STATE OF OHIO
 DEPARTMENT OF
 TRANSPORTATION
 COLUMBUS, OHIO
 CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIAL
 SPECIFICATIONS
 ONLINE VERSION 01/19/2018
 
 An Equal Opportunity Employer
 Be advised:
 The page numbers in this online only document WILL NOT MATCH
 the page numbers in the official printed specification due to page size
 and formatting differences.
 
 Copies of the Construction and Material Specifications may be purchased by contacting:
 Ohio Department of Transportation
 Office of Contracts
 P.O. Box 899
 Columbus, Ohio 43216-0899
 Telephone (614) 466-3778, 466-3200
 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS
 Table Of Contents 3
 100 General Provisions 8
 101 Definitions And Terms 8
 102 Bidding Requirements And Conditions 17
 103 Award And Execution Of Contract 21
 104 Scope Of Work 22
 105 Control Of Work 25
 106 Control Of Material 31
 107 Legal Relations And Responsibility To Public 34
 108 Prosecution And Progress 43
 109 Acceptance, Measurement, And Payment 54
 200 Earthwork 73
 Item 201 Clearing And Grubbing 73
 Item 202 Removal Of Structures And Obstructions 75
 Item 203 Roadway Excavation And Embankment 80
 Item 204 Subgrade Compaction And Proof Rolling 89
 Item 205 Chemically Stabilized Embankment 93
 Item 206 Chemically Stabilized Subgrade 95
 Item 208 Rock Blasting 99
 Item 209 Linear Grading 110
 250 Pavement Repairs 112
 Item 251 Partial Depth Pavement Repair 112
 Item 252 Full Depth Rigid Pavement Removal And Flexible Replacement 113
 Item 253 Pavement Repair 114
 Item 254 Pavement Planing 115
 Item 255 Full Depth Pavement Removal And Rigid Replacement 117
 Item 256 Bonded Patching Of Portland Cement Concrete Pavement 121
 Item 257 Diamond Grinding Portland Cement Concrete Pavement 124
 Item 258 Load Transfer Retrofit 126
 300 Bases 129
 Item 301 Asphalt Concrete Base 129
 Item 302 Asphalt Concrete Base 130
 Item 304 Aggregate Base 132
 Item 305 Portland Cement Concrete Base 135
 Item 320 Rubblize And Roll 136
 
 Item 321 Cracking And Seating Non- Reinforced Concrete Pavement 138
 400 Flexible Pavement 140
 Item 401 Asphalt Concrete Pavements—General 140
 Item 402 Asphalt Concrete Mixing Plants 152
 Item 403 Asphalt Concrete Quality Control And Acceptance 154
 Item 407 Tack Coat 163
 Item 408 Prime Coat 165
 Item 409 Sawing And Sealing Asphalt Concrete Pavement Joints 166
 Item 410 Traffic Compacted Surface 168
 Item 411 Stabilized Crushed Aggregate 170
 Item 421 Microsurfacing 172
 Item 422 Chip Seal 185
 Item 423 Crack Sealing, Hot Applied 192
 Item 424 Fine Graded Polymer Asphalt Concrete 195
 Item 441 Asphalt Concrete - Mix Design And Quality Control 197
 Item 442 Superpave Asphalt Concrete 205
 Item 443 Stone Matrix Asphalt Concrete 208
 Item 446 Asphalt Concrete Core Density Acceptance 212
 Item 448 Asphalt Concrete Acceptance 215
 450 Rigid Pavement 216
 Item 451 Reinforced Portland Cement Concrete Pavement 216
 Item 452 Non-Reinforced Portland Cement Concrete Pavement 232
 Item 455 Quality Control Plan, Testing And Assurance For Qc/Qa Concrete 233
 Item 499 Concrete—General 241
 500 Structures 248
 Item 501 Structures—General 248
 Item 502 Structures For Maintaining Traffic 254
 Item 503 Excavation For Structures 255
 Item 504 Sheet Piling Left In Place 259
 Item 505 Pile Driving Equipment Mobilization 260
 Item 506 Static Load Test 261
 Item 507 Bearing Piles 263
 Item 508 Falsework And Forms 267
 Item 509 Reinforcing Steel 269
 Item 510 Dowel Holes 273
 Item 511 Concrete For Structures 274
 Item 512 Treating Concrete 290
 Item 513 Structural Steel Members 301
 
 Item 514 Painting Of Structural Steel 315
 Item 515 Prestressed Concrete Bridge Members 334
 Item 516 Expansion And Contraction Joints Joint Sealers And Bearing Devices 344
 Item 517 Railings 348
 Item 518 Drainage Of Structures 350
 Item 519 Patching Concrete Structures 352
 Item 520 Pneumatically Placed Mortar 354
 Item 522 Structural Plate Corrugated Metal Structures On Footings 358
 Item 523 Dynamic Load Test 359
 Item 524 Drilled Shafts 360
 Item 526 Approach Slabs 366
 600 Incidentals 368
 Item 601 Slope And Channel Protection 368
 Item 602 Masonry 373
 Item 605 Underdrains 377
 Item 606 Guardrail 380
 Item 607 Fence 382
 Item 608 Walks, Curb Ramps, And Steps 384
 Item 609 Curbing, Concrete Medians, And Traffic Islands 386
 Item 610 Cellular Retaining Walls 390
 Item 611 Pipe Culverts, Sewers, Drains, And Drainage Structures 393
 Item 613 Low Strength Mortar Backfill 411
 Item 614 Maintaining Traffic 414
 Item 615 Roads And Pavements For Maintaining Traffic 428
 Item 616 Dust Control 431
 Item 617 Reconditioning Shoulders 432
 Item 618 Rumble Strips On Shoulders 434
 Item 619 Field Office 435
 Item 620 Delineators 438
 Item 621 Raised Pavement Markers (Rpm) 439
 Item 622 Concrete Barrier 442
 Item 623 Construction Layout Stakes And Survey Monuments 444
 Item 624 Mobilization 447
 Item 625 Highway Lighting 449
 Item 626 Barrier Reflectors 460
 Item 630 Traffic Signs And Sign Supports 462
 Item 631 Sign Lighting And Electrical Signs 471
 Item 632 Traffic Signal Equipment 475
 Item 633 Traffic Signal Controllers 486
 
 Item 638 Water Mains And Service Branches 491
 640 Pavement Marking 499
 Item 641 Pavement Marking—General 499
 Item 642 Traffic Paint 504
 Item 643 Polyester Pavement Marking 507
 Item 644 Thermoplastic Pavement Marking 509
 Item 645 Preformed Pavement Marking 512
 Item 646 Epoxy Pavement Marking 514
 Item 647 Heat-Fused Preformed Thermoplastic Pavement Marking 518
 Item 648 Spray Thermoplastic Pavement Marking 520
 650 Roadsides 523
 Item 651 Topsoil Stockpiled 523
 Item 652 Placing Stockpiled Topsoil 524
 Item 653 Topsoil Furnished And Placed 525
 Item 654 Renovating Existing Soil 526
 Item 656 Roadside Cleanup 527
 Item 657 Riprap For Tree Protection 528
 Item 658 Tree Root Aeration 530
 Item 659 Seeding And Mulching 531
 Item 660 Sodding 541
 Item 661 Planting Trees, Shrubs, Perennials And Vines 544
 Item 662 Landscape Watering 548
 Item 666 Pruning Existing Trees 549
 Item 670 Erosion Protection 550
 Item 671 Erosion Control Mats 551
 700 Material Details 553
 700.00 Minimum Requirements For Sampling Materials 553
 701 Cementitious Materials And Carbonate Micro-Fines 593
 702 Asphalt Material 594
 703 Aggregate 603
 704 Masonry Units 620
 705 Concrete Incidentals 621
 706 Concrete And Clay Pipe 629
 707 Steel, Aluminum, And Plastic Pipe 652
 708 Paint 665
 709 Reinforcing Steel 669
 710 Fence And Guardrail 672
 711 Structural Steel And Structure Incidentals 678
 
 712 Miscellaneous 685
 720 Delineator Materials 692
 721 Raised Pavement Marker Materials 693
 725 Highway Lighting Materials 695
 726 Barrier Reflector Materials 708
 730 Traffic Sign And Support Material 709
 731 Sign Lighting And Electrical Signs Material 713
 732 Traffic Signal Material 715
 733 Traffic Signal Controller Material 726
 740 Pavement Marking Material 751
 748 Water Main And Service Branch Material 758
 
 100 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 101 DEFINITIONS AND TERMS
 101.01
 General. These Construction and Material Specifications are written to the Bidder before award of
 the Contract and to the Contractor after award of the Contract. The sentences that direct the Contractor to perform
 Work are written as commands. For example, a requirement to provide cold-weather protection would be expressed
 as, “Provide cold-weather protection for concrete,” rather than “The Contractor shall provide cold-weather
 protection for concrete.” In the imperative mood, the subject “the Bidder” or “the Contractor” is understood.
 All requirements to be performed by others have been written in the active voice. Sentences written in the active
 voice identify the party responsible for performing the action. For example, “The Engineer will determine the
 density of the compacted material.” Certain requirements of the Contractor may also be written in the active voice,
 rather than the active voice and imperative mood, if the sentence includes requirements for others in addition to the
 Contractor. For example, “After the Contractor provides initial written notice, the Engineer will revise the Contract
 as specified in 104.02.”
 Sentences that define terms, describe a product or desired result, or describe a condition that may exist are written
 in indicative mood. These types of sentences use verbs requiring no action. For example, “The characteristics of
 the soils actually encountered in the subgrade may affect the quality of the cement and depth of treatment
 necessary.”
 101.02
 Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in the Contract Documents, represent the
 full text shown.
 AAN
 AASHTO
 AC
 ACBFS
 ACI
 ACIA
 ADT
 ADTT
 AIC
 AISC
 AISI
 ANFO
 ANSI
 AOS
 AREA
 AMRL
 ASCE
 ASME
 ASTM
 AWG
 AWPA
 AWS
 AWWA
 BBR
 BMP
 
 American Association of Nurserymen
 American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
 Asphalt Cement (pavement), Alternating Current (traffic)
 Air Cooled Blast Furnace Slag (aggregate)
 American Concrete Institute
 Asynchronous Communications Interface Adapter (traffic controller)
 Average Daily Traffic
 Average Daily Truck Traffic
 Amps Interrupting Capacity
 American Institute of Steel Construction
 American Iron and Steel Institute
 Ammonium Nitrate and Fuel Oil
 American National Standards Institute
 Apparent Opening Size (fabric)
 American Railway Engineering Association
 AASHTO Material Reference Library
 American Society of Civil Engineers
 American Society of Mechanical Engineers
 American Society for Testing and Materials
 American Wire Gauge
 American Wood Preservers' Association
 American Welding Society
 American Water Works Association
 Bending Beam Rheometer (asphalt binder test)
 Best Management Practice (erosion)
 
 BOF
 BSG
 BTEX
 BUSTR
 C&MS
 CAPWAP
 CBAE
 CCRL
 CCS
 CECI
 CFR
 CIE
 CPESC
 CRS
 CRSI
 CSS
 CVN
 CWT
 DC
 DCA
 DCE
 DDD
 DET
 DGE
 DLS
 DNR
 DRC
 DSR
 DZA
 EAF
 EDA
 EEI
 EIA
 EPA
 EQS
 FAA
 FCM
 FEMA
 FHWA
 FRP
 FSS
 GGBFS
 GS
 HDPE
 HMWM
 ICEA
 IEEE
 IES
 IMSA
 IPCEA
 IPS
 ISSA
 
 Basic Oxygen Furnace (aggregate)
 Bulk Specific Gravity
 Benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene, and xylene (a soil test)
 Bureau of Underground Storage Tank Regulations (Division of Fire Marshal)
 Construction and Material Specifications
 Case Pile Wave Analysis Program
 Cut Back Asphalt Emulsion
 Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory
 Crushed Carbonate Stone
 Contactors Erosion Control Inspector
 Code of Federal Regulations
 Commission Internationale d'Eclairage (illumination)
 Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control
 Cationic Rapid Set (asphalt emulsion)
 Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute
 Cationic Slow Set (asphalt emulsion)
 Charpy V-notch (steel test)
 Hundred Weight (100 lbs)
 Direct Current
 District Construction Administrator
 District Construction Engineer
 District Deputy Director
 District Engineer of Tests
 District Geotechnical Engineer
 Data Logging System (traffic markings)
 Department of Natural Resources
 Dry Rodded Condition (asphalt aggregate test)
 Dynamic Shear Rheometer (asphalt binder test)
 Deficient Zone Average (concrete test)
 Electric Arc Furnace
 Earth Disturbing Activity
 Edison Electric Institute
 Electronic Industries Alliance
 Environmental Protection Agency
 Exceptional Quality Solids (compost)
 Fine Aggregate Angularity (asphalt aggregate)
 Fracture Critical Member (steel test)
 Federal Emergency Management Agency
 Federal Highway Administration, Department of Transportation
 Fiber Reinforced Polymer
 Federal Specifications and Standards, General Services Administration
 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag
 Granulated Slag
 High Density Polyethylene
 High Molecular Weight Methacrylate
 Insulated Cable Engineers Association
 Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers
 Illuminating Engineering Society
 International Municipal Signal Association
 Insulated Power Cable Engineers Association
 International Pipe Standard
 International Slurry Seal Association
 
 ITE
 Institute of Transportation Engineers
 IZEU
 Inorganic Zinc Epoxy Urethane
 JMF
 Job Mix Formula
 LED
 Light Emitting Diode
 LWT
 Loaded Wheel Test (asphalt test)
 MBF
 Thousand Board Feet (wood)
 MC
 Medium Cure (asphalt emulsion)
 MCB
 Microchannel Bus (traffic controller)
 MOV
 Metal Oxide Varistor (traffic controller)
 MPI
 Magnetic Particle Inspection (steel test)
 MSG
 Maximum Specific Gravity (asphalt)
 MTD
 Maximum Theoretical Density (asphalt)
 NACE
 National Association of Corrosion Engineers
 NCHRP National Cooperative Highway Research Program
 NEMA
 National Electrical Manufacturers Association
 NHI
 National Highway Institute
 NIST
 National Institute of Standards and Technology
 NOI
 Notice of Intent
 NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
 OAC
 Ohio Administrative Code
 ODOT
 Ohio Department of Transportation
 OEPA
 Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
 OH
 Open Hearth (aggregate)
 OHWM Ordinary High Water Mark
 OMM
 Office of Materials Management (the Central Office Laboratory)
 OMUTCD Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
 ORC
 Ohio Revised Code
 ORDC
 Ohio Rail Development Commission
 OSHA
 Occupational Safety and Health Administration
 OTE
 Office of Traffic Engineering
 OWPCA Ohio Water Pollution Control Act
 OZEU
 Organic Zinc Epoxy Urethane
 PAT
 Project Average Thickness (concrete test)
 PAV
 Pressure Aging Vessel (asphalt binder test)
 PB
 Polybutylene (conduit)
 PCC
 Portland Cement Concrete
 PCS
 Petroleum Contaminated Soil
 PDA
 Pile Dynamic Analysis (steel piling)
 PE
 Polyethylene (conduit)
 PG
 Performance Grade (asphalt binder grading system)
 pH
 Potential of Hydrogen
 PLS
 Pure Live Seed
 PVC
 Polyvinyl chloride
 QA
 Quality Assurance
 QC
 Quality Control
 QCFS
 Quality Control Fabricator Specialist (structures)
 QCP
 Quality Control Program, or Plan, or Points (steel test)
 QCQC
 Quality Control Qualification Committee
 QPL
 Qualified Products List
 RAP
 Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement
 RAS
 Reclaimed Asphalt Shingles
 RC
 Rapid Cure (asphalt emulsion)
 
 REA
 RFI
 RH
 RMS
 RPCC
 RPM
 RS
 RTFO
 RUS
 SAE
 SBA
 SBR
 SBS
 SCD
 SDS
 SF
 SI
 SM
 SMA
 SPD
 SPST
 SS
 SSD
 SSPC
 SWPPP
 TAP
 TCE
 TMPTA
 TNP
 TODS
 TSEC
 TSR
 UF
 UL
 USACE
 USC
 VA
 VAC
 VCA
 VECP
 VMA
 VME
 WDT
 WEAP
 WPS
 WZRPM
 XCU
 101.03
 follows:
 
 Rural Electrification Administration
 Radio Frequency Interference (traffic controller)
 Relative Humidity
 Root Mean Square (traffic controller)
 Recycled Portland Cement Concrete
 Raised Pavement Marker (traffic)
 Rapid Set (asphalt emulsion)
 Rolling Thin-Film Oven (asphalt binder test)
 Rural Utilities Service
 Society of Automotive Engineers
 Styrene Butadiene Amine
 Styrene Butadiene Rubber
 Styrene Butadiene Styrene
 Standard Construction Drawing
 Safety Data Sheets
 Standard Fabricated members (structures)
 International System of Units (Metric)
 AASHTOWare Project Sitemanager ™
 Stone Matrix Asphalt
 Surge Protection Device (traffic controller)
 Single Pole / Single Throw (traffic controller)
 Slow Set (asphalt emulsion)
 Saturated Surface Dry (aggregate)
 Society for Protective Coatings
 Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
 Traffic Authorized Product
 Trichloroethylene
 Tri-methyolpropane Tri-acrylate (paint)
 Total Neutralizing Power
 Tourist-Oriented Directional Signs
 Temporary Sediment and Erosion Control
 Tensile Strength Ratio (asphalt mix test)
 Unique Fabricated members (structures)
 Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.
 United States Army Corps of Engineers
 United States Code
 Verification Acceptance
 Volts Alternating Current
 Volume of Coarse Aggregate (asphalt mix test)
 Value Engineering Change Proposal
 Voids in the Mineral Aggregate
 VersaModule Eurocard (traffic controller)
 Watchdog Timer
 Wave Equation Analysis (steel piling)
 Welding Procedure Specification (steel test)
 Work Zone Raised Pavement Marker (traffic)
 Explosion, Collapse and Underground
 Definitions. The following terms or pronouns, when used in the Contract Documents, are defined as
 
 Advertisement. The public announcement, as required by law, inviting Bids for Work to be performed or
 materials to be furnished.
 
 Award. The written acceptance by the Director of a Bid.
 Bid. The offer of a Bidder, on the prescribed form properly signed and guaranteed, to perform the Work and to
 furnish the labor and materials at the prices quoted.
 Bid Documents. The Bid Documents include the Invitation for Bids, Addenda, Proposal, Expedite file, contract
 form and required bonds, Specifications, Supplemental Specifications, Special Provisions, general and detailed
 plans, Plan notes, standard construction drawings identified in the Plans, notice to Contractor, and any other
 document designated by the Department as a Bid Document, all of which constitute one instrument.
 Bidder. An individual, firm, or corporation submitting a Bid for the advertised Work, acting directly or through
 the duly authorized representative, and qualified as provided in ORC 5525.02 to 5525.09.
 Bridge. A structure, including supports, erected over a depression or an obstruction, such as water, a highway,
 or a railway, and having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads and having a length
 measured along the center of roadway of 10 feet (3.048 m) or more between undercopings of abutments or extreme
 limits of openings for multiple boxes.
 A. Length. The length of a bridge structure is the over-all length measured along the centerline of the roadway
 surface.
 B. Roadway Width. The clear width measured at right angles to the longitudinal centerline of the bridge between
 the bottom of curbs or guard timbers or, in the case of multiple heights of curbs, between the bottoms of the lower
 risers. For curb widths of 1 foot (0.3 m) or less, the roadway width is measured between parapets or railings.
 Calendar Day or Day. Every day shown on the calendar.
 Certified Test Data. A test report from a manufacturer’s or an independent laboratory approved by the Director
 listing actual test results of samples tested for compliance with specified Department requirements. The Department
 will accept certified test data from manufacturers’ laboratories if their products have been used satisfactorily on
 prior Department contracts and their test data has been confirmed. Include a statement that the test data furnished
 is representative of the material furnished to a Department project or to a supplier. The report is identified by
 number or date and identifies the Department project or supplier to which the material is shipped. Submit reports
 signed by a person having legal authority to act for the manufacturer or independent laboratory.
 Change Order. A written order issued by the Director to the Contractor, covering changes to the terms and
 conditions, plans and/or quantities, within or beyond the scope of the Contract and establishing the basis of payment
 and time adjustments for the work affected by the changes.
 Claims. Disputes that are not settled through Steps 1 and 2 of the Dispute Resolution and Administrative Claim
 Process. The Dispute becomes a Claim when the Contractor submits a Notice of Intent to File a Claim.
 Completion Date. The date, as shown in the Contract Documents, on which the Work contemplated shall be
 completed.
 Construction Limits. These limits must encompass all Work. This includes removals, room for construction
 equipment to complete work, site access, etc.
 Contract. The written agreement between the Department and the Contractor setting forth the obligations of the
 parties, including, but not limited to, the performance of the Work and the basis of payment.
 Contract Bond. The approved forms of security, executed by the Contractor and its Sureties, guaranteeing
 complete execution of the Work as required by the Contract Documents and the payment of all legal debts
 pertaining to the construction of the Project which security shall comply with and be subject to ORC 5525.16 and
 5525.13, and related provisions.
 Contract Documents. The Contract Documents include the Invitation for Bids, Addenda, Proposal, contract
 form and required bonds, Specifications, Supplemental Specifications, Special Provisions, general and detailed
 plans, Plan notes, standard construction drawings identified in the Plans, notice to contractor, Change Orders,
 Supplemental Agreements, Extra Work Contracts, “Accepted” and “Accepted as Noted” Working Drawings, and
 any other document designated by the Department as a Contract Document, all of which constitute one instrument.
 
 Contract Item (Pay Item). A specifically described unit of Work for which a price is provided in the Contract.
 Contract Price. The amount of compensation bid by the Contractor for a Contract Item in the Proposal or the
 amount of compensation established for a Contract Item added or modified pursuant to the Contract Documents.
 Contract Time. The number of workdays or calendar days, including authorized adjustments, allowed for
 completion of the Project. When a specified Completion Date is shown in the Contract Documents instead of the
 number of workdays or calendar days, completion of the Project shall occur on or before that date. Specified
 Completion Date and Calendar Day Contracts shall be completed on or before the day indicated even when that
 date is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday.
 Contractor. The individual, firm, or corporation contracting with the Department for performance of prescribed
 Work, acting directly or through a duly authorized representative and qualified under the provisions of ORC
 5525.02 to 5525.09 inclusive, and any amendments thereto.
 County. The designated county in which the Work specified is to be done.
 Culvert. Any structure not classified as a Bridge that provides an opening under the roadway.
 Department. The Department of Transportation, State of Ohio.
 Director. Administrative head of the Department appointed by the Governor.
 Disputes. Disagreements, matters in question and differences of opinion between the Department’s personnel
 and the Contractor.
 District Testing. The Departments district testing laboratories.
 Engineer. Duly authorized agent of the Department acting within the scope of its authority for purposes of
 engineering and administration of the Contract.
 Engineered Drawings. A type of Working Drawing that requires the practice of engineering as defined in ORC
 4733.01(E). Examples of Engineered Drawings include: Excavation Bracing Plans, Demolition Plans, Erection
 Plans, Falsework Plans, Cofferdam Plans, Causeway Plans, Jacking and Temporary Support Plans, Plans for Heavy
 Equipment on Structures, Plans for structures for Maintaining Traffic, and Corrective Work Plans.
 Equipment. All machinery and equipment, together with the necessary supplies for upkeep and maintenance,
 and also tools and apparatus necessary for the proper construction and acceptable completion of the Work.
 Extra Work. An item of Work not provided for in the Contract as awarded but found essential to the satisfactory
 completion of the Contract within its intended scope.
 Extra Work Contract. A Contract concerning the performance of Work or furnishing of materials involving
 Extra Work. Such Extra Work may be performed at agreed prices or on a force account basis as provided in ORC
 5525.14.
 Fabricator. The individual, firm, or corporation that fabricates structural metals or prestressed concrete members
 as an agent of the Contractor.
 Final Inspector. An Engineer appointed by the DDD who inspects the completed Work and accepts it if it
 complies with the Contract Documents.
 Inspector. The Engineer’s authorized representative assigned to make detailed inspections of Contract
 performance.
 Invitation for Bids. The invitation for Proposals for all Work on which Bids are required. Such Proposal will
 indicate with reasonable accuracy the quantity and location of the Work to be done or the character and quality of
 the material to be furnished and the time and place of the opening of Proposals.
 Laboratory. The testing laboratories of the Department, including the Office of Materials Management (OMM)
 located at 1600 West Broad Street, Columbus, Ohio, and the District testing facilities.
 Materials. Any materials or products specified for use in the construction of the Project and its appurtenances.
 
 Partnering. A collaborative process for project cooperation and communication meant to achieve effective and
 efficient contract performance and completion of the Project within budget, on schedule, safely and with requisite
 quality in accordance with the contract.
 Plans. The drawings, standard construction drawings and supplemental drawings provided by the Department
 that show the location, character, dimensions, and details of the Work.
 Prebid Question.
 
 A written inquiry submitted by a prospective bidder.
 
 Profile Grade. The trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top surface of the proposed wearing surface, usually
 along the longitudinal centerline of the roadbed. Profile grade means either elevation or gradient of such trace
 according to the context.
 Project Limits. Project limits are points on the mainline centerline of construction where the proposed
 improvement, as described in the project description on the Title Sheet (excluding incidental construction), begins
 and ends
 Project Right-of-Way. That portion of the Right-of-Way between the beginning and end of the Project.
 Project. The specific section of the highway together with all appurtenances and Work to be performed thereon
 under the Contract.
 Proposal. The approved form on which the Department requires Bids to be prepared and submitted for the Work.
 Proposal Guaranty. The security furnished with a Bid to guarantee that the Bidder will enter into the Contract
 if its Bid is accepted.
 Questionnaire. The specified forms on which the Contractor shall furnish required information as to its ability
 to perform and finance the Work required under ORC 5525.01.
 Reasonably Close Conformity. Reasonably close conformity means compliance with reasonable and customary
 manufacturing and construction tolerances where working tolerances are not specified. Where working tolerances
 are specified, reasonably close conformity means compliance with such working tolerances. Without detracting
 from the complete and absolute discretion of the Engineer to insist upon such tolerances as establishing reasonably
 close conformity, the Engineer may accept variations beyond such tolerances as reasonably close conformity where
 they will not materially affect the value or utility of the Work and the interests of the Department.
 Registered Engineer. An engineer registered with the Ohio State Board of Registration for Professional
 Engineers and Surveyors to practice professional engineering in the State of Ohio
 Registered Surveyor. A surveyor registered with the Ohio State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers
 and Surveyors to practice professional surveying in the State of Ohio.
 Right-of-Way. A general term denoting land, property, or interest therein, usually in a strip, acquired for or
 devoted to a highway.
 Road. A general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel, including the entire area within the
 Right-of-Way, as defined in ORC 5501.01.
 Roadbed. The graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes, prepared as a foundation for the pavement
 structure and shoulder.
 Roadside. The areas between the outside edges of the shoulders and the Right-of-Way boundaries. Unpaved
 median areas between inside shoulders of divided highways and infield areas of interchanges are included.
 Roadside Development. Those items necessary to the highway that provide for the preservation of landscape
 materials and features; the rehabilitation and protection against erosion of all areas disturbed by construction
 through seeding, sodding, mulching, and the placing of other ground covers; such suitable planting; and other
 improvements as may increase the effectiveness and enhance the appearance of the highway.
 Roadway. The portion of a highway within limits of construction.
 
 Shop Drawings. Drawings accepted by the Contractor and submitted to the Department that describe portions of
 the Work fabricated off site that are incorporated permanently with the project. Department acceptance is not
 required.
 Shoulder. The portion of the roadway contiguous to the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles,
 for emergency use, and for lateral support of base and surface courses.
 Sidewalk. That portion of the roadway primarily constructed for the use of pedestrians.
 Signatures on Contract Documents. All signatures on Contract Documents must meet the requirements of
 102.06.
 Special Provisions. Additions and revisions to the standard and Supplemental Specifications covering conditions
 peculiar to an individual Project.
 Specifications. The directions, provisions, and requirements contained herein as supplemented by the
 Supplemental Specifications and Special Provisions.
 State. The State of Ohio acting through its authorized representative.
 Street. A general term denoting a public way for purpose of vehicular travel, including the entire area within the
 Right-of-Way.
 Structures. Bridges, culverts, catch basins, drop inlets, retaining walls, cribbing, manholes, endwalls, buildings,
 sewers, service pipes, underdrains, foundation drains, and other features that may be encountered in the Work and
 not otherwise classed herein.
 Subcontractor. An individual, firm, or corporation to whom the Contractor sublets part of the Contract to be
 performed on the job site, who prior to such undertaking receives the written consent of the Director, and who is
 qualified under ORC 5525.02 through 5525.09 inclusive.
 Subgrade. The portion of a Roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed.
 Substructure. All of that part of the structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans, skewbacks of
 arches, and tops of footings of rigid frames, together with backwalls and wings.
 Superintendent. The Contractor’s authorized representative in responsible charge of the Work.
 Superstructure. The entire structure except the Substructure.
 Supplement. A list of requirements for fabrication plants, methods of test, or other miscellaneous requirements
 that are maintained on file in the Office of the Director.
 Supplemental Agreement. A written agreement executed by the Contractor and by the Director covering
 necessary alterations.
 Supplemental Specifications. Detailed specifications supplemental to or superseding these Specifications.
 Surety. The corporation, partnership, or individual, other than the Contractor, executing a bond furnished by the
 Contractor.
 Titles (or Headings). The titles or headings of the sections and subsections herein are intended for convenience
 of reference and shall not be considered as having any bearing on their interpretation.
 Waters of the United States. Waters that are under the jurisdiction of the Corps of Engineers under the Clean
 Water Act as defined by 33 CFR Ch. II Part 328, which as applied to Ohio means: the Ohio River and Lake Erie
 and any other river, stream, creek, lake, pond, or wetland that drains directly or indirectly into the Ohio River or
 Lake Erie.
 Work. All labor, materials, equipment, tools, transportation, supplies, and other incidentals and all tasks that
 comprise the project or any portion thereof, as described by the Contract Documents.
 Work Limits. Work Limits are the extreme limits of the contractor’s responsibility on a project, including all
 temporary and incidental construction, with the exception of work zone traffic control devices required for
 maintenance of traffic.
 
 Workday. A calendar day that the Contractor normally works.
 Working Drawings. Contractor submitted drawings for work, not otherwise defined in the Bid Documents, and
 require Department acceptance. Examples of Working Drawings include: Engineered Drawings, installation plans,
 certified drawings, and any other supplementary plans or similar data that the Contractor is required to submit for
 acceptance.
 101.04
 Interpretations. In order to avoid cumbersome and confusing repetition of expressions in these
 Specifications, it is provided that whenever anything is, or is to be, done, if, as, or, when, or where “contemplated,
 required, determined, directed, specified, authorized, ordered, given, designated, indicated, considered necessary,
 deemed necessary, permitted, reserved, suspended, established, approval, approved, disapproved, acceptable,
 unacceptable, suitable, accepted, satisfactory, unsatisfactory, sufficient, insufficient, rejected, or condemned,” it
 shall be understood as if the expression were followed by the words “by the Engineer” or “to the Engineer.”
 
 102 BIDDING REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS
 102.01
 Prequalification of Bidders. A Bidder must be prequalified by the Department according to ORC
 Chapter 5525 and the rules and regulations governing prequalification in order to submit a Bid. Upon request, the
 Department will provide a prequalification application, applicable rules and regulations, and other relevant
 information. For prospective Bidders that are not yet prequalified, furnish the Department with a properly
 completed prequalification application at least 30 days before the date specified for the receipt of Bids. The
 prequalification certificate is the Bidder’s license to Bid and perform construction for the Department.
 For foreign Contractors, refer to ORC 5525.18 and Ohio Administrative Rule 5501:2-3-07.
 The Department will perform contractor performance evaluations for each contractor and subcontractor on every
 ODOT-let construction project. Evaluations shall be well documented, objective, and performed in a timely
 manner, in accordance with Supplement 1131. The contractor’s average scores for the previous calendar year will
 be used in the calculation of the contractor’s bidding capacity. The contractor has the right to appeal an evaluation.
 102.02
 Contents of Bid Documents. Use the Proposal to prepare and submit Bids for the Work. Upon
 request, the Department will provide Bid Documents that include or reference the following:
 A. Location and description of the Project.
 B. Estimate of quantities and description of the Work.
 C. Time to complete the Work.
 D. Amount of the Proposal Guaranty.
 E. Department’s deadline for receiving a completed Bid.
 F. Schedule of contract items.
 G. Standard Specifications, Special Provisions, Supplemental Specifications, and the Plans.
 H. Proposal.
 102.03
 
 Issuance of Proposals.
 
 A. General. Upon request, the Department will provide applicable rates and other relevant information for
 obtaining bidding information and submitting a Bid.
 B. Department Will Not Issue. The Department may refuse to sell or issue Bid Documents to a prospective
 Bidder for any of the following reasons:
 1.
 
 The prospective Bidder owes the Department for previously issued plans.
 
 2.
 
 The prospective Bidder has defaulted on previous contracts.
 
 3.
 
 The prospective Bidder is debarred from bidding on and receiving Department contracts.
 
 4.
 
 The prospective Bidder is currently in the debarment process.
 
 102.04
 Interpretation of Quantities in Proposal. The quantities in the Bid Documents are approximate and
 the Department uses them for the comparison of Bids only.
 The Department will only pay the Contractor for the actual quantities of Work performed and accepted according
 to the Contract Documents. The Department may increase, decrease, or omit the scheduled quantities of Work as
 provided in 109.04 without invalidating the Bid prices.
 102.05
 Examination of Bid Documents and Project Site and Submission of Prebid Questions. Carefully
 examine the Bid Documents and perform a reasonable site investigation before submitting a Bid. Submitting a Bid
 is an affirmative statement that the Bidder has investigated the Project site and is satisfied as to the character,
 quality, quantities, and the conditions to be encountered in performing the Work. A reasonable site investigation
 includes investigating the Project site, borrow sites, hauling routes, and all other locations related to the
 performance of the Work.
 When available, the Department will include in the Contract Documents or provide for the Bidder’s review at
 the Department’s offices or website, one or more of the following:
 
 A. Record drawings.
 B. Available information relative to subsurface exploration, borings, soundings, water levels, elevations, or
 profiles.
 C. The results of other preliminary investigations.
 A reasonable site investigation includes a review of these documents.
 Should a question arise at any time during the examination of Bid Documents or investigation of the site the
 Bidder may seek clarification by submitting a Prebid Question. Submit all Prebid Questions in writing via the
 Department’s website. The Department will post a response on its website to all questions submitted before a
 deadline of 10:00 am four working days prior to the public opening of Bids. Responses to Prebid Questions posted
 on the Department’s website are not revisions to the Bidding Documents and are not binding. The Department is
 not obligated to respond to, or otherwise act upon, a Prebid Question submitted after this deadline, but reserves the
 right to act upon any information received.
 102.06
 Preparation of Bids. Prepare a Bid according to this subsection and the requirements found in the
 Bid Documents. Properly complete the Expedite file and submit it using the software specified in the Bid
 Documents rather than completing it by handwriting, typing, or using unauthorized computer-generated forms.
 Provide a unit price for each item listed in the Proposal. Calculate and place the products for the respective unit
 prices and quantities in the “Bid Amount” column. For a lump sum item, place the same price in the “Unit Price”
 column and in the “Bid Amount” column pertaining to that item. Indicate the total Bid amount by adding the values
 entered in the “Bid Amount” column for the listed items. Submit the Expedite file using the software specified in
 the Bid Documents.
 Properly execute the Proposal by completing the miscellaneous section and attaching the required signatures in
 the space provided in the Expedite file.
 ENTITY SUBMITTING PROPOSAL
 REQUIRED SIGNATURE
 Individual
 Partnership
 Joint Venture
 Corporation
 
 Limited Liability Company
 
 The individual or a duly authorized agent.
 A partner or a duly authorized agent.
 A member or a duly authorized agent of at least one of the joint
 venture firms.
 An authorized officer or duly authorized agent of the corporation.
 Also, show the name of the state chartering the corporation and
 affix the corporate seal.
 A manager, a member, or a duly authorized agent.
 
 102.07
 Duty to Notify of Errors in Bid Documents. Notify the Department of errors and omissions in the
 Bid Documents. Make notification by submitting a question in the manner described in 102.05. The Contractor’s
 duty to disclose errors and omissions is not only a bidding requirement but is also a legal requirement that cannot
 be ignored.
 Failure to provide the required notification prior to the opening of bids shall constitute a waiver by the Contractor
 and does not obligate the Department for any costs based upon any apparent or patent ambiguity arising from
 insufficient data or obvious errors in the Bid documents. Knowingly withholding information regarding an error or
 omission in the Bid Documents, or intentionally misrepresenting an item of Work for financial or competitive gain
 may result in civil or criminal penalties in excess of the value of the item bid.
 102.08
 Unbalanced Bidding. Bid all items correctly and price each quantity as indicated in the Bid
 Documents. The Department will reject a Mathematically Unbalanced Bid if the Bid is also Materially Unbalanced.
 A Mathematically Unbalanced Bid is a Bid containing lump sum or unit price items that do not include reasonable
 labor, equipment, and material costs plus a reasonable proportionate share of the Bidder’s overhead costs, other
 indirect costs, and anticipated profit. A Materially Unbalanced Bid is when the Department determines that an
 
 award to the Bidder submitting a Mathematically Unbalanced Bid will not result in the lowest ultimate cost to the
 Department.
 102.09
 Proposal Guaranty. The Department will reject a Bid submitted without a Proposal Guaranty in the
 amount designated and payable to the Director. Submit the required Proposal Guaranty in one of the following
 forms:
 A. Properly executed project Bid bond submitted on the Department’s form.
 B. Properly executed electronic bid transfer to the Department's account.
 C. Certified check drawn on the account of the Bidder submitting the Bid.
 D. Cashier’s check.
 E. Properly executed electronic project Bid bond submitted using the software specified in the Bid Documents.
 When submitting a Bid bond, ensure that the Surety is licensed to do business in the State.
 If the Department invites alternate Bids and the Bidder elects to Bid more than one alternate, the Bidder may
 submit one Proposal Guaranty in the amount required for a single alternate. The Proposal Guaranty covers each
 individual Bid.
 If the Department invites combined Bids and the Bidder elects to Bid only on one package, then the Bidder must
 submit only one Proposal Guaranty. If the Bidder bids on the combined Bid package, the Bidder must submit a
 Proposal Guaranty in the amount required for the combined Bid. The combined Proposal Guaranty covers each
 individual Bid.
 102.10
 Delivery of Bid. Unless otherwise indicated in the Proposal, all Bids must be submitted using the
 electronic Bid submission software specified in the Proposal. The Department will accept Bids until the time and
 date designated in the Notice to Bidders. The Department will return Bids received after the designated time to the
 Bidders unopened. The Department will return all Bids not prepared and submitted in accordance with the Proposal.
 102.11
 Withdrawal of Bids. After Bids are opened, ORC 5525.01 requires that a Bidder identify a mistake
 in its Bid within 48 hours of the Bid opening. After Bids are opened the Bidder must provide a written request to
 withdraw a Bid already filed with the Department. Any Bidder for whom a request to withdraw its Bid is approved
 by the Department will not be permitted to participate in any manner in a contract awarded for that project for
 which the Bid was withdrawn.
 102.12
 Combination Proposals. The Department may elect to issue Bid Documents for projects in
 combination or separately, so that Bids may be submitted either on the combination or on separate units of the
 combination. The Department reserves the right to make awards on combination Bids or separate Bids to the best
 advantage of the Department. The Department will not consider combination Bids, other than those it specifically
 identifies in the Bid Documents. The Department will write separate Contracts for each individual Project included
 in the combination.
 102.13
 Public Opening of Bids. The Department will publicly open Bids at the time and place indicated in
 the notice to Contractors. The Department will announce the total Bid amount for each Bid.
 Bidders or their authorized agent and other interested persons are invited to the opening.
 The Department may postpone the receipt of Bid time or the opening of Bids time. If the Department changes
 the hour or the date of the receipt of Bids or the opening of Bids, it will issue an addendum or public notice to
 notify prospective Bidders.
 102.14
 Disqualification of Bidders. The Department will declare a Bid non-responsive and ineligible for
 award when any of the following occur:
 A. The Bidder lacks sufficient prequalification work types or dollars to be eligible for award.
 B. The Bidder fails to furnish the required Proposal Guaranty in the proper form and amount.
 C. The Bid contains unauthorized alterations or omissions.
 D. The Bid contains conditions or qualifications not provided for in the Bid Documents.
 
 E. The Proposal is not prepared as specified.
 F. A single entity, under the same name or different names, or affiliated entities submits more than one Bid for
 the same Project.
 G. The Bidder fails to submit a unit price for each contract item listed, except for lump sum items where the
 Bidder may show a price in the “Bid Amount” column for that item.
 H. The Bidder fails to submit a lump sum price where required.
 I. The Bidder fails to submit a complete Expedite file using the software specified in the Proposal.
 J. The Bidder is debarred from submitting Bids.
 K. The Bidder has defaulted, has had a Contract terminated for cause by the Department, has either agreed not to
 Bid or has had debarment proceedings initiated against the Bidder’s company and/or its key personnel.
 L. The Bidder submits its Bid or Proposal Guaranty on forms other than those provided by the Department.
 M. The Bidder fails to properly complete the supplemental questionnaire section of the Expedite file.
 N. The Bidder submits a Materially Unbalanced Bid as defined by 102.08.
 O. The Bidder fails to acknowledge addenda.
 P. The Department finds evidence of collusion.
 Q. Any other omission, error, or act that, in the judgment of the Department, renders the Bidder’s bid nonresponsive.
 102.15 Material Guaranty. Before any Contract is awarded, the Department may require the Bidder to furnish
 a complete statement of the origin, composition, and manufacture of any or all Materials to be used in the
 construction of the Work together with samples. The Department may test the samples as specified in these
 Specifications to determine their quality and fitness for the Work.
 102.16 Certificate of Compliance with Affirmative Action Programs. Before any Contract is awarded, the
 Department will require the Bidder to furnish a valid Certificate of Compliance with Affirmative Action Programs,
 issued by the State EEO Coordinator dated prior to the date fixed for the opening of bids.
 102.17 Drug-Free Safety Program. During the life of this project, the Contractor and all its Subcontractors,
 that provide labor on the Project site, must be enrolled in and remain in good standing in the Ohio Bureau of
 Worker’s Compensation (“OBWC”) Drug-Free Safety Program (“DFSP”) or a comparable program approved by
 the OBWC.
 In addition to being enrolled in and in good standing in an OBWC-approved DFSP or a comparable program
 approved by the OBWC, the Department requires each Contractor and Subcontractor that provides labor, to subject
 its employees who perform labor on the project site to random drug testing of 5 percent of its employees. The
 random drug testing percentage must also include the on-site supervisors of the Contractors and Subcontractors.
 Upon request, the Contractor and Subcontractor shall provide evidence of required testing to the Department.
 Each Subcontractor shall require all lower-tier Subcontractors that provides labor on the project site with whom
 the Subcontractor is in contract for the Work to be enrolled in and be in good standing in the OBWC-approved
 DFSP prior to a lower-tier Subcontractor providing labor at the Site.
 The Department will declare a bid non-responsive and ineligible for award if the Contractor is not enrolled and
 in good standing in the Ohio Bureau of Workers’ Compensation’s Drug-Free Safety Program (DFSP) Discount
 Program or a similar program approved by the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation within 8 days of the bid opening.
 Furthermore, the Department will deny all requests to sublet when the subcontractor does not comply with the
 provisions of this section.
 Failure of the Contractor to require a Subcontractor to be enrolled in and be in good standing in the an OBWCapproved DFSP prior to the time that the Subcontractor provides labor at the Site, shall result in the Contractor
 being found in breach of the Contract and that breach shall be used in the responsibility analysis of that Contractor
 
 or the Subcontractor who was not enrolled in a program for future contracts with the State for five years after the
 date of the breach.
 
 103 AWARD AND EXECUTION OF CONTRACT
 103.01
 Consideration of Proposals. After opening and announcing the Bids, the Department will compare
 the Bidders’ proposed prices. The proposed price is the summation of the products of the estimated quantities
 shown in the Proposal and the unit Bid prices. If the amount shown for the proposed product differs from the actual
 product of the unit Bid price and the estimated quantity, then the actual product will govern.
 The Department may reject any or all Bids, waive technicalities, or advertise for new Bids without liability to
 the Department.
 103.02
 Award of Contract. The Department will award a Contract or reject Bids within 10 days after Bid
 opening. The Department will mail a letter to the address on the Bid notifying the successful Bidder of Bid
 acceptance and Contract award. The Department will award to the lowest competent and responsible bidder. The
 Department will not award a Contract until it completes an investigation of the apparent low Bidder.
 If the Department’s estimate for the cost of the improvement is not confidential, the Department will not award
 a Contract for an amount greater than 5 percent more than the Department’s estimate. If the Department’s estimate
 is confidential, the Department may award the Contract according to ORC 5525.15.
 103.03
 Cancellation of Award. The Department may cancel a Contract award at any time before all parties
 sign the Contract without liability to the Department.
 103.04
 Return of Proposal Guaranty. Immediately after the opening and checking of Bids, the Department
 will return all Proposal Guaranties provided in the form of a certified check or cashier’s check, except to the three
 lowest Bidders. Within 10 days after opening bids, the Department will return the Proposal Guaranties of the two
 remaining unsuccessful Bidders. After the successful Bidder submits the signed Contract, Contract Bonds, and
 other Contract Documents, and after the Department signs the Contract, the Department will return the Proposal
 Guaranty to the successful Bidder. The Department will not return Bid bonds.
 103.05
 Requirement of Contract Bond. Furnish Contract Bonds within 10 days after receiving notice of
 award. Furnish Contract Bonds to the Director on the prescribed form, in the amount of the Contract, and according
 to ORC 5525.16.
 103.06
 Execution of Contract. Sign and return the Contract, along with the certificate of compliance,
 Contract Bonds, and other required Contract Documents, within 10 days after notice of award. The State does not
 consider a proposal binding until the Director signs the Contract. If the Director does not sign the Contract within
 20 days after receiving the successful Bidder’s signed Contract, certificates, Contract Bonds, and other Contract
 Documents, the successful Bidder may withdraw the Bid without prejudice.
 103.07
 Failure to Execute Contract. If the successful Bidder fails to sign the Contract and furnish the
 Contract Bonds, the Department will have just cause to cancel the award. The successful Bidder shall forfeit the
 Proposal Guaranty to the Department, not as a penalty, but as liquidated damages. The Department may award the
 Contract to the next lowest responsive Bidder, re-advertise the Work, or take any other action decided by the
 Director.
 
 104 SCOPE OF WORK
 104.01
 Intent of the Contract Documents. The intent of the Contract Documents is to provide for the
 construction and completion of the Work. Perform the Work according to the Contract Documents.
 104.02
 
 Revisions to the Contract Documents.
 
 A. General. The Department reserves the right to revise the Contract Documents at any time. Such revisions do
 not invalidate the Contract or release the Surety, and the Contractor agrees to perform the Work as revised.
 The provisions of this section are subject to the limitation of ORC 5525.14.
 B. Differing Site Conditions. During the progress of the Work, if subsurface or latent physical conditions are
 encountered at the site differing materially from those indicated in the Contract Documents or if unknown physical
 conditions of an unusual nature, differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized
 as inherent in the Work provided for in the Contract Documents, are encountered at the site, notify the Engineer as
 specified in 108.02.F of the specific differing conditions before they are disturbed or the affected Work is
 performed.
 Upon notification, the Engineer will investigate the conditions and if it is determined that the conditions
 materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of any Work
 under the Contract, the Department will make an adjustment and modify the Contract as specified in 108.06 and
 109.05. The Engineer will notify the Contractor of the determination whether or not an adjustment of the Contract
 is warranted.
 C. Suspension of Work. If the performance of all or any portion of the Work is suspended or delayed by the
 Engineer in writing for an unreasonable period of time (not originally anticipated, customary, or inherent to the
 construction industry) and the Contractor believes that additional compensation or time is due as a result of such
 suspension or delay, notify the Engineer as specified in 108.02.
 Upon receipt of notice, the Engineer will evaluate the Contractor’s request. If the Engineer agrees that the cost
 or time required for the performance of the Work has increased as a result of such suspension and the suspension
 was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the Contractor, its suppliers, or subcontractors
 at any approved tier, and not caused by weather, the Engineer will make an equitable adjustment (excluding profit)
 and modify the contract as specified in 108.06 and 109.05. The Engineer will notify the Contractor of its
 determination whether or not an adjustment to the Contract Documents is warranted. Failure of the Engineer to
 suspend or delay the Work in writing does not bar the Contractor from receiving a time extension or added
 compensation according to 108.06 or 109.05.
 The Department will not make an adjustment under this subsection in the event that performance is suspended
 or delayed by any other cause, or for which an adjustment is provided or excluded under any other term or condition
 of this Contract.
 D. Significant Changes in Character of the Work. The Engineer may increase or decrease quantities and alter
 the Work as necessary to complete the Project. The Engineer will make appropriate adjustments according to
 108.06 and 109.05, if such alterations significantly change the character of the Work.
 If the Contractor disagrees as to whether an alteration constitutes a significant change, use the notification
 procedures specified in 108.02.G.
 The term “significant change” is defined as follows:
 1. when the character of the Work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that involved or
 included in the original proposed construction; or
 2. when the product of the quantity in excess of the estimated quantity of a contract item and the unit price
 exceeds the limits set forth in Table 104.02-1.
 
 TABLE 104.02-1
 Contract Price
 Up to $500,000
 $500,001 to $2,000,000
 Over $2,000,000
 
 Contract Limits
 $25,000
 5% of Total Contract Price
 $100,000
 
 A quantity underrun is defined as follows:
 1.
 
 the estimated quantity of a contract item exceeds four units, and
 
 2.
 
 the decrease in quantity of any unit price Contract Item exceeds 25 percent of the estimated quantity, and
 
 3.
 
 the total of all such adjustments for all Contract Items is more than $800.
 
 Then after the determination of final quantities according to 109.12.C, the Engineer will adjust the unit prices
 for the affected Contract item by multiplying the bid unit price by the factor obtained from Table 104.02-2.
 TABLE 104.02-2
 % Decrease
 25
 26 to 27
 28 to 29
 30 to 31
 32 to 33
 34 to 35
 36
 37 to 38
 39
 40 to 41
 42
 43
 44 to 45
 46
 47
 48
 49
 50
 51
 52
 53
 54
 55
 56
 57
 58
 59
 60
 61
 62
 63
 64
 65
 66
 
 Factor
 1.08
 1.09
 1.10
 1.11
 1.12
 1.13
 1.14
 1.15
 1.16
 1.17
 1.18
 1.19
 1.20
 1.21
 1.22
 1.23
 1.24
 1.25
 1.26
 1.27
 1.28
 1.29
 1.31
 1.32
 1.33
 1.35
 1.36
 1.38
 1.39
 1.41
 1.43
 1.44
 1.46
 1.49
 
 % Decrease
 67
 68
 69
 70
 71
 72
 73
 74
 75
 76
 77
 78
 79
 80 and over
 
 Factor
 1.51
 1.53
 1.56
 1.58
 1.61
 1.64
 1.68
 1.71
 1.75
 1.79
 1.84
 1.89
 1.94
 2.00
 
 When the increase in quantity or decrease in quantity of any unit price contract item does not exceed the limits
 set forth in Tables 104.02-2 and 104.02-3, the change is considered a minor change. The Department will pay for
 minor changes in the Work at the unit bid price.
 E. Eliminated Items. The Department may partially or completely eliminate contract items.
 The Department will only make an adjustment to compensate the Contractor for the reasonable cost incurred
 in preparation to perform significantly changed work as set forth in 104.02.D or work completely eliminated prior
 to the date of the Engineer’s written order to significantly change or completely eliminate the Work. The adjustment
 will be determined according to 109.04 and 109.05. Such payment will not exceed the price of the Contract Item.
 The Department will not seek a savings for maintaining traffic, mobilization, and construction layout stakes
 items for Eliminated Items of Work, unless there is a significant change.
 F. Extra Work. Perform Extra Work as directed by the Engineer. The Department will pay for Extra Work as
 specified in 109.05. Time extensions, if warranted, will be determined according to 108.06.
 G. Unilateral Authority to Pay. The Department has unilateral authority to pay the Contractor sums it determines
 to be due to the Contractor for work performed on the project. This unilateral authority to pay by the Department
 does not preclude or limit the rights of the Department and the Contractor to negotiate and agree to the amounts to
 be paid to the Contractor.
 104.03
 Rights in and Use of Materials Found on the Work. Upon obtaining the Engineer’s approval, the
 Contractor may use material, such as stone, gravel, or sand, found in the plan excavation for another Contract Item.
 The Department will pay for both the excavation of the material under the corresponding Contract Item and for the
 placement of the excavated material under the Contract Item(s) for which the excavated material is used. Excavate
 or remove material only from within the grading limits, as indicated by the slope and grade lines.
 Obtain written permission from the Engineer according to 107.11.A.
 104.04
 Cleaning Up. Maintain the Project in a presentable condition. Remove all rubbish, layout stakes,
 sediment control devices as directed by the Engineer, excess material, temporary structures, and equipment,
 including stream channels and banks within the Right-of-Way at drainage structures, and all borrow and waste
 areas, storage sites, temporary plant sites, haul roads, and other ground occupied by the Contractor in connection
 with the Work. Establish suitable vegetative cover in these areas by seeding and mulching according to Item 659,
 except for cultivated fields. Leave the Project site in an acceptable condition as determined by the Engineer. The
 cost of cleanup is incidental to all contract items. The Department may withhold 10 percent of the Bid amount for
 the mobilization contract item, if included, until performance under this section is complete. See 624.04.
 
 105 CONTROL OF WORK
 105.01
 
 Authority of the Engineer. The Engineer will decide questions concerning all of the following:
 
 A. The quality and acceptability of Materials furnished.
 B. The quantity of Work performed.
 C. The Contractor’s rate of progress.
 D. The interpretation of the Contract Documents.
 E. Acceptable fulfillment of the Contract.
 F. Contractor compensation.
 The Engineer may suspend all or part of the Work when the Contractor fails to correct conditions that are unsafe
 for the workers or the general public, fails to comply with the Contract Documents, or fails to comply with the
 Engineer’s orders. The Engineer may suspend the Work due to adverse weather conditions, conditions considered
 adverse to the prosecution of the Work, or other conditions or reasons in the public interest.
 The Engineer’s acceptance does not constitute a waiver of the Department’s right to pursue any and all legal
 remedies for defective work or work performed by the Contractor in an un-workmanlike manner.
 105.02
 Plans and Working Drawings. The Plans show details of structures, the lines and grades, typical
 cross-sections of the Roadway, and the location and design of structures. Keep at least one set of Plans at the Project
 at all times.
 Prepare working drawings when required by the Contract Documents and after verifying applicable field and
 plan elevations, dimensions, and geometries. Where Work consists of repairs, extension, or alteration of existing
 structures, take measurements of existing structures to accurately join old and new Work.
 Unless otherwise indicated, the Department will review working drawing submittals to ensure conformance with
 the Contract and to provide the Contractor a written response to document the results of its review as follows:
 A. “ACCEPTED.” The Department accepts the submittal for construction, fabrication, or manufacture.
 B. “ACCEPTED AS NOTED.” The Department accepts the submittal for construction, fabrication, or
 manufacture, subject to the Contractor’s compliance with all Department comments or corrections to the submittal.
 If also marked “RESUBMIT,” the Department still accepts the submittal, but requires the Contractor to provide a
 corrected submittal to the Department.
 C. “NOT ACCEPTED.” The Department does not accept the submittal. The submittal does not conform to
 Contract requirements. Do not begin construction, fabrication, or manufacture of Work included in the submittal.
 Revise the submittal to comply with Department comments or corrections and Contract requirements and provide
 the revised submittal to the Department for another review.
 “Accepted” and “Accepted as Noted” Working Drawings are Contract Documents as defined in 101.03. The
 Department’s acceptance will not relieve the Contractor of responsibility to complete the Work according to the
 Contract nor relieve a signatory engineer’s responsibility as defined by OAC 4733-23. Include the cost of furnishing
 Working Drawings in the cost of the Work they cover.
 105.03
 Conformity with Contract Documents. Perform all Work and furnish all Materials in reasonably
 close conformity with the lines, grades, cross-sections, dimensions, and material requirements as shown on the
 Plans and as specified.
 If the DCA determines the Work is not in reasonably close conformity with the Contract Documents and
 determines the Contractor produced reasonably acceptable Work, the DCA may accept the Work based on
 engineering judgment. The DCA will document the basis of acceptance in a Change Order that provides for an
 appropriate adjustment to the Contract Price of the accepted Work or Materials. If the DCA determines the Work
 is not in reasonably close conformity with the Contract Documents and determines the Work is inferior or
 unsatisfactory, remove, replace, or otherwise correct the Work at no expense to the Department.
 
 105.04
 Coordination of the Contract Documents. The Contract Documents are those defined in 101.03. A
 requirement appearing in one of these documents is as binding as though it occurs in all. The Engineer will resolve
 discrepancies using the following descending order of precedence:
 A. Addenda.
 B. Proposal and Special Provisions.
 C. Plans.
 D. Supplemental Specifications.
 E. Standard Construction Drawings.
 F.
 
 Standard Specifications.
 Immediately notify the Engineer upon discovering any latent error or omission in the Contract Documents.
 
 105.05
 Cooperation by Contractor. The Department will supply the Contractor with two sets of the
 Contract Documents, except for the standard construction drawings, which will only be supplied if requested. The
 Department will provide only one copy of these Specifications.
 Provide the constant attention necessary to progress the Work according to the Contract Documents. Cooperate
 with the Engineer, inspectors, and all other Contractors on or adjacent to the Project.
 105.06
 Superintendent. Provide a Superintendent for the Project that is available and responsive at all times
 and is responsible for all aspects of the Work, irrespective of the amount of subcontract Work. The Superintendent
 must be capable of reading and understanding the Contract Documents and experienced in the type of Work being
 performed. The Superintendent shall receive instructions from the Engineer or the Engineer’s authorized
 representatives. The Superintendent shall promptly execute the Engineer’s orders or directions and promptly supply
 the required materials, equipment, tools, labor, and incidentals.
 105.07
 Cooperation with Utilities. Unless otherwise provided for by the Contract Documents, the
 Department will direct the utility owners to relocate or adjust water lines, gas lines, wire lines, service connections,
 water and gas meter boxes, water and gas valve boxes, light standards, cableways, signals, and all other utility
 appurtenances within the limits of the proposed construction at no cost to the Contractor.
 If the Contractor is directed by a utility company to perform any work not specifically contained in this note, the
 Department will not compensate the Contractor for this work unless the Department approves the request in writing
 before the work begins. If the work is not preapproved by the Department, the Contractor will be responsible for
 obtaining reimbursement for its work from the utility company which directed the Contractor to perform the work.
 In the event that the Contractor requests that additional work, not specifically contained in this note, be performed
 by a utility company, the Contractor will be responsible for reimbursing the utility company for the additional work
 unless the Department has agreed in writing to pay for the additional work before the work begins.
 The Contract Documents will indicate various utility items and indicate a time frame or date when the
 Department expects the owners to complete utility relocation or adjustment. Provide utility owners adjusting
 facilities during construction with adequate notification of the scheduled Work to prevent conflict with the
 Contractor’s schedule of operations.
 When bidding, consider all permanent and temporary utility appurtenances in present and relocated positions as
 shown in the Contract Documents.
 According to ORC 153.64 and at least 2 Workdays prior to commencing construction operations in an area that
 may affect underground utilities shown on the Plans, notify the Engineer, the registered utility protection service,
 and the owners that are not members of the registered utility protection service.
 The owner of the underground utility shall, within 48 hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays,
 after notice is received, start staking, marking, or otherwise designating the location, course, 2 feet (0.6 m),
 together with the approximate depth of the underground utilities in the construction area.
 
 If the utility owners fail to relocate or adjust utilities as provided for in the Contract Documents and the
 Contractor sustains losses that could not have been avoided by the judicious handling of forces, equipment, and
 plant, or by reasonable revisions to the schedule of operations, then the Engineer will adjust the Contract according
 to 108.06 and 109.05.
 105.08
 Cooperation Between Contractors. At any time, the Department may contract for other work on or
 near the Project.
 Separate Contractors working within the limits of the Project shall conduct their work without interfering with
 or hindering the progress or completion of Work being performed by other Contractors and shall cooperate with
 each other as directed by the Engineer.
 105.09
 Authority and Duties of the Inspector. Inspectors are authorized to inspect the Work and the
 preparation, fabrication, or manufacture of materials. Inspectors are not authorized to alter or waive requirements
 of the Contract Documents. Inspectors are authorized to notify the Contractor of Work that does not conform to
 the Contract; reject materials that do not conform to Specification requirements; and until the issue is decided by
 the Engineer, suspend portions of the Work if there is a question regarding the Contract Documents, use of
 unapproved material, or safety. Inspectors are not obligated or authorized to provide direction, superintendence, or
 guidance to the Contractor, its crew, its subcontractors, or suppliers to accomplish the Work.
 Any action or inaction of the Inspector does not constitute a waiver of the Department’s right to pursue any and
 all legal remedies for defective work or work performed by the Contractor in an un-workmanlike manner.
 105.10
 Inspection of Work. The Engineer may inspect materials and the Work. Provide the Engineer or the
 Engineer’s representative access to the Work, information, and assistance necessary to conduct a complete
 inspection. Notify the Engineer at least 24 hours prior to all required inspections.
 When directed by the Engineer, remove or uncover completed Work to allow inspection. After the Engineer’s
 inspection, restore the Work according to the requirements of the Contract Documents. If the inspected Work
 conformed to the requirements of the Contract Documents, the Department will pay for uncovering or removing
 and restoring the Work as Extra Work according to 109.05. If the inspected Work did not conform to the Contract
 Documents, the Department will not pay for uncovering or removing and restoring the Work.
 The Department shall have the discretion to dictate the level of inspection for any item of work. The Contractor
 bears sole responsibility for the quality of work and compliance with the contract regardless of the Department’s
 level of inspection.
 The Department’s failure to identify defective Work or material shall not, in any way, prevent later rejection
 when defective Work or material is discovered, or obligate the Department to grant acceptance under 109.11 or
 109.12.
 Inspection of Work may include inspection by representatives of other government agencies or railroad
 corporations that pay a portion of the cost of the Work. This inspection will not make other government agencies
 or railroad corporations a party to the Contract and will not interfere with the rights of the Contractor or Department.
 105.11
 Removal of Defective and Unauthorized Work. Work that does not conform to the requirements
 of the Contract is defective.
 Unless the Department formally accepts defective Work according to 105.03, immediately remove and replace
 defective Work.
 Unauthorized Work is Work done contrary to the instructions of the Engineer, beyond the plan lines, or any extra
 work done without the Department’s permission. The Department will not pay for unauthorized Work. The
 Engineer may order the Contractor to remove or replace unauthorized Work at no expense to the Department.
 If the Contractor fails to comply with the Engineer’s orders under the provisions of this subsection, the DCA
 may correct or remove and replace defective or unauthorized Work and deduct the costs from the Contract Price.
 105.12
 
 Load Restrictions. Comply with all legal load restrictions when hauling materials on public roads.
 
 Operate equipment of a weight or so loaded as to not cause damage to structures, to the roadway, or to other
 types of construction. Comply with subsection 501.05.B.6 for allowed loads on bridges.
 Do not use off road vehicles on bases or pavements unless permitted by the DCA in writing.
 Do not haul on concrete pavement, base, or structures before the expiration of the curing period.
 Do not exceed the legal load limits in this section unless permitted by the Director in writing.
 105.13
 Haul Roads. Prior to hauling equipment or materials, provide written notification to the Engineer of
 the specific roads or streets on the haul route. If the haul route includes roads and streets that are not under the
 jurisdiction and control of the State and the DCA determines that State controlled roads are not available or practical
 for a haul route, the Contractor may use local roads and streets that are not restricted by local authorities. If the
 DCA determines that state controlled roads are available and practical for a haul route, revise the proposed haul
 route provided in the original written notification and resubmit to the DCA.
 If the Engineer determines that haul route roads were properly used during construction to haul equipment and
 materials and that the haul route roads were damaged, then the Engineer may order the Contractor to perform
 immediate and practical repairs to ensure reasonably normal traveling conditions. The Engineer will pay for repairs
 according to applicable provisions of 109.04 and 109.05.
 The Contractor shall not file a claim for delays or other impacts to the Work caused by disputes with the local
 authorities regarding the use of local roads or streets as haul routes. The Contractor shall save the State harmless
 for any closures or hauling restrictions outside the Project limits beyond the control of the Department.
 105.14
 Maintenance During Construction. Maintain the Work during construction and until Final
 Inspector accepts the work under 109.12, except for portions of the Work accepted under 109.11. The Contractor
 is responsible for damage done by its equipment.
 Maintain the previous courses or subgrade during all construction operations, when placing a course upon other
 courses of embankment, base, subgrade, concrete or asphalt pavement, or other similar items previously
 constructed. This maintenance includes, but is not limited to draining, re-compacting, re-grading, or if destroyed,
 the removal of Work previously accepted by the Department.
 Maintain the Post Construction Storm Water Best Management Practice (BMP) features. Prevent sediment laden
 surface water from coming in contact with the BMP features during construction.
 Maintain the Work during construction and before acceptance of the Work under 109.12, except for portions of
 the Work accepted under 109.11. The Department will not provide additional compensation for maintenance work.
 105.15
 Failure to Maintain Roadway or Structure. If the Contractor, at any time, fails to comply with the
 provisions of 105.14, the Engineer will immediately notify the Contractor of such noncompliance. If the Contractor
 fails to remedy unsatisfactory maintenance within 24 hours after receipt of such notice, the Engineer may
 immediately proceed to maintain the Project, and deduct the entire cost of this maintenance from monies due or to
 become due the Contractor on the Contract.
 105.16
 Borrow and Waste Areas. Prior to beginning borrow or wasting operations, obtain the Engineer’s
 written approval of a detailed operation plan that addresses the following concerns:
 A. Control of drainage water.
 B. Cleanup, shaping, and restoration of disturbed areas.
 C. Disposal of regulated materials.
 D. Avoidance of regulated areas.
 E. Excavation and filling of waste and borrow areas.
 F.
 
 Saving of topsoil.
 
 G. Temporary Sediment and Erosion Control BMPs required for compliance under the Clean Water Act, Ohio
 Water Pollution Control Act, (OWPCA) (ORC Chapter 6111) and the NPDES permit.
 
 Perform all engineering necessary to ensure long term stability of all side slopes and foundations of all borrow
 and waste areas. Furnish a certification by a Registered Engineer attesting to the stability of all borrow and waste
 areas. All damage resulting from the instability of borrow and waste areas, the removal of borrow materials, the
 placement of waste materials, or the hauling of material to and from these areas is the sole responsibility of the
 Contractor. Repairs to approved haul roads will be made in accordance with 105.13.
 Perform all engineering, including any field investigation, necessary to ensure long term stability of all side
 slopes and foundations of all borrow and waste areas.
 Ensure that all side slopes of all waste areas do not reduce horizontal sight distance as defined by the current
 version of the Department’s Location and Design Manual.
 Have the proposed borrow and waste areas reviewed by an environmental consultant that is pre-qualified by the
 Department for ecological work. Have the environmental consultant certify that the proposed borrow and waste
 operations will not impact the “Waters of the United States” or an isolated wetland. If consultant certification is
 not provided, obtain the 404/401 permits necessary to perform the operations as proposed. Have the environmental
 consultant certify that the work conforms to the requirements of the permit(s). Provide all documentation submitted
 to obtain the appropriate permit(s) and a copy of the permit(s) to the Department’s Office of Environmental
 Services.
 If burning is permitted under the OAC-3745-19 and ORC 1503.18, submit a copy of the Ohio EPA permit and
 the Ohio DNR permit to the Engineer and copies of all information used to obtain the permit.
 Prior to the disposal of waste materials, submit to the Department an executed copy of the Contract or permission
 statement from the property owner. The Contract or permission statement must indicate that the waste materials
 are not the property of the Department. Further, it must expressly state that the Department is not a party to the
 Contract or permission statement and that the Contractor and property owner will hold the Department harmless
 from claims that may arise from their contract or permission statement.
 Restoration of all borrow or waste areas includes cleanup, shaping, replacement of topsoil, and establishment of
 vegetative cover by seeding and mulching according to 104.04 and Item 659. Ensure the restored area is well
 drained unless approval is given by the Engineer to convert a pit area into a pond or lake, in which case confine
 restoration measures to the disturbed areas above the anticipated normal water level.
 For waste sites shown on the plan, the plan will indicate if the clearances have or have not been obtained for the
 project right-of-way locations. No extension of time or additional compensation will be paid for any delays due to
 not having the written permit(s) to waste in a floodplain.
 The allowed use of Project Right-of-Way and other Department property for borrow and waste is detailed in
 104.03 and 107.11.
 Borrow and Waste Area shall adhere to 107.10.
 The cost of work described herein is incidental to the Contract, unless included under another item of work.
 105.17
 Construction and Demolition Debris. OAC-3745-37, OAC-3745-400, and ORC Chapter 3714
 regulates the use and disposal of construction and demolition debris. Notify the local Board of Health or the local
 Ohio EPA office 7 days before placing Clean Hard Fill off the Right-of-Way. Submit copies of this notification to
 the Engineer.
 Legally dispose of debris containing wood, road metal, or plaster at a licensed construction and demolition debris
 site.
 Under the regulations cited above the disposal of brush, trees, stumps, tree trimmings, branches, weeds, leaves,
 grass, shrubbery, yard trimmings, crop residue, and other plant matter is restricted. If allowed by the Contract
 Documents, the Contractor may waste brush, trees, stumps, tree trimming, branches, weeds, leaves, grass,
 shrubbery, yard trimmings, crop residue, and other plant matter within the Right-of-Way. Otherwise, submit a plan
 and any required permits to legally dispose of these materials off the Right-of-Way to the Engineer. Provide all
 documents submitted to obtain this permit to the Engineer.
 
 If the Project contains garbage or solid and hazardous waste, the Contract Documents will detail the removal of
 these items.
 When wasting PCC, mix the PCC with at least 30 percent natural soil to construct an inner core in the waste area.
 Cover this inner core with 3 feet (1.0 m) of natural soil on the top and 8 feet (2.4 m) on the side slopes. Place and
 compact the material according to 203.06.D to prevent future settlement and sliding.
 Clean Hard Fill consisting of reinforced or non-reinforced concrete, asphalt concrete, brick, block, tile or stone
 that is free of all steel as per 703.16 shall be managed in one or more of the following ways:
 1. Recycled into a usable construction material.
 2. Disposed in licensed construction and demolition debris facility.
 3. Used in legitimate fill operations on the site of generation according to 105.16.
 4. Used in legitimate fill operations on a site other than the site of generation to bring a site up to grade.
 A Beneficial Reuse Certification form needs to be properly executed by the Recipient prior to any material
 leaving the project.
 105.18
 Acceptance. The Department will accept Work according to 109.12 or completed sections of the
 Project according to 109.11.
 105.19
 Value Engineering Change Proposals. The Department will Partner with the Contractor by
 considering the Contractor’s submission of a Value Engineering Change Proposal (VECP) which will reduce
 construction costs and possibly time on projects that do not contain Design Build provisions or incentive provisions
 based on time. The purpose of this provision is to encourage the use of the ingenuity and expertise of the Contractor
 in arriving at alternate plans, specifications or other requirements of the contract. Savings in construction costs and
 possibly time will be shared equally between the Contractor and the Department. The Contractor’s costs for
 development, design and implementation of the VECP are not eligible for reimbursement. The VECP must not
 impair any of the essential functions and characteristics of the project such as service life, reliability, economy of
 operation, ease of maintenance, safety and necessary standardized features. The submission of the value
 engineering change proposal shall conform to Supplement 1113. Acceptance of a VECP is at the sole discretion of
 the Director.
 The Department will not approve VECPs with any of the following characteristics:
 A. Consist only of non-performing items of work contained in the plans.
 B. Include plan errors identified by the Contractor as part of the cost reduction.
 C. The VECP designer/consultant for the Contractor is also the designer of record for ODOT.
 D. Changes to any special architectural or aesthetic treatments.
 E. Requires concrete beams to be installed with less than 17' vertical clearance over a state highway.
 F.
 
 Changes the type or buildup of permanent pavement.
 
 G. Compromises controlling design criteria or would require a design exception as discussed in Volume I, Section
 100, of the Location and Design Manual.
 H. Proposes a time savings for any project which has an Incentive / Disincentive clause, which was awarded based
 on A+B Bidding or Lane Rental.
 Engineering and drawing development and implementation costs for the VECP are not recoverable.
 The Contractor shall have no claim against the Department for any costs or delays due to the Department’s review
 or rejection of the VECP.
 If the Department already is considering revisions to the contract which are subsequently proposed as a VECP,
 the Department may reject the Contractor’s initial VECP or portions thereof and may proceed with such revisions
 without any obligations to the Contractor.
 
 106 CONTROL OF MATERIAL
 106.01
 Source of Supply and Quality Requirements. Notify the Engineer of the proposed sources of supply
 before the delivery of materials. The Engineer may approve materials at the source of supply before delivery. If the
 proposed sources of supply cannot produce the specified material, then furnish materials from alternate sources
 without adjustment to the Contract Price or Completion Date.
 106.02
 Samples, Tests, and Cited Specifications. The Engineer will inspect and determine whether the
 materials comply with the specified requirements before they are incorporated into the Work. The Department may
 sample and test materials or require certifications. Unless specified, the Department will pay for and test materials
 according to AASHTO, ASTM, or the methods on file in the office of the Engineer. A qualified representative of
 the Department will take test samples according to Departmental procedures. Read any reference to other
 specifications or testing methods to mean the version in effect at the pertinent Project Advertisement date. All
 materials being used are subject to inspection, test, or rejection at any time before their incorporation into the Work.
 The Department will furnish copies of the tests to the Contractor’s representative upon request. Furnish the required
 samples and specified material certifications at no expense to the Department other than provided in 109.03.
 Equip all transports and distributors hauling asphalt material with an approved submerged asphalt material
 sampling device.
 106.03
 Small Quantities and Materials for Temporary Application. The Engineer may accept small
 quantities and materials for temporary application that are not intended for permanent incorporation in the Work.
 The Engineer may accept these small quantities and materials for temporary application in either of the following
 cases:
 A. Where similar materials from the same source have recently been approved.
 B. Where the materials, in the judgment of the Engineer, will serve the intended purpose.
 106.04
 source.
 
 Plant Sampling and Testing Plan. The Engineer may undertake the inspection of materials at the
 
 In the event plant sampling and testing is undertaken, the Contractor and its material provider shall meet the
 following conditions:
 A. Cooperate and assist the Engineer with the inspection of materials. Provide full entry to the Engineer at all
 times to such parts of the plant as may concern the manufacture or production of the materials being furnished.
 Agree to all documentation and inspection requirements of the TE-24 plant sampling and testing plan.
 B. If required by the Engineer, arrange for the inspector to use an approved building on site. The building should
 be located near the plant and independent of any building used by the material producer.
 C. Maintain and provide adequate safety measures at the plant at all times.
 The Department reserves the right to retest all materials that have been tested and accepted at the source of supply
 before their incorporation into the Work. After the approved materials have been delivered to the site, the
 Department may reject all materials that when retested do not meet the requirements of the Contract Documents.
 106.05
 Storage of Materials. Properly store all materials to ensure the preservation of their quality and
 fitness for the Work. The Engineer may re-inspect stored materials before their incorporation into the Work, even
 though they were approved before storage. Locate stored materials to facilitate their prompt inspection. The
 Contractor may use approved portions of the Project Right-of-Way for storage; however, if any additional space is
 required, the Contractor must provide it at the Contractor’s expense. Do not use private property for storage
 purposes without written permission from the owner or lessee. If requested by the Engineer, furnish copies of the
 written permission. Restore all storage sites to their original condition at no expense to the Department. The
 Contractor and property owner will hold the Department harmless from claims that may arise from their contract
 or permission statement. This subsection does not apply to the stripping and storing of topsoil, or to other materials
 salvaged from the Work.
 Areas used to Store Materials shall conform to 107.10.
 
 106.06
 Handling Materials. Handle all materials in such manner as to preserve their quality and fitness for
 the Work. Transport aggregates from the storage site to the project site in vehicles constructed to prevent loss or
 segregation of materials after loading and measuring. Ensure that there are no inconsistencies in the quantities of
 materials loaded for delivery and the quantities actually received at the place of operations.
 106.07
 Unacceptable Materials. Unacceptable materials are all materials not conforming to the
 requirements of these Specifications at the time they are used. Immediately remove all unacceptable materials from
 the project site unless otherwise instructed by the DCA. The DCA will determine if unacceptance materials may
 remain conforming to Supplement 1102. The DCA must approve the use of previously identified unacceptable
 materials that have been corrected or repaired. If the Contractor fails to comply immediately with any order of the
 DCA made under the provisions of this subsection, the DCA will have authority to remove and replace defective
 materials and to deduct the cost of removal and replacement from any monies due or to become due to the
 Contractor.
 106.08
 Department-Furnished Material. Furnish all materials required to complete the Work, except when
 otherwise provided in the Proposal.
 The Department will deliver the Department-furnished materials to the Contractor at the points specified in the
 Contract Documents.
 Include the cost of handling and placing of all Department-furnished materials in the contract price for the
 contract item for which they are used.
 The Department will hold the Contractor responsible for all material upon delivery of the materials to the Project
 site. The Department will make deductions from any monies due the Contractor to make good any shortages and
 deficiencies, for any cause whatsoever, and for any damage that may occur after such delivery, and for any
 demurrage charges.
 106.09
 Steel and Iron Products Made in the United States. Furnish steel and iron products that are made
 in the United States according to the applicable provisions of Federal regulations stated in 23 CFR 635.410 and
 State of Ohio laws, and ORC 153.011 and 5525.21. “United States” means the United States of America and
 includes all territory, continental or insular, subject to the jurisdiction of the United States.
 A. Federal Requirements. All steel or iron products incorporated permanently into the Work must be made of
 steel or iron produced in the United States and all subsequent manufacturing must be performed in the United
 States. Manufacturing is any process that modifies the chemical content; physical shape or size; or final finish of a
 product. Manufacturing begins with the initial melting and mixing, and continues through the bending and coating
 stages. If a domestic product is taken out of the United States for any process, it becomes a foreign source material.
 B. State Requirements. All steel products used in the Work for load-bearing structural purposes must be made
 from steel produced in the United States. State requirements do not apply to iron.
 C. Applications.
 1. When the Work is federally funded both the Federal and State requirements apply. This includes all
 portions of the Work, including portions that are not federally funded.
 2.
 
 When the Work has no Federal funds, only the State requirements apply.
 
 D. Exceptions. The Director may grant specific written permission to use foreign steel or iron products in bridge
 construction and foreign iron products in any type of construction. The Director may grant such exceptions under
 either of the following conditions:
 1. The cost of products to be used does not exceed 0.1 percent of the total Contract cost, or $2,500, whichever
 is greater. The cost is the value of the product as delivered to the project.
 2. The specified products are not produced in the United States in sufficient quantity or otherwise are not
 reasonably available to meet the requirements of the Contract Documents. The Director may require the Contractor
 to obtain letters from three different suppliers documenting the unavailability of a product from a domestic source,
 if the shortage is not previously established.
 
 E. Proof of Domestic Origin. Furnish documentation to the Engineer showing the domestic origin of all steel
 and iron products covered by this section, before they are incorporated into the Work. Products without a traceable
 domestic origin will be treated as a non-domestic product.
 106.10
 Qualified Products List. The Department may use Qualified Product Lists (QPL) for approval of
 manufactured materials. The Office of Materials Management (OMM) will maintain the QPL and the standard
 procedure for the QPL process. Inclusion of a material onto the QPL will be determined by OMM with support
 from other Department offices. To be kept on the QPL, manufacturers must recertify their material according to
 the Department’s standard procedure by January 1 of each year. When a material requires QPL acceptance, only
 provide materials listed on the QPL at the time of delivery of the material to the project. Provide the Engineer
 documentation according to the Department’s standard procedure that, at the time of delivery, the material provided
 is on the QPL.
 106.11
 Maritime Transportation. On federal-aid projects, ensure that project-specific materials or
 equipment transported by ocean vessel are in compliance with 46 CFR 381 and the Cargo Preference Act. Transport
 at least 50% of any equipment or materials on privately owned United States-flag commercial vessels, if available.
 
 107 LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO PUBLIC
 107.01
 Laws to be Observed. Stay fully informed of all Federal and State laws, all local laws, ordinances,
 and regulations, and all orders and decrees of authorities having any jurisdiction or authority that affect those
 engaged or employed on the Work, or that affect the conduct of the Work. Observe and comply with all such laws,
 ordinances, regulations, orders, and decrees. The Contractor shall protect and indemnify the State and its
 representatives against any claim or liability arising from or based on the violation of any such law, ordinance,
 regulation, order, or decree, whether by the Contractor or the Contractor’s employees, subcontractors, or agents.
 The Contractor, under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act and related statutes, agrees that in the hiring of employees
 for the performance of Work under this Contract or any subcontract hereunder, neither the Contractor, the
 subcontractor, nor any person acting on behalf of such Contractor or subcontractor shall, by reasons of race,
 religion, color, sex, national origin, disability or age, discriminate against any citizen of the United States in the
 employment of labor or workers, who is qualified and available to perform the Work to which the employment
 relates.
 Neither the Contractor, the subcontractor, nor any person on their behalf shall, in any manner, discriminate
 against or intimidate any employee hired for the performance of Work under this Contract on account of race,
 religion, color, sex, national origin, disability or age.
 Comply with OAC-4123:1-3, entitled “Specific Safety Requirements of the Industrial Commission of Ohio
 Relating to Construction,” as amended, and with the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 and Code
 of Federal Regulations, Title 29, Chapter XVII, Part 1926 and as amended.
 107.02
 Permits, Licenses, and Taxes. Procure all permits and licenses; pay all charges, fees, and taxes; and
 provide all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the Work.
 107.03
 Patented Devices, Materials, and Processes. Before employing any design, device, material, or
 process covered by letters of patent or copyright, provide for its use by suitable legal agreement with the patentee
 or owner. The Contractor and the Surety shall indemnify and save harmless the State, any affected third party, or
 political subdivision from any and all claims for infringement of patented design, device, material, process, or any
 trademark or copyright, and shall indemnify the State for any costs, expenses, and damages that it may be obliged
 to pay by reason of any infringement, at any time during the prosecution or after the completion of the Work.
 107.04
 Restoration of Surfaces Opened by Permit. The Director may grant to the municipality in which
 the Work is performed a reservation of rights to construct or reconstruct any utility service in the highway or street
 or to grant permits for same, at any time.
 Any individual, firm, or corporation wishing to make an opening in the highway must secure a permit. Allow
 parties bearing such permits, and only those parties, to make openings in the highway. When ordered by the
 Engineer, make in an acceptable manner all necessary repairs due to such openings. The necessary repairs will be
 paid for as Extra Work, or as provided in the Contract Documents, and will be subject to the same conditions as
 the original Work performed.
 107.05
 Federal-Aid Provisions. When the United States Government pays for all or any portion of the
 Project’s cost, the Work is subject to the inspection of the appropriate Federal agency.
 Such inspections will not make the Federal Government a party to this Contract. The inspections will in no way
 interfere with the rights of either party to the Contract.
 107.06
 Sanitary Provisions. Provide and maintain sanitary accommodations in a neat condition for the use
 of employees and Department representatives that comply with the requirements of the State and local Boards of
 Health, or of other authorities having jurisdiction over the Project.
 107.07
 Public Convenience and Safety. At all times, ensure that the Work interferes as little as possible
 with the traffic. Provide for the safety and convenience of the general public and the residents along the highway
 and the protection of persons and property. Do not close any highways or streets unless specifically allowed by the
 Contract.
 
 107.08
 Bridges Over Navigable Waters. Conduct all Work on navigable waters so that it does not interfere
 with free navigation of the waterways and that it does not alter the existing navigable depths, except as allowed by
 permit issued by the U.S. Coast Guard. Work within the flood plain of a navigable stream may require a permit
 from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. If an U.S. Army Corps of Engineers permit is required, provide all
 documentation submitted to obtain the permit(s) and a copy of the permit(s) to the Department.
 107.09
 Use of Explosives. When the use of explosives is necessary for the prosecution of the Work, exercise
 the utmost care not to endanger life or property, including new Work. The Contractor is responsible for all damage
 resulting from the use of explosives.
 Obtain written permission to perform in-stream blasting from the Chief of the Division of Wildlife, Ohio DNR
 according to ORC 1533.58. Provide the Engineer with all documentation submitted to obtain this permit and with
 a copy of the permit.
 The Contractor agrees, warrants, and certifies that it will observe State laws and local ordinances and regulations
 relative to the use and storing of explosives kept on the Project site.
 Perform all blasting operations according to Item 208.
 107.10
 Protection and Restoration of Property. The Contractor is responsible for the preservation of all
 public and private property impacted by the Contractor’s operations.
 The Contractor is responsible for all damage or injury to property, during the prosecution of the Work, resulting
 from any act, omission, neglect, defective work or materials, or misconduct in the manner or method of executing
 the Work. The Contractor will remain responsible for all damage and injury to property until the Project is accepted
 under 109.12, except for portions of the Work accepted under 109.11.
 If the Contractor causes any direct or indirect damage or injury to public or private property by any act, omission,
 neglect, or misconduct in the execution or the non-execution of the Work, then it must restore, at its own expense,
 the property to a condition similar or equal to that existing before the damage or injury.
 If mail boxes, road, or street name signs and supports interfere with the Work, then remove and erect them in a
 temporary location during construction in a manner satisfactory to and as directed by the Engineer. After
 completion of the Work and before final acceptance of the Project, erect the mailboxes, road, or street name signs
 and supports in their permanent locations according to the plans unless otherwise directed by the Engineer.
 Consider the cost of this Work as incidental to the affected items.
 Cooperate with the Engineer in protecting and preserving survey monuments that are affected by the Work as
 required by ORC 5519.05. At the beginning of the Work, verify the position of all survey monuments in the area
 to be improved, according to 623. If survey monuments not shown in the Contract Documents are unexpectedly
 encountered, then protect, reference, and preserve them in the same manner as survey monuments that are shown
 in the Contract Documents.
 Do not create staging areas, store materials and equipment, or borrow or waste materials in areas labeled as an
 environmental resources areas in the Contract Documents. All properties to be utilized by the Contractor outside
 the project Work Limits must be cleared for all environmental resource impacts prior to the beginning of work.
 Environmental resources include but may not be limited to:
 1.
 
 Cultural Resources
 a.
 
 Buildings, structures, objects, and sites eligible for or listed on the National Register of Historic Places
 
 b. Historic or prehistoric human remains, cemeteries, and/or burial sites (pursuant with ORC 2909.05
 and 2927.11
 2.
 
 Ecological Resources
 a.
 
 Wetlands
 
 b.
 
 Streams
 
 c.
 
 Wooded areas with trees to be removed in excess of 8 inches diameter at breast height
 
 3.
 
 Public Lands
 a.
 
 Lands meeting the criteria of 49 U.S.C. 303, 23 CFR 771.I35: 4(f).
 
 b.
 
 Lands meeting the criteria of 16 U.S.C. 4601-4, 36 CFR59.1: 6(f).
 
 4.
 
 FEMA Mapped 100 year Floodplains
 
 5.
 
 Hazardous Waste Areas
 
 Except for locations utilized specifically for:
 1. Parking of equipment between workdays for maintenance type projects:
 2. Reuse of Clean Hard Fill as described in CA-EW-20 (ODOT Beneficial Reuse Form). Prior to transferring
 Clean Hard Fill from the project, fully execute form CA-EW-20 and provide appropriate documentation to the
 Engineer as described for each reuse option.
 All areas proposed to be utilized by the Contractor outside the project construction limits and not described above
 shall be reviewed by environmental Contractor(s) that are prequalified by the Department for each environmental
 resource. Exception (1.) noted above only applies to projects with “maintenance” in the project description. Have
 the consultant(s) certify that the proposed site to be utilized for the Contractor will not impact:
 1.
 
 Cultural Resources
 
 2.
 
 Ecological Resources
 
 3.
 
 Public Lands
 
 4.
 
 FEMA Mapped 100 year Floodplains
 
 5.
 
 Hazardous Waste Areas
 
 Provide all documentation and the consultant certification to the Office of Environmental Services with a copy
 to the Engineer.
 Should the areas proposed for use by the Contractor outside the project right of way limits contain environmental
 resources the Contractor is responsible to the Department for all environmental clearances and permits prior to the
 beginning of work.
 107.11
 
 Contractor’s Use of the Project Right-of-Way or Other Department-Owned Property.
 
 A. Disposal of Waste Material and Construction Debris and Excavation of Borrow on the Project Rightof-Way or on Other Department-Owned Property. Dispose of waste material according to 105.16 and dispose
 of construction debris according to 105.17. In addition to the rights granted in 104.03, the Contractor’s use of the
 Project Right-of-Way or other Department-owned property for the disposal of waste material and construction
 debris and excavation of borrow material is restricted as follows:
 1. If the Contract Documents identify locations for the disposal of waste material and construction debris or
 excavation of borrow material within the Project Right-of-Way or on other Department-owned property, then only
 perform these operations in these designated locations.
 2. If the Contract Documents do not identify locations for the disposal of waste material and construction
 debris or excavation of borrow material within the Project Right-of-Way or on other Department-owned property,
 then do not Bid assuming that the Department will make such locations available.
 If the Contractor’s request to use locations within the Project Right-of-Way or on other Department-owned
 property is approved by the Engineer, then the Department may allow the Contractor to dispose of waste material
 and construction debris or excavate borrow material for a fee of $0.50 per cubic yard.
 B. Contractor’s Use of Portable Plants Within the Project Right-of-Way or on Other Department-Owned
 Property. The Contractor’s use of portable plants within the Project Right-of-Way or on other Department-owned
 property is limited as follows:
 
 1. If the Contract Documents identify locations within the Project Right-of-Way or on other Departmentowned property to place a portable plant, then only place a portable plant in these designated locations subject to
 the requirements of 107.11.C.
 2. If the Contract Documents do not identify locations within the Project Right-of-Way or on other
 Department-owned property to place a portable plant, then do not bid assuming that the Department will make such
 locations available.
 However, the Department will consider a Value Engineering Change Proposal (VECP) for the placement of a
 portable plant within the Project Right-of-Way or on other Department-owned property and, if accepted, may allow
 the use of a particular site on its property subject to the requirements of 107.11.C.
 C. Placement of a Portable Plant within the Project Right-of-Way or on Other Department-Owned
 Property. To place a portable plant within the Project Right-of-Way or on other Department-owned property,
 comply with the following requirements:
 1.
 
 Local noise ordinances.
 
 2. Obtain any necessary EPA permits for the operation of the plant. Provide the Department with a copy of
 the information submitted to obtain the permit and a copy of the permit.
 3. Provide the Engineer written certification that the plant will supply material only for the Project for which
 it was approved. Do not use the plant to supply any other project or to sell materials commercially.
 4. Submit a traffic control plan to the Engineer for approval that details the anticipated truck movements and
 provides acceptable protection, warning, and guidance to motorists, pedestrians, and the workers.
 D. Equipment Storage and Staging. The Contractor may use, fee-free, any portion of the Project within the
 Project Right-of-Way for staging, equipment storage, or an office site with the approval of the Engineer, provided
 such usages do not interfere with the Work and are not prohibited by the Contract Documents. Do not bid in
 anticipation of using any properties within the Project Right-of-Way or Department-owned property outside the
 Project Right-of-Way for equipment storage or staging.
 E. Equipment Removal and Site Restoration. Remove all Contractor equipment and completely restore all
 utilized sites used as required by 104.04 before Final Acceptance as provided in 109.12.
 107.12
 Responsibility for Damage Claims and Liability Insurance. The Contractor shall indemnify and
 save harmless the State and all of its representatives, municipalities, counties, public utilities, any affected railroad
 or railway company, and any fee owner from whom a temporary Right-of-Way was acquired for the Project from
 all suits, actions, claims, damages, or costs of any character brought on account of any injuries or damages sustained
 by any person or property on account of any negligent act or omission by the Contractor or its subcontractors or
 agents in the prosecution or safeguarding of the Work.
 The Contractor shall procure and maintain insurance for liability for damages imposed by law and assumed under
 this Contract, of the kinds and in the amounts hereinafter provided from insurance companies authorized to do
 business in the State by the Ohio Department of Insurance. The cost of insurance is incidental to all contract items.
 Before the execution of the Contract by the Director, furnish to the Department a certificate or certificates of
 insurance in the form satisfactory to the Department demonstrating compliance with this subsection. Provide an
 insurance certificate or certificates that show that the Contractor’s liability and auto policies coverage are not
 reduced, restricted, or canceled until 30 days written notice has been given to the Department by the insurer. Mail
 all certificates and notices to: Administrator, Office of Contracts, Ohio Department of Transportation, 1980 West
 Broad Street, Columbus, Ohio 43223. Upon request, the Contractor shall furnish the Department with a certified
 copy of each policy, including the provisions establishing premiums.
 The types and minimum limits of insurance are as follows:
 A. Workers’ Compensation Insurance. Comply with all provisions of the laws and rules of the Ohio Bureau of
 Workers’ Compensation covering all operations under Contract with the Department whether performed by it or
 its subcontractors. In addition, if a portion of the Work is performed from a barge or ship or requires unloading
 material from a barge or ship on a navigable waterway of the United States, it is the responsibility of the Contractor
 
 to arrange coverage for that portion of the Work under the Longshore and Harborworkers’ Compensation Act [33
 USC Section 901 et seq.] and the Jones Act [5 USC Section 751 et seq.] and provide proof of coverage to the
 Department.
 B. Commercial General Liability Insurance. The minimum limits for liability insurance are as follows:
 General Aggregate Limit
 Products - Completed Operations Aggregate Limit
 Personal and Advertising Injury Limit
 Each Occurrence Limit
 
 $2,000,000
 $2,000,000
 $1,000,000
 $1,000,000
 
 Obtain the above minimum coverages through primary insurance or any combination of primary and umbrella
 insurance. In addition, the Department will require the General Aggregate Limit on a per project basis.
 Ensure that the Commercial General Liability Insurance policy names the State of Ohio, Department of
 Transportation, its officers, agents, and employees as additional insureds with all rights to due notices in the manner
 set out above. Obtain Explosion, Collapse, and Underground (XCU) coverage at the same limits as the commercial
 general liability insurance policy. In addition, if blasting is to be performed, obtain XCU coverage providing a
 minimum Aggregate Limit of $5,000,000 and Each Occurrence Limit of $1,000,000. Submit proof of insurance,
 endorsements, and attachments to the Engineer prior to starting the Work.
 C. Comprehensive Automobile Liability Insurance. The Comprehensive Automobile Liability policy shall
 cover owned, non-owned, and hired vehicles with minimum limits as follows:
 Bodily Injury and Property Damage Liability Limit, Each Occurrence
 
 $1,000,000
 
 Insurance coverage in the minimum amounts set forth neither relieves the Contractor from liability in excess of
 such coverage, nor precludes the Department from taking such other actions as are available to it under any other
 provisions of this Contract or otherwise in law.
 Clearly set forth all exclusions and deductible clauses in all proof of insurance submitted to the Department. The
 Contractor is responsible for the deductible limit of the policy and all exclusions consistent with the risks it assumes
 under this Contract and as imposed by law.
 If the Contractor provides evidence of insurance in the form of certificates of insurance, valid for a period of
 time less than the period during which the Contractor is required by terms of this Contract, then the Department
 will accept the certificates, but the Contractor is obligated to renew its insurance policies as necessary. Provide new
 certificates of insurance from time to time, so that the Department is continuously in possession of evidence that
 the Contractor’s insurance is according to the foregoing provisions.
 If the Contractor fails or refuses to renew its insurance policies or the policies are canceled or terminated, or if
 aggregate limits have been impaired by claims so that the amount available is under the minimum aggregate
 required, or modified so that the insurance does not meet the requirements of 107.12.C, the Department may refuse
 to make payment of any further monies due under this Contract or refuse to make payment of monies due or coming
 due under other contracts between the Contractor and the Department. The Department in its sole discretion may
 use monies retained pursuant to this subsection to renew or increase the Contractor’s insurance as necessary for the
 periods and amounts referred to above. Alternatively, should the Contractor fail to comply with these requirements,
 the Department may default the Contractor and call upon the Contractor’s Surety to remedy any deficiencies.
 During any period when the required insurance is not in effect, the Engineer may suspend performance of the
 Contract. If the Contract is so suspended, the Contractor is not entitled to additional compensation or an extension
 of time on account thereof.
 Nothing in the Contract Documents and insurance requirements is intended to create in the public or any member
 thereof a third party beneficiary hereunder, nor is any term and condition or other provision of the Contract intended
 to establish a standard of care owed to the public or any member thereof.
 
 107.13
 Reporting, Investigating, and Resolving Motorist Damage Claims. The Contractor and the
 Department are required to report, investigate, and resolve motorist damage claims according to 107.10 and 107.12
 and as follows.
 When a motorist reports damage to its vehicle either verbally or in writing to the Contractor, the Contractor shall
 within 3 days make and file a written report to the District’s construction office In the event that the Department
 directly receives the motorist’s claim, the Department shall within 3 days send the claim report to the Contractor.
 In the event the Contractor has not agreed to resolve the motorist claim, the District’s construction office shall
 forward the report to the Department’s Court of Claims Coordinator who, as a co-insured party, may then contact
 the Contractor’s insurance company and request that the insurance company investigate and resolve the claim. If
 the Contractor or their insurance company does not resolve the claim in a timely manner, the Department may
 advise the motorist of the option of pursuing the claim in the Ohio Court of Claims.
 In the event of a lawsuit filed against the Department in the Ohio Court of Claims by the motorist, the Department,
 as co-insured party, may request the Contractor’s insurance company to defend this lawsuit and hold the
 Department harmless according to 107.12.
 If the lawsuit claim amount is $2,500 or less and the Court of Claims Coordinator determines that the Contractor
 is responsible for the claimed damages then the Department's Court of Claims Coordinator may, after notifying the
 Contractor, determine that it would be in the best interest of the Department to settle the claim. Any settlement
 amount including court costs may be assessed to the Contractor and deducted from the project. The Engineer will
 notify the Contractor prior to executing the deduction. The Contractor or the Contractor's insurance company may
 within 14 days appeal the assessment decision of the Court of Claims Coordinator to the District Construction
 Engineer. The decision of the DCA will be made within 14 days and will be administratively final.
 107.14
 Opening Sections of Project to Traffic. The Engineer may order the Contractor to open a section of
 the Work to the safe use of traffic at any time. The Department will make an adjustment according 108.06 and
 109.05 to compensate the Contractor for the added costs and delay, if any, resulting from such an opening.
 107.15
 Contractor’s Responsibility for Work. Until the Final Inspector accepts the Work during the Final
 Inspection according to 109.12.A, the Contractor is responsible for the Project and will take every precaution
 against injury or damage to any part thereof by the action of the elements or from any other cause, whether arising
 from the execution or from the non-execution of the Work. Rebuild, repair, restore, and make good all injuries or
 damages to any portion of the Work occasioned by any of the above causes before final acceptance. Bear the
 expense of the repairs except when damage to the Work was due to unforeseeable causes beyond the control of and
 without the fault or negligence of the Contractor. Unforeseeable causes include but are not restricted to; (a)
 earthquake, floods, tornados, high winds, lightning or other catastrophes proclaimed a disaster or emergency, (b)
 slides, (c) civil disturbances, or (d) governmental acts.
 In the event that the Engineer determines that damage to completed permanent items of Work results from traffic
 using a substantially completed section of Roadway, the Department may compensate the Contractor for repair of
 the damage as authorized by Change Order. To receive compensation for the damage the Contractor must meet the
 following requirements.
 A. Notify the Engineer of each occurrence of damage in writing within 10 Calendar Days.
 B. Contact the local law enforcement agency to determine if the accident was investigated and a report filed. If
 an accident report was filed, obtain the report and notify the motorist, and copy their insurance company, via
 registered mail that the motorist is responsible for the cost of damage repairs. If the motorist does not respond
 within 30 days, make a second attempt to contact the motorist and copy the insurance company via registered mail.
 C. If no response is received from the motorist or insurance company within 30 days, send a letter to the Engineer
 within eighteen months of the event and include documentation of good faith effort to seek recovery from
 responsible parties.
 D. The Department will make an adjustment according to 108.06 and 109.05 to compensate the Contractor for
 the added costs and delays, if any, resulting from repairing damaged Work.
 
 If there is no accident report on file and no means of identifying the guilty motorist, the Contractor will likewise
 be compensated to repair the damaged Work.
 In case of suspension of Work by the Contractor or under the provisions of 105.01, the Contractor is responsible
 for the Project and shall take necessary precautions to prevent damage to the Project; provide for normal drainage;
 and erect any necessary temporary structures, signs, or other facilities at its expense. During such period of
 suspension of Work, properly and continuously maintain in an acceptable growing condition all living material in
 newly established plantings, seedings, and soddings furnished under the Contract, and take adequate precautions
 to protect new tree growth and other important vegetative growth against injury.
 The Engineer may direct the Contractor to remove graffiti any time during the Work. The Department will make
 an adjustment according to 108.06 and 109.05 to compensate the Contractor for the added costs and delays, if any,
 resulting from all ordered graffiti removal.
 107.16
 Contractor’s Responsibility for Utility Property and Services. At points where the Contractor’s
 operations are adjacent to properties of railway, cable, telephone, and power companies, or are adjacent to other
 property, and any damage to their property may result in considerable expense, loss, or inconvenience, do not
 commence with the operation until all arrangements necessary for the protection of the property have been made.
 Cooperate with the owners of any underground or overhead utility lines in their removal and rearrangement
 operations to ensure these operations progress in a reasonable manner, that duplication of rearrangement Work may
 be reduced to a minimum, and that services rendered by those parties will not be unnecessarily interrupted.
 In the event interruption to underground or overhead utility services results from an accidental breakage or from
 being exposed or unsupported, immediately alert the occupants of nearby premises as to any emergency that the
 accidental breakage may create at or near such premises. Then notify the Engineer and the owner or operator of the
 utility facility of the disruption and cooperate with the said utility owner or operator in the restoration of service.
 If water service is interrupted, perform the repair work continuously until the service is restored unless the repair
 work is performed by the local governmental authority. Do not begin Work around fire hydrants until the local fire
 authority approves provisions for continued service.
 107.17
 Furnishing Right-of-Way. The Department is responsible for securing all necessary Right-of-Way
 in advance of construction. The Bid Documents will indicate any exceptions. The Department will notify all
 prospective Bidders in writing before the date scheduled for receipt of Bids regarding the specific dates certain
 parcels will be made available to the Contractor.
 107.18
 No Waiver of Legal Rights. The following Department actions do not waive the Department’s rights
 or powers under the Contract, or any right to damages herein provided:
 A. Inspection by the Engineer or by any of Engineer’s duly authorized representatives.
 B. Any order, measurements, or certificate by the Director, or Department representatives.
 C. Any order by the Director or Department representatives for the payments of money or the withholding of
 money.
 D. Acceptance of any Work.
 E. Any extension of time.
 F. Any possession taken by the State or its duly authorized representatives.
 The Department will not consider any waiver of a breach of this Contract to be a waiver of any other subsequent
 breach.
 107.19
 Environmental Protection. Comply with all Federal, State, and local laws and regulations
 controlling pollution of the environment. Avoid polluting streams, lakes, ponds, and reservoirs with fuels, oils,
 bitumens, chemicals, sediments, or other harmful materials, and avoid polluting the atmosphere with particulate
 and gaseous matter.
 By execution of this contract, the Contractor, will be deemed to have stipulated as follows:
 
 A. That any facility that is or will be utilized in the performance of this contract, unless such contract is exempt
 under the Clean Air Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1857 et seq., as amended by Pub.L. 91-604), and under the Federal
 Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as amended by Pub.L. 92-500), Executive Order
 11738, and regulations in implementation thereof (40 CFR 15) is not listed, on the date of contract award, on the
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) List of Violating Facilities pursuant to 40 CFR 15.20.
 B. That the firm agrees to comply and remain in compliance with all the requirements of Section 114 of the Clean
 Air Act and Section 308 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and all regulations and guidelines listed
 thereunder.
 C. That the firm shall promptly notify the Department of the receipt of any communication from the Director,
 Office of Federal Activities, EPA, indicating that a facility that is or will be utilized for the contract is under
 consideration to be listed on the EPA List of Violating Facilities.
 D. That the firm agrees to include or cause to be included the requirements of paragraph 1 through 4 of this
 Section in every nonexempt subcontract, and further agrees to take such action as the government may direct as a
 means of enforcing such requirements.
 Fording of streams is prohibited. Causeways for stream and river crossings or for Work below a bridge are
 permitted provided:
 A. The causeway complies with the requirements of the 404 Permit the Department obtained for the Project.
 B. The Contractor obtains a 404 Permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers if the Department has not
 obtained such a permit. Obtain the 404 Permit prior to beginning construction of the causeway. The Department
 does not guarantee that the Contractor will be able to obtain a 404 Permit.
 Comply with all current provisions of the Ohio Water Pollution Control Act (OWPCA), (ORC Chapter 6111).
 The Department will obtain a storm water permit under the OWPCA provisions when the plan work acreage
 requires a permit. Apply for a permit to cover operations outside the Project limits shown on the plans as required
 by the OWPCA provisions. When the Department has not applied for a permit on the Project and a permit is
 required under the provisions of the OWPCA because of the total area of the Contractor’s work, apply for, obtain,
 and comply with the required permit for both the Work within Project limits and the Contractor’s work.
 The Department has obtained the required permits from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and Ohio EPA for
 Work in the “Waters of the United States” and isolated wetlands under ORC Chapter 6111. Comply with the
 requirements of these permits.
 When equipment is working next to a stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, appropriate spill response equipment is
 required. Do not stockpile fine material next to a stream, lake, pond, or reservoir.
 Take precautions to avoid demolition debris and discharges associated with the excavation and hauling of
 material from entering the stream. Remove any material that does fall into the stream as soon as possible.
 When excavating in or adjacent to streams, separate such areas from the main stream by a dike or barrier to keep
 sediment from entering the stream. Take care during the construction and removal of such barriers to minimize
 sediment entering the stream.
 Contain, collect, characterize and legally dispose of all liquid waste and sludge generated during the work. Do
 not mix wastes with storm water. Do not discharge any liquid waste without the appropriate regulatory permits.
 Manage liquid waste and sludge in accordance with ORC Chapter 6111 and all other laws, regulations, permits and
 local ordinances relating to this waste. Liquid waste management is incidental to the Work unless otherwise
 specified in the contract.
 Control the fugitive dust generated by the Work according to OAC-3745-17-07(B), OAC-3745-17-08, OAC3745-15-07, and OAC-3745-17-03 and local ordinances and regulations. Prior to the initiation of abrasive coating
 removal, pavement cutting or any other construction operation that generates dust, demonstrate to the Engineer that
 construction related dust will be controlled with appropriate Reasonable Available Control Measures (RACM) as
 described in OEPA Engineering Guide #57.
 
 In addition, use dust control measures when fugitive dust creates unsafe conditions as determined by the
 Engineer. Perform this work without additional compensation except for Item 616.
 Perform open burning according to 105.16.
 107.20
 Civil Rights. Comply with Federal, State, and local laws, rules, and regulations that prohibit unlawful
 employment practices including that of discrimination because of race, religion, color, sex, national origin,
 disability or age and that define actions required for Affirmative Action and Disadvantaged Business Enterprise
 (DBE) programs.
 107.21
 Prompt Payment. In accordance with ORC 4113.61, make payment to each subcontractor and
 supplier within 10 Calendar Days after receipt of payment from the Department for Work performed or materials
 delivered or incorporated into the Project, provided that the pay estimate prepared by the Engineer includes Work
 performed or materials delivered or incorporated into the public improvement by the subcontractor or supplier.
 Contractors are prohibited from holding retainage from bonded subcontractors. For unbonded subcontractors,
 promptly release any retainage held, as set forth in any subcontractor or supplier agreement, within 10 days of
 department's acceptance of the work involving the subcontractor or supplier from whom retainage has been held.
 For the sole purpose of establishing a time frame for the release of the subcontractor or supplier retainage,
 acceptance of subcontractor or supplier work will occur when the subcontractor or supplier has complied with the
 requirements of 109.12.A, and B. No subcontract provision shall permit the Contractor to delay subcontractor’s
 retainage payments until the Project’s final payment.
 Also require that this contractual obligation be placed in all subcontractor and supplier contracts that it enters
 into and further require that all subcontractor and suppliers place the same payment obligation in each of their
 lower tier contracts. If the Contractor, subcontractors, or supplier subject to this provision fail to comply with the
 10 Calendar Day requirement, the offending party shall pay, in addition to the payment due, interest in the amount
 of 18 percent per annum of the payment due, beginning on the eleventh Calendar Day following the receipt of
 payment from the Department and ending on the date of full payment of the payment due plus interest.
 Repeated failures to pay subcontractors and suppliers timely pursuant to this subsection will result in a finding
 by the Department that the Contractor is in breach of Contract and subject to all legal consequences that such a
 finding entails. Further, repeated failures to pay timely pursuant to this subsection will result in a lower evaluation
 score for the Contractor and those subcontractors who are subject to evaluation by the Department.
 107.22
 Unmanned Aircraft Systems. If the project requires or anticipates the use of Unmanned Aircraft
 Systems within ODOT Right of Way, the Contractor will follow proper risk assessment and federal regulations in
 accordance with Supplement 1132.
 
 108 PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS
 108.01
 Subletting of the Contract. Perform Work amounting to not less than 50 percent of the Contract
 Price with its own organization, unless otherwise approved by the Director. The phrase “its own organization”
 includes only workers employed and paid directly, inclusive of employees who are employed by a lease agreement
 acceptable to the Department, and equipment owned or rented with or without operators by the Contractor. The
 phrase does not include employees or equipment of a subcontractor, assignee, or agent of the Contractor. Obtain
 the Director’s written consent to subcontract, sublet, sell, transfer, assign, or otherwise relinquish rights, title, or
 interest in the Work. Provide the Director with a copy of all Disadvantaged Business Enterprise subcontracts.
 The Contractor’s percentage of the total Contract Price includes the cost of materials and manufactured products
 purchased by the Contractor, but not the cost of materials and manufactured products purchased by subcontractors.
 The Director will calculate the Contractor’s percentage based on the quantities shown in the Proposal and the
 unit prices of the contract items to be performed by the Contractor’s organization. If the Contractor performs only
 a portion of a contract item, then the Director will determine the proportional value administratively on the same
 basis. The Director will follow this procedure even when the part not subcontracted consists only of the
 procurement of materials. However, if a firm both sells the materials to the Contractor and performs the Work of
 incorporating the materials into the Project, then the Department will consider these two phases in combination and
 as a single subcontract. If an affiliate of the firm either sells the materials or performs the Work, the Department
 may refuse approval. An affiliate is one who has some common ownership or other close relation to said firm.
 Use actual subcontract prices for calculating compliance with any Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE)
 percentage subcontracting obligations. If only a part of a contract item is sublet, then determine its proportional
 value administratively on the same basis. The Director will follow this procedure even when the part not sublet
 consists only of procuring materials. However, if a firm both sells the materials to the Contractor and performs the
 work of incorporating the materials into the Project, then the Department will consider these two phases in
 combination and as a single subcontract. If an affiliate of the firm either sells the materials or performs the Work,
 the Department may refuse approval.
 108.02
 Partnering. It is the intent of the Department to partner every project. The purpose of Partnering is
 to develop a proactive effort and spirit of trust, respect, and cooperation among all stakeholders in a project.
 Partnering does not affect the terms and conditions of the Contract. The Partnering process in this section is Selffacilitated Partnering performed by the Project personnel. Costs associated with the Self-facilitated Partnering
 process are incidental to the Contract.
 A. Preconstruction Meeting. Meet with the Engineer for a Preconstruction Meeting before beginning the Work.
 At or before the meeting, submit the initial progress schedule to the DCE. Prepare the schedule according to 108.03.
 Furnish a list of proposed subcontractors and material suppliers at or before the Preconstruction Meeting. If
 the Contractor fails to provide the required submissions at or before the Preconstruction Meeting, the Engineer may
 order the meeting suspended until they are furnished. Do not begin the Work until the meeting is reconvened and
 concluded or the Engineer gives specific written permission to proceed.
 B. Initial Partnering Session. In conjunction with the Engineer, determine whether the Initial Partnering
 Session will be conducted as part of the Preconstruction Meeting or as a separate meeting. Partnering shall have its
 own agenda with specific time set aside to develop the necessary partnering protocols. Develop the Partnering
 agenda with the Engineer.
 Identify and invite all stakeholders necessary to make the Project successful including utility companies, other
 transportation entities (i.e., railroads), community leaders, all Project participants including subcontractors.
 During the Initial Partnering Session, consider developing Partnering teams consisting of Department and
 Contractor senior personnel and Project personnel. Consider the following items for discussion:
 1. Identifying and developing a consensus on project goals consistent with the contractual obligations,
 including specific goals concerning safety, quality, schedule, and budget.
 2.
 
 Deciding how the teams will measure progress on Project goals.
 
 3. Identifying any potential risks to the Project’s success, mitigation strategies and an implementation plan
 for the appropriate strategies.
 4. Defining key issues, project concerns, joint expectations, roles of key partnership leaders, lines of decision
 making authority, and share relevant information to help determine the scope of the Partnering efforts.
 5. Identifying any opportunities for project enhancement, enhancement strategies and a specific action plan
 for implementing strategies.
 6.
 
 Developing a communication protocol to enhance communication on the Project
 
 7. Developing an issue identification and resolution process that identifies and attempts to resolve issues at
 the level closest to the work. The issue identification and resolution process will develop all the necessary steps for
 issue elevation including Notice and Mitigation defined in 108.02.F and the Dispute Resolution and Administrative
 Claims Process defined in 108.02.G.
 C. Progress Meetings. Hold monthly Progress Meetings unless the frequency is otherwise determined at the
 Preconstruction Meeting. Coordinate with the Engineer to determine agenda topics prior to each meeting. The
 purpose of Progress Meetings is to keep open communication between the Contractor and the Engineer. The senior
 personnel team is encouraged to participate in all Progress Meetings. Include Partnering as an agenda item at the
 Progress Meetings.
 D. Post-milestone Meeting. In conjunction with the Engineer, determine whether the Post-milestone Meeting
 will be conducted as part of the Progress Meeting or as a separate meeting for multi-year, multi-phase, or projects
 with critical items of work or milestone dates. Consider discussing and updating items from the Initial Partnering
 Session in addition to items specific to the Project. All stakeholders should be invited to attend.
 E. Partnering Monitoring. Monitor the progress of the Partnering relationship based on the goals decided during
 the Initial Partnering Session. On-line surveys of Project participants may be used to monitor progress on Project
 goals and help identify issues as they arise. The on-line surveys are consistent with the Department’s Partnering
 Project Rating Form which is located on the Division of Construction Management’s Partnering website:
 http://www.dot.state.oh.us/Divisions/ConstructionMgt/Pages/Partnering.aspx
 F. Mitigation and Notice. Mitigation of any issue, whether caused by the Department, Contractor, third-party or
 an intervening event, is a shared contract and legal requirement. Mitigation efforts include, but are not limited to,
 re-sequencing work activities, acceleration, and substitution of materials. The Contractor and Engineer must
 explore and discuss potential mitigation efforts in a timely manner.
 1. Contractor Initial Oral Notification. Provide immediate oral notification to the Engineer upon discovering
 a circumstance that may require a revision to the Contract Documents or may result in a dispute. Upon notification,
 the Engineer will attempt to resolve the identified issue as quickly as possible.
 2. Contractor Written Early Notice. If the Engineer has not resolved the identified issue within two (2)
 working days after receipt of oral notification, provide written notice to the Engineer of any circumstance that may
 require a revision to the Contract Documents or may result in a dispute. This early notice must be given by the end
 of the second working day following the occurrence of the circumstance.
 The Engineer and Contractor shall maintain records of labor, equipment, and materials used on the disputed
 work or made necessary by the circumstance. Such records will begin when early notice is received by the Engineer.
 Tracking such information is not an acknowledgement that the Department accepts responsibility for payment for
 this disputed work.
 If an issue is not resolved through the initial mitigation efforts, either abandon or escalate to the Dispute and
 Administrative Claims Process defined in 108.02.G.
 G. Dispute Resolution and Administrative Claims Process. Whenever an issue is elevated to a dispute, the
 parties shall exhaust the Department’s Dispute Resolution and Administrative Claim process set forth below as a
 condition precedent to filing an action in the Ohio Court of Claims. The following procedures do not otherwise
 compromise the Contractor’s right to seek relief in any Ohio Court with legal jurisdiction.
 
 All parties to the dispute must adhere to the Dispute Resolution and Administrative Claim process. Do not
 contact Department personnel who are to be involved in a Step 2 or Step 3 review until a decision has been issued
 by the previous tier. Department personnel involved in Step 2 or Step 3 reviews will not consider a dispute until
 the previous tier has properly reviewed the dispute and issued a decision.
 Failure to meet any of the timeframes outlined below or to request an extension will terminate further review
 of the dispute and serve as a waiver of the Contractor’s right to file a claim.
 Disputes and claims by subcontractors and suppliers may be pursued by the Contractor on behalf of
 subcontractors or suppliers. Disputes and claims by subcontractors and suppliers against the Department but not
 supported by the Contractor will not be reviewed by the Department. Disputes and claims of subcontractors and
 suppliers against the Contractor will not be reviewed by the Department.
 Continue with all Work during the Dispute Resolution and Administrative Claims process, including that
 which is in dispute. The Department will continue to pay for Work.
 The Department will not make the adjustments allowed by 104.02.B, 104.02.C, and 104.02.D if the Contractor
 did not give notice as specified in 108.02.F.1 and 108.02.F.2. This provision does not apply to adjustments provided
 in Table 104.02-2.
 1. Step 1 (On-Site Determination). The Engineer will meet with the Contractor’s superintendent within two
 (2) working days of receipt of the Contractor Written Early Notice set forth in 108.02.F.2. They will jointly review
 all pertinent information and contract provisions and negotiate in an effort to reach a resolution. The Engineer will
 issue a written Step 1 decision within fourteen (14) calendar days of the meeting. If the dispute is not resolved,
 either abandon or escalate the dispute to Step 2.
 2. Step 2 (District Dispute Resolution Committee). Each District will establish a District Dispute Resolution
 Committee (DDRC) which will be responsible for hearing and deciding disputes at the Step 2 level. The DDRC
 will consist of the District Deputy Director, District Construction Engineer and the Planning and Engineering
 Administrator or designees (other than the project personnel involved in the dispute).
 Within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of the Step 1 decision, either abandon the dispute or submit a written
 request for a Step 2 meeting to the District Construction Engineer (DCE). The DCE will assign the dispute a dispute
 number. Within fourteen (14) calendar days of submitting the request for a Step 2 meeting, submit three (3)
 complete copies of the Dispute Documentation to the DCA as follows:
 a) Identify the Dispute on a cover page by county, project number, Contractor name, subcontractor or
 supplier if involved in the dispute, and the dispute number.
 b) Clearly identify each item for which additional compensation and/or time is requested.
 c) Provide a detailed narrative of the disputed work or project circumstance at issue. Include the dates of the
 disputed work and the date of early notice.
 d) Reference the applicable provisions of the plans, specifications, proposal, or other contract documents in
 dispute. Include copies of the cited provisions in the Dispute Documentation.
 e)
 
 Include the dollar amount of additional compensation and length of contract time extension requested.
 
 f)
 
 Include supporting documents for the requested compensation stated above.
 
 g) Provide a detailed schedule analysis for any dispute involving additional contract time, actual or
 constructive acceleration, or delay damages. At a minimum, this schedule analysis must include the Schedule
 Update immediately preceding the occurrence of the circumstance alleged to have caused delay and must comply
 with accepted industry practices. Failure to submit the required schedule analysis will result in the denial of that
 portion of the Contractor’s request.
 h) Include copies of relevant correspondence and other pertinent documents.
 Within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of the Contractor’s Dispute Documentation, the Engineer will
 provide the Contractor with all documentation it intends to rely on at the DDRC meeting to rebut the Contractor’s
 dispute.
 
 After allowing at least fourteen (14) calendar days for the Contractor to review the Engineer’s Dispute
 Documentation, the DDRC will conduct the Step 2 meeting with Contractor personnel who are authorized to
 resolve the dispute. The DDRC will issue a written Step 2 decision to the Contractor and the Dispute Resolution
 Coordinator within fourteen (14) calendar days of the meeting. If the dispute is not resolved, either abandon or
 escalate the dispute to Step 3.
 3. Step 3 (Director’s Claims Board Hearing or Alternative Dispute Resolution). Submit a written Notice of
 Intent to File a Claim to the Dispute Resolution Coordinator in the Division of Construction Management within
 fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of the Step 2 decision. The dispute becomes a claim when the Dispute
 Resolution Coordinator receives the Notice of Intent to File a Claim. Include the Contractor’s request for either: 1)
 a Director’s Claim Board hearing on the claim or 2) Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR).
 a) Director’s Claims Board Hearing. The Director’s Claims Board (the “Board”) will consist of the Deputy
 Director of the Division of Construction Management, Deputy Director of Engineering and a District Construction
 Engineer from a district not involved in the claim, or their designees. A representative from the Division of Chief
 Legal Counsel and Equal Opportunity may be present to observe the hearing. The Director or designee will be
 responsible for deciding claims.
 (1) Submit six (6) complete copies of the Claim Documentation to the Dispute Resolution
 Coordinator within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the Notice of Intent to File a Claim. This timeframe may
 be extended with approval of the Dispute Resolution Coordinator.
 In addition to the documentation submitted at Step 2:
 (a) Enhance the narrative to include sufficient description and information to enable understanding
 by a third party who has no knowledge of the dispute or familiarity with the project.
 (b) Certify the claim in writing and under oath using the following certification:
 “I, (Name and Title of an Officer of the Contractor) certify that this claim is made in good faith, that all
 supporting data is accurate and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief, and that the claim amount
 accurately reflects the contract amendment for which (Contractor Company name) believes the Department is
 liable.”
 Sign and date this claim certification and have the signature notarized pursuant to the laws of the State
 of Ohio. The date the Dispute Resolution Coordinator receives the certified claim documentation is the date of the
 Department’s Receipt of the Certified Claim for the purpose of the calculation of interest as defined in 108.02.G.4.
 The Dispute Resolution Coordinator will forward one (1) complete copy of this documentation to the District.
 (2) Within thirty (30) calendar days of the District’s receipt of the Contractor’s Claim
 Documentation, the District will submit six (6) complete copies of its Claim Documentation to the Dispute
 Resolution Coordinator. This timeframe may be extended with approval from the Dispute Resolution Coordinator.
 At a minimum, the District’s Claim Documentation should include:
 (a) An overview of the project
 (b) A narrative of the disputed work or project circumstance at issue with sufficient description and
 information to enable understanding by a third-party who has no knowledge of the dispute or
 familiarity with the project
 (c) The dates of the disputed work and the date of early notice
 (d) References to the applicable provisions of the plans, specifications, proposal, or other contract
 documents. Copies of the cited provisions shall be included in the claim document
 (e) Response to each argument set forth by the Contractor
 (f) Any counterclaims, accompanied by supporting documentation, the District wishes to assert
 (g) The status of the negotiations of the Claim that have occurred to-date, including the amount of
 any offers and counteroffers made by the parties
 (h) Copies of relevant correspondence and other pertinent documents
 
 (3) Within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of the District’s Claim Documentation, the Dispute
 Resolution Coordinator will forward one (1) complete copy to the Contractor and will schedule a hearing on the
 dispute.
 Once a hearing date has been established, both the Contractor and District shall provide the Dispute
 Resolution Coordinator with a list of names of persons who may be presenting information at the hearing. Unless
 otherwise permitted by the Board, the exchange of documentation and all disclosures specified in this step of the
 process shall be completed at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the hearing.
 Upon request or at the Board’s discretion, the Board may delay the hearing to allow more time for
 preparation and review, or to fulfill requests for more documentation.
 The Board will hear the entire claim on behalf of the Director. The Board may have its own technical
 advisors at the hearing for consultation and assistance in reviewing the claim. The Contractor and District will each
 be allowed adequate time to present their respective positions before the Board. The Contractor and District will
 also each be allowed adequate time for rebuttal, limited to the scope of the opposing party’s presentation. The
 Board may suspend any portion of a presentation or rebuttal it deems to be argumentative, repetitive, or irrelevant
 to the claim. The Contractor’s position will be presented by one or more of the Contractor’s employees who are
 thoroughly knowledgeable of the claim. The Contractor may have legal counsel present during the hearing to
 observe or for private consultation. Similarly, the District’s position will be presented by one or more District
 representatives who are thoroughly knowledgeable of the claim.
 The Board may, on its own initiative, request information in addition to that submitted for the hearing.
 If the Contractor fails to reasonably comply with such request, the Board may render its decision without such
 information.
 Upon completion of the hearing and following consideration of any additional information submitted
 upon request, the Board will submit a written recommendation on the disposition of the claim to the Director. The
 Director or designee will ratify, modify, or reject the recommendation of the Board and render a decision within
 sixty (60) calendar days of the hearing. Within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the Board’s decision, either
 accept or reject the decision in writing. In the event the Contractor fails to do so, the Board may revoke any offers
 of settlement contained in the decision.
 The decision of the Director is the final step of the Department’s Dispute Resolution Process and may
 not be appealed within the Department. The Director is not bound by any offers of settlement or findings of
 entitlement made during Steps 1 and 2 of the Dispute Resolution Process.
 b) Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR). In lieu of the Director’s Claim Board hearing, the parties may opt
 to proceed through an Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Process. The parties will then choose either arbitration
 or mediation in the manner in which those methods are practiced by the Department and allowed by law.
 The Dispute Resolution Coordinator will coordinate the agreement of the parties to the ADR method, and
 the selection of a neutral third-party or technical expert. The fees of the neutral third-party or technical expert will
 be shared equally between the Department and the Contractor. The Dispute Resolution Coordinator will obtain a
 written agreement, signed by both parties, that establishes the ADR process. The neutral third-party or technical
 expert will have complete control of the claim upon execution of the ADR agreement.
 Prior to any ADR meeting, certify the claim in writing and under oath using the following certification:
 “I, (Name and Title of an Officer of the Contractor) certify that this claim is made in good faith, that all
 supporting data is accurate and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief, and that the claim amount
 accurately reflects the contract amendment for which (Contractor Company name) believes the Department is
 liable.”
 4. Interest on Claims. The Department will pay interest in accordance with ORC Section 5703.47 on any
 amount ultimately found due on a claim which is not paid within 30 days of the Dispute Resolution Coordinator's
 
 Receipt of the Certified Claim. However, interest will not be paid on the amount of any agreed settlement unless
 specifically itemized and included in the total settlement prior to agreement.
 H. Post Construction Meeting. The District will conduct a Post Construction Meeting with the Contractor prior
 to the project finalization. The District will invite the design agency and any other stakeholders deem necessary
 including utility companies, other transportation entities (i.e. railroads), community leaders, all Project participants
 including subcontractors performing critical work to attend this meeting.
 Consider the following items for discussion:
 1,
 
 Project Safety.
 
 2.
 
 How were the goals evaluated or measured?
 
 3.
 
 How were foremen/ workers involved in the Partnering process?
 
 4.
 
 How were the subcontractors involved in the Partnering process?
 
 5.
 
 How were relationships with key stakeholders managed?
 
 6.
 
 Teambuilding activities or unique motivational activities.
 
 I. Partnering Close-Out Survey. Complete the final Partnering evaluation to get participants’ feedback and
 improve the Partnering process. The Partnering Close-Out Survey is located on the Division of Construction
 Management’s Partnering website:
 http://www.dot.state.oh.us/Divisions/ConstructionMgt/Pages/Partnering.aspx
 108.03
 Prosecution and Progress. Start the Work according to 108.02. Notify the Engineer at least 24 hours
 before starting the Work. If the prosecution of the Work is suspended, notify the Engineer a minimum of 24 hours
 in advance of resuming operations.
 Pursue the Work diligently and continuously as to complete the Project by the Completion Date.
 A. Progress Schedule.
 1. General. Furnish a bar chart progress schedule to the District Construction Engineer for review at or before
 the Preconstruction Meeting. The Engineer will review the schedule and within 14 calendar days of receipt, will
 either accept the schedule or provide the Contractor with comments. Acceptance of the schedule does not revise
 the Contract Documents. Provide clarification or any needed additional information within 10 days of a written
 request by the Engineer. The Department will withhold Estimates until the Engineer accepts the schedule. The
 Engineer will not measure or pay for the preparation of the schedule and schedule updates directly, but the cost of
 preparing and updating the schedule is incidental to all Contract Items.
 a.
 
 Include the following Administrative Identifier Information:
 (1) Project Number
 (2) County
 (3) Route Number
 (4) FHWA Number
 (5) PID Number
 (6) Contract Number
 (7) Date of Contract
 (8) Completion Date
 (9) Contractor's Name
 (10) Contractor's Dated Signature
 (11) ODOT's Dated Acceptance Signature
 
 Provide a working day schedule that shows the various activities of Work in sufficient detail to
 demonstrate a reasonable and workable plan to complete the Project by the Completion Date. Show the order and
 the sequence for accomplishing the Work. Describe all activities in sufficient detail so that the Engineer can readily
 identify the Work and measure the progress of each activity. The bar chart schedule must reflect the scope of work,
 
 required phasing, maintenance of traffic requirements, interim completion dates, the Completion Date, and other
 project milestones established in the Contract Documents. Include activities for submittals, working and shop
 drawing preparation, submittal review time for the Department, material procurement and fabrication, and the
 delivery of materials, plant, and equipment, and other similar activities. The schedule must be detailed on letter or
 legal sized paper.
 b.
 
 Activity requirements are discussed in further detail as follows:
 
 (1) Activity Description. Assign each activity an unambiguous descriptive word or phrase. For
 example, use "Excavate Area A," not "Start Excavation."
 (2) Activity Original Duration. Indicate a planned duration in calendar days for each activity. Do not
 exceed a duration of 20 working days for any activity unless approved by the Engineer. Do not represent the
 maintenance of traffic, erosion control, and other similar items as single activities extending to the Completion
 Date. Break these Contract Items into component activities in order to meet the duration requirements of this
 paragraph.
 2. Early Completion Schedule. An Early Completion Schedule is defined as a baseline schedule or update
 schedule which anticipates completion of all work prior to the Completion Date established by the contract
 documents and the Contractor submits as an Early Completion Schedule. In the event that an Early Completion
 Schedule is accepted, the Engineer will initiate a change order amending the Completion Date to the finish date
 shown on the accepted Early Completion Schedule. The amended Completion Date will be effective upon
 execution of that change order and all contract provisions concerning the Completion Date such as incentives,
 disincentives, excusable delays, compensable delays, and liquidated damages will be measured against the
 amended Completion Date. The Contractor may elect not to execute the change order amending the Completion
 Date; however, in so doing, the Contractor waives its rights to delay damages in meeting the projected early
 Completion Date.
 3. Updated Progress Schedule. Submit an updated progress schedule when ordered by the Engineer. The Engineer
 may request an updated progress schedule when progress on the work has fallen more than 14 calendar days behind
 the latest accepted progress schedule. Information in the updated schedule must include a "% work completed"
 value for each activity.
 4. Recovery Schedule. If the progress schedule projects a finish date for the Project more than 14 calendar days
 later than the Completion Date, submit a revised schedule showing a plan to finish by the Completion Date. The
 Department will withhold Estimates until the Engineer accepts the revised schedule. The Engineer will use the
 schedule to evaluate time extensions and associated costs requested by the Contractor.
 108.04
 Limitation of Operations. Limit operations to prevent unnecessary inconvenience to the traveling
 public. If the Engineer concludes that the extent of the Contractor’s Work unnecessarily inconveniences the public
 or concludes limiting operations are necessary to protect the existing or new construction from damage, the
 Engineer will require the Contractor to finish portions of Work in progress before starting new Work.
 108.05
 Character of Workers Methods and Equipment. Provide personnel with sufficient skills and
 experience to perform assigned tasks.
 Ensure that no debarred individuals listed on the Federal website: www.epls.gov or State debarment list at the
 website: www.dot.state.oh.us/divisions/contractadmin/ act in any ownership, leadership, managerial, or other
 similar position that could influence the operations of an entity doing business with the Department.
 If the Engineer gives written notification that specific Contractor or subcontractor personnel are improperly
 performing the Work, intemperate, disorderly, or creating a hostile work environment, remove the identified
 personnel from the Project. Do not allow removed personnel to return to the Project without the Engineer’s
 approval.
 The Engineer may suspend the Work by written notice under this subsection for the following reasons:
 A. The Contractor does not furnish sufficient skilled and experienced personnel to complete the Project by the
 Completion Date.
 
 B. The Contractor does not remove personnel from the Project as directed in writing by the Engineer.
 Use equipment of sufficient size and mechanical condition to complete the Project by the Completion Date.
 Ensure that the equipment does not harm the roadway, adjacent property, other highways, workers, or the public.
 If the Contract Documents do not prescribe the methods and equipment required to accomplish the Work,
 determine the methods or equipment necessary to complete the Work according to the Contract.
 If the Contract Documents specify methods and equipment to perform the Work, use such methods and
 equipment, unless others are authorized by the Engineer. Obtain the Engineer’s written approval before substituting
 alternate methods or equipment. To obtain the Engineer’s approval, submit a written description of the alternate
 methods and equipment proposed and an explanation of the reasons for making the change. The Engineer’s
 approval of the substitute methods and equipment does not relieve the Contractor of the obligation to produce Work
 according to 105.03. If after trial use of the substituted methods or equipment, the Engineer determines that the
 Work does not conform to the Contract Documents, then complete the remaining Work using the specified methods
 and equipment. Remove all deficient Work and replace it according to the Contract Documents, or take such other
 corrective action as directed by the Engineer. The Engineer’s authorization to substitute alternate methods and
 equipment will not change the basis of payment for the construction items involved or the Contract Time.
 108.06
 
 Determining a Time Extension to the Completion Date and Payment for Excusable Delays.
 
 A. General. The Department will only extend the Completion Date if an excusable delay, as specified in 108.06.B
 or 108.06.D, delays Work on the critical path shown on the accepted progress schedule and impacts the Completion
 Date. The critical path is defined as; the longest path of activities in the project that determines the project schedule
 completion date. The activities that make-up the critical path of activities are the “Critical Activities.” Any
 extension of the Completion Date will be executed by a change order.
 Mitigation of any delay, whether caused by the Department, Contractor, third-party or an intervening event, is
 a shared contract and legal requirement. Mitigation efforts include, but are not limited to, re-sequencing work
 activities, acceleration, and continuation of work through an otherwise planned shutdown period. The Contractor
 and Engineer must explore and discuss potential mitigation efforts in a timely manner.
 The Department will not evaluate a request for extension of the Completion Date unless the Contractor notifies
 the Engineer as specified in 108.02.F. Notification shall be in writing to the Engineer within 30 days following the
 termination of the event giving rise to the request and shall be accompanied by supporting analysis and
 documentation.
 The Engineer will evaluate the Contractor’s analysis and determine the time extension due, if any. The
 Engineer will measure all time extensions in Calendar Days. For delays measured in Workdays, the Engineer will
 convert Workdays to Calendar Days by multiplying by 1.4 for a 5-day work week or less; 1.2 for a 6-day work
 week; and 1 for a 7-day work week; and extend the Completion Date by the resulting number of Calendar Days
 plus any holidays the Contractor does not normally work that occur in the extension period. When the conversion
 of Workdays to Calendar Days results in a decimal of 0.5 or greater, the Engineer will round the number of Calendar
 Days to the next highest whole number. When the conversion results in a decimal less than 0.5, the Engineer will
 delete the decimal portion of the Calendar Days.
 The Engineer will not grant an extension of time for delays incurred from December 1 to April 30 unless the
 Contractor’s accepted progress schedule depicts work on the critical path occurring during this period.
 The Engineer may order the Contractor to continue Work after November 30 and compensate the Contractor
 for costs incurred due to cold weather Work.
 The Contractor’s plea that insufficient time was specified is not a valid reason for an extension of time.
 The Department will relieve the Contractor from associated liquidated damages, as specified in 108.07, if the
 Engineer extends the Completion Date under 108.06.A.
 The extended Completion Date shall then have the same standing and effect as though it was the original
 Completion Date.
 
 If the Contractor contends that an excusable delay is also compensable, as specified in 108.06.D, submit a
 detailed cost analysis of the requested additional compensation along with the request for extension of Completion
 Date.
 B. Excusable, Non-Compensable Delays. Excusable, non-compensable delays are delays that are not the
 Contractor’s or the Department’s fault or responsibility. The Engineer will not grant additional payment for
 excusable, non-compensable delays.
 The following are excusable, non-compensable delays:
 1.
 
 Delays due to floods, tornadoes, lightning strikes, earthquakes, or other cataclysmic phenomena of nature.
 
 2.
 
 Delays due to weather as specified in 108.06.C.
 
 3. Extraordinary delays in material deliveries the Contractor or its suppliers cannot foresee or avoid resulting
 from freight embargoes, government acts, or area-wide material shortages. Delays due to the Contractor’s,
 subcontractor’s, or supplier’s insolvency or mismanagement are not excusable.
 4.
 
 Delays due to civil disturbances.
 
 5.
 
 Delays from fires or epidemics.
 
 6. Delays from labor strikes that are beyond the Contractor’s, subcontractor’s, or supplier’s power to settle
 and are not caused by improper acts or omissions of the Contractor, subcontractor, or supplier.
 7.
 
 Added quantities that delay an activity on the critical path.
 
 8.
 
 All other delays not the Contractor’s and Department’s fault or responsibility.
 
 C. Extension to the Completion Date for Weather or Seasonal Conditions. A weather day is defined as a
 workday that weather or seasonal conditions reduced production by more than 50 percent on items of work on the
 critical path. Submit the dates and number of weather days in writing to the Engineer at the end of each month. In
 the event the Contractor fails to submit weather days at the end of each month the Engineer will determine the dates
 and number of weather days from project records.
 Delays caused by weather and seasonal conditions should be anticipated and will be considered as the basis
 for an extension of time when the Contractor’s accepted progress schedule depicts Work on the critical path and
 the actual workdays lost exceeds the number of work days lost each month as determined by Table 108.06-1.
 TABLE 108.06-1
 Month
 January
 February
 March
 April
 May
 June
 July
 August
 September
 October
 November
 December
 
 Number of Workdays
 Lost Due to Weather
 8
 8
 7
 6
 5
 5
 4
 4
 5
 6
 6
 6
 
 This table applies to the duration between contract execution and original completion date. Extensions for
 weather days beyond the original completion date will be for the actual workdays lost each month.
 The Engineer will not consider weekends and holidays as lost workdays unless the Contractor normally works
 those days or unless the Engineer directs the Contractor to work those days.
 
 D. Excusable, Compensable Delays. Excusable, compensable delays are delays that are not the Contractor’s
 fault or responsibility, and are the Department’s fault or responsibility or are determined by judicial proceeding to
 be the Department’s sole responsibility or are the fault and responsibility of a local government. For the following
 excusable, compensable delays, the Engineer will extend the Completion Date if the conditions specified in
 108.06.A are met:
 1.
 
 Delays due to revised Work as specified in 104.02.B, 104.02.D, or 104.02.F.
 
 2.
 
 Delays due to utility or railroad interference within the Project limits.
 
 3.
 
 Delays due to an Engineer-ordered suspension as specified in 104.02.C.
 
 4. Delays due to acts of the government or a political subdivision other than the Department; however, these
 compensable delay costs are limited to escalated labor and material costs only, as allowed in 109.05.D.2.b and
 109.05.D.2.d.
 5.
 
 Delays due to the neglect of the Department or its failure to act in a timely manner.
 
 Compensation for excusable, compensable delays will be determined by the Engineer according to 109.05.D.
 E. Non-Excusable Delays. Non-excusable delays are delays that are the Contractor’s fault or responsibility. All
 non-excusable delays are non-compensable.
 F. Concurrent Delays. Concurrent delays are separate critical delays that occur at the same time. When a noncompensable delay is concurrent with a compensable delay, the Contractor is entitled to additional time but not
 entitled to additional compensation.
 108.07
 Failure to Complete on Time. If the Contractor fails to complete the Work by the Completion Date,
 then the Director, if satisfied that the Contractor is making reasonable progress, and deems it in the best interest of
 the public, may allow the Contractor to continue in control of the Work. The Department will pay the Contractor
 for Work performed on the Project less any liquidated damages incurred.
 If the Work is not completed by the Completion Date and the Director permits the Contractor to remain in control,
 prosecute the Work at as many different places, at such times, and with such forces as the Director requests. Provide
 a written plan for the completion of the Work.
 For each calendar day that Work remains uncompleted after the Completion Date, the Department will deduct
 the sum specified herein from any money due the Contractor, not as a penalty, but as liquidated damages. The
 Director will adjust the Completion Date or other contractually mandated dates for delays specified in 108.06.B.7
 and 108.06.D.
 Permitting the Contractor to continue and complete the Work or any part of the Work after the Completion Date,
 or after extensions to the Completion Date, will in no way operate as a waiver on the part of the Department of any
 of its rights under the Contract.
 The Director may stop deducting liquidated damages when:
 A. The Work is substantially complete and the project is available for use as intended by the contract.
 B. The Contractor is diligently pursuing the remaining Work.
 C. The Work remaining will not interfere with the intended use of the project and will not impact traffic. For the
 limited purposes of assessing liquidate damages, the closing of a shoulder is not considered an impact upon traffic.
 D. All contract safety items are complete and operational. These safety items include but are not limited to signs,
 pavement markings, guardrail, attenuators, and signals. Raised pavement markers (RPM) are required safety items
 if the roadway section involved had RPMs before the project started.
 E. Deemed reasonable and appropriate by the District Deputy Director.
 
 TABLE 108.07-1 SCHEDULE OF LIQUIDATED DAMAGES
 Original Contract Amount
 (Total Amount of the Bid)
 From More Than
 To and Including
 $0.00
 $500,000
 $500,000
 $2,000,000
 $2,000,000
 $10,000,000
 $10,000,000
 $50,000,000
 Over $50,000,000
 
 Amount of Liquidated
 Damages to be Deducted for each
 Calendar Day of Overrun in Time
 $400
 $600
 $900
 $1,400
 $2,900
 
 108.08
 Unsatisfactory Progress and Default of Contractor. The Director will notify the Contractor in
 writing of unsatisfactory progress for any of the following reasons:
 A. The Contractor has not commenced the Work by the dates established in the schedule.
 B. The Contractor does not proceed with the Work in a manner necessary for completion of the Project by the
 Completion Date.
 C. The Contractor is performing the Work improperly.
 D. The Contractor abandons, fails, or refuses to complete the Work.
 E. Any other reason the Director believes jeopardizes completion of the Work by the Completion Date.
 If the Contractor does not respond to the satisfaction of the Director, the Director may declare the Contractor in
 default and may notify the Contractor and Surety that the responsibility to complete the Work is transferred to the
 Surety. Upon receipt of this notification, the Contractor’s right to control and supervise the Work will immediately
 cease. In such a case, the Director will proceed as specified in ORC 5525.17. The defaulted Contractor will not be
 compensated for costs resulting from the default and is not eligible to be retained by the Surety to complete the
 Work. If it is determined that the Department’s default of the Contractor according to 108.08 is wrongful, then the
 default will revert to a termination of the Contract according to 108.09.
 108.09
 Termination of the Contract for Convenience of the Department. The Director may terminate the
 Contract at any time for the convenience of the Department. The Department will compensate the Contractor
 according to 109.04 and 109.05 for termination of the Contract for the convenience of the Department. This
 subsection is subject to the provisions of ORC 5525.14.
 108.10
 
 Payroll Records. Keep payroll records as specified in ORC 4115.07 or as required by Federal law.
 
 Authorized representatives of the Director may inspect the certified payroll and other payroll records. Upon
 completion of the Work and before receiving the final estimate and when required by ORC 4115.07, submit an
 affidavit stating that wages have been paid according to the minimum rates specified in the Contract Documents.
 
 109 ACCEPTANCE, MEASUREMENT, AND PAYMENT
 109.01
 Measurement of Quantities. The Department will measure the quantities of Work and calculate
 payments based on the method of measurement and basis of payment provisions provided in these Specifications.
 When the following units of measure are specified, the Department will measure quantities as described below
 unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents. The accuracy of individual pay item estimate payments will
 be one decimal more accurate than the unit of measure denoted for the pay item.
 Lump Sum. Not measured. Describes payment as reimbursement for all resources necessary to complete the
 Work. When a complete structure or structural unit is specified as the unit of measurement, the unit will include all
 necessary fittings and accessories.
 Each. Measured by the number of individual items of Work completed.
 Foot (Meter). Measured parallel to the longitudinal base or foundation upon which items are placed, or along
 the longitudinal surface of the item. Measured vertically to the nearest 0.1 foot (0.01 m), with a minimum vertical
 measurement of 1 foot (0.10 m), at each unit.
 Square Yard or Square Foot (Square Meter). Measured by a two-dimensional area method on the surface of
 the item.
 M Square Feet. One thousand square feet.
 Cubic Yard (Cubic Meter). Measured by a three-dimensional volume method. Measure all “loose material” or
 material “measured in the vehicle” by the cubic yard (cubic meter). Haul material “measured in the vehicle” in
 approved vehicles and measure in the vehicle at the point of delivery. For this purpose, use approved vehicles of
 any type or size satisfactory to the Engineer, provided the vehicle’s bed is of such type that the actual contents are
 readily and accurately determined. Unless all approved vehicles on a job are of uniform capacity, each approved
 vehicle must bear a legible identification mark indicating the specific approved capacity. The Inspector may reject
 all loads not hauled in such approved vehicles.
 Cubic Yard (Cubic Meter) for Asphalt Concrete. Measure as specified in 401.21.
 Acre (Hectare). Measured by a two-dimensional area method on the surface to the nearest 0.1 acre (0.05 ha).
 Pound (Kilogram). Measured by actual item net weight avoirdupois (mass).
 Ton (Metric Ton). The term “ton” means the short ton consisting of 2000 pounds avoirdupois. The term “metric
 ton” means 1000 kilograms. Weigh all materials that are proportioned by weight on accurate and approved scales
 that are operated by competent, qualified personnel at locations approved by the Engineer. However, car weights
 will not be acceptable for materials to be passed through mixing plants. If trucks are used to haul material being
 paid for by weight, weigh the empty truck at least once daily and as the Engineer directs and only if the weight of
 the truck is used in determining the ticket weight. Place a plainly legible identification mark on each truck bearing
 the weight of the truck.
 For Work on a tonnage basis, file with the Engineer receipted freight bills for railroad shipments and certified
 weight-bills when materials are received by any other method, showing the actual tonnage used. For Work on a
 volume basis, itemize evidence of the volume used.
 Gallon (Liter). Measured by actual item liquid volume. The Department will measure the following materials
 by the gallon (liter) at the following temperatures:
 Temperatures
 60 F (16 C)
 100 F (38 C)
 300 F (149 C)
 
 Items
 Creosote for Priming Coat, Creosote Oil, Creosote Solutions for
 Timber Preservatives, Asphalt Primer for Water-proofing, and
 Liquefier
 RC, MC Asphalt Emulsions, CBAE, Primer 20, and Primer 100
 Asphalt Binder
 
 Measure tank car outage of asphalt material at its destination before any material has been removed from the tank
 car according to Supplement 1060.
 Convert the net weight of asphalt material shipments to gallons (liters) at the specified pay temperature according
 to Supplement 1060.
 Convert the gallons (liters) at the measured temperature to gallons (liters) of asphalt material at the specified pay
 temperature according to Supplement 1060.
 M Gallon. One thousand gallons.
 Thousand Board Feet, MBF (Cubic Meter). Measure timber by MBF (cubic meter) actually incorporated in
 the structure. Base the measurement on nominal widths, thicknesses, and the extreme length of each piece.
 Standard Manufactured Items. When standard manufactured items are specified such as fence, wire, plates,
 rolled shapes, pipe conduit, etc., and these items are identified by size, unit weight, section dimensions, etc., such
 identification will be to nominal weights or dimensions set by the industry.
 109.02
 Measurement Units. The Department will measure using either English or metric units as indicated
 in the Contract Documents. Use the Tables 109.02-1 and 109.02-2 to convert units when required. If Tables 109.021 and 109.02-2 do not provide a required factor, then use the appropriate factor provided in the IEEE/ASTM SI 10.
 
 TABLE 109.02-1 ENGLISH TO SI (METRIC) CONVERSION FACTORS
 Symbol
 Length
 mil
 in
 ft
 yd
 mi
 Area
 in²
 ft²
 yd²
 ac
 ac
 mi²
 Volume
 fl oz
 gal
 ft³
 yd³
 Mass
 oz
 lb
 T
 Temperature
 °F
 Illumination
 fc
 fl
 
 When You Know
 mils
 inches
 feet
 yards
 miles
 
 Multiply By
 25.4
 25.4
 0.3048
 0.9144
 1.609347
 
 To Find
 
 Symbol
 
 micrometers
 millimeters
 meters
 meters
 kilometers
 
 µm
 mm
 m
 m
 km
 
 square inches
 square feet
 square yards
 acres
 acres
 square miles
 
 645.16
 0.09290304
 0.8361274
 0.4046873
 4046.873
 2.589998
 
 square millimeters
 square meters
 square meters
 hectares
 square meters
 square kilometers
 
 mm²
 m²
 m²
 ha
 m²
 km²
 
 fluid ounces
 gallons
 cubic feet
 cubic yards
 
 29.57353
 3.785412
 0.02831685
 0.7645549
 
 milliliters
 liters
 cubic meters
 cubic meters
 
 mL
 L
 m³
 m³
 
 ounces
 pounds
 2000 pounds
 
 28.34952
 0.4535924
 0.9071847
 
 grams
 kilograms
 metric tons
 
 g
 kg
 t
 
 Celsius
 
 °C
 
 10.76391
 3.426259
 
 lux
 candelas per
 square meter
 
 lx
 cd/m²
 
 1.355818
 4.448222
 47.88026
 
 newton meter
 newtons
 pascals
 
 Nm
 N
 Pa
 
 0.006894757
 
 megapascals
 
 MPa
 
 Fahrenheit
 foot-candles
 foot-lamberts
 
 Force and Pressure or Stress
 pounds-force foot
 lbfft
 lbf
 pounds force
 lbf/ft² (psf)
 pounds force per
 square foot
 lbf/in² (psi)
 pounds force per
 square inch
 
 C = (F-32)/1.8
 
 TABLE 109.02-2 SI (METRIC) TO ENGLISH CONVERSION FACTORS
 Symbol
 µm
 mm
 m
 m
 km
 mm²
 m²
 m²
 ha
 m²
 km²
 mL
 L
 m³
 m³
 g
 kg
 t
 °C
 lx
 cd/m²
 
 Nm
 N
 Pa
 MPa
 
 When You Know
 
 Multiply By
 To Find
 Length
 micrometers
 0.03937
 mils
 millimeters
 0.03937
 inches
 meters
 3.28084
 feet
 meters
 1.093613
 yards
 kilometers
 0.62137
 miles
 Area
 square millimeters 0.00155
 square inches
 square meters 10.76391
 square feet
 square meters 1.19599
 square yards
 hectares
 2.4710437
 acres
 square meters 0.000247
 acres
 square kilometers 0.3861
 square miles
 Volume
 milliliters
 0.033814
 fluid ounces
 liters
 0.264172
 gallons
 cubic meters
 35.31466
 cubic feet
 cubic meters
 1.30795
 cubic yard
 Mass
 grams
 0.035274
 ounces
 kilograms
 2.204622
 pounds
 metric tons
 1.1023114
 2000 pounds
 Temperature
 Celsius
 F = 1.8C + 32
 Fahrenheit
 Illumination
 lux
 0.09290304
 foot-candles
 candelas per
 0.29186352
 foot-lamberts
 square meter
 Force and Pressure or Stress
 newton meters 0.7375621
 pounds-foot force
 newtons
 0.22480892
 pound force
 pascals
 0.02088543
 pounds force per
 square foot
 megapascals
 145.03774
 pounds force per
 square inch
 
 Symbol
 mil
 in
 ft
 yd
 mi
 in²
 ft²
 yd²
 ac
 ac
 mi²
 fl oz
 gal
 ft³
 yd³
 oz
 lb
 T
 °F
 fc
 fl
 
 lbf ft
 lbf
 lbf/ft² (psf)
 lbf/in² (psi)
 
 109.03
 Scope of Payment. Payment of the Contract Price is full compensation for all resources necessary to
 complete the Contract Item and maintain the Work. Assume liability for risk, loss, damage, or expense resulting
 from the Work. The Contract Price and Contract Time shall only be changed by written Change Order or as
 determined by the Department in writing in accordance with the contract documents.
 109.04
 Compensation for Altered Quantities, Eliminated Items or Termination of the Contract for
 Convenience of the Department. If the agreed quantities of contract items vary from the quantities in the Contract,
 the Department will make payment at the original Contract unit prices for the agreed quantities of Work.
 
 A. If an item is eliminated in accordance with 104.02.E or the contract is terminated in accordance with 108.09
 the Department will pay the following in addition to that provided by 104.02.D:
 1. Restocking charges supported by paid invoices and an additional 5 percent markup on the compensation
 for overhead and profit.
 2. The cost of material transferred to the Department or a local government agency in lieu of restocking or
 disposal. The allowed compensation is the paid invoice cost plus 15 percent markup, but no more than the unit bid
 price for the reference number involved.
 3. Hauling costs, if not included in restocking charges, for returned material and for material delivered to
 the Department.
 B. If the project is terminated for convenience of the Department, the Department will negotiate compensation
 with the Contractor for actual costs incurred as a result of the termination. The Department will pay for Extra Work
 as stipulated in approved Extra Work Change Orders or written authorizations subject to the limitations set forth
 in ORC 5525.14. Such authorizations for emergencies and to avoid Project delays are in advance of an approved
 Extra Work Change Order and commit the Department only to the terms of the authorizations. The Department
 will pay for Extra Work after the approval of the subsequent Change Order.
 109.05
 
 Changes and Extra Work.
 
 A. General. If the Department revises the Contract under: 104.02, 105.07, 105.10, 105.13, 107.10, 107.14,
 107.15, 108.09, 109.06, or 109.07, the Department will pay for changes and Extra Work with a Change Order using
 the sequence specified in 109.05.B through 109.05.E.
 In establishing the method of payment for contract changes or extra work orders, force account procedures
 shall only be used when strictly necessary, such as when agreement cannot be reached with the Contractor on the
 price of a new work item, or when the extent of work is unknown or is of such character that a price cannot be
 determined to a reasonable degree of accuracy. The reason or reasons for using force account procedures shall be
 documented.
 Unless otherwise stated in 109.05, the compensation provided in 109.05.B through 109.05.E constitutes
 payment in full for all changes and Extra Work completed by original Contract Price, agreed unit price, agreed
 lump sum price, and for work performed on a force account basis, including:
 1.
 
 Administration.
 
 2.
 
 Superintendence.
 
 3.
 
 Project and field office overhead.
 
 4.
 
 Home office overhead.
 
 5.
 
 Use of tools and equipment for which no rental is allowed.
 
 6.
 
 Profit.
 
 7.
 
 Taxes other than sales tax.
 
 8. Premiums on insurance including additional premiums for Commercial General Liability Insurance
 required by 107.12.B and any additional coverage carried by the Contractor or subcontractor, excluding pollution
 and railroad General Liability Insurance. The Department will pay the Contractor’s pollution and railroad liability
 insurance premiums, if required by the contract, by a separate Change Order for the cost of the premium without
 any markup. When the Contractors or subcontractors basic rate for General Commercial Liability Insurance
 required by 107.12.B is greater than 5 percent of payroll, the Department will pay directly without markup the
 portion of the premium in excess of 5 percent and provide copies of paid premiums.
 Sales tax will not be allowed on any item for which tax exemption was obtained.
 B. Negotiated Prices. Negotiated prices for changes and Extra Work shall be comparable to prices that would
 have resulted from a competitive bid contract. The Engineer and Contractor will negotiate agreed unit or lump sum
 prices using one or more of the following methods:
 
 1.
 
 Original Contract prices for similar work but adjusted for:
 a.
 b.
 c.
 
 increased or decreased material costs specified in 109.05.C.3.
 increased or decreased labor costs specified in 109.05.C.2
 increased or decreased equipment costs specified in 109.05.C.4
 
 Adjustments of these prices for inflation or markup for subcontractor work is not allowed.
 2. State-wide average unit price awarded for the item or items as listed in the Department’s annual “Summary
 of Contracts Awarded.” These prices may be adjusted for inflation using factors issued by the Office of
 Construction Administration. No markup for subcontractor work is allowed.
 3. Average price awarded on three different projects of similar work and quantity. These prices may be
 adjusted for inflation using factors issued by the Office of Construction Administration. No markup for
 subcontractor work is allowed.
 4.
 
 Prices computed by the Office of Estimating.
 
 5.
 
 Cost analysis of labor, material, equipment, and markups as allowed in 109.05.C.
 
 6.
 
 For the cost of compensable delays as defined in 108.06, prepare a cost analysis as allowed by 109.05.D.
 
 Provide proposed pricing and cost justification for changes or Extra Work within 5 business days after the
 Department’s request. The Department will respond within 5 business days after receipt of the Contractor’s
 proposal. The Department and the Contractor can mutually agree to extend these 5-day time limits.
 If the Department negotiates with the Contractor but does not agree on a price adjustment, the Engineer may
 direct the Contractor to perform all or part of the revised Work under force account.
 C. Force Account.
 1. General. The Engineer may direct the Contractor to perform the revised Work under force account.
 Submit a written proposal and estimated costs for the Work, including the planned equipment, materials, labor, and
 a work schedule.
 The Department will pay the Contractor as specified in 109.05.C as full compensation for performing the
 force account Work. The Project and Contractor personnel will document the labor and equipment used on the
 force account work on a Daily Force Account Record. At the end of each Workday, the Project and Contractor
 personnel will compare and sign the Daily Force Account Record. The Department will make no force account
 payment before the Contractor submits an itemized statement of the costs for that work.
 The Engineer will examine and, if found to be acceptable, approve all rates and costs submitted by the
 Contractor.
 Provide the following content in itemized statements for all force account work:
 a.
 
 Name, classification, date, daily hours, total hours, rate, and amount for all labor.
 
 b. Designation, dates, daily hours, total hours of actual operation and idle time, Blue Book rate with
 reference or category, and amount for each unit of equipment and the applicable Blue Book hourly operating cost
 for each unit of equipment and invoices for all rental equipment. The designation includes the manufacturer’s name
 or trademark, model number, and year of manufacture.
 c.
 
 Quantities of materials and prices.
 
 d.
 
 Transportation charges on materials, free on board (F.O.B.) at the job site.
 
 e. Cost of workers’ compensation insurance premiums, all applicable insurance premiums,
 unemployment insurance contributions, and social security tax and fees or dues required by a collective bargaining
 agreement. Express each of these items of cost as a percentage of payroll, except fees or dues, which should be
 expressed as a cost per hour.
 f. Documentation showing payment for all surveying, professional, or similar specialized Work not
 normally a part of a Department contract.
 
 g. If materials are taken from Contractor’s stock and original receipted invoices for the materials and
 transportation charges do not exist, provide an affidavit and certify all of the following:
 (1) The materials were taken from the Contractor’s stock.
 (2) The quantity shown was actually used for the force account work.
 (3) The price and transportation costs represent the actual cost to the Contractor.
 h. Documentation showing payment to trucking firms and owner-operators. Submit documentation
 showing owner-operations status. When the trucking is subject to prevailing wage, submit payroll and equipment
 usage records according to 109.05.C.1.a, 109.05.C.1.b, and 109.05.C.1.e.
 i. Provide “receipted invoices” for all costs substantiated by an invoice.
 If only part of the expenditure represented by an invoice is applicable to force account work, or if the
 invoice represents expenditure for more than one item of work, clearly indicate the actual amount of expenditure
 applicable to each item of work.
 2. Labor. The Department will pay the wages and fringe benefits currently in effect for each hour the Work
 is performed by all labor employed in the Work and all foremen in direct charge of the specific operation. The
 Department will pay an additional 38 percent markup on these wages and benefits. “Fringe benefits” are the actual
 costs paid to, or on behalf of, workmen by reason of health and welfare benefits, pension fund benefits, or other
 benefits, when such amounts are required by prevailing wage laws or by a collective bargaining agreement or other
 employment contracts generally applicable to the classes of labor employed on the Project.
 The Department will pay the actual itemized cost, without markup, of the following payroll taxes and
 legally required insurances:
 a. Social Security Tax.
 b. Medicare Tax.
 c. Ohio Workers’ Compensation Premiums.
 d. State and Federal Unemployment Insurance.
 e. Longshore and Harborworkers’ Compensation Insurance for work from a barge or ship, or unloading
 material from a barge or ship.
 Provide itemized statements in addition to the documentation requirements for all labor including the
 name, classification, date, daily hours, total hours, rate, and amount. If any person is paid more than the one rate, a
 separate listing shall be made for that person for each rate paid. Provide itemized statements for Ohio Workers’
 Compensation insurance premiums, all applicable insurance premiums, State and Federal Unemployment
 Insurance contributions, and Social Security Tax and fees or dues required by a collective bargaining agreement.
 Express each of these items of cost as a percentage of payroll, except fees or dues, which shall be expressed as a
 cost per hour.
 Instead of itemizing the cost of Social Security Tax, Ohio Workers’ Compensation, and State and Federal
 Unemployment Insurance, the Contractor may elect to receive as compensation for these payroll taxes and
 premiums, an amount equal to 22 percent of the paid wages. If the Contractor pays fringes directly to the worker
 in lieu of paying into a fringe benefit program, then the Department will treat these fringe payments as paid wages
 when calculating the allowed 22 percent compensation.
 The Department will pay, without markup, the actual itemized cost of fees and dues paid to labor unions
 or to business associations when they are based on payroll hours and required by a collective bargaining agreement.
 The Department will not pay for wages or benefits for personnel connected with the Contractor’s forces
 above the classification of foreman that have only general supervisory responsibility for the force account work.
 If the foreman or timekeeper is employed partly on force account work and partly on other work, the
 Contractor shall prorate the number of hours between the force and non-force account work according to the
 number of people on each task as shown on payrolls.
 
 The Department will pay the prevailing wage and fringe rates that apply to the Project for the
 classifications required for Extra Work. The Contractor must provide payroll records for pay rates higher than the
 prevailing wages and establish that the higher than prevailing rates are paid for original Contract Work. The
 Department will pay for foremen and time keepers not covered by prevailing wages not more than the salaried rate
 they receive when engaged in original Contract Work.
 The Department will pay actual costs for subsistence and travel allowances when such payments are
 required by the collective bargaining agreement or other employment contracts applicable to the classes of labor
 employed on the Project. The Department will not pay a percent markup on these costs.
 3. Materials. The Department will pay the Contractor’s actual invoice costs, including applicable taxes and
 actual freight charges, for Engineer approved materials the Contractor uses in force account Work. The Department
 will pay an additional 15 percent markup on these costs.
 Freight or hauling costs charged to the Contractor and not included in unit prices shall be itemized and
 supported by invoices. The cost of owned or rented equipment used to haul materials to the project is not part of
 the materials cost. Such equipment, when used for hauling materials, shall be listed under cost of equipment.
 Provide itemized statements in addition to the documentation requirements for all equipment including
 the quantity and price of each material and transportation charges free on board (F.O.B.) at the job site. Attach
 invoices to support the quantities of materials used, unit prices paid and transportation charges. If the Contractor
 uses materials from the Contractor’s stock and original receipted invoices for the materials and transportation
 charges do not exist, the Department and the Contractor will agree on a price that represents the actual cost to the
 Contractor. Provide an affidavit and certify all of the following:
 a.
 
 The materials were taken from the Contractor’s stock.
 
 b.
 
 The quantity shown was actually used for the force account work.
 
 c.
 
 The price and transportation costs represent the actual cost to the Contractor.
 
 Do not incorporate materials into the Work without a price agreement.
 4.
 
 Equipment.
 
 a. General. The Department will pay the Contractor’s costs for equipment the Engineer deems
 necessary to perform the force account work for the time directed by the Engineer or until the Contractor completes
 the force account Work, whichever happens first. The Department will pay the Contractor the established rates for
 equipment only during the hours that it is operated, except as otherwise allowed elsewhere in these Specifications.
 The Department will pay for non-operating hours at the idle equipment rate as specified in 109.05.C.4.c. Report
 equipment hours to the nearest 1/2 hour. The established equipment rates in these Specifications include
 compensation for overhead and profit except as otherwise specified.
 The Department will pay for use of Contractor-owned equipment the Engineer approves for force
 account Work at established rates. The Department will pay the rates, as modified in 109.05.C.4.b, given in the
 Equipment Watch Cost Recovery (formerly Rental Rate Blue Book), by EquipmentWatch, a division of Penton
 Business Media, Inc.
 Provide, and the Engineer will confirm, the manufacturer’s ratings and manufacturer-approved
 modifications required to classify equipment for rental rate determination. For equipment with no direct power
 unit, use a unit of at least the minimum recommended manufacturer’s rating.
 The Department will not pay rental for small tools or equipment that show a daily rate less than $5.00
 or for unlisted equipment that has a value of less than $400.
 Tool trucks will be allowed for compensation if they are used at the force account site. Only the tools
 used from the tool truck will be allowed for compensation. Tools in the tool truck that are not used in the force
 account work will not be compensated. A tool trailer that remains at the Contractor’s office or yard will not be
 allowed on the force account work. Tool trailers that are taken to the force account site will be allowed for
 compensation along with the tools used on the force account work that were taken from the trailer.
 
 Treat traffic control devices used in Maintaining Traffic and owned by the Contractor as owned
 equipment. Allowed rates for common traffic control devices and concrete barrier that are not listed in the Blue
 Book will be as determined by the Department.
 Use Engineer approved equipment in good working condition and providing normal output or
 production. The Engineer may reject equipment not in good working condition or not properly sized for efficient
 performance of the Work.
 For each piece of equipment used, whether owned or rented, provide the Engineer with the following
 information:
 (1) Manufacturer’s name or trademark.
 (2) Equipment type.
 (3) Year of manufacture.
 (4) Model number.
 (5) Type of fuel used.
 (6) Horsepower rating.
 (7) Attachments required, together with their size or capacity.
 (8) All further information necessary to determine the proper rate.
 (9) Dates, daily hours, total hours of actual operation and idle time,
 (10) Blue Book rate with reference or category,
 (11) Amount
 (12) Applicable Blue Book hourly operating cost
 (13) Invoices for all rental equipment.
 b. Hourly Owned Equipment Rates. The base rate for the machine and attachments represent the major
 cost of equipment ownership, such as depreciation, interest, taxes, insurance, storage, and major repairs. The hourly
 operating rate represents the major costs of equipment operation, such as fuel and oil lubrication, field repairs, tires,
 expendable parts, and supplies.
 For all equipment used on force account work, determine, and have the Department confirm, the
 hourly owned equipment rates as follows:
 HOER = [RAF  ARA  (R / 176)] + HOC
 Where:
 HOER = hourly owned equipment rate
 RAF = regional adjustment factor shown in the Blue Book
 ARA = age rate adjustment factor shown in the Blue Book
 R = current Blue Book monthly rate
 HOC = estimated hourly operating cost shown in the Blue Book
 However, compensation for equipment normally used on a 24 hours per day basis will not exceed the
 monthly rate plus adjustments and operating costs.
 The rate adjustment factor assigned to any attachment will be the yearly factor as determined for the
 base equipment.
 When multiple attachments are included with the rental equipment, only the attachment having the
 highest rental rate will be eligible for payment, provided that the attachment has been approved by the Engineer as
 being necessary to the force account Work.
 When a piece of owned equipment is not listed in the Blue Book, use the rate for similar equipment
 found in the Blue Book or use 6 percent of the purchase price as the monthly rate (R) and add the hourly operating
 rate found in the Blue Book for similar equipment of the same horsepower.
 For equipment brought to the Project exclusively for force account work and on the Project for less
 than a month, multiply the monthly rate (R) by the factor listed below:
 
 TABLE 109.05-1
 Working Hours
 Less than or equal to 8.0
 8.1 to 175.9
 176 or greater
 
 Factor
 2.00
 2.048 - (hours/168)
 1.00
 
 The term “WORKING HOURS,” as used in Table 109.05-1, includes only those hours the equipment
 is actually in operation performing force account work; apply the factor, as determined above, to these actual
 working hours only. Calculate compensation for any idle time according to 109.05.C.4.c without application of the
 factor.
 The Department will pay as working equipment for the entire Workday equipment used intermittently
 during the Workday. The following criteria qualify for intermittently used equipment:
 (1) Equipment dedicated to the force account exclusively all day and not used on bid work.
 (2) Equipment works before and after the intermittent idle period and its total working time during
 the Workday is at least 2 hours.
 Equipment that is captive to the force account work (i.e. it must remain at the force account site), but
 does not qualify for intermittently used owned equipment, is paid as idle equipment according to 109.05.C.4.c. for
 the time it is not working.
 c. Hourly Idle Equipment Rate. For equipment that is in operational condition, on site, and necessary
 for force account Work, but is idle, the Department will pay an hourly idle equipment rate. The procedure to
 determine the hourly idle equipment rate for Contractor owned equipment is as follows:
 HIER = RAF  ARA  (R / 176)  (1/2)
 Where:
 HIER = Hourly idle equipment rate.
 RAF = Regional adjustment factor shown in the Blue Book.
 ARA = Age rate adjustment factor shown in the Blue Book.
 R = Current Blue Book monthly rate.
 If rented equipment necessary for force account work is idle, the Department will pay the Contractor
 for the actual invoiced rates prorated for the duration of the idle period. The actual invoiced rates must be reasonably
 in line with the Blue Book rates and approved by the Engineer. The Department will pay a 15 percent markup for
 overhead and profit for the actual invoiced rates during the idle period.
 The Department will not pay idle owned equipment costs for more than 8 hours in a 24-hour day or
 40 hours in a week.
 The Department will not pay for inoperable equipment.
 The Engineer may order specific equipment to the site up to 5 days before its planned usage. If this
 equipment is not used for other work, the Department will pay for it as idle equipment until used.
 The Department will pay for the cost of idle owned or rented equipment when the Work was
 suspended for the convenience of the State. The Department will not pay the cost of idle equipment when the Work
 was suspended by the Contractor for the Contractor’s own reasons.
 The Department will only pay for the number of Calendar Days during the existence of the
 suspension. The Department will not compensate the Contractor for days that the Engineer determined were lost
 to weather.
 The Department will only pay for equipment physically located at the Project site that was received
 to prosecute the scheduled work during the delay.
 Compensation for idle equipment will stop at the completion of the force account Work or at the end
 of the suspension of Work.
 
 d. Rented Equipment. The Department will pay a 15 percent markup for overhead and profit for all
 rented equipment, its corresponding Blue Book hourly operating costs, and State and Local sales taxes.
 (1) Equipment Rented Solely for Force Account Work. If the Contractor rents or leases
 equipment from a third party exclusively for force account Work, the Department will pay the actual invoiced
 amount. The actual invoiced rates must be reasonably in line with the Blue Book and approved by the Engineer.
 The Department will pay a 15 percent markup for overhead and profit for all rented equipment paid for by the
 actual invoices. Add the Blue Book hourly operating cost to the marked up actual invoiced rates.
 (2) Equipment Rented for Original Contract Work, but Used for Force Account Work. If the
 Contractor uses rented equipment currently on the Project for original Contract Work to perform force account
 Work, then determine the hourly outside-rented equipment rate as follows:
 HRER = (HRI 115%) + HOC
 Where:
 HRER = hourly rented equipment rate
 HRI = hourly rental invoice costs prorated for the actual number of hours that rented equipment is
 operated solely on force account work. Use a monthly invoice rate divided by 176, a weekly
 invoice rate divided by 40, or a daily invoice rate divided by 8.
 HOC = hourly operating cost shown in the Blue Book
 The Department will not compensate for rental rates that exceed the Blue Book rates unless approved
 in advance of the Work by the Engineer.
 e. Moving of Equipment. The Department will also pay for the time required to move needed
 equipment to the location of the force account work and to return it to its original location. The Department will
 pay for loading and transportation costs instead of moving time if equipment is moved by means other than its own
 power. Moving time back to the original location or loading and transportation costs will not be allowed if the
 equipment is used at the site of the force account work on contract items or related work.
 The Department will consider the actual cost of transferring the equipment to the Project and returning
 it to the original location as an additional expense and pay for it as specified, for equipment moved on the Project
 exclusively for force account work.
 The Engineer will confirm the original location of the equipment before the Contractor moves and
 uses it for force account work.
 If the equipment is transported by a common carrier, the allowance is the invoiced amount paid for
 the freight plus 15 percent. However, if the Contractor’s forces transport the equipment, the allowable
 compensation will be Blue Book rate of the hauling unit and hourly Blue Book operating cost plus the driver’s
 wages and the cost of loading and unloading the equipment calculated according to 109.05.C.2.
 5. Foreman’s Transportation. The Department will pay the Blue Book rate for every hour the foreman’s
 truck is on the force account site or moving to or from the site. This rate includes equipment cost, fuel and
 lubricants, overhead, profit, and mobile phone or two-way radios.
 6. Subcontract Work. For Work performed by an approved subcontractor, the Department will pay an
 amount to cover administrative costs of 8% on the first $10,000 of work and 5% for work in excess of $10,000 as
 provided in 109.05.C.2 through 109.05.C.5. No additional mark-up is allowed for work of a sub-subcontractor or
 trucking services employed by a subcontractor.
 7. Final Adjustment to Premium for Contract Bonds. The final bond premium amount for the payment
 and performance bonds will be computed based on the actual final contract value. For the purpose of computing a
 bond premium adjustment the actual final contract value is defined as the whole sum of money, excluding any bond
 premium adjustment, which is passed from the Department to the Contractor as a result of the completion of the
 Work. If the actual final contract value is different from the original contract value, the premium shall be adjusted
 accordingly; either by refund of part of the original bond premium by the Contractor if the original contract value
 is larger than the actual final contract value; or by payment of additional bond premium by the Department if the
 
 original contract value is smaller than the actual final contract value. Additional payment by the Department or
 refund by the Contractor will be based on the difference between the invoiced bond premium for the original
 contract value and the invoiced bond premium for the actual final contract value without any markup. A final bond
 premium adjustment will not be made when the actual final contract value differs from the original contract value
 by less than $ 40,000.00.
 8.
 
 Trucking.
 
 a. Trucking firms and owner operators not subject to prevailing wage will be paid at the invoiced cost
 plus 8% on the first $10,000 of trucking and 5% for trucking in excess of $10,000 to cover administrative costs.
 b. Trucking that is subject to the prevailing wage law will be compensated according to 109.05.C.1,
 109.05.C.2, 109.05.C.4, 109.05.C.6, 109.05.C.10, and 109.05.C.11.
 Provide documentation showing payment to trucking firms and owner-operators and owner-operations
 status. When the trucking is subject to prevailing wage, submit payroll and equipment usage records according to
 109.05.C.2 and 109.05.C.4.
 9. Professional and Specialized Work. The following work, when performed by a firm hired by the
 Contractor, is paid at the reasonable and fair market invoiced cost plus 8% on the first $10,000 of work and 5% for
 work in excess of $10,000.
 a.
 
 Surveying.
 
 b.
 
 Engineering design.
 
 c. Specialized work that is not normally part of a Department Contract and is not normally subject to
 prevailing wage.
 d. Installation, periodic maintenance, and removal of traffic control devices under Item 614 performed
 by a traffic control service or rental company, provided the workers are not on the Project full-time. Maintenance
 of Traffic services performed by LEO.
 e.
 
 Other professional or specialized work not contemplated at the time of Bid.
 
 Provide documentation showing payment for professional and specialized Work.
 10. Payment for Force Account Work. Submit an analysis of estimated cost prepared in accordance with
 109.05C for work that will be performed on a force account basis. Attach an original affidavit to the analysis stating:
 “Labor rates shown are the actual rates paid for labor, unit prices for materials and rates for owned and rented
 equipment have been estimated on the basis they are not in excess of those charged in the area in which the work
 will be performed.”
 The Engineer will process an Estimated Cost of Force Account (ECFA) if the amount of the force account
 work is likely to be greater than $100,000 and is expected to take more than two weeks to complete. The Engineer
 will process an Actual Cost of Force Account (ACFA) to make any necessary adjustment between the ECFA and
 the final itemized costs for the force account work.
 For force account work estimated to be less than $100,000 and anticipated to require less than two weeks
 to perform, the Engineer will process an Actual Cost of Force Account (ACFA) at the conclusion of the work.
 Submit biweekly itemized statement of costs prepared from the Daily Force Account Records to the
 Engineer as the work is being performed. The Engineer will process estimates as the force account work is
 performed. Payment will only be made upon receipt of the Contractor’s itemized statement of costs.
 Upon conclusion of the work performed by an ECFA or work performed by an ACFA submit an itemized
 statement of the actual costs prepared from the Daily Force Account Record and utilizing the Department’s
 electronic template titled “Electronic Force Account.” Submit a compact disk (CD), labeled with the Contractor’s
 name and the project number, and a hard copy of the “Electronic Force Account.” The “Electronic Force Account”
 template can be downloaded from the following website:
 www.dot.state.oh.us/divisions/constructionmgt/admin/pages/default.aspx
 
 The Engineer may approve an alternative electronic template provided all calculations and printouts are
 equivalent to those generated by the “Electronic Force Account” template.
 Attach an original affidavit to the hard copy stating:
 “The name, classification, total hours worked and rates paid each person listed on the Summary of Actual Cost
 are substantiated by actual records of persons employed on the force account work. All unit prices for materials
 and rates for owned and rented equipment listed on the Summary of Actual Costs are substantiated by actual
 records of materials and equipment actually used in performance of the force account work and the price of any
 owned equipment not previously agreed upon does not exceed prices charged for similar equipment in the area in
 which the work was performed.”
 Daily Force Account Records signed by both the Department and Contractor will govern over other
 Department and Contractor records subject to the following:
 a. When the Contractor is subject to a Union Contract that requires a minimum number of paid hours,
 the compensation will be for the verified contract minimum hours.
 b. Material quantity disagreements will be resolved by field measurements of the installed quantities or
 the Engineer’s estimate of the amount of temporary or un-measurable material used. The Engineer may also review
 and consider the Contractor’s material invoices and material certifications to make the final determination.
 In the event the Contractor declines to sign the Daily Force Account Record, the Department’s records
 shall govern. Any resulting dispute must be pursued in accordance with 108.06.G.
 D. Delay Costs.
 1. General. If the Department agrees that it has caused a delay, the Department will pay for the costs
 specified in 109.05.D as allowed by 108.06.D, unless these costs have been previously paid as listed in 109.05.B
 or 109.05.C. Such payment constitutes full compensation for any and all delay costs
 The Department will make no payment for delays occurring during the period from December 1 to April
 30 unless the Contractor’s approved progress schedule depicts critical Work occurring throughout this period.
 The Department will not pay for delay costs until the Contractor submits an itemized statement of those
 costs. Provide the content specified in 109.05.C.1, for the applicable items in this statement and as follows:
 a. Proof of cost of Superintendent, or other project staff salaries, wages, and payroll taxes and insurance.
 b. Proof of cost of office rent, utilities, land rent, and office supplies.
 c. Proof of escalated cost for labor and material.
 d. Proof of material storage costs.
 2.
 
 Allowable Delay Costs
 
 a. Extended Labor. Compute labor costs during delays as specified in 109.05.C.2 for all non-salaried
 personnel remaining on the Project as required under collective bargaining agreements or for other Engineerapproved reasons.
 b. Escalated Labor. To receive payment for escalated labor costs, demonstrate that the Departmentcaused delay forced the Work to be performed during a period when labor costs were higher than planned at the
 time of Bid. Provide adequate support documentation for the costs, allowances, and benefits specified in
 109.05.C.2. The Department will pay wages and fringes with a 20 percent mark-up to cover administrative costs.
 c. Idle Equipment or Equipment Demobilization. The Department will pay the Contractor according
 to 109.05.C.4.c for idle equipment, other than small tools, that must remain on the Project during the delays. The
 Department will pay the Contractor’s transportation costs to remove and return equipment not required on the
 Project during the delays. No other equipment costs are recoverable as a result of delay.
 d. Material Escalation or Material Storage. The Department will pay the Contractor for increased
 material costs or material storage costs due to the delay. Obtain the Engineer’s approval before storing materials
 
 due to a delay. Payment will be based upon the accepted quantity of work performed during the period for which
 escalated costs have been approved. The Department will pay increased material costs with an 8 percent mark-up
 to cover administrative costs and any material waste inherent to the Work.
 e. Field Overhead. The Department will pay any Contractor or subcontractor for field overhead costs
 which include the cost of supervision, field office and office supplies, and utilities for which payment is not
 provided for in 109.05.D.2.f, during a delay period provided all of the following criteria are met:
 (1) The Contractor or subcontractor has incurred an excusable, compensable delay that delays the
 Work at least 10 Calendar Days beyond the original Completion Date. These days are cumulative throughout the
 project.
 (2)
 The delay for which payment of field overhead is sought is only due to delays defined in
 108.06.D.2, 108.06.D.3, 108.06.D.5 or for delays due to revised Work as specified in 104.02.B or 104.02.F.
 The Department will pay the salary and fringes plus a 5 percent markup for field personnel identified
 in Table 109.05-4.
 TABLE 109.05-4
 Original Contract Amount
 Up to $5,000,000
 $5,000,001 to $50,000,000
 
 Over $50,000,000
 
 Field Personnel
 One Superintendent
 One Superintendent,
 One Assistant Superintendent or One Engineer,
 One Clerk
 One Superintendent,
 One Assistant Superintendent,
 One Engineer, One Clerk
 
 Superintendent’s transportation is compensable at the same rate allowed for foreman’s transportation
 in 109.05.C.5, which includes the cost of mobile communication devices. The allowed hours are when the
 superintendent is at the project site.
 Superintendent’s subsistence, provided this is the company’s terms of compensation to such
 employees, as documented by the Contractor’s written company policy or contracts with their employees.
 The Contractor’s or subcontractor’s field office costs include field office trailers, tool trailers, office
 equipment rental, temporary toilets, and other incidental facilities and supplies. Compute these costs on a Calendar
 Day basis. Owned trailers are paid at the Blue Book rate. Rented trailers are paid at the invoiced cost plus a 15
 percent markup. Rented office space, toilets, and office equipment are allowed a 5 percent markup. Purchased
 office supplies are allowed a 5 percent markup.
 Office utilities include, but are not limited to, telephone, electric, water, and natural gas. Compute
 these costs on a Calendar Day basis and allow a 5 percent markup.
 f. Home Office Overhead. The Department will pay the Contractor for home office overhead,
 unabsorbed home office overhead, extended home office overhead, and all other overhead costs for which payment
 is not provided for in 109.05.D.2.e, including overhead costs that would otherwise be calculated using the Eichleay
 formula or some other apportionment formula, provided all of the following criteria are met:
 (1) The Contractor has incurred an excusable, compensable delay that delays the Work at least 10
 Calendar Days beyond the original Completion Date. These days are cumulative throughout the project.
 (2) The delay for which payment of home office overhead is sought is only due to delays defined in
 108.06.D.2, 108.06.D.3 and 108.06.D.5.
 Any subcontractor that has approved C-92’s for subcontracted work totaling $4,000,000 or more is
 eligible for reimbursement of home office overhead provided the criteria set forth in 109.05.D.2.f.(1) and
 109.05.D.2.f.(2) are met.
 Payment will be made for every eligible day beyond the original contract completion date at the rate
 determined by 109.05.D.2.f.i. Payment for eligible days occurring during an unanticipated construction period will
 
 be calculated in accordance with 109.05.D.2.f.ii. Payment for eligible days occurring during an unanticipated
 winter period will be calculated in accordance with 109.05.D.2.f.iii.
 (i) Home Office Overhead Daily Rate
 Calculate the home office overhead daily rate using the following formula:
 Daily HOOP = (A × C)/B
 Where:
 A = original contract amount
 B = contract duration in Calendar Days
 C = value from Table 109.05-5
 TABLE 109.05-5
 Original Contract Amount
 Up to $5,000,000
 $5,000,001 to $25,000,000
 Over $25,000,000
 Daily HOOP =
 
 C
 0.08
 0.06
 0.05
 
 home office overhead daily rate
 
 Contract duration term, B, includes every Calendar Day from the execution of the Contract,
 unless otherwise specified by the Director, to the original Contract Completion Date.
 When the Contractor requests home office overhead compensation for a subcontractor, use the
 above formula to calculate the subcontractor’s Daily HOOP; however, in the subcontractor calculation, A is equal
 to the subcontractor’s portion of the original contract amount as determined by the sum of all approved C-92’s
 issued for the subcontracted work.
 (ii) Home Office Overhead Payment for an Unanticipated Construction Period
 Calculate the home office overhead payment for an unanticipated construction period occurring
 between May 1 and November 30 using the following formula:
 CP HOOP = Daily HOOP × D
 Where:
 D=
 
 sum of all excusable, compensable delays in Calendar Days minus the sum of all delays
 due to 108.06.D.1 and 108.06.D.4 in Calendar Days
 Daily HOOP =
 daily home office overhead rate
 CP HOOP = home office overhead payment for an unanticipated construction period occurring
 between May 1 and November 30
 The excusable, compensable delay term, D, is the additional, unanticipated extended period for
 work performed between May 1 and November 30 in Calendar Days.
 (iii) Home Office Overhead Payment for an Unanticipated Winter Period
 Calculate the payment for home office overhead for an unanticipated winter period occurring
 between December 1 and April 30 using the following formula:
 WP HOOP = Daily HOOP × F × D/E
 Where:
 D = sum of all excusable, compensable delays in Calendar Days minus the sum of all delays
 due to 108.06.D.1 and 108.06.D.4 in Calendar Days
 E = sum of all excusable, compensable delays in Calendar Days plus the sum of all excusable,
 non-compensable delays in Calendar Days
 F = 151 for a non-leap year or 152 for a leap year
 Daily HOOP = daily home office overhead rate
 WP HOOP = home office overhead payment for an unanticipated winter period occurring
 between December 1 and April 30
 
 Payment for Home Office Overhead for an unanticipated winter period will not be made when
 the value of the remaining work is below the lesser of $500,000.00 or 10 percent of the estimated final contract
 value.
 (iv) Total Home Office Overhead Payment
 Calculate the total home office overhead payment using the following formula:
 Total HOOP = CP HOOP + WP HOOP
 Where:
 CP HOOP = home office overhead payment for an unanticipated construction period occurring
 between May 1 and November 30
 WP HOOP = home office overhead payment for an unanticipated winter period occurring
 between December 1 and April 30
 Total HOOP = total home office overhead payment
 g. Subsistence and Travel Allowance. The Department will pay costs for subsistence and travel
 allowances for labor that must remain on the Project during the delays, when such payments are required by the
 collective bargaining agreement or other employment contracts applicable to the classes of labor employed on the
 project. Overnight lodging will be reimbursed if the person is at a location greater than forty-five miles from their
 residence up to a maximum of $106 per day. Meals and incidental expenses will reimbursed up to a maximum of
 $56 per day. The Department will not pay a percent markup on these costs.
 E. Changes in Materials. Changes in material specifications that result in increased cost to the Contractor are
 compensated by lump sum adjustment to the reference number. The allowed compensation is equal to the invoice
 supported material cost increase plus 15 percent markup for profit and overhead.
 Material cost savings resulting from a specification change shall be credited to the project by a lump sum
 adjustment to the reference number plus a 15 percent markup if the originally specified material has not been
 ordered.
 If the original material was ordered before the Contractor was informed of the change, the savings markup
 allowed is 2.5 percent in order to exclude profit on the original bid price and pay only for incurred overhead.
 109.06
 Directed Acceleration. The Engineer may order the Contractor to accelerate the Work to avoid delay
 costs or to complete the Project early. The Director and the Contractor will negotiate acceleration costs.
 109.07
 Inefficiency. The Department will compensate the Contractor for inefficiency or loss of productivity
 resulting from 104.02 Revisions to the Contract Documents. Use the Measured Mile analysis comparing the
 productivity of work impacted by a change to the productivity of similar work performed under un-impacted
 conditions to prove and quantify the inefficiency.
 109.08
 Unrecoverable Costs. The Contractor is not entitled to additional compensation for costs not
 specifically allowed or provided for in 109.05 including, but not limited to, the following:
 A. Loss of anticipated profit.
 B. Consequential damages, including loss of bonding capacity, loss of bidding opportunities, insolvency, and the
 effects of force account work on other projects, or business interruption.
 C. Indirect costs.
 D. Attorney’s fees, claim preparation expenses, and the costs of litigation.
 109.09
 Estimates. If satisfactory progress is being made, the Contractor will receive monthly payments
 equaling the Work and materials in place. The monthly payment is approximate, and all partial estimates and
 payments are subject to correction in the Final Estimate and payment. Payment for Work and materials shall not,
 in any way, prevent later rejection when defective Work or material is discovered, or constitute acceptance under
 109.11 or 109.12.
 
 Except for estimates generated during Project finalization, the Department will not pay an estimate until the
 Contractor certifies to the Engineer that the work for which payment is being made was performed in accordance
 with the contract. Certification will be made on forms provided by the Department.
 The Department may pay estimates twice each month if the Engineer concludes the amount of work performed
 is sufficient.
 No estimate or payment shall be construed as acceptance of defective Work or improper materials.
 The Department will not pay the adjusted final estimate until the Contractor remedies all defective Work and
 accepted Work damaged by the Contractor’s operations.
 Interest will be paid in accordance with ORC 126.30 when warranted.
 109.10
 Payment for Delivered Materials. The Department will pay, up to 75 percent of the applicable
 contract item, for the invoiced cost of the delivered and approved materials before they are incorporated in the
 Work, if the approved materials are delivered, accepted, and properly stored on the project or stored in acceptable
 storage places in the vicinity of the Project.
 The Department will pay for the cost of approved materials before they are incorporated in the Work when asked
 by the Contractor, if the Engineer determines that it is not practical to deliver the material to the Project site. This
 provision applies only to bulky materials that are durable in nature and represent a significant portion of the project
 cost, such as aggregates, steel, and precast concrete. The Department will pay for un-fabricated structural steel if
 the following requirements are met:
 1. The Contractor has provided both the Engineer and the Office of Materials Management an itemized invoice
 from the steel mill for the steel for which reimbursement is requested
 2. Project structural Steel design plans are complete with no forthcoming revisions. For design build projects,
 Contractor accepted show drawings per 501.04, will need to be provided.
 3. Contractor accepted certified test data for all steel in question along with mill shipping notices have been
 received by the Office of Materials Management per 501.06.
 4. The steel is properly stored to allow inspection by the Office of Materials Management. It shall also be properly
 set apart from other material and identified as belonging to ODOT.
 5. The Contractor will provide the Engineer a written statement that under 106, the Contractor is responsible for
 the steel that has been paid for until the actual steel is erected and accepted in the field.
 6. Payment shall only be authorized after all the aforementioned documentation has been received by the Office
 of Materials Management and the steel has been inspected by the Office of Materials Management to verify that
 all steel listed in the itemized invoice has been received by the fabricator and properly stored. The amount to be
 paid shall be equivalent to the itemized invoice from the steel mill, but shall not exceed 50% of the bid price for
 the structural steel.
 The Department will not pay delivered materials on small warehouse items or for plant materials.
 109.11
 Partial Acceptance. Upon completion of a portion of the Work, the Contractor may request
 acceptance of a completed portion of the Work.
 A. An inspection may be performed on a completed portion of the project roadway section provided:
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 
 All safety items are in place including permanent pavement markings.
 Traffic is in its final pattern.
 A completed portion of the project constitutes a completed geographic section of the project or a
 direction of traffic on a divided highway.
 Is in accordance with other contract provisions.
 
 B. An inspection may be performed on a completed bridge provided:
 1.
 
 All work on the bridge and approaches are complete, including all safety items and permanent
 pavement markings.
 
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 
 The Contractor will not return to the bridge for any work except as allowed in 4.
 Traffic is in its final pattern.
 Painting of structural steel is either completed or scheduled to be performed.
 Is in accordance with other contract provisions.
 
 The Final Inspector will grant written partial acceptance for that portion of the Work or reject the Contractor’s
 request. Such written partial acceptance will designate what portion of the Work is accepted, the date of acceptance,
 and the warranty provisions started by the partial acceptance.
 Partial acceptance will relieve the Contractor of maintenance responsibility for the designated portion of the
 Work. This does not relieve the Contractor of responsibility to correct defective Work or repair damage caused by
 the Contractor or waive any other remedy to which the Department is entitled at law or in equity.
 109.12
 
 Final Acceptance.
 
 A. Final Inspection. The Department will perform a Final Inspection for the sole purpose of relieving the
 Contractor of maintenance responsibility for the Work.
 The Final Inspection shall be a limited visual review of the Work and shall only serve as the Department’s
 verification that the Work appears substantially complete. Final Inspection does not waive any available rights or
 remedies of the Department, nor divest the Contractor of any responsibility for compliance with the contract or
 liability for damages.
 Notify the Engineer when the Project is complete and all of the Engineer’s punch list items are complete. If
 the Engineer agrees the Project is complete, then within 10 business days the District Final Inspector will inspect
 the Work and categorize it as one of the following:
 1.
 
 Unacceptable or not complete.
 
 2.
 
 Substantially complete with punch list items found by the Final Inspector.
 
 3.
 
 Substantially complete.
 
 If the Final Inspector finds the Work substantially complete or substantially complete with punch list items,
 then the Contractor’s maintenance responsibilities end on the day of the Final Inspection, except for any
 maintenance related to unfinished punch list items. This does not relieve the Contractor of responsibility to correct
 defective Work or repair damage caused by the Contractor or waive any other remedy to which the Department is
 entitled at law or in equity. The Final Inspector will issue a Final Inspection Report that will document the findings
 of the inspection and start any warranty period.
 B. Punch List. The Final Inspector will issue to the Contractor a written punch list of work required as a condition
 of acceptance. The Final Inspector’s punch list will stipulate a reasonable time to complete the required Work.
 Failure of the Contractor to complete the punch list items by the stipulated time will result in the assessment of
 fifty percent of the Liquidated Damages according to 108.07 for each Calendar Day for every day beyond the
 stipulated time the punch list work remains incomplete and beyond the revised Completion Date.
 C. Finalization. The Contractor shall accept the final quantities as determined by the Engineer or provide a
 written notice indicating the reason for disagreement within 30 Calendar Days of receiving the Engineer’s list of
 final quantities. The prescribed 30 Calendar Day period can be modified by mutual agreement of the Contractor
 and the District Construction Engineer. If no notice of disagreement is received, then the final payment will be
 based on the Engineer’s list of final quantities.
 Supply all documents necessary for Project finalization within 60 Calendar Days from the date that the Work
 is physically complete. These documents include:
 1.
 
 Delinquent material certifications.
 
 2.
 
 Delinquent certified payrolls or required revised payrolls.
 
 3.
 
 Wage affidavit required by ORC Chapter 4115 on projects without any Federal funding.
 
 4.
 
 Delinquent force account records.
 
 5.
 
 If applicable, DBE affidavits.
 
 6.
 
 Any other document required to complete finalization of the project.
 
 Failure to submit these acceptably completed documents will result in an administrative fee of $100 per
 Calendar Day for every day that any of the required documents remain delinquent, starting 30 Calendar Days after
 receipt of written notification from the Engineer of a document deficiency.
 D. Final Payment. Final payment is based on:
 1. The agreed final quantities or as determined by the Engineer if agreement is not possible, no compensation
 for unauthorized work is allowed.
 2.
 
 Finding of substantial completion by the Final Inspector.
 
 3.
 
 Receipt of acceptable finalization documents.
 
 4.
 
 Contractor certification that the Work was performed in accordance with the contract.
 
 E. Completion of Contract and Continuation of Contractor’s Responsibility. The Contract is complete,
 except for items covered by the required bonds, when the Contractor receives final payment. The DCA will issue
 a letter confirming completion of the contract, noting any exception as provided in Items 659 and 661 and any
 warranty. The date the final payment is approved by the District constitutes acceptance for the purpose of ORC
 5525.16. Neither Completion of the Contract nor substantial completion relieves the Contractor of any
 responsibilities to properly perform or correct the Work or to repair damage or waives any remedies to which the
 Department is entitled at law or in equity.
 
 200 EARTHWORK
 ITEM 201 CLEARING AND GRUBBING
 201.01
 201.02
 201.03
 201.04
 201.05
 201.06
 
 Description
 General
 Clearing and Grubbing
 Scalping
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 201.01
 Description. This work consists of clearing, grubbing, scalping, removing trees and stumps, and
 removing all vegetation and construction debris from the limits shown on the plans, except such objects that are to
 remain or are to be removed according to other items of work.
 Use removed or excavated materials in the work when the material conforms to the specifications; if not then
 recycle, burn, or dispose of the material according to 105.16 and 105.17.
 201.02
 
 General
 
 A. Remove or save all trees, shrubs, and plants as designated on the plans. Preserve all vegetation and objects not
 designated for removal. Paint cut or scarred surfaces of trees or shrubs selected for retention according to 666.04.
 B. In order to retard and prevent the spread of destructive insects, limit the movement of regulated articles
 according to Ohio Administrative Code 901:5. Observe requirements for handling and transporting of regulated
 articles in quarantined areas as defined by the Ohio Department of Agriculture.
 Follow all other federal and state destructive insect quarantines.
 C. Restrictions on when the Contractor may perform the clearing and grubbing work are located in other parts of
 the Contract Documents.
 201.03
 Clearing and Grubbing. Clear and grub all trees and stumps marked for removal and all surface
 objects, brush, roots, and other protruding obstructions not designated to remain, except for special treatments listed
 below:
 A. In locations to be seeded, remove stumps at least 6 inches (150 mm) below ground surface.
 B. In unseeded areas to be rounded at the top of backslopes, cut the stumps flush with or below the surface of the
 final slope line.
 C. The Contractor may leave undisturbed stumps and roots, and nonperishable solid objects 6 inches (150 mm)
 above the existing ground surface in the plan embankment construction locations when both of the following
 conditions are true:
 1. The embankment height is greater than 9 feet (3 m) as measured vertically from the existing ground
 surface to the proposed ground surface, and
 2.
 
 The slope of the existing ground is 8:1 or flatter.
 
 D. In locations outside of the construction limits of the cut and embankment areas not to be seeded, the Contractor
 may leave sound stumps 24 inches (0.6 m) above the existing ground surface.
 Except in areas to be excavated, backfill stump holes and other holes created by removing obstructions with Item
 203 embankment material. Place and compact according to Item 203.
 Remove low hanging, unsound, or unsightly branches on trees or shrubs designated to remain. Trim branches of
 trees extending over the roadbed to provide a clear height of 20 feet (6 m) above the roadbed surface.
 Dispose of debris contaminated with garbage, solid waste, or hazardous waste or material according to other
 contract items.
 
 201.04
 Scalping. Scalping includes removing surface material such as roots, sod, grass, residue of
 agricultural crops, sawdust, and decayed vegetable matter. The depth of scalping does not include topsoil or other
 material below the scalping operation. The Engineer will not require areas to be scalped in the plan embankment
 construction locations when both of the following conditions are true:
 1. The embankment height is greater than 9 feet (3 m) as measured vertically from the existing ground
 surface to the proposed ground surface, and
 2.
 
 The slope of the existing ground is 8:1 or flatter.
 
 Scalp all other areas where excavation or embankment is required.
 201.05
 
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure by one of the following methods:
 
 If Clearing and Grubbing is specified in the Contract, the Department will not measure the area cleared and
 grubbed.
 If Item 201 Tree Removed or Item 201 Stump Removed is specified in the Contract, the Department will measure
 trees and stumps designated for removal according to the following table.
 TABLE 201.05-1
 Tree or Stump Diameter
 Over 12 inches to 24 inches
 Over 24 inches to 36 inches
 Over 36 inches to 60 inches
 Over 60 inches
 
 Pay Item Designation
 18-inch size
 30-inch size
 48-inch size
 60-inch size
 
 Over 0.3 m to 0.6 m
 Over 0.6 m to 0.9 m
 Over 0.9 m to 1.5 m
 Over 1.5 m
 
 0.5 m size
 0.8 m size
 1.2 m size
 1.5 m size
 
 The Department will measure the diameter of trees at a height of 54 inches (1.4 m) above the ground. Trees 12
 inches (0.3 m) and less in diameter are classified as brush. The Department will measure stumps by taking the
 average diameter at the cutoff.
 201.06
 Basis of Payment. If Item 201 Clearing and Grubbing is specified in the Contract, the Department
 will pay for all work described, including backfilling holes, scalping, and removing all trees and stumps, at the
 lump sum price bid. If Item 201 Tree Removed or Item 201 Stump Removed is specified in the Contract, the
 Department will consider the remaining work described incidental and will not pay for performing this work
 directly.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 201
 201
 201
 
 Lump Sum
 Each
 Each
 
 Clearing and Grubbing
 Tree Removed, ___ Size
 Stump Removed, ___ Size
 
 ITEM 202 REMOVAL OF STRUCTURES AND OBSTRUCTIONS
 202.01
 202.02
 202.03
 202.04
 202.05
 202.06
 202.07
 202.08
 202.09
 202.10
 202.11
 202.12
 202.13
 
 Description
 General Construction Requirements
 Structures Removed
 Pipe Removal
 Pavement, Walks, Curbs, Steps, Gutters, or Traffic Dividers Removed
 Buildings Demolished
 Septic Tanks and Privy Vaults Removed
 Underground Storage Tanks Removed
 Guardrail and Fence Removed
 Manhole, Catch Basin, and Inlet Removed
 Manhole, Catch Basin, and Inlet Abandoned
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 202.01
 Description. This work consists of removing, entirely or in part, and disposing of all buildings,
 fences, guardrails, structures, old pavements, abandoned pipe lines, storage tanks, septic tanks, privy vaults, and
 other obstructions not designated or permitted to remain, except for utilities and obstructions to be removed and
 disposed of under other items in the Contract. This work also consists of backfilling the resulting trenches, holes,
 and pits, and salvaging designated materials.
 When specific pay items for removal of structures and obstructions are not listed in the Contract Documents,
 perform this work under Item 203.
 202.02
 General Construction Requirements. Raze, remove, and dispose of all buildings and foundations,
 structures, fences, guardrails, old pavements, abandoned pipe lines, storage tanks, septic tanks, privy vaults, and
 other obstructions within the Right-of-Way, except for utilities and those items where other provisions have been
 made for removal. Remove and store, at the specified locations within the Project limits, or reuse all designated
 salvageable materials.
 The Department will take ownership of all salvageable items specified for storage. Reuse all salvageable items
 specified for reuse on the project. When the Contract Documents do not indicate for storage or for reuse, take
 ownership of the material.
 Use removed or excavated materials in the Work when the material conforms to the specifications; if not, then
 dispose of the material according to 105.16 and 105.17.
 Do not remove any item in use by traffic until after making arrangements to accommodate traffic.
 When backfilling is required, backfill the resulting cavities, voids, or trenches with either Item 203 embankment
 material or Item 611 Structural Backfill Type 1 or 2. Use Item 611 Structural Backfill when the removed item is
 under the proposed pavement or paved shoulder and when the site limits the use of compaction equipment larger
 than an 8-ton (7 metric tons) roller; otherwise the Contractor may use Item 203 embankment material. Place and
 compact the embankment or Item 611 Structural Backfill according to 203.
 For backfilled areas outside the plan construction limits, provide a final grade that presents a neat, well-drained
 appearance that conforms to the final topography and prevents water from draining onto adjacent properties.
 202.03
 Structures Removed. Remove bridges, culverts, and other structures indicated for removal in the
 Contract Documents. If within a stream, remove the substructures of existing structures, including piling, down to
 the proposed stream bottom. For those parts outside the stream, remove substructures to a minimum of 1 foot (0.3
 m) below proposed ground surface. Remove, as necessary, those portions of existing structures that lie entirely or
 partially within the limits for a new structure to accommodate the construction of the proposed structure.
 Where alteration of an existing structure requires removal of portions of the structure, remove those portions
 with sufficient care as to avoid damage to the remaining portion of the structure. In case of damage to the existing
 structure, repair or replace the structure at no expense to the Department. Remove any existing welded form
 
 hangers, welded attachments two inches or longer measured parallel to the long axis of the top flange of steel beams
 or girders, and welded attachments that interfere with the placement of welded shear connectors.
 If removing a bridge or portion of a bridge with an asphalt wearing course, remove the wearing course separately
 before removing the bridge or portion of the bridge.
 Backfill the cavity created by the removal item according to 202.02, except when the cavity lies within the limits
 of subsequent excavation or other work.
 202.04
 Pipe Removal. Remove and reuse, store, or dispose of pipe, or culvert as specified in the Contract
 Documents.
 If removing an existing concrete waterline pipe that was constructed before 1980, it may be an asbestos pipe.
 Test the pipe by using a Department prequalified environmental consultant to determine if it is an asbestos pipe. If
 it is determined that the pipe is asbestos, then a certified asbestos Contractor must perform the removal. Dispose
 of all asbestos pipe at a solid waste facility that is licensed by the Local Health Department and permitted by the
 OEPA.
 Seal openings left in walls of manholes or catch basins that are to remain in place, and remove and dispose of
 pipe headwalls.
 If an adjacent existing pipe is encountered during removal operations and the pipe is inactive or is to be
 abandoned, plug or seal the remaining ends of the pipe before proceeding with backfilling operations. Perform
 plugging by using approved precast stoppers. Perform sealing by using masonry bulkheads.
 Remove a sufficient section of the pipe to allow the Engineer to determine the quality of the pipe and the
 possibility of its removal without damage to pipe specified for reuse or storage. If the Engineer determines the pipe
 is salvageable, carefully remove the remainder of the pipe to avoid breaking or damaging the pipe. Transport and
 store the removed pipe, as necessary before relaying. Replace sections of pipe lost or damaged by negligence or by
 use of improper methods at no additional cost to the Department. Clean all pipe before reusing. Remove salvageable
 pipe under Item 202 Pipe Removed for Reuse or Storage.
 If the Engineer determines the pipe is unusable, take ownership of the pipe, and dispose of or recycle it according
 to 202.02. Remove unusable pipe under Item 202 Pipe Removed.
 Before backfilling the trench, excavate the caved material, as necessary.
 Backfill trenches resulting from the removal of pipe according to 202.02, except when the trench lies within the
 limits of subsequent excavation or other work.
 202.05
 Pavement, Walks, Curbs, Steps, Gutters, or Traffic Dividers Removed. As designated, remove
 and dispose of the existing wearing course, concrete base course, concrete pavement, asphalt wearing course on
 brick or concrete base, concrete walks, concrete steps, concrete gutters, stone or concrete curbs, and concrete traffic
 dividers. If removing only a portion of an existing pavement, walk, step, gutter, curb, or traffic divider, saw or
 otherwise cut a neat joint at the removal limit if it does not occur at an existing joint.
 If Item 202 Pavement Removed is specified in the Contract, remove all asphalt, concrete, or brick from the
 surface to the bottom of the pavement courses as shown on the plans. If 202 Base Removed is specified in the
 Contract, remove the specific layer as shown on the plans. If Item 202 Wearing Course Removed is specified in
 the Contract, remove all asphalt from the surface to the top of the concrete or brick or remove the specific layer or
 layers shown on the plans.
 Backfill the cavity created by the removal item according to 202.02, except when the cavity lies within the limits
 of subsequent excavation or other work.
 202.06
 Buildings Demolished. Do not disturb buildings and appurtenances designated for demolition until
 the Engineer provides a Notice of Possession and Approval to Proceed. Immediately after receiving approval,
 schedule and perform the demolition under the Engineer’s direction in order to accommodate utility rearrangements
 and clearance of structures. Whether the building is located partially or totally on temporary or permanent Rightof-Way perform the demolition the same.
 
 The Contractor may use buildings located partially on and off the permanent Right-of-Way for storage, office,
 living quarters, or other purposes. The agreement shall allow such use during the period of the Contract and save
 the Department harmless from any claims whatsoever by reason of such use.
 Remove foundations; floors; floor slabs; and basement, pit, well, and cistern walls to a minimum of 1 foot (0.3
 m) below the grade of the surrounding area.
 Completely remove all tanks and clear basements of all materials, debris, appliances, wood or metal partitions,
 and wood floors so only masonry walls and concrete basement floors remain. Break up and remove all floor slabs
 under which a pit, well, cistern, or tank exists. Break up basement floors to be left in place, and seal remaining
 drains with masonry or with precast clay or concrete stoppers.
 Take ownership of all materials, except those belonging to a public or private utility. Notify the owners of water,
 electric, or gas meters when the meters are ready for removal. Disconnect all utilities according to local
 requirements.
 After completing demolition work and obtaining the Engineer’s approval, immediately backfill the cavity created
 by the removal item according to 202.02, except when the cavity lies within the limits of subsequent excavation or
 other work.
 202.07
 Septic Tanks and Privy Vaults Removed. Empty all septic tanks and privy vaults. Dispose of the
 removed contents in a manner that conforms to the requirements of the State and Local Boards of Health or other
 authorities having jurisdiction.
 Completely remove and dispose of septic tanks and privy vaults located above the subgrade or finished ground
 surface. For septic tanks and privy vaults located below the subgrade or finished ground surface, remove tops and
 walls to a minimum depth of 3 feet (1 m) below subgrade or 1 foot (0.3 m) below finished ground surface. Break
 up floors and seal remaining drains with masonry or with precast clay or concrete stoppers.
 Backfill the cavity created by the removal, partial removal, or emptying operation according to 202.02, except
 when the cavity lies within the limits of subsequent excavation or other work.
 202.08
 Underground Storage Tank Removed. Remove and dispose of underground storage tanks or
 regulated underground storage tanks, as designated in the Contract Documents, and according to the requirements
 of the authorities having jurisdiction.
 If Item 202 Regulated Underground Storage Tank Removed is specified in the Contract, remove the tank
 according to the Bureau of Underground Storage Tank Regulations of the Division of Fire Marshal (BUSTR), Ohio
 EPA, and all applicable Federal, State, and local regulations. Removal includes obtaining the required permit,
 disposing of the tank and its contents, testing the excavated material, and preparing the closure report. Provide a
 Certified Tank Installer to supervise the removal. Provide an independent non-Contractor employee BUSTR
 inspector or a State Certified BUSTR inspector to perform the BUSTR required inspections. For tanks containing
 hazardous substances other than petroleum, use the Ohio EPA regulations in addition to State Fire Marshal
 regulations.
 Completely remove regulated underground storage tank and contents. Take ownership and dispose of tanks
 according to 202.02 and the above requirements. If because of leakage from the tank, any contaminated water or
 soil disposal or remediation is required, perform the necessary work under other items in the Contract or according
 to 109.05.
 If Item 202 Underground Storage Tank Removed is specified in the Contract, completely remove and dispose of
 the tank. Dispose of the removed contents in a manner that conforms to the requirements of the State and local
 Boards of Health, or other authorities having jurisdiction.
 Backfill the cavity created by the removal items according to 202.02, except when the cavity lies within the limits
 of subsequent excavation or other work.
 202.09
 Guardrail and Fence Removed. Carefully dismantle and store existing guardrail (including anchor
 assemblies and terminal assemblies, and any attached posts, signs, and delineators) and fence when designated for
 
 reuse or storage by the Department. Dispose of wood posts and other materials not considered salvageable
 according to 202.02.
 When fence is designated for replacement, do not remove the existing fence until the replacement material is on
 site. Begin the new installation within 7 workdays of beginning the removal process.
 When guardrail is designated to be replaced and traffic is being maintained in the adjacent lane, do not leave
 hazards unprotected except for the actual time required to remove the existing guardrail and install the proposed
 guardrail in a continuous operation. Do not remove the guardrail until the replacement material is on the site and
 ready for installation. The Engineer will suspend work for failure to comply with this requirement.
 Backfill the cavity created by the removal item according to 202.02, except when the cavity lies within the limits
 of subsequent excavation or other work.
 202.10
 Manhole, Catch Basin, and Inlet Removed. Remove existing drainage structures of the types
 designated for removal. Take ownership of castings unless otherwise noted on the plans.
 Backfill the cavity created by the removal item according to 202.02, except when the cavity lies within the limits
 of subsequent excavation or other work.
 202.11
 Manhole, Catch Basin, and Inlet Abandoned. Remove existing drainage structures of the types
 designated to be abandoned to a minimum of 1 foot (0.3 m) below the finished subgrade or ground surface. Do not
 damage pipes that are to remain. Take ownership of castings unless otherwise noted on the plans.
 Connect existing pipes with new pipe through the structures. Seal the existing inlet and outlet pipes with precast
 vitrified or concrete stoppers or with masonry of a type and thickness to fill the inlet or outlet pipe.
 After connecting or sealing the existing pipes and removing the walls to the required depth, backfill the remaining
 cavities according to 202.02. If using connecting pipes, carefully hand tamp backfill under and around the pipe
 according to 202.02.
 202.12
 Method of Measurement. If the Contract specifies that removal of structures and obstructions is on
 a lump sum basis, the work will include all structures or obstructions encountered at locations or within areas
 designated in the Contract Documents. However, the Department will measure asphalt wearing course removal on
 a bridge separate from the lump sum item for structure removal.
 If the Contract specifies that removal of specific items is on a unit basis, the Department will measure the quantity
 of each item by the unit stipulated in the Contract. If removal of steps is measured by the foot (meter), the
 Department will measure the number of feet (meters) along the front edge of each tread. If the steps have an integral
 wall, the Department will include the thickness of the integral wall with the tread width measurement.
 202.13
 Basis of Payment. Payment is full compensation for all work involved in the removal and storage,
 reuse, or disposal of structures and obstructions, including excavation and backfill incidental to their removal,
 removing the contents of the underground storage and septic tanks and the custody, preservation, storage on the
 Right-of-Way, and disposal as provided in this specification.
 For pipe removed and reused or stored, the Department will pay for the accepted work under Item 202 Pipe
 Removed for Reuse or Storage. For unusable pipe removed, the Department will pay for the accepted work under
 Item 202 Pipe Removed.
 If the Contract Documents do not include a pay item for Item 202 Asbestos Pipe Removed, then the Department
 will pay for removal and disposal of asbestos pipe according to 109.05.
 When removed pavement is replaced with embankment material, the Department will pay for the embankment
 material under the applicable 203 or 204 pay item. When pipe is removed from beneath existing pavement, the
 Department will pay for pavement removal under the applicable pay item for pavement removal or excavation, and
 the Department will pay for new pavement under the applicable pavement pay item.
 Include all of the costs and work associated with compliance of the rules or regulations under Item 202 Regulated
 Underground Storage Tank Removed. If the underground storage tank is not regulated, the work does not include
 
 obtaining inspection services, permits, testing excavated material, or closure reporting and the payment will be
 under Item 202 Underground Storage Tank Removed.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 202
 202
 
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum, or
 Cubic Yard or Pound
 (Cubic Meter
 or Kilogram)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Lump Sum, or
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot or
 Square Yard
 (Meter or
 Square Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Lump Sum
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 Structure Removed
 Portions of Structure Removed
 
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 202
 
 Pipe Removed for Reuse or Storage
 Pipe Removed
 Asbestos Pipe Removed
 Pavement Removed
 Wearing Course Removed
 Base Removed
 Walk Removed
 Steps Removed
 Curb Removed
 Curb and Gutter Removed
 Gutter Removed
 
 Curb Removed for Storage
 Precast Traffic Divider Removed for Reuse or Storage
 Building Demolished
 Underground Storage Tank Removed
 Regulated Underground Storage Tank Removed
 Septic Tank Removed
 Privy Vault Removed
 Guardrail Removed
 Guardrail Removed for Reuse or Storage
 Fence Removed for Reuse or Storage
 Manhole Removed
 Manhole Abandoned
 Catch Basin or Inlet Removed
 Catch Basin or Inlet Abandoned
 
 ITEM 203 ROADWAY EXCAVATION AND EMBANKMENT
 203.01
 203.02
 203.03
 203.04
 203.05
 203.06
 203.07
 203.08
 203.09
 203.10
 
 Description
 Material Definitions
 Restrictions on the Use of Embankment Materials
 General
 Embankment Construction Methods
 Spreading and Compacting
 Compaction and Moisture Requirements
 Earthwork Construction Tolerances
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 203.01
 Description. This work consists of preparing areas upon which embankments are to be placed;
 excavating for roadways and channels, including the removal of all material encountered not being removed under
 another item; constructing embankments with the excavated material and material from other approved sources as
 necessary to complete the planned embankments; furnishing and incorporating all water required for compacting
 embankment; disposing of unsuitable and surplus material and finishing shoulders, slopes, and ditches.
 All excavation is considered unclassified excavation. If the excavation contains regulated materials such as
 garbage, solid waste, and hazardous waste or material, the Contract Documents will detail the removal for these
 items.
 Use removed or excavated materials in the Work when the material conforms to the specifications; if not, then
 recycle or dispose of the material according to 105.16 and 105.17.
 203.02
 
 Material Definitions.
 
 A. Asphalt Concrete. Recycled asphalt pavement (RAP) that is blended to meet the requirements in 703.16.
 B. Base. Selected material of planned thickness placed on the subgrade as a foundation for other bases, or asphalt
 or concrete pavements. The base is a part of the pavement structure.
 C. Borrow. Material obtained from approved sources, located outside the construction limits that is required for
 the construction of the embankment. When borrow is specified or used, use suitable materials that conform to
 203.02.R.
 D. Compaction Testing. The Department will perform the compaction testing of embankment and subgrade
 according to Supplement 1015.
 E. Embankment. A structure consisting of suitable materials conforming to 203.02.R and constructed in lifts to
 a predetermined elevation and cross section.
 F. Excavation. The excavation and disposal of all materials required by the Contract Documents.
 G. Maximum Dry Density. The maximum dry density is determined according to AASHTO T 99, AASHTO T
 272, or Supplement 1015. The Department will use this maximum dry density for compaction acceptance.
 H. Natural Granular Materials. Natural granular materials include broken or crushed rock, gravel, sand, durable
 siltstone, and durable sandstone that can be placed in an 8-inch (200 mm) loose lift.
 I. Natural Soil. All natural earth materials, organic or inorganic, resulting from natural processes such as
 weathering, decay, and chemical action.
 J. Optimum Moisture Content. The water content at which the maximum dry density is produced in an
 embankment material. The optimum moisture content is determined according to AASHTO T 99, AASHTO T 272,
 or Supplement 1015.
 K. Petroleum Contaminated Soil (PCS). Petroleum contaminated soil (PCS) that is regulated under OAC1301:7-9-16.
 L. Random Material. Mixtures of suitable materials that can be placed in 8-inch (200 mm) loose lifts.
 
 M. Recycled Portland Cement Concrete. Recycled Portland cement concrete (RPCC) that is blended to meet
 the requirements in 703.16.
 N. Recycled Materials. Fly ash, bottom ash, foundry sand, recycled glass, tire shreds, or other materials or
 manufacturing bi-products not specifically named as suitable materials in 203.02.R.
 O. Rock. Sandstone, siltstone, limestone, dolomite, glacial boulders, brick, and RPCC too large to be placed in
 an 8-inch (200 mm) loose lift.
 P. Shale. A fine-grained sedimentary rock formed from the lithification of clay, silt, or mud. Shale has a laminated
 structure, which splits easily (is fissile). For the purpose of this specification, mudstone and claystone are also
 considered to be shale. Shale is classified as durable or nondurable according to 703.16.D.
 Q. Slag Materials. Slag materials include air cooled blast furnace slag (ACBFS), granulated slag (GS), open
 hearth (OH) slag, basic oxygen furnace (BOF) slag, and electric arc furnace (EAF) slag meeting the requirements
 in 703.16.
 R. Suitable Materials. All suitable materials are restricted in 203.03. Furnish soil or embankment material
 conforming to 703.16, when Item 203 Embankment is specified. Furnish material that conforms to 703.16.B or
 703.16.C when Item 203 Granular Embankment is specified. Furnish material that conforms to 703.16.C when
 Item 203 Granular Material Types A, B, C, D, E or F are specified. Do not use recycled materials unless specifically
 allowed by the Supplemental Specifications.
 203.03
 follows:
 
 Restrictions on the Use of Embankment Materials. Suitable materials are further restricted as
 
 A. Use silt identified as ODOT Group Classification A-4b and RAP only if placed at least 3 feet (1 m) below the
 surface of the subgrade.
 B. Do not place RPCC and RAP in any location where it would inhibit the growth of vegetation.
 C. Do not use any suitable material that cannot be incorporated in an 8-inch (200 mm) lift in the top 2 feet (0.6
 m) of the embankment.
 D. Do not use nondurable shale in the top 2 feet (0.6 m) of the embankment that is not completely compacted and
 pulverized into a soil with 100 percent of the material passing the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve.
 E. If using RPCC, OH slag, EAF slag, BOF slags, or blends of these materials, place these materials at least 1
 foot (0.3 m) below the flow line of the underdrains.
 F. Do not use RPCC, OH slag, EAF slag, BOF slags, granulated slag, or blends of these materials for underwater
 applications.
 G. Do not use materials that cannot be satisfactory placed and compacted to a stable and durable condition.
 H. Material excavated in the work that contains excessive moisture is unsuitable for embankment construction
 unless dried. Dry or aerate such material before incorporating in the work. The Contractor may elect to waste this
 material, instead of drying it.
 I. If Granular Material Type E in 703.16.C is allowed or specified, use a geotextile fabric conforming to 712.09,
 Type D on the top, bottom, and around the Type E material to prevent piping of the material into the Type E
 material.
 J. If electing to use PCS, submit the information stated below in a suitable format at least 10 workdays before
 the intended usage.
 1. Have an independent ODOT consultant pre-qualified in remedial design environmental site assessment
 review the proposed usage. The consultant shall provide all documentation used to ensure that the proposed usage
 obeys all Ohio EPA regulations. The consultant shall coordinate all EPA required meetings, documentation, and
 testing requirements. The consultant shall randomly monitor the construction to ensure that the environmental
 requirements are carried out on the project. The consultant shall report any discrepancies to the Department and
 the Contractor. The consultant shall certify the report or reports to the Department.
 
 2.
 
 Use PCS that conforms to all current environmental policies, rules, and regulations and the following:
 a.
 
 Use PCS material that does not exceed the petroleum constituent concentrations stated below:
 Benzene (B)
 Toluene (T)
 Ethyl benzene (E)
 Total Xylenes (X)
 
 35 parts per million
 109 parts per million
 32 parts per million
 165 parts per million
 
 b. Include test results from BTEX testing by using U.S. EPA test method SW 846, method 8020, or
 equivalent method.
 c.
 
 Perform the tests on every 100 tons (90 metric tons) of PCS used.
 
 203.04
 General. Perform the required clearing and grubbing before starting the excavation, grading, and
 embankment operations.
 Coordinate the clearing and grubbing with the installation of sediment and erosion controls.
 Remove all existing pavement before the embankment construction.
 Temporarily discontinue operations when the excavating operations encounter remains of prehistoric
 archaeological sites, historical archaeological sites, or human remains. The Engineer will contact the Department’s
 Office of Environmental Services to determine the disposition thereof. Preserve the artifacts or other archeological
 items or human remains until a determination as to what the disposition and/or removal of such items is made by
 the Office of Environmental Services. Such excavation is considered Extra Work.
 If the Contractor encounters any abnormal material such as, but not limited to, drums, tanks, or stained earth or
 any unusual odors during construction operations, the Contractor shall temporarily discontinue the work in this
 area, leave equipment in place, cordon off the area, and notify the Engineer. The area is considered to contain
 hazardous waste or material and must be handled according to The Construction Inspection Manual of Procedures,
 Item 202 Removal of Structures and Obstructions, Section- Regulated Waste Requirements, Regulated Wastes
 Found During Construction.. Upon notification by the Engineer to resume work, the Contractor may file for an
 extension of time according to 108.06.
 A. Drainage and Maintenance of the Work. Maintain a well-drained embankment and excavation operation. If
 trenching for narrow widening and in other areas of the embankment construction, construct ditches of an adequate
 depth and at frequent intervals across the berm or embankment to maintain drainage. Deepen side ditches when
 necessary to ensure thorough embankment or subgrade drainage.
 Construct the embankment with sufficient cross-slope to drain in case of rain.
 If precipitation saturates the embankment construction, stay off the embankment construction until the
 embankment dries or stabilizes. Expedite the construction by removing the saturated embankment or dry the
 embankment by scarifying, plowing, disking, and recompacting the embankment.
 Throughout the embankment construction operation and at the end of each day’s operation, shape to drain,
 compact, and recompact the work area to a uniform cross section. Eliminate all ruts and low spots that could hold
 water.
 If using embankment construction or cut areas to haul on, continuously move the hauling equipment around
 on the area to take advantage of the compactive effort. Continually re-grade and compact the haul roads and
 maintain the construction according to 105.13 and 105.14.
 Plug and cover the upstream ends of all pipe lines encountered during earthwork operations.
 B. Rock or Shale Blasting Operations. Conform to Item 208 when blasting.
 C. Slides and Breakages. Remove all slides and breakages beyond the limits of the planned finished work when
 caused by improper excavation methods.
 
 D. Shoulders, Slopes, and Ditches. When specified, place the topsoil in areas to be seeded or sodded according
 to Item 659. Build shoulders to the lines shown on the plans and to the tolerances specified in 203.08. Reshape
 shoulders, slopes, and ditches that have been damaged by erosion during construction.
 Keep new and existing pavement, and the paved area of the berm clear of earth stockpiles or other berm
 materials.
 E. Pavement Widening Construction. Locate sound pavement edges, and cut and trim pavement to a neat line.
 Repair and restore damage caused by the equipment or methods. Include the cost of cutting, trimming, and disposal
 under Item 203 Excavation.
 F. Borrow. Unless otherwise designated in the Contract, make arrangements for obtaining borrow and pay all
 costs involved. If borrow is specified, use all suitable excavated material in the work prior to using the borrow
 material.
 Place borrow used as embankment according to all the requirements for constructing embankment.
 Blade and leave all borrow areas in such shape as to allow accurate measurements after the excavation has
 been completed.
 Notify the Engineer sufficiently in advance of opening any borrow areas so that cross section elevations and
 measurements of the ground surface after stripping may be taken.
 Construct borrow areas that conform to 105.16; clean up the borrow areas according to 104.04.
 G. Staged Construction and Waiting Periods. If specified in the Contract Documents, control the rate of fill
 accordingly. Adhere to the rate of fill and to the waiting periods during the work.
 203.05
 Embankment Construction Methods. Embankment construction includes preparing areas upon
 which embankments are to be placed; placing and compacting approved material within roadway areas where
 unsuitable material has been removed; and placing and compacting approved material in holes, pits, and other
 depressions within the roadway.
 If scalping is required, scarify, plow, disk, and compact the existing embankment foundation. Compact the top
 8 inches (200 mm) of the foundation to 95 percent of the maximum dry density or to a maximum test section dry
 density according to Supplement 1015. If the foundation cannot be compacted, the Department will design
 replacement material or the Engineer may increase the lift thickness of the next layer of embankment.
 The Engineer may increase the lift thickness of the next embankment layer to bridge the soft or wet foundation
 areas that will not support the weight of the trucks or hauling equipment. Dump successive loads of rock, durable
 shale, or granular material in a uniform lift. Do not exceed the thickness required to support the equipment placing
 the material. Manipulate, blade, distribute, level, and doze the material in place until the area is stabilized and
 material is above the normal water elevation. Once the bridging has been accomplished, construct the remaining
 lifts according to 203.06.
 If the existing slope is steeper than 8:1, bench into the existing slope as follows:
 A. Scalp the existing slope according to Item 201.
 B. Cut horizontal benches in the existing slope to a sufficient width to blend the new embankment with the
 existing embankment and to accommodate the placement, and compaction operations and equipment.
 C. Bench the slope as the embankment is placed, and compact into layers.
 D. Begin each bench at the intersection of the existing slope and the vertical cut of the previous bench. Recompact
 the cut materials along with the new embankment.
 If constructing embankment on only one side of abutments, wing walls, piers, or culvert headwalls, construct the
 embankment so that the area immediately adjacent to the structure is not compacted in a manner that causes
 overturning of or excessive pressure against the structure. If constructing embankment on both sides of a concrete
 wall, pipe, or box type structure, construct the embankment so that the elevation on both sides of the structure is
 always approximately the same.
 
 203.06
 Spreading and Compacting. Do not construct frozen embankment material or place embankment
 material on frozen ground.
 Spread all embankment material, except for rock in 203.06.C. and RPCC in 203.06.D, in successive horizontal
 loose lifts, not to exceed 8 inches (200 mm) in thickness. Compact all embankment material lifts, except for Type
 D granular material, Type E granular material, rock and durable shale, to the specified density and moisture controls
 in 203.07.
 When a minimum effective weight requirement is specified in 203.06 or 203.07, the Contractor may use a
 vibratory roller which meets the requirement using a combination of weight and equivalent centrifugal force from
 vibration. In all cases, submit documentation from the manufacturer that shows the roller meets the minimum
 effective weight requirements.
 The Engineer may reduce the minimum number of passes if additional passes are detrimental to compaction or
 stability.
 A. Soil and Granular Embankment. For soil or granular material, when a test section is used, use a minimum
 compactive effort of eight passes with a steel drum roller having a minimum effective weight of 10 tons (9 metric
 tons).
 Compact Type D and Type E granular material using at least ten passes of a smooth drum vibratory roller
 having a minimum effective weight of 10 tons (9 metric tons). Add water to Type D granular material as needed
 or directed by the Engineer.
 B. Shale. The Engineer will test shale for durability according to 703.16.D, to determine if compaction testing is
 required. For nondurable shale, when a test section is used, use a minimum compactive effort of ten passes with a
 footed drum roller having a minimum effective weight of 15 tons (14 metric tons) or with rollers meeting the
 requirements of 703.16.D.
 Use water to aid in breaking down large particles and to bring the shale to at least 2 percent above optimum
 moisture content.
 Compact durable shale, as defined in 703.16.D, with a minimum compactive effort of ten passes of a footed
 drum roller having a minimum effective weight of 15 tons (14 metric tons) or with rollers meeting the requirements
 of 703.16.D. When durable shale is mixed with fine material, use fine material that is at least 2 percent above
 optimum moisture content. No density testing will be required. If shale mixtures contain large particles of shale,
 break down the particles during placement until the voids are filled.
 Place and compact shale and rock mixtures using the same procedure as for shale. Reduce rock size in a shalerock mixture to less than or equal to 8 inches (200 mm), or separate rock greater than 8 inches (200 mm) from the
 mixture and use as rock fill. Use the construction methods for rock when the shale-rock mixture contains less than
 15 percent shale.
 C. Rock. Reduce the rock until it is small enough to be incorporated into the following horizontal lift thickness:
 Place rock in a maximum loose lift thickness 6 inches larger than the largest diameter of the rock pieces or 3 feet
 (1 m), which ever results in the smaller lift thickness. When placing rock fill within a length of six times the height
 of the fill at an abutment, place rock fill in loose lifts not to exceed 18 inches (0.5 m). [For example, if the fill height
 is 20 feet (6 m), then the rock fill within 120 feet (36 m) of the abutment is placed in less than 18-inch (0.5 m) loose
 lifts.]
 Do not dump the rock, but distribute and place the full width of the lift by blading or dozing to ensure proper
 placement. Evenly distribute the larger rocks, and reduce the voids, pockets, and bridging to ensure minimum
 deformation. Incorporate smaller rock pieces in the upper portions of each rock lift to fill the voids during this
 manipulation.
 When placing embankment material other than rock on top of the rock lift, level and smooth the rock surface
 using suitable leveling equipment and evenly distribute the smaller rock, rock spalls, or finer rock fragments.
 Roll all rock lift surfaces with eight passes of a vibratory footed drum roller having a minimum effective weight
 of 10 tons (9 metric tons).
 
 When constructing rock and other embankment materials at approximately the same time, perform the
 following:
 1.
 
 Use the rock at the base of the embankment.
 
 2.
 
 Use rock in the outer portions of the embankment.
 
 3.
 
 Use the larger rocks on the outside side slopes.
 
 4.
 
 Use the other embankment material in the inner portion of the fill.
 
 5.
 
 Keep the top of the other embankment materials higher than the rock.
 
 6.
 
 Construct the other embankment materials to a sufficient width to allow the specified compaction.
 
 7. When rock is placed on top of other embankment material, construct the other embankment material at a
 center-to-side slope grade of approximately 4 percent.
 D. Random Materials. Reduce the random material until it is small enough to incorporate into an 8-inch (200
 mm) lift, except for RPCC in 203.06.D.1 through 203.06.D.4.
 When using a uniformly graded mixture, use material with a moisture content less than 2 percent below
 optimum to obtain compaction. When large pieces are incorporated in the lifts, use fine material with a moisture
 content less than 2 percent below optimum to obtain compaction.
 Compact natural soil and natural granular material blends with RAP or RPCC to the same requirements as a
 granular embankment in 203.06.
 When using RPCC slabs or large RPCC pieces in the embankment construction, conform to the following:
 1. Use natural soil or natural granular material that is less than 2 percent below optimum moisture content in
 the blend. Reduce the slabs or pieces to less than 3  3 feet (1  1 m) in size and place the blend in a maximum
 loose lift thickness of 12 inches (300 mm).
 2. Manipulate, level, and distribute the mixture by blading or dozing to fill the voids and pockets, and reduce
 bridging.
 3. Compact the natural soil or natural granular embankment to the compaction and moisture requirements in
 203.07.
 4. When the RPCC slabs or large RPCC pieces consists of more than 50 percent of the embankment lift,
 place the blended material in maximum loose lifts of 18 inches (0.5 m). Do not place one slab directly on the other.
 Compact, manipulate, level, and distribute as stated in 203.06.D.1 through 203.06.D.3.
 E. Areas Inaccessible to Rollers. For areas inaccessible to rollers, such as adjacent to culverts, retaining walls,
 or other structures, construct the embankment in 6-inch (150 mm) horizontal loose lifts.
 203.07
 Compaction and Moisture Requirements. Construct all embankments, except rock and durable
 shale, using moisture and density controls. Unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents, the Engineer
 will perform all compaction tests according to Supplement 1015.
 A. Moisture Controls. Sprinkle enough water on embankment material that contains too little moisture to wet it
 to a moisture content needed to meet the density requirements. Apply the water using tank trucks equipped with
 suitable sprinkling devices. Thoroughly incorporate the water into the material by using discs, plows, or other
 approved equipment. Continue to water and to manipulate until the required moisture is uniformly distributed
 throughout the lift.
 Before or during compaction, allow the embankment material that contains excess moisture to dry to a moisture
 content needed to meet the density requirements. Continue drying until the required moisture is uniform throughout
 the lift. However, for material that displays pronounced elasticity or deformation under the action of loaded rubber
 tire construction equipment or other equipment, reduce the moisture content to secure stability. Expedite and
 manipulate the embankment material by drying the wet embankment material by using plows or discs; by adding
 dry material, lime, lime kiln dust, or cement; or by other methods.
 
 Do not mix shale in the lifts to reduce the moisture content of the embankment material.
 B. Compaction Requirements. Compact all embankment materials, except for rock and durable shale, in
 horizontal lifts to a dry density greater than the percentage of maximum dry density in Table 203.07-1, or to 98
 percent of the maximum dry density determined by the test section methods specified in Supplement 1015.
 TABLE 203.07-1 EMBANKMENT COMPACTION REQUIREMENTS
 Maximum
 Dry Density
 [lb/ft³ (kg/m³)]
 90 to 104.9 (1440 to 1680)
 105 to 119.9 (1681 to 1920)
 120 and more (1921 and more)
 
 Minimum Compaction
 Requirements in Percent of
 Maximum Dry Density
 102
 100
 98
 
 If needed for compaction acceptance, construct a test section using the following:
 1. Use at least the same number of passes and compactive effort used to construct the test section to construct
 the production embankment areas.
 2.
 
 Construct a new test section when the material, supporting foundation, or embankment changes.
 
 3.
 
 Reduce the moisture content if the material becomes unstable.
 
 203.08
 Earthwork Construction Tolerances. Finish the completed excavation and embankment to the cross
 sections shown on the plans. Check the excavation and embankment work with templates, slope boards, electronic
 methods, or other methods specified in Item 623. The Engineer will allow occasional deviations in the work within
 the following tolerances:
 A. When topsoil is specified, use the following:
 1.
 
 In fill areas, construct the embankment to the bottom of the topsoil depth.
 
 2.
 
 In cut areas, excavate additional depth to allow for the topsoil.
 
 3.
 
 For cuts or fills, the cross sections show the finished grade, which is the top of the topsoil.
 
 B. For the backslopes (cut slopes), from the back of the ditch to the existing ground, and for the foreslopes (fill
 slopes), from the edge of the graded shoulder to the bottom of the ditch, do not allow deviations greater than 1 foot
 (0.3 m) as measured in the horizontal plane.
 C. Do not construct shoulders and ditches less than the horizontal measurement from the centerline or to a higher
 elevation than shown on the plans. However, the cross section may vary below the plan grades by less than 1/2 inch
 (15 mm) at the pavement edge and by less than 2 inches (50 mm) elsewhere.
 D. Construct or fine grade the subgrade to within 1/2 inch (15 mm) of the plan elevation at any location. Construct
 or fine grade the subgrade to within 1/2 inch (15 mm) of the plan grade as measured with a 10-foot (3 m)
 straightedge applied to the surface parallel to the centerline of the pavement.
 E. For all rock or shale cut slopes that do not require control blasting techniques, rake excavate, hoe, ram, or
 mechanically shape these slopes to obtain a neat and smooth appearance.
 203.09
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Excavation by the number of cubic yards
 (cubic meters) of material in the original position, acceptably excavated, using the average end area method.
 The Department will measure Embankment; Rock; Granular Embankment; and Granular Material, Type ___ by
 the number of cubic yards (cubic meters) of material in the final position, acceptably placed, using the average end
 area method.
 Measurement will include overbreakage or slides not attributable to carelessness of the Contractor, embankment
 settlement caused by soft embankment foundation, unsuitable materials excavated and removed to obtain proper
 stability in cut sections and in foundation areas for fill sections.
 
 The Department may use three-dimensional measurements where it is impractical to measure material by the
 cross section method due to the erratic location of isolated deposits.
 The Department will not measure excavation or embankment outside plan limits.
 The Department will measure Borrow by the cubic yard (cubic meter) or ton (metric ton) as specified in the
 Contract Documents.
 The Contract Documents will specify borrow only when the measurement of the material in its final location by
 volume is impractical. For example, this would apply when the borrow material is to be placed in locations that are
 under water or in locations with extremely soft foundations. In addition, the Department may specify borrow when
 additional material is needed and when Item 209 is specified. In this case, the Department will pay for borrow
 under 209 Borrow.
 The Department will measure the volume of borrow material in a natural formation either by the average end
 area method or by weight.
 Where measurement is by the average end area, the Department will take cross sections after the surface has
 been cleared and scalped and again after the borrow area excavation has been completed. The cross sections
 determine the volume for payment.
 Where the total weight is measured and converted to volume, the Department will determine material density in
 pounds per cubic yard (kilograms per cubic meters) in its original position by a series of representative field
 measurements made after clearing and scalping have been performed, and as the excavation exposes the borrow
 material. Weigh the acceptable material, minus excess moisture, excavated from the borrow area for incorporation
 into the embankment, and furnish the Department with load slips. The Department will determine the cubic yards
 (cubic meters) for payment by dividing the total weight of the borrow material by the average weight per cubic
 yard (cubic meter) of the undisturbed material. If the moistures of the in-place borrow site density test material is
 not within 2 percent of the accepted delivered material, the Department will calculate volume based on the dry
 densities and weights.
 The Department will calculate the volume of borrow from sources other than natural in-place formations, such
 as processed slag, sand, stone or gravel, and quarry material as follows: Determine the material in-place compacted
 density in pounds per cubic yard (kilograms per cubic meter). The volume paid will be the total weight of the
 material furnished, minus excess moisture, divided by 95 percent of the average embankment density. If the
 moisture content of the accepted in-place density test material is not within 2 percent of the delivered material, the
 Department will calculate volume based on the dry densities and weights. Where measurements show that
 completed embankment exists outside the plan cross sections or outside the allowable tolerances, the Department
 will multiply the quantity outside plan lines by a shrinkage factor to determine the quantity deducted from the
 measured borrow quantity. The shrinkage factor is determined by dividing the volume or weight of the material
 excavated or used as borrow by the volume or weight of the material compacted in place.
 When the measurement is by weight, the Department will accept the material based on the freight bills and weight
 and volume evidence according to 109.
 203.10
 Basis of Payment. If the Contract does not include 201 Clearing and Grubbing or an estimated
 quantity for 201 Tree Removed or 201 Stump Removed, or an estimated quantity for the pay items under Item 202,
 the Department will not pay for this work directly but will considered it incidental to pay items under Item 203.
 The Department will not pay for additional wasting cost of material excavated in the work that was wasted instead
 of being dried as detailed in 203.03.H.
 If the Contractor elects to use PCS, the Department will not pay for additional work necessary to comply with
 the requirements specified in 203.03.J.
 If during excavation the Contractor encounters remains of prehistoric archaeological sites, historical
 archaeological sites, or human remains, the Department will pay for such excavation according to 109.05.
 If during excavation the Contractor encounters hazardous material or waste, the Department will pay according
 to 109.05.
 
 If necessary during the construction in 203.03.H, 203.04.A, or 203.07.A, the Department will not pay for
 removing the saturated embankment or drying the embankment.
 If caused by improper excavation methods, the Department will not pay for removing slides and breakages
 beyond the limits of the planned finished work. The Department will pay for the removal of slides and breakages
 beyond the limits of the planned finished work according to 109.05, when there is no Contractor fault or neglect.
 If caused by the lack of implementing erosion controls, the Department will not pay for reshaping shoulders,
 slopes, and ditches damaged by erosion during construction.
 If caused by the Contractor’s equipment or methods, the Department will not pay for repairing or restoring
 damaged areas designated for salvage.
 When topsoil is specified, the Department will not make deductions or additions from the earthwork quantities
 for the topsoil.
 The Department will not adjust earthwork quantities when the volume between two consecutive cross-sections
 differs by less than 5 percent from the plan quantity, unless the difference between the actual quantity and plan
 quantity is greater than 1000 cubic yards (1000 m³) for all pay items measured by the cubic yard (cubic meter)
 under Item 203, combined. For quantity differences greater than 5 percent or greater than 1000 cubic yards (1000
 m³), submit supporting documentation to the Engineer. However, the Department will adjust earthwork quantities
 for changes less than 5 percent or 1000 cubic yards (1000 m³) when the change results from the following:
 undercutting, foundation settlement, changes to grades or slopes, and removing slides. For quantities measured for
 payment, the Department will use the plan cross sections, corrected for errors, as the original field cross sections.
 Additional cross sections may be interpolated from the plans at points necessary to more accurately determine
 quantities.
 The Department will pay according to 109.05 for changes or extra work that increases the haul distance more
 than 1/2 mile (1 km) to the work detailed in the Contract Documents. The Department will pay for additional
 quantities that increase the haul distance 1/2 mile (1 km) or less at the unit bid price.
 When specified, the payment for borrow includes all work to complete the embankment construction to the cross
 sections shown on the plans. The Department will not make additional payment for the embankment construction
 of the borrow material. When borrow is not specified, all work is included in the excavation or embankment pay
 items.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 203
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard or Ton
 (Cubic Meter or
 Metric Ton)
 Cubic Yard or Ton
 (Cubic Meter or
 Metric Ton)
 Cubic Yard or Ton
 (Cubic Meter
 or Metric Ton)
 Cubic Yard or Ton
 (Cubic Meter
 or Metric Ton)
 
 Excavation
 
 203
 203
 203
 203
 203
 
 Embankment
 Granular Embankment
 Granular Material, Type ___
 Borrow
 Rock
 
 ITEM 204 SUBGRADE COMPACTION AND PROOF ROLLING
 204.01
 204.02
 204.03
 204.04
 204.05
 204.06
 204.07
 204.08
 204.09
 
 Description
 Materials
 Compaction of the Subgrade
 Unstable Subgrade
 Rock, Shale, or Coal Subgrade
 Proof Rolling
 Spreading and Placing of Materials
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 204.01
 Description. This work consists of preparing suitable subgrade material by drying, compacting, proof
 rolling, and grading. This work also consists of removing unsuitable subgrade material and constructing new
 embankment to the limits shown on the plans.
 The contract documents provide the anticipated amount of excavation for unsuitable subgrade material which
 includes unsuitable soil, rock, shale, and coal in the subgrade, and for unstable subgrade material.
 Use removed or excavated materials in the Work when the material conforms to the specifications; if not, then
 recycle or dispose of the material according to 105.16 and 105.17.
 204.02
 Materials. Furnish suitable material conforming to 203.02.R, 203.03, and 703.16, except use soils in
 the top 12 inches (300 mm) of the subgrade that have a maximum dry density of at least 100 pounds per cubic foot
 (1600 kg/m³).
 Furnish material that conforms to 703.16.B or 703.16.C when Granular Embankment is specified. Furnish
 material that conforms to 703.16.C when Granular Material, Type ___ is specified, except do not use RPCC, EAF
 slag, or BOF slag.
 Do not use Granular Material Type D, E, or F in the location where underdrains are to be constructed.
 Furnish geotextile fabric that conforms to 712.09, Type D
 204.03
 Compaction of the Subgrade. Compact subgrade materials that have a maximum dry density of 100
 to 105 pounds per cubic foot (1600 to 1680 kg/m³) to not less than 102 percent of maximum dry density. Compact
 all other subgrade materials to not less than 100 percent of maximum dry density. Determine the maximum dry
 density using AASHTO T 99, AASHTO T 272, or test section method described in Supplement 1015, according
 to the Engineer. Unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents, the Engineer will perform all compaction
 tests according to Supplement 1015. The Department may check for compaction before or after the fine grading
 operation.
 If needed for compaction acceptance, use the test section method as follows:
 A. Use a minimum of eight passes with a steel drum roller having a minimum effective weight of 10 tons (9 metric
 tons).
 B. Use 98 percent of the test section maximum dry density for acceptance of the production subgrade compaction.
 C. Use at least the same number of passes and compactive effort used to construct the test section for the
 production subgrade compaction.
 D. Construct a new test section when the subgrade material, supporting foundation or embankment material
 changes.
 E. Reduce the moisture content if the material becomes unstable. The Engineer may reduce the minimum number
 of passes if the passes are detrimental to compaction.
 Use the moisture controls specified in 203.07.A.
 Compact the subgrade under pavements to a depth of 12 inches (300 mm) below the subgrade surface and 18
 inches (450 mm) beyond the edge of the surface of the pavement, paved shoulders, or paved medians. Compact all
 
 subgrades under paved driveways, paved mailbox turnouts, curbs and gutters to a depth of 12 inches (300 mm)
 below the subgrade surface.
 Maintain and drain the subgrade according to 203.04.A.
 204.04
 Unstable Subgrade. If satisfactory subgrade stability cannot be obtained by moisture control and
 compaction according to 204.03, the Engineer will direct the Contractor to remove the unstable material and to
 construct the replacement material to the finished grade within the tolerances specified in 203.08.
 Conduct the removal and replacement operations to allow the Engineer to measure the cross-sections before
 placing the replacement material.
 Remove the unstable subgrade material to the depth determined by the Engineer or specified in the Contract
 Documents. Replace with suitable material according to 204.07.
 204.05
 Rock, Shale, or Coal Subgrade. If an aggregate base is not a part of the pavement design, excavate
 the subgrade 2 feet (0.6 m) below the final subgrade elevation where rock, shale, or coal is encountered. If an
 aggregate base is part of the pavement design, reduce the above 2-foot (0.6 m) excavation depth by the thickness
 of the aggregate base or bases. Maintain a total excavation depth of 2 feet (0.6 m) below the bottom of the asphalt
 or concrete pavement.
 Excavate for a width of 1 foot (0.3 m) beyond the shoulders. Replace with suitable material according to 204.07.
 204.06
 
 Proof Rolling. Test the stability and uniformity of the subgrade compaction by proof rolling.
 
 A. Use a proof roller conforming to the following:
 1.
 
 Four heavy pneumatic tire wheels mounted on a rigid steel frame.
 
 2.
 
 Wheels evenly spaced in one line across the width of the roller.
 
 3.
 
 Wheels arranged so that all wheels carry approximately equal loads when operated over an uneven surface.
 
 4.
 
 A maximum center-to-center spacing between adjacent wheels not exceeding 32 inches (0.8 m).
 
 5.
 
 A body for ballast loading capable of varying the gross load from 25 to 50 tons (23 to 45 metric tons).
 
 6. Tires capable of operating at inflation pressures ranging from 90 to 120 pounds per square inch (620 to
 830 kPa). Provide a tire pressure gage for measurement before use.
 7.
 
 Tires filled with liquid from 90 to 95 percent by volume.
 
 Provide ballast that consist of blocks of known weight, sand bags with a weight of 100 pounds (45 kg), bags
 of other material of known weight, or other suitable material such that the total ballast weight is readily
 determinable at all times. Provide sufficient ballast to load equipment to a maximum gross weight of 50 tons (45
 metric tons).
 Furnish the Engineer information verifying that the weights and tire pressures can be met.
 B. After compacting the subgrade according to 204.03 and before placing overlying course, proof roll designated
 subgrade areas. If proof rolling is performed after the underdrains are installed, do not use the proof roller within 1
 1/2 feet (450 mm) of the underdrains.
 Ensure that the subgrade moisture content at the time of proof rolling is within 2 percent of the moisture used
 for acceptance in 204.03.
 Adjust the load and tire inflation pressure as directed by the Engineer or according to the following:
 1. For soils classified as A-3, A-4, A-6, or A-7-6, use a 35-ton (32 metric tons) roller with a tire pressure of
 120 pounds per square inch (820 kPa).
 2. For granular soils, and soil, rock, and granular mixtures, use a 50-ton (46 metric tons) roller with a tire
 pressure of 120 pounds per square inch (830 kPa).
 3. When proof rolling areas where unsuitable or unstable subgrade materials have already been excavated
 and replaced with granular material, use the weight and tire pressure appropriate for the original subgrade material
 type.
 
 Measure the tire pressure in the presence of the Engineer. Operate equipment at a speed between 2 1/2 and 5
 miles per hour (4 and 8 km/hr). Adjust the speed to allow the Engineer to measure the deflections, ruts, or elasticity.
 Make only one trip of the proof roller over any area. Offset trips to completely cover the subgrade area.
 Where proof rolling indicates areas of unstable subgrade, the Engineer will investigate for the source of the
 problem. The Contractor is responsible for all problems found in the materials constructed under the Contract
 Documents. Correct all deficiencies found. Correct the subgrade to a uniform and satisfactory stability as directed
 by the Engineer.
 After proof rolling, check the subgrade for conformance to the plans, and correct all surface irregularities.
 Shape the subgrade within the tolerances specified in 203.08.
 204.07
 Spreading and Placing of Materials. Place materials, conforming to 204.02, in 8-inch (200 mm)
 loose lifts. The Engineer may increase the lift thickness depending on the stability of the bottom of the excavation.
 The Engineer may increase the lift thickness up to 24 inches (600 mm) to obtain stability at the top of the lift. Doze,
 track, or manipulate the material to maximize the density and stability. Once stability is achieved, compact
 according to 204.03.
 When specified, place geotextile fabric at the bottom of the cut or at locations designated in the Contract
 Documents. Place the geotextile fabric smooth and free of tension or wrinkles. Fold or cut the geotextile fabric to
 conform to curves. Overlap a minimum of 18 inches (450 mm) at the ends and sides. Hold the geotextile fabric in
 place with pins or staples.
 End dump the suitable material on the geotextile fabric. Do not operate the equipment directly on the geotextile
 fabric. Unless stated otherwise, spread the end dumped material and maintain a minimum lift thickness of 12 inches
 (300 mm).
 When granular material Type E is specified or allowed, use a geotextile fabric on the top, bottom and around the
 Type E granular material to prevent piping of material into the Type E granular material. The Engineer may use
 granular material Type E when excess water is at the bottom of the cut.
 204.08
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Subgrade Compaction by the number of
 square yards (square meters) computed from the profile grade and typical sections and actually compacted. The
 Department will measure 18 inches (450 mm) beyond the edge of the pavement surface, paved shoulders, and
 paved medians. The Department will measure the surface area of the paved driveways, paved mailbox turnouts,
 curb, and gutter.
 The Department will measure Proof Rolling by the number of hours accepted. The Department will not measure
 idle time for repairs, servicing, loading and unloading ballast, adjusting tire pressure, bad weather, wet subgrade,
 usage at times and at locations other than Department directed, and stand-by time to be available when next needed
 or other cause for stand-by time.
 The Department will measure Excavation of Subgrade; Embankment; Granular Embankment; and Granular
 Material, Type ___ according to 203.09. All excavation is unclassified.
 The Department will measure Geotextile Fabric by the number square yards (square meters) of surface area of
 geotextile fabric placed. The Department will not measure the specified lap length.
 204.09
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay according to 109.05 for changes or extra work that
 increases the haul distance more than a 1/2 mile (1 km) to the work detailed in the Contract Documents. The
 Department will pay for additional quantities that increase the haul distance 1/2 mile (1 km) or less at the unit bid
 price.
 If unstable subgrade results from inadequate surface drainage or lack of maintenance, as required by 203.04.A,
 the Department will not pay for replacing the unstable subgrade and disposing of the removed material.
 For problems identified in 204.06 that are the result of soils or conditions at lower elevations than the Contract
 work, the Department will pay for the corrections.
 The Department will pay for the subgrade compaction in areas requiring excavation and replacement in 204.04,
 204.05, and 204.07. The Department will not pay for subgrade compaction in areas stabilized under Item 206.
 
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 204
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Hour
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Subgrade Compaction
 
 204
 204
 204
 204
 204
 204
 
 Proof Rolling
 Excavation of Subgrade
 Embankment
 Granular Embankment
 Granular Material Type ___
 Geotextile Fabric
 
 ITEM 205 CHEMICALLY STABILIZED EMBANKMENT
 205.01
 205.02
 205.03
 205.04
 205.05
 205.06
 205.07
 
 Description
 Materials
 Submittals
 Construction
 Mixture Design for Chemically Stabilized Soils
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 205.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing a chemically stabilized embankment by mixing
 cement or lime into the embankment soil using the method for the specified chemical.
 The Contract Documents include an estimated quantity for the specified chemical.
 205.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Portland cement ............................................................................... 701.04
 Lime (quick lime) .........................................................................712.04.B
 Furnish water conforming to 499.02. Furnish suitable natural soil, from on or off the project site, conforming to
 703.16 and 203.03.
 205.03
 Submittals. Submit, for the Engineer’s acceptance, a report that lists the type of equipment to be
 used, speed of the intended equipment usage, rate of application of the chemical, and calculations that demonstrate
 how the required percentage of chemical will be applied. Submit the report to the Engineer for acceptance at least
 2 workdays before the stabilization work begins.
 If the pay item for Mixture Design for Chemically Stabilized Soils is included in the Contract Documents, prepare
 and submit reports according to Supplement 1120.
 205.04
 Construction. Perform chemically stabilized embankment work when the air temperature is 40 F (5
 C) or above and when the soil is not frozen.
 Do not perform this work during wet or unsuitable weather.
 Drain and maintain the work according to 203.04.A.
 A. Spreading. If the pay item for Mixture Design for Chemically Stabilized Soils is not included in the Contract
 Documents, use the following spreading percentage rate for the specified chemical. The percentage is based on a
 dry density for soil of 110 pounds per cubic foot (1760 kg/m³):
 TABLE 205.04-1
 Chemical
 Cement
 Lime
 
 Spreading Rate
 6%
 5%
 
 Spread the chemical uniformly on the surface using a mechanical spreader at the approved rate and at a constant
 slow rate of speed.
 Use a distribution bar with a maximum height of 3 feet (1 meter) above the ground surface. Use a canvas
 shroud that surrounds the distribution bar and extends to the ground surface.
 Minimize dusting when spreading the chemical. Control dust according to 107.19. Do not spread chemical
 when wind conditions create blowing dust that exceeds the limits in 107.19.
 Do not spread the chemical on standing water.
 B. Mixing. Immediately after spreading the chemical, mix the soil and chemical by using a power driven rotary
 type mixer. If necessary, add water to bring the mixed material to at least optimum moisture content for cement,
 and to at least 3 percent above optimum moisture content for lime. Continue mixing until the chemical is thoroughly
 
 incorporated into the soil, all soil clods are reduced to a maximum size of 2 inches (50 mm), and the mixture is a
 uniform color.
 For areas not under pavements or paved shoulders, the Contractor may use a spring tooth or disk harrow in
 place of the power-driven rotary type mixer by modifying the above procedure as follows:
 1.
 
 Open the soil with a spring tooth or disc harrow before spreading.
 
 2.
 
 Spread the chemical.
 
 3. Use a minimum disc harrow coverage of ten passes in one direction and ten passes in the perpendicular
 direction to thoroughly incorporate the chemical into the soil. Continue mixing until all soil clods are reduced to a
 maximum size of 1 inch (25 mm) and the mixture is a uniform color.
 C. Compacting. Construct and compact chemically stabilized embankment according to 203.07, except use 98
 percent of the maximum dry density for acceptance.
 Determine the maximum dry density for acceptance using the Ohio Typical Moisture Density Curves, the
 moisture density curves from the Contractor’s mixture design submittal, or the maximum dry density obtained by
 test section method.
 205.05
 Mixture Design for Chemically Stabilized Soils. When included in the plans, perform a mixture
 design for chemically stabilized soils according to Supplement 1120.
 205.06
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure chemically stabilized embankment by the
 number of cubic yards (cubic meters) used in the complete and accepted work, as determined by Item 203.
 The Department will measure cement and lime by the number of tons (metric tons) incorporated in the complete
 and accepted work.
 205.07
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay lump sum for all work, labor, and equipment described
 in 205.05. The Department will pay two-thirds of the lump sum amount bid when the sampling and testing is
 complete and the report is accepted by the Department. The Department will pay one-third of the lump sum amount
 bid when the chemically stabilized embankment is completed and accepted by the Department, and the field
 verification test results are all submitted.
 The Department will not apply the quantity underrun adjustment factors in Table 104.02-2 to the bid unit prices
 for Cement and Lime.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 205
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Ton (Metric Ton)
 Ton (Metric Ton)
 Lump Sum
 
 Cement Stabilized Embankment
 
 205
 205
 205
 205
 
 Lime Stabilized Embankment
 Cement
 Lime
 Mixture Design for Chemically Stabilized Soils
 
 ITEM 206 CHEMICALLY STABILIZED SUBGRADE
 206.01
 206.02
 206.03
 206.04
 206.05
 206.06
 206.07
 206.08
 
 Description
 Materials
 Submittals
 Test Rolling
 Construction
 Mixture Design for Chemically Stabilized Soils
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 206.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing a chemically stabilized subgrade by mixing cement
 or lime into the subgrade soil using the method for the specified chemical. The Contract Documents include an
 estimated quantity for the specified chemical.
 206.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Portland cement ............................................................................... 701.04
 Lime (quick lime) .........................................................................712.04.B
 Furnish water conforming to 499.02.
 For the curing coat, furnish rapid setting emulsified asphalt conforming to 702.04.
 206.03
 Submittals. Submit a report that lists the type of equipment to be used, speed of the intended
 equipment usage, rate of application of the chemical, and calculations that demonstrate how the required percentage
 of chemical will be applied. For phased work, list in the report the procedure to be used to construct the chemically
 stabilized subgrade to ensure full depth and continuity across phase interfaces. Submit the report to the Engineer at
 least 2 workdays before the stabilization work begins. Department acceptance of the report is not required. The
 absence of Department acceptance does not supersede the Engineer’s authority as defined in 105.01.
 If the pay item for Mixture Design for Chemically Stabilized Soils is included in the Contract Documents, prepare
 and submit reports according to Supplement 1120.
 206.04
 to 204.06.
 
 Test Rolling. When specified, test roll prior to chemical stabilization with a proof roller conforming
 
 206.05
 Construction. Perform chemical stabilization work (including the curing period) when the air
 temperature is 40 F (5 C) or above and when the soil is not frozen. Do not perform this work during wet or
 unsuitable weather.
 Where phasing for maintenance of traffic uses part width stabilization of the subgrade, ensure that the required
 chemical spreading rate, mixing depth, and compaction are provided at the interface between adjacent phases.
 A. Spreading. Shape the subgrade to the approximate profile grade prior to spreading the chemical so as to permit
 the construction of a uniformly compacted course of chemically treated soil to the thickness shown on the plans.
 The addition of the chemical will raise the subgrade profile approximately 1 inch (25 mm). Remove this excess
 material during the fine grading.
 If the pay item for Mixture Design for Chemically Stabilized Soils is not included in the Contract Documents,
 use the following spreading percentage rate for the specified chemical. The percentage is based on a dry density
 for soil of 110 pounds per cubic foot (1760 kg/m3):
 TABLE 206.05-1
 Chemical
 Cement
 Lime
 
 Spreading Rate
 6%
 5%
 
 Spread the chemical uniformly on the subgrade using a mechanical spreader at the approved rate and at a
 constant slow rate of speed.
 
 Use a distribution bar with a maximum height of 3 feet (1 meter) above the subgrade. Use a canvas shroud that
 surrounds the distribution bar and extends to the subgrade.
 Minimize dusting when spreading the chemical. Control dust according to 107.19. Do not spread the chemical
 when wind conditions create blowing dust that exceeds the limits in 107.19.
 Do not spread the chemical on standing water.
 B. Mixing. Immediately after spreading the chemical, mix the soil and chemical as follows.
 1. Cement. Mix the chemical and soil using a power driven transverse type mixer equipped with a computer
 controlled volumetric water readout. Continue mixing until the cement is thoroughly incorporated into the soil and
 is a uniform color.
 Do not water during the initial mixing.
 Perform the initial mixing so that 60 percent of the soil mixture passes the No. 4 sieve (4.75 mm) and 100
 percent passes the 1 inch sieve (25mm), exclusive of aggregate larger than the No. 4 sieve (4.75 mm) size.
 After the initial mixing, remix the soil and introduce water through the mixer to bring the mixed material
 to at least optimum moisture. Uniformly distribute the water in sufficient quantity to hydrate the cement.
 If the chemical and soil can be mixed to the required gradation and the water can be added to bring the
 soil mixture to the required moisture content in one mixing, then only one mixing of the soil, water and chemical
 is required.
 Restrict the addition of water when the moisture content of the soil exceeds 3 percent above optimum
 moisture. Add water to the mixed soil within 2 hours after the initial mixing.
 Once the water is added to the mixture, complete the mixing, compacting, and shaping within 2 hours
 from start to finish.
 2. Lime. Mix the lime and soil using a power driven transverse type mixer equipped with a computer
 controlled volumetric water readout. If necessary, add water to bring the mixed material to at least 3 percent above
 optimum moisture content. Continue mixing until the lime is thoroughly incorporated into the soil, all soil clods
 are reduced to a maximum size of 2 inches (50 mm), and the mixture is a uniform color.
 After the initial mixing, lightly compact the material to seal it against rain or excessive drying by using a
 steel wheel or pneumatic tire roller.
 Allow the lime and soil mixture to cure (mellow) for a period of not less than 24 hours and not more than
 7 days. If more than 7 days elapse between initial mixing and final mixing, add an additional 0.5 percent of lime
 during the final mixing. Furnish the additional lime at no cost to the Department unless the delay beyond the 7-day
 limit is caused by conditions beyond the Contractor’s control.
 Perform the final mixing until the soil mixture is completely pulverized with all clods reduced to a
 maximum size of 1 inch (25 mm) and at least 60 percent of the clods passing the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve, exclusive
 of aggregate larger than the No. 4 sieve (4.75 mm). Continue mixing until the lime is uniformly distributed
 throughout the pulverized soil.
 During final mixing, return the mixture to the moisture contents stated above, then shape and compact the
 mixture.
 3. Mixture Depth Check. Check the uniformity of the mix by digging trenches or a series of holes at regular
 intervals for the full depth of treatment and inspecting the color and depth of the exposed material. Use diluted
 hydrochloric acid or phenolphthalein to indicate the presence of calcium and ensure that the chemical is mixed to
 the desired depth.
 C. Compacting. Start compaction no more than 30 minutes after the final mixing.
 Compact all chemically stabilized subgrade to the requirements in 204.03, except use 98 percent of the
 maximum dry density for acceptance. Determine the maximum dry density for acceptance by using the Ohio
 Typical Moisture Density Curves, the moisture density curves from the Contractor’s mixture design submittal, or
 
 the maximum dry density obtained by test section method. Unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents,
 the Engineer will perform all compaction tests according to Supplement 1015.
 Use a vibratory footed roller weighing at least 10 tons (9 metric tons).
 Use the moisture controls according to 203.07.A, except ensure that the moisture content at time of compaction
 is at or above optimum.
 Perform the final rolling using a smooth drum roller. Do not use vibration during the final rolling.
 The Contractor may either shape and fine grade the chemically stabilized subgrade before the curing period,
 or shape the subgrade before the curing period and fine grade after the curing period. If fine grading before the
 curing period, fine grade the same day as mixing, compacting, and shaping. If fine grading after the curing period,
 shape the subgrade approximately 1 inch (25 mm) above the profile grade and typical sections. In either case, fine
 grade the subgrade to the profile grade and typical sections within the tolerances in 203.08.
 D. Curing. Immediately after the compaction and shaping of the chemically stabilized subgrade, cover the surface
 with curing coat for curing the chemically stabilized subgrade. Use a rate of 1 gallon per 30 square feet (1.36 liters
 per square meter) for emulsions.
 Apply the curing coat before the surface dries. If the curing coat is delayed or the surface starts to dry out,
 indicated by turning white, apply water for temporary curing until the curing coat can be applied. Do not apply the
 curing coat unless the curing coat can set up before it rains. When the application of curing coat must be delayed,
 keep the chemically stabilized subgrade wet by using water until the curing coat can be applied.
 Cure the chemically stabilized subgrade for at least five days before the placement of the overlying course.
 E. Proof Rolling. After the curing period, proof roll the chemically stabilized subgrade according to Item 204.
 F. Protection. Drain and maintain the work according to 203.04.A.
 Do not operate any equipment on the chemically stabilized subgrade during the curing period.
 Do not allow the chemically stabilized subgrade to freeze during the cure period.
 Cover the completed chemically stabilized subgrade with the aggregate base within 60 calendar days.
 206.06
 Mixture Design for Chemically Stabilized Soils. When included in the plans, perform a mixture
 design for chemically stabilized soils according to Supplement 1120.
 206.07
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure chemically stabilized subgrade by the
 number of square yards (square meters) computed from the profile grade and typical sections accepted in place.
 The Department will measure cement and lime by the number of tons (metric tons) incorporated in the complete
 and accepted work.
 The Department will measure Test Rolling according to 204.08 as specified for Proof Rolling.
 The Department will measure Curing Coat by the number of square yards (square meters) computed from the
 profile grade and typical sections accepted in place.
 206.08
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay lump sum for all work, labor, and equipment described
 in 206.06. The Department will pay two-thirds of the lump sum amount bid when the soil sampling and testing is
 complete and the report is accepted by the Department. The Department will pay one-third of the lump sum amount
 bid when the chemically stabilized subgrade is completed and accepted by the Department, and the field verification
 test results are all submitted.
 The Department will not apply the quantity underrun adjustment factors in Table 104.02-2 to the bid unit prices
 for Cement and Lime.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 206
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Cement Stabilized Subgrade, __inches deep
 
 206
 206
 206
 206
 206
 206
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Ton (Metric Ton)
 Ton (Metric Ton)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Hour
 Lump Sum
 
 Lime Stabilized Subgrade, __ inches deep
 Cement
 Lime
 Curing Coat
 Test Rolling
 Mixture Design for Chemically Stabilized Soils
 
 ITEM 208 ROCK BLASTING
 208.01
 208.02
 208.03
 208.04
 208.05
 208.06
 208.07
 208.08
 208.09
 208.10
 208.11
 208.12
 208.13
 208.14
 208.15
 208.16
 208.17
 208.18
 208.19
 208.20
 208.21
 208.22
 
 Description
 Regulations on the Use of Explosives
 Product Specifications
 Stabilization
 Blasting Plan Submittal
 Production Holes
 Blasting Test Sections
 Safety Procedures
 Presplitting
 Cushion Blasting
 Sliver Cuts
 Blaster
 Blasting Consultant
 Pre-Blast Condition Survey
 Vibration Control and Monitoring
 Airblast and Noise Control
 Hydrologist
 Flyrock Control
 Public Meetings
 Record Keeping
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 208.01
 Description. This work consists of using production and controlled blasting techniques to fracture
 rock or shale and to construct stable final rock cut faces.
 Controlled blasting refers to the controlled use of explosives and blasting accessories in carefully spaced and
 aligned drill holes to produce a free surface or shear plane in the rock along the specified excavation backslopes.
 Controlled blasting techniques include presplitting, cushion blasting, and sliver cut blasting.
 If the designed cut slope is steeper than 1:1 and deeper than 5 feet (1.5 m), use controlled blasting techniques,
 even if the main excavation is ripped or excavated. In rare instances, the Department will specify presplitting for 1
 to 1 slopes. For all slopes that do not require controlled blasting techniques, rake, excavate, hoe ram, or
 mechanically shape these slopes to obtain a neat and smooth appearance.
 Production blasting refers to the rock fragmentation blasts resulting from more widely spaced production holes
 drilled throughout the main excavation area adjacent to the controlled blast line. Detonate production holes in a
 controlled delay sequence.
 208.02
 Regulations on the Use of Explosives. Perform all blasting operations according to all applicable
 Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, and the provisions of 107.09. These regulated blasting operations
 include but are not limited to the following:
 A. Storage and handling of explosives, blasting agents, and detonators.
 B. Use of explosives in character and amount as allowed.
 C. Storage plan, including the type of magazine or explosive storage facility to be used on the job site.
 D. Record keeping, placarding, safe distances, and all other requirements concerning storage.
 E. Obtaining and displaying magazine permits.
 208.03
 Product Specifications. Be aware that delay elements in blasting caps may deteriorate with age.
 Aged explosives are known to deliver much less than the rated energy.
 
 If evaporation occurs or if improperly mixed, bulk explosives (such as ammonium nitrate and fuel oil) may not
 contain the proper amount of diesel oil. Low diesel oil drastically reduces the energy content of the explosive and
 commonly produces reddish brown or yellow fumes upon detonation even in dry blast holes.
 Use products conforming to manufacturers’ specifications. Ship the manufacturer recommended expiration dates
 with the products delivered to the project. Do not use any blasting product that is either excessively old or in a
 deteriorated condition. Cease all work until the product’s age or quality is determined.
 208.04
 Stabilization. Remove or stabilize rock along the cut face that is loose, hanging, or creates a
 potentially dangerous situation during or upon the completion of the excavation in each lift. Do not drill the next
 lift until this work is performed.
 208.05
 Blasting Plan Submittal. Submit three copies of the Blasting Plan to the Engineer and one copy of
 the Blasting Plan to the Office of Construction Administration for review at least two weeks before beginning
 drilling and blasting operations, or at any time the drilling and blasting methods change. If the drilling and blasting
 methods change, submit four copies of the changed sections one week prior to the work.
 The Blasting Plan shall include, at a minimum, the following:
 A. General details of the drilling and blasting patterns and controls proposed to use for both the controlled and
 production blasting.
 B. Station limits of proposed shots. Critical distances to structures. Place the pre-blast survey limits detailed in
 208.14 on the Right-of-Way or plan view sheets.
 C. One plan and section view for each main excavation cut showing the proposed typical range of drill patterns
 including a range of values for the free face, burden, blast hole spacing, blast hole diameters, blast hole angles, lift
 heights, and subdrill depths.
 D. A typical loading diagram showing the type and amount of explosives, primers, and initiators and location and
 depth of stemming.
 E. Typical range of initiator sequence of blast holes including delay times and delay system.
 F.
 
 Manufacturers’ data sheets for all explosives, primers, and initiators to be employed.
 
 G. Use the blaster’s plan form or the blasting plan forms in FHWA Publication FHWA-HI-92-001 Rock Blasting
 and Overbreak Control. Adapt these forms to meet the project requirements.
 In a subsequent submittal, submit one Detailed Plan for all test sections. (Submit or fax at least 24 hours before
 the shot.) Detail the specific proposed amounts of materials and work described in 208.05.A through 208.05.G
 above on this Detailed Plan.
 The Blasting Plan submittal is for quality control, informational, and record keeping purposes. The review of the
 Blasting Plan does not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for using existing drilling and blasting technology
 and for obtaining the required results.
 If specified in the Contract, use an approved blasting consultant, conforming to 208.13, to assist with the blast
 design and to ensure that the Blasting Plan is carried out on the project.
 208.06
 Production Holes. Perform all production blasting, including blasting carried out in conjunction with
 the blasting test section requirements of 208.07, according to the following requirements:
 A. Drill the production blast holes on the patterns and to the depths submitted in the Blasting Plan and Detailed
 Plan, as specified in 208.05, but not exceeding a depth of 60 feet (18 m). Drill the production blast holes within
 two blast hole diameters of the staked collar location. If the blaster does not drill the production holes then the
 blaster shall inspect the holes and review the drilling logs prior to loading the holes.
 B. Deepen or clean-out blast holes if they are plugged or unable to be fully loaded. Check and measure blast holes
 before any explosives are loaded into any of the holes to eliminate any safety hazard resulting from drilling near
 loaded holes.
 C. Maintain a burden distance that is equal to or less than the bench height in order to control the blasting effects.
 
 D. Drill the row of production blast holes immediately adjacent to the controlled blast line on a plane
 approximately parallel to the controlled blast line. Drill the production blast holes no closer than 6 feet (2 m) to the
 controlled blast line. Drill the bottom of the production holes no lower than the bottom of the controlled blast holes
 except by the amount of subdrilling used in the production holes. Do not exceed 6 3/4 inches (170 mm) in diameter
 for the production blast holes. Delay the detonation sequence of the production holes toward a free face.
 E. Maintain a stemming depth of at least 0.7 times the burden distance. If water is present or when blasting within
 200 feet (61 m) of a structure, use crushed No. 8 coarse aggregate for holes less than 4 inches (100 mm) in diameter
 and crushed No. 57 coarse aggregate for holes 4 inches (100 mm) in diameter and larger for the stemming material.
 Use the coarse aggregate gradations of Nos. 8 and 57 gradations on Table 703.01-1. If gravel is used, use crushed
 material with a minimum of two mechanically fractured faces on 60 percent of the material. In other locations, the
 Contractor may use drill cuttings for stemming, if it does not compromise the shot integrity.
 F.
 
 Take all necessary precautions in the production blasting to minimize blast damage to the rock backslope.
 
 G. Drill a line of buffer holes on a parallel plane adjacent to the presplit holes if presplit results are not satisfactory
 and production holes are damaging the presplit line. Drill the buffer hole 3  1 inch (75  25 mm) in diameter. Drill
 the line of buffer holes approximately 3 feet (1 m) from the presplit line, and space 3 to 5 feet (1 to 1.5 m) centerto-center. Do not load the buffer holes with more than 50 percent of the full explosive load that could be placed in
 a 3-inch (75 mm) production hole. Delay the detonation sequence toward a free face.
 208.07
 Blasting Test Sections. Before commencing full-scale blasting operations, demonstrate the adequacy
 of the proposed Blasting Plan. Drill, blast, and excavate short test sections to determine which combination of
 methods, hole spacing, and charge works best. Use a test section with lengths up to 150 feet (45 m) for presplitting
 and 120 feet (36 m) for production blasting when field conditions warrant.
 Do not exceed a production hole depth of 30 feet (9 m) for the first test section.
 Begin the controlled blasting tests for presplitting with the controlled blast holes spaced 36 inches (900 mm)
 apart, then adjust, if needed, until the spacing for full-scale presplit blasting operations is approved. A new test
 section is required to increase the spacing for the presplitting to a maximum of 48 inches (1200 mm).
 Perform two test sections on every project. Use explosive depths greater than 20 feet (6.1 m) for these test
 sections. Use one test section for controlled blasting and one test section for production blasting.
 Apply the requirements specified for controlled and production blasting operations to the test section blasting.
 For controlled blasting and for production blasts within 10 feet (3 m) of the finished slope, do not drill ahead of
 the test shot area until the test section has been excavated and the results evaluated. If the test shots are
 unsatisfactory, revise methods as necessary to achieve the required results. Unsatisfactory test shot results include
 an excessive amount of fragmentation beyond the indicated lines and grade, excessive flyrock, or violation of other
 requirements within Item 208.
 If the drilling and blasting methods do not produce the desired result of a uniform slope and shear face, within
 the tolerances specified, drill, blast, and excavate short sections, not exceeding 150 feet (45 m) in length for a
 presplit line or 120 feet (36 m) for a production hole line, until a technique produces the desired results.
 The blasting consultant shall witness the test sections drilling and loading operations and be present when all test
 sections are shot. The time spent witnessing these operations is considered part of the time required to observe the
 loading, drilling, and blasting operations, as specified in 208.13.
 208.08
 
 Safety Procedures
 
 A. Warnings and Signals. Establish a method of warning all employees on the job site of an impending blast.
 Define the limits of the blasting area where there is a flyrock danger. Control the access to the blasting area to
 prevent the presence of livestock or unauthorized persons at least ten minutes before each blast.
 Notify all employees in the area that a blast shall be fired with a one minute signal. After the blast is over,
 sound an “all clear” signal so all employees in the area understand that all blasting operations are finished.
 
 One minute before the blast, sound three long signals, lasting five seconds, on an air horn or siren. For the all
 “clear” signal, sound one long signal, lasting at least five seconds, to indicate that all blasting has ceased.
 Fill out the Department’s Blast Site Security Plan Form (CA-EW-11).
 B. Lightning Protection. Furnish, maintain, and operate lightning detection equipment during the entire period
 of blasting operations and during the periods that explosives are used at the site. If the lightning detection device
 indicates a blasting hazard potential, evacuate personnel from all areas where explosives are present. If a lightning
 detector indicates a blasting hazard, perform the following:
 1.
 
 Clear the blasting area of all personnel.
 
 2.
 
 Notify the Engineer of the potential hazards and precautions to be taken.
 
 3.
 
 Terminate the loading of holes and return the unused explosives to the day storage area.
 
 4. If blast holes are loaded and would pose a hazard to traffic if detonated, close the roads until the lightning
 hazard has passed.
 5.
 
 When the hazard dissipates, inform the Engineer that production blasting can continue.
 
 C. Check for Misfires. Observe the entire blast area for a minimum of five minutes following a blast to guard
 against rock fall before commencing work in the cut. The five minute delay between blasting and not allowing
 anyone but the blaster to enter the area is needed to make sure that no misfires have occurred.
 During the five minute delay, the blaster is responsible for going into the shot area and checking all the holes
 to make sure that they have detonated. If any holes have not fired, the blaster shall handle these misfires before
 others enter the work area.
 Halt the blasting operations if the methods being employed result in the required slopes not being in a stable
 condition or the safety and convenience of the traveling public is jeopardized.
 D. Misfire Handling Procedures. If a visual inspection indicates that complete detonation of all charges did not
 take place, proceed as follows:
 1. If the system was energized and no charges fired for electric systems, test the lead wire continuity before
 inspection of the remainder of the blast. For nonelectric systems, check the lead in or tube to make sure that
 detonation has entered the blast area.
 2. If an inspection of the electrical trunkline or lead in tubing-line indicates that there is a break in the line
 or if the tubing did not fire, repair the system and refire the blast. If the inspection indicates that the trunkline has
 fired, and misfired charges remain, the blaster shall do the following:
 a.
 
 Exclude all employees except those necessary to correct the problem.
 
 b.
 
 Close traffic, if a premature explosion could be a hazard to traffic on nearby roads.
 
 c. Correct the misfire in a safe manner. If the misfire poses a problem that the blaster cannot safely
 correct, the Contractor shall call a consultant or an explosive company representative skilled in the art of correcting
 misfires to correct the problem.
 208.09
 Presplitting. Perform all presplitting, including that carried out in conjunction with the blasting test
 section requirements of 208.07, according to the following requirements:
 A. Completely remove all overburden soil and loose or decomposed rock along the top of the excavation for a
 distance of at least 30 feet (9 m) beyond the end of the production hole drilling limits, or to the end of the cut,
 before drilling the presplitting holes.
 B. Remove potentially dangerous boulders or other material located beyond the excavation limits.
 C. Drill the presplit holes 3  1 inch (75  25 mm) in diameter.
 D. Control the drilling operations by using proper equipment and technique to ensure that no hole deviates from
 the plane of the planned slope by more than 12 inches (300 mm) either parallel or normal to the slope.
 
 E. Extend presplit holes a minimum of 30 feet (9 m) beyond the limits of the production holes to be detonated,
 or to the end of the cut as applicable.
 F. Drill the presplit holes for any individual lift to a vertical depth of less than or equal to 30 feet (9 m).
 Demonstrate that the blast can stay within the above tolerances and produce a uniform slope. If more than 5 percent
 of the presplit holes are misaligned in any one lift, reduce the depth of the lifts until the 12-inch (300 mm) alignment
 tolerance is met.
 G. If a cut height requires more than one lift or if there is a slope change (for example, when changing from a 1:1
 slope to a 0.75:1 slope), use a maximum 2-foot (0.6 m) offset between lifts for drill equipment clearances. Begin
 the presplit blast hole drilling at a point that allows for the necessary offsets and adjust to compensate for any drift
 that may occur in the upper lifts. Move the controlled blast line back if required to accommodate for these
 conditions.
 H. The Contractor may drill 2 feet (0.6 m) below ditch bottom to remove the toe berm.
 I. Before placing charges, determine if the hole is free of obstructions for its entire depth. Exercise all necessary
 precautions so that the placing of the charges will not cause caving of material from the walls of the holes.
 J. Drill hole conditions may vary from dry to filled with water. Use whatever types of explosives and blasting
 accessories necessary to accomplish the specified results.
 K. Use a maximum diameter of explosives that is not greater than one-half the diameter of the presplit hole.
 L. Do not use bulk ammonium nitrate and fuel oil (ANFO) in the presplit holes.
 M. Use only standard explosives manufactured especially for presplitting in the presplit holes.
 N. If using a continuous column cartridge type of explosives with detonating cord, assemble and affix the
 detonating cord according to the explosive manufacturer’s instructions. Furnish a copy of the instructions to the
 Engineer.
 O. The Contractor may make the bottom charge of a presplit hole larger than the line charges but not large enough
 to cause overbreak. Place the top charge of the presplitting far enough below the collar, and reduce the charge
 sufficiently, to avoid overbreaking and heaving.
 P. Stem the upper portion of all presplit holes, from the topmost charge to the hole collar. Use stemming material
 conforming to the stemming specified for the production holes in 208.06.
 Q. As long as equally satisfactory presplit slopes are obtained, either presplit the slope face before drilling for
 production blasting or presplit the slope face and production blast at the same time, provided the presplitting drill
 holes are fired first. If required to reduce ground vibrations or noise, delay the presplit holes, except that the holeto-hole delay must be less than 25 milliseconds.
 R. Do not deviate the presplit slope face more than 1 foot (0.3 m) from a plane passing through adjacent drill
 holes, except where the character of the rock is such that irregularities are unavoidable. Measure the 1-foot (0.3 m)
 tolerance perpendicular to the plane of the slope. Do not encroach on the roadbed with any portion of the slope.
 S. Use the same diameter and drilled in the same plane and to the same tolerance as the presplit holes when using
 unloaded and unstemmed guide holes between presplit holes.
 T. Detonate the presplit line before detonating any production holes, except when the closest horizontal distance
 between the production line and presplit line is greater than 50 feet (16 m).
 208.10
 Cushion Blasting. If the horizontal distance from the cut face to the existing rock face is less than 15
 feet (4.5 m), the Contractor may use cushion blasting instead of presplitting. Perform cushion blasting according
 to 208.09, except as follows:
 A. Detonate along the cut face after the detonation of all production holes.
 B. Between the trim line and the nearest production row, use a difference in delay time of 25 to 75 milliseconds.
 208.11
 Sliver Cuts. For sliver cuts, pioneering the top of cuts and preparing a working platform to begin the
 controlled blasting and drilling operations may require unusual working methods and use of equipment. Use angle
 
 drilled holes or fan drilled holes during the initial pioneering operations to obtain the desired rock face. Apply the
 hole diameter requirements for controlled blasting for pioneering work. Do not exceed a hole spacing of 36 inches
 (900 mm).
 208.12
 Blaster. Use an experienced blaster in charge of all blasting operations. Use a blaster with at least
 five years of proven experience in heavy construction or highway rock blasting and with a sufficient amount of
 proven experience of the type of highway rock blasting required by the Contract.
 Before or at the preconstruction conference, submit a resume of the credentials of the proposed blaster. Include
 in the resume a list of at least five heavy construction or highway rock blasting projects on which the blaster was
 responsibly in charge of the rock blasting. List a description of the projects, with details of the blasting operations.
 List the names and telephone numbers of project owners with sufficient knowledge of the projects to verify the
 submitted information. Obtain approval of the blaster before beginning any drilling and blasting work. Allow 30
 days for the review of this documentation. The blaster shall perform the following:
 A. Control the ground vibrations by the use of properly designed delay sequences and by using allowable charge
 weights per delay.
 B. Base the allowable charge weights per delay on vibration levels that will not cause damage.
 C. Establish the allowable charge weights per delay by carrying out trial blasts and measuring the vibration levels.
 D. Independently measure the vibrations and airblast at the closest structure using the criteria and limits set in
 208.15 and 208.16. Ensure that only trained and certified personnel set up the seismographs.
 E. Use appropriate blast hole patterns, detonation systems, and stemming to prevent venting of blasts and to
 minimize airblast and noise levels produced by the blasting operations.
 F.
 
 Carry out the trial blasts according to the blasting test section requirements of 208.07.
 
 G. Report the vibrations (velocity and frequency) and airblasts on both seismographs before the next blast. This
 report shall denote whether or not these numbers exceeded the allowable set by the vibration specialist.
 H. Modify 208.12.A through 208.12.F above as required to limit ground vibrations and airblast to the levels
 established by the vibration specialist, and the airblast and noise control specialist.
 I.
 
 Coordinate and review the blast hole layout and drilling operations.
 
 The blaster, blasting contractor, or the Contractor shall obtain insurance as specified in 107.12. Present a
 certificate of insurance 10 days before the blasting operations begin.
 208.13
 Blasting Consultant. If specified in the Contract, retain an experienced and recognized blasting
 consultant to assist in the blast design. The blasting consultant shall assist in the design of both the controlled and
 production blasting.
 Retain a blasting consultant with at least five years of proven experience in heavy construction or highway rock
 blasting design and with a sufficient amount of proven experience of the type of highway rock blasting design
 required by the Contract. The Contractor shall not use a blasting consultant that is an employee of the Contractor,
 explosives manufacturer, or explosives distributor.
 Before or at the preconstruction conference, submit a resume of the credentials of the proposed blasting
 consultant. Include in the resume a list of at least five heavy construction or highway rock blasting projects on
 which the blasting consultant was responsibly in charge of the rock blasting design. List a description of the
 projects, with details of the blast plans and modifications made during the project. List the names and telephone
 numbers of project owners with sufficient knowledge of the projects to verify the submitted information. Obtain
 approval of the blasting consultant before beginning any drilling and blasting work. Allow 30 days for the review
 of this documentation.
 The blasting consultant shall observe the loading, drilling, or blasting operations for at least 8 hours per week if
 these operations are in progress for 40 or more hours per week. The blasting consultant shall witness the drilling,
 loading and blasting of the first shot in each major cut. At a minimum, the blasting consultant shall witness the
 drilling, loading and blasting of every 20th shot on the project. The blasting consultant shall write a written report
 
 to the Engineer at least once a month detailing the blasting operations. The time spent writing this report is not
 considered part of the time required to observe the loading, drilling, and blasting operations. The Contractor shall
 coordinate the blasting consultant’s hours with the Engineer.
 208.14
 Pre-Blast Condition Survey. If specified in the Contract, conduct a pre-blast survey of any buildings,
 structures, or utilities within 1500 feet (460 m) or to the nearest structure up to a 1/2-mile (0.8 km) radius of the
 blasting operations. Use a greater radius if the structures are potentially at risk from blasting damage. The
 Contractor shall use a survey method acceptable to its insurance company. The Contractor is responsible for any
 damage resulting from blasting.
 If owners or occupants fail to allow access to the property for the pre-blast survey, send a certified letter to the
 owner or occupant. Make the notification effort and the certified letter part of the pre-blast survey records.
 Submit a copy of the pre-blast survey records to the Engineer before beginning the blasting operations at the
 critical blasting locations.
 Notify occupants of local buildings before the commencement of blasting.
 208.15
 Vibration Control and Monitoring. If specified in the Contract, use vibration control and
 monitoring if blasting near buildings, structures, or utilities that may be subject to damage from blast induced
 ground vibrations. The vibration specialist interprets the seismograph records to ensure that the seismograph data
 is effective in the control of the blasting operations with respect to the existing structures.
 Retain an experienced vibration specialist to establish the safe vibration limits. Use a vibration specialist with at
 least five years of proven experience in monitoring vibrations on heavy construction or highway rock blasting
 projects and with a sufficient amount of proven experience of the type of highway rock blasting vibration
 monitoring required by the Contract.
 Use a vibration specialist that is an expert in the interpretation of the vibration data. The Contractor shall not use
 a vibration specialist that is an employee of the Contractor, explosives manufacturer, or explosives distributor.
 Before or at the preconstruction conference, submit a resume of the credentials of the proposed vibration
 specialist. Include in the resume a list of at least five heavy construction or highway rock blasting projects on which
 the vibration specialist was responsibly in charge of monitoring the rock blasting vibrations. List a description of
 the projects, with details of the vibration interpretations made on the project. List the names and telephone numbers
 of project owners with sufficient knowledge of the projects to verify the submitted information. Obtain approval
 of the vibration specialist before beginning any drilling and blasting work. Allow 30 days for the review of this
 documentation.
 The vibration specialist shall perform the following:
 A. Monitor each blast with an approved seismograph located between the blast area and the closest structure
 subject to blast damage.
 B. Use a seismograph capable of recording particle velocity for three mutually perpendicular components of
 vibration in the range generally found with controlled blasting.
 C. Furnish the data recorded for each shot before the next blast and include the following:
 1.
 
 Identification of instrument used.
 
 2.
 
 Name of approved observer and interpreter.
 
 3.
 
 Distance and direction of recording station from blast area.
 
 4.
 
 Type of ground at recording station and material on which the instrument is sitting.
 
 D. Ensure that the peak particle velocity of each component of the safe limits of the nearest structure subject to
 vibration damage is not exceeded.
 E. The vibration specialist may elect to summarize and report this information monthly, when the blaster
 measures the vibration and airblast with its own seismograph and reports the measurements on the vibration
 specialist’s seismographs.
 
 F. Establish what vibration limits are being used and explain why they are being used to the Engineer before
 blasting begins near structures denoted in the pre-blast survey in 208.14.
 G. Stop all operations if the vibration limits are exceeded until the vibration specialist reports to the Engineer that
 no damage has occurred or will occur and that corrective action has been taken to lower the vibration.
 208.16
 Airblast and Noise Control. If specified in the Contract, install an airblast monitoring system
 between the main blasting area and the nearest structure subject to blast damage or annoyance.
 Retain an experienced airblast and noise control specialist. Use an airblast and noise control specialist with at
 least five years of proven experience in airblast and noise control on heavy construction highway rock blasting
 projects and with a sufficient amount of proven experience of the type of rock blasting airblast and noise control
 monitoring required by the Contract. Use an airblast and noise control specialist that is an expert in airblast and
 noise control. The Contractor shall not use an airblast and noise control specialist that is an employee of the
 Contractor, explosives manufacturer, or explosives distributor.
 Before or at the preconstruction conference, submit a resume of the credentials of the proposed airblast and noise
 control specialist. Include in the resume a list of at least five heavy construction or highway rock blasting projects
 on which the airblast and noise control specialist was responsibly in charge of the airblast and noise control of the
 rock blasting operations. List a description of the projects, with details of the airblast and noise control monitoring
 made on the project. List the names and telephone numbers of project owners with sufficient knowledge of the
 projects to verify the submitted information. Obtain approval of the airblast and noise control specialist before
 beginning any drilling and blasting work. Allow 30 days for the review of this documentation.
 The airblast and noise control specialist shall perform the following:
 A. Use equipment of the type specifically manufactured for the purpose to make the airblast measurements. Hold
 peak overpressure below 134 dB at the nearest structure or other designated location. Lower the overpressure limit
 if it proves too high based on damage or complaints.
 B. The airblast and noise control specialist may establish the peak overpressure limits higher than 134 dB. Submit
 information explaining why higher limits are needed and are safe to the Engineer before blasting begins near
 structures denoted in the pre-blast survey in 208.14.
 C. Furnish a permanent signed and dated record of the peak overpressure measurements to the Engineer
 immediately after each shot or use the same reporting procedures and time frames denoted for vibration in 208.15.
 D. Stop all operations if the overpressure limits are exceeded until the airblast and noise control specialist reports
 to the Engineer that no damage has occurred or will occur and that corrective action has been taken to lower the
 airblast.
 208.17
 Hydrologist. If specified in the Contract, use a qualified hydrologist to monitor before, during, and
 after blasting or major excavation the quantity and quality of the water supplies within 1500 feet (460 m) of the
 blasting or major excavation areas. The water supplies shall include, but not be limited to, all wells, springs, or
 other water supplies for human consumption.
 Retain an experienced hydrologist. The Contractor shall not use a hydrologist that is an employee of the
 Contractor, explosives manufacturer, or explosives distributor.
 Before or at the preconstruction conference, submit a resume of the credentials of the proposed hydrologist.
 Include in the resume a list of at least five heavy construction or highway projects on which the hydrologist was
 responsibly in charge of monitoring water quality and quantities. List a description of the projects, with details of
 the water monitoring or modeling performed on the projects. List the names and telephone numbers of project
 owners with sufficient knowledge of the projects to verify the submitted information. Obtain approval of the
 hydrologist before beginning any major excavation, drilling, or blasting work. Allow 30 days for the review of this
 documentation.
 The hydrologist shall perform, at minimum, all of the following:
 
 A. Review the available public records, including Ohio DNR well logs, to obtain background information and to
 identify the locations and geology of water supplies within 1500 feet (460 m) of the blasting areas or major
 excavations.
 B. Examine private wells, and public and industrial water supplies (as allowed by property owners or occupants),
 and measure water levels and well depths with a water level meter. Clean the water level meter before and between
 each use.
 C. Collect water quality data (pH, e-coli, specific conductivity, turbidity, sulfate, and iron) from private wells,
 and public and industrial water supplies to determine the major excavation work or blasting effects on the water
 supplies by using field instruments.
 D. Measure the water quality and water level for a minimum of two times per week for two weeks before, during,
 and two weeks after major excavation or blasting within 1500 feet (460 m) of the water supplies.
 E. Perform an associated field survey of the locations and elevations of wells and springs.
 F. Evaluate the need for piezometers to monitor the ground water conditions. Place and monitor the piezometers
 as necessary.
 G. Provide a monitoring plan report detailing the proposed activities, frequencies, testing, and any
 recommendations for monitoring the water supplies as detailed in 208.17.A through 208.17.F above. Submit this
 report at least 10 days before beginning the scheduled blasting or major excavation.
 H. Provide a monthly report of the conclusions and results of the monitoring plan.
 I. Provide a final report on the final condition or effect of the blasting or major excavation on the water supplies.
 Submit this report within 30 days after the blasting or major excavation is completed on the project.
 J. Meet with the Engineer in order to coordinate this work and provide input, update the project schedule, report
 progress (including completed work and updated schedule), and make recommendations. Allow for ten meetings.
 The Contractor is not responsible for damages to the above denoted water supplies if the blasting or excavation
 is done according to this specification. The Contractor is responsible for damage caused by negligence, vibration
 or noise above the allowable limits, flyrock, or back break.
 208.18
 Flyrock Control. Before firing any blast in areas where flying rock may result in personal injury or
 unacceptable damage to property or the work, cover the rock with blasting mats, soil, or other equally serviceable
 material to prevent flyrock.
 If flyrock leaves the construction site or lands on a traveled road, the Contractor shall cease all blasting operations
 until the blasting consultant specified in 208.13 reviews the site and determines the cause and solution to the flyrock
 problem. Before blasting proceeds, submit a written report addressing the following:
 A. Why the flyrock left the construction site or landed on a traveled road.
 B. What corrective measures were taken to prevent this from reoccurring?
 208.19
 Public Meetings. If a blasting consultant, vibration specialist, airblast and noise control specialist, or
 hydrologist are specified in the Contract, make the consultant, specialists, Contractor’s superintendent and blaster
 available for one day to prepare for and participate in a public meeting organized by the Engineer and conducted
 by the Contractor to inform the public about anticipated drilling and blasting operations. The consultant and
 specialists shall be prepared to answer any questions dealing with the magnitude of seismic motion, vibrations,
 airblast overpressure, flyrock, and water problems that may affect the public.
 208.20
 
 Record Keeping.
 
 A. Daily Explosive Material Consumption. Keep a daily record of the transactions at each storage magazine.
 Update inventory records at the close of every business day. Show on the records the class and quantities received
 and issued and total remaining on hand at the end of each day. Check the remaining explosive inventory each day
 and report any discrepancies that would indicate a theft or loss of explosive material.
 
 B. Report of Loss. If a loss or theft of explosives occur, report all circumstances and details of the loss or theft
 immediately to the nearest Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, as well as to the local law enforcement
 authorities and the Engineer.
 C. Daily Drilling and Blasting Logs. On a weekly basis, provide a daily log of the drilling and blasting
 operations. Update the log at the close of each business day.
 Fill out the Department or blaster’s drilling form to document the following: burden, spacing, bench height,
 hole depth and diameter, and subdrill depth. Document additional information about the drilling such as voids, mud
 seams, air pressure loss and lack of cuttings. The driller shall give this form to the blaster and the Department.
 Document on the blasting log the number of blasts, times and dates of blasts, the blasting locations and patterns,
 and all of the following information:
 1.
 
 Station limits of the shot.
 
 2. Plan and section views of drill pattern including free face, burden, blast hole spacing, blast hole diameters,
 blast hole angles, lift height, and subdrill depth.
 3. Loading diagram showing type and amount of explosive, primers, and initiators and location and depth of
 stemming.
 4.
 
 Initiators sequence of blast holes including delay times and delay system in each blast hole.
 
 5.
 
 Trade names and sizes of all explosives, primers, and initiators employed.
 
 6.
 
 Signature of the blaster in charge.
 
 7. Use the blaster’s blasting form or the Blasting Report form in FHWA Publication FHWA-HI-92-001 Rock
 Blasting and Overbreak Control. Adapt these forms to meet the project requirements.
 The drilling and blasting logs are for quality control, informational, and record keeping purposes. Review of
 the blast log by the Engineer does not relieve the Contractor of responsibility for the accuracy and adequacy of the
 drilling and blasting log.
 D. Video Recording of Blasts. Record video of each blast. Index the recordings in a manner that permits easy
 and correct identification of each blast. Submit copies of the blast recordings on a weekly basis. If submitting the
 video recordings as electronic data files, furnish them in a video format acceptable to the Engineer and capable of
 being viewed on the Department’s computers.
 208.21
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Presplitting by the number of square yards
 (square meters) along the slope face of the cut. The horizontal measurement will begin at the first hole and end at
 the last hole of the cut, and the vertical slope measurement will be along the sloped drill hole.
 208.22
 Basis of Payment. The Department will not make separate payment for the production blasting
 operations. Payment for the production blasting is incidental to the other work items in the Contract requiring
 blasting. The Department will pay for additional excavation volume resulting from the 2-foot (0.6 m) offsets at the
 Contract unit price for Item 203 Excavation. The Department will pay for the removal of this material beyond the
 excavation limits under 109.05.
 The Department will pay lump sum for all work for the Pre-Blast Condition Survey, Blasting Consultant, Airblast
 and Noise Control, Vibration Control and Monitoring, and Hydrologist. The same person or consultant may
 perform the pre-blast survey, vibration control and monitoring, airblast and noise control, and the work required of
 the hydrologists. The Department may make intermediate payments based on the percentage of the work completed
 for Pre-Blast Condition Survey, Blasting Consultant, Airblast and Noise Control, Vibration Control and
 Monitoring, or Hydrologist.
 Payment for guide holes is incidental to Presplitting. Payment for all of controlled blasting is included in the
 payment for Presplitting.
 The Department will pay for stabilization under 109.05 if caused by geology. The Department will not pay for
 stabilization if caused by the Contractor’s blasting operations.
 
 The Department will pay for the placement and monitoring of piezometers according to 109.05.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 208
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 
 Presplitting
 
 208
 208
 208
 208
 208
 
 Pre-Blast Condition Survey
 Blasting Consultant
 Airblast and Noise Control
 Vibration Control and Monitoring
 Hydrologist
 
 ITEM 209 LINEAR GRADING
 209.01
 209.02
 209.03
 209.04
 209.05
 209.06
 209.07
 209.08
 209.09
 
 Description
 Materials
 Construction Requirements
 Ditch Cleanout
 Reshaping Under Guardrail
 Preparing Subgrade for Shoulder Paving
 Grading Tolerances
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 209.01
 Description. This work consists of performing linear grading within the specified alignment detailed
 in the Contract Documents and within the grading tolerances.
 Use removed or excavated materials in the Work when the material conforms to the specifications; if not, then
 recycle or dispose of the material according to 105.16 and 105.17.
 209.02
 209.03
 204.
 
 Materials. Furnish suitable materials as defined in 203.02.R.
 Construction Requirements. Construct embankment and subgrade work according to Items 203 and
 
 When off-project-limit embankment material is needed for the work, an estimated quantity for Item 209 Borrow
 will be specified in the Contract Documents.
 209.04
 Ditch Cleanout. Reestablish the cross-section of the existing ditch. Use the required embankment
 material to fill the eroded conditions. The compaction requirements specified in Item 203 do not apply.
 209.05
 Reshaping Under Guardrail. Reshape graded shoulders at locations where the existing guardrail is
 removed or where the new guardrail is to be erected to ensure a smooth drainable surface free of all irregularities.
 209.06
 Preparing Subgrade for Shoulder Paving. Prepare the subgrade for shoulder paving by excavating
 the existing shoulder material to the depth shown in the plan. Trim unsound or broken edges of asphalt concrete or
 concrete pavement to a line established by the Engineer. Remove any unstable material and shape and compact the
 subgrade.
 Compact the subgrade according to 204.03. Backfill areas graded in excess of the depth shown on the plans with
 Item 617 compacted aggregate at no expense to the Department.
 209.07
 Grading Tolerances. Do not encroach on stream channels, impact wetlands, or extend beyond
 construction limits, Right-of-Way or easement limits. Do not make alignment or profile grade adjustments that
 adversely affect drainage. Construct the work to the tolerances in 203.08.
 209.08
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Linear Grading, Reshaping Under
 Guardrail, and Preparing Subgrade for Shoulder Paving by the number of either stations or miles (meters or
 kilometers) completed and accepted, along each side of the pavement. The Department will not make deductions
 for intersections and other gaps.
 The Department will measure Ditch Cleanout by the number of feet (meters) measured along the centerline of
 the ditch.
 The Department will measure Borrow according to 203.09.
 209.09
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay according to 109.05 for changes or extra work that
 increases the haul distance by more than 1/2 mile (1 km) to the work detailed in the Contract Documents. The
 Department will pay for additional quantities that increase the haul distance 1/2 mile (1 km) or less at the unit bid
 price.
 
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 209
 
 Station or Mile
 (Meter or Kilometer)
 Feet (Meters)
 Station or Mile
 (Meter or Kilometer)
 Station or Mile
 (Meter or Kilometer)
 Cubic Yard or Ton
 (Cubic Meter
 or Metric Ton)
 
 Linear Grading
 
 209
 209
 209
 209
 
 Ditch Cleanout
 Reshaping Under Guardrail
 Preparing Subgrade for Shoulder Paving
 Borrow
 
 250 PAVEMENT REPAIRS
 ITEM 251 PARTIAL DEPTH PAVEMENT REPAIR
 251.01
 251.02
 251.03
 251.04
 251.05
 
 Description
 Removal of Existing Pavement
 Placement of Asphalt Concrete
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 251.01
 Description. This work consists of partial depth removal of existing pavement in areas exhibiting
 deterioration at the surface, applying tack coat, and placing and compacting asphalt concrete.
 251.02
 Removal of Existing Pavement. The Engineer will designate the location and limits of areas to be
 repaired. Provide the Engineer with aerosol spray paint to outline those areas for repair. Construct rectangular repair
 areas with dimensions as required to envelop surface deterioration. Unless otherwise specified, extend repair areas
 the full width of a traffic lane. Remove pavement to the depth shown on the plans.
 Remove the pavement to the specified depth within the designated limits without loosening or otherwise
 damaging adjacent pavement. Dispose of removed pavement according to 202.
 Trim the limits of the repair to form a vertical face 1.5 inches (38 mm) deep from the surface unless the repair is
 covered with an overlay within 60 days.
 251.03
 Placement of Asphalt Concrete. Apply 407.02 material to thoroughly coat the exposed surface and
 to fill cracks and joint openings.
 Place and compact approved asphalt concrete meeting the design requirements of the item shown in the pay item
 description in one or more lifts as necessary to finish flush with the adjacent pavement surface. Place surface course
 mixes at a maximum 2 inch (50 mm) lift thickness and intermediate courses at a maximum 3 inch (75 mm) lift
 thickness.
 Thoroughly compact the final lift using a Type I pneumatic tire roller conforming to 401.13. As the rolling
 progresses, add additional asphalt concrete, as necessary, to produce a smooth surface flush with the adjacent
 pavement surface.
 Continuously compact each lift while the material is in a workable condition throughout the depth of the lift.
 Ensure that each lift is thoroughly compacted to a suitable density that will not result in displacement under traffic.
 If the Contract does not include resurfacing, seal the perimeter surface of the repaired area by applying a 2 to 4
 inch (50 to 100 mm) wide strip of approved 705.04 material or 702.01 approved PG binder.
 251.04
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure the quantity of Partial Depth Pavement
 Repair by the number of square yards (square meters) or cubic yards (cubic meters) of pavement repaired in the
 complete and accepted work, calculated using the dimensions established by the Engineer.
 251.05
 Basis of Payment. Payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials, including aerosol spray
 paint, tack coat, asphalt concrete, and perimeter seal.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 251
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Partial Depth Pavement Repair (441)
 
 251
 251
 251
 
 Partial Depth Pavement Repair (442)
 Partial Depth Pavement Repair (441)
 Partial Depth Pavement Repair (442)
 
 ITEM 252 FULL DEPTH RIGID PAVEMENT REMOVAL AND FLEXIBLE
 REPLACEMENT
 252.01
 252.02
 252.03
 252.04
 252.05
 252.06
 
 Description
 Removal of Existing Rigid Pavement
 Correction of Subgrade
 Placement of Asphalt Concrete
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 252.01
 Description. This work consists of the full depth removal of existing rigid pavement, correcting the
 subgrade, placing and compacting asphalt concrete, and restoring the shoulders.
 252.02
 
 Removal of Existing Rigid Pavement. Conform to 255.03, except the last paragraph does not apply.
 
 252.03
 Correction of Subgrade. Shape and recompact the subgrade as the Engineer directs. Clean all
 vertical faces of the existing pavement, and coat them with asphalt material according to 401.14.
 252.04
 Placement of Asphalt Concrete. Construct the pavement replacement by placing and compacting
 Item 301, 441 Type 2, or 442 19mm material in two or more lifts according to 401.16.
 Thoroughly and uniformly compact all lifts before the final lift using suitable mechanical compaction equipment
 operated over the entire replacement area.
 Thoroughly compact the final lift using a pneumatic tire roller conforming to 401.13. As the rolling progresses,
 add additional asphalt concrete, as necessary, to produce a smooth surface flush with the adjacent pavement surface.
 Continuously compact each lift while the material is in a workable condition throughout the depth of the lift.
 Ensure that each lift is thoroughly compacted to a suitable density that will not result in displacement under traffic.
 Trim the limits of the repair to form a vertical face 1.5 inches (38 mm) deep from the surface unless the repair is
 covered with an overlay within 60 days.
 If the Contract does not include resurfacing, seal the perimeter surface of the repaired area by applying a 2 to 4
 inch (50 to 100 mm) wide strip of approved 705.04 material or 702.01 approved PG binder.
 After completing repairs, restore the existing shoulders to the condition that existed prior to the repair work.
 252.05
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure the quantity of Full Depth Rigid Pavement
 Removal and Flexible Replacement by the number of square yards (square meters) of rigid pavement repaired in
 the complete and accepted work, calculated using the dimensions established by the Engineer.
 The Department will measure the quantity of Full Depth Pavement Sawing by the number of feet (meters) of full
 depth saw cuts in the complete and accepted work. The Department will not measure offset saw cuts. The
 Department will not measure additional cuts made to facilitate the removal of the pavement
 252.06
 Basis of Payment. Payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials, including aerosol spray
 paint, removing pavement, correcting the subgrade, placing flexible pavement, sealing, and restoring the shoulders.
 Include the cost of removal, disposal, and replacement of pavement damaged adjacent to the repair area in the
 contract unit price for Full Depth Rigid Pavement Removal and Flexible Replacement.
 Include the cost of any additional concrete sawing and removal depths less than 1 inch (25 mm) greater than
 those shown in the plans.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 252
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 
 Full Depth Rigid Pavement Removal and Flexible Replacement
 
 252
 
 Full Depth Pavement Sawing
 
 ITEM 253 PAVEMENT REPAIR
 253.01
 253.02
 253.03
 253.04
 253.05
 
 Description
 Removal of Existing Pavement
 Placement of Asphalt Concrete
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 253.01
 Description. This work consists of removing existing asphalt concrete, brick, portland cement
 concrete, or aggregate pavement courses; shaping and compacting the exposed material; and placing new asphalt
 concrete pavement or aggregate and asphalt concrete pavement courses.
 The plans show details about the repairs and replacement material.
 253.02
 Removal of Existing Pavement. The Engineer will designate the location and limits of areas to be
 repaired. Provide the Engineer with aerosol spray paint to outline those areas for repairs. Repair the full depth of
 the pavement, unless otherwise shown on the plans.
 Cut the existing pavement at the limits specified and as necessary to prevent disturbing or undermining the
 remaining pavement during removal. Completely remove pavement in the repair area to the specified depth without
 displacing, undermining, or otherwise damaging the remaining pavement. Dispose of removed pavement according
 to 202.
 Trim the limits of the repair to form a vertical face 1.5 inches (38 mm) deep from the surface unless the repair is
 covered with an overlay within 60 days.
 253.03
 Placement of Asphalt Concrete. Shape and compact the exposed underlying material as the
 Engineer directs. Before placing asphalt concrete, clean all vertical faces of the existing pavement and coat them
 with asphalt material according to 401.14. Place the replacement material in lifts as the Engineer directs.
 Thoroughly and uniformly compact each lift using suitable compaction equipment as the Engineer directs. Finish
 the final lift flush with the adjacent pavement surface.
 Thoroughly compact the final lift using a pneumatic tire roller conforming to 401.13. As the rolling progresses,
 add additional asphalt concrete, as necessary, to produce a smooth surface flush with the adjacent pavement surface.
 Continuously compact each lift while the material is in a workable condition throughout the depth of the lift.
 Ensure that each lift is thoroughly compacted to a suitable density that will not result in displacement under traffic.
 If the Contract does not include resurfacing, seal the perimeter surface of the repaired area by applying a 2 to 4
 inch (50 to 100 mm) wide strip of approved 705.04 material or 702.01 approved PG binder.
 After completing repairs, restore the existing shoulders to the condition that existed prior to the repair work.
 253.04
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure the quantity of Pavement Repair by either
 the number of square yards (square meters) or cubic yards (cubic meters) of pavement repaired in the complete and
 accepted work, calculated using the dimensions established by the Engineer.
 253.05
 Basis of Payment. Payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials, including aerosol spray
 paint and replacement and restoration materials; cutting, removing, and disposing of existing pavement; shaping
 and compacting the exposed underlying material; placing new pavement; and restoring the shoulders.
 The Department will not pay for additional work to repair damage caused by the pavement sawing or pavement
 removal.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 253
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Pavement Repair
 
 253
 
 Pavement Repair
 
 ITEM 254 PAVEMENT PLANING
 254.01
 254.02
 254.03
 254.04
 254.05
 254.06
 254.07
 
 Description
 Equipment
 Planing
 Surface Patching
 Surface Tolerances
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 254.01
 Description. This work consists of planing asphalt concrete and disposing of the cuttings, and, if
 specified in the Contract, patching the planed surface.
 254.02
 Equipment. Use self-propelled planing equipment that has sufficient power and stability to
 consistently and efficiently meet the requirements of 254.05 and the plans. Use equipment with either grinding,
 sawing, or milling type cutters. Ensure that the cutters are mounted rigidly to the carrier and are adjustable to
 control the depth of cut and cross-slope. Use equipment with a suitable carrier wheelbase or with an automatic
 control system having an external reference. Ensure that cross-slope adjustments or automatic controls are capable
 of producing either a variable or a constant cross-slope, as required.
 For small or confined areas, the Contractor may use suitable supplemental equipment or methods approved by
 the Engineer.
 254.03
 Planing. Make one or more planing passes, as necessary, over the designated area to the depth
 specified in the plans. Remove irregularities such as bumps, corrugations, and wheel ruts, when required, to
 establish a new pavement surface elevation or cross-slope.
 Remove cuttings from the surface following each pass. Before opening the completed area to traffic, thoroughly
 clean the surface of all loose material that would create a hazard or nuisance, or would redeposit into the surface
 texture. Dispose of cuttings according to 202.
 Implement effective measures to control dust, pavement contamination, and the scattering of loose particles
 during planing and cleaning operations.
 If planing damages the adjacent pavement, repair the damaged area to the Engineer’s satisfaction. Ensure that
 the repaired area matches the adjacent pavement in terms of smoothness and mix type.
 254.04
 Surface Patching. Patch areas of the planed surface that the Engineer designates that have spalling
 or dislodged unsound pavement. Before patching, clean areas of loose material, coat with 407.02 asphalt material,
 and fill with Item 441 Type 1 or 442 9.5mm or 12.5mm material. Level and compact new material flush to the
 adjacent planed pavement.
 254.05
 Surface Tolerances. Plane the surface free from grooves, ridges, gouges, or other irregularities
 detrimental to the safe operation of vehicles on the planed surface.
 If the Contract specifies planing without resurfacing, plane the surface to a smoothness of 1/8 inch in 10 feet (3
 mm in 3 m). If the Contract specifies resurfacing after planing, plane the surface to a smoothness of 1/4 inch in 10
 feet (6 mm in 3 m). Match the surfaces at the edges of adjacent passes within 1/8 inch (3 mm). Ensure that the
 cross-slope of the planed surface is within 3/8 inch in 10 feet (10 mm in 3 m) of the specified cross-slope.
 254.06
 Method of Measurement. The Engineer will measure the quantity of Pavement Planing, Asphalt
 Concrete by the number of square yards (square meters).
 The Engineer will measure the quantity of Patching Planed Surface by the number of square yards (square
 meters).
 254.07
 Basis of Payment. The Department will not pay for repairs due to damage caused by planing
 operations. If the depth of the planed surfaces is increased by more than 3/8 inches (10 mm) the Department will
 compensate for the additional work.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 254
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Pavement Planing, Asphalt Concrete
 
 254
 
 Patching Planed Surface
 
 ITEM 255 FULL DEPTH PAVEMENT REMOVAL AND RIGID REPLACEMENT
 255.01
 255.02
 255.03
 255.04
 255.05
 255.06
 255.07
 255.08
 255.09
 255.10
 
 Description
 Materials
 Removal of Existing Pavement
 Correction of Disturbed Subgrade
 Placing Dowels and Tiebars
 Placement of Portland Cement Concrete
 Wearing Course Replacement
 Opening to Traffic
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 255.01
 Description. This work consists of full depth removal of existing pavement; removing subbase where
 specified; compacting the subgrade; furnishing and placing dowels, tiebars, and mesh where specified; placing,
 consolidating, finishing, and curing new portland cement concrete to the level of the adjacent portland cement
 concrete pavement; replacing wearing course where required; and restoring affected shoulders.
 255.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Concrete, Class QC 1, QC MS, QC FS ................................................ 499
 Curing materials, Type 2 ................................................................. 705.07
 Non-shrink non-metallic grout ........................................................ 705.20
 Reinforcing steel ............................................................................. 709.00
 Preformed elastomeric joint sealer .................................................. 705.11
 Tiebar ............................................................................... 705.01 or 709.00
 Dowel bars and basket assemblies ................................... 705.01 or 709.13
 Expansion shield anchors Type A ................................................... 712.01
 Use epoxy coated hook bolt, wiggle bolt, and coupling.
 Select and furnish grout from the Qualified Product List issued by the Laboratory that firmly anchors the dowel
 or tiebar within 30 minutes.
 A. Rapid Repair Concrete Mix Materials. If the bid item requires RRCM (Rapid Repair Concrete Mix) do not
 use the Concrete classes listed above. Develop a specialized mix design as follows:
 Use one of the following special rapid early repair admixture systems such as
 1.
 
 4 x 4 concrete system
 
 2.
 
 Rapid -1
 
 3.
 
 Other manufactured systems acceptable to the Director
 
 Develop a RRCM concrete mix design that will achieve a flexural strength of 400 psi (2.8 MPa) in not less than
 4 hours and not more than 6 hours using 6 in x 6 in (150 mm x 150 mm) beam samples conforming to ASTM C293.
 Use cements conforming to 701.02, 701.04 or 701.05
 Use fine aggregate conforming to 703.02.A
 Use coarse aggregate(s) conforming to 703.02.B and 703.13
 Provide concrete with 4 to 8 percent air content.
 During the testing of the RRCM mix design develop the mix’s maturity curve according to Supplement 1098 (S
 1098) using the actual materials that will be used on the project.
 Document and submit to the Engineer the RRCM mix design results showing flexural strength, time to strength,
 materials, sources of materials, quantities of materials and batching requirements.
 The Engineer will have 10 days review the mix design and accept or reject.
 
 255.03
 Removal of Existing Pavement. The Engineer will locate and mark all areas for repair before the
 start of diamond sawing. Provide the Engineer with aerosol spray paint to outline those areas for repair.
 Saw cut the existing rigid pavement to the full depth at the limits of the area designated by the Engineer using a
 diamond saw blade. Where there is an existing asphalt concrete overlay on top of the concrete pavement to be
 removed, the Contractor may make either a full depth saw cut through the asphalt concrete overlay and the concrete
 pavement, or make an offset saw cut through the asphalt concrete overlay. If making an offset saw cut through the
 asphalt concrete overlay, remove the overlay as necessary to provide clearance for the full depth saw cut through
 the concrete pavement. The Contractor may elect to make additional cuts to facilitate the removal of the pavement.
 Remove pavement in the repair area by the lift-out method without damaging or undermining the remaining
 pavement. After the repair area is isolated by full depth saw cuts, drill holes through the deteriorated slab, and
 install lift pins. Vertically lift the pavement out of the repair area. Remove loose debris left behind after lift-out
 using hand methods. Dispose of removed pavement according to Item 202.
 Do not break the pavement and clean out the material using a backhoe unless the Engineer determines that the
 lift-out method is not feasible due to deteriorated pavement or existing asphalt concrete repairs.
 If the bottom face of the adjacent concrete pavement is deteriorated for a height greater than one-fourth (1/4) the
 thickness of the rigid pavement, make additional full depth saw cuts as directed by the Engineer along the full
 width of the lane or lanes to remove the deteriorated areas. Repair pavement damaged during the pavement sawing
 or pavement removal according to Item 255 or Item 256.
 255.04
 Correction of Subgrade. After removing the pavement full depth and before installing dowels or
 tiebars, shape and re-compact the subgrade to the satisfaction of the Engineer. Use concrete to replace any subgrade
 material removed as part of the rigid pavement replacement.
 255.05
 Placing Dowels and Tiebars. Drill dowel and tiebar holes using hydraulic, electric, or pneumatic
 percussion drills without spalling or damaging the existing concrete. Provide drills capable of independent
 adjustment of each drill shaft in the horizontal and vertical direction. When drilling dowels, use a device capable
 of drilling a minimum of three holes at a time. For patches 10 feet (3 m) or greater in length, provide tie bars or
 wiggle bolts of the size and spaced as shown on the standard construction drawings along the longitudinal joint(s).
 Blow all drilled holes clean with oil-free compressed air. Maintain holes dry and frost free before grouting the
 dowels or tiebars. Pneumatically inject grout starting at the rear of the drilled holes and drawing a bead of material
 towards the front. Inject a sufficient amount of grout to fill all voids around the dowels and tiebars. Use a grout
 retention disc with a radius slot as shown in the standard drawings to retain the grout within the drilled holes. Place
 the grout retention disc on the dowels and tiebars at the end to be inserted in the hole. Insert dowels and tiebars in
 the holes and rotate the dowels and tiebars approximately one full revolution. Ensure a small amount of grout
 extrudes through the radius slot in the grout retention disc when the dowels and tiebars are installed. Hold dowel
 bars in proper alignment until the grout has hardened.
 255.06
 Placement of Portland Cement Concrete. Do not place any portland cement concrete for rigid
 pavement replacement until the grout around the dowels and tiebars has hardened. Coat dowel bars with bond
 breaking material conforming to 451.09.B. Place portland cement concrete according to 451.07. Use forms when
 placing Portland cement concrete against asphalt concrete or any unbound material. Cast each patch in one
 continuous operation. Consolidate the concrete around the perimeter of the patch and within the limits of the patch
 area using an internal type vibrator. Use approved internal type vibrators capable of visibly affecting the concrete
 for a distance of 12 inches (0.3 m) from the vibrator head.
 When using RRCM concrete install maturity sensors to measure the maturity of each day’s placement according
 to Supplement 1098. If RRCM placement from one location to another is delayed by more than 1 hour treat the
 delayed placement as a new day’s placement and install additional maturity sensors according to Supplement 1098.
 Ensure that batch tickets of the delivered RRCM conform to the accepted mix design. Provide batch tickets in
 accordance with 499.07.
 Screed repairs less than 12 feet (3.7 m) in length parallel to the centerline. Screed repairs 12 feet (3.7 m) in length
 and longer perpendicular to the centerline.
 
 While the concrete is still in a plastic state, test the surface for trueness and for being flush with the edges of the
 adjacent slabs using a 10-foot (3 m) straightedge. Place the straightedge parallel to the pavement centerline with
 half of the straightedge resting on the adjacent pavement, and draw the straightedge across the patch to test the
 patch edges. Check areas within the patch length in a similar manner. Where the straightedge shows deviations,
 correct all high or low areas exceeding 1/8 inch in 10 feet (3 mm in 3 m). Recheck the concrete surface after making
 corrections to ensure conformance to the above tolerance. Make additional checks and corrections until patch is
 within tolerance.
 Texture the new concrete surface similar to that of the surrounding pavement.
 Apply the liquid membrane-forming curing compound at a minimum rate of 1 gallon (1 L) of material for each
 150 square feet (3.7 m²).
 255.07
 Wearing Course Replacement. Trim the limits of the repair to form a vertical face 1.5 inches (38
 mm) deep from the surface. Replace the removed asphalt concrete overlay with material as shown on the plans.
 Compact the material as approved by the Engineer using any of the roller types specified in 401.13. Apply Item
 407 tack coat to the replacement surfaces.
 Before opening the rigid replacement to traffic, restore the shoulders to the original line and grade. Use either
 aggregate or asphalt concrete as shown on the plans or as the Engineer directs. Fill the low areas, and compact them
 flush with the surrounding shoulder.
 Seal the perimeter surface of the repaired areas by applying a 2 to 4 inch (50 to 100 mm) wide strip of approved
 705.04 material or 702.01 approved PG binder.
 255.08
 Opening to Traffic. Do not open the rigid replacement to traffic until the concrete attains a modulus
 of rupture of 400 pounds per square inch (2.8 MPa).
 For RRCM mixes do not open the rigid replacement to traffic until the RRCM attains a modulus of rupture of
 400 pounds per square inch (2.8 MPa) based on maturity testing.
 If maintaining traffic in adjacent lanes, schedule work in order to place the concrete in the prepared repair area
 within 48 hours after removing pavement. In accordance with standard drawing MT-101.90, drums may be used
 as a separator to the adjacent traveled lane for repairs 60 feet (18 m) or less in length.
 If unable to complete placement of the concrete in the exposed repair area by the end of a daily work shift, fill
 or cover repair areas less than 4 feet (1.2 m) from the traveled lane. Fill using a temporary patch material suitable
 to the Engineer or cover unfilled repair areas 10 feet (3 m) or less in length with a steel plate.
 Do not leave repair areas unfilled with concrete when work is suspended on weekends or holidays. If unable to
 complete placement of the concrete in the exposed repair area before suspending work for a weekend or holiday or
 within the 48-hour time specified above, fill the repair area with an asphalt concrete mixture or other suitable
 temporary patch material with a durable surface as the Engineer directs. Maintain the temporary patches while they
 are in service.
 255.09
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure the quantity of Full Depth Pavement
 Removal and Rigid Replacement by the number of square yards (square meters) repaired in the complete and
 accepted work.
 The Department will measure the quantity of Full Depth Pavement Sawing by the number of feet (meters) of
 perimeter full depth saw cuts in the complete and accepted work. The Department will not measure offset saw cuts.
 The Department will not measure additional cuts made to facilitate the removal of the pavement.
 255.10
 Basis of Payment. Payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials, including paint;
 developing and testing the concrete mix, removing pavement by any method; removing subbase for undercut
 replacement; compacting subbase and subgrade; placing rigid pavement, including concrete necessary to replace
 removed subbase or subgrade; furnishing and placing dowels, tiebars, and mesh; performing maturity testing and
 acceptance; placing, maintaining, removing, and disposing of temporary patches, and restoring the shoulders.
 The Department will not pay for additional concrete sawing and removal depths within 1 inch (25 mm) greater
 than those shown on the plans.
 
 The Department will not pay for additional work to repair damage caused by pavement sawing, pavement drilling
 or pavement removal.
 The Department will include tack coat in the cost of the asphalt concrete. The Department will pay for asphalt
 concrete according to Item 301, Item 441, or Item 442.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 255
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 
 Full Depth Pavement Removal and Rigid Replacement, Class ___
 
 255
 
 Full Depth Pavement Sawing
 
 ITEM 256 BONDED PATCHING OF PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT
 256.01
 256.02
 256.03
 256.04
 256.05
 256.06
 256.07
 256.08
 256.09
 256.10
 
 Description
 Materials
 Equipment
 Removal of Unsound Concrete
 Preparation of Patch Area
 Bonding Grout Installation
 Placing Patching Material
 Curing and Loading
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 256.01
 Description. This work consists of bonded patching of portland cement concrete pavements at spall
 areas adjacent to cracks or joints or other areas of the pavement as designated by the Engineer. This work involves
 removing all loose and unsound concrete and asphalt material patches; removing sound concrete as directed;
 preparing the surface; applying a bonding grout if required; reconstructing the joint or crack; and mixing, placing,
 finishing, and curing of the patching material called out in the pay item description.
 256.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Portland cement ............................................................................... 701.05
 Fine aggregate .................................................................................. 703.02
 Coarse aggregate, No. 8 size............................................................ 703.02
 Curing material ................................................................................ 705.07
 Air-entraining admixture ................................................................. 705.10
 Quick setting concrete mortar .......................................................... 705.21
 256.03
 Equipment. Use a milling machine, concrete saw, jackhammers, or other approved equipment to
 remove existing surface material. Provide oil and moisture free compressed air for cleaning and abrasive blasting
 the prepared area. Provide an on-site concrete mixer capable of mixing a minimum of 2-cubic foot (0.06 m³) batches
 of patching material. Provide chipping hammers not heavier than the nominal 35-pound (16 kg) class.
 256.04
 Removal of Unsound Concrete. The Engineer will locate and mark all areas to be repaired prior to
 concrete sawing. Provide the Engineer with aerosol spray paint to outline the areas for repair. Repair areas will be
 rectangular or square in shape with dimensions as required to envelope the surface deterioration.
 Saw the perimeter of all areas designated for removal to a depth of 1 inch (25 mm) to produce a vertical or
 slightly undercut face. Make additional saw cuts as required to facilitate removal. Remove all unsound concrete,
 all asphalt material, and all obviously loose and disintegrated concrete within the patch area. Remove sound
 concrete where required to achieve the minimum depth within the patch area. Remove concrete by jack hammering
 or milling. The minimum depth of any partial depth repair is 1 1/2 inch (38 mm) except at the perimeter saw cuts.
 Operate chipping hammers at an angle of less than 45 degrees measured from the surface of the pavement. During
 removal of unsound concrete, remove all pavement reinforcing exposed in the patch areas using a cutting tool or a
 torch.
 256.05
 Preparation of Patch Area. Before placing the patching material or before applying the bonding
 grout, if used, abrasive blast the exposed concrete surfaces to which the patching material is to bond until free of
 loose particles, oil, dust, traces of asphalt concrete and joint sealer, and other contaminates. Do not begin abrasive
 blasting operations until implementing reasonably available engineering controls to limit fugitive dust that are
 acceptable to the Engineer. Conform to State, regional, and local government agency requirements regarding
 control of dust generated by the blasting operation. Remove all sandblasting residue with compressed air just prior
 to placing the patching material or just prior to applying the bonding grout, if used. For Types B and C patching
 materials that do not use water as the activator, perform additional surface preparation according to the patching
 material manufacturer’s recommendations.
 
 Recreate joints and cracks through or along the patch using a joint board that extends below the prepared surface
 and has a width equal to the existing joint or crack. One hour after placing the patching material, remove the joint
 board in a manner that does not damage the patch.
 256.06
 Bonding Grout Installation. For bonding Type A patches, use grout that consists of equal parts, by
 volume, of portland cement and sand, mixed with sufficient water to form a stiff slurry. Using a stiff brush or
 broom, apply a thin, uniform coating of grout to the prepared surface. Scrub the grout onto the dry surfaces of the
 prepared area to be patched immediately before placing the patching material. Do not allow excess grout to collect
 in low spots. Do not allow the grout to dry before placing the new concrete. Paint grout over all sawed joints
 between the patch and adjacent concrete immediately after completing the finishing.
 For bonding Types B and C patches, conform to the patching material manufacturer’s recommendations.
 256.07
 
 Placement of Patch Material. Use Type A, B, or C patch material as follows:
 
 A. Type A. Provide patch material consisting of one part high early strength portland cement, one and a half parts
 fine aggregate, and one and a half parts coarse aggregate by volume. Add sufficient air-entraining admixture to
 maintain an air content of 8 ±2 percent. Add enough water to obtain the minimum slump practical for placing, and
 do not allow slump to exceed 4 inches (100 mm). Mix the materials on site. Do not use ready-mixed concrete. Place
 the concrete mixture in the patch area while the bonding grout is still wet. Slightly overfill, vibrate, and strike off
 the concrete.
 B. Type B. Provide patch material consisting of quick setting concrete mortar 705.21, Type 1 or 2. Mix and place
 the mortar according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Add coarse aggregate, as needed, according to the
 manufacturer’s instructions. Place the concrete mixture in the patch area. If the manufacturer’s requirements
 specify using bonding grout, place the concrete mixture while the bonding grout is still wet. Slightly overfill,
 vibrate, and strike off the concrete.
 C. Type C. Provide patch material consisting of a blend of quick setting concrete mortar 705.21, Type 2 and
 selected aggregates with an activator. Mix and place these materials according to the manufacturer’s
 recommendations. Add coarse aggregate, as needed, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Place the
 concrete mixture in the patch area. If the manufacturer’s requirements specify using bonding grout, place the
 concrete mixture while the bonding grout is still wet. Slightly overfill, vibrate, and strike off the concrete.
 Screed patches 12 feet (3.7 m) and less in length parallel to the centerline. Screed patches over 12 feet (3.7 m)
 in length perpendicular to the centerline.
 While the concrete is still in a plastic state, test the surface for trueness and for being flush with the edges of
 the adjacent slabs using a 10-foot (3 m) straightedge. Place the straightedge parallel to the pavement centerline
 with the ends resting on the adjacent pavement and draw the straightedge across the patch. Where the straightedge
 shows deviations, correct all high or low areas exceeding 1/8 inch in 10 feet (3 mm in 3 m). Recheck the concrete
 surface after making corrections to assure that the patch area meets the surface tolerance before the patching
 material hardens.
 Texture the new concrete surface similar to that of the surrounding pavement.
 256.08
 Curing and Opening to Traffic. Cure Type A patches according to 451.11, except allow the patch
 to attain a modulus of rupture of 400 pounds per square inch (2.8 MPa) before opening to traffic. Cure Types B
 and C patches according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 256.09
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure the quantity of Bonded Patching of Portland
 Cement Concrete Pavement, Type ___ by the number of square feet (square meters) of the exposed surface of all
 patches, irrespective of the depth of the patch, repaired in the complete and accepted work. If the actual measured
 area of a patch is less than 2 square feet (0.2 m²), the Engineer will increase each such measurement to 2 square
 feet (0.2 m²).
 256.10
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 256
 
 Square Feet
 (Square Meter)
 
 Bonded Patching of Portland Cement Concrete Pavement, Type __
 
 ITEM 257 DIAMOND GRINDING PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT
 257.01
 257.02
 257.03
 257.04
 257.05
 257.06
 
 Description
 Equipment
 Construction
 Final Surface Finish
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 257.01
 Description. This work consists of diamond grinding and texturing Portland cement concrete
 pavement longitudinally to substantially eliminate joint and crack faulting and to restore proper riding
 characteristics to the pavement surface.
 257.02
 Equipment. Provide grinding equipment that is a power driven, self-propelled machine that is
 specifically designed to smooth and texture Portland cement concrete pavement with diamond blades or diamond
 impregnated cylinder rings. Mount the blades or cylinder rings on an arbor head. Provide a grinding head at least
 3 feet (0.9 m) wide. Ensure the equipment is capable of grinding the surface in the longitudinal direction without
 causing spalls or other damage at cracks, joints and other locations. Ensure the equipment is capable of correcting
 the pavement profile and providing proper cross slope on the concrete pavement.
 Provide equipment with an effective wheelbase of at least 12.0 feet (3.6 m); a set of pivoting tandem bogey
 wheels at the front of the machine and rear wheels that travel and track in the fresh cut pavement. Ensure the center
 of the grinding head is no further than 3.0 feet (0.9 m) forward from the center of the back wheels. Ensure the
 equipment is of a shape and dimension that does not encroach on traffic movement outside of the work area.
 Furnish and maintain a profiler conforming to Supplement 1058 for daily use during the grinding operations.
 Provide all necessary supplies to fully operate and graph the results of testing the ground pavement for smoothness.
 The Engineer will verify the profiler according to Supplement 1058.
 257.03
 Construction. The plans will designate the areas of pavement surfaces to be ground. Grinding of
 bridge decks, approach slabs, and roadway shoulders will not be required unless indicated on the plans or required
 to provide drainage. Perform grinding in a manner that eliminates crack or joint faults while providing positive
 lateral drainage by maintaining a constant cross-slope between grinding extremities in each lane. Transition
 auxiliary or ramp lane grinding as required from the mainline edge to provide positive drainage and an acceptable
 riding surface.
 Ensure the operation results in pavement that conforms to the typical cross-section and the requirements specified
 for the final surface finish, however, it is the intention of this specification that the faulting at joints and cracks be
 eliminated and the overall riding characteristics be restored within the limits specified. To accomplish the
 smoothness required, grinding may not be required on 100 percent of the pavement surface.
 During initial grinding operations, use the profiler to test the pavement surface as soon as the concrete has been
 ground full lane width. This initial testing is to aid the Contractor in evaluating the grinding methods and equipment
 being used. Subsequent to the initial testing, run daily profiles of each day's grinding the next working day.
 Remove all grinding residue. Remove solid residue before it is blown by traffic action or wind. Do not allow
 residue to flow across lanes used by the traveling public or into gutters or drainage facilities.
 257.04
 Final Surface Finish. Produce a pavement surface that is true to grade with the ground area consisting
 of a longitudinal corduroy-type texture. Ensure the peaks of the ridges are approximately 1/16 inch (1.5 mm) higher
 than the grooves with 53 to 57 evenly spaced grooves per foot (174 to 187 per meter).
 Measure the finished pavement surface for riding quality.
 Produce a mainline riding surface which does not exceed an IRI of 95 inches per mile (1.50 m/km), nor any
 localized surface deviations in excess of 0.4 inches in 25 feet (10 mm in 7.6 m), as measured with the approved
 profiler. Use equipment conforming to Supplement 1058 and obtain a profile and smoothness measurements using
 ProVAL and Supplement 1110. The Engineer will witness the testing of the pavement surface’s wheel paths. The
 wheel paths are located parallel to the centerline of the pavement and approximately 3 feet (0.9 m) from the center
 
 of the lane measured transversely. Maintain the alignment of the profiler with reference to the pavement edge at all
 times. Re-grind any 0.10 mile (0.16 km) sections with an IRI greater than 95 inches per mile (1.5 m/km) until the
 measured IRI is less than 95 inches per mile (1.5 m/km).
 Provide the necessary traffic control and survey stationing for initial measurements or any subsequent
 measurements. Measure the entire length of pavement, event marking the profile runs such that the data can later
 be identified when the profile sensor(s) is within 1.0 foot (0.3 m) of any bridge deck, pressure relief joint, approach
 slab, or pavement not included in the grinding area identified in the plans or established by the Engineer.
 Ensure transverse joints and cracks are flush with adjacent surfaces. The Engineer will visually inspect transverse
 joints and cracks to ensure that adjacent surfaces are in the same plane. Adjacent sides of joints or cracks within of
 1/16 inch (1.5 mm) of each other will be considered flush. Ensure the transverse slope of the pavement is uniform
 to a degree that no depressions or misalignments of slope greater 1/4 inch in 12 feet (6 mm in 3.6 m) are present.
 Use a straightedge placed perpendicular to the centerline to measure depressions and misalignments. Straightedge
 requirements do not apply outside of area ground.
 257.05
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure diamond grinding by the number of square
 yards (square meters) of pavement ground and accepted. The quantity of diamond grinding will be determined by
 multiplying the width specified on the plan by the total length of the diamond ground surface.
 257.06
 Basis of Payment. Payment is full compensation for furnishing all labor, materials, tools, equipment
 and incidentals and for doing all work involved in grinding the existing surface, removing residue, cleaning the
 pavement, and testing with a profiler.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 257
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Diamond Grinding Portland Cement Concrete Pavement
 
 ITEM 258 LOAD TRANSFER RETROFIT
 258.01
 258.02
 258.03
 258.04
 258.05
 258.06
 
 Description
 Materials
 Equipment
 Construction
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 258.01
 Description. This work consists of sawing slots across transverse cracks, cleaning the slot, injecting
 caulking filler, placing a dowel or deformed bar in the slot, and filling the slot with a patching material.
 258.02
 Materials. Furnish a one part silicone sealant which does not require a primer for bond to concrete
 and conforms to the following Table:
 Properties
 Flow, ASTM D5893
 Extrusion Rate, C1183 method A
 Tack free time @ 77 °F ±3 °F (25 °C ±2 °C) – ASTM
 C679
 Specific Gravity - ASTM D 792, Method A
 Durometer Hardness - Shore A, cured 7 days @ 77 °F ±3
 °F (25 °C ±2 °C) and 45 to 55% R.H.; ASTM D 2240
 Tensile Stress -@ 150% elongation, 7 day cure @ 77 °F
 ±3 °F (25 °C ±2 °C) and 45 to 55% R.H.; ASTM D 412,
 Die C
 Elongation - 7 day cure @ 77 °F ±3 °F (25 °C ±2 °C) and
 45 to 55% R.H.; ASTM D 412, Die C.
 Bond to Concrete Mortar Briquettes - Air cured 12 days
 @ 77 °F ±3 °F (25 °C ±2°C);[1]
 
 Requirements
 0.3 inches(7.6 mm) maximum
 75 to 350 grams/minute
 20 to 90 minutes
 1.010 to 1.515
 10 to 25 at 0 °F (-18 °C)
 45 psi (310 kPa) maximum
 800% minimum
 50 psi (345 kPa) minimum
 
 Extend 100% and compress 50%; No adhesive
 or cohesive failure after 10 cycles at 0 °F (-18
 °C)
 9 months from date of shipment from
 Shelf Life
 manufacturer
 [1]Bond to Concrete Mortar Briquettes molded in accordance with AASHTO T 132 sawed in half and bonded with
 a thin section of sealant and tested in accordance with AASHTO T 132. Briquettes will be dried to constant
 weight in oven at 212 °F ±9 °F (100 °C ±5 °C).
 [2]Movement Capability and Adhesion: Prepare 1-inch × 2-inch × 3-inch (25 mm × 50 mm × 75 mm) concrete
 blocks in accordance with ASTM C 719. A sawed face will be used for bond surface. Seal 2 inches (50 mm) of
 block leaving 1/2 inch (13 mm) on each end of specimen unsealed. The depth of sealant will be 3/8 inch (10
 mm) and the width 1/2 inch (13 mm). Subject sealant to movement in accordance with ASTM C 719. The
 magnitude of the movement will be as specified, and the rate of extension or compression will be 1/8 inch (3.2
 mm) per hour.
 Movement Capability and Adhesion [2]
 
 Furnish materials conforming to:
 Aggregate .................................................................................. 703.02.A.3
 Curing material ................................................................... 705.07, Type 2
 Dowel bars ....................................................................... 709.13 or 705.01
 Deformed bars ................................................................. 705.01 or 709.00
 Bar chairs ..................................................709.14 or non-metallic material
 Preformed filler ................................................................................ 705.03
 Patching material. Must meet the performance requirements of ASTM C928, Table 1, R3 concrete material
 with the following exceptions and additions:
 
 Final Set Time (ASTM C403)............................... 25 minutes minimum
 Length Change (ASTM C157)
 @ 4 days .....................................................................±0.13% maximum
 Freeze Thaw Durability Factor (ASTM C666) Procedure A @ 300 cycles or Procedure B @ 350 cycles,
 Durability Factor: ............................................................ 90% minimum
 Furnish patching material according to the Departments Qualified Products List (QPL)
 Mix prepackaged materials that contain all aggregates needed to produce the desired concrete as specified by the
 manufacturer. For bagged cementitious materials that need additional aggregates, grade the aggregate according to
 the patching material manufacturer’s recommendation except ensure that 100% passes the 1/2-inch (12.5 mm) sieve
 and a minimum of 85 percent, by weight, passes the 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) sieve.
 258.03
 Equipment. Furnish equipment to create slots that has a power driven gang type assembly, consisting
 of diamond blade saws, capable of sawing a minimum of six sawcuts at one time to the required dimensions,
 without damage to the surrounding pavement.
 Furnish jack hammers weighing less than 30 pounds (13.6 kg).
 Furnish abrasive blast equipment capable of removing the saw slurry or other foreign material from the exposed
 surfaces leaving a clean, newly exposed concrete surface free of spalls, laitance, and all contaminants detrimental
 to achieving an adequate bond. Ensure water blasting pressure with abrasives in the water is 10,000 psi (690 bar)
 or less.
 258.04
 Construction. The Engineer will locate and mark cracks to be retrofitted. Provide the Engineer with
 aerosol spray paint to mark the cracks to be retrofit.
 Construct 2 1/2-inch (65 mm) wide slots into the pavement to the required depth to place the center of the bar at
 mid-depth in the concrete slab. Ensure the slots are parallel to the centerline of the pavement. Saw the sides of the
 slots using the required sawing equipment. Make multiple saw cuts parallel to the centerline if necessary to properly
 remove material from the slot and to provide a level surface for the feet of the bar chairs. Chip out the concrete
 using jack hammers to create the slot. Do not operate jack hammers in a manner that causes damage to the
 surrounding concrete. Construct three slots, on one foot (0.3 m) centers, in each wheel path, as shown in the
 standard drawings.
 Do not allow traffic across the crack once the concrete has been removed from the slots until all six retrofit bars
 are in place, cured and completed. Do not allow the tires of construction vehicles to travel on slots where concrete
 has been removed.
 Clean the sides of the slots by approved blast methods to produce a rough surface. Ensure any blasting operation
 does not damage the surrounding pavement. Do not begin abrasive blasting operations until implementing
 reasonably available engineering controls to limit fugitive dust that are acceptable to the Engineer. Conform to
 state, regional, and local government agency requirements regarding control of dust generated by the blasting
 operation.
 Caulk cracks at the bottom and sides of the slot with an approved silicone sealant in order to prevent any grout
 from entering the crack. Apply the sealant with a pressure applicator that forces it into the crack.
 Place a 1/2 inch (13 mm) thick preformed filler board on dowel bars to maintain the crack, as shown in the
 standard drawings. Ensure the filler board fits tight around the dowel and to the bottom and sides of the slot.
 Maintain the filler board in a vertical position and tight to all sides during placement of the patching material.
 Ensure the filler board extends from the bottom of the slot to the surface of the pavement. If for any reason the
 filler board shifts during placement of the patching material, redo the dowel bar retrofit at no expense to the
 Department.
 Ensure the bar chair firmly holds the bar centered in the slot. Obtain the Engineer’s approval before using any
 bar chairs. The Engineer will reject any chair design that may allow movement of the bar during the placement of
 grout.
 
 Provide smooth dowel bars 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) in diameter and 18 inches (460 mm) long. Center the filler
 board on dowel bars. Coat dowel bars with a thin uniform coat of new light form oil as a bond-breaking material
 just prior to installation in the slot. Place an expansion cap on each end of dowel bars prior to installation. Ensure
 the expansion caps are tight fitting and made of non-metallic material which will allow 1/4 inch (6 mm) movement
 at each end of the dowel.
 Provide #11 (#36M) deformed bars 18 inches (460 mm) long.
 Use two chairs to firmly hold the bar in the slot during placement of the patching material. Furnish chairs that
 are a nominal 2 1/2 inches (65 mm) wide and center the bar across the crack. Ensure dowel bars vary no more than
 1/4 inch (6 mm) from parallel to the pavement surface and the centerline of the pavement. Just prior to placement
 of the patching material, make one or more passes of an air blast to provide a dust-free, clean slot to insure an
 adequate bond of the patching material.
 Mix, place, and cure the patching material in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Consolidate
 the patching material using a vibrator approved by the Engineer. Place the patching material in the slot and finish
 to produce a smooth, even surface.
 Repair any damage to the pavement due to the Contractor’s operation at no expense to the Department.
 Cure the patching material for a minimum of four hours before placing any vehicle loads on the repair, or as
 directed by the Engineer.
 258.05
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure the quantity of Retrofit Dowel Bars and
 Retrofit Deformed Bars by the actual number in the complete and accepted work.
 258.06
 Basis of Payment. Payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials including paint; sawing
 and cleaning the slots; installing dowel chairs, dowels, deformed bars, bond breaker material, dowel bar end caps,
 sealant/caulking material, filler material, and patching material.
 The Department will not pay for additional work or materials required due to shifting of the filler board.
 The Department will not pay for any additional work to repair damage to the pavement caused by the Contractor.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 258
 258
 
 Each
 Each
 
 Retrofit Dowel Bar
 Retrofit Deformed Bar
 
 300 BASES
 ITEM 301 ASPHALT CONCRETE BASE
 301.01
 301.02
 301.03
 301.04
 301.05
 301.06
 
 Description
 Composition
 Mixing
 Spreading and Finishing
 Spreading and Surface Tolerances
 Basis of Payment
 
 301.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing a base course of aggregate and asphalt binder, mixed
 in a central plant and spread and compacted on a prepared surface.
 The requirements of Item 401 apply, except as modified by this specification.
 301.02
 
 Composition. Furnish aggregate for the mix that conforms to the following gradation:
 Sieve Size
 2 inch
 1 inch
 1/2 inch
 No. 4
 No. 8
 No. 16
 No. 50
 No. 200
 
 (50 mm)
 (25.0 mm)
 (12.5 mm)
 (4.75 mm)
 (2.36 mm)
 (1.18 mm)
 (300 µm)
 (75 µm)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 75 to 100
 50 to 85
 25 to 60
 15 to 45
 10 to 35
 3 to 18
 1 to 7
 
 Submit for OMM’s approval the desired percentage of the aggregate passing the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve and blend
 of individual components. The Contractor may use reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement according to 401.04.
 OMM will establish the required binder content within a range of 4.7 to 7 percent. Do not make changes in these
 JMF values due to unsatisfactory results or other conditions except as authorized by OMM. Obtain a new JMF
 approval for any desired change to an existing JMF.
 301.03
 Mixing. If using a batch plant, use screens with openings of sizes that result in a reasonably balanced
 separation of the dried and heated aggregate into a minimum of two bins.
 301.04
 Spreading and Finishing. Ensure that the maximum compacted depth of any one layer is 6 inches
 (150 mm). Ensure that the temperature of the mixture when delivered to the paver is a minimum of 250 °F (120
 °C). Ensure the temperature of the mixture is sufficient for the roller coverage to be effective in compacting the
 mixture.
 301.05
 Spreading and Surface Tolerances. Do not exceed 3/8 inch (10 mm) in surface variation from the
 testing edge of a 10-foot (3 m) straightedge. If using Item 301 Asphalt Concrete Base as a subbase for a rigid
 pavement or base, do not exceed a variation of 1/4 inch (6 mm).
 Correct variations in excess of slope or surface tolerances by adding or removing material in a manner
 satisfactory to the Engineer. The Contractor may use asphalt concrete approved by the Engineer.
 301.06
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities, complete in place, at the contract
 price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 301
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Asphalt Concrete Base
 
 ITEM 302 ASPHALT CONCRETE BASE
 302.01
 302.02
 302.03
 302.04
 302.05
 302.06
 
 Description
 Composition
 Mixing
 Spreading and Finishing
 Spreading and Surface Tolerances
 Basis of Payment
 
 302.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing a base course of aggregate and asphalt binder, mixed
 in a central plant and spread and compacted on a prepared surface.
 The requirements of Item 401 apply, except as modified by this specification.
 302.02
 A.
 
 Composition
 
 General. Furnish a mixture that conforms to the following gradation:
 
 Sieve Size
 Total Percent Passing
 2 inch
 (50 mm)
 100
 1 1/2 inch
 (37.5 mm)
 85 to 100
 1 inch
 (25.0 mm) [1]
 68 to 88
 [1]
 3/4 inch
 (19.0 mm)
 56 to 80
 [1]
 1/2 inch
 (12.5 mm)
 44 to 68
 3/8 inch
 (9.5 mm) [1]
 37 to 60
 No. 4
 (4.75 mm)
 22 to 45
 No. 8
 (2.36 mm)
 14 to 35
 No. 16
 (1.18 mm)
 8 to 25
 No. 30
 (600 µm)
 6 to 18
 No. 50
 (300 µm)
 4 to 13
 No. 200
 (75 µm)
 2 to 6
 [1]Provide aggregate to retain a minimum of 7 percent of the material on each of these sieves. This requirement
 applies to the gradation of the JMF and the mix production according to Item 403.
 In the design of the asphalt concrete base, the requirements of Item 441 apply, except as follows:
 The Contractor may use reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement according to 401.04. Should problems with
 proper coating or other material issues related to the use of reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement or reclaimed
 asphalt shingles be evident, OMM may restrict the allowable percentage of reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement
 to the reduced limits shown in tables 401.04-1 and 401.04-2 or may eliminate use of reclaimed asphalt shingles. In
 this case the virgin binder content will be adjusted by OMM.
 Add hydrated lime in the dry form at a rate of 0.75 percent by the dry weight of aggregate for asphalt concrete
 base, if antistrip additive is required and hydrated lime is used.
 Design the asphalt concrete base to yield 4.0 percent air voids and the following properties:
 Property
 Binder Content, %
 Stability, lb (N), 70 blow
 Flow, 0.25 mm, 70 blow
 Voids in Mineral Aggregate %
 Note 1: See tables in 401.04
 
 Acceptable Range of Values
 Minimum
 Maximum
 Note 1
 6.0[Total]
 3000 (13,345)
 --28
 12.0
 --
 
 Use equipment that meets the requirements of a Level 3 laboratory as specified in Supplement 1041. Ensure
 that the following equipment is designed and manufactured according to ASTM D5581 to prepare and test a
 Marshall specimen with a 6.0-inch (152.4 mm) diameter and a 3.75 ±0.05 inch (95 ±1.3 mm) height:
 1.
 
 Specimen mold assembly
 
 2.
 
 Specimen extractor
 
 3.
 
 Compaction hammer.
 
 4.
 
 Compaction pedestal specimen mold holder.
 
 5.
 
 Marshall test apparatus.
 
 Produce batches of asphalt concrete base in the amount that will result in a compacted specimen 3.75 ±0.05
 inch (95 ±1.3 mm) in height. This amount is about 4050 grams.
 B. Compaction of Specimens. Fill the mold with asphalt concrete base by placing approximately one-half of the
 batch in the mold and spading it vigorously with a heated spatula or trowel 15 times around the perimeter and ten
 times over the interior. Place the second half of the batch in the mold and spade the mixture in the same manner.
 Compact the specimen on both sides with 70 blows.
 C. Stability Correlation Ratios. Convert measured stability values for specimens that depart from the standard
 3.75-inch (95 mm) thickness to an equivalent 3.75-inch (95 mm) value by multiplying the stability value by the
 appropriate correlation ratio as follows:
 Approximate Thickness of Specimen, inches (mm)
 3 1/2
 (89)
 3 9/16
 (90)
 3 5/8
 (92)
 3 11/16
 (94)
 3 3/4
 (95)
 3 13/16
 (97)
 3 7/8
 (98)
 3 15/16
 (100)
 4
 (102)
 302.03
 
 Correlation Ratio
 1.12
 1.09
 1.06
 1.03
 1.00
 0.97
 0.95
 0.92
 0.90
 
 Mixing. Conform to the requirements of 301.03.
 
 302.04
 Spreading and Finishing. Ensure that the compacted depth of any one layer is a minimum of 4 inches
 (100 mm) and a maximum of 7.75 inches (190 mm). If the plan thickness is 7.0-7.75 inches (178 mm – 190 mm)
 and District Testing confirms the JMF and mixture production has 95% passing the 1.50 inch (37.5 mm) sieve, the
 302 may be placed in two lifts if requested by the Contractor. One lift of plan thickness will be required if top size
 aggregate dragging occurs. Ensure that the temperature of the mixture when delivered to the paver is a minimum
 of 250 °F (120 °C). Ensure the temperature of the mixture is sufficient for the roller coverage to be effective in
 compacting the mixture.
 302.05
 
 Spreading and Surface Tolerances. Conform to the requirements of 301.05.
 
 302.06
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities, complete in place, at the contract
 price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 302
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Asphalt Concrete Base
 
 ITEM 304 AGGREGATE BASE
 304.01
 304.02
 304.03
 304.04
 304.05
 304.06
 304.07
 304.08
 
 Description
 Materials
 Before Spreading
 Spreading
 Compaction
 Finished Surface
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 304.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing, placing, and compacting one or more courses of
 aggregate on a prepared surface, including furnishing and incorporating all water required for compaction.
 304.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to 703.17.
 
 304.03
 Before Spreading. Sample the material stockpile, according to ASTM D75, to determine the initial
 moisture content to be used for compaction. Create the moisture-density curve according to AASHTO T 99,
 Method C, to determine the optimum moisture content.. For projects when the total volume of material is less than
 1000 cubic yards (765 m3), the optimum moisture content may be obtained from a moisture-density curve that was
 performed on the material within 1 year prior to the date of placement. Submit moisture-density test results to the
 Engineer.
 Use material that has reasonably uniform moisture content. Ensure the moisture content is not less than 2 percent
 below the optimum moisture content before spreading. Add water to the stockpile if necessary to meet this moisture
 requirement.
 Handle the material in a manner to minimize segregation. If segregation occurs, thoroughly mix or regrade the
 stockpile.
 304.04
 Spreading. Spread the material on the prepared surface. Do not use frozen material and do not spread
 on frozen surfaces.
 Do not exceed a compacted lift thickness of 8 inches (200 mm) when using vibratory rollers with effective
 weights greater than 12 tons (11 metric tons). Do not exceed a compacted lift thickness of 6 inches (150 mm) when
 using vibratory rollers with effective weights from 10 to 12 tons (9 to 11 metric tons). Do not exceed a maximum
 compacted lift thickness of 4 inches (100 mm) when these vibratory rollers are not used. The effective weight of a
 vibratory roller is the weight plus the centrifugal force from vibration. Submit documentation from the
 manufacturer that shows the vibratory roller meets the minimum effective weight requirements.
 Place the material in two or more approximately equal lifts when the specified compacted thickness exceeds the
 maximum allowed.
 Place the material with self-propelled spreading machines capable of placing the material true to line and grade.
 Spreading machines such as spreader boxes or pavers are allowed. Do not use graders or dozers without spreader
 boxes to spread the material except for areas described in the next paragraph. Spread the material such that it
 minimizes segregation and requires minimal blading or manipulation. The Department may perform in-place
 gradation testing in areas that are visually segregated according to Supplement 1090.
 The Contractor may use hand-placing methods, dozers or graders when the total area of the material is 2000
 square yards (1700 m²) or less or in small areas where self-propelled spreading machines are impractical. Small
 areas include lane widths less than 12 feet (3.7 m) or lengths less than 1000 feet (305 m). The Department will not
 take in-place gradation tests in these small areas.
 The Department may test for in-place gradation after spreading but before compaction testing according to
 Supplement 1090.
 304.05
 Compaction. Add water or dry the material to bring it to within 2 percent of the optimum moisture
 content before compacting. Maintain the moisture content within this range during all compaction operations. The
 Engineer will determine the percentage of moisture to apply or to be dried from the material. Uniformly apply the
 
 water or dry the material throughout the lift and in a manner that does not soften or disturb the lower courses.
 Reduce the moisture content if the material becomes unstable during the compaction operation.
 Compact each lift of material immediately after spreading. Use rollers that correspond with the lift thickness as
 described in 304.04. The Contractor may use lighter rollers or vibratory equipment in small areas as specified in
 304.04 or when heavier rollers are not practical. Approved compaction equipment may consist of vibratory rollers,
 static rollers, or vibratory equipment.
 At the beginning of the compaction operation, construct a test section according to Supplement 1015. Use a
 minimum compactive effort of eight passes to construct the test section. Use and adjust the vibration on the
 vibratory rollers to maximize the density and stability. Construct a new test section when the material changes or
 when the supporting materials change appreciably.
 Unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents, the Engineer will perform all compaction tests according
 to Supplement 1015.
 The Engineer will use 98 percent of the test section maximum dry density for acceptance of the production
 material. Use at least the same number of passes and compactive effort used to obtain the test section maximum
 dry density for the production material. At a minimum, use eight passes in the production area. The Engineer may
 reduce the minimum passes if the passes are detrimental to compaction.
 The Engineer may check the production material density before or after the finishing operations.
 Maintain the surface of each lift during the compaction operations in such a manner that the surface texture is
 reasonably uniform and the material is firmly keyed.
 Cover the aggregate base with the next layer of pavement before the end of the construction season. If the
 aggregate base is not covered up, then assume all liability for contamination of, damage to and instability of the
 base, subgrade and underdrains.
 Provide drainage and maintain the material according to 203.04.A.
 304.06
 Finished Surface. Ensure that the finished surface does not vary more than 3/8 inch (10 mm) from a
 10-foot (3 m) straightedge parallel to the centerline or more than 1/2 inch (13 mm) from a template conforming to
 the required cross-section. Furnish straightedges, templates, or other devices satisfactory to the Engineer, and check
 the surface for conformance with these requirements.
 Do not construct the aggregate base at a consistent depth below the required minimum compacted depth
 thickness. When the depth is found to be less than the required depth, provide the Engineer with a written corrective
 action plan for approval.
 304.07
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Aggregate Base by the number of cubic
 yards (cubic meters) computed from the profile grade and typical sections, compacted in place.
 Where variable depth is specified, the Department will measure the number of cubic yards (cubic meters) of
 aggregate base by converting from weight using the following conversion factors:
 
 TABLE 304.07-1
 Material
 Conversion Factor
 Crushed stone
 4000 lb/yd³
 2375 kg/m³
 Crushed gravel
 4000 lb/yd³
 2375 kg/m³
 [1]
 Crushed slag
 less than 90 lb/ft³ (1450 kg/m³)
 3600 lb/yd³
 2140 kg/m³
 90 to 100 lb/ft³ (1450 to 1600 kg/m³)
 4000 lb/yd³
 2375 kg/m³
 more than 100 lb/ft³ (1600 kg/m³)
 4500 lb/yd³
 2670 kg/m³
 Granulated slag
 2800 lb/yd³
 1660 kg/m³
 [1]Based on average dry rodded weight of standard size of slag aggregates on record at the Laboratory.
 The conversion factors listed are the long gradation weights. These numbers are based on the dry
 rodded weights of No. 67, 57, or 8 gradation. The Department will determine slag weights based
 on weights obtained from the original source.
 The Department will verify that the moisture content of the delivered material is less than 2 percent above
 saturated surface dry (SSD). If the moisture content is greater than 2 percent above SSD, then the Department will
 calculate the number of cubic yards (cubic meters) based on the dry density and dry weight.
 The Department will determine the pounds per cubic yard (kilograms per cubic meter) for aggregate mixtures by
 using 100 percent of the test section maximum dry density obtained in 304.05.
 304.08
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 304
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Aggregate Base
 
 ITEM 305 PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE BASE
 305.01
 305.02
 305.03
 305.04
 
 Description
 Construction
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 305.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing a portland cement concrete base on a prepared
 surface.
 305.02
 Construction. The requirements of Item 451 apply, except as follows.
 Do not comply with the requirements of 451.08.
 Provide dowels at transverse contraction joints in mainline pavement, ramps, acceleration/deceleration lanes, or
 collector/distributor lanes. Dowels for contraction joints in concrete shoulders on mainline pavement, ramps,
 acceleration/deceleration lanes, or collector/distributor lanes are not required unless the contraction joint is located
 within 500 feet (150 m) of a pressure relief joint.
 Do not place construction joints within 6 feet (1.8 m) of another parallel joint.
 Modify the curing membrane application rate specified in 451.11 to 200 square feet per gallon (5 m²/L) of treated
 pavement surface.
 Produce a final surface with a uniform, gritty, longitudinal, or transverse texture using a broom drag in either
 direction.
 Ensure that pavement surface variations do not exceed 1/4 inch in 10 feet (6 mm in 3 m).
 Impressing station numbers into the plastic concrete as specified in 451.10 is not required.
 305.03
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Concrete Base by the number of square
 yards (square meters) completed and accepted in place. The width equals the base width shown on the typical crosssection of the plans plus additional widening as the Engineer directs in writing. The Department will field measure
 the length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp.
 305.04
 Basis of Payment. For base found deficient in thickness, the Department will pay a reduced price
 according to 451.18.A.
 The Department will not make additional payment over the Contract unit price for any base with an average
 thickness in excess of that shown on the plans.
 For base found deficient in strength, the Department will pay a reduced price according to 451.18.B and table
 451.19-2. Use the determination and pay procedures for non QC/QA items.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows.
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 305
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Concrete Base
 
 ITEM 320 RUBBLIZE AND ROLL
 320.01
 320.02
 320.03
 320.04
 320.05
 320.06
 
 Description
 Materials
 Equipment
 Construction Details
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 320.01 Description. This work consists of rubblizing and rolling reinforced concrete pavement before placing
 an asphalt concrete pavement.
 320.02 Materials. Furnish filler aggregate conforming to Item 304.
 320.03 Equipment. Use a self-contained and self-propelled unit of either the resonant frequency type or the
 multiple head breaker type for rubblizing the concrete pavement.
 If using a resonant frequency unit, ensure that it is capable of producing low amplitude, 2000-pound-force (8900
 N) blows at a rate of not less than 44 blows per second.
 If using a multiple head breaker unit, ensure that it has the capability of rubblizing the full 12-foot (3.6 m) lane
 width in a single pass. Ensure the breaking head consists of 12 to 16 hammers, each weighing 1000 to 1500 pounds
 (450 to 680 kg). Attach each hammer to a hydraulic lift cylinder that operates as an independent unit, develops
 2000 to 12,000 foot-pounds (2700 to 16,000 J) of energy depending on lift height selected, cycles at a rate of 30 to
 35 impacts per minute, and has a maximum lift height of 60 inches (1.5 m).
 Use a vibratory steel wheel roller having a total weight of not less than 10 tons (9 metric tons).
 320.04 Construction Details. Make a full depth saw cut or cut load transfer devices at joints on ramps or
 mainline where the rubblizing abuts concrete pavement or approach slabs that are to remain in place permanently
 or temporarily for maintenance of traffic.
 Before the rubblizing operations begin, the Engineer will designate a test section. Rubblize the test section
 according to this specification. After rubblizing, excavate a test pit, where the Engineer designates, to check for
 proper particle size throughout the thickness of the concrete. Fill in the test pit using the excavated material and
 additional filler aggregate as necessary. Compact the test pit as part of the rolling operation. Excavate at least one
 test pit, at the location designated by the Engineer, for each production day or every 7040 square yards (5886 m2),
 whichever is greater.
 Adjust the rubblizing procedure to maintain the proper particle sizes. Control the operating speed of the
 rubblizing equipment such that: 75% of the rubblized particles above the reinforcing steel are reduced to 3 inches
 (75 mm) in their largest dimension, 90% of the rubblized particles below the reinforcing steel do not exceed 9
 inches (230 mm) in their largest dimension, and no particles exceed 12 inches (300 mm) in their largest dimension.
 Before placing the initial asphalt concrete course, compact the rubblized pavement with two passes of the
 vibratory roller. Operate the roller in the vibratory mode and at a speed not to exceed 6 feet (1.8 m) per second.
 Leave steel reinforcement in place in the rubblized pavement. However, cut off any exposed steel reinforcement
 below the surface and remove it from the site.
 Fill depressions 1 inch (25 mm) or greater in depth compared to the immediate surrounding area resulting from
 the rubblizing, the compactive effort, or the steel reinforcement removal, with the filler aggregate. Strike off excess
 aggregate level with the surrounding area. Compact filled depressions with the same roller and compactive effort
 previously described.
 Do not allow traffic on the rubblized pavement before the asphalt concrete base and intermediate courses are in
 place.
 Do not allow more than 48 hours to elapse between rubblizing the pavement and placing the initial asphalt
 concrete course. However, in the event of rain, the Engineer may waive this time limitation to allow sufficient time
 
 for the rubblized pavement to dry to the Engineer’s satisfaction. If the Engineer waives the time limitation, cease
 rubblizing the pavement until the Engineer allows paving to resume.
 320.05 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Rubblize and Roll by the number of square
 yards (square meters). The Engineer will use the width of the concrete pavement prior to rubblizing and will
 measure the length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp.
 The Department will measure the Filler Aggregate by the number of cubic yards (cubic meters) furnished, placed,
 and compacted.
 320.06 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 320
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Rubblize and Roll
 
 320
 
 Filler Aggregate
 
 ITEM 321 CRACKING AND SEATING NONREINFORCED CONCRETE PAVEMENT
 321.01
 321.02
 321.03
 321.04
 321.05
 
 Description
 Equipment
 Construction Details
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 321.01
 Description. This work consists of cracking and seating non-reinforced concrete pavement or
 concrete base before placing an asphalt concrete pavement.
 321.02
 Equipment. Use devices for cracking the concrete capable of producing the desired crack pattern
 without extensive spalling or excessive shattering. Extensive spalling is spalling over 1 1/4 inches (30 mm) in
 depth. Do not use whiphammers.
 Use watering equipment capable of wetting the cracked surface uniformly to reveal the crack pattern.
 Use a 50-ton (45 metric tons) pneumatic tire roller conforming to the requirements of Item 204 for seating the
 cracked concrete slabs. Use pneumatic tire towing equipment capable of moving the roller forward and backward
 along predetermined lines.
 321.03
 Construction Details. Demonstrate, to the Engineer’s satisfaction, the ability of the selected
 equipment and procedures to produce cracking of acceptable quality by cracking at least three, but no more than
 five, concrete slabs. When cracking the test slabs, furnish and apply water to dampen the cracked concrete to
 enhance visual determination of the cracking pattern. In addition to 107.07, provide positive provision to contain
 any flying debris during cracking operations.
 Crack concrete into nominal 4  4-foot (1.2  1.2 m) segments. In the event panels are already cracked into
 segments, crack these segments further into nominally equal-sized square or rectangular pieces having longitudinal
 and transverse dimensions not more than 5 feet (1.5 m) and not less than 3 feet (0.9 m), wherever feasible. Do not
 allow the cracking equipment to impact the slabs within 1 foot (0.3 m) of another break line, joint, or the edge of
 the concrete.
 Furnish and apply water to a check section of three to five slabs at least once each day to verify that a satisfactory
 crack pattern is being maintained. Make adjustments to the energy or striking pattern when the Engineer deems it
 necessary, based on the check sections.
 Roll the cracked concrete until the concrete pieces are firmly seated. Perform rolling with at least two coverages
 as specified in Item 204. The Engineer will determine the maximum number of coverages of the roller on the test
 sections to ensure seating without damage to the concrete.
 Before placing the asphalt concrete, remove all loose pieces of broken concrete that are not firmly seated. Repair
 all voids, such as spalls, removed loose pieces, joints, or cracks that, in the Engineer’s opinion, will make uniform
 compaction of the first asphalt concrete course difficult. Repair voids by applying 407 tack coat, filling with asphalt
 concrete, and compacting as directed by the Engineer.
 Do not allow traffic on the cracked concrete before the asphalt concrete base and intermediate courses are in
 place.
 321.04
 Method of Measurement. The Engineer will measure the area of non-reinforced concrete pavement
 or concrete base satisfactorily cracked and seated in square yards (square meters). The Engineer will use the width
 of the concrete pavement prior to cracking and will measure the length along the centerline of each roadway or
 ramp.
 321.05
 Basis of Payment. Include the cost of all crack pattern test and check sections including water; and
 for repairing of joint, cracks, spalls, and voids in the contract unit price for Cracking and Seating Non-Reinforced
 Concrete Pavement.
 The Department will pay for the accepted quantities at the contract price as follows.
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 321
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Cracking and Seating Non- Reinforced Concrete Pavement
 
 400 FLEXIBLE PAVEMENT
 ITEM 401 ASPHALT CONCRETE
 PAVEMENTS—GENERAL
 401.01
 401.02
 401.03
 401.04
 401.05
 401.06
 401.07
 401.08
 401.09
 401.10
 401.11
 401.12
 401.13
 401.14
 401.15
 401.16
 401.17
 401.18
 401.19
 401.20
 401.21
 401.22
 
 Description
 Mix Design and Quality Control
 Materials
 Reclaimed Asphalt Concrete Pavement and Reclaimed Asphalt Shingles
 Mixing Plants
 Weather Limitations
 Notification
 Asphalt Binder
 Aggregate Preparation
 Mixing
 Hauling
 Spreading Equipment
 Rollers
 Conditioning Existing Surface
 Spreading, Finishing and Night Work
 Compaction
 Joints
 Asphalt Binder Compatibility
 Spreading and Surface Tolerances
 Asphalt Binder Price Adjustment
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 401.01
 Description. This specification is applicable to all types of asphalt concrete pavements irrespective
 of gradation of aggregate, kind, and amount of asphalt binder, or pavement use. Deviations from these general
 requirements are covered in the specific requirements for each type according to the appropriate contract item or
 items.
 Work consists of one or more courses of asphalt concrete constructed on a prepared foundation. The asphalt
 concrete consists of a mixture of graded aggregate and specified type and grade of asphalt binder.
 Control all production processes to assure the Engineer that the mixture delivered to the paving site is uniform
 in composition, conforms to the specification requirements and that the placed mixture is free of any defect (ex.
 segregation, tenderness, lack of mixture and texture uniformity, raveling, flushing, rutting, holes, debris etc.) within
 the Contractor’s control at project completion.
 The asphalt concrete pavement thickness shown on the plans or stated in the Proposal is for exclusive use in
 calculating the weight required to be placed per unit of surface area.
 401.02
 Mix Design and Quality Control. Use an approved Job Mix Formula (JMF). The quality control
 and acceptance requirements of Item 403 apply unless otherwise specified.
 If required to perform the mix design or quality control, provide a laboratory and personnel meeting the
 requirements of Supplement 1041 to perform mix design and quality control tests.
 Calibrate asphalt content nuclear gauges according to Supplement 1043 using personnel with a minimum Level
 2 approval according to Supplement 1041. Mix and test the calibration verification sample with a Department
 employee present. Provide and dispose of the solvent used for cleaning the asphalt content nuclear gauge pans.
 401.03
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Asphalt binder
 
 (asphalt concrete, 401.14, 401.15) ............................................... 702.01
 Asphalt material (401.14, 401.18) ..............................................................
 .......................................................SS875.02, 702.01, 702.04, or 702.13
 Aggregates (base courses) ............................................................... 703.04
 Aggregates (intermediate and
 surface courses) ............................................................................ 703.05
 Mineral filler ................................................................................... 703.07
 Sample aggregate, asphalt binder, asphalt material, and mineral filler according to 106.01.
 If 100 percent of coarse aggregate in an asphalt mix design is steel slag (703.01.E), the Contractor may include
 steel slag as a maximum of up to 50 percent of fine aggregate. If a steel slag source causes bulking (expansion
 resulting in flushing or material loss) in asphalt concrete courses, OMM will place limits on the amount of steel
 slag allowed in a mix design. Bulking may be shown through testing, such as ASTM D 4792, or through field
 failure such as, but not limited to, flushing on newer pavement or apparent over-asphalting in production. The
 Department may require the steel slag processor at any time to perform additional testing to verify steel slag
 properties. Potential pavement performance problems due to poor control of steel slag aggregate include bulking,
 poor gradation and specific gravity control resulting in highly variable void properties, excess soft pieces resulting
 in pock marks, flushing, etc.
 Take prompt corrective action if mixture delivered to the paving site is not uniform in composition, does not
 conform to the specification requirements or is not free of any defect (ex. segregation, tenderness, lack of mixture
 and texture uniformity, raveling, flushing, rutting, holes, debris etc.) within the Contractor’s control as determined
 by the Engineer. The Engineer will stop conditional acceptance of the asphalt concrete for failure to correct
 problems.
 401.04
 Reclaimed Asphalt Concrete Pavement and Reclaimed Asphalt Shingles. Provide reclaimed
 asphalt concrete pavement (RAP) and/or reclaimed asphalt shingles (RAS) according to the following requirements
 when choosing to use them in a mix. Failure to follow these requirements will result in a rejection of the Contractor
 QCP (403.03); restriction of any RAP or RAS use at the facility; and/or a change to Unconditional Acceptance at
 the facility.
 Job Mix Formula. The Contractor may use a blend of new materials in combination with RAP obtained from
 verifiable Department or Ohio Turnpike Commission projects and/or RAS obtained from un-used manufactured
 shingle waste or used roofing tear-off shingles as listed in Tables 401.04-1 and 401.04-2 and as follows. If the RAP
 is not from the above sources or the source is unknown, process and blend the RAP into a single uniform stockpile,
 test according to Level 3 Asphalt Mix Design requirements and obtain District Testing approval for use. Obtain
 written approval from OMM for use of unusually large, old RAP stockpiles of unknown content and/or age. Include
 approved methods in the QCP for ongoing processing and testing of these piles. Ensure no foreign or deleterious
 material (703.04, 703.05) is present in RAP. All RAS suppliers must be approved and meet the requirements of
 Supplement 1116.
 Ensure that the JMF falls within the specified limits of the required mix item. Ensure the JMF submittal includes
 the percentages of RAP, RAS, virgin aggregates, and virgin asphalt binder required for the mix item. Report all
 RAP and RAS test results, including binder blend analysis, in the JMF submittal. Identify the RAP in the JMF
 submittal as to project origin and mix type(s). Identify the approved manufactured shingle waste manufacturer
 source or the approved tear-off RAS processor in the JMF submittal.
 Determine RAP properties and uniformity as follows. Determine the final RAP gradation and asphalt binder
 content on a minimum of four separate stockpile (or roadway for concurrent grinding) samples all agreeing within
 a range of 0.4 percent for asphalt binder content and 5 percent passing the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve. If fractionated
 RAP is used use a suitable sieve for determining gradation uniformity. Determine RAP binder content from a
 centrifuge extraction test. Do not use reflux extraction or oven burnoff.
 Determine RAS properties and usage as follows. Use no more than 5.0 percent RAS by dry weight of mix. When
 using RAP and RAS in combination use no more than 3.0 percent RAS. For design assume 18.0 percent available
 
 RAS binder. Determine gradation and specific gravity according to AASHTO PP 78-14, Section 5 or subsequent
 AASHTO applicable standard. Provide the required certification forms in the JMF submittal documenting that the
 RAS meets AASHTO MP 23-14, section 4 and that RAS from roofing tearoffs conforms to the EPA’s NESHAP,
 40 CFR 61 Subpart M, and other applicable agency requirements for asbestos.
 RAP and RAS Usage Limits and Requirements. Process and use RAP and RAS as follows.
 Process and use RAP by one of the following two methods. Note on the JMF submittal RAP page which of
 Method 1 or Method 2 methods described below apply to the RAP. When using RAS without RAP apply the virgin
 binder requirements of Table 401.04-2 Method 2. Use PG64-28 virgin binder in all 442 intermediate courses
 regardless of the percentage of RAP used. If greater than 25 percent RAP is used in a JMF submittal use PG58-28
 or PG64-28 virgin binder. If 26-30 percent RAP is used in the JMF submittal, the Contractor may submit a 3000
 gram RAP sample along with a blend chart, according to Level 3 Mix Design procedures, to determine the grade
 of virgin asphalt binder to use. When using both 15 percent or greater RAP and 3 percent RAS in an intermediate
 or base course use PG58-28 or PG64-28. ODOT may request RAP and/or RAS samples or binder properties at any
 time.
 A. Method 1 Standard RAP. Include RAP in a JMF submittal according to the Standard RAP/RAS Limits Table
 401.04-1 unless specified differently in the applicable mix specification. For mixes that will contain up to 10
 percent RAP and no RAS, the JMF submittal is not required to include the RAP except when a virgin polymer
 asphalt binder is used in a surface course. For surface course JMFs having polymer asphalt binder only submit at
 0 or 10 percent RAP.
 TABLE 401.04-1 METHOD 1 – STANDARD RAP/RAS LIMITS
 Asphalt Mix
 Application
 
 Percent
 RAP by
 Dry Weight RAS Usage [1]
 of Mix,
 Max.
 
 442 Polymer Surface
 Course
 
 10%
 
 441 Surface Course
 
 20%
 
 441, 442 Intermediate
 Course
 
 35%
 
 301 Base Course
 
 50%
 
 302 Base Course
 
 40%
 (30%)
 
 None
 Manufacturing
 waste only
 Manufacturing
 waste and
 tear-offs
 Manufacturing
 waste and
 tear-offs
 Manufacturing
 waste and
 tear-offs
 
 Total Virgin Asphalt
 Binder Content,
 Min.
 
 Comments
 
 5.2
 
 Polymerized binder is virgin.
 (For non-polymer virgin
 binder allow 20% max RAP)
 
 5.0
 
 Polymer or non-polymer virgin.
 
 3.0
 
 Any mix type used as an
 intermediate course.
 
 2.7
 
 OMM will establish the asphalt
 binder content.
 
 2.0
 
 A lower RAP limit of 30
 percent will be required if
 poor production mixing or
 coating is evident.
 
 [1]No more than 5.0% RAS by dry weight of mix
 RAP Processing for Table 401.04-1 Method 1-Standard RAP. For surface courses process RAP to less than
 0.75 inch (19 mm) and place a 0.75 inch (19 mm) screen on the cold feed. For other courses place a 2-inch (50
 mm) screen on the cold feed. Ensure that the RAP is the proper size to allow for complete breakdown in the plant.
 If mixing is incomplete, place a smaller screen on the cold feed.
 B. Method 2 Extended RAP. Include RAP in a JMF submittal according to the Extended RAP/RAS Limits
 Table 401.04-2 unless specified differently in the applicable mix specification. Only use Method 2 with counter
 flow drum plants or mini-drum batch plant configurations meeting 402. For mixes that will contain up to 15 percent
 
 RAP and no RAS, the JMF submittal is not required to include the RAP unless a virgin polymer asphalt binder is
 used in a surface course. For JMFs having polymer asphalt binder do not submit at 1 through 9 percent RAP.
 TABLE 401.04-2 METHOD 2-EXTENDED RAP/RAS LIMITS
 Asphalt Mix
 Application
 442 Polymer
 Surface Course
 441 Surface
 Course
 441, 442
 Intermediate
 Course
 301 Base Course
 
 302 Base Course
 
 Percent RAP
 by
 RAS Usage [1]
 Dry Weight of
 Mix, Max.
 15%
 25%
 40%
 
 55%
 
 45%
 (35%)
 
 None
 Manufacturing
 waste only
 Manufacturing
 waste and tearoffs
 Manufacturing
 waste and tearoffs
 Manufacturing
 waste and tearoffs
 
 Total Virgin
 Asphalt
 Binder
 Content, Min.
 
 Comments
 
 5.0
 
 Polymerized binder is virgin. (For
 non-polymer virgin binder allow
 25% max RAP
 
 5.0
 
 Polymer or non-polymer virgin.
 
 3.0
 
 Any mix type used as an
 intermediate course.
 
 2.5
 
 OMM will establish the asphalt
 binder content.
 
 1.8
 
 A lower limit of 35 percent will be
 required if poor coating is evident.
 The virgin requirement of 302.02
 does not apply.
 
 [1]No more than 5.0% RAS by dry weight of mix
 RAP Processing for Table 401.04-2 Method 2-Extended RAP. Process RAP by means of fractionation or
 by additional in line processing. Include in the QCP additional methods and procedures to dictate how this is to be
 accomplished at plants. Specify documentation method for RAP measurement. Fractionation is the process of
 creating separate piles of RAP from one pile when split over a specific sieve or sieves. Test fractionated piles to
 show uniformity. For additional in line processing only process RAP from a uniform, tested and approved stockpile
 by passing the RAP over a double deck screen placed in-line between the RAP cold feed bin and the mixer. Use a
 9/16 inch (14.3 mm) screen for surface and intermediate mixes and a 1.5 inch (37.5 mm) screen for base mixes. Do
 not use concurrent project RAP in a stream process.
 C. RAS Processing and Usage. Include RAS in a JMF submittal according to the Standard RAP/RAS Limits
 Table 401.04-1 or Extended RAP/RAS Limits Table 401.04-2 unless specified differently in the applicable mix
 specification. When using RAS without RAP apply the virgin binder requirements of Table 401.04-2 Method 2.
 Ensure RAS is processed to have 100 percent passing the 1/2 inch (12.5 mm) sieve and at least 85 percent
 passing the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve. Ensure RAS has less than 1.0 percent deleterious materials and 0.1 percent
 metals by weight. Do not blend RAS from manufacturing waste and RAS from roofing tearoffs.
 Ensure the QCP includes RAS usage methods before using RAS. Include in the Contractor QCP what
 Contractor requirements apply to the RAS processor.
 Introduce and control RAS in asphalt plants in the same manner as RAP is introduced and controlled. RAS for
 base courses may be preblended with RAP if using rate control equipment to ensure uniformity of blending and if
 satisfactory blend and production is achieved. RAS may be preblended with a small amount of virgin aggregate
 meeting 703.05 to minimize stockpile agglomeration. Include in the Contractor QCP blending equipment type and
 operation and uniformity testing requirements for preblended RAP and RAS or RAS and virgin aggregate. Other
 methods must be approved by OMM.
 RAP and RAS QC and Management Requirements. Maintain as part of the QC records the signed certification
 forms as required in Supplement 1116.
 
 Always note on the daily quality control report how much RAP and RAS is actually being used. Apply a tolerance
 of ± 5.0 percent on the amount of RAP used if needed for a quality control adjustment but do not exceed the limits
 of Table 401.04-1 or Table 401.04-2, whichever applies. If this adjustment is not adequate for maintaining control
 of the mix submit a new JMF for approval. Do not apply this tolerance to RAS.
 Include in the QCP methods to be used to meet Method 1 and Method 2 requirements above and the following
 requirements:
 Provide enough space for meeting all RAP and RAS handling requirements at a hot mix facility. Provide a clean,
 graded base for stockpiles that does not collect water. Test blended RAP and RAS stockpiles to assure uniform
 gradation and asphalt binder content. Ensure uniform stockpile properties match the JMF submitted RAP and RAS
 properties unless the uniform stockpile will be processed into the asphalt plant using plant cold feed in line
 processing.
 If the uniform stockpile will be processed into the asphalt plant using plant cold feed in line processing determine
 the processed RAP properties for use in the mix design. Record in the JMF submittal both the uniform stockpile
 and in line processed RAP properties.
 If desired, when applying Method 1 Standard RAP requirements, use concurrent Department project RAP in a
 stream process in place of stockpiling and testing for uniformity but do so in the following manner. Concurrent
 project RAP must be taken from one existing mix type on the concurrent project or two existing mix types if both
 mix types are taken at the same time in one pass of the milling machine. Submit a new JMF for each existing mix
 type on the project (or each milling pass of two types) desired for use as concurrent project RAP. Include in the
 QCP methods of validating RAP properties when using concurrent project RAP. If these requirements are not met
 blend and test for uniformity and apply the stockpile requirements of this specification.
 Maintain in the plant lab and control room an up to date and dated site map of all tested and untested RAP and
 RAS stockpiles. Give each stockpile a unique identification and identify if RAS piles are from un-used
 manufactured shingle waste or used roofing tear-off shingles. Provide in the plant lab RAP and RAS properties for
 each uniform, blended stockpile cross referenced with its identification. In addition, provide the date the stockpile
 processing was completed and the stockpile estimated size in tons. Provide signage at all RAP and RAS piles. Do
 not add to a stockpile once it is tested for uniformity. Provide signage at all uniform stockpiles to inform haulers
 that uniform piles are not to be added to.
 Stockpiles and processing methods are subject to inspection and approval by the Laboratory at any time.
 Rejection of stockpiles can occur for the presence of foreign or deleterious materials, lack of uniformity, incomplete
 mixing in the asphalt mixture, adding to piles, or moving RAP or RAS in a way not traceable through the QCP
 records and methods. OMM will resolve disputes over acceptability of RAP or RAS.
 401.05
 Mixing Plants. The Department will approve mixing plants before preparation of the mixtures.
 Schedule a date with the Department for approval inspection to be at least 1 week before mix production. Do not
 produce mixtures for projects from un-approved plants. General requirements for asphalt concrete mixing plants
 are specified in Item 402. Set the asphalt binder controls for the computerized plant at the virgin asphalt binder
 content of the JMF at all times unless change is authorized by OMM.
 Asphalt mixtures may be produced using the warm mix asphalt method according to 402.04 except as restricted
 by specification.
 401.06
 Weather Limitations. Place asphalt concrete only if the surface is dry and if weather conditions are
 such that proper handling, finishing, and compaction can be accomplished. Never place asphalt concrete if the
 surface temperature is below the minimum established in Table 401.06-1.
 
 TABLE 401.06-1
 Course Thickness
 Minimum Surface Temperature
 3.0 inches (75 mm) and over
 36 F [1]
 (2 C [1])
 1.5 to 2.9 inches (38 to 74 mm)
 40 F
 (5 C)
 1.0 to 1.4 inches (25 to 37 mm)
 50 F
 (10 C)
 Less than 1.0 inch (25 mm)
 60 F
 (16 C)
 Variable Intermediate,
 40 F
 (5 C)
 0 to 3.0 inches (0 to 75 mm)
 [1]Instead of 36 F (2 C), use a minimum air temperature of 40 F (5 C) if paving on an
 aggregate base or subgrade.
 In addition to the above surface temperature requirements, do not place surface courses if the air temperature is
 less than 40 F (5 C).
 For any surface course with a polymer modified asphalt binder, ensure that the paving surface is at least 50 F
 (10 C) and the air temperature is at least 50 F (10 C).
 Do not schedule the placement of any surface course with a polymer modified asphalt binder after November 1,
 regardless of pavement or air temperature.
 401.07
 Notification. Notify the Engineer at least 24 hours before starting paving on a project. After starting,
 if paving operations are stopped for 1 week or more, notify the Engineer at least 24 hours before resuming paving
 on a project.
 401.08
 Asphalt Binder. Heat the asphalt binder and deliver it to the mixer within the temperature range
 specified in Table 702.00-1. Do not use asphalt binder while it is foaming in a storage tank. Take samples using
 correct new containers from the binder line between the last piping ‘tee’ and inlet into the plant unless a different
 storage method requires a different sampling location.
 401.09
 Aggregate Preparation. Feed aggregates in their proper proportions and at a rate to permit correct
 and uniform control of heating and drying. Remove all aggregates in the plant that will produce a mix outside the
 temperature limits or that contain excessive moisture or expanding gases causing foaming in the mixture, and return
 them to the proper stockpiles.
 401.10
 Mixing. Maintain the temperature of the mix at the plant within the range in JMF or according to the
 specification. Ensure the mixture is workable and temperature is sufficient for compaction at the point of placement.
 The Engineer will verify the required temperature of the mixture on arrival at the project site based on the
 temperature range in the JMF and heat losses in transit.
 For batch plants, after all of the aggregate is in the mixer, add the asphalt binder in an evenly spread sheet over
 the full length of the mixer. The mixing time is defined as the interval between the start of application of the asphalt
 binder and the opening of the mixer gate. Discharge all asphalt binder required for one batch in 30 seconds or less.
 After the asphalt binder is added, apply the mixing time determined by OMM but not less than 30 seconds.
 401.11
 Hauling. Use trucks for hauling asphalt concrete that have tight, clean, smooth metal beds from which
 the entire quantity of mixture is discharged smoothly into the spreading equipment.
 Before loading, apply a thin coating of an approved release agent to the inside surfaces of the truck bed to prevent
 adhesion of mixture to the bed surfaces. OMM maintains a list of approved release agents. Do not use fuel oil for
 this purpose. Drain truck beds after applying the release agent and before loading. Load trucks in manner to
 minimize segregation of the mixture according to the approved QCP.
 Do not clean out truck beds on the roadway ahead of the paver. Provide a location away from the roadway or off
 the project for cleaning trucks. If there is excessive sticking of material in truck beds, the sticking is in areas of the
 truck that would indicate excessive cooling of the mix (front corners, bottom, etc.) due to a long haul, and it is not
 resolved in a reasonable time, the Engineer will require an insulated bed. The Contractor may only make procedure
 changes for better mix handling at the discretion of OMM.
 
 Equip each truck with a securely fastened, waterproof cover of suitable material to protect the mixture from wind
 and weather. At the request of the Engineer, remove covers before dumping into the paver.
 If transporting hot asphalt concrete at prevailing air temperatures below 50 F (10 C) or if the length of haul
 exceeds 20 miles (32 km), insulate all truck beds to maintain workable mix temperature, and ensure that all covers
 are fastened to exclude the wind. Do not exceed a distance of 50 miles (80 km) from the asphalt concrete plant to
 the paving site except by specific permission of the Department. Completely discharge the mixture into the
 spreading equipment and within 90 minutes of loading.
 401.12
 Spreading Equipment. Use self-contained spreading equipment of sufficient size, power, and
 stability to receive, distribute, and strike-off the asphalt concrete at rates and widths meeting the typical sections
 and other details shown on the plans. Use spreading equipment that has automatic control systems that maintain
 the screed in a constant position relative to profile and cross-slope references. Ensure control of the screed position
 is reasonably independent of irregularities in the underlying surface and of the spreader operation. Equip asphalt
 spreading equipment to prevent the segregation of coarse aggregate from the remainder of the asphalt concrete
 when the material moves from the hopper to the screed. Use means and methods approved by the asphalt spreader
 manufacturer consisting of but not limited to any combination of chain curtains, deflector plates, or other such
 devices.
 The Engineer will base final approval of spreading equipment on the demonstrated capability of the equipment
 to place the mixture to the required cross-section, profile and alignment in an acceptable, finished condition ready
 for compaction.
 Where the use of standard full-scale spreading equipment is impractical due to the size or irregularity of the area
 to be paved, use specialized equipment or hand methods approved by the Engineer to spread the asphalt concrete.
 Anti-Segregation Equipment. When specified, provide a Material Transfer Vehicle (MTV) with paver hopper
 insert; a Material Transfer Device (MTD) with paver hopper insert; or a remixing paver specifically manufactured
 to eliminate segregation. Use paver hopper inserts with a minimum capacity of 10 tons (9 metric tons). Remixing
 may be done by the MTV or MTD, in the paver hopper insert, or by the remixing paver.
 Provide and operate equipment in a manner that does not result in physical segregation, and limits temperature
 differentials to less than 35 °F (20 °C) throughout the mixture.
 Use anti-segregation equipment when paving intermediate and surface courses on all mainline lanes of the
 traveled way including express lanes, collector-distributor lanes, continuous center turn lanes, acceleration/
 deceleration lanes, and ramp lanes.
 On the first day or night of paving any JMF, perform a test strip of a minimum of 1000 ft (300 m) in length.
 Notify the Engineer a minimum of 24 hours prior to performing the test strip. Demonstrate to the Engineer that the
 selected equipment is not physically segregating the mix and consistently limits the temperature differential of the
 mat surface, measured transversely, to 35 °F (20 °C) or less. Document results of each test strip on Department
 form CA-FP-5. Remove equipment or JMF that provides a mat with physical segregation, does not meet the
 temperature differential requirement, or both. Perform a new test strip any time placement equipment or JMF is
 replaced. If the Contractor is unable to produce a satisfactory test strip in two attempts per JMF, cease paving and
 provide a written plan to the DCA for approval prior to continuing the paving operation.
 Cease the paving operation in the events of; equipment breakdown, inability to consistently provide a mat free
 of physical segregation, inability to consistently meet the temperature differential requirements, or any
 combination. Do not resume paving until equipment is replaced with suitable equipment. The Engineer may allow
 paving to continue if an isolated area of mat temperature differential is in excess of 35 °F (20 °C). The Engineer
 may require additional evaluation of the area to determine the acceptability of the material.
 401.13
 Rollers. Use only steel wheel and pneumatic tire types of rollers meeting the minimum requirements
 of the following tables. Conform to manufacturer’s specifications for all ballasting.
 
 TABLE 401.13-1 ROLLER CAPACITY
 Roller Type
 Tandem
 Three-Wheel
 Trench
 Pneumatic Tire, Type I
 Pneumatic Tire, Type II
 Vibratory, Vibrating Roll
 Vibratory, Static Roll (not vibrating)
 
 Maximum Capacity
 square yards per hour (m²/hr)
 700 (600)
 700 (600)
 15 per inch width (13 per 25 mm width)
 1000 (850)
 700 (600)
 15 per inch width (13 per 25 mm width)
 3 per inch width (3 per 25 mm width)
 
 TABLE 401.13-2 STEEL WHEEL ROLLERS
 Roller Type
 Total weight, tons
 (metric tons)
 Compression rolls,
 pounds per inch width
 (kN/m), minimum
 
 Three-Wheel
 10
 (9)
 300
 (53)
 
 Tandem
 8 to 12
 (7 to 11)
 200
 (35)
 
 Vibratory Static Trench
 8 to 12
 (7 to 11)
 120
 300
 (21)
 (53)
 
 TABLE 401.13-3 PNEUMATIC TIRE ROLLERS
 Type I
 Tire size, minimum
 Wheel load, minimum
 Average tire contact pressure, minimum
 Type II
 Tire size, minimum
 Wheel load, minimum
 Average tire contact pressure, minimum
 
 9.00  20 in (229  508 mm)
 5000 lb. (2250 kg)
 85 psi (590 kPa)
 7.50  15 in (191  381 mm)
 2000 lb. (900 kg)
 55 psi (380 kPa)
 
 For pneumatic tire rollers, use self-propelled, reversible units with vertical oscillation on all wheels on at least
 one axle. Determine the tire inflation pressure necessary to meet the specified minimum contact area and contact
 pressure requirements. Furnish the tire manufacturer’s charts or tabulations to the Engineer for verification of the
 required inflation pressure. Check tire inflation pressure as the Engineer directs and maintain it within 5 pounds
 per square inch (35 kPa) of the required pressure.
 Provide rolls and wheels with the necessary accessories to prevent adhesion of the mixture, and keep them
 properly moistened with water, water containing a detergent, or water containing an approved additive. Do not use
 excess liquid.
 401.14
 Conditioning Existing Surface. Clean the surface on which the asphalt concrete is to be placed, and
 keep it free of accumulations of materials that would, in the judgment of the Engineer, contaminate the mixture,
 prevent bonding, or interfere with spreading operations. Where approved subgrade or pavement courses previously
 constructed under the Contract become loosened, rutted, or otherwise defective, correct the deficiency according
 to the contract item or items involved before the spreading of a subsequent pavement course.
 If a quantity of asphalt concrete is specified for use in spot leveling or patching, spread and compact the material
 needed to effect the corrections as directed by the Engineer.
 If placing asphalt concrete against a vertical pavement face, curb, gutter, manhole, or other structure, clean the
 surface of foreign material and apply a thick, uniform coating of 702.01 PG binder, Supplemental Specification
 875.02 Hot Applied Asphaltic Joint Adhesive, or 702.13 SBR Asphalt Emulsion to provide 100 percent coverage.
 401.15
 
 Spreading, Finishing and Night Work
 
 Spreading and Finishing. Do not co-mingle multiple JMFs in the same asphalt paver. Spread the mixture at a
 rate calculated using the specified thickness and the compacted width of the pavement course being placed, and the
 weight-to-volume conversion factors established in 401.21. Maintain the actual rate of spreading the mixture equal
 to the required calculated rate within the tolerance specified in 401.19. For pavement courses specified for leveling,
 the actual rate of spreading the mixture may vary from the required calculated rate as approved by the Engineer to
 accomplish the intended purpose.
 For intermediate courses, make the maximum compacted depth of any one layer 3 inches (75 mm).
 Spread and finish the mixture using approved equipment or methods such that compaction can follow
 immediately. Preheat screeds and extensions before placing any asphalt concrete. Use side plates sufficient to
 contain the mixture laterally during spreading. Use only screed extensions, rigid or extendable, having the same
 features as the main screed including, but not limited to, vibration, heating, pre-strikeoffs, and tamping bars. When
 using front-mounted hydraulically extendable screeds at a fixed paving width use full width auger extensions and
 full tunnel extensions. When using fixed screed extensions use full width auger extensions and full tunnel
 extensions. Do not allow a buildup of excess material in front of the screed. Where excessive buildup of material
 is not controlled, the Engineer will require paver changes to correct the problem.
 Ensure the paver operation, screed, screed extension, and, or, mix design provide a mat, prior to compaction, that
 is free of texture inconsistencies, shadowing, streaking, tearing, pulling, or other deficiencies. Take immediate
 action to correct the paver operation, screed, screed extensions, or, mix design. The Engineer may stop placement
 until corrections are completed.
 Use strike-off plates/strike-off extensions only on irregular areas such as mailbox turnouts, driveway turnouts,
 and other irregular non-travelled roadway areas. The Engineer may approve the use of strike-off plates/extensions
 on variable width shoulders if the use of a standard extendable screed extension with the same features as the main
 screed is not practicable. Perform supplemental hand forming and tamping where irregularities develop and where
 placing the mixture by hand methods.
 Take prompt corrective action if placed mixture exhibits any defect (ex. segregation, tenderness, lack of mixture
 and texture uniformity, raveling, flushing, rutting, holes, debris etc.) within the Contractor’s control and as
 determined by the Engineer. Remove and replace, or otherwise correct in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer,
 any portion of the pavement course found to be defective in surface texture or composition before or after
 compaction. Coordinate the spreading operation with the rate of production and delivery of the mixture to attain
 uniform, continuous progress. Avoid erratic spreader operation due to irregular contact with the hauling vehicle,
 surging in the feed and distribution of the mixture, or other cause. Maintain sufficient control of the spreading
 equipment with regard to line and grade references so that the pavement course, when compacted as specified, is
 in reasonable conformance with the Contract Documents.
 Do not displace or damage bridge deck waterproofing membranes during spreading operations on the
 membranes.
 Do not allow traffic on the compacted mixture until it has cooled sufficiently to prevent glazing as determined
 by the Engineer.
 After completion of the surface course, seal gutters with asphalt binder as directed by the Engineer. Apply the
 material at a uniform width of approximately 4 inches (100 mm) and at a rate just sufficient to fill surface voids.
 Night Work. Do not start night work or carry on day work into night work without operating an adequate and
 approved lighting system. Night work is defined as work performed from 30 minutes after sunset to 30 minutes
 before sunrise.
 Operation of adequate lighting system consists of furnishing, installing, operating, maintaining, moving, and
 removing night time lighting to illuminate construction work areas for night work. Obtain the Engineer’s approval
 of the lighting at the beginning of the project and before starting the paving operation by measuring the luminance.
 Provide an illuminated zone around all operating machinery. Provide an illuminated zone of at least 5 Footcandles (55 lux) of lighting luminance in the immediate vicinity of pavers, rollers, grinding equipment, material
 transfer vehicles, etc., and at least 1 Foot-candle (10 lux) at 25 feet (7.6 m) from this equipment. Provide an
 
 illuminated zone of at least 5 Foot-candles (55 lux) of lighting luminance in the immediate vicinity of coring
 equipment and at least 1 Foot-candle (10 lux) at 10 feet (3 m). Position the light sources so they don’t interfere
 with or impede traffic in any direction and do not cause glare for motorists or point onto adjacent properties. Provide
 a photometer capable of measuring the level of luminance on each night project. Take luminance measurements at
 a height of 20 inches (500 millimeters) above the roadway.
 Obtain the luminance level any time requested by the Engineer. Test the illumination levels on the site each time
 a change in lighting configuration is made. Replace non-functioning lamps immediately. Check the luminaires
 aiming daily. Clean the luminaires regularly. Correct any deficient lighting within one hour or the Engineer will
 terminate construction activities.
 When the total project includes more than one continuous lane mile (including bridges) of surface course paving
 in combination with night paving, and no pay item for anti-segregation equipment, provide anti-segregation
 equipment according to 401.12, for only the surface course. No additional payment will be made for this antisegregation equipment.
 401.16
 Compaction. Immediately after spreading the asphalt concrete and adjusting any surface
 irregularities, compact the mixture uniformly using rollers conforming to 401.13. Do not use a spreading rate that
 exceeds the total of the specified capacities of the rollers in use. However, if compacting a mixture spread as an
 intermediate or pre-leveling course less than 1-inch (25 mm) thick do not use a spreading rate that exceeds twice
 the total capacity of the rollers in use.
 Coordinate the spreading of the mixture with the required roller coverage, considering the rate of cooling of the
 mixture as affected by lift thickness and environmental conditions. Complete the required roller coverage during
 the period of time in which the temperature of the mixture is sufficient for the roller coverage to be effective in
 compacting the mixture.
 Compact base mixtures using a combination of both steel wheel and Type I pneumatic tire rollers; however, in
 small areas, compact these mixtures as the Engineer approves using any of the rollers specified in 401.13.
 Compact intermediate and surface mixtures using a three-wheel roller in the breakdown position (roller
 immediately behind the paver) of the roller train; however, in small areas, compact these mixtures as the Engineer
 approves using any of the roller types specified in 401.13.
 Compact variable depth courses using a combination of both steel wheel and pneumatic tire rollers; however, in
 small areas, compact these mixtures as the Engineer approves using any of the roller types specified in 401.13.
 For surface courses using a polymer modified asphalt binder give a copy of the JMF approval letter containing
 the design compaction temperature to the Engineer before any mix is placed. Unless otherwise specified ensure
 that the mix temperature immediately before rolling is not less than 290 °F (145 °C) if placing hot mix asphalt, and
 not less than 250 °F (121 °C) if placing warm mix asphalt according to 402.04. Do not compact polymer asphalt
 concrete surface courses with pneumatic tire rollers.
 When using pneumatic tire rollers, ensure for any mix that surface deviations and deformations caused by the
 tires are removed with steel wheel rollers. Do not use pneumatic tire rollers if any resultant surface deformations
 cannot be removed.
 Do not use vibratory rollers on courses with a thickness under 1-1/2 inches (38 mm).
 If using vibratory rollers, supplement them with three-wheel or pneumatic tire rollers.
 Unless otherwise directed, begin rolling at the sides and proceed longitudinally parallel to the centerline at a
 slow, uniform speed. After each coverage or complete round trip, move the roller towards the crown of the road to
 begin its next pass, overlapping the previous pass by at least one-half the width of the previous pass. On
 superelevated curves, begin rolling at the low side and progress toward the high side. Where a longitudinal joint is
 being made, roll the joint then follow the applicable rolling procedure.
 Continue rolling until full coverage of the course is complete and all roller marks are eliminated. Take care to
 prevent displacement of the edge line and grade. Where displacement occurs, correct the area immediately in a
 manner satisfactory to the Engineer.
 
 Along curbs, headers, walls, and in other areas not accessible to rollers, thoroughly compact the mixture with
 hot, hand tampers or with mechanical tampers. On depressed areas, the Contractor may use trench rollers or rollers
 fitted with compression strips.
 Replace mixture that becomes loose, broken, contaminated, or otherwise defective with fresh, hot mixture.
 Compact it to match with the surrounding area.
 401.17
 Joints. Place the asphalt concrete mixture as continuous as possible. Set up joints at the proper height
 above the adjacent construction to receive maximum compaction. Where the edge of the new pavement is
 significantly rounded, trim it to a vertical face before placing the adjacent pavement. On projects where traffic is
 allowed to cross the edge of the new pavement lane, complete the longitudinal joint of the adjacent lane or shoulder
 within 24 hours.
 Construct longitudinal joints using string line or other controls as a point of reference to provide a straight
 longitudinal joint. Prior to placing adjacent pavement, trim any locations along the longitudinal joint that deviate
 horizontally from the point of reference. Maintain a consistent overlap of 1 to 1 1/2 inches (25 to 38 mm) on
 adjacent pavement when closing longitudinal joints. Where phasing for maintenance of traffic will not allow
 lapping cold longitudinal joints according to Standard Drawing BP-3.1, provide a minimum of 6 inches (150 mm)
 offset between cold joints for each course placed.
 Form hot longitudinal joints using pavers operating in contiguous lanes, one just ahead of the other. Maintain the
 distance between pavers in adjacent lanes such that it does not exceed the distance that a normal size load of mixture
 will cover. Alternate loads of mixture between the pavers. Do not allow rollers performing the initial rolling
 operation in one lane closer than 12 inches (0.3 m) to the longitudinal joint until the adjacent lane is placed.
 Instead of hot joint construction using multiple pavers, the Contractor may use full width construction with a
 single unit paver.
 Compact all cold longitudinal joints on intermediate and surface courses using a three-wheel roller.
 For surface courses, form or cut all transverse construction joints to a vertical.
 Seal all cold longitudinal construction joints by coating the entire face of the cold joint with a certified 702.01
 PG binder or Supplemental Specification 875.02 Hot Applied Asphaltic Joint Adhesive to provide 100 percent
 coverage of the joint. Overlap the joint edges by at least 1/2 inch (13 mm). Seal all cold transverse construction
 joints with a certified 702.01 PG binder, Supplemental Specification 875.02 Hot Applied Asphaltic Joint Adhesive
 or 702.13 SBR Asphalt Emulsion to provide 100 percent coverage of the joint or with a certified 702.04 asphalt
 material applied at a rate of 0.25 gallon per square yard (1 L/m²).
 401.18
 Asphalt Binder Compatibility. If excess fat spots, regular random areas of flushing, or excess drain
 down occur on a project that are not attributable to over rolling, plant operation, or mix quality compared to the
 JMF, the Department will consider the asphalt binder incompatible. The Department will reject any on-hand asphalt
 binder because of incompatibility. The Department may use its discretion in determining if problem areas can be
 corrected, or if removal and replacement is required. Demonstrate to OMM through reporting actual testing analysis
 the compatibility of another asphalt binder and that proper equipment is in place in order to be allowed to resume.
 401.19
 Spreading and Surface Tolerances. If a uniform course is specified, make checks and adjustments
 to maintain the rate of spreading within a tolerance of ±5 percent of the required calculated weight per unit of area.
 If a variable depth course is specified, place the mixture as shown on the plans.
 If a longitudinal profile is specified by elevations on the plans, do not allow the completed pavement surface to
 deviate more than 1/2 inch (13 mm) at any point from parallel with the specified profile. Before placing the surface
 course, check the profile of the preceding course at 50-foot (15 m) intervals along the outside edge of each traffic
 lane and along any additional line described in superelevation tables, and submit a tabulation of all results that
 includes documentation of all deviations from the above tolerance to the Engineer. Perform corrective work
 necessary for compliance with the profile tolerance before placing the surface course. The requirements of this
 paragraph do not apply to small incidental areas of pavement less than 500 feet (150 m) in length.
 
 Do not vary the transverse slope of the surface of the completed course from the specified slope by more than
 3/8 inch in 10 feet (10 mm in 3 m).
 Do not vary the surface of each completed intermediate or surface course from the testing edge of a 10-foot (3
 m) rolling straightedge by more than 1/4 inch (6 mm). Furnish straightedges, straightedges equipped with levels,
 or other devices such as approved profilers conforming to Supplement 1058 and using ProVAL software.
 Equipment will be satisfactory to the Engineer.
 Check the surface course for variations in slope or surface at locations where bumps are suspected when directed
 by the Engineer.
 Correct variations in excess of slope or surface tolerance by removing mixture to neat lines and replacing, or by
 surface grinding in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer.
 401.20
 Asphalt Binder Price Adjustment. A contract item is eligible for a price adjustment when the
 contract’s proposal specifically includes an Asphalt Binder Price Adjustment note and the contract item meets the
 quantity limitations of the proposal note.
 401.21
 Method of Measurement. The Contractor is responsible for recording the net weight of each
 truckload of mixture to the nearest 100 pounds (50 kg) in triplicate on plant ticket forms approved by the
 Department. If the pay quantities are established by platform scales, provide a tare weight for each truck at the
 beginning of each day’s operation and a minimum of every 4 hours of operation each day. The Engineer may
 require additional tare weight measurements at any time. The Engineer will have the right to monitor all weighing
 operations and may require reweighing trucks at any time or location. Correct any discrepancies immediately.
 Continued non-compliance will result in the Department taking necessary and appropriate action, such as, but not
 limited to, assigning a Department ticket writer to the plant. Send one copy of the plant ticket with each load
 delivered to the paver and present it to the Engineer.
 The Engineer will convert the total of the weights recorded on the plant tickets representing mixture finished
 according to contract requirements to cubic yards (cubic meters) using a conversion factor established by OMM.
 OMM will establish this conversion factor from the approved JMF. However, if a mix design is not available,
 OMM will use the conversion factors in Table 401.21. If a uniform course is specified, the Department will not
 pay for a number of cubic yards (cubic meters) that exceeds the quantity calculated from plan lines and dimensions.
 TABLE 401.21
 Aggregate
 Gravel and stone
 Slag less than 90 lb/yd³ (less than 1450 kg/m³) [1]
 Slag 90 to 100 lb/yd³ (1450 to 1600 kg/m³) [1]
 Slag more than 100 lb/yd³ (more than 1600 kg/m³) [1]
 [1]Based on average dry rodded weight at the Laboratory.
 
 lb/yd³
 4000
 3600
 4000
 4300
 
 (kg/m³)
 (2370)
 (2135)
 (2370)
 (2550)
 
 401.22
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for all work performed and measured as specified above
 according to the appropriate contract items for each type.
 The cost of sealing the joints is included in the unit price bid for the asphalt concrete.
 The Department will assess all costs against the Contractor that it incurs as a result of taking necessary and
 appropriate action due to the Contractor’s continued non-compliance.
 The Department will not pay for removing and replacing incompatible asphalt binder areas.
 
 ITEM 402 ASPHALT CONCRETE MIXING PLANTS
 402.01
 402.02
 402.03
 402.04
 
 Description
 Calibration
 Polymer Binders
 Water Injection System for Warm Mix Asphalt
 
 402.01
 Description. This specification consists of the minimum requirements for an asphalt concrete mixing
 plant to produce asphalt concrete mixes according to Department specifications.
 Ensure asphalt concrete mixing plants conform to the requirements of Supplement 1101 in addition to the
 following.
 402.02
 Calibration. Ensure the plant is calibrated according to Supplement 1101 when producing any
 asphalt concrete for the Department. Ensure that the calibration is accurate within 1.0 percent. When performing a
 complete calibration for ODOT projects notify District Testing 24 hours in advance of the calibration.
 402.03
 Polymer Binders. If an asphalt binder is modified by SBR at an asphalt concrete mixing plant, equip
 the plant with an automated SBR flow control and monitoring system. Obtain OMM’s approval of the system
 before operating and demonstrate the system calibration to District Testing. If District Testing waives the
 demonstration, provide a letter documenting calibration data for the flow system to District Testing for each project.
 Obtain written approval from OMM for the use of SBR and ensure the QCP contains methods for properly
 controlling and sampling SBR binder blends.
 For drum mix plants, introduce the SBR directly into the asphalt binder line through means of an in-line
 motionless blender or other device approved by OMM which is able to provide a homogeneous blend. Ensure the
 in-line motionless blender design provides aggressive interaction of asphalt binder and SBR emulsion to provide a
 homogenous blend at the sampling port. Some blenders such as ‘swirl’ type blenders do not accomplish proper
 blending. The Astec in line SBR blender or similar design accomplishes proper blending. Locate a sampling valve
 between the in-line blender and the plant drum, at least 12 ft (3 m) downstream of the in-line blender and at least 5
 ft (1 m) downstream of a piping elbow. Ensure the sampling valve port is at least 1 in (25.4 mm) in diameter.
 Ensure the sampling valve can be opened quickly for maximizing sample flow for the purpose of obtaining a proper
 sample. In place of an in-line sampling valve, a sample may be taken from a 3 to 5 gal (11 to 19 L) surge tank as
 long as the tank is downstream of the required blender and the in-line flow can be quickly and directly diverted to
 the surge tank. Contents of the tank should be drained into a 5 gal (19 L) sampling bucket and stirred before filling
 the required sample container. Provide a sampling valve port that is in a position to safely obtain the required
 sample volume in the required 5 gal (19 L) sampling bucket. Provide a stable sampling rack to obtain a sample.
 For batch plants, add the SBR after the aggregate has been completely coated with asphalt binder. Continue
 mixing for a minimum of 20 seconds after SBR is added and long enough to provide a uniform mixture.
 Ensure the SBR pumping and metering system is capable of adding the SBR within the limits of 702.01. For
 drum plants ensure the SBR pump is automatically controlled by an independent computer and interfaced with the
 asphalt binder flow to automatically maintain the SBR flow within specification limits. Produce asphalt mixtures
 for placement in automatic SBR control mode only.
 Ensure the SBR meter is accurate to ± 2.0 percent over a flow range typical of that used at the asphalt plant
 (typically 0.8 to 12 gpm (0.05 to 0.76 L/s) at drum plants and 10 to 25 gpm (0.63 to 1.58 L/s) at batch plants).
 Ensure the SBR meter is a magnetic flow meter consisting of a metering flow tube which utilizes Faraday’s Law
 of Induction to measure the flow and includes a transmitter to transmit the flow signal to a totalizer located in the
 control room of the asphalt plant. Locate the SBR meter downstream of any recirculation lines. Provide a means
 for removing the SBR line at the in-line blender to be able to obtain a sample of the SBR for calibration purposes.
 Obtain OMM approval for use of any other type of SBR meter. Ensure the totalizer displays total volume
 measured and flow rate in standard engineering units. Ensure the totalizer is interfaced with a data logger that
 produces printouts of the logged data every five minutes for a drum plant or every batch for a batch plant. Ensure
 the logged data includes time, date, flow rate, and flow total except flow rate is not necessary for batch plant
 production.
 
 Balling or wadding of SBR or uncoated aggregate indicates improper mixing; cease production immediately and
 until corrected to District Testing satisfaction.
 402.04
 
 Water Injection System for Warm Mix Asphalt.
 
 When allowed by specification use a water injection system approved by OMM for the purpose of foaming the
 asphalt binder and lowering the mixture temperature. Only use equipment that has been proven stable and effective
 through project use on non-ODOT projects. Ensure equipment for water injection meets the following
 requirements:
 A. Injection equipment computer controls are in the plant control room and are tied to the plant computer
 metering.
 B. Injection equipment has variable water injection control controlled by the plant operation rate and the water
 injection can never exceed 2.2 percent by weight of asphalt binder.
 C. Water injection rate cannot be manually overridden by the plant operator once in the computer.
 D. Injection equipment stops water flow when a control or equipment failure in the injection system occurs.
 E. The water injects into the asphalt binder flow before the asphalt binder spray hits aggregate. Do not allow
 water to touch aggregate before the binder spray.
 F.
 
 Injection equipment includes water storage and pump control tied to the injection computer controls.
 
 G. Water storage low water alarm installed in the control room.
 H. Provide a PG binder sampling valve between the last piping tee on the tank side of the line and the injection
 equipment to sample PG binder before water is injected.
 
 ITEM 403 ASPHALT CONCRETE QUALITY CONTROL AND ACCEPTANCE
 403.01
 403.02
 403.03
 403.04
 403.05
 403.06
 403.07
 403.08
 
 Description
 General
 Quality Control Program (QCP)
 Plant Calibration
 Quality Control Tests
 Verification Acceptance (VA)
 Unconditional Acceptance
 Acceptance Tables for 448 Mixes
 
 403.01
 Description. This specification outlines the Contractor requirements for controlling asphalt concrete,
 asphalt concrete base, or other asphalt mixtures as specified.
 403.02
 General. The Department will verify quality control by Department Verification Acceptance (VA)
 tests and monitoring reviews as specified. If the Contractor fails to operate according to its Quality Control Program
 (QCP), the Department will accept asphalt mixtures by Unconditional Acceptance.
 Restoration of VA procedures will be by the Department’s Quality Control Qualification Committee (QCQC)
 based on District recommendation and review of the Contractor problems, resolutions and QCP.
 Acceptance does not relieve the Contractor of responsibility for supplying and installing a finished product
 conforming to all requirements of the Contract.
 403.03
 Quality Control Program (QCP). Create and implement a Quality Control Program (QCP) for each
 paving season. The QCP will cover processes conducted to provide an asphalt mixture at the paving site that is
 uniform in composition, conforms to the specification requirements and that when placed is free of any defect (ex.
 segregation, lack of mixture and texture uniformity, raveling, rutting, holes, debris etc.) within the Contractor’s
 control at project completion. A minimum of 3 weeks before mix production, but no later than February 28, submit
 a hard copy of the proposed QCP to OMM for review and acceptance.
 Send a hard copy and a digital copy (if available) of the acceptance letter and accepted QCP to District Testing
 in every District in which work is performed. Keep copies of the letter and the QCP in each Contractor plant
 laboratory and plant operation control room. Digital copies of the QCP and letter in pdf format are allowed in each
 Contractor plant laboratory and plant operation control room with the following requirements: The file icon must
 be appropriately labeled and be on the computer desktop of a computer in each area, the QCP must contain page
 numbering and a Table Of Contents inside the front cover locating all sections by page number , and out of date
 QCPs must be removed from the computer desktop.
 Failure to comply with the approved QCP may result in removal of personnel in accordance with Supplement
 1041, removal from VA, and adversely affect the Contractor’s Prequalification rating.
 The QCP is a reflection of a Contractor’s sincerity and ability in producing a quality product. Development of
 this program beyond the minimum requirements specified below is encouraged and is taken into consideration by
 the QCQC when reviewing Contractor plant operation for qualification for VA.
 Include in the program:
 A. The assignment of quality control responsibilities. Quality control includes all efforts required to achieve a
 product meeting specifications. List individuals as required below and note their designated responsibilities to meet
 QCP requirements. Provide a Quality Control Manager holding a Supplement 1041 Level 3 approval and who is a
 company employee. Assign Level 2 technicians for all Level 2 QC testing duties, and provide a list designating
 their responsibilities and expected actions. Ensure only approved personnel handle and test samples at all times. If
 Level 2 consultant technicians are used provide a document in the QCP and to them listing designated
 responsibilities and expected actions (if different from employee expectations). Define who is responsible at plants
 and specific methods for ensuring haul vehicles meet all requirements and proper bed release products are used.
 Provide a Field Quality Control Supervisor (FQCS), holding Supplement 1041 Field Quality Control Supervisor
 approval and who is a company employee, who is routinely and usually at the paving site during placement of any
 
 non-temporary asphalt concrete pavement. Ensure personnel obtaining and handling cores at the project site are
 approved Level 2 technicians, FQCS or personnel approved by OMM.
 B. Means for annual training of company and consultant technicians and their supervisors in ethical conduct
 according to company expectations. Document how and when training is given, what the expectations are, how
 expectations are communicated and list all personnel trained. Describe the QC Manager’s and technician
 supervisor’s responsibilities and methods in ensuring ethical conduct is maintained throughout the year.
 C. Provisions to meet the Department mix specifications.
 D. Procedures for extra testing (e.g., job start, responses to poor test results or field mix problems, aggregate stock
 testing, reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement checks, moistures) and any other testing necessary to control materials
 not already defined in these Specifications.
 E. Specify warning bands to be used by technicians for all tests and give specific instruction how the warning
 bands will be used for tests in concert with Table 441.10-1 specification requirements.
 F. Methods to maintain all worksheets, including all handwritten records, and other test and sample records from
 the plant or project for the duration of the contract or 5 years, whichever is longer. Define the test record process.
 Define company records retention requirements. Provide copies of all test reports and forms used in the quality
 control process.
 G. Procedures for equipment calibration and documentation for Level 2 lab equipment. Provide documentation
 that all Level 2 lab equipment has been calibrated at the time of the Level 2 lab approval inspection. Procedures
 for calibration record storage.
 H. Method of Quick Calibration and documentation for each plant type.
 I. Procedure for random sampling to be used at the plant and documentation method. Procedures for sample
 taking, tracking, handling and documentation method for all samples taken at the project paving site including
 taking of all cores used for density determination or density gauge correlation.
 J. All procedures to meet the processing, testing and documentation requirements for RAP and RAS in 401.04
 including test forms, record keeping, technician responsibilities, etc.
 K. Procedure for ensuring that every Contractor employee involved in the testing of asphalt mix and operation of
 the asphalt plant facility has read the QCP and has on site access to all applicable Department specifications,
 proposals, policies, and the current approved JMF.
 L. Procedure for ensuring asphalt binder Bills of Lading with BOL load number, binder source and grade are
 reviewed against running JMFs and record of review listing the above information be kept in the plant lab for the
 duration of the project. Means to meet the handling and storage requirements of 402.03 and asphalt binder suppliers
 for all asphalt binders.
 M. Means to meet delivered mixture uniformity/coating and hauling/trucking requirements.
 N. Define the roles and responsibilities of the Field Quality Control Supervisors. List approved Field Quality
 Control Supervisors.
 O. Signature of the Quality Assurance Manager and, if different, the person in authority to enforce all operations
 covered by the QCP as outlined in this subsection.
 403.04
 
 Plant Calibration. Conform to the requirements of Item 402.
 
 Before manufacturing asphalt concrete, demonstrate to the Monitoring Team that the Contractor’s facility
 adequately meets the specification requirements. Calibrate the plant using procedures approved by the Department.
 Perform initial calibrations in the presence of the Monitoring Team. District Testing may request a letter of
 certification and certified data documenting the calibration results, instead of having the Monitoring Team present.
 Verify the calibrations biweekly using a Quick Calibration. However, District Testing may request additional
 Quick Calibrations if there are mix production problems or plant operation concerns. The Quick Calibration is a
 quality control procedure developed by the Contractor that verifies the accuracy of a facility to proportion materials
 to meet the current JMF. Include the Quick Calibration procedure and data forms in the QCP in accordance with
 
 403.03.H. If the difference between current calibration and the Quick Calibration is within 2 percent, then the
 current calibration is acceptable. If the 2 percent variation is exceeded, perform a recalibration of the facility.
 Document the Quick Calibration procedure as specified in the QCP and post the procedure and results in plain view
 in the plant control room and plant laboratory for reference by the Monitoring Team. Document all data from
 calibrations in a format approved by OMM, and retain the data for review by the Monitoring Team.
 If asphalt concrete is being produced from a batch type facility, verify the accuracy of the aggregate and asphalt
 binder weighing devices on a biweekly basis. Include the verification procedure in the QCP. Document the
 verification procedure as specified in the QCP and post the procedure and results in plain view in the plant control
 room and plant laboratory for reference by the Monitoring Team. Do not allow the deviation between the plant
 recorded weights and actual weights to exceed 1 percent. Record all data from verification of weighing devices in
 a format approved by OMM, and retain the data for review by the Monitoring Team.
 403.05
 Quality Control Tests. Perform quality control tests to control the asphalt concrete mix within the
 appropriate specifications.
 For items that use 446 and 448 acceptance, perform all mix testing and quality control according to 441.09. The
 Contractor may test a 448 Sublot sample instead of the required quality control test provided the sample is tested
 in the half day in which the Sublot sample mix was produced and is tested for all required quality control properties.
 For mixes that do not use 446 and 448 acceptance (Basic mixes, e.g. Items 301, 302, and Supplemental
 Specification 803), test the mix according to 441.09 for asphalt binder content and gradation. Other requirements
 of 441.09 and 441.10 do not apply. Control the Basic mixes as follows:
 A. If a single asphalt binder content is more than 0.5 percent beyond the JMF, immediately take and test an
 additional sample.
 B. If two consecutive asphalt binder content tests are more than  0.5 percent beyond the JMF, notify the
 Monitoring Team and cease production until the problem is corrected.
 C. If the Range difference in any three consecutive asphalt binder content tests is greater than 0.7 percent (for 302
 mix) or 0.6 percent (Basic mix, other than 302) immediately notify the Monitoring Team.
 D. If the Range difference in any three consecutive gradation tests for the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve is greater than
 10.0 percent, immediately notify the Monitoring Team.
 E. If Range deviations as specified in 403.05.C or 403.05.D continue, cease production.
 Range is defined as the difference between the largest and the smallest test result.
 403.06
 Verification Acceptance (VA). District Testing will perform VA testing. If the random Department
 VA sampling and testing verifies the accompanying Contractor tests, the average of the Contractor’s quality control
 tests for each day or night (for Basic mix), the average of the Contractor’s tests for each Lot (for 448 acceptance
 mix) or daily average MSG (446 acceptance mix) will be used to determine acceptance.
 A. Sampling. District Testing will perform the VA by testing independent and split samples.
 For plant sampling for Basic mixes or 441 quality control testing, the Contractor’s technician will randomly
 select the truck in which to take a sample by using a random number procedure as outlined in the QCP. The
 Contractor’s technician will give no indication to anyone of the time that the sample is to be taken. For other than
 job start, previous mix production problems, low production tonnage, or as requested by the Monitoring Team,
 exclude the first three trucks from sampling. Include the random number, sample tonnage location, and time of
 sampling on the daily Quality Control Report (Contractor form TE-199) with each test. Tests, other than the
 required random sample tests, are at the Contractor’s discretion according to the QCP.
 Provide a clean area of sufficient size and a hard surface to perform sample splitting. Split samples by
 quartering and recombining only as described in AASHTO T 248, Method B for hard surfaces for the Department
 and Contractor’s sample. The split sample size required is generally 22 to 27 pounds (10,000 to 12,000 g). A
 mechanical quartering device approved by OMM may be used in lieu of the above but only split according to the
 procedure outlined in the Contractor QCP. Ensure that every quality control or 448 Sublot sample taken by the
 
 technician has a labeled split for the Department. Wrap and label split samples as to Lot or Sublot, time, location
 (tonnage), and accompanying Contractor test identification. The Monitoring Team will pick up all Department split
 samples within 4 workdays. Sample mishandling (careless identification, changing sample size, consistency, or
 pre-testing) will result in a change to Unconditional Acceptance.
 For 448 acceptance mixes, conform to the procedures of Supplements 1035, 1038, 1039, and 1043 except take
 samples from a truck at the plant. If workmanship problems continue on the project (segregation, etc.) or if quality
 control problems persist, District Testing may require sampling on the road according to Supplement 1035. Lots
 will be 3000 tons (3000 metric tons), and Sublots will be 750 tons (750 metric tons). However, when production is
 limited to less than 3000 tons (3000 metric tons), consider the quantity produced as a partial Lot. For partial Lots
 of 1500 tons (1500 metric tons) or less sample and test at least two sublot samples regardless of the tons produced.
 Split and test all sublot samples taken by the Contractor from locations selected by the Monitoring Team or
 Engineer. The Contractor may test a QC sample at the required Sublot sample location as both a QC and Sublot
 test provided the sample is tested for all required quality control properties. Test results will apply for both QC and
 sublot requirements. A change in the location of the Sublot sample must be approved by the Monitoring Team and
 be reasonably close to the original location. This allowance does not apply to any other samples including
 Department VA sample locations selected by the Monitor. Label Department split samples as Sublot or quality
 control samples.
 For 446 acceptance mixes MSG VA testing will be performed by District Testing on a minimum of one in
 every four required District sampled Daily samples. Other properties can be tested for by the District as desired.
 B. Reporting. Report all testing performed and sample identification on a Quality Control Report (Contractor
 form TE-199). Record on the TE-199 if the mixture produced was ran at the asphalt plant as a hot mix asphalt
 (HMA) or as a warm mix asphalt (WMA) produced according to 402.04 or another approved method. Deliver (fax,
 e-mail, hand) completed Quality Control Reports to District Testing by the end of each day in which testing is
 conducted. If desired by District Testing and always for unsigned E-mail versions, mail the originals. After startup
 adjustments, report any plant operation changes on the Quality Control Report. Ensure that each Quality Control
 Report contains technician comments as to production quality, input materials received and condition, and includes
 any other quality control activities as specified in the QCP. Ongoing problems with inadequate, incomplete, or
 illegible reporting will result in a change to Unconditional Acceptance. The Contractor’s technician must sign each
 Quality Control Report.
 Report test results to the accuracy of the following decimal places. When the figures to be dropped in rounding
 off are exactly one-half of unity in the decimal place to be retained, round the value up to the nearest number in the
 decimal place to be retained.
 Asphalt Binder Content
 No. 200 (75 µm) sieve
 Other sieves
 BSG
 
 Single Test
 0.1
 0.1
 Whole number
 0.001
 
 Average
 0.01
 0.01
 0.1
 0.001
 
 For 448 acceptance mixes, track the Item 448 Sublot and Lot tonnages through the project and identify on the
 Quality Control Report each random Sublot test as to Lot number and Sublot tonnage location. In addition to the
 Quality Control Report submit the TE-448 Department form with lot identification and actual sieve weights for
 each Sublot sample from the technician’s gradation worksheets. Attach computerized plant printouts representing
 samples tested to that day’s report, if desired by the Monitoring Team, or otherwise keep them with the quality
 control records. Ensure that the technician notes on the accompanying printout from which tonnage the quality
 control sample was taken with accompanying test results for AC content and percent passing the No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 sieve. Keep remaining printouts in the plant laboratory for the duration of the project. Keep a copy of all quality
 control reports for a project in the Contractor’s plant laboratory.
 C. Department Verification Testing and Monitoring. For Basic, 446 and 448 acceptance mixes the Monitor
 will randomly choose one Department sample in a maximum of every four production days for VA testing to
 confirm Contractor testing and mix control. More frequent VA samples can be taken when desired. The Department
 
 VA sample location will be chosen randomly by the Monitor, including where in the truck to take the sample, if
 applicable. The Contractor technician will take the sample from the truck with the Monitor witnessing. The Monitor
 will keep the sample in the Department’s possession until delivered to District Testing or testing is complete. The
 Monitor will have enough sample taken to split with the Contractor. The Monitor will split the sample in the
 Contractor lab. The Monitor will have the sample tested at District Testing or as noted below. The Contractor will
 test his split of the VA sample with the Monitor witnessing. The Department will use its VA test result, the
 Contractor result of the split, as well as the most recent previous day (or night) Contractor quality control and/or
 sublot test in the comparison for the Department VA testing.
 The Monitor may opt to test the Department VA sample in the plant laboratory with the Contractor’s
 permission, according to the Contractor’s safety practices, and with the restriction of only the Contractor’s
 technician physically placing a sample pan in the AC Gauge. However, if the Monitor tests VA samples on
 Contractor equipment, test a VA sample on District Testing equipment a minimum of one time in 15 production
 days from a given plant regardless of the number of projects or JMFs tested in the Level 2 lab. Record the results
 and testing location in the District Testing project record. One day may be added to the above Department sample
 testing frequency for each day production is less than 500 tons (450 metric tons).
 For 446 acceptance mixes MSG VA testing will be performed by District Testing on a minimum of one in
 every four required District-sampled Daily samples. This result will be compared to that days Contractor average
 of MSG QC test results.
 For all mixes, the District may increase the number of VA testing samples if desired.
 All Department VA test results will be given to the Contractor by a reasonable arrangement acceptable to both.
 Department VA sample testing not completed in a timely manner is of no value in verifying quality control testing
 quality for Contractor test acceptance and/or investigating problem causes. As such, if not completed in a timely
 manner, Contractor tests will automatically stand and the District will note the problem in the District’s VA record.
 TABLE 403.06-1 DEPARTMENT VERIFICATION ACCEPTANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL TEST
 COMPARISON
 Percent Asphalt Binder
 VA [1]
 QC/lot test [2]
 ±0.3
 ±0.4
 ±0.3
 ±0.3
 
 Percent Passing No. 4 (4.75mm)
 VA [1]
 QC/lot test [2]
 ±4.0
 ±5.0
 ±4.0
 ±4.0
 
 MSG Comparison
 VA [3]
 
 Basic
 446, 448
 0.010
 446
 [1]District VA mix test deviation from Contractor split.
 [2]District VA mix test deviation from most recent previous day (or night) QC and/or lot test.
 [3]Deviation of District Daily sample MSG compared to QC MSG daily average.
 If the Department VA tests confirm Contractor testing is within the verification tolerances, but a pattern of
 high or low results exist that suggests mix control is not at the JMF, then investigate with the Monitoring Team’s
 assistance to correct the problem to the Monitoring Team’s satisfaction. Direct any questions regarding
 interpretation of circumstances to OMM.
 D. Contractor Tests are Verified. Production is acceptable if:
 1.
 
 The Monitoring Team verifies the Contractor’s QCP is being fully followed; and
 
 2.
 
 The Department VA tests are within the limits specified in 403.06.C; and
 
 3.
 
 For Basic mixes, the remaining sieves do not exceed the limits of the applicable specification.
 
 Failure on the Contractor’s part to respond and resolve Monitoring Team concerns may result in a change to
 Unconditional Acceptance.
 Acceptance is based on Table 403.06-2.
 
 TABLE 403.06-2 MIX ACCEPTANCE
 Mix Type
 
 Acceptance Tolerances or Method
 Deviation
 Range
 from JMF [1]
 Asphalt Binder Content
 ±0.5%
 1.0
 
 Basic Mixes
 (no acceptance limits stated in appropriate
 No. 4 (4.75mm) sieve
 ±6%
 12
 specification)
 Basic Mixes
 (acceptance limits stated in appropriate
 Use acceptance limits in appropriate specification
 specification)
 448 Acceptance Mixes
 Calculate pay factor according to 403.08
 446 Acceptance Mixes
 Calculate pay factor according to 446.04
 [1] Based on the average of the day or night QC Tests
 
 E. Contractor Tests not Verified. If the Department MSG VA test shows the MSG comparison tolerance in
 Table 403.06-1 is not met, a single Department tested MSG for that day and every prior production day back to
 when the Department MSG VA last met the tolerance will be used for each 446 Day/Lot density determination.
 The Contractor may request a review with the Department occasionally for the purpose of determining the cause
 of a comparison problem. Department decisions upon review are final. If a Contractor is requesting a review of
 every occurrence of lack of comparison and the Department test is always found correct, the Department may deny
 that Contractor further reviews. For all other mixes, if the Department VA test does not verify the accompanying
 Contractor tests within the verification tolerances, then the Monitoring Team will investigate.
 If the deviation between the District and Contractor test is greater than the limits in Table 403.06-3 immediately
 cease production until resolved. If the deviation is less than the limits in Table 403.06-3 and discrepancies continue,
 perform additional tests to aid in problem solving.
 TABLE 403.06-3 DEVIATION LIMITS
 Property
 Asphalt Binder Content
 No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve
 
 Mix
 All
 All, except 302
 302
 
 Limits
 ±0.5 %
 ±6.0%
 ±7.0%
 
 Additional tests may include any testing necessary to resolve the problem. If the additional testing does not
 resolve the problem by one-half production day or 1000 tons (1000 metric tons), whichever occurs first, to the
 Monitoring Team’s satisfaction, stop production, if not already, until problems are resolved. Contact OMM for
 assistance in resolving problems. If the District testing program is confirmed by the additional tests and Monitoring
 Team investigation and no reason to question the original test exists, then the original District VA tests will stand.
 After the above investigation, one of the three following actions will occur:
 1. Mix Production Compares Well to the JMF. If the District test and investigation shows mix is actually
 controlled well compared to the JMF in spite of the Contractor test, the District does not have to test additional
 samples if the Contractor testing problem is corrected.
 2. Mix Production Does Not Compare Well to the JMF. If the District tests and investigation shows lack
 of Contractor mix control compared to the JMF the District will test the remaining Department split or Daily
 samples for the days or Lots represented by the original tests. The District will use the test results to calculate the
 acceptance. While working with the District, immediately take steps to correct the problem according to the QCP.
 Failure to achieve a quick resolution will result in a change to Unconditional Acceptance.
 3. District Testing Problem. If the District testing program has a problem as confirmed by the additional
 testing and District review, the District will correct the problem, throw out the original District test results and take
 new samples from the samples representing the days or Lots in question for the VA tests.
 
 F. Contractor Removal, Restoration. For 446 MSG, for a given Contractor facility, if in a series of 15 or more
 Contractor/ Department MSG comparison tests (VA, Monitoring tests) the Contractor MSG is lower than the
 Department MSG by more than 0.002 and occurs a minimum of 65 percent of the time the facility will be removed
 from Department MSG Verification Acceptance and operate under 403.07. (At a minimum, a report will be issued
 annually of the Contractor/ Department MSG comparison status of each facility for this determination. This
 frequency may be increased.)
 For all other mixes, if repeated problems with poor comparison of tests are not the District’s fault; or poor
 comparison of Contractor tests to the JMF; or with plant operation, input materials, or any of the other requirements
 of Department specifications occur in a single project or successive projects, the District will request an opinion
 from the QCQC before notifying the Contractor of removal from Department VA. The District will immediately
 notify the Contractor of the removal with a follow up letter from District Testing. Once notified, acceptance of
 asphalt mixtures is by Unconditional Acceptance. Restoration of the VA procedures may occur on a future project
 with a District recommendation to the QCQC based on consistent improved plant operation and mix control, a
 review of the Contractor problems and resolutions, and a review of the QCP by the QCQC.
 403.07
 occur.
 
 Unconditional Acceptance. If the Contractor is removed from Department VA, the following will
 
 The Contractor must bring its QCP and operation to a level acceptable to the District and QCQC before
 production continues. District Testing will ensure that the project C-95 (Contractor’s Prequalification Rating
 survey) reflects the change to Unconditional Acceptance in all of the appropriate C-95 categories. The Department
 will accept all material for Department projects from the facility under Unconditional Acceptance. While the
 facility is under Unconditional Acceptance, acceptance of small quantities under the small quantities policy will
 not apply.
 Quality control testing requirements specified in 403.05 are modified as follows:
 A. The required number of test series is a minimum of four each per production day or night. If a production day
 is less than 6 hours, the Department may reduce the frequency but not less than one test series per every 3 production
 hours. This requirement does not apply to 446 MSG as outlined below.
 B. For Basic mixes, if the variation from the JMF for one test is 8 percent passing the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve or
 0.3 percent asphalt binder content, investigate and correct the problem, then resample and test. Maintain the
 moving average of three tests within 4 percent passing the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve and 0.2 percent asphalt binder
 content. In addition to the Quality Control Report, maintain control charts according to 441.10 for asphalt binder
 content and the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve. If the Range difference in any three consecutive tests is greater than 0.6
 percent for asphalt binder content or 10.0 percent passing the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve, notify the Monitoring Team.
 If Range deviations as specified continue, cease production.
 For 446 MSG, the Department will test a single daily MSG for each corresponding 446 Day/Lot density
 determination from the facility. The facility can be returned to Department MSG VA when the 65 percent criteria
 (see 403.06 F) is not exceeded in a series of 30 comparison tests.
 C. Report each day’s testing on a Quality Control Report, according to 446.03. Report all testing performed by
 the Contractor’s technician on the Quality Control Report. After startup adjustments, report any plant operation
 changes on the Quality Control Report. Ensure that each Quality Control Report contains technician comments as
 to production quality, input materials received and condition, and includes any other quality control activities
 required in the QCP. The Contractor’s technician must sign each Quality Control Report. Attach each day’s
 computerized plant printouts to that day’s report. The technician must note on the accompanying printout from
 which tonnage the quality control sample was taken with accompanying test results for asphalt binder content and
 percent passing the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve. Keep a copy of all Quality Control Reports for a project in the
 Contractor’s plant laboratory.
 
 The District will monitor according to 441.06, except notification for ceasing production does not have to be in
 writing. Additional samples may be obtained for Department test at any time.
 For Basic mixes, if the average of the Lot or partial Lot acceptance tests for any sieve other than the No. 4 (4.75
 mm) sieve exceeds the specification limits, the pay factor is determined as follows:
 TABLE 403.07-1 BASIC MIX PAY FACTORS
 Number of Tests
 Pay Factor
 
 1
 0.98
 
 2
 0.97
 
 3
 0.96
 
 4
 0.95
 
 For 448 acceptance mixes, the Department will perform acceptance sampling and testing according to 403.06
 and 403.08, except the Lot size will be 5000 tons (5000 metric tons) with 1250 ton (1250 metric tons) Sublots.
 Sublots and acceptance samples may be taken from the roadway or plant at the Districts discretion. Department
 testing under Unconditional Acceptance will receive a lower testing priority than other VA projects.
 403.08
 Acceptance Tables for 448 Mixes. A Lot is considered acceptable for gradation and asphalt binder
 content if the deviation of the average from the JMF and the Range is no more than the tolerances shown in Table
 403.08-1.
 TABLE 403.08-1 DEVIATION FROM THE JMF
 AND RANGE TOLERANCES [1]
 Deviation from JMF
 Mix Property
 (Percent)
 Asphalt Binder Content
 0.3
 1/2 inch (12.5 mm) sieve
 6
 No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve
 5
 No. 8 (2.36 mm) sieve
 4
 [1] Based on average of four Lot Acceptance tests.
 
 Range
 (Percent)
 1.0
 15
 15
 15
 
 If the average of the Lot acceptance tests for a particular sieve or sieves, or for asphalt binder content deviates
 from the JMF by more than the tolerances shown in Table 403.08-1, but falls within the tolerances shown in Table
 403.08-2, then the Lot is considered reasonably acceptable and may remain in place with payment at a reduced pay
 factor as show in Table 403.08-2.
 If the Range of the Lot acceptance tests for asphalt binder content or for any particular sieve, or sieves, exceeds
 the tolerance shown in Table 403.08-1, the Department will apply a pay factor of 0.95.
 
 TABLE 403.08-2 448 ACCEPTANCE SCHEDULE [1]
 Mix
 Property
 
 Pay
 2
 3
 4
 Factor
 Tests
 Tests
 Tests
 1.00
 0 to 0.47
 0 to 0.36
 0 to 0.30
 0.98
 0.48 to 0.54
 0.37 to 0.42
 0.31 to 0.35
 Asphalt
 0.90
 0.55 to 0.61
 0.43 to 0.48
 0.36 to 0.40
 Binder
 0.80
 0.62 to 0.68
 0.49 to 0.54
 0.41 to 0.45
 Content
 0.60
 0.69 to 0.75
 0.55 to 0.59
 0.46 to 0.50
 [2]
 > 0.75
 > 0.59
 > 0.50
 1.00
 0 to 8.5
 0 to 6.9
 0 to 6.0
 0.99
 8.6 to 9.9
 7.0 to 8.1
 6.1 to 7.0
 1/2 inch
 0.97
 10.0 to 11.3
 8.2 to 9.2
 7.1 to 8.0
 (12.5 mm)
 0.94
 11.4 to 12.7
 9.3 to 10.4
 8.1 to 9.0
 sieve
 0.90
 12.8 to 14.1
 10.5 to 11.5
 9.1 to 10.0
 [3]
 > 14.1
 > 11.5
 > 10.0
 1.00
 0 to 7.1
 0 to 5.8
 0 to 5.0
 0.99
 7.2 to 8.5
 5.9 to 6.9
 5.1 to 6.0
 No. 4
 0.97
 8.6 to 9.9
 7.0 to 8.1
 6.1 to 7.0
 (4.75 mm)
 0.94
 10.0 to 11.3
 8.2 to 9.2
 7.1 to 8.0
 sieve
 0.90
 11.4 to 12.7
 9.3 to 10.4
 8.1 to 9.0
 [3]
 > 12.7
 > 10.4
 > 9.0
 1.00
 0 to 5.7
 0 to 4.6
 0 to 4.0
 0.99
 5.8 to 7.1
 4.7 to 5.8
 4.1 to 5.0
 No. 8
 0.97
 7.2 to 8.5
 5.9 to 6.9
 5.1 to 6.0
 (2.36 mm)
 0.94
 8.6 to 9.9
 7.0 to 8.1
 6.1 to 7.0
 sieve
 0.90
 10.0 to 11.3
 8.2 to 9.2
 7.1 to 8.0
 [3]
 > 11.3
 > 9.2
 > 8.0
 [1]Based on average of Lot Acceptance tests from the JMF.
 [2]Remove and replace material
 [3]Engineer will determine if the material may remain in place. Pay factor for material allowed to remain in place
 is 0.70.
 The Department will determine payment for the Lot by multiplying the contract unit price by the pay factor.
 When any pay factors for a specific Lot are less than 1.00, use the lowest pay factor to calculate the payment.
 The Department will base acceptance of partial Lots on the average and the Range of the results of tests on the
 number of samples obtained.
 
 ITEM 407 TACK COAT
 407.01
 407.02
 407.03
 407.04
 407.05
 407.06
 407.07
 407.08
 
 Description
 Materials
 Equipment
 Weather Limitations
 Preparation of Surface
 Application of Asphalt Material
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 407.01
 Description. This work consists of preparing and treating a paved surface with asphalt material, and
 cover aggregate if required.
 407.02
 Materials. Conform to the applicable requirements of 702 for the asphalt material and use one of the
 following types: 702.04 RS-1, SS-1, SS-1h, CRS-1, CSS-1, or CSS-1h; 702.12 Non-Tracking Asphalt Emulsion or
 702.13 SBR Asphalt Emulsion.
 Supply 702.12 Non-Tracking Asphalt Emulsion any time Item 407 Non-Tracking Tack Coat is specified.
 Conform to 703.06 for cover aggregate.
 407.03
 
 Equipment. Provide adequate cleaning equipment, spreader boxes, and distributors.
 
 Use distributors designed, equipped, maintained, and operated to apply asphalt material at the specified rate per
 square yard (square meter) with uniform pressure over the required width of application. Ensure that the distributor
 includes a tachometer, pressure gauges, and an accurate volume measuring device or a calibrated tank. Mount an
 accurate thermometer with a range covering the specified application temperature for asphalt material at
 approximately center height of the tank with the stem extending into the asphalt material. Ensure that the distributor
 has a full-circulating system with a spray bar that is adjustable laterally and vertically. Ensure that the spray bar
 will maintain a constant height above the pavement under variable load conditions. Supply each distributor with
 suitable charts showing truck and pump speeds and other pertinent application data necessary to obtain the required
 results.
 Do not use equipment that cannot obtain the correct tack application.
 407.04
 Weather Limitations. Do not apply the asphalt material if the surface temperature is below the
 minimum placement temperature for the pavement course to be placed, as specified in 401.06.
 407.05
 Preparation of Surface. Ensure that the surface is thoroughly clean and dry when the asphalt material
 is applied. Remove material cleaned from the surface and dispose of it as the Engineer directs.
 407.06
 Application of Asphalt Material. Uniformly apply the asphalt material with a distributor having
 clean nozzles functioning properly.
 For irregular areas such as driveways and intersections, apply the asphalt material using a method the Engineer
 approves.
 If paving asphalt concrete directly onto Portland cement concrete or brick pavement, tack the pavement with
 SBR asphalt emulsion conforming to 702.13.
 Apply the asphalt material in a manner that offers the least inconvenience to traffic. Only apply the asphalt
 material to areas that will be covered by a pavement course during the same day. Ensure the tack breaks before
 releasing to construction traffic unless the paver is equipped with a spray bar system to apply tack just prior to mat
 placement.
 Apply asphalt material to obtain uniform coverage within the range specified in Table 407.06-1, as directed by
 the Engineer. Obtain the Engineer's approval for the quantity, rate of application, temperature, and areas to be
 treated before application of the asphalt material. The Engineer will determine the actual application in gallons per
 square yard (liters per square meter) by a check on the project.
 
 TABLE 407.06-1
 TYPICAL TACK COAT APPLICATION RATES
 Existing Pavement
 New Asphalt
 Oxidized Asphalt
 Milled Asphalt Surface
 Milled PCC Surface
 PCC Surface
 
 Application Rate
 gal/yd2 (L/m2)
 0.05 to 0.06 (0.23 to 0.27)
 0.08 to 0.09 (0.36 to 0.41)
 0.08 to 0.09 (0.36 to 0.41)
 0.06 to 0.08 (0.27 to 0.36)
 0.06 to 0.08 (0.27 to 0.36)
 
 The application is considered satisfactory when the actual rate is within ±10 percent of the required rate and the
 material is applied uniformly with no visible evidence of streaking, ridging or pickup by construction traffic. The
 Engineer will require proper correction when ridging, streaking, pickup or other non-uniform coverage is observed.
 Correct non-uniform tack only in areas of non-uniform coverage. Do not reapply tack in areas where the tack meets
 uniformity and application requirements.
 If the coverage is not uniform and not corrected the total square yardage of non-uniform application will be
 considered non-specification material. The Engineer will determine the number of gallons (liters) for non-payment
 by using the approved rate of application times the total square yards (square meters) of non-uniform application.
 407.07
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Tack Coat and Non-Tracking Tack Coat by
 the number of gallons (liters) of undiluted asphalt material applied for each according to Item 109.
 407.08
 
 Basis of Payment. The cost of cover aggregate is incidental to Tack Coat.
 
 The Department will not pay for non-uniformly applied materials as defined in 407.06.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 407
 407
 
 Gallon (Liter)
 Gallon (Liter)
 
 Tack Coat
 Non-Tracking Tack Coat
 
 ITEM 408 PRIME COAT
 408.01
 408.02
 408.03
 408.04
 408.05
 408.06
 408.07
 408.08
 408.09
 408.10
 
 Description
 Asphalt Material
 Cover Aggregate
 Weather Limitations
 Equipment
 Preparation of Surface
 Application of Asphalt Material
 Application of Cover Aggregate
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 408.01
 Description. This work consists of preparing and treating an existing surface with asphalt material,
 and cover aggregate if required.
 408.02
 Asphalt Material. Conform to the applicable requirements of 702 for asphalt material and use one
 of the following types: 702.02 MC-30, MC-70, or MC-250; or 702.03 Primer 20.
 408.03
 or 703.06.
 
 Cover Aggregate. Use cover aggregate conforming to No. 9 size or gradation requirements of 703.05
 
 408.04
 Weather Limitations. Do not apply asphalt material on a wet surface. Do not apply prime coats for
 asphalt concrete or surface treatment work when the atmospheric temperature is below 50 F (10 C) or when the
 air temperature within the preceding 24 hours has been 40 F (5 C) or lower. Do not apply prime coats on stabilized
 or granular base courses when the atmospheric temperature is below 40 F (5 C).
 408.05
 
 Equipment. Use equipment conforming to 407.03.
 
 408.06
 Preparation of Surface. Shape the surface to be primed to the required grade and section. Ensure the
 surface is free from all ruts, corrugations, segregated material or other irregularities and is smooth and uniformly
 compacted at the time of application of the asphalt material. Clean the surface in a manner that will thoroughly
 remove all mud, earth, and other foreign material. Take care to clean the edges of road to be primed to ensure
 uniform application of the asphalt material directly onto the existing base or pavement surface. Remove material
 cleaned from the surface and dispose of it as the Engineer directs.
 408.07
 Application of Asphalt Material. Apply asphalt material in a uniform manner spread to the width
 of the section to be primed by means of a distributor conforming to 407.03. Take care that the application of asphalt
 material at the junction of spreads is not in excess of the specified amount. Squeegee excess asphalt material from
 the surface. Correct skipped areas or deficiencies.
 Do not allow traffic on the prime coat until the asphalt material has been absorbed by the surface and will not be
 picked up. Obtain the Engineer's approval for the quantity, rate of application, temperatures and areas to be treated
 before application of the prime coat.
 408.08
 Application of Cover Aggregate. If, after applying the prime coat, the asphalt material fails to
 penetrate and traffic must use the roadway, spread cover aggregate in the amount required to absorb any excess
 asphalt material.
 408.09
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Prime Coat by the number of gallons (liters)
 according to 109.
 408.10
 
 Basis of Payment. The cost of cover aggregate is incidental to Prime Coat.
 
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities, complete in place, at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 408
 
 Gallon (Liter)
 
 Prime Coat
 
 ITEM 409 SAWING AND SEALING ASPHALT CONCRETE PAVEMENT JOINTS
 409.01
 409.02
 409.03
 409.04
 409.05
 
 Description
 Materials
 Construction Details
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 409.01
 Description. This work consists of saw cutting and sealing the finished surface of the asphalt concrete
 pavement and shoulders directly over and in line with transverse joints in the underlying Portland cement concrete
 pavement.
 409.02
 Materials. Use joint sealant conforming to 705.04 and approved by OMM before shipment to the
 project. Use a 1/2 inch (13 mm) diameter closed cell foam backer rod that will form and maintain a reservoir of
 sealant as specified in 409.03.
 409.03
 Construction Details. Saw cut, clean, and seal transverse joints as a continuous operation. If the
 surface course is not placed within 5 days after the intermediate course is placed, make a 1/8-inch (3 mm) wide
 saw cut that is one-fourth the depth of the intermediate course over contraction joints and a 1/2-inch (13 mm) wide
 cut that is one-fourth the depth of the intermediate course over expansion joints.
 Saw joints in the surface course as soon as the saw can be operated without damaging the asphalt concrete, but
 no later than 48 hours after the asphalt concrete is placed.
 Locate the sawed joints directly over each transverse pavement joint in the concrete pavement, including joints
 at full-depth pavement repairs. Accurately locate joints with pins or stakes before paving. Pre-mark the saw cut on
 the new asphalt with a chalk line or other acceptable method. Obtain the Engineer's approval of the method for
 locating and accurately marking the proposed saw cuts before starting any resurfacing operations.
 Saw all transverse joints and create a joint sealant reservoir according to Table 409.03-1. Use either dry or wet
 cutting. Make one or two passes to create the saw cut and joint sealant reservoir.
 TABLE 409.03-1
 Measurement
 Saw cut depth
 Backer rod diameter
 Joint sealant reservoir
 Width
 Depth
 Recess below surface course
 
 Inch (mm)
 2 (50)
 1/2 (13)
 3/8 (10)
 3/4 (19)
 1/8 (3)
 
 Clean dry sawed joints with compressed air to remove dirt, dust, or deleterious matter. Use an air compressor
 with a minimum rated capacity of 100 pounds per square inch (689 kPa) and sufficient hose for continuous cleaning
 operations.
 Clean wet sawed joints with a water blast to remove sawing slurry, dirt, or deleterious matter. Dry wet sawed
 joints with a propane torch or lance unit capable of producing a blast of hot air at 2000 F (1093 C) and with a gas
 velocity of 2000 feet per second (610 m/s).
 Extend the transverse saw cut joints the full width of the asphalt over the concrete pavement and paved shoulders.
 Do not allow traffic to knead together or damage the sawed joints before sealing.
 Heat joint sealant material in a kettle or melter constructed as a double boiler, with the space between the inner
 and outer shells filled with oil or other heat transfer medium. Provide positive temperature control and mechanical
 agitation.
 Heat the material according to the manufacturer’s recommendation. Consider the first gallon (4 L) of material
 that flows out of the applicator wand at the start of the day spoil, and discard it into a container so designated.
 
 After cleaning, place the backer rod in the sawed joints, then immediately seal the joints with sealant applied
 through a nozzle projected into the sawed joint, filling from the bottom up. Ensure that the sealant completely fills
 the joint such that after cooling, the level of the sealant is below the surface by less than 1/8 inch (3 mm). Fill any
 depression in the seal greater than 3/16 inch (5 mm) to the specified limit by adding additional sealant. Do not
 overfill the joints. Take care in the sealing of the joints so that the final appearance will present a neat line.
 409.04
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Sawing and Sealing Asphalt Concrete
 Pavement Joints by the number of feet (meters) of joints sawed and sealed.
 409.05
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will not pay for saw cuts in the intermediate course.
 
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 409
 
 Foot (Meter)
 
 Sawing and Sealing Asphalt Concrete Pavement Joints
 
 ITEM 410 TRAFFIC COMPACTED SURFACE
 410.01
 410.02
 410.03
 410.04
 410.05
 410.06
 410.07
 
 Description
 Materials
 Conditioning of the Subgrade
 Spreading and Shaping
 Maintaining
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 410.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and placing an aggregate wearing course on the
 completed and accepted subgrade or temporary road.
 410.02
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to 703.18 for the type of material specified (Type A, Type
 B, or Type C).
 410.03
 Conditioning of the Subgrade. Eliminate wavy and irregular surfaces and maintain the subgrade in
 this condition until the application of material under this item. If the subgrade is soft due to rain, frost, or snow,
 place material only as permitted.
 410.04
 Spreading and Shaping. Uniformly spread the material using an approved spreader box or by other
 methods. Spread the amount of material shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer. After spreading, blade
 and shape the materials to the specified cross-sections. Haul the material to its place on the road over the previously
 spread material. Conduct the hauling to obtain uniform compaction over the entire width of the surface material
 without rolling.
 410.05
 Maintaining. After shaping the material, blade it as directed by the Engineer. Open the road to traffic
 immediately after all the material has been spread and shaped.
 Correct all holes, ruts, defects, or soft places that occur in the subgrade or surface by adding material and
 dragging. Maintain the surface, slopes, shoulders, ditches, and drainage structures until the work on this item has
 been completed and accepted.
 410.06
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Traffic Compacted Surface, Type ___ by
 the number of cubic yards (cubic meters) or tons (metric tons) of accepted material placed, shaped, and maintained
 as specified.
 The Department will measure the cubic yards (cubic meters) of aggregate used loose in the vehicle at the point
 of delivery or calculate it by converting from weight using the following conversion factors:
 
 TABLE 410.06-1
 Material
 Conversion Factor
 Gravel, bank run or crusher run
 2700 lb/yd³
 1600 kg/m³
 Limestone, crusher run
 2500 lb/yd³
 1485 kg/m³
 Gravel, Size No. 4 and 57
 2500 lb/yd³
 1485 kg/m³
 Limestone, Size No. 4 and 57
 2400 lb/yd³
 1425 kg/m³
 Crushed slag [1]
 less than 80 lb/ft³ (1300 kg/m³)
 2000 lb/yd³
 1185 kg/m³
 80 to 90 lb/ft³ (1300 to 1450 kg/m³)
 2100 lb/yd³
 1250 kg/m³
 90.1 to 100 lb/ft³ (1451 to 1600 kg/m³)
 2300 lb/yd³
 1365 kg/m³
 100.1 to 125 lb/ft³ (1601 to 2000 kg/m³)
 2700 lb/yd³
 1600 kg/m³
 more than 125 lb/ft³ (2000 kg/m³)
 3000 lb/yd³
 1780 kg/m³
 Recycled Portland Cement Concrete
 2250 lb/yd³
 1335 kg/m³
 Recycled Asphalt Pavement
 2650 lb/yd³
 1570 kg/m³
 [1]Based on average dry rodded weight determined by the Laboratory. The conversion factors listed are the
 long gradation weights. These numbers are based on the dry rodded weights of Nos. 67, 57, or 8 gradation.
 The Department will determine slag weights based on weights obtained from the original source.
 The Department will classify salvaged or mixed materials according to the material that makes up the majority
 of the mixture.
 Ensure that the moistures of the delivered material are less than 2 percent above saturated surface dry condition;
 if not, the Department will base payment on the dry densities and dry weights.
 Furnish freight bills, and weight and volume evidence according to 109.
 410.07
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 410
 
 Cubic Yard or Ton
 (Cubic Meter
 or Metric Ton)
 Cubic Yard or Ton
 (Cubic Meter
 or Metric Ton)
 
 Traffic Compacted Surface, Type A or B
 
 410
 
 Traffic Compacted Surface, Type C
 
 ITEM 411 STABILIZED CRUSHED AGGREGATE
 411.01
 411.02
 411.03
 411.04
 411.05
 
 Description
 Materials
 Construction Methods
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 411.01
 
 Description. This work consists of placing a compacted course or courses of crushed aggregate.
 
 411.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to 703.18.
 
 411.03
 Construction Methods. Construct the subgrade according to Item 204. Use the spreading and
 compaction requirements of Item 304, except as modified by the following:
 A. Use a maximum compacted lift thickness of 6 inches (150 mm).
 B. Perform the initial compaction of the material by using crawler type tractors, tamping rollers, trench rollers,
 suitable pneumatic tire equipment, or other suitable equipment.
 C. Perform final compaction of the surface of the stabilized crushed aggregate by using approved pneumatic tire
 equipment.
 Unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents, the Engineer will perform all compaction tests according
 to Supplement 1015.
 411.04
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Stabilized Crushed Aggregate by the
 number of cubic yards (cubic meters) computed from the profile grade, cross-sections and typical sections,
 compacted in place.
 When the plans provide for the use of material in variable width or depth of course and the quantity cannot be
 readily calculated from the profile grade, typical sections and cross-sections, the Department will measure the cubic
 yards (cubic meters) by converting from weight using the following conversion factors:
 TABLE 411.04-1
 Material
 Conversion Factor
 Crushed stone
 3800 lb/yd³
 2250 kg/m³
 Crushed gravel
 3900 lb/yd³
 2310 kg/m³
 Crushed slag [1]
 less than 90 lb/ft³ (1450 kg/m³)
 3600 lb/yd³
 2140 kg/m³
 90 to 100 lb/ft³ (1450 to 1600 kg/m³)
 4000 lb/yd³
 2375 kg/m³
 more than 100 lb/ft³ (1600 kg/m³)
 4500 lb/yd³
 2670 kg/m³
 Granulated slag
 2800 lb/yd³
 1660 kg/m³
 Recycled Portland Cement Concrete
 3400 lb/yd³
 2020 kg/m³
 Recycled Asphalt Pavement
 4000 lb/yd³
 2375 kg/m³
 [1]Based on average dry rodded weight of standard size of slag aggregates on record
 at the Laboratory. The conversion factors listed are the long gradation weights.
 These numbers are based on the dry rodded weights of Nos. 67, 57, or 8 gradation.
 The Department will determine slag weights based on weights obtained from the
 original source.
 The Department will classify salvaged or mixed materials according to the material that makes up the majority
 of the mixture.
 Ensure that the moistures of the delivered material are less than 2 percent above saturated surface dry condition;
 if not, the Department will base payment on the dry densities and dry weights.
 Furnish freight bills or certified weight bills according to 109.
 
 411.05
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 411
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Stabilized Crushed Aggregate
 
 ITEM 421 MICROSURFACING
 421.01
 421.02
 421.03
 421.04
 421.05
 421.06
 421.07
 421.08
 421.09
 421.10
 421.11
 421.12
 421.13
 421.14
 421.15
 421.16
 
 Description
 Materials
 Proportioning
 Quality Control Program
 Weather Limitations
 Mixing Equipment
 Equipment Calibration
 Spreading Equipment
 Surface Preparation
 Test Strip
 Application
 Quality Control
 Acceptance
 Performance Review
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 421.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing a cold laid polymer modified emulsified asphalt
 pavement course to fill ruts or provide a leveling and/or surface course for existing pavements. Warrant the
 microsurfacing for two years.
 421.02
 Materials. Use a polymer modified emulsified asphalt binder (Binder) consisting of the following:
 Use a quick-traffic CSS-1hM modified emulsified asphalt (Binder) meeting the requirements in Table 421.02-1.
 Use only emulsion certified according to Supplement 1032. Do not use port addition of the polymer to the
 emulsified asphalt. Provide to the Engineer certified test data and a statement from the Binder supplier with each
 load of Binder that the Binder is the same base asphalt binder, polymer, polymer percentage as formulated and used
 in the mix design. Include the percent residue on the Bill of Lading.
 Ensure the Binder meets the following and specification limits will be producible for at least 30 days from sample
 date:
 
 TABLE 421.02-1
 Tests on emulsion, AASHTO T 59, unless otherwise designated:
 CSS-1hM [1]
 Viscosity, Saybolt Furol at 77 °F (25 °C) (SFS)
 20 to 100
 Storage Stability Tests, 24-hr (% difference), max.
 1
 Particle Charge Test
 Positive
 Sieve Tests (%) (Distilled Water), max.
 0.10
 Distillation to 177 °C, Residue % solids, min.[2]
 62
 Tests on distillation residue:
 Penetration, 25 °C, 100 g, 5 sec (dmm) AASHTO T 49
 40 to 90
 Ductility, 25 °C, 5 cm/min, (cm), min. AASHTO T 51
 40
 Solubility in trichloroethylene, (%), min. AASHTO T 44 [3]
 97.5
 Elastic Recovery, 10 °C, 20 cm (%), min. AASHTO T 301 [4]
 50
 Softening Point, Ring & Ball (°C), min. AASHTO T 53
 60
 [1]
 Pre-blend only: Use a minimum of 3.0% SBR solids based on weight of the asphalt binder.
 Use Natural SBR latex modifier or synthetic SBR latex modifier conforming to 702.14. Use only
 one type of latex. Mill or blend the SBR Emulsion into the emulsified solution prior to the
 emulsification process.
 [2]
 See Supplement 1013. For natural latex, use the Oven Evaporation method in AASHTO T 59
 in place of distillation and use this residue for further testing.
 [3]
 On the base asphalt only. Solubility in N-Propyl Bromide (ASTM D7553) can be used in
 place of trichloroethylene.
 [4]
 Straight molds. Hold at test temperature for 90 minutes. Place in ductilometer and elongate
 20 cm at 5 cm/min. Hold for 5 minutes and cut. After 1 hour retract the broken ends to touch and
 measure the elongation (X) in centimeters to the nearest 0.01 cm. Use the following formula to
 calculate the elastic recovery: Percent Recovery = ((20-X)/20) x 100. Report results to nearest
 0.1%.
 Conform to 703.01 and 703.05 for aggregate, except as follows:
 TABLE 421.02-2
 Percent by weight of fractured pieces
 Sand Equivalence (AASHTO T176)
 
 100
 55 minimum
 
 Conform to Table 421.02-3 Gradation A for the aggregate for surface courses, Gradation B for the aggregate for
 rut fill courses, and Gradation A or B for the aggregate for leveling courses. Stockpile tolerance will be based on
 target gradation stated in the mix design but will not exceed design gradation band for No. 200 sieve.
 
 TABLE 421.02-3
 Sieve Size
 3/8 inch
 (9.50 mm)
 No. 4
 (4.75 mm)
 No. 8
 (2.36 mm)
 No. 16
 (1.18 mm)
 No. 30
 (600 µm)
 No. 50
 (300 µm)
 No. 100
 (150 µm)
 No. 200
 (75 µm)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 A
 B
 100
 100
 85 to 100
 70 to 90
 50 to 80
 45 to 70
 40 to 65
 28 to 50
 25 to 45
 19 to 34
 13 to 25
 12 to 25
 –
 7 to 18
 5 to 15
 5 to 18
 
 Stockpile Tolerance
 ± 5.0%
 ± 5.0%
 ± 5.0%
 ± 5.0%
 ± 4.0%
 ± 3.0%
 ± 2.0%
 ± 5.0%
 
 Screen the aggregate for oversize material prior to use using a 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) screen size. When a blend of
 aggregates is to be used to meet gradation A or B, proportion the aggregates in a separate stockpile and blend to a
 uniform consistency prior to screening. Screen the aggregate to complete the blending process and to remove any
 oversize material prior to use. If oversize material becomes present in the mixture, screen the aggregate directly
 into material support units.
 For mineral filler, use Portland cement conforming to ASTM C 150, Type I. Adjustments in the quantity of
 mineral filler added to the mixture are permitted to improve mixture consistency, mix time, or set time. Do not
 exceed ± 0.5% from the mix design during placement.
 Use water conforming to 499.02. Add water to the mixture to control mixture consistency only and not to control
 mix time.
 Use mix set additives as stated in the mix design to control the mixture’s mix and set time. If mix set additives
 are used during production of mixture, include as part of the mix design. Ensure additives are compatible with the
 other components of the mix.
 421.03
 Proportioning. Develop a mix design to comply with the mix design criteria and submit to OMM on
 approved forms, at least two weeks prior to the start of calibration, for preliminary JMF approval. OMM may
 require additional time prior for preliminary approval to perform tests on lab materials to ensure mix compliance.
 OMM will notify the Contractor if additional time for testing is required. Final JMF approval will be granted upon
 successful placement in the field. OMM may require the Contractor to design and submit for a new JMF for lack
 of mix compliance or lack of field performance.
 Submit the mix design and proposed materials to OMM. Include a minimum of 11 pounds (5,000 g) of each
 aggregate, one quart (1 L) sample of Binder, 3.5 ounces (100 g) of mineral filler, and one pint (0.5 L) of additive,
 if used, and a complete mix design packet prepared by an AASHTO-accredited laboratory in Pavement
 Preservation. Prepare the mix design by designing the mixture using the minimum, mid-point, and maximum
 residual binder content for gradations A or B and present all test data for all tests specified in Table 421.03-1.
 Determine the residual binder content and present related proportioning of total water (includes moisture in
 aggregate), mineral filler, and additive with tolerances for each in the final designed mixture. Verify during the
 mix design the compatibility of the aggregate, Binder, mineral filler, and other additives. Produce the mix design
 using the same materials that will be used on the project. Approved JMF’s expire on December 31st..
 A. Ensure that the mix design:
 1.
 
 Has aggregate (including blended aggregates) meeting the gradation specified.
 
 2. Has residual asphalt by dry weight of aggregate of 7.0 to 8.5 percent for leveling and surface courses or
 6.5 to 8.0 percent for rut fill courses.
 3. Has a mineral filler content of 0.3 to 2.5 percent by dry weight of aggregate and a tolerance of not greater
 than ± 0.5 percent of the mix design within the required minimum and maximum.
 4. Verify the mix times and wet cohesion requirements based on specific minimum and maximum percent
 mineral filler, total water, and additive.
 
 5.
 
 Has a total water content with a tolerance not greater than ± 1.5 percent.
 
 6. Has a total non-diluted additive content with a tolerance not greater than ± 0.2 percent. Verify that the
 additive dilution rate with water specified in the mix design is consistent with the paving machine being used.
 74. Meets the specified properties of the following International Slurry Seal Association (ISSA) tests:
 TABLE 421.03-1
 ISSA Test No. Description
 Wet Cohesion
 TB-139
 30 minutes min. (set time)
 60 minutes min. (traffic)
 TB-114
 Wet Stripping
 Wet Track Abrasion Loss
 TB-100
 1-hour soak
 6 day soak
 TB-144
 Saturated Abrasion Compatibility
 Mix Time @ 25 C
 TB-113
 Mix Time @ 40 C
 TB-147
 Lateral Displacement (For Leveling and
 Rut Fill courses only)
 TB-109
 Excess Asphalt by LWT Sand Adhesion
 
 Specification
 12 kg-cm min.
 20 kg-cm min or near spin
 90 percent min.
 450 g/m² max.
 650 g/m² max.
 2 g loss max.
 Controllable to 120 seconds
 Controllable to 60 seconds
 5%, max.
 538 g/m² max.
 
 Check the ISSA TB-139 (set time) and ISSA TB-113 (mix time) tests at the highest temperature expected during
 construction. For the ISSA TB-113 test at 104 °F (40 °C), preheat all ingredients and containers.
 B. Report the following in the mix design (all percentages are based on the dry weight of the aggregate):
 1. Source and location of each individual material. Provide percentage of each aggregate source if multiple
 aggregate sources are used.
 2. Aggregate gradation, washed and dry (dry for field QC). Provide aggregate gradation of each source and
 final combined if multiple sources are used.
 3.
 
 Percentage of aggregate.
 
 3.
 
 Sand equivalence of the aggregate.
 
 4
 
 Percentage of mineral filler and tolerance.
 
 5.
 
 Percentage of total water and tolerance, and acceptable pH range.
 
 6.
 
 Percentage and type of mix set additives (if required) and tolerance.
 
 7.
 
 Percentage of Binder and residual asphalt content in the mixture.
 
 8.
 
 Quantitative effects of moisture content on the unit weight of the aggregate per AASHTO T 19.
 
 421.04 Quality Control Program (QCP). Create and implement a Quality Control Program (QCP) for each
 construction season. The QCP will cover processes conducted to provide a microsurface mixture at the project site
 that is uniform in composition, conforms to the specification requirements and project mix design, and that when
 placed is free of any defects (lack of mixing, inconsistent texture, inconsistent profile, excessive overlap at joints,
 streaking, drag marks, roughness, raveling, rutting, holes, and debris, etc.) within the Contractor’s control at project
 completion. Submit a hard copy of the proposed QCP to OMM for review and acceptance. Submit by February 28
 or a minimum of five (5) weeks before calibration.
 
 Submit a hard copy and a digital copy (if available) of the QCP acceptance letter and accepted QCP to District
 Testing a minimum of two weeks prior to calibration. Keep copies of the letter and the QCP with each Contractor’s
 Quality Control Manager and provide a copy of both to the Engineer. Digital copies of the QCP and letter in pdf
 format are allowed with the following requirements: The file icon must be appropriately labeled and be on the
 computer desktop. The QCP must contain page numbering and a Table of Contents inside the front cover locating
 all sections by page number and out of date QCPs must be removed from the computer desktop.
 Failure to comply with the approved QCP may result in work stoppage and adversely affect the Contractor’s
 Prequalification rating.
 The QCP is a reflection of a Contractor’s sincerity and ability in producing a quality product. Development of
 this program beyond the minimum requirements specified below is encouraged.
 Include in the program:
 A. The assignment of quality control responsibilities. Quality control includes all efforts required to achieve a
 product meeting specifications. List individuals as required below and note their designated responsibilities to meet
 QCP requirements. Provide a Quality Control Manager who is a company employee who is routinely and usually
 at the paving site during placement of any microsurfacing. Provide a list designating technician responsibilities and
 expected actions. Ensure only trained personnel handle and test samples at all times. Define who is responsible at
 the project site and specific methods for ensuring mixing equipment, haul vehicles, etc. meet requirements.
 B. Means for annual training of company and consultant technicians and their supervisors in ethical conduct
 according to company expectations. Document how and when training is given, what the expectations are, how
 expectations are communicated, and list all personnel trained. Describe the QC Manager’s and technician
 supervisor’s responsibilities and methods in ensuring ethical conduct is maintained throughout the year.
 C. Provisions to meet the Department mix specifications.
 D. Procedures for extra testing (e.g., job start, responses to poor test results or field mix problems, aggregate
 stock testing, moistures) and any other testing necessary to control materials not already defined in these
 Specifications.
 E. Methods to maintain all worksheets, including all handwritten records, and other test and sample records
 from the project for the duration of the contract or five years, whichever is longer. Define the test record process.
 Define company records retention requirements. Provide copies of all test reports and forms used in the quality
 control process.
 F. Procedures for calibration and documentation for all testing equipment. Procedures for calibration record
 storage. Procedure to supply documentation records of testing equipment calibration at the request of the engineer.
 G. Method of performing mixing equipment calibrations including scales to be used, yield checks, and
 documentation for each project.
 H. Procedure for random sampling to be used at the project and documentation method. Procedures for sample
 taking, tracking, handling, and documentation method for all samples taken at the project paving site.
 I. Procedure for ensuring that every Contractor employee involved in the testing of aggregates and
 microsurfacing mix and operation of the mixing equipment has read the QCP and has on site access to all applicable
 Department specifications, proposals, policies, and the current approved JMF.
 J. Procedure for ensuring binder Bills of Lading with BOL load number, binder source and grade, and binder
 percent residue are reviewed against running mix designs and record of review listing the above information be
 kept with the QC Manager for the duration of the project. Means to meet the handling and storage requirements of
 the Binder and tack coat suppliers.
 K. Means to meet placed mixture uniformity and hauling/trucking requirements.
 L. Define the roles and responsibilities of the QC Manager.
 M. Signature of the Quality Control Manager and, if different, the person in authority to enforce all operations
 covered by the QCP as outlined in this subsection.
 
 421.05
 Weather Limitations. Apply the mixture only when it is not raining, pavement has no standing water,
 and the existing pavement surface and atmospheric temperature is a minimum of 45 F (7 C) and rising and there
 is no forecast of an atmospheric temperature below 32 F (0 C) within 24 hours from the time the mixture is
 applied. Between September 30 and May 1, do not apply the mixture if the existing pavement surface temperature
 is less than 50 F (10 C).
 421.06
 Mixing Equipment. Produce the mixture in a self-propelled, front feed, continuous loading mixing
 machine equipped with a conveyer belt aggregate delivery system and an interconnected positive displacement,
 water jacketed asphalt emulsion gear pump to accurately proportion aggregate and asphalt emulsion or a variable
 displacement computerized rate control to accurately proportion aggregate and asphalt emulsion. Locate the
 mineral filler feed so the proper amount of mineral filler is dropped on the aggregate before discharge into the
 pugmill. Provide a spray bar to completely prewet the aggregate dropping into the pugmill with additive and water
 before introduction of asphalt emulsion. Ensure that the twin-shaft, multi-blade pugmill is a continuous flow type
 and minimum of 49 inches (1.25 m) long. Ensure that the blade size and side clearances meet the equipment
 manufacturer’s recommendations. Introduce the emulsion within the first one-third of the mixer length to ensure
 proper mixing of all materials before exit from the pugmill.
 Equip the machine with opposite side driving stations to allow full control of the machine from either side. Equip
 the mixer with a remote forward speed control at the back mixing platform so the operator controlling the mixture
 placement can control forward speed and level of mixture in the spreader or rut box. Provide material control
 devices that are readily accessible and positioned so the amount of each material used can be determined at any
 time.
 Equip the mixing machine with a water pressure system and nozzle type spray bar to provide a water spray ahead
 of and outside the spreader box when required. Apply water at a rate that will dampen the surface, but will not
 create free flowing water ahead of the spreader box.
 The Contractor may use truck-mounted batch machines with a conveyer belt aggregate delivery system and
 without the front feed, continuous loading feature on projects of less than 15,500 square yards (13,000 m2), on spot
 repairs, on projects with multiple routes where every route is less than 15,500 square yards (13,000 m 2), or where
 specified in the plans.
 421.07
 Equipment Calibration. Before mix production, calibrate the mixing equipment to the approved
 JMF in the presence of the Engineer according to Supplement 1040. Verify that the project calibration is not
 affected by any previous calibrations and scale factors by removing or resetting prior to starting a new calibration.
 Generate documentation for the Engineer, including individual calibrations of each material at various settings.
 Perform a calibration for each JMF used on the project. Following calibration, do not make any further calibration
 adjustments to the mixing equipment without the Engineer’s approval. The Engineer may require additional
 calibrations following any equipment break down related to the aggregate delivery belt, asphalt emulsion gear
 pump, or mixture performance issues.
 Submit the approved mix design information and JMF(s) to the Engineer and District Testing at least 48 hours
 prior to start of calibration.
 421.08
 Spreading Equipment. If a leveling or surface course is specified, apply the mixture by means of a
 conventional spreader box attached to the mixer.
 If a rut fill course is specified, apply the mixture with a 5 to 6 foot (1.5 m to 1.8 m) width V-shaped rut filling
 spreader box attached to the mixer. Equip the rut filling spreader box with a steel strike-off.
 If a leveling course is specified, apply the mixture with a spreader box equipped with a steel or rubber strike-off
 that is designed to fill wheel path ruts. A secondary strike-off may be used to reduce roughness of the leveling
 course but will not remove mixture in wheel path ruts or affect desired cross section.
 Equip the spreader box with paddles or augers mounted on an adjustable shaft to continually agitate and distribute
 the materials throughout the box. Ensure that the equipment provides sufficient turbulence to prevent the mix from
 setting in the rut fill or spreader box or causing excessive side build-up or lumps. To prevent loss of the mixture
 
 from the spreader box, attach flexible seals, front and rear, in contact with the road. Operate the spreading
 equipment in such a manner as to prevent the loss of the mixture on superelevated curves.
 For surface courses, attach a secondary strike-off to the spreader and adjust as required to provide a uniform
 mixture texture.
 The Contractor may use burlap drags or other drags, if necessary, to obtain the desired finish. Replace drags
 having excessive build-up.
 421.09
 
 Surface Preparation. Before applying the mixture, thoroughly clean the surface.
 
 Remove raised pavement markers according to 621.08, when specified. The Contractor may fill the depression
 caused by the removal of the casting with material meeting this specification.
 Remove all existing pavement markings, except 740.02 (traffic paint), using an abrasion method conforming to
 641.10.
 Seal visible joints and cracks longer than 2 feet (600mm) in length and any joint or crack greater than 1/4 inch
 (6 mm) in width no matter the length using Item 423 Type II or Type III sealant only. Apply crack sealant material
 at a width of 2 to 4 inches (50 to 100 mm) and at a thickness of not less than 1/16 inch (2 mm) and not greater than
 3/16 inch (5 mm).
 Apply a tack coat to the existing pavement surface conforming to Item 407 CSS-1h or 421.02 CSS-1hM,
 consisting of a minimum of 15% asphalt residue achieved by diluting with water. Apply the tack coat at a rate of
 0.06 to 0.12 gallons per square yard (0.25 to 0.45 L/m²) that provides uniform coverage without excess run-off and
 allow tack to break before releasing to construction traffic. Adjust application rate of tack coat based on surface
 texture and porosity. Apply the tack coat only to areas that will be covered by the microsurface during the same
 day. Do not apply tack coat on top of a leveling course prior to placing the surface course.
 Protect drainage structures, monument boxes, water valve, etc. during material application.
 421.10
 Test Strip. Construct a continuous 1000-foot (300 m) long by lane width test strip for each approved
 JMF(s) for the project. The test strip will demonstrate the mix and set time of the material and ability to perform
 under full traffic. If handwork will be performed on the project, include handwork in the test strip. Construct the
 test strip at the same time of day or night the full production will be applied. Perform a yield check to ensure the
 proper spread rate, surface quality requirements and compliance with JMF components are met. Submit results to
 the Engineer.
 The Engineer will evaluate the completed test strip and yield check report after a minimum of 12 hours under
 traffic, to determine if the mix design and application is acceptable. The Contractor may begin full production after
 the Engineer accepts the test strip.
 If the microsurfacing is being applied between May 1 and October 15, the Department may waive the test strip
 if the Contractor has constructed a Department accepted test strip during the same timeframe with the same
 materials and JMF(s) and with no documented project performance issues. Provide documentation (Project
 Number, District, Route, Test Strip Date, Engineer, etc.) and history from the previous test strip(s) and
 calibration(s) to the Engineer.
 .
 421.11
 Application. Apply the microsurfacing mixture to the prepared surface in a manner to fill cracks,
 shallow potholes, and minor surface irregularities and achieve a uniform textured surface without causing skips,
 lumps, or tears. Carry a sufficient amount of material at all times in all parts of the spreader box to ensure complete
 and uniform coverage. Avoid overloading of the spreader box. Do not allow lumping, balling, or unmixed aggregate
 in the spreader box.
 When specified, place leveling courses to cover the entire pavement area as specified. Place the leveling course
 in a manner to maintain or improve the ride quality of the existing pavement. Provide a completed leveling course
 with no drag marks or tears greater than 1/2 inch (13 mm) wide, 1/4 inch (6 mm) deep, or 12 inches (25 mm) in
 length. Provide a completed leveling course free of flushing, bleeding, or added roughness. The completed leveling
 
 course may exhibit minor raveling upon opening to traffic but will not exhibit any continued raveling after the first
 four hours of traffic.
 If a rut fill course is specified, apply enough material to fill the wheel paths without excess crowning (overfilling).
 An excess crown is defined as 1/8 inch (3 mm) after 24 hours of traffic compaction. Apply rut fill courses in widths
 from 5 to 6 feet (1.5 to 1.8 m) for each wheel path. Provide a smooth, neat seam where two rut fill passes meet.
 Take care to restore the designed profile of the pavement cross-section. Feather the edges of the rut fill course to
 minimize the use of excess material.
 When specified, apply rut fill courses in widths from 5 to 6 feet (1.5 to 1.8 m) for each wheel path. Apply enough
 material to fill the wheel paths without excess crowning (overfilling). An excess crown is defined as 1/8 inch (3
 mm) after 24 hours of traffic compaction. If rut depth exceeds 1.0 inches (25 mm), apply rut fill course in multiple
 courses. Provide a smooth, neat seam where two rut fill passes meet. Take care to restore the designed profile of
 the pavement cross-section. After compaction by traffic, ensure the completed rut fill does not result in deviations
 in excess of 1/4 inch (6 mm) as measured across each wheel path using a 6 foot (1.8 m) straight edge. Do not place
 microsurfacing surface course material until wheel path deviations in excess of 1/4 inch (6 mm) are corrected.
 Place the rut fill course in a manner to maintain or improve the ride quality of the existing pavement. Provide a
 completed rut fill course with no drag marks or tears greater than 1/2 inch (13 mm) wide, 1/4 inch (6 mm) deep, or
 12 inches (25 mm) in length. Provide a completed rut fill course free of flushing, bleeding, or added roughness.
 The completed rut fill course may exhibit minor raveling upon opening to traffic but will not exhibit any continued
 raveling after the first four hours of traffic.
 If a leveling course and a surface course are specified, apply the microsurfacing mixture at a minimum of 14
 pounds per square yard (7.6 kg/m²) of dry aggregate weight for the leveling course and 18 ± 1 pounds per square
 yard (9.8 ± 0.5 kg/m²) of dry aggregate weight for the surface course. Apply the two courses at a minimum
 combined rate of 32 pounds per square yard (17.4 kg/m²) of dry aggregate weight.
 If a surface course is specified and it is not placed on a microsurfacing leveling course, apply the microsurface
 mixture at a rate of 22 ± 0.5 pounds per square yard (11.9 ± 0.3 kg/m2) of dry aggregate weight. Apply the mixture
 in a manner to produce a uniform surface texture across the entire paving pass.
 For leveling and surface courses, provide a smooth, feathered, neat seam of 1 to 3 inches (25 to 75 mm) where
 two passes meet at the pavement centerline and at edge of shoulder. In variable width pavement sections minimize
 overlap and feather overlapping pass on to the completed surface. Construct overlaps such that cross slope drainage
 is maintained. Immediately remove excess material from the ends of each run.
 Construct surface courses at a width to cover the outside edges of rut fill and leveling courses. Construct seams
 at or near edge of lane but do not construct seams in wheel paths. Maintain straight edge lines along curbs and
 shoulders. Do not allow runoff in these areas. Ensure that lines at intersections are straight..
 Use squeegees and lutes using similar material as the secondary strike-off to spread the mixture in areas
 inaccessible to the spreader box and areas requiring hand spreading. The Contractor may adjust the mix set additive
 to provide a slower setting time if hand spreading is needed. Do not adjust the water content to adjust the setting
 time. If hand spreading, pour the mixture in a small windrow along one edge of the surface to be covered and spread
 it uniformly by a hand squeegee or lute. Provide uniform appearance of the entire surface area regardless of the
 means used to spread material.
 Ensure that the microsurfacing cures at a rate that will permit traffic on the pavement within 1 hour after
 application without damaging the pavement surface. However, should the Contractor experience a curing condition
 that does not allow the opening to traffic within one hour, work out an arrangement agreeable to the Engineer
 before releasing traffic on the pavement.
 If the final surface course is not uniform in texture, free of streaks, drag marks, lumps or tears, stop applying the
 mixture and take steps to correct the streaking problem. Do not resume work until the Engineer is satisfied the
 problem has been corrected.
 
 If a section of pavement is not going to be exposed to traffic within 48 hours, compact it with a pneumatic tire
 roller after curing. Conform the pneumatic tire roller to 401.13, and inflate the tire pressure to 40 to 60 pounds per
 square inch (275 to 400 kPa).
 421.12 Quality Control.
 A. General. Use the methods described in this section to control the quality of the mixture and application, and
 to measure compliance. If any test results or measures of compliance exceed any of the identified quality control
 tolerances or specification requirements, stop placement and immediately notify the Engineer and District Testing.
 Identify the cause of exceeding any of the identified quality control tolerances and document in detail the corrective
 action necessary to bring the deficiency into compliance. Implement the corrective action and resume work and
 immediately perform a test or measure to confirm corrective action has resolved the deficiency. If upon resuming
 work the tolerances are exceeded, stop the work. Present a revised corrective action plan to, and obtain the
 Engineer’s approval before resuming work. Upon resuming work, immediately perform a test or measure to
 confirm corrective action has resolved the deficiency.
 The Department can obtain samples of materials at any time. Aggregate samples can be taken from sources, onhand stockpiles, or from the mixing equipment. Work can be stopped and materials and JMF can be rejected on
 the basis of poor Department test results. If the Department reports non-compliance on any material test, the
 Department will compare results with the Contractors Quality Control Manager. The Engineer will determine if
 the tests or compliance measurement has been satisfactory corrected.
 Prior to starting placement, verify the pH of the water to be used is within the acceptable range on the JMF.
 Verify again if source of water changes.
 Perform a minimum of four yield checks daily with one occurring within the first 1,000 linear feet (300 linear
 meter) of continuous placement and the last occurring in the last 1,000 linear feet (300 linear meter). Perform at
 least one yield check for each course applied. For cross-overs, driveways, and any other irregular areas, determine
 yield checks by a means acceptable to the Engineer. Ensure yield checks are a minimum of 500 linear feet (150
 linear meter) for continuous loading mixing machines or one full-loaded truck-mounted machine. Ensure yield
 checks meet and include documentation of compliance for sections 421.03, 421.05, 421.09, 421.11, and 421.13.
 B. Binder. Within one hour of the start of production obtain and label a Binder sample from supply tanker and
 diluted tack coat sample from the distributor truck and give the samples to the Engineer the same day. Provide and
 sample the Binder and diluted tack coat in one quart (1 L) plastic containers with plastic screw tops. Label and
 retain one sample per each additional day for the Department. Take more samples when requested by the Engineer.
 Visually inspect Binder in supply tanker(s) to ensure uniform material with no separation or contamination.
 Verify temperature of Binder and tack coat. Monitor and verify proportioning of asphalt emulsion and water into
 distributor and proper mixing before use or sampling. Perform a minimum of one Binder and tack coat cook-off
 each production day to determine the residue content of the Binder and tack coat and verify compliance.
 C. Aggregate. Ensure the aggregate stockpile gradation does not vary by more than the stockpile tolerance in
 Table 421.02-3 compared to the approved JMF and does not exceed the design gradation band for No. 200 (75 µm)
 sieve. Ensure the percent passing does not change from the high end to the low end of the range for any two
 consecutive sieves.
 Verify the blending and screening of aggregates at the stockpile site and sample the blended and screened
 aggregate for QC testing.
 Stockpile a minimum of 10 percent of the project aggregate or 200 tons (180 metric tons) of aggregate whichever
 is less at a staging area. Obtain three (3) aggregate samples from the stockpile and perform gradation testing on
 each sample according to AASHTO T 2, AASHTO T 248, Supplement 1004 (AASHTO T 11 where required), and
 moisture content per AASHTO T 255. Use dry gradations for determining the No. 200 (75 µm) sieve. Determine
 the percent passing for each sieve size listed in Table 421.02-3. Calculate the average of each sieve for all three
 tests. Ensure the average value for each sieve is within the requirements of Table 421.02-3. Do not begin production
 if not in compliance with gradation band and stockpile tolerance.
 
 At a minimum test one sample taken from the stockpile randomly during each production day. Include additional
 testing when directed to sample and test by the Engineer. The Contractor may perform an additional aggregate test
 to verify results if first test is not in compliance with stockpile tolerance. Report and track all test results and
 monitoring trending of the aggregate gradation within the stockpile.
 Reject aggregate that does not meet the stockpile tolerance in Table 421.02-3 compared to the approved JMF.
 Do not exceed the design gradation band for No. 200 sieve.
 For data collection by the Department, if requested by the Engineer, obtain a mix sample randomly during the
 day by dragging a tube sampler across material under the mixer but before the spreader box as it moves forward.
 Obtain a 10 pound (4,535 gram) minimum mix sample, put in a suitable plastic container, and provide to the
 Engineer.
 D. Mixture Application. Ensure the Quality Control Manager and trained technicians perform and use the
 methods described in this section to control quality and measure compliance.
 1. Supervise the mixing machine calibration, test strip application, and verify compliance before production
 begins.
 2. Establish with the mix operator restrictive operating limits for use of total mixture water, additive, and mineral
 filler subject to weather conditions and course applied.
 3. Maintain all calibration records and compare calibration results for each project through construction season.
 4. Direct all material input settings required to produce mix design compliance.
 5. Verify mixture meets required mix time, set time and mix consistency.
 6. Perform an aggregate moisture test at the start of each production day.
 7. Communicate and direct any desired adjustments with the Binder supplier (asphalt emulsion) for mix and set
 time properties.
 8. Evaluate roadway for determination of planned application rates and maintain direct communication with
 Department personnel, application personnel, and Engineer on all compliance issues.
 9. Verify and document that all cracks greater than 1/4 inch (6 mm) in width and all cracks longer than two feet
 (50 mm) have been filled and that the crack sealant is in compliance with thickness requirements.
 10. Monitor roadway during application for proper surface cleaning.
 11. Monitor application of tack coat for proper coverage and document application rate.
 12. Monitor mixture placement for consistency, uniformity of thickness across paving pass, and use of water
 spray bars.
 13. Monitor mixture application rate and finishing methods to ensure uniform surface.
 14. Monitor cross section compliance subject to course type specified.
 15. Monitor set properties for opening to traffic and durability under traffic.
 16. Monitor daily production reports for compliance with mix design tolerances.
 17. Maintain each material usage by ticket weight and verify consistency to mixing machine calibrated use.
 18. Direct adjustments of material settings and mixture subject to material test results and field performance.
 19. Monitor haul trucks, mixing machine, and allied equipment for oil drippings, aggregate spillage and other
 factors that may affect the adherence or performance of the applied mixture.
 E. Documentation. Provide the Engineer a daily report no later than the next calendar day (excluding Sundays)
 with the following:
 1. A printout from the mixing machine showing the total pounds of aggregate, emulsion, and cement as well
 any other materials capable of being printed used for the day as part of the daily production report.
 2.
 
 Project number, county, and route.
 
 3.
 
 Date, air temperature, pavement temperature, and humidity.
 
 4.
 
 Binder temperature, percent residue, and pounds per gallon (grams per liter)
 
 5. Production report with course(s) applied, lane(s) completed, location of work, daily summary of each
 material used, application rate for each course and lane and total area per course.
 6. Yield checks on application rate and compliance with application placement requirements (four per day,
 minimum).
 7. Gradation and moisture content (one random sample during the day and any other samples when directed
 by the Engineer).
 8.
 
 Total gallons (L) of tack cost used and residual asphalt content.
 
 9.
 
 Quality Control Tests and Reports.
 
 10. Contractor representative’s signature.
 Provide a Bill of Lading for Binder and aggregate as requested or at project completion.
 421.13
 Acceptance. Maintain continuous control of the binder to dry aggregate proportioning to conform to
 the approved JMF’s within a tolerance of ±1.5 gallons per ton (±6.4 L/metric ton). Control the spread rate to not
 less than the specified quantity of aggregate per square yard (square meter) on a dry weight basis.
 Within one hour of start of production obtain and label a binder and diluted tack coat sample from the distributor
 trucks and give the samples to the Engineer the same day. Provide and sample the binder and diluted tack coat in
 one quart plastic containers with plastic screw tops. Label and retain one sample of each per each additional day
 for the Department. Take more samples when requested by the Engineer.
 The Engineer will base acceptance of the binder-to-dry aggregate proportion and spread rate on the Engineer’s
 summary of quantities used each day. The Engineer will approve and accept a day’s application of microsurfacing
 provided:
 A. The Engineer’s summary indicates conformance with the above control requirements for proportioning and
 spread rate and
 B. The course(s) applied are in compliance with the application requirements of this specification and
 C. The pavement cracks are sealed prior to placement of the microsurface and
 D. The Quality Control requirements are met and
 E. The pavement is uniform in composition and texture, free from excessive scratch marks, tears, rippling and
 other surface irregularities (segregation, raveling, rutting, holes, debris, etc.), longitudinal joints and lane edges
 coincide with any lane lines and edge lines and transverse joints are uniform, neat and provide a smooth transition.
 The spread rate requirement does not apply to rut fill courses if the Contractor filled the wheel paths according
 to this specification.
 421.14 Performance Review. Perform remedial actions for any defect exceeding the threshold levels in Table
 421.14-1 for a period of two years from the date of substantial work complete as documented on the Department’s
 Form C-85. Contact the Department to schedule a final performance review at least 60 days prior to the end
 performance review period. The Department will review the pavement before the end of the two year performance
 review period to determine if remedial action is required. The Department will issue the results in writing to the
 Contractor upon completion of the performance review.
 Remedial Actions. Perform Remedial Actions by October 15th of the same year as the review. If the Department
 determines that immediate repairs are necessary, due to a potential hazard to the traveling public, the Department
 will notify the Contractor and establish a date that all repairs are to be finished.
 
 Provide construction traffic control when performing any work required or allowed by this specification in
 accordance with current Department policy and the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Obtain
 Department approval for the time the work will be performed.
 Provide approved materials, equipment, and labor to perform Remedial Actions at no additional cost to the
 Department. Prior to performing a Remedial Action, submit a Remedial Action plan to the DCE for approval. State
 in the plan when and how the Remedial Action will be performed; what material will be used; and how traffic will
 be controlled. Warrant Remedial Action work for the remainder of the warranty period.
 Use only microsurfacing for permanent repair and resurfacing areas. Perform temporary repairs using material
 approved by the DCA. Replace temporary repairs with a permanent repair as soon as weather permits.
 Replace pavement markings or raised pavement markers (RPM) removed, obliterated, or damaged while
 performing a Remedial Action with equivalent approved pavement markings or RPMs products at no cost to the
 Department.
 The Contractor is not responsible for pavement damage beyond the Contractor’s control (i.e., car fire, oil spill,
 structural issues etc.).
 TABLE 421.14-1
 Defect Type
 
 Threshold Level (6)
 
 (allowable distress levels)
 
 Non-Uniform Mixture (1)
 300 square feet (28 m2)
 (2)
 Surface Loss
 20 square feet (1.8 m2)
 Raveling (3)
 300 square feet (28 m2)
 (4) (5)
 Rutting
 0.25 inch (6.5 mm) continuous in any Segment.
 Notes:
 (1) Texture inconsistencies in either the transverse and or longitudinal direction.
 (2) Loss of surface by traffic wear, debonding, or delamination.
 (3) “Moderate” level raveling as defined in the Strategic Highway Research Program (SHRP)
 “Distress Identification Manual for the Long-Term Pavement Performance Project” (SHRP-P-338).
 (4) Measure the wheel path with a 4 foot (1.2 m) straight edge.
 (5) Only applies during the first 120 days of Warranty or after any Warranty work.
 (6) Based on 1000 foot (300 m) lane Segment. The beginning of a Segment is the beginning of any
 distress type.
 If any 1000 foot (300 meter) lane segment has repairs or defects greater than 5 percent of the area, resurface with
 a full lane width of microsurfacing meeting the requirements of this specification.
 421.15
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Microsurfacing, Surface Course and
 Microsurfacing, Leveling Course by the number of square yards (square meters), complete and accepted in place.
 The Department will base the width of the pavement course on the width shown on the plans, specified in this
 specification, or directed by the Engineer. The Department will measure the length along the centerline of each
 roadway or ramp.
 The Department will measure the number of raised pavement markers removed.
 The Department will measure Microsurfacing, Rut Fill Course by the number of tons (metric tons) of dry
 aggregate used, complete and accepted in place. The Department will base the weight of the dry aggregate used on
 the calibrated unit weight as reported from the aggregate delivery belt.
 421.16
 
 Basis of Payment. The cost of tack coat and Item 423 Crack Sealing is incidental to Microsurfacing.
 
 The Department will pay for removal of existing pavement markings according to 421.08 under Items 643, 644,
 645, 646, 647, and 648 as specified. The Department will pay for removal of existing raised pavement markers
 according to Item 621 Raised Pavement Markers Removed.
 
 The Department will pay for the construction of accepted test strips at the individual bid prices for the courses
 constructed.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 421
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Ton
 (Metric Ton)
 
 Microsurfacing, Surface Course
 
 421
 421
 
 Microsurfacing, Leveling Course
 Microsurfacing, Rut Fill Course
 
 ITEM 422 CHIP SEAL
 422.01
 422.02
 422.03
 422.04
 422.05
 422.06
 422.07
 422.08
 422.09
 422.10
 422.11
 422.12
 422.13
 422.14
 
 Description
 Materials
 Equipment
 Weather Limitations
 Test Strip
 Surface Preparation
 Binder Application
 Cover Aggregate Application
 Construction Operation
 Quality Control
 Acceptance
 Performance Review
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 422.01
 Description. This work consists of preparing and applying a single or double chip seal. Warrant
 exposed chip seals for two years.
 422.02
 Materials. Use polymer emulsified binder conforming to 702.16 Type A.
 Provide aggregate consisting of washed limestone or washed dolomite conforming to 703.05. Do not use an
 aggregate source designated with “SR” on the Aggregate Source Group list in accordance with 703.01.F.
 Additionally the following requirements apply:
 Stockpile the material to be used for the chip seal at the aggregate source.
 Obtain five (5) samples from the stockpile and perform gradation testing on each sample and determine the
 percent passing for each sieve size listed in Table 422.02-1
 A. Calculate the total range for the No. 8 (2.36 mm) sieve for all five samples. The range will not exceed 6%.
 B. Calculate the percent passing the No. 200 (75 µm) sieve for each sample. No single sample value will exceed
 2.0 percent.
 C. Calculate the average of each sieve for all five samples. Ensure the average value for each sieve is within the
 requirements of Table 422.02-1.
 Submit a letter to the Engineer and District Testing containing the JMF gradations and the calculations to show
 the cover aggregate meets requirements.
 If a staging location will be used for the chip seal aggregate first move the initially tested aggregates from the
 aggregate source stockpile to the staging location and construct a staging stockpile. Then obtain five (5) aggregate
 samples from the staging location stockpile and perform gradation testing on each sample to determine the percent
 passing for each sieve size listed in Table 422.02-1.
 Evaluate the staging location aggregate samples the same as the aggregate source samples except allow an
 average for the No. 200 (75 µm) sieve not greater than 1.7 percent.
 Submit the JMF gradations from the staged stockpile and the calculations to show the cover aggregate meets
 requirements in letter form to the Engineer and District Testing.
 If the chip seal aggregates fail to meet requirements, either at the aggregate source or the staging location, rewash and/or rework the aggregate materials and retest the new stockpiles.
 
 TABLE 422.02-1
 Sieve Size
 1/2 inch
 3/8 inch
 No. 4
 No. 8
 No. 16
 No. 200
 [1]Washed gradation value
 
 (12.5 mm)
 (9.5 mm)
 (4.75 mm)
 (2.36 mm)
 (1.18 mm)
 (75 µm)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 Type A
 Type B
 100
 85 to 100
 100
 5 to 25
 85 to 100
 0 to 10
 5 to 30
 0 to 5
 0 to 10
 [1]
 0 to 1.5
 0 to 1.5 [1]
 
 The District may obtain and test verification samples of the JMF aggregates at any time. If a single verification
 sample is either outside the values in Table 422.02-1 with the exception that the No. 200 (75 µm) value is not
 greater than 2.0 percent, the district will obtain five (5) samples and retest to determine if the aggregate JMF falls
 within the limits of Table 422.02-1. If the JMF verification test doesn’t meet the source or staging location limits
 the stockpile is not acceptable.
 422.03
 Equipment. Provide equipment conforming to the requirements of this section. Obtain approval of
 equipment before starting the job.
 Use equipment for binder distribution conforming to 407.03, except ensure that it has a computerized rate control
 that automatically adjusts the binder pump to the unit ground speed and has a gauge or meter in plain view for
 reading gallons (liters). Use appropriate spray nozzles for the material and rate specified. Adjust spray bar and
 nozzles to provide triple lap coverage.
 Use Type II pneumatic tire rollers conforming to 401.13 with the exception of the requirements of Table 401.131 Roller Capacity. Use a minimum of 3 Type II pneumatic tire rollers capable of ballast loading. The roller weight
 must be between 6 to 8 Tons (5 to 7 metric tons) each to achieve a minimum contact pressure of 80 psi (550 kPa).
 Tires must be inflated to the proper pressure as specified by the roller manufacturer. Use self-propelled aggregate
 spreaders with a variable width aggregate hopper capable of placing from 8 to 16 feet (2.4 to 4.8 m) in any
 increment and a computerized rate control that automatically adjusts the aggregate output to the unit ground speed.
 Equip spreaders with pneumatic tires, a screen to remove oversized material, revolving cylinders, and adjustments
 necessary to produce a uniform distribution of particles at the specified rate.
 Furnish power sweepers, pickup sweepers, or rotary brooms as required for the initial surface preparation and
 for removing loose aggregate particles.
 Furnish accurate thermometers for determining any of the applicable temperature requirements of this
 specification.
 422.04
 Weather Limitations. Place the chip seal when the pavement temperature is between 60 F (16 C)
 and 140 F (60 C). Do not schedule the performance of this work for the time period before May 1 or after
 September 15. Do not place chip seal if any of the following conditions exist:
 A. The atmospheric temperature is below 70 °F (21 °C).
 B. Impending weather conditions do not allow for proper curing.
 C. If temperatures are forecasted below 50 °F (10 °C) within 24 hours from the time of work.
 422.05
 Test Strip. Construct a continuous 1000-foot (300 m) long by lane width test strip in the presence of
 the Engineer. Do not waive test strips regardless if the same materials have been used on another project.
 Determine the initial binder application rates and aggregate application rates for the test strip to achieve 2/3
 aggregate embedment.
 For a single chip seal, Type A, an initial target rate of 0.37 ±0.03 gallon per square yard (1.68 L/m²) is
 recommended for the test strip. For a single chip seal, Type B, an initial target rate of 0.35 ±0.03 gallon per square
 yard (1.58 L/m²) is recommended for the test strip. For double chip seal, a target rate of 0.36 ±0.03 gallon per
 
 square yard (1.63 L/m²) for the first course and 0.33 ±0.05 gallon per square yard (1.49 L/m²) for the second course
 is recommended for the test strip. Notify the Engineer of the initial target rates.
 Calibrate the aggregate spreader to ensure a uniform application rate in both the transverse and longitudinal
 directions. Verify the application rates with a one square yard (one square meter) piece of cardboard or other
 material to collect and weigh the aggregate. Adjust spreader rates to maintain application rate within 10% of the
 target rate. Do not over apply cover aggregate relying on vacuum and broom sweeping to pick up all excess.
 Amounts of loose aggregate that create a nuisance to the public will result in work stoppage. If work is stopped by
 the Engineer recalibrate the aggregate spreader determining a new application rate and apply cover aggregate at
 the new rate. Verify the aggregate gradation meets 422.10.C. during the test strip and provide the results to the
 Engineer.
 The Engineer and Contractor will review the test strip the next workday for streaking, ridging, bleeding,
 aggregate loss or other problems. If the review shows the test strip meets the requirements of 422.11 and the
 application rate and quality control tests show all is in control compared to the JMF, then progress with the work.
 Should problems be noted, the Engineer may require another test strip.
 JMF gradation targets may be adjusted once within the limits of Table 422.02-1 based on results of the approved
 test strip. Provide adjusted gradation targets to the Engineer and the DET prior to progressing with the work.
 422.06
 Surface Preparation. Clean the pavement according to 407.05. If necessary, clean areas of the
 pavement with a hand broom.
 Remove all existing pavement markings, except 740.02 (traffic paint), using an abrasion method conforming to
 641.10.
 Remove the raised pavement markers according to 621.08.
 Do not place material until the Engineer approves the existing surface.
 422.07
 Binder Application. Before applying binder, ensure that sufficient cover aggregate is available for
 immediate application. Apply the binder at the target rate(s) established from a successful test strip. Ensure
 distributor spray bar and nozzles are set to provide triple overlap coverage with no streak or drill patterns on the
 road surface.
 Maintain the binder temperature from 150 to 185 F (65 to 85 C) during construction, including the start of each
 day. Reheat the binder at a rate of no more than 25 F (14 C) per hour, when the binder is allowed to cool below
 150 F (65 C).
 If the target application rates are not the optimum application rates to achieve proper stone embedment during
 the actual application, immediately notify the Engineer. Proper stone embedment is 2/3 of the stone chip height
 and can be checked by pulling out several chips by hand. Adjust and document the new application rate by
 stationing. Recheck stone embedment after adjustment and obtain the Engineer’s approval of the new rate.
 Do not allow the binder to streak on the road surface. If the Engineer determines that streaking is occurring, cease
 operations until the Engineer is satisfied that streaking has been eliminated.
 At the beginning and at the end of a contract section, start and stop the application on a removable protective
 cover (paper, metal sheets, or other suitable material) sufficiently wide enough to allow full application on the
 surface being treated. Make transverse and longitudinal laps in such manner to ensure that the texture of the finished
 surface is uniform and continuous. To prevent lapping at transverse junctions, promptly shut off the binder spray
 at the end of the application. Before continuing the application, place a removable protective cover a sufficient
 distance back from the joint on the cover aggregate so the sprayers are operating at full force when the distributor
 has attained the predetermined speed upon reaching the uncovered surface. Upon completion, remove all removable
 protective covers.
 422.08
 Cover Aggregate Application. Verify the application rate with a one square yard (one square meter)
 piece of cardboard or other material to collect and weigh the aggregate before placing binder. Adjust if necessary
 and re-verify. Record final results and inform the Engineer. Immediately after applying the binder, apply cover
 aggregate uniformly without ridges or laps at the specified rate adjusted as directed by the Engineer to produce a
 
 minimum of excess loose particles. Spread the material in such manner that the tires of the truck or aggregate
 spreader at no time contact the uncovered and newly applied binder. Before rolling, correct deficiencies in the
 application of cover aggregate in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer.
 After rolling, protect the surface from traffic damage during the period required for the binder to cure sufficiently
 and prevent dislodging of the aggregate particles by normal traffic. During this period and as directed by the
 Engineer, correct deficiencies in cover aggregate by spreading additional aggregate or by light brooming.
 Apply cover aggregate at a rate necessary to provide full coverage of the binder and to avoid tracking. Do not
 over apply cover aggregate relying on vacuum and broom sweeping to pick up all excess. Nuisance to the public
 amounts of aggregate will result in work stoppage. If work is stopped by the Engineer recalibrate the aggregate
 spreader determining a new application rate and apply cover aggregate at the new rate. If the target rate needs
 adjustment due to the gradation of the aggregate or due to existing surface conditions of the pavement, immediately
 notify the Engineer and document the new rate by stationing.
 422.09
 Construction Operation. Establish stations at 1000-foot (300 m) intervals on the entire project
 before placing materials. Clearly identify and maintain the stations until project completion.
 Keep the binder distributor, aggregate spreader, and rollers as close to each other as possible. Do not allow the
 binder distributor to be more than 150 feet (45 m) ahead of the aggregate spreader.
 Perform rolling immediately after placing the aggregate, but before the binder sets up. Do not leave aggregate
 unrolled for more than 5 minutes. Perform a minimum of two complete roller passes over the aggregate. A single
 complete pass is forward and backward over the same path. For each new pass, overlap the previous pass by about
 one-half the width of the roller. Use a minimum of three rollers, and roll in a longitudinal direction at a speed not
 greater than 5 miles per hour (8 km/h). Do not operate rollers at speeds that cause pick-up or dislodging of aggregate
 particles.
 Within 4 hours of placement but after the binder sets, sweep the pavement as needed to remove all loose
 aggregate. Use pickup sweepers in curbed areas and where aggregate shoulders do not exist. Do not sweep loose
 aggregate onto lawns, curbed areas, or intersections.
 If the pavement cannot be swept within the 4-hour period due to problems associated with the stone moisture,
 binder, breaking, humidity, or other unknown, the Engineer may suspend the operation until the problem is resolved
 or more suitable conditions are obtained to maintain the 4-hour time frame for sweeping. Extend sweeping 1 foot
 (0.3 m) beyond the edge of the chip seal to help prevent migration of loose aggregate back onto the pavement. Do
 not re-use aggregate from a chip seal that is swept from the pavement or that is already loose off the pavement
 edge.
 Perform a final sweeping immediately before application of permanent pavement markings or a fog seal, if a fog
 seal is required. Use pickup sweepers in curbed areas and where aggregate shoulders do not exist. Do not sweep
 loose aggregate onto lawns, curbed areas, or intersections. The Contractor is responsible for claims of damage to
 vehicles prior to the final sweeping.
 Wait at least 24 hours before placing the second course of a double chip seal. Ensure the first course of a double
 chip seal meets the gradation of Table 422.02-1 Type A and the second course meets the gradation of Table 422.021 Type B. Ensure that the first course meets requirements of this specification and is cured and capable of
 withstanding construction traffic without damage. If loose aggregate is evident, sweep the first course again just
 prior to placing the second course. Correct damage to the underlying chip seal before placing the second course.
 Place the longitudinal construction joint on a lane line or as directed by the Engineer. For double chip seal, place
 the longitudinal construction joint for the first course 6 inches (150 mm) off the centerline and place the second
 course so the longitudinal joint is at the centerline.
 Before opening to traffic, post the roadway with “Loose Gravel/Fresh Tar” signs and a “35 mph” speed plaque
 mounted below the sign. Ensure that signs conform to Item 614. Place these signs in the advance warning area and
 just beyond each intersecting road throughout the length of the activity area. Remove the signs as directed by the
 Engineer.
 
 On two-lane roads or pavements where traffic is maintained on a chip seal constructed that workday, provide a
 traffic control pilot vehicle operated at no more than 25 miles per hour (40 km/h) in the immediate work area.
 Protect all utility castings, monument boxes, and other similar items using tarpaper or other approved material.
 Remove protection before sweeping and opening to traffic.
 422.10
 
 Quality Control
 
 A. General. Use the methods described in this section to measure compliance. If test results exceed any of the
 identified quality control tolerances, stop placement and immediately notify the Engineer and District Testing.
 Identify the cause of exceeding any of the identified quality control tolerances and document in detail the corrective
 action necessary to bring the deficiency into compliance. Obtain the Engineer’s approval before resuming work.
 Upon resuming work, take another sample and immediately provide the test results to the Engineer. If the tolerances
 are exceeded, stop the work. Do not resume work until approved by the Engineer and District Testing. The
 Department can obtain samples of materials at any time. Aggregate samples can be taken from sources, on-hand
 stockpiles or the aggregate spreader box. Work can be stopped and materials can be rejected on the basis of poor
 Department test results. Any deficient materials found to be incorporated in the project will be evaluated per
 Supplement 1102.
 B. Binder. Within one hour of start of production obtain and label a binder sample from the distributor truck and
 give the sample to the Engineer the same day. Provide and sample the binder in one quart plastic containers with
 plastic screw tops. Label and retain one sample per each additional day for the Department. Take more samples
 when requested by the Engineer.
 For the binder application rate, as determined by a yield check, do not exceed a tolerance of ±0.02 gallon per
 square yard (0.09 L/m²) from the established application rate.
 C. Coarse Aggregate. At a minimum test one sample taken from the aggregate spreader box at production start
 and sample and test one sample from the aggregate spreader box randomly during the day. Provide the Engineer
 with a split sample that is a minimum of 22lbs (10,000g) from each day’s random sample for verification testing.
 An aggregate spreader box sample may be taken by laying a piece of suitable material under the spreader as it
 moves forward. Include additional testing when directed to sample and test by the Engineer. Sample and test
 aggregate according to AASHTO T 2, AASHTO T 248, and Supplement 1004 (AASHTO T 11 where required).
 Use washed gradations for determining the percent passing the No. 200 (75 µm) sieve. Submit daily test results to
 the Engineer prior to beginning the next day’s production. The Contractor may use additional tests. These may
 include dry gradations for control purposes but acceptance of on-hand aggregate will be based on washed gradations
 only. Reject and do not use aggregate creating dusting nuisance to the public on the project.
 Reject truckloads of aggregate if water is seen coming from the truck bed.
 Reject aggregate that does not meet the following requirements:
 No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve from JMF
 No. 8 (2.36 mm) sieve from JMF
 No. 200 (75 µm) sieve from JMF
 Aggregate moisture content
 (by dry weight)
 
 ±5.0%
 ±3.0%
 ±1.0%, 2.05% upper limit
 4.0% max. for aggregates with an Absorption > 2.0%,
 3.0% max. for aggregates with an Absorption ≤ 2.0%
 
 D. Documentation. Provide the Engineer a daily report with the following:
 1.
 
 Project number, county, route.
 
 2.
 
 Date, air temperature, pavement temperature, and humidity.
 
 3.
 
 Binder temperature.
 
 4.
 
 Beginning and ending stations.
 
 5.
 
 Target binder and aggregate application rates.
 
 6.
 
 Yield checks on binder (three per day, minimum).
 
 7.
 
 Yield checks on aggregate (three per day, minimum).
 
 8. Gradation, moisture content, and station (One sample from spreader box at production start, one random
 sample during the day and any other samples when directed by the Engineer).
 9.
 
 Length, width, and total area.
 
 10. Condition of “Loose Stone” signs with “35 mph” speed plaques.
 11. Contractor representative’s signature.
 Provide a bill of lading for binder and aggregate when requested or at project completion.
 422.11
 Acceptance. Inspect the chip seal daily for deficiencies resulting from poor workmanship, flushing,
 tracking from equipment, surface patterns, loss of stone, and sweeping. Inspect workmanship for untreated areas,
 minimum overlap on longitudinal joints, and minimum overlap on construction joints.
 Verify the following for daily acceptance:
 A. Finished surface has no more than four tears or untreated areas greater than 1 inch (25 mm) wide and 4 inches
 (100 mm) long in any 120-square yard (100 m2) area.
 B. Joints appear neat and uniform without buildup, uncovered areas, or unsightly appearance.
 C. Longitudinal joints have less than a 2-inch (50 mm) overlap on the adjacent passes.
 D. Transverse joints have no more than 1/4-inch (6 mm) difference in elevation across the joint as measured with
 a 6-foot (2 m) straightedge.
 E. Chip seal edge is neat and uniform along the roadway lane, shoulder, and curb lines.
 F. Chip seal edge has no more than 2-inch (50 mm) variance in any 100 feet (30 m), along the roadway edge or
 shoulder.
 G. Typical stone chip embedment is 2/3 of typical stone chip height.
 For project acceptance, the Contractor and Engineer will review the completed work 25 to 35 days after
 placement. The finished work must meet the following requirements:
 Defect [1]
 Surface patterns
 
 Severity
 Alternate lean and heavy lines
 (Ridges or streaking over the surface)
 Bleeding/flushing
 Distinctive appearance
 (Excess binder on surface)
 Loss of cover aggregate
 Patches or lines of aggregate lost from surface
 [1]No more than 20% of any 120 square yard (100 m2) area can contain any defect. The
 measurement of the 120 square yard (100 m2) area begins at the start of the defect.
 Perform all corrective work to the satisfaction the Engineer.
 422.12
 Performance Review. Perform remedial actions for any defect exceeding the threshold levels in
 Table 422.12-1 for a period of two years from the date of substantial work complete as documented on the
 Department’s Form C-85. Contact the Department to schedule a final performance review at least 60 days prior to
 the end performance review period. The Department will review the pavement before the end of the two year
 performance review period to determine if remedial action is required. The Department will issue the results in
 writing to the Contractor upon completion of the performance review.
 Remedial Actions. Perform Remedial Actions between May 1 and September 1. If the Department determines
 that immediate repairs are necessary, due to a potential hazard to the traveling public, the Department will notify
 the Contractor and establish a date that all repairs are to be finished.
 
 Provide construction traffic control when performing any work required or allowed by this specification during
 the warranty period in accordance with current Department policy and the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
 Devices. The Department will approve when the work is performed.
 Provide approved materials, equipment, and labor to perform Remedial Actions at no additional cost to the
 Department. Prior to performing a Remedial Action, submit a Remedial Action plan to the DCA for approval. State
 in the plan when and how the Remedial Action will be performed; what material will be used; and how traffic will
 be controlled. Warrant Remedial Action work for the remainder of the warranty period.
 Replace pavement markings or raised pavement markers (RPM) removed, obliterated, or damaged while
 performing a Remedial Action with pavement markings or RPMs equal approved products at no cost to the
 Department.
 The Contractor is not responsible for pavement damage beyond the Contractor’s control (i.e., car fire, oil spill,
 structural issues, etc.).
 TABLE 422.12-1
 Each segment will be 300 ft (91 m) in length and the width of the lane. The beginning point of a 300
 ft (91 m) segment starts at the beginning of any individual defect type. For loss of aggregate, the
 beginning point of a 300 ft (91 m) lane segment will exclude locations where vehicles turn from or
 onto other state highways.
 Defect
 Severity
 Threshold Levels
 Surface Patterns
 Severe - light and heavy lines over
 40% of segment length affected,
 the pavement surface
 continuous or localized
 Bleeding/ Flushing
 Moderate - excess binder on surface 5% of segment length affected
 (loss of stone/tire contact) not
 continuously or total of 20%
 subject to wearing off quickly
 localized problems
 Loss of Aggregate
 Moderate- patches of aggregate loss 10% of segment length affected
 continuously or total of 20%
 localized problems
 422.13
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Single Chip Seal or Double Chip Seal by
 the number of square yards (square meters), completed and accepted in place. The Department will determine the
 width by measuring the actual width of the chip seal. The Department will determine the length along the centerline
 of each roadway or ramp.
 The Department will measure the number of raised pavement markers removed if a Double Chip Seal is specified.
 422.14
 Basis of Payment. The Department will not pay for materials, equipment, or labor to make
 corrections.
 The Department will pay for removal of existing pavement markings according to Items 643, 644, 645, 646, 647,
 and 648 as specified.
 The Department will pay for removal of existing raised pavement markers according to Item 621 Raised
 Pavement Markers Removed.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 422
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Single Chip Seal, Type __
 
 422
 
 Double Chip Seal
 
 ITEM 423 CRACK SEALING, HOT APPLIED
 423.01
 423.02
 423.03
 423.04
 423.05
 423.06
 423.07
 423.08
 423.09
 423.10
 423.01
 sealant.
 423.02
 
 Description
 Materials
 Equipment
 Weather Limitations
 Preparation
 Mixing Type II and III
 Application of Sealant
 Opening to Traffic
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 Description. This work consists of preparing and sealing pavement cracks with a hot applied crack
 Materials. Furnish hot applied crack sealant, of the type specified, conforming to:
 
 Type I ............................................................................................... 705.04
 Type II ......................................................................................... 702.17.B
 Type III ......................................................................................... 702.17.C
 Type IV ........................................................................................ 702.17.D
 Furnish Type I crack sealant material according to the Department’s TE-24 system before shipping to the project.
 Obtain approval of other crack sealants according to 702.17.
 423.03
 Equipment. Equipment used in the performance of this work is subject to the Engineer’s approval
 and to the requirements of 108.05.
 For Type I crack sealant, heat the sealant in a kettle or melter constructed as a double boiler, with the space
 between the inner and outer shells filled with oil or other heat-transfer fluid. Use a kettle or melter with positive
 temperature control of the oil bath, and provide a mixing vat, mechanical agitation, and recirculating pumps. Do
 not apply direct heat to the sealant.
 For Types II, III, and IV crack sealants, heat the sealant in a kettle or melter constructed as a double boiler, with
 the space between the inner and outer shells filled with oil or other heat-transfer fluid. Use a kettle or melter with
 separate thermometers for the oil bath and mixing vat. Equip the kettle with a full sweep type agitator. Also, equip
 the kettle with a 2-inch (50 mm) minimum recirculating pump to provide circulation of the materials when not
 applying the crack sealant. Do not apply direct heat to the sealant.
 For Types I and IV crack sealants, use a mechanical applicator wand capable of continuously feeding the sealant
 through nozzles shaped to penetrate the cracks. A positive sealant flow shutoff mechanism is required. Ensure that
 the wand produces a band according to the tolerances of 423.07.
 For Types II and III crack sealants, use a mechanical applicator wand head capable of placing the crack sealant
 according to the tolerances of 423.07 while filling the cracks. A positive sealant flow shutoff mechanism is required.
 Use portable air compressors capable of furnishing at least 100 pounds per square inch (690 kPa) of air pressure
 at the nozzle. Use compressors equipped with traps that maintain the compressed air free of oil and water.
 Use water cleaning equipment capable of delivering water at 2000 pounds per square inch (14 MPa) of pressure
 from a nozzle to the crack being cleaned.
 Use a propane lance unit capable of producing a blast of hot air that operates at 1000 F (538 C) and a gas
 velocity of 2000 feet per second (600 m/s).
 Use mechanical and power driven routing and sawing equipment capable of following close to the path of cracks
 and of widening the cracks to the required dimension without causing excessive spalling or damage to the adjacent
 pavement. For sawing equipment, use diamond saw blades with a diameter of 8 inches (200 mm) or less.
 
 423.04
 Weather Limitations. Do not seal cracks if the surface is visibly damp or the temperature is below
 45 F (7 C).
 423.05
 
 Preparation. Fill all visible cracks according to 423.07 or as directed by the Engineer.
 
 If routing is specified, rout cracks with an opening less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) to provide a sealant reservoir with
 a nominal size of 3/4 inch (19 mm) wide by 1 inch (25 mm) deep.
 If sawing is specified, saw all cracks to 3/4 to 7/8 inch (19 to 22 mm) wide and 7/8 to 1 inch (22 to 25 mm) deep.
 Use hand tools or a lightweight chipping hammer to remove all slivers of asphalt concrete less than 1 inch (25 mm)
 wide remaining along the crack after sawing. Immediately before sealing, sandblast both faces of the sawed crack
 to remove all contamination and to texture the faces. If the crack below the sealant reservoir is greater than 3/8 inch
 (10 mm) wide, insert a backer rod into the crack to form the bottom of the reservoir at the proper depth.
 Before applying the hot sealant, clean cracks by an approved method or methods to remove dust, dirt, moisture,
 vegetation, and other foreign material. Keep the cracks clean and dry until all sealing operations are completed.
 423.06
 Mixing Type II and III. Use weigh tickets in determining the specified proportion of fiber to blend
 into the binder. Add fibers to the binder, and mix thoroughly in the kettle. Do not allow the temperature of the
 sealant in the field application to exceed the safe heating temperature recommended by the manufacturer. Do not
 heat Type III crack sealant to greater than 295 F (146 C).
 423.07
 operation.
 
 Application of Sealant. Perform the crack sealing operation within 250 feet (76 m) of the cleaning
 
 Seal only cracks that are wide enough to permit entry of sealant. Seal tightly closed cracks (less than 1/4-inch (6
 mm) wide) only if they show signs of raveling or spalling. Do not seal cracks greater than 1-inch (25 mm) wide,
 and do not seal spalls or cavities greater than 4 inches (100 mm) wide, unless otherwise directed.
 For Types I and IV crack sealants, fill the entire crack reservoir with the sealant from the bottom up to
 approximately 1/16 inch (2 mm) above the pavement surface. Immediately scrape the filled cracks with a V-shaped
 or U-shaped squeegee, or similar hand tool, to smooth the overfill. This may require more than one application of
 sealant. The Engineer will not accept the work if the band of sealant on the pavement surface is greater than 2
 inches (50 mm) wide.
 For Types II and III crack sealants, place the sealant such that it fills the cracks with a band of sealant within 2
 to 4 inches (50 to 100 mm) wide. The Engineer will not accept the work if the thickness on the pavement is greater
 than 3/16 inches (5 mm).
 423.08
 Opening to Traffic. Do not allow traffic on the sealant until it has cured and the possibility of tracking
 no longer exists. However, if the Engineer determines it is necessary to allow traffic to pass over the sealant before
 adequate curing, dust Portland cement or other approved material over sealed cracks to eliminate pickup or tracking.
 423.09
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Crack Sealing, of the type specified, by the
 number of pounds (kilograms) of hot applied sealant in place, completed, and accepted.
 The Department will measure Crack Sealing, of the type specified, by the square yards of sealing completed and
 accepted.
 423.10
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 423
 
 Pound (Kilogram)
 or Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 or Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 
 Crack Sealing, Type I
 
 423
 423
 
 Crack Sealing with Routing, Type I
 Crack Sealing with Sawing, Type I
 
 423
 423
 423
 423
 
 or Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 or Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 or Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 or Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 or Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Crack Sealing, Type II
 Crack Sealing, Type III
 Crack Sealing, Type II or III
 Crack Sealing, Type IV
 
 ITEM 424 FINE GRADED POLYMER ASPHALT CONCRETE
 424.01
 424.02
 424.03
 424.04
 424.05
 424.06
 424.07
 424.08
 424.09
 424.10
 
 Description
 Composition
 Materials
 Mixing
 Weather Limitations
 Spreading, Compacting and Finishing
 Surface Tolerances
 Acceptance
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 424.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing a surface course of aggregate and polymer modified
 asphalt binder mixed in a central plant and spread and compacted on a prepared surface. The requirements of 401
 apply, except as modified by this specification.
 424.02
 
 Composition. For Type A mixes use 8.5 percent modified asphalt binder by total mix weight.
 
 For Type B mixes, submit a proposed JMF according to 441.02 to the Laboratory that meets the requirements of
 a Type 1 surface course, except as follows:
 A. Minimum VMA, 15.0 percent
 B. Minimum total binder content, 6.4 percent
 C. Design air voids, 4.0 percent
 D. For projects with less than 1500 trucks use 50 blows, for projects with greater than or equal to 1500 trucks use
 75 blows. If multiple traffic segments occur on a project use 75 blows for the project.
 424.03
 Materials. Furnish clean, uncoated aggregate conforming to the applicable requirements of Table
 424.03-1 and quality requirements of 703.05.
 Use a PG 76-22M asphalt binder; or a PG 64-22 asphalt binder modified by adding 5.0 ±0.3 percent by weight
 Styrene Butadiene Rubber (SBR) solids and meeting the requirements of PG 76-22. Provide SBR conforming to
 702.14. Provide mineral filler conforming to 703.07. Provide binders conforming to 702.01.
 Ten percent RAP may be used in a Type B mix if all requirements of footnote [3] are met by the RAP. Do not
 use RAP in a Type A mix.
 TABLE 424.03-1 - MIX GRADATION
 Sieve Size
 1/2 inch
 3/8 inch
 No. 4
 No. 8
 No. 16
 No. 30
 No. 50
 No. 100
 No. 200
 
 (12.5 mm)
 (9.5 mm)
 (4.75 mm)
 (2.36 mm)
 (1.18 mm)
 (600 µm)
 (300 µm)
 (150 µm)
 (75 µm)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 Type A [1][2]
 Type B [1][3][4]
 100
 100
 95 to 100
 95 to 100
 85 to 95
 90 to 100
 53 to 63
 80 to 100
 37 to 47
 60 to 90
 25 to 35
 30 to 65
 9 to 19
 10 to 30
 -3 to 10
 3 to 8
 
 [1]Gradation includes any mineral filler and is specified in percent passing.
 [2]Use natural sand with at least 50 percent silicon dioxide by weight according to ASTM C 146. Include with a
 JMF submittal certified test data from an AASHTO accredited laboratory showing conformance to the 50
 percent silicon dioxide requirement. Ensure data is no more than one year old at time of submittal.
 [3]Fine Aggregate - Use natural sand with at least 50 percent silicon dioxide by weight according to ASTM C 146.
 Include with a JMF submittal certified test data from an AASHTO accredited laboratory showing conformance
 to the 50 percent silicon dioxide requirement. Ensure data is no more than one year old at time of submittal. For
 50 blow mixes, use no more than 20 percent limestone sand, No. 10 limestone, or combination of both by weight
 of total aggregate. For 75 blow mixes, use 20 percent limestone sand, No. 10 limestone, air cooled slag sand or
 combination thereof by weight of total aggregate. If 10 percent RAP is used the silicon dioxide content of the
 total natural sand blend must be at least 50 percent. Contact OMM for guidance on submitting RAP aggregate
 silicon dioxide data.
 [4]Coarse Aggregate - For 50 blow mixes, for the final blend of all coarse aggregate use a minimum 10 percent
 two or more fractured faces aggregate. For 75 blow mixes, use 100 percent two or more fractured faces
 aggregate. Meet the two or more fractured faces aggregate criteria of ASTM D5821-13.
 424.04
 Mixing. Ensure the mixing plant conforms to 402. Discharge the mix from the plant at temperatures
 from 335 °F to 370 °F (168 °C to 188 °C) for hot mix asphalt or 300 °F to 340 °F (149 °C to 171 °C) for warm mix
 asphalt.
 424.05
 Weather Limitations. Do not place the asphalt concrete when the surface of the existing pavement
 is less than 60 °F (15 °C) or the air temperature is less than 60 °F (15 °C).
 424.06
 Spreading Compacting and Finishing. Compact Type A or B mixes conforming to 401.13 and
 401.16. If compacting a mixture 1 inch (25 mm) thick or less do not use a spreading rate that exceeds twice the
 total capacity of the rollers in use. Use a minimum of two rollers. Do not allow traffic on the compacted mixture
 until it has cooled sufficiently to prevent damage.
 424.07
 
 Surface Tolerances. Ensure the completed surface course conforms to 401.19.
 
 Remove raised pavement markers according to 621.08. The Contractor may fill the depression caused by the
 removal of the casting with material meeting this specification.
 424.08
 Acceptance. For Type A mixes comply with acceptance requirements of 301. For Type B mixes
 comply with all requirements of 448.
 424.09
 Method of Measurement. For Type A mixes use a unit weight conversion of 1.75 tons/cubic yard
 (2.08 metric tons/cubic meter).
 The Department will measure the number of raised pavement markers removed.
 424.10
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for removal of existing raised pavement markers
 according to Item 621 Raised Pavement Markers Removed.
 The Department will make payment for accepted quantities, completed in place, at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 424
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Fine Graded Polymer Asphalt Concrete, Type A
 
 424
 
 Fine Graded Polymer Asphalt Concrete, Type B
 
 ITEM 441 ASPHALT CONCRETE - MIX DESIGN AND QUALITY CONTROL
 441.01
 441.02
 441.04
 441.05
 441.06
 441.07
 441.08
 441.09
 441.10
 441.11
 441.12
 441.13
 441.14
 
 Description
 Composition
 Antistrip Additive
 JMF Field Adjustment
 Monitoring
 Quality Control Program
 Testing Facilities
 Quality Control Tests
 Control Charts
 Quality Control Reports
 Mixture Deficiencies
 Acceptance
 Basis of Payment
 
 441.01 Description. This work consists of constructing a surface course or an intermediate course of aggregate
 and asphalt binder mixed in a central plant and compacted on a prepared surface. This specification includes general
 requirements applicable to all types of asphalt concrete pavements where the Contractor is responsible for
 performing the mix design and quality control. Deviations from these general requirements will be covered in the
 specific requirements for each type. The requirements of Item 401 apply, except as follows.
 Control all production processes to assure the Engineer that the mixture delivered to the paving site is uniform
 in composition, conforms to the specification requirements and that the placed mixture is free of any defect (e.g.
 segregation, tenderness, lack of mixture and texture uniformity, raveling, flushing, rutting, holes, debris etc.) within
 the Contractor’s control at project completion.
 When specified, provide anti-segregation equipment for all courses of uniform thickness in accordance with
 401.12.
 441.02 Composition. Compose the asphalt concrete of approved aggregates, asphalt binder and, if required,
 other modifiers. Develop a JMF to comply with the mix design criteria and submit it to OMM on approved forms
 at least two weeks prior to the start of production for preliminary approval. OMM may require additional time prior
 to preliminary approval to perform tests on lab or plant produced mixtures to ensure adequate mix performance.
 OMM will notify the Contractor if additional time for testing is required. Based on the results of this testing, OMM
 may require the Contractor to design a new JMF.
 Perform the mix design and supply all required data in a manner taught in Level 2 Asphalt Technician School,
 Level 3 Asphalt Mix Design School and in the Asphalt Institute Manual Series No. 2. OMM may visit the Level 3
 mix design lab for review. Use a 2-hour cure for all mix samples. Ensure the cure temperature and specimen
 compaction temperature are the same. Select the JMF asphalt binder content using the Design Air Voids and ensure
 the JMF meets the other requirements of Table 441.02-1. Determine Air Voids from specimens prepared and tested
 according to Supplement 1036. Provide a mix design with at least four asphalt binder content points, including a
 minimum of two points above and two points below the JMF asphalt binder content. Submit no more than two
 JMFs for each asphalt concrete pay item per project. Additional submittals are at the discretion of OMM. Unless
 otherwise directed submit a 5-pound (2500 g) minimum uncompacted sample (all mixes) representing the JMF.
 Submit additional samples as requested by OMM.
 Do not start mix production without a preliminary JMF approval and 48 hour notification of District Testing.
 Final approval of a JMF will be based upon field verification. According to 441.12 the JMF can be rejected for
 failure to verify in the plant or at the project.
 Do not apply the gradation requirements of 703.05 for fine aggregate.
 If the F/A ratio using total asphalt binder content is greater than 1.0 recalculate it using the effective asphalt
 binder content. Calculate the effective asphalt binder content according to the Asphalt Institute Manual Series No.
 
 2 . The value (calculated to the nearest percentage point) of the Fifty to Thirty (F-T) value, is the percent of total
 aggregate retained between the No. 50 (300 m) and No. 30 (600 m) sieves, minus the percent of total aggregate
 retained between the No. 30 (600 m) and No. 16 (1.18 mm) sieves.
 Use a PG 64-22 asphalt binder for a Type 1 Intermediate course unless RAP and/or RAS used according to
 401.04 require a virgin binder grade change. Use a PG 64-22 asphalt binder for a Type 2 intermediate course unless
 RAP and/or RAS used according to 401.04 require a virgin binder grade change. Use a PG 64-22 asphalt binder
 and Type 1 surface gradation for asphalt concrete for driveways and under guardrails.
 Identify the PG Binder supplier, as well as the polymer type if applicable, on the JMF submittal. A change in
 polymer asphalt binder or polymer source will require a redesign. Provide on one page neatly summarized, dated
 test results for the requirements of Table 702.01-1. Ensure data is no more than two months old. If SBR polymer
 is added at the asphalt concrete mixing plant, provide in the JMF data from the SBR polymer supplier for total
 solids (percent) and ash (percent) according to the 702.14. As well, provide the target amount of SBR polymer
 greater than or equal to 3.5 percent to achieve the properties specified. Include a letter of certification from the
 polymer supplier verifying percent butadiene in the SBS or SBR polymer. Report in the JMF submittal results of
 temperature-viscosity testing for mixing and compaction temperatures. For polymer asphalt binders, supplier
 recommended temperatures may be used in lieu of the temperature-viscosity results, but the temperature-viscosity
 results must still be reported.
 
 TABLE 441.02-1
 Asphalt Mixture Composition
 Type 1
 Type 1
 Surface
 Intermediate
 
 Property
 1 1/2 inch (37.5 mm)[1]
 1 inch (25.0 mm)[1]
 3/4 inch (19.0 mm)[1]
 1/2 inch (12.5 mm)[1]
 100
 3/8 inch (9.5 mm)[1]
 90-100
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)[1]
 45-57
 No. 8 (2.36 mm)[1]
 30-45
 No. 16 (1.18 mm)[1]
 17-35
 12-25
 No. 30 (600 m)[1]
 5-18
 No. 50 (300 m)[1]
 2-10
 No. 100 (150 m)[1]
 No. 200 (75 m)[1]
 Asphalt Binder[2]
 5.8-10.0
 F/A Ratio, max.[3]
 1.2
 F-T Value[4]
 +2
 Blows[5]
 50
 Stability, min., pounds[5] (N)
 1200 (5338)
 Flow, 0.25 mm[5]
 8 to 16
 Design Air Voids[6]
 3.5
 VMA, min.[7]
 16
 [1]
 Sieve, percent passing
 [2]
 Percent of total mix
 [3]
 Using effective asphalt binder content
 [4]
 Percentage points maximum
 [5]
 AASHTO T 245
 [6]
 Percent, Supplement 1036
 [7]
 Percent, Supplement 1037
 441.03
 
 100
 90 to 100
 50-72
 30 to 55
 17 to 40
 12 to 30
 5 to 20
 2 to 12
 5.0 to 10.0
 1.2
 +2
 50
 1200 (5338)
 8 to 16
 3.5
 16
 
 Type 2
 Intermediate
 100
 95-100
 85-100
 65-85
 35-60
 25-48
 16-36
 12-30
 5 to 18
 2 to 10
 4.0 to 9.0
 1.2
 50
 1200 (5338)
 8 to 16
 4.0
 13
 
 Use of Reclaimed Pavement. Comply with the requirements of 401.04.
 
 441.04
 Antistrip Additive. If the proposed JMF contains any gravel coarse aggregate, or contains more than
 25 percent natural sand, or contains more than 20 percent reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement containing gravel
 coarse aggregate, or is designed according to Item 442 conduct the following tests:
 Moisture damage potential test
 Washed gradation
 Adherent fines test for each component
 
 Supplement 1051
 AASHTO T 11 as modified by Supplement 1004
 ASTM D 5711
 
 Modify the mix with one of the following antistrip additives if the results of the moisture damage potential test
 show the Tensile Strength Ratio (TSR) of the asphalt concrete mix to be less than 0.80 for 442 mixes or 0.70 for
 all other mix types:
 Liquid Antistrip Material. Include liquid antistrip material at a rate of 0.5 to 1.0 percent by weight of the asphalt
 binder. However, if 442 is specified, include liquid antistrip material at a rate of 0.50 to 1.25 percent by weight of
 
 the asphalt binder. Ensure the TSR of the asphalt concrete mix is greater than or equal to 0.80 after the addition of
 the liquid antistrip material.
 Hydrated Lime. Include hydrated lime in the dry form at a rate of 1.0 percent by the dry weight of aggregate
 for asphalt concrete. Conform to AASHTO M 303, Type 1 for hydrated lime. Ensure the TSR of the asphalt
 concrete mix is greater than or equal to 0.80 after the addition of the hydrated lime. Provide the Engineer the
 following information for each shipment of hydrated lime: Letter of certification, Production date, Shipment date,
 Shipment destination, Batch or lot number and Net weight. The Laboratory may obtain samples of the hydrated
 lime at any time to verify quality. If the quality of the hydrated lime is in question, the Laboratory may require
 independent laboratory testing.
 Include the antistrip additive in the mix design. Submit the following to OMM with the proposed JMF:
 A. All TSR data (before and after the addition of the antistrip additive).
 B. Rate of addition of the liquid antistrip material, if used.
 C. If using liquid antistrip material submit product information, information on use by other State DOTs using
 the liquid antistrip material, and a letter of certification. If using hydrated lime submit certified test data showing
 the hydrated lime conforms to AASHTO M 303, Type 1.
 D. Results of the washed gradation test of the individual components of the mix used in determining the combined
 gradation.
 E. Results of the adherent fines testing for each component.
 OMM may perform additional tests on lab or plant produced mix according to Supplements 1004, 1051, and
 1052. If a change in the aggregate production is suspected, the Laboratory may require the Contractor to perform
 washed gradations on components and calculate adherent fines to determine the need for additional TSR review.
 Store and introduce antistrip additives into the plant according to Supplement 1053. Obtain Laboratory approval
 of the antistrip additive storage and feed systems prior to the start of production.
 Provide delivery tickets to the Engineer at the end of the project and at the end of each construction year on a
 multiple year project. The Engineer will verify the number of pounds of antistrip additive used is within 10 percent
 of the calculated amount of antistrip additive required for the total weight of asphalt binder, based on the JMF, used
 in the asphalt concrete.
 441.05 JMF Field Adjustments. During the first three days of production the Contractor may adjust the JMF
 gradation within the below limits without a redesign of the mixture. For projects with less than 3 days of production,
 give District Testing written notice of any JMF gradation adjustments within 1 workday following the last day of
 production. Limit adjustments of the JMF to conform to actual production, without a redesign of the mixture, to 3
 percent passing each of the 1/2 inch (12.5 mm), No. 4 (4.75 mm), and No. 8 (2.36 mm) sieves and 1 percent
 passing the No. 200 (75m) sieve. Do not exceed the limits in Table 441.02-1 and Table 442.02-2 in the adjusted
 JMF. The adjustment on the 1/2 inch (12.5 mm) sieve applies only to Type 2 mixes. Determine the need for any
 JMF gradation adjustments in the time specified. Should no adjustments be made, the Department will base
 acceptance on conformance to the original JMF. After the time period specified, the Department will allow no
 further adjustment of the JMF.
 Should a redesign of the mixture become necessary, submit a new JMF according to the requirements for the
 initial JMF. A new acceptance lot will begin when a new JMF established by a redesign of the mixture becomes
 effective. Make any adjustment of this new JMF as provided for the original JMF. Record both the design JMF and
 the adjusted JMF in effect during production of an acceptance lot on the Quality Control Report for that lot. In the
 event that a new JMF is proposed and approved, also make a notation on the ticket for the first load produced under
 the new JMF.
 441.06 Monitoring. The Department will establish District Monitoring Teams for the purpose of verifying all
 Contractor mixture production processes. Verification may be accomplished by obtaining split samples from
 Contractor QC or independent samples from the plant or roadway. If independent samples are taken split them for
 Contractor testing. If the mixture quality verifies then production may continue. If mixture quality does not verify
 
 then the Monitoring Team and Contractor will cooperatively investigate and resolve the problem. Whenever results
 are disputed OMM will investigate and conduct additional testing to resolve. Based on their review, the Monitoring
 Team may at any time disallow production to continue.
 441.07 Quality Control Program. Submit a QCP according to 403.03. Include an example control chart
 according to 441.10 with the QCP. Use quality control technicians working in the plant lab during all mixture
 production and that are approved by the Department. Technician approval will be according to Supplement 1041.
 441.08 Testing Facilities. Provide testing facilities at the plant site conforming to Supplement 1041.
 441.09 Quality Control Tests. Perform quality control tests to control the asphalt concrete mix within the
 specifications. As required by mix type, ensure that these quality control tests measure the asphalt binder content,
 gradation, air voids, and Maximum Specific Gravity (MSG) according to the Contractor’s QCP. Perform each
 quality control test a minimum of one time each half of a production day or night (two tests per production day or
 night), or one each 1400 tons (1300 metric tons), whichever is less.
 Perform more sampling and testing than the minimum specified at the start of production. Additionally perform
 more sampling and testing than the minimum during production when the quality control tests show the asphalt
 concrete being produced is outside the warning bands as shown in the Contractor’s QCP. Immediately resolve
 problems indicated by any test result exceeding the warning bands and immediately retest to validate corrections
 have returned the materials to within the warning band limits. The Contractor may determine the method of testing
 of the asphalt concrete beyond the minimum specified, and will detail the methods technicians will follow in the
 Contractor’s QCP.
 Should additional testing as required above not be performed District Testing, after consultation with OMM, will
 require the testing frequency be increased to all tests every two hours of production for the remainder of the project.
 If this occurs, District Testing will request an opinion from the QCQC for action(s) against the technician and/or
 Contractor including but not limited to warning, removal and/or a change of the facility to Unconditional
 Acceptance.
 Record the results of every test performed.
 Perform the required quality control tests as follows:
 A. Asphalt Binder Content. Determine the asphalt binder content of a sample of asphalt concrete by performing
 an Asphalt Content (AC) Gauge test according to Supplement 1043. Make all printouts available for review by the
 Monitoring Team at any time. Offset the AC Gauge for each JMF on each project at the project’s start. Perform the
 offset using the solvent extraction method for every QC sample according to Supplement 1038 and the AC Gauge
 Verification and Offset Record until the offset is established. Use solvent extraction according to Supplement 1038
 when an AC Gauge problem exists and for testing cooled samples that cannot adequately be tested in an AC Gauge
 test.
 Total, for each day’s production, the flow meter printouts for SBR polymer added at the asphalt concrete
 mixing plant. Calculate the percent of polymer versus neat asphalt binder in the mix each day and record on the
 TE-199. Hold calculation worksheets and printouts in the plant laboratory for review by the Monitoring Team. A
 +/- 0.2 percent tolerance from the target amount of SBR polymer will be used as a guide for an acceptable amount
 of SBR polymer, but consistently low will not be acceptable. Only take SBR PG-Modified Binder samples using a
 five gallon (19 L) bucket. Take 1 gallon (4 L) to clean the valve port and discard. Take 2 gallons (7.5 L) again, stir
 its contents and transfer to the required sample containers.
 Determine the moisture content of the asphalt concrete for each AC Gauge test. Maintain the moisture content
 at 0.8 percent or less.
 B. Gradation. Perform at least one gradation test each production day on aggregate remaining after removing
 the asphalt binder with a solvent from an asphalt concrete sample used in an AC Gauge test (solvent sample) or on
 aggregate remaining after removing the asphalt binder with a preapproved asphalt ignition oven according to
 Supplement 1054 and from an asphalt concrete sample used in an AC Gauge test (ignition oven sample). Use only
 an asphalt ignition oven to obtain an aggregate sample from an asphalt concrete sample having a polymer modified
 PG Binder. District Testing may make an exception to this for SBS polymer as long as no issues arise. Correct each
 
 solvent sample for ash. Perform all other gradations on solvent samples, ignition oven samples, or on samples
 obtained according to the Contractor’s QCP.
 The gradation results of all the sieves must be representative of the JMF. If the Contractor fails to control the
 entire gradation, the Laboratory may require a redesign according to 441.02.
 When the F-T value is specified for a mix in 441.02 calculate it for each gradation analysis. Maintain the F-T
 value at +4 percentage points or less for these mixes.
 Calculate the F/A ratio for every solvent sample or ignition oven sample analysis. Maintain the F/A ratio so
 no F/A ratio is greater than 1.2 for all mixes. Use the asphalt binder content determined by the AC Gauge for
 calculating the F/A ratio. If the F/A ratio is greater than 1.0, recalculate the F/A ratio using the effective asphalt
 binder content. Calculate the effective asphalt binder content on the calculation sheet using the asphalt binder
 content determined by the AC Gauge and attach it to the Quality Control Report. Use bulk and effective aggregate
 specific gravities and remaining values needed in the calculation from the approved JMF. Do not deviate from
 these values without OMMs approval. If the F/A ratio is greater than 1.0 for ignition oven samples, calculate the
 F/A ratio using the percent passing the No. 200 (75 m) sieve from a washed gradation of the ignition oven sample
 according to AASHTO T 30.
 C. Air Voids and MSG. Determine the air voids of the asphalt concrete by analyzing a set of compacted
 specimens and a corresponding MSG determination according to Supplement 1036. Ensure that the cure
 temperature and specimen compaction temperature are the same. Use a 1-hour cure for all mix samples used in
 voids analysis. The Contractor may use a 2-hour cure time if voids are consistently near the low void warning band.
 In this case, use the 2-hour cure for all voids testing through the remainder of the project. For hot mix asphalt use
 the JMF lab compaction temperature. For warm mix asphalt according to 402.04 use a lab compaction temperature
 30.0 ºF (16.7 ºC) less than the JMF lab compaction temperature for hot mix asphalt. Use a compaction temperature
 tolerance of +/- 5.0 ºF (3.0 ºC). Record on the TE-199 if the mixture produced was ran at the asphalt plant as a hot
 mix asphalt (HMA) or as a warm mix asphalt (WMA) produced according to 402.04 or another approved method.
 Calculate the Voids in Mineral Aggregate (VMA) value for every set of compacted specimens according to
 Supplement 1037.
 Calculate the average of all the MSG determinations performed each production day and report this average
 on the Quality Control Report. When the range of three consecutive daily average MSG determinations is equal to
 or less than 0.020, average these three average MSG determinations to determine the Maximum Theoretical Density
 (MTD). After the MTD is established, compare all individual MSG determinations to the MTD.
 Whenever compacted specimens are to be made and an MSG determination is to be run, take a sample of
 sufficient size to run a corresponding AC Gauge test. When the air void and MSG test results are recorded reference
 them to the AC Gauge test of the sample.
 D. Other Requirements. Supply proper containers and take two 1 quart (1 L) asphalt binder samples from the
 first transport truck load of each different asphalt binder grade of the project before incorporation into the storage
 tank. Label the samples with binder grade, supplier, project number and date and retain them in the plant laboratory
 for future reference by the Department. Discard the samples at project finaling if not taken by the Monitoring Team.
 Retain a split sample for each AC Gauge test and MSG test and all compacted specimens for monitoring by
 the Department. Maintain MSG samples in the state described in ASTM D 2041, Section 9.2. The Contractor may
 dispose of the AC Gauge test samples after two days and all other split samples after seven days if the Department
 does not process the split samples.
 Measure the temperature of the mixture and record. Validate the results on the load tickets at least once during
 each hour of production.
 The Contractor may conduct additional testing of any type. Record such additional testing along with all other
 quality control records and have these records readily available for the Monitoring Team’s review. The Laboratory
 may observe, review, and approve the procedures at any time.
 
 441.10 Control Charts. Maintain up to date control charts showing each individual test result and also the
 moving accumulative range as follows:
 A. Plot tests showing the percent passing for the 1/2 inch (12.5 mm), No. 4 (4.75 mm), No. 8 (2.36 mm), and No.
 200 (75 µm) sieves, the percent asphalt binder content, the MSG, and the percent air voids. Round all percentages
 to the nearest whole percent; except, round asphalt binder content, the No. 200 (75 µm) sieve, and air voids to the
 nearest 0.1 percent.
 B. Show the out of specification limits specified in Table 441.10-1 and QCP Warning Band Limits on the control
 charts.
 C. Label each control chart to identify the project, mix type and producer.
 D. Record the moving accumulative range for three tests under each test point on the chart for air voids and asphalt
 binder content. Accumulative range is defined as the positive total of the individual ranges of two consecutive tests
 in three consecutive tests regardless of the up or down direction tests take. If more than the minimum required
 testing (i.e. two tests per production day or night, 441.09 first paragraph) is performed do not include the result in
 accumulative range calculations.
 Stop production and immediately notify the Monitoring Team when either E or F occurs:
 E. Any two tests in a row or any two tests in two days are outside of the specification limits of Table 441.10-1.
 F. Any four consecutive moving accumulative ranges greater than specification limits of 2.50 percent for air
 voids or 0.60 percent for asphalt binder content occur.
 Any mixture sent to the paving site without stopping production and notifying the Monitoring Team, when
 required by this specification, will be considered non-specification material.
 Do not restart production until an adequate correction to remedy problems is in place and the Monitoring Team
 is satisfied. Following a shutdown restart production in a manner acceptable to District Testing. When production
 problems cannot be solved within one day after a plant shut down a Contractor’s representative holding Level 3
 Asphalt Department approval is required to be at the asphalt plant until a full production day is achieved with
 results satisfactory to the Monitoring Team.
 TABLE 441.10-1
 Mix Characteristic
 Out of Specification Limits[5]
 Asphalt Binder Content[1]
 -0.3% to 0.3%
 [1]
 1/2 inch (12.5 mm) sieve
 -6.0% to 6.0%
 [1]
 No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve
 -5.0% to 5.0%
 [1]
 No. 8 (2.36 mm) sieve
 -4.0% to 4.0%
 [1]
 -2.0% to 2.0%
 No. 200 (75 m) sieve
 [2]
 Air Voids
 2.5% to 4.5%
 [3]
 Air Voids
 3.0% to 5.0%
 [4]
 MSG
 -0.012 to 0.012
 [1]deviation from the JMF
 [2]for Design Air Voids of 3.5%
 [3]for Design Air Voids of 4.0%
 [4]deviation from the MTD
 [5]unless otherwise restricted by mix type specification
 441.11 Quality Control Reports. Use Contractor Form TE-199 for the Quality Control Report. Record all test
 results on the Quality Control Report. Document all decisions regarding responses to test results on the Quality
 Control Report (referring to the particular test), including reasons why a particular problem may exist, what action
 was taken to correct the problem (plant operation or testing), and what communication with Department personnel
 took place. Submit one Quality Control Report to District Testing no later than specified. Retain copies of all
 
 records documenting the quality control inspections and tests throughout the life of the Contract and furnish them
 to District Testing on request.
 441.12 Mixture Deficiencies. Control all production processes to assure the Engineer that the mixture delivered
 to the paving site is uniform in composition; within the specification requirements and limits; conforms to the JMF:
 and that the placed mixture is free of any defect (ex. segregation, tenderness, lack of mixture and/or texture
 uniformity, raveling, flushing, rutting, holes, debris etc.) within the Contractor’s control. Correct obvious pavement
 problems according to 401.15. If the Department has any suspicion that other mixture composition or pavement
 problems exist, the Monitoring Team will conduct an initial investigation through review of data and/or sampling
 of the asphalt pavement. Should a Department investigation determine that the Contractor’s QCP is not controlling
 the mixture in a manner to achieve mixture quality as described above, the Contractor quality control data may be
 rejected. In that case the Department will conduct a thorough investigation by testing samples from the roadway
 and use those test results in determining disposition of the non-specification material.
 A mixture is not uniform in composition if multiple random non-specification individual tests or any four
 consecutive non-specification moving accumulative ranges exist. The mixture can be rejected, production can be
 stopped and/or a redesign can be called for by the Department. OMM will not approve any redesign it determines
 is unsatisfactory to provide acceptable mix performance. Submit this new design for approval according to 441.02
 and at no additional cost to the Department.
 When any out of specification material, based on quality control tests not within the limits of Table 441.01-1, is
 sent to the paving site the Engineer will determine disposition of the material according to Supplement 1102.
 441.13 Acceptance. The Department will base acceptance of the asphalt concrete mix on the item specified in
 the Contract item description. (i.e., Item 446, Item 448).
 441.14 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 441
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Asphalt Concrete Surface Course, Type 1, (448), PG64-22
 
 441
 441
 441
 441
 441
 441
 441
 
 Asphalt Concrete Surface Course, Type 1, (446), PG64-22
 Asphalt Concrete Surface Course, Type 1, (448), PG70-22M
 Asphalt Concrete Surface Course, Type 1, (446), PG70-22M
 Asphalt Concrete Intermediate Course, Type 1, (448)
 Asphalt Concrete Intermediate Course, Type 2, (448)
 Asphalt Concrete Intermediate Course, Type 2, (446)
 Anti-Segregation Equipment
 
 ITEM 442 SUPERPAVE ASPHALT CONCRETE
 442.01
 442.02
 442.03
 442.04
 442.05
 442.06
 442.07
 442.08
 
 Description
 Type A Mix Design
 Type B Mix Design
 Asphalt Binder
 Quality Control
 Compaction
 Acceptance
 Basis of Payment
 
 442.01
 Description. This work consists of gyratory mix design, material, and quality control requirements
 for constructing a Superpave asphalt concrete pavement surface or intermediate course. The asphalt concrete
 pavement course consists of aggregate, and asphalt binder mixed in a central plant and spread and compacted on a
 prepared surface.
 The requirements of Item 441 apply, except as modified by this specification.
 When specified, provide anti-segregation equipment for all courses of uniform thickness in accordance with
 401.12.
 442.02
 Type A Mix Design. Design the mixture composition for a Type A mix according to 441.02 and the
 most recent Asphalt Institute Manual Series No. 2 (MS-2) for design procedures and material properties except as
 modified by this subsection. Include in the JMF submittal the standard Department cover and summary page; all
 printouts from the gyratory compactor (all gyratory points not necessary); and analysis covering the required mix
 properties. Unless otherwise directed submit one compacted gyratory sample and loose mix for compaction of
 another sample, in addition to a 5-pound (2000 g) loose sample, for each JMF.
 The Contractor may use the Marshall flow test in design as an indicator of potential for excess tenderness.
 Supply aggregate according to the lane current average daily truck traffic (Lane ADTT) as follows unless
 otherwise shown on the plans:
 Lane ADTT = Current ADT × T24 × 0.45
 Where:
 Current ADT = current average daily traffic count from the plans
 T24 = percent trucks per day from the plans
 TABLE 442.02-1 GYRATION LEVEL AND MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
 Coarse
 Fine
 Lane
 Aggregate
 Aggregate
 ADTT
 Nini
 Ndes
 Nmax
 Angularity
 Angularity
 <4000
 7
 65
 105
 95 [1] /90 [2]
 44
 [1]
 [2]
 >4000
 7
 65
 105
 100 /100
 44
 [1]Percent fractured (one or more faces) according to ASTM D5821
 [2]Percent fractured (two or more faces) according to ASTM D5821
 
 Flat and
 Elongated
 Particles
 10
 10
 
 Sand
 Equivalent
 45
 50
 
 Submit aggregate to be used to OMM for approval a minimum of 3 weeks before submitting a JMF for approval.
 If fine aggregate is from crushed carbonate stone or air-cooled blast furnace slag, the Department will not require
 the fine aggregate angularity (FAA) test. The Department will allow a blend of a material not meeting the FAA
 with a material that meets the FAA, but calculate the FAA result based on the individual Department FAA results
 and actual blend percentages. Obtain OMM approval of any blends.
 The restricted zone does not apply. Use control points according to MS-2, except as specified in Table 442.022.
 
 TABLE 442.02-2 AGGREGATE GRADATION REQUIREMENTS
 9.5 mm mix
 12.5 mm mix
 19 mm mix
 Sieve Size
 Total Percent Passing
 1 1/2 inch
 (3.75 mm)
 –
 –
 100
 3/4 inch
 (19 mm)
 –
 100
 85 to 100
 1/2 inch
 (12.5 mm)
 100
 95 to 100
 90 max
 3/8 inch
 (9.5 mm)
 90 to 100
 96 max
 –
 No. 4
 (4.75 mm)
 70 max
 52 to 60[1]
 –
 No. 8
 (2.36 mm)
 34 to 52
 34 to 45
 28 to 45
 No. 200
 (75 µm)
 2 to 8
 2 to 8
 2 to 6
 [1] For the No. 4 sieve do not exceed 63 in production.
 Ensure that the F/A ratio is a maximum of 1.2. Use a 2-hour cure for the mix design.
 If more than 15 percent fine aggregate not meeting FAA is used, perform a loaded wheel test (LWT) according
 to Supplement 1057. To estimate a LWT sample mix volume, use the bulk density from gyratory specimens at Ndes.
 Results less than 0.20 inch (5.0 mm) at 120 F (49 C) are considered passing.
 The Contractor may use reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement according to 401.04. Test design volumetric
 properties at Ndes. Test Nmax for the required criteria. Ensure that the VMA is not less than the minimum values of
 Table 442.02-3.
 TABLE 442.02-3 VMA CRITERIA
 Mix
 9.5 mm
 12.5 mm
 19.0 mm
 
 VMA (percent minimum)
 15.0
 14.0
 13.0
 
 442.03
 Type B Mix Design. Apply the mix design specified in 442.02 for a Type A mix except as modified
 by this subsection:
 Modify the Coarse Aggregate Angularity of Table 442.02-1 according to Table 442.03-1.
 TABLE 442.03-1
 Lane ADTT
 Coarse Aggregate Angularity
 <4000
 65 [1] /65 [2]
 >4000
 75 [1] /70 [2]
 [1]Percent fractured (one or more faces) according to ASTM D5821
 [2]Percent fractured (two or more faces) according to ASTM D5821
 Ensure that at least 50 percent by weight of virgin fine aggregate is aggregate meeting FAA or is crushed
 carbonate stone or air-cooled blast furnace slag. Modify the No. 8 (2.36 mm) sieve requirement for a 12.5 mm mix
 in Table 442.02-2 to 34 to 40 percent. Apply an F-T value of +2 according to 441.02 and 441.09.
 442.04
 Asphalt Binder. Use a PG 70-22M asphalt binder for surface courses and a PG 64-28 asphalt binder
 for intermediate courses.
 The minimum total asphalt binder content for a surface course is 5.7 percent.
 442.05
 Quality Control. Conform to 441.09, except as specified in this subsection. Ensure that plant
 operation and quality control testing conform to the Contractor’s Quality Control Program (QCP).
 For 12.5mm mixes ensure the percent passing the No. 4 sieve does not exceed 63 in production. If two tests in
 a row or any two tests in two days (QC and/or 448 sublot) exceed 63 stop production and notify District Testing.
 Use a gyratory compactor conforming to the requirements of Superpave. If the gyratory compactor was moved
 to the plant before production, calibrate it and present the results to District Testing.
 
 Determine bulk gravity for air voids determination on specimens compacted to Ndes. For 12.5mm mixes, compact
 one set of samples to Nmax a minimum of once each day for the first 3 production days. Ensure that density at Nmax
 is less than 98.0 percent of MSG. The Monitoring Team will not allow production to continue if Nmax is greater
 than or equal to 98.0 percent of MSG unless acceptable corrections proven by resample and test are made.
 If the design gradation requires an LWT test, take a sample sufficient to run a LWT test once each day for the
 first 3 days and test it according to Supplement 1057. The Contractor may perform the LWT test in the Contractor’s
 Level 2 laboratory, but must compact the sample the same day the sample was taken, cure it overnight, and test it
 the following day. Give the test result and sample density to District Testing the day of the LWT test. Report the
 LWT data on the Quality Control Report.
 442.06
 tender.
 
 Compaction. Cease production if compaction causes bumps in the mix or the mix is excessively
 
 442.07
 Acceptance. The Department will base acceptance of the asphalt concrete mix on the method
 specified in the Contract line item description (i.e., 446, 448).
 442.08
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 442
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Asphalt Concrete Surface Course, 12.5 mm, Type A (446)
 
 442
 442
 442
 442
 442
 442
 442
 442
 442
 442
 442
 442
 442
 442
 
 Asphalt Concrete Surface Course12.5 mm, Type B (446)
 Asphalt Concrete Surface Course, 9.5 mm, Type A (446)
 Asphalt Concrete Surface Course, 9.5 mm, Type B (446)
 Asphalt Concrete Intermediate Course, 19 mm, Type A (446)
 Asphalt Concrete Intermediate Course, 19 mm, Type B (446)
 Asphalt Concrete Intermediate Course, 9.5 mm, Type A (448)
 Asphalt Concrete Intermediate Course, 9.5 mm, Type B (448)
 Asphalt Concrete Surface Course, 12.5 mm, Type A (448)
 Asphalt Concrete Surface Course, 12.5 mm, Type B (448)
 Asphalt Concrete Surface Course, 9.5 mm, Type A (448)
 Asphalt Concrete Surface Course, 9.5 mm, Type B (448)
 Asphalt Concrete Intermediate Course, 19 mm, Type A (448)
 Asphalt Concrete Intermediate Course, 19 mm, Type B (448)
 Anti-Segregation Equipment
 
 ITEM 443 STONE MATRIX ASPHALT CONCRETE
 443.01
 443.02
 443.03
 443.04
 443.05
 443.06
 443.07
 443.08
 443.09
 
 Description
 Quality Control Program
 Composition
 Mixing
 Storage
 Quality Control
 Construction
 Acceptance
 Basis of Payment
 
 443.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing a stone matrix asphalt concrete (SMA) course
 consisting of aggregate, asphalt binder, and additives.
 The requirements of 442 and 446 apply except as follows. Do not use the warm mix asphalt method (402.04) for
 this item.
 443.02
 Quality Control Program. Update the Quality Control Program meeting 403.03 to include a section
 for how the quality control, production and placement of SMA will meet this specification. Submit the revised
 program to OMM with the SMA mix design to be approved.
 443.03
 Composition. Discuss the mix design approach with OMM during the mix design process and prior
 to submittal.
 A. Design Limits. Submit a JMF to the Laboratory which meets the requirements of Table 443.03.1 and Table
 443.03-2.
 TABLE 443.03-1 MIX GRADATION
 Sieve size
 3/4 inch
 (19.0 mm)
 1/2 inch
 (12.5 mm)
 3/8 inch
 (9.5 mm)
 No. 4
 (4.75 mm)
 No. 8
 (2.36 mm)
 No. 50
 (300 µm)
 No. 200
 (75 µm)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 85 to 100
 50 to 75
 20 to 28
 15 to 24
 10 to 20
 8 to 12
 
 TABLE 443.03-2 MIX PROPERTIES
 Property Description
 Binder, % [1]
 VMA, % [2]
 Draindown Test, % [3]
 Design Air Voids, %
 Design Gyrations [4]
 VCA MIX / VCA DRC [5]
 TSR [6]
 F/A
 
 Specification
 5.8 to 7.5
 16.0 to 19.0
 0.3
 3.5
 65
 < 1.0
 0.80
 NA
 
 [1]By total mix
 [2]Based on bulk gravity
 [3]AASHTO T305 conducted at mix production temperature (not compaction temperature)
 [4]Nini and Nmax do not apply
 [5]VCA = Volume of Coarse Aggregate (Calculated for mix and dry rodded conditions according to AASHTO
 PP41- 02 or newer version.)
 [6]Unconditioned specimens will have a minimum 65 psi (450 kPa) retained strength.
 
 Compact specimens at 300 °F (149 °C) for PG 70-22M and 310 °F (154 °C) for PG 76-22M.
 B. Asphalt Binder. Provide asphalt binder conforming to 702.01.
 C. Coarse Aggregate. Use approved coarse aggregates. Ensure coarse aggregates meet 703.05 and Table 443.033.
 TABLE 443.03-3 AGGREGATE REQUIREMENTS
 Tests
 ASTM D 4791
 ASTM D 5821
 AASHTO T 96
 
 Description
 % Flat and Elongated Ratio at
 3:1, (max. to min.)
 5:1, (max. to min.)
 % Crushed, one / two faces
 LA Abrasion (stone or gravel)
 
 Specification
 20 max
 5 max
 100 / 90 min
 35 max
 
 D. Mineral Filler. Conform to 703.07. Use mineral filler in the JMF with a plasticity index (AASHTO T 90) not
 greater than 4 (does not apply to hydrated lime). Reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement passing the 5/8 inch (16
 mm) sieve may be used as filler only. Do not account for reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement binder content. Do
 not use quicklime (CaO). Do not premix filler with another aggregate. Cover mineral filler piles to protect from
 rain.
 Blend the mineral filler, asphalt binder and fiber stabilizer into a homogenous mixture and test the mortar for
 the following properties of Table 443.03-4.
 TABLE 443.03-4 MORTAR TEST REQUIREMENTS
 Tests
 AASHTO T315
 AASHTO T315 & T240
 AASHTO R28 & T313
 
 Description
 Unaged DSR, G*/ sin  (kPa)
 RTFO Aged DSR, G*/ sin  (kPa)
 PAV Aged BBR, Stiffness (MPa)
 
 Specification
 5 minimum
 11 minimum
 1500 maximum
 
 E. Reclaimed Asphalt Concrete Pavement. Do not use reclaimed asphalt concrete pavement except as described
 in D above.
 F. Fiber Stabilizer. Choose and meet the requirements of one of the following fiber stabilizers. Submit with the
 JMF submittal the fiber manufacturer’s most recent actual test data and a certification of compliance for the fiber
 type to be used. Protect the fiber stabilizer from moisture or other contamination.
 Cellulose Fibers. Add the fiber at a dosage rate of 0.3 to 0.4 percent by weight of the total mix as directed by
 District Testing to control draindown in production.
 1. Fiber Length (max) 0.25 inches (6.35 mm)
 2. Sieve Analysis – Alpine Sieve Method
 Sieve size
 Total Percent Passing
 No. 100 (150 µm)
 60 to 80
 Sieve Analysis – Ro-Tap Sieve Method
 Sieve size
 Total Percent Passing
 No. 20 (850 µm)
 80 to 95
 No. 40 (425 µm)
 45 to 85
 No. 100 (150 µm)
 5 to 40
 3. Ash Content 18% non-volatiles (±5%)
 4. pH 7.5 (±1.0)
 5. Oil Absorption (times fiber weight) 5.0 (±1.0)
 6. Moisture Content (max) 5.0%
 Cellulose Pellets. Cellulose pellets consist of cellulose fiber and may be blended with 0 to 20 percent asphalt
 binder. Meet the cellulose fiber requirements above. If no asphalt binder is used, add the pellet at a dosage rate of
 
 0.3 to 0.4 percent by weight of the total mix as directed by District Testing to control draindown in production.
 Adjust the fiber dosage to maintain the desired fiber amount when fiber is pre-blended with binder.
 Maximum Pellet size
 Binder
 
 1/4 cubic inch (4000 mm3)
 25 to 80 pen.
 
 Mineral Fiber. Use mineral fibers made from virgin basalt, diabase, or slag treated with a cationic sizing agent
 to enhance disbursement of the fiber as well as increase adhesion of the binder to the fiber surface. Add the fiber
 at a dosage rate of 0.3 to 0.4 percent by weight of the total mix as directed by District Testing to control draindown
 in production.
 Average Fiber length (max)
 0.25 in (6.35 mm)
 Average Fiber thickness (max)
 0.0002 in (0.005 mm)
 Shot content (ASTM C612)
 Percent Passing No. 60 (250 µm) sieve
 90 to 100
 Percent Passing No. 230 (63 µm) sieve
 65 to 100
 [1]
 Degradation (max)
 30 percent
 [1] (GeorgiaDOT-124/McNett) - copy available from OMM .
 443.04
 
 Mixing. Conform to the following additional requirements.
 
 A. Fiber Stabilizer. Furnish feeder equipment specifically manufactured to uniformly feed fiber into the plant
 and that is automated through connection with plant controls. Include a low level and no-flow indicator, print out
 the feed rate of the feeder supply system, and include a transparent pipe section for observing flow consistency.
 District Testing will approve the fiber feed system prior to the start of production by a trial load of SMA and
 inspection of the bag house collected material. Conduct and document a weekly quick check of the fiber feed
 calibration according to the Quality Control Plan. Conduct a daily check of fiber usage by calculating and
 documenting on the TE 199 that fiber usage is within 10 percent of the intended usage.
 In drum plants, add the fibers in loose form, by an automated calibrated feed system, such that the fibers are
 coated by asphalt binder before being caught in the drum air flow.
 In batch plants, distribute the fiber uniformly before injecting asphalt binder and increase mixing time a
 minimum of 5 seconds.
 B. Mineral Filler. Filler may be fed through a hopper if consistency of flow is achieved. If a problem in feeding
 consistency occurs a pneumatic system will be required. Feed filler into the weigh hopper or pug mill of a batch
 plant, or at a point away from the flame on a drum plant.
 443.05
 Storage. Do not store the SMA at the plant for more than 2 hours. Do not exceed a mix temperature
 of 350 °F (180 °C). Provide SMA at a minimum of 300 °F (148 °C) when it arrives at the paver, unless otherwise
 approved by OMM. If draindown occurs shorten the storage time and increase the fiber dosage.
 443.06
 Quality Control. Ensure an employee of the Contractor with a Level 3 rating is at the plant or
 construction site during production of the SMA for any test strips and through at least one full production day
 satisfactory to the District.
 Perform quality control tests every 3 hours of production. The increased frequency of quality control testing may
 require additional quality control personnel at the plant. Determine the asphalt binder content, gradation, moisture
 content, air voids, VMA, and MSG of the SMA. For each test series calculate the VCAMIX / VCADRC. If the
 limit of 1.0 is exceeded stop production until resolved. Perform a draindown test once each day of production and
 raise fiber dosage 0.1 percent if the test limit is exceeded. Do not exceed the No. 200 (75 µm) sieve design bands
 by the moving average of three tests. Compact specimens at 300 °F (149 °C) for PG 70-22M and 310 °F (154 °C)
 for PG 76-22M. Due to sample variability with SMA, a larger than usual sample size from which material is
 obtained for the various tests is required.
 443.07
 Construction. At least 24 hours prior to beginning a test strip meet with the Engineer and District
 Testing and provide a written summary of steps taken to assure mix quality and construction practices account for
 the special needs of SMA production and placement. Send a copy of the written summary to OMM.
 
 A. Test Strips and JMF Adjustment. Do not begin full production of the SMA until receiving authorization
 from District Testing. This authorization will be based on the successful construction of one or more test strips.
 Test strips consist of 50 to 100 tons of SMA produced and placed in accordance with these specifications. Cease
 SMA production that day unless another test strip is needed. Place test strips in one continuous mat. The test strip
 will be included in the first lot for determining density for payment.
 During the construction of a test strip, perform one set of quality control tests as described above and obtain
 and test 3 random cores of the compacted pavement. Within 1 working day after a test strip is completed, the
 Laboratory and the Contractor's Level 3 employee will determine if any changes in the SMA JMF, production, or
 placement procedures are needed. A redesign of the JMF or another test strip may be required. OMM will notify
 District Testing of any JMF adjustments. Do not start production until notified by District Testing.
 B. Compaction. Start compaction immediately after the SMA has been placed. Use only steel wheel rollers.
 Vibratory rollers in vibratory mode, set at a high frequency and low amplitude, can be used as the breakdown roller
 only. Always operate the breakdown roller immediately behind the paver. If isolated, small fat spots develop, apply
 sand immediately during compaction. If continuous and/or large fat spots develop, cease production until resolved.
 Do not compact SMA that is below 230 °F (110 °C).
 C. Hauling. Do not allow trucks to dump any mix on the project mat after delivering mix to the paver. Provide a
 suitable place for bed cleaning off of the mat.
 443.08
 
 Acceptance. After accepting the test strips, the Department will accept SMA according to 446.04.
 
 443.09
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities of Stone Matrix Asphalt
 Concrete, complete in place, including test strip, at the contract price as modified by 446.04, as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 443
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Stone matrix asphalt concrete, 12.5mm, PG70-22M, (446)
 
 443
 
 Stone matrix asphalt concrete, 12.5mm, PG76-22M, (446)
 
 ITEM 446 ASPHALT CONCRETE CORE DENSITY ACCEPTANCE
 446.01
 446.02
 446.03
 446.04
 446.05
 
 Description
 Monitoring
 Reports
 Density Acceptance
 Joints
 
 446.01
 Description. This specification describes the acceptance criteria for asphalt concrete surface and
 intermediate courses. The Department will base acceptance of the compacted mixture in place on the level of
 density attained as sampled by the Contractor and analyzed by the Department.
 446.02
 Monitoring. If there is poor comparison between the Department’s comparison samples and the
 Contractor’s quality control tests, the Monitoring Team may at any time disallow acceptance to continue under
 446. In this case, accept per 448 and 446. The Department will notify the Contractor in writing to stop production.
 446.03
 Reports. Submit the Quality Control Report according to 441.11 on the workday following the
 production day of the material represented by the report.
 446.04
 Density Acceptance. The requirements of 401.13 do not apply. However, rollers must fully and
 satisfactorily provide the required compaction, be mechanically sound, and meet Asphalt industry standards. The
 Department retains the right to reject the use of rollers which are not in good repair, or are not designed to do the
 work required. A three-wheel roller according to 401.17 is not required.
 Obtain ten, 4-inch cores for the Department to test to determine the in-place density of the compacted mixture as
 a percentage of the average QC Maximum Specific Gravity (MSG) for the production day the material was placed.
 If Department MSG VA tests show poor comparison to the average QC MSG according to 403.06 use Department
 determined MSG results in the density calculation for each production day. Compact shoulders using the same
 equipment and procedures as used on the mainline pavement. The requirements of 401.16, except for the last four
 paragraphs, are waived.
 Payment for compaction of the completed mainline pavement and ramps is by Lot, based upon the degree to
 which density is attained. Payment for shoulders depends on the degree to which the density is obtained on the
 adjacent mainline pavement lane or ramp. However, when a cold longitudinal joint is made between a mainline
 pavement lane and an adjoining shoulder, payment for the shoulder will be based on the degree to which the density
 is obtained on the shoulder.
 A Lot consists of an area of pavement placed during a production day, including the shoulders. If less than 400
 tons (400 metric tons) is produced in a production day, then that production day is combined with the next
 production day into a single Lot. If greater than 250 tons (250 metric tons) and less than 400 tons (400 metric tons)
 are produced on the last day of production for the project, then the day’s production is a separate Lot. If less than
 250 tons (250 metric tons) is produced on the last production day for the project, it is part of the previous Lot for
 acceptance, provided the previous Lot was placed within 3 days; otherwise, it is a separate Lot.
 Within 48 hours after the pavement is placed, obtain ten cores for each Lot at random locations the Engineer
 determines. Only obtain core samples in the presence of the Engineer and immediately surrender each core sample
 to the Engineer for testing. The Engineer will divide a Lot into five equal sublots and calculate two random core
 locations in each sublot as described below using ODOT TE-217 procedure. Both mainline pavement and ramps
 will be included in Lot determinations. The Engineer will not give the Contractor random core locations early in
 the Lot placement. The Engineer will tell the Contractor the method used to determine random locations as noted
 below before project start and will use the same method for all Lots.
 Cores will be taken from each lot as follows. Three cores will be taken from cold longitudinal joints (joint cores)
 and seven cores will be taken from the mat (mat cores). If locations not according to this specification are given,
 immediately inform the Engineer. Do not take joint cores from ramp joints. Take joint cores from the first, last and
 randomly from one of the three remaining sublots. Determine by random number the longitudinal location of the
 joint core, and which pavement edge to be cored when the mat placed has both confined and unconfined edges.
 Except where notched wedge joints are used, take joint cores such that the core's closest edge is 4 inches (100 mm)
 
 from the edge of the mat. Obtain the mat cores from at least twelve inches away from the longitudinal joint. Locate
 cores obtained for Contractor quality control (QC sister core) longitudinally from and within four inches (100 mm)
 of the random core. In addition to the QC sister cores, three extra cores may be taken from the first lot of a JMF
 for testing to correlate density gauges. Do not take additional cores beyond what is noted above unless clearly
 identified in the Contractor’s QCP. Clearly label all cores with mat locations so that they may be readily identified.
 Any unlabeled cores may be destroyed by the Department. Notify the Laboratory if any questions arise. Do not
 store additional cores anywhere (project, in vehicles or at the plant) beyond those required to be taken for testing.
 Test all Contractor QC cores and maintain records of all tests (core tests and correlated gauge tests) per the QCP.
 Destroy all cores immediately after testing is complete.
 Notched Wedge Joints: When notched wedge joint construction is used do not take cores on the sloped face of
 the wedge before the adjoining lane (matching pass) is placed. Take cores such that the core's closest edge is six
 inches (150 mm) from the edge of the joint upper notch. When a nine inch or wider wedge joint is used take the
 core three inches from the upper wedge joint notch.
 The Department will determine the pay factor for each Lot cored by the pay schedule in Table 446.04-1 for Lots
 with three cold longitudinal joint cores and Table 446.04-2 for Lots with less than three cold longitudinal joint
 cores. The Department will verify the MTD if the MSG determination has a deviation from the MTD of less than
 or equal to 0.020. If the MTD is not verified, establish a new MTD according to the procedures established in
 441.09. If less than 10 cores are available for determining the mean, OMM will determine disposition of the Lot.
 Fill core holes by the next workday with asphalt concrete. Before filling, ensure the holes are dry and tack them
 with asphalt material conforming to 407.02. Properly compact the asphalt concrete used for filling the hole and
 leave it flush with the pavement.
 TABLE 446.04-1 FOR LOTS WITH 3 COLD JOINT CORES
 [1]
 
 Pay Factor
 Intermediate Course
 
 Mean of Cores
 Surface Course
 [2]
 [2]
 98.0% or greater
 [2]
 97.0 to 97.9%
 0.94
 96.0 to 96.9%
 1.00
 0.94
 [4]
 93.4 to 95.9%
 1.04
 1.00
 92.4 to 93.3%
 1.00
 1.00
 91.4 to 92.3%
 0.98
 1.00
 90.4 to 91.3%
 0.90
 0.94
 89.4 to 90.3%
 0.80
 0.88
 [3]
 [3]
 88.4 to 89.3%
 [2]
 [2]
 Less than 88.4%
 [1] Mean of cores as percent of average MSG for the production day.
 [2] For surface courses, remove and replace. For other courses, the District will determine whether the
 material may remain in place. If the District determines the course should be removed and replaced, the
 Contractor will remove and replace this course and all courses paved on this course. The pay factor for
 material allowed to remain in place is 0.60.
 [3] The District will determine whether the material may remain in place. If the District determines the
 course should be removed and replaced, the Contractor will remove and replace this course and all
 courses paved on this course. The pay factor for such material allowed to remain in place is 0.70.
 [4] No incentive will be paid if any single cold joint core is less than 91.0%.
 
 TABLE 446.04-2 FOR LOTS WITH LESS THAN 3 COLD JOINT CORES
 [1]
 
 Pay Factor
 Intermediate Course
 [2]
 [2]
 0.94
 1.00
 1.00
 1.00
 0.94
 0.88
 [3]
 [2]
 
 Mean of Cores
 Surface Course
 98.0% or greater
 [2]
 97.0 to 97.9%
 0.94
 96.0 to 96.9%
 1.00
 94.0 to 95.9%
 1.04 [4]
 93.0 to 93.9%
 1.00
 92.0 to 92.9%
 0.98
 91.0 to 91.9%
 0.90
 90.0 to 90.9%
 0.80
 89.0 to 89.9%
 [3]
 Less than 89.0%
 [2]
 [1]Mean of cores as percent of average MSG for the production day.
 [2]For surface courses, remove and replace. For other courses, the District will determine whether the material
 may remain in place. If the District determines the course should be removed and replaced, the Contractor will
 remove and replace this course and all courses paved on this course. The pay factor for material allowed to
 remain in place is 0.60.
 [3]The District will determine whether the material may remain in place. If the District determines the course
 should be removed and replaced, the Contractor will remove and replace this course and all courses paved on
 this course. The pay factor for such material allowed to remain in place is 0.70.
 [4]No incentive will be paid for lots where 3 joint cores are required to be taken but less than 3 cores are taken.
 446.05
 Joints. Construct joints according to 401.17. Make a hot longitudinal joint between the mainline
 pavement lane and the adjoining shoulder and all ramps and the adjoining shoulders. If a hot longitudinal joint is
 specified between the mainline pavement lanes, the Contractor may construct a cold longitudinal joint between the
 mainline pavement lanes and the adjoining shoulders. Cold longitudinal joints in mainline pavement will be tested
 according to 446.04.
 
 ITEM 448 ASPHALT CONCRETE ACCEPTANCE
 448.01
 448.02
 448.03
 448.04
 
 Description
 Density
 Reports
 Acceptance
 
 448.01
 Description. This specification describes the acceptance criteria for asphalt concrete surface and
 intermediate courses. The Department will determine acceptance of the mixture by Lot, based on the composition
 of random samples taken and tested by the Contractor and verified by the Department.
 448.02
 Density. Conduct density gauge quality control testing on the asphalt mat according to Supplement
 1055. Conduct density gauge testing on uniform courses of 1.0 in (25mm) or more plan thickness. Conduct density
 gauge testing on projects of two adjacent lanes or more and with at least one continuous mile (1.6 kilometers) of
 paving (excepting bridges, intersections etc.). Do NOT enter a density gauge offset of any kind into the gauge. If
 an offset is already in the gauge remove it. Verify to the Engineer daily that no offset is present in the gauge. All
 values used in controlling mat density according to Supplement 1055 will be as calculated and written on forms
 supplied in Supplement 1055.
 When Supplement 1055 density gauge testing is required, the requirements of 401.16, except the last four
 paragraphs, are waived. The requirements of 401.13 do not apply. However, rollers must fully and satisfactorily
 provide the required compaction, be mechanically sound, and meet Asphalt industry standards. The Department
 retains the right to reject the use of rollers which are not in good repair, or are not designed to do the work required.
 A three-wheel roller per 401.17 is not required.
 448.03
 Reports. Refer to Item 403 for reporting requirements of asphalt mixtures tested at the asphalt plant.
 Report density gauge QC testing results according to Supplement 1055.
 448.04
 Acceptance. Refer to Item 403 for acceptance requirements. If a project includes 448.02 Density,
 acceptance will include any density deductions according to Supplement 1055.
 
 450 RIGID PAVEMENT
 ITEM 451 REINFORCED PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT
 451.01
 451.02
 451.03
 451.04
 451.05
 451.06
 451.07
 451.08
 451.09
 451.10
 451.11
 451.12
 451.13
 451.14
 451.15
 451.16
 451.17
 451.18
 451.19
 451.20
 451.21
 
 Description
 Materials
 Pavement Quality Control
 Equipment
 Setting Forms
 Fine Grading of Subgrade or Subbase
 Placing Concrete
 Placing Reinforcement
 Joints
 Finishing
 Curing
 Removing Forms
 Surface Smoothness
 Profile Grinding
 Pavement Grooving Corrections
 Sealing Expansion Joints
 Opening to Traffic
 Pavement Thickness and Concrete Strength
 Price Adjustments
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 451.01 Description. This work consists of constructing a pavement composed of reinforced portland cement
 concrete on a prepared surface.
 451.02 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 Concrete, either Class QC 1, QC MS, .................................................. 499
 * Class RCA ................................................................ Supplement 1117
 Joint sealer ....................................................................................... 705.04
 Preformed filler ................................................................................ 705.03
 Curing materials......................................... 705.05, 705.06, 705.07 Type 2
 Tiebar steel, epoxy coated ............................................................... 709.00
 Reinforcing steel .................................................... 709.09, 709.10, 709.12
 Dowel bars and basket assemblies ................................................... 709.13
 * Use of Recycled Concrete aggregate as part of a concrete mix can be accepted with conformance to
 Supplement 1117
 451.03 Pavement Quality Control. When the concrete pavement bid item includes “with QC/QA”, provide
 complete quality control of the concrete manufacturing, placing and curing operations and quality control testing
 of the work conforming to Item 455. The Engineer will review and accept the plan prior to beginning of any paving
 operations.
 When the concrete pavement bid item includes “with QC/QA” the Engineer will perform Quality Assurance
 conforming to Item 455.
 451.04 Equipment. Furnish self-propelled spreading and finishing machines capable of consolidating and
 finishing the concrete and producing a finished surface meeting the requirements specified. Ensure that all paving
 equipment is operated in a manner that does not result in segregation of the mixture or loss of air entrainment in
 the mixture.
 
 Construct pavement using either fixed forms or slip form paving equipment that conforms to the following:
 A. Fixed Form Construction. Spread, screed, and consolidate concrete using one or more machines between
 previously set side forms. Furnish an adequate number and capacity of machines to perform the work at a rate equal
 to the concrete delivery rate. Furnish machines capable of uniformly distributing and consolidating the concrete
 without segregation.
 Provide machines capable of operating on two side forms, on adjacent lanes of pavement and one side form,
 or on two adjacent lanes as necessary. When placing concrete adjacent to an existing pavement lane, take measures
 to protect the adjacent pavement from damage. Remove from the work any machine that causes displacement of
 the side forms from the line or grade or causes undue delay, as determined by the Engineer, due to mechanical
 difficulties.
 Finish small areas, irregular areas, and areas that are inaccessible to finishing equipment using other methods
 as approved by the Engineer. Accomplish vibration of these areas using hand held or machine mounted internal
 vibrators. Continue vibration to achieve adequate consolidation, without segregation, for the full depth and width
 of the area placed.
 Use straight edge side forms made of steel and of a depth equal to the specified pavement thickness. Do not
 use bent or damaged side forms or forms with damaged joint locks or pin pockets. Provide forms in sections of not
 less than 10 ft (3 m) in length without horizontal joints in the height of the form. Utilize forms with a nominal base
 width of at least 3 inches (75 mm). Ensure forms are capable of supporting the paving equipment without shifting
 or deforming during paving. Clean and oil all forms each time they are used. If the radius of the circular pavement
 edge is 100 feet (30 m) or less, use flexible or curved forms of a design acceptable to the Engineer. Provide adequate
 devices to securely set forms and withstand operation of the paving equipment. Do not use built-up forms except
 to construct pavement of a specified thickness whose total area for the project is less than 2000 square yards (1650
 m2). Provide forms with adequate joint locks to tightly join ends of abutting form sections together.
 B. Slip Form Construction. Place concrete using an industry-standard slip form paver designed to spread,
 consolidate, screed, and finish the freshly placed concrete in one complete pass of the machine and with a minimum
 of hand finishing providing a dense and homogeneous pavement.
 Consolidate the full width and depth of concrete pavement placed by a single pass of approved internal
 vibrators. Operate the vibrators at a frequency range of 7000 to 11,000 impulses per minute. Attach vibrators to
 either the spreading or finishing equipment in such a manner that they do not come in contact with preset dowel
 basket assemblies, the subgrade, reinforcing mesh, or side forms. Do not operate vibrators in a manner to cause a
 separation of the mix ingredients (segregation); i.e., either a downward displacement of large aggregate particles
 or an accumulation of laitance on the surface of the concrete. Avoidance of segregation may require reduction in
 the vibration frequency within the range specified when forward motion of the paver is reduced. Connect the power
 to all vibrators so they stop when the machine motion is stopped. Stop paving operations if any vibrator fails to
 operate within the above specified range.
 Provide an electronic monitoring device that displays the operating frequency of each internal vibrator when
 paving mainline, ramps, acceleration/deceleration lanes, and collector distributor lanes. Ensure the monitoring
 device has a readout display near the paver operator’s controls visible to the operator and the Engineer. Operate
 the monitoring device continuously while paving and display all vibrator frequencies with manual or automatic
 sequencing among individual vibrators. Using the monitoring system, record the following minimum information:
 time of day, station location, paver track speed, and the frequency of each individual vibrator. Make recordings
 after each 25 feet (8 m) of paving or after 5-minute intervals of time. If not using a monitoring system with a
 recorder, make and record readings every 30 minutes. Provide vibration data, in electronic format, to the Engineer
 prior to the next concrete placement.
 Electronic vibration monitoring devices are not required for paving machines used to construct shoulders,
 gores, or for any construction project with a total of less than 10,000 square yards (8000 m 2) of pavement. When
 electronic monitoring devices are not required, use a tachometer or similar device to demonstrate to the Engineer
 the paving equipment vibration meets specification.
 
 Operate the slip form paver with as nearly a continuous forward movement as possible. Coordinate all
 operations of mixing, delivering, and spreading concrete to provide uniform progress with minimal stopping and
 starting of the paver. If for any reason it is necessary to stop the forward movement of the paver, immediately stop
 the consolidation devices. Unless controlled from the machine, do not apply any other tractive force to the machine.
 Accurately control the finish grade of the pavement from a pre-set grade line parallel to the finish grade. Use
 equipment with controls that will trace the grade line and automatically adjust the grade of the screed.
 In areas where adjoining concrete pavement is to be constructed, ensure that the surface at the edge of the
 pavement on either side of the longitudinal joint does not vary more than 1/4 inch (6 mm) below the typical section.
 Ensure that the outside edges of the pavement does not vary more than 1/2 inch (13 mm) below the typical section.
 Ensure that all pavement edges are nearly vertical with no projections or keyways exceeding 1/2 inch (13 mm).
 In the area of construction joints placed at the end of the days run, the Engineer will allow a reduction of
 approximately 2 inches (50 mm) in overall width.
 451.05 Setting Forms. Set all forms in conformance to the required grade and alignment. Ensure the entire length
 of the forms is supported on thoroughly compacted material for the entire operation of placing and finishing the
 concrete. Set side forms with the top face of the form varying not more than 1/8 inch in 10 feet (3 mm in 3 m) from
 true plane, and the vertical face varying not more than 1/4 inch in 10 feet (6 mm in 3 m) from true plane. Test the
 forms for variations from the above requirements and reset as necessary. Do not use loose earth, pebbles, etc., to
 shim the forms. Immediately before placing concrete, the Engineer will approve the alignment and grade of all
 forms set.
 451.06 Fine Grading of Subgrade or Subbase.
 A. Fixed Form Construction. After side forms have been set to line and grade and securely fastened, use a
 subgrade or subbase planer to remove a slight amount of material and bring the surface to final grade and a smooth
 dense condition. Check the subgrade or subbase using a multiple pin template operated on the forms or other
 methods approved by the Engineer. Correct and retest all high or low spots.
 Instead of the above operation, the Contractor may place forms on subgrade or subbase prepared according to
 451.06.B.
 B. Slip Form Construction. After the subgrade or subbase is placed and compacted to the required density, use
 an automatic subgrading machine to cut the areas for pavement and the areas that will support the paving machine
 to the plan elevation. Construct the grade sufficiently in advance of placing the concrete to permit the Engineer to
 check the grade.
 451.07 Placing Concrete. When constructing on subgrade or subbase, immediately before placing concrete,
 bring the surface to a thoroughly moistened condition by sprinkling with water as directed by the Engineer.
 When constructing on asphalt concrete, coat the surface with curing membrane at least one day prior to placing
 concrete. Apply the curing membrane at a minimum rate of 1 gallon (1 L) for each 150 square feet (3.7 m 2) of
 surface treated using an approved self-propelled mechanical sprayer. Provide an adequate shield to protect the fog
 spray from the wind. Thoroughly agitate the curing material before use.
 Deposit concrete on the grade in a manner that requires as little rehandling as possible. Do not allow workers to
 walk in the freshly mixed concrete unless wearing clean boots or shoes, free of earth or any foreign material.
 When using dowel basket assemblies, place concrete in such a manner that the assemblies are not disturbed. Do
 not allow concrete to discharge onto any dowel basket assembly unless the hopper is well centered on the assembly.
 Use a separate internal vibrator to consolidate concrete around dowel basket assemblies.
 Do not operate mechanical equipment other than saws on newly placed concrete pavement prior to opening to
 traffic according to 451.17. If only finishing equipment is carried on an existing lane, paving may be permitted
 after that lane has been in place for at least 3 days and after specimen beams shall have attained a modulus of
 rupture of 500 psi (3.5 MPa).
 When the width of pavement being placed in one operation is 12 feet (3.6 m) or more and the total area of any
 given width of pavement on the project exceeds 10,000 square yards (8300 m2), use a separate standard
 
 manufacture, self-propelled concrete placer/spreader that receives concrete into a hopper adjacent to the area to be
 paved, delivers the concrete in front of the slipform paver, and uniformly spreads the concrete at the proper
 thickness for the full width being paved. When a slipform paver is equipped with a dowel bar inserter, the separate
 placer/spreader requirement may be waived provided the concrete is delivered in front of the slipform paver at a
 consistent and uniform thickness for the full width being paved and the slipform paver is capable of spreading,
 consolidating, screeding, and float finishing the freshly placed concrete. Provide the Engineer documentation that
 the slipform paver will meet this specification.
 Do not mix, place, or finish concrete after dark without operating an adequate and approved lighting system.
 When the air temperature is 35 F (2 C) or below, ensure the concrete has a temperature of between 50 and 80
 F (10 and 27 C) at the point of placement.
 When the air temperature is greater than 35 F (2 C) before placing, maintain a concrete temperature of not
 more than 95 F (35 C).
 Do not place concrete on any surface that is frozen or has frost.
 Make two test beams from each 7500 square yards (6300 m2) of concrete or fraction thereof incorporated in the
 work each day. Construct and test concrete beams for modulus of rupture according to Supplement 1023.
 451.08 Placing Reinforcement. Place pavement mesh of the size and at the locations within the concrete slab
 shown on the standard construction drawings. When placing reinforced concrete pavement in two layers, strike off
 the entire width of the bottom layer to a length and depth that allows laying the mat of reinforcement on the concrete
 and in its final position without further manipulation. After installing reinforcement directly upon the concrete,
 place, strike off, and screed the top layer of concrete. When reinforced concrete pavement is placed in one layer
 and in advance of placing concrete, position and securely anchor the reinforcement to the underlying base or
 pavement. As an alternative, after spreading the concrete and while it is in a plastic condition, use mechanical or
 vibratory means to place reinforcement in the concrete.
 Where reinforcement is overlapped, securely fasten mats of reinforcement together at the edges of the sheets and
 at two additional points along the lap. Use reinforcing steel free from dirt, oil, paint, and grease.
 451.09 Joints. Unless otherwise directed, construct all transverse joints normal to the centerline of the pavement
 lane and of the type, dimensions, and at locations specified.
 Determine contraction and longitudinal joint sawing time limits to protect the concrete from early cracking by
 using HIPERPAV software. Provided the curing compound damage caused by sawing is repaired according to
 451.11 and to the Engineer’s satisfaction, the Contractor may operate the sawing equipment necessary to saw joints
 on the newly constructed pavement. Obtain HIPERPAV according to Supplement 1033.
 Twenty four hours before placing concrete pavement create a HIPERPAV project date file according to
 Supplement 1033.
 Provide the completed file and the printout to the Engineer. When HIPERPAV predicts early age slab cracking
 will occur, whether due to standard construction practices, joint sawing methods, mix design or curing, either do
 not start construction until modifications have been made to eliminate HIPERPAV’s predicted slab cracking or do
 not pave.
 Perform a HIPERPAV analysis for each pour.
 If software analysis determines joint sawing could exceed 24 hours, ensure all joints are sawed within 24 hours.
 A HIPERPAV analysis showing paving can proceed does not eliminate the requirements of 451.17.
 Accurately mark both edges of the pavement with the correct locations of all joints to be saw cut. Ensure the
 method of marking remains clearly visible after the paver passes and until the joint saw cut is completed.
 A. Longitudinal Joint. Construct longitudinal joints between simultaneously placed lanes by sawing.
 When a standard (water cooled diamond bladed) concrete saw is used to make the longitudinal joint between
 simultaneously placed lanes, saw the joint within the timeframe provided in the HIPERPAV output but not more
 
 than 24 hours. For pavement less than or equal to 10 inches (255 mm), saw the joint to a minimum depth of onefourth the specified pavement thickness. For pavements greater than 10 inches (255 mm) thick, saw the joint to a
 minimum depth of one-third the specified pavement thickness. Saw joints 1/4 ± 1/16 inch (6 ± 1.6 mm) wide
 measured at the time of sawing.
 When using early-entry (dry cut, light weight) saws to make the longitudinal joint between simultaneously
 placed lanes, only use saw blades and skid plates as recommended by the saw manufacturer for the coarse aggregate
 type being used in the concrete. Perform the early-entry sawing after initial set and before final set. Saw the joint
 1/8 inch (3 mm) wide and 2 1/4 to 2 1/2 inches (56 to 63 mm) deep.
 Place deformed epoxy coated steel tiebars, epoxy coated hook bolt with epoxy coated coupling,or epoxy coated
 hook bolt alternate (wiggle bolt) with epoxy coated coupling, in longitudinal joints during consolidation of the
 concrete. Install them at mid-depth in the slab by approved mechanical equipment. As an alternate procedure,
 rigidly secure them on chairs or other approved supports to prevent displacement. Provide tie bars, hook bolts, or
 wiggle bolts of the size and spaced as shown on the standard construction drawings. If used, securely fasten hook
 bolts or wiggle bolts with couplings to the form at the longitudinal construction joint as shown on the standard
 construction drawings.
 B. Transverse Joints. Unless otherwise directed, construct all transverse joints normal to the centerline of the
 pavement lane and of the type, dimensions, and at locations specified.
 For all transverse joints, install round, straight, smooth, steel dowel bars of the size shown in Table 451.09-1.
 
 Thickness of Pavement
 Less than 8 1/2 inches (215 mm)
 8 1/2 to 10 inches (215 to 255 mm)
 Over 10 inches (255 mm)
 
 TABLE 451.09-1 DOWEL SIZE
 Tubular Dowel
 Diameter of Solid
 Dowel
 Outside Diameter
 Wall Thickness
 1 inch (25 mm)
 1 5/16 inches (33 mm),
 1 1/4 inches (32 mm)
 0.120 inches (3 mm)
 or 1 3/8 inches (35 mm)
 1 1/2 inches (38 mm)
 1 5/8 inches (41 mm) 0.120 inches (3 mm)
 
 Ensure each end of tubular dowel is fitted with a snug fitting plug style insert cap that does not exceed the
 outside diameter of the tubular dowel, to prohibit any intrusion of concrete or other materials.
 Within 2 hours prior of placing concrete coat the full length of all dowels with a thin uniform coat of new light
 form oil as a bond-breaking material.
 1.
 
 Load Transfer Assemblies.
 
 Use load transfer (dowel basket) assemblies in transverse contraction joints conforming to and placed
 according to the standard drawings to hold the dowels in a position parallel to the surface and centerline of the slab
 at mid-depth of the slab thickness.
 Preset all dowel basket assemblies before the day’s paving unless the Engineer determines complete
 presetting is impractical.
 Completely install dowel basket assemblies before shipping and spacer wires are removed. Immediately
 before paving, remove all shipping and spacer wires from the dowel basket assemblies, check that the assemblies
 are held firmly in place, and check that the dowels are parallel to the grade and parallel to centerline of pavement.
 For each load transfer assembly, provide a continuous assembly between longitudinal joints or between
 the longitudinal joint and pavement edge. Drive at least eight 1/2-inch (13 mm) diameter steel pins a minimum of
 18 inches (460 mm) long at an angle to brace the assembly from lateral and vertical displacements during the
 placing of concrete. Drive two of these pins opposite each other at each end of the assembly, and drive the remaining
 pins in staggered positions on each side of the assembly. Where it is impractical to use the 18-inch (460 mm) length
 pins, such as where hardpan or rock is encountered, and provided the assembly is held firmly, the Engineer may
 authorize use of shorter pins. Where the dowel basket assembly is placed on material that may allow settlement or
 
 distortion, anchor the assembly with a combination of pins and steel plates, or by some other means satisfactory to
 the Engineer to prevent settlement.
 When concrete pavement is placed on an existing concrete pavement or on a stabilized base, secure dowel
 basket assemblies from lateral and vertical displacement during concrete placement using power-driven fasteners
 and appropriate clips or pins driven in predrilled holes of a diameter slightly less than the pin diameter. Use either
 of the above methods or a combination of the two in sufficient numbers to adequately secure the basket assemblies.
 Where widths other than 12 feet (3.6 m) are specified, the Contractor may use standard dowel basket
 assemblies with dowel spacings adjusted as follows. Maintain 6-inch (150 mm) dowel spacing at the longitudinal
 joint and increase the spacing at the outer edge of the lane up to 12 inches (300 mm). Where an odd width of lane
 occurs and if the standard dowel basket assembly would provide for a space exceeding 12 inches (300 mm), place
 a dowel 6 inches (150 mm) from the outer edge of the lane. Hold such a dowel rigidly in proper position by a
 method satisfactory to the Engineer or cut and splice a dowel basket assembly of greater length than required to
 attain the required length.
 2.
 
 Slip Form Paver with Mechanical Dowel Bar Inserter.
 
 The Contractor may propose to use a slip form paver with mechanical dowel bar inserter (DBI) to place
 dowels in transverse contraction joints the full thickness of pavement and spaced according to the standard
 construction drawings. Submit details and specifications of the proposed equipment to the Engineer at least 14
 calendar days prior to mobilizing the equipment to the project.
 The use of any slip form paver with DBI is allowed only after acceptable performance is demonstrated
 with a test section and approved by the Engineer. Continued verification during all contract paving is required for
 each production day as detailed below.
 Provide all equipment, perform all testing, and evaluate the slip form paver with DBI as detailed in the
 following sections.
 a.
 
 MIT Scan-2 Equipment and Reporting
 
 Provide MIT Scan-2 equipment to determine the location of dowel bars in either fresh or hardened
 concrete including horizontal translation, longitudinal translation, vertical translation, horizontal skew, vertical tilt,
 and cover.
 Provide equipment for determining dowel bar alignment that has an onboard computer that runs the
 test; collects and stores the test data on a memory card; performs the preliminary evaluation; and provides a printout
 of results immediately after scanning. Provide a copy of MagnoProof or other required software to the Engineer to
 analyze equipment data and generate a detailed report of all required alignment parameters in an Excel and a
 graphical color representation.
 Ensure the equipment is properly calibrated conforming to the manufacturer’s specifications and for
 the specific project conditions. Provide calibration documentation to the Engineer prior to the start of construction.
 Establish a standard protocol for scanning direction.
 Provide trained personnel to operate the equipment and documentation of training prior to start of
 construction.
 Provide a print out, at the time of scanning, for horizontal translation, longitudinal translation, vertical
 translation, horizontal skew, vertical tilt, and cover for each bar in each joint scanned. For each Test Section and
 daily, for each day of production, provide a complete report to the Engineer at the completion of scanning along
 with a digital copy of all data collected in the manufacturer’s native file format as well as all calibration files.
 Include the standard report generated using the MagnoProof software in Excel format and with color graphical
 representation of each joint. Include in the report: project contract number, county-route-section, placement date,
 scan date, station location and lane, joint ID number, name of operator, and all required alignment parameters.
 If non-magnetic dowel bar materials are to be used, propose and demonstrate alternative measurement
 equipment to the Engineer showing capability to provide measures equal or similar to the acceptance and rejection
 
 criteria of Table 451.09-2. Obtain the Engineer's approval of alternative equipment prior to paving. If no alternative
 equipment can demonstrate the required capability, do not use the slip form paver with DBI.
 Prior to paving, review the measurement equipment applicability for the project conditions with the
 Engineer, including: ambient moisture conditions, dowel material, metallic concrete aggregate and potential
 contributors to magnetic interference (presence of tiebars, reinforcing steel or other embedded or underlying steel
 items that may affect measurement accuracy). Establish how the measurement device can meet the project
 conditions. If the measurement device cannot meet the project conditions, do not use the slip form paver with DBI.
 b. Acceptance/Rejection
 The required dowel bar tolerances are given in Table 451.09-2. Dowel bar alignment is measured as
 detailed below. Any dowel bar exceeding any Acceptance Tolerance in Table 451.09-2 is considered misaligned.
 Rejection Criteria is in absolute inches.
 TABLE 451.09-2
 INDIVIDUAL DOWEL BAR ALIGNMENT TOLERANCES
 Acceptance Tolerance
 Rejection Criteria
 (inches)
 (inches)
 Horizontal Translation a
 ±2.0
 ±3.0
 b
 Longitudinal Translation
 ±2.0
 ±4.0
 c
 Vertical Translation
 ±1.0
 ± T/6
 Horizontal Skew d
 ±0.60
 ±1.0
 e
 Vertical Tilt
 ±0.60
 ±1.0
 Cover f
 2.5 minimum
 a. Horizontal Translation - the total difference, measured horizontally, between the actual dowel bar location and
 the plan required dowel bar location along the transverse contraction joint.
 b. Longitudinal Translation - the total difference, measured in the longitudinal direction, from the center of the
 transverse contraction joint to the actual dowel bar center. Also termed as “side shift”.
 c. Vertical Translation - the total difference, measured vertically, between the centerline of the actual dowel bar
 location and the mid-depth of the slab. (T = Pavement Thickness in inches)
 d. Horizontal Skew - the total difference, measured from end to end of a dowel bar, of the dowel in the horizontal
 plane.
 e. Vertical Tilt - the total difference, measured from end to end of a dowel bar, of the dowel bar in the vertical
 plane.
 f. Cover - the least distance between the surface of embedded reinforcement and the outer surface of the concrete.
 Alignment Parameter
 
 Perform a Joint Score Analysis conforming to CPTP Tech Brief Best Practices for Dowel Placement
 Tolerances (FHWA-HIF-07-021) for every joint. Joint Score is a measure of the combined effects of horizontal
 skew and vertical tilt. To calculate the Joint Score: calculate the Single Dowel Misalignment (SDM) by the square
 root of the sum of the squares of the Horizontal Skew and Vertical Tilt of each dowel in the joint; determine the
 weighing factor (W) for each bar from Table 451.09-3; sum the W values for every dowel in the joint and add one
 (1).
 𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒 𝐷𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑙 𝑀𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 (𝑆𝐷𝑀) = √(𝐻𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑆𝑘𝑒𝑤)2 + (𝑉𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝑇𝑖𝑙𝑡)2
 
 Joint Score (JS) – Evaluated for a single transverse joint between adjacent longitudinal joint(s) and/or
 pavement edge(s) (i.e., a typical 12 ft [3.6 m] standard lane or up to 14 ft [4.3 m] widened lane), and calculated as:
 𝑛
 
 𝐽𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 (𝐽𝑆) = 1 + ∑ 𝑊𝑖
 𝑖=1
 
 Where:
 n
 
 =
 
 number of dowels in the single joint
 
 Wi
 
 =
 
 weighting factor (Table 451.09-3) for dowel i
 TABLE 451.09-3
 WEIGHTING FACTORS IN JOINT SCORE (JS) DETERMINATION
 Single Dowel Misalignment (SDM)
 SDM ≤ 0.6 in. (15 mm)
 0.6 in. (15 mm) < SDM ≤ 0.8 in. (20 mm)
 0.8 in. (20 mm) < SDM ≤ 1 in. (25 mm)
 1 in. (25 mm) < SDM ≤ 1.5 in. (38 mm)
 1.5 in. (38 mm) < SDM
 
 W, Weighting Factor
 0
 2
 4
 5
 10
 
 Joint Score Trigger (JST) – A scaling of the Joint Score risk value to account for the actual number
 of dowels required in a single joint for pavement width other than 12 ft (3.6 m), calculated as:
 𝐽𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑇𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑔𝑒𝑟 (𝐽𝑆𝑇) = 10 ∗
 
 # 𝑜𝑓 𝐷𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑙 𝐵𝑎𝑟𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒 𝐽𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡
 12
 
 Include the Joint Score and Joint Score Trigger for every joint scanned in the report to the Engineer.
 Any joint with a Joint Score equal to or greater than the Joint Score Trigger is considered locked and rejectable.
 3.
 
 Test Section
 
 Prior to production use of a DBI slip form paver, perform at least a 500-foot (150 m) long test section for
 acceptance of the machine. Measure the alignment and location of each dowel bar in the test section using the MIT
 Scan-2. The test section will be considered acceptable if the following acceptance criteria are met:
 a.
 
 Each Joint Score (JS) is less than Joint Score Trigger (JST);
 
 b.
 
 Ninety percent (90%) of the dowel bars meet the Acceptance Tolerances of Table 451.09-2;
 
 c.
 
 None of the dowels exceed the Rejection Tolerances of 451.09-2.
 
 If the test section acceptance criteria is not met, use the data to refine the paving process and
 reduce/eliminate misalignments and mislocations. Modify, repair or replace any slip form paver with DBI that does
 not meet the acceptance criteria and perform another test section. Do not begin production paving until the slip
 form paver with DBI test section acceptance criteria is met.
 Perform corrective action of all joints in the test section according to Section 5 below.
 Perform a new test section for any new slip form paver with DBI that will be used for any contract item
 of work.
 
 Perform a new test section at the beginning of every construction season; after major paver
 maintenance/repairs; at mobilization or remobilization to a project, for major concrete mix design changes or
 different concrete mix designs; and as required by Section 4 of this specification.
 If the length of the section to be paved makes it unreasonable to perform the test section, scan all joints
 for conformance with the requirements of Section 2, Acceptance/Rejection. Correct any joints with dowels found
 to be rejectable or JS greater than JST according to Section 5, Corrective Action.
 Determine during the test section if embedded tiebars are affecting the Rejection Tolerances and JS’s. If
 the test section demonstration shows interference, exclude from the JS and JST calculations any dowel bar(s) closer
 than 12 in. (300 mm) in any direction to tiebars in the longitudinal joint(s). At the Engineer’s discretion, establish
 the location of excluded dowels by another equivalent non-destructive method or by probing.
 4.
 
 Paving Quality Control Testing (QCT) for Dowel Bar Inserters
 
 When using the accepted slip form paver and DBI for any contract item of work, perform quality control
 scans with the MIT-Scan 2 equipment at the following minimum:
 a. Measure the alignments and location for every 10th joint and calculate the JS and JST for each
 measured joint. Acceptable QCT is when all measures are within the acceptance tolerances in Table 451.09-2 and
 JS is less than JST.
 i. When the daily QCT finds more than 10 percent of the joints scanned have dowels exceeding the
 acceptance tolerances of Table 451.09-2 but the JS is less than the JST, increase the scanning frequency to every
 5th joint. Evaluate the paving process to reduce/eliminate misalignments and mislocations and continue to pave.
 The QCT frequency will revert back to every 10th joint when two consecutive days of scanning every 5th joint
 show no dowels exceeding the acceptance tolerances of Table 451.09-2 and all JSs are less than the JST.
 ii. When QCT finds any individual dowel bars exceeding the rejection criteria of Table 451.09-2 or
 the JS is found to exceed the JST, the joint is considered to be locked and immediate investigation needs to be
 made as follows:
 1. Scan joints in front and behind the locked joint location until five (5) consecutive joints in
 both directions are found with no dowel bars exceeding the rejection criteria of Table 451.09-2 and no JS is found
 to exceed the JST.
 2. If the additional scanned joints show no additional dowel bars exceeding the rejection criteria
 of Table 451.09-2 and no JS exceeding the JST, evaluate equipment to determine what caused the original problem.
 Before continuing paving increase the frequency of QCT to conform to 4.a.i.
 3. If the additional scanned joints show additional dowel bars exceeding rejection criteria of
 Table 451.09-2 or joints with a JS exceeding the JST, stop paving. Investigate to determine the cause of the dowel
 bar rejection issues and provide the causes and alternative corrections to the Engineer.
 The Engineer will determine if the corrections will correct the problem and may allow paving to
 temporarily continue to validate if the corrections work. During any evaluation, scan all joints to determine if the
 corrections were successful. If successful, continue QCT scanning at the frequency of 4.a.i. If not successful,
 discontinue paving, repair or replace the slip form paver and DBI, and repeat the Test Section
 b. All dowel bars found beyond rejection criteria of Table 451.09-2 or joints with a JS exceeding the
 JST require a corrective action proposal conforming to Section 5, Corrective Action.
 Provide report formats as described in Section 1, MIT Scan-2 Equipment and Reporting.
 5.
 
 Corrective Action
 
 Submit a proposal for corrective action to the Engineer for any dowel that exceeds the rejection criteria in
 Table 451.09-2 or any joint that has a JS greater than the JST. As a minimum, include the following in the corrective
 action proposal:
 1. Locations of rejectable dowels with identification information as described in Section 1, MIT Scan2 Equipment and Reporting.
 
 2.
 Reporting.
 
 Locked joint identification information as described in Section 1, MIT Scan-2 Equipment and
 
 3. Proposed method of remediation for each identified location, including supporting documentation of
 the effectiveness of the means of proposed remediation.
 The Department may not require corrective action for random dowels that exceed the rejection criteria of
 Table 451.09-2 depending on location; what alignment parameter was the cause for the rejection; and the frequency
 of the rejectable dowels.
 The Department may not require corrective action for all JS exceeding the JST, if they are random in
 nature. Up to two (2) consecutive joints with a JS exceeding the JST may be accepted, provided that the adjacent
 three (3) joints before or after do not have dowels exceeding Table 451.09-2 rejection limits and have JS’s less than
 the JST. The Department will require corrective action where there are more than two (2) consecutive joints with
 a JS exceeding the JST.
 Do not proceed with any corrective action until the Engineer approves the proposed method(s) of
 correction.
 C. Expansion Joints. Where a pressure relief joint is not provided adjacent to a bridge structure, construct
 expansion joints at the first two regularly spaced joint locations adjacent to the bridge approach slab on each side
 of the bridge. If the pavement is constructed in two or more separately placed lanes, construct the transverse
 expansion joints in a continuous line for the full width of the pavement and shoulders.
 Construct expansion joints according to the standard construction drawings. Install the face of the expansion
 joint perpendicular to the centerline except when expansion joint is installed at a skewed bridge approach slab.
 Use round, straight, smooth, steel dowels, and within 2 hours of placing concrete, coat the dowels with a thin
 uniform coat of new light form oil as a bond-breaking material to provide free movement. After coating the dowel,
 install a sleeve of metal or other approved material approximately 3 inches (75 mm) long, with crimped end,
 overlapping seams fitting closely around the dowel, and a depression or interior projection to stop the dowel a
 sufficient distance from the crimped end to allow 1 inch (25 mm) for longitudinal dowel movement with pavement
 expansion on one free end of each dowel. If approved by the Engineer, use other means to allow for 1 inch (25
 mm) of expansion.
 Punch or drill proper size dowel holes into the preformed expansion joint filler to assure a tight fit around each
 dowel.
 Form a 1-inch (25 mm) wide and 1-inch (25 mm) deep opening on top of the expansion joint filler and seal
 this opening with 705.04 joint sealers.
 D. Contraction Joints. For pavement less than or equal to 10 inches (225 mm) thick, saw contraction joints with
 a standard (water cooled diamond bladed) concrete saw to a minimum depth of one-fourth of the specified
 pavement thickness. For pavement greater than 10-inches (255 mm) thick, saw contraction joints to a minimum
 depth of one-third the specified pavement thickness. When cutting joints using a standard (water cooled diamond
 blade) saw ensure the joint is 1/4 ± 1/16-inch (6 ± 1.6 mm) wide when measured at the time of sawing.
 When using the option of early-entry (dry cut, light weight) saws, only use saw blades and skid plates as
 recommended by the saw manufacturer for the coarse aggregate type being used in the concrete. Perform the early
 entry contraction joint sawing after initial set and before final set. Saw the contraction joint 2-1/4 to 2-1/2-inches
 (56 to 63 mm) deep. Ensure any early entry saw joints are approximately 1/8-inch (3 mm) wide at the time of
 sawing.
 If the pavement is constructed in two or more separately placed lanes, install the joints continuous for the full
 width of the pavement. Saw the pavement with sawing equipment approved by the Engineer as soon as the saw can
 be operated without damaging the concrete. Provide saws with adequate guides, blade guards, and a method of
 controlling the depth of cut. After wet sawing, clean the joint using a jet of water. After dry sawing clean the joint
 using air under pressure. During sawing of contraction joints, maintain a standby saw in working condition with
 an adequate supply of blades.
 
 E. Construction Joints. Install dowelled construction joints at the end of each day’s work and when work is
 suspended for a period of more than 30 minutes.
 Use dowels in transverse construction joints. Within 2 hours prior to placing concrete, coat the free half of all
 dowels with a thin uniform coat of new light form oil. Use an adequate bulkhead, with openings provided for dowel
 bars spaced as specified and shaped to fit the typical section of the pavement, to form a straight joint. During
 placing of concrete, hold dowels rigidly in position.
 Locate construction joints at or between contraction joints. If located between contraction joints, construct the
 construction joint no closer than 10 feet (3 m) to the last contraction joint.
 451.10 Finishing. Use 10-foot (3 m) straightedges to continually check the finished concrete surface for trueness.
 If the pavement surface is dragged with a diagonal pipe float machine, occasionally check the surface while the
 concrete is plastic. Do not add water to aid finishing.
 Before the concrete initially sets, round the edges of the pavement along each side of each slab and on each side
 of transverse expansion joints to the radius specified using an approved edging tool. Before texturing the surface,
 eliminate tool marks left by the edging tool.
 Texture the surface in the longitudinal or transverse direction using a broom to produce a uniform, gritty, texture.
 Immediately following the broom drag texture, tine the pavement in the longitudinal direction using an approved
 device that produces uniform tine spacing 3/4 inches (19 mm) apart, 1/8 inch deep (3 mm) and 1/8 inch wide (3
 mm). Do not tine within 3 inches (75 mm) of pavement edges or longitudinal joints. Only use equipment that will
 tine the full width of the pavement in one operation and uses string line controls for line and grade to assure straight
 tining texture.
 Use transverse tining in small areas only with the approval of the Engineer. Use equipment that produces a
 random pattern of grooves [0.05 inch (1.3 mm) to 0.08 inch (2.0 mm) deep and 0.10 inch (3 mm) wide] spaced at
 3/8 to 1-3/4 inches (10 to 45 mm), with 50 percent of spacings less than 1 inch (25 mm). Transverse tining may be
 used as an option for shoulders of main line or shoulders of ramps and gore areas. Tine all mainline shoulders or
 all ramp shoulders in a consistent direction if choosing this option. Request the use of transverse tining and identify
 the locations, at least one week prior to paving, for approval by the Engineer.
 Demonstrate to the Engineer methods to ensure the groove depth meets this specification.
 Before the concrete finally sets, impress complete station numbers into the pavement every 100 feet (50 m), e.g.,
 1+00 (2+050). Mark station equations in the pavement as shown on the plans. Ensure that the numerals are 3 to 4
 inches (75 to 100 mm) high and 1/4 inch (6 mm) deep. Place the station numbers parallel with and facing the right
 edge of the pavement, and centered 12 inches (0.30 m) in from the right edge. On divided highways, provide station
 numbers on both pavements. When placing concrete shoulders with the traveled lane, place station numbers 12
 inches (0.30 m) in from the outside edge of the shoulder and facing the pavement.
 451.11 Curing. Immediately after the finishing operations have been completed and after all free water has
 dissipated, spray and seal all exposed concrete surfaces with a uniform application of curing membrane in such a
 manner as to provide a continuous uniform film without marring the surface of the concrete. Apply a minimum of
 1 gallon (1 L) of material for each 150 square feet (3.7 m2) of surface treated using an approved self-propelled
 mechanical sprayer. Provide an adequate shield to protect the fog spray from the wind. Before each use, thoroughly
 agitate the curing material.
 On pavement with integral curb or small and irregular areas that are inaccessible to the mechanical spray
 machine, apply the curing material by a hand-held sprayer.
 As soon as the forms have been removed, immediately correct all honey-comb areas and coat the edges of the
 pavement with the curing material.
 Respray all areas of curing material film damaged during the sawing of joints.
 The Contractor may water cure concrete with wet burlap cloth, waterproof paper, or polyethylene sheeting. Apply
 curing as soon as possible and without marring the concrete surface. Unless the specimen beams have attained a
 
 modulus of rupture of 600 psi (4.2 MPa) keep the entire surface of the top and sides of the newly placed concrete
 covered for seven days. Protect concrete from freezing until beams attain a strength of 600 psi (4.2 MPa).
 The above requirements for curing are minimum requirements only. Repair or replace all concrete showing injury
 or damage due to insufficient curing at no additional cost to the Department.
 451.12 Removing Forms. Remove forms in a manner that doesn’t damage the pavement.
 451.13 Surface Smoothness. After final concrete curing and cleaning the pavement surface, test the pavement
 surface for smoothness using a 10-foot (3 m) rolling straightedge. Provide a two or four-wheeled device with an
 indicator wheel at the center that detects high and low areas in the pavement surface. Provide equipment that
 actuates a pointer scale, issues an audio alert, or marks the pavement with paint or dye when encountering any high
 or low areas in excess of a preset tolerance. Tow or walk the rolling straightedge over the completed pavement.
 Test all wheel paths in the presence of the Engineer. Locate wheel paths parallel to the pavement centerline and
 approximately 3 feet (1 m) measured transversely from the center of the lane. Maintain alignment of the rolling
 straightedge with reference to the pavement edge at all times. Other devices such as approved profilers conforming
 to Supplement 1058 and using ProVAL software may be used with approval of the Engineer.
 Correct all surface variations so indicated to within the specified tolerance and in a manner that provides a surface
 texture conforming to 451.10. For corrective grinding provide equipment conforming to 451.14. Ensure pavement
 surface variations do not exceed 1/8 inch in a 10-foot (3 mm in a 3 m) length of pavement. For ramp pavements
 and for those pavements with curvature greater than 8 degrees, or with grades exceeding 6 percent, ensure the
 surface variations do not exceed 1/4 inch in 10 feet (6 mm in 3 m).
 Repair or replace sections of pavement containing depressions that cannot be corrected by grinding as directed
 by the Engineer.
 451.14 Profile Grinding. To correct surface variations exceeding tolerances specified in 451.13 use grinding
 equipment conforming to Item 257.
 451.15 Pavement Grooving Corrections. When pavement tining locations are found out of conformance with
 451.10 correct the tining using power driven, self-propelled machines specifically designed to groove concrete
 pavement with diamond impregnated blades or diamond impregnated cylinder rings. Furnish blades or cylinder
 rings mounted on an arbor head so that the resulting grooves comply with 451.10. Furnish grooving equipment
 with a depth control device that will detect variations in the pavement surface and enable adjustment of the cutting
 head to maintain the specified groove depth.
 If a pavement area was diamond ground to bring the pavement’s surface smoothness within the tolerances of
 451.13, that pavement area does not require tining restoration conforming to 451.10.
 Vary from these requirements only for small areas and only with written permission from the Engineer.
 451.16 Sealing Expansion Joints. As soon as feasible after completing sawing, but before the pavement is open
 to construction equipment and traffic, seal expansion joints with material conforming to 705.04. Just before sealing,
 thoroughly clean each joint of all foreign material, using approved equipment. Ensure the joint faces are clean and
 dry when the seal is installed.
 451.17 Opening to Traffic. When 7 days have elapsed, the Contractor may use the completed pavement for
 traffic, including construction traffic. If a modulus of rupture of 600 psi (4.2 MPa) has been attained, the Contractor
 may open the pavement to traffic when 5 days have elapsed. If necessary to open a portion of the pavement in less
 than 5 days, with the proviso that the pavement will be cured for a minimum of 3 days, use a high early strength
 concrete composed of additional 701.04 or 701.05 cement, or non-chloride accelerating admixture to obtain a
 modulus of rupture of 600 psi (4.2 MPa) in 3 days or less.
 Pavement Repairs before Department Acceptance. Remove and replace or repair diagonal cracks;
 longitudinal cracks; transverse cracks; spalled pavement surfaces, and any pavement panels with cement balls or
 mud balls; as approved by and at no cost to the Department. Do not repair single hairline transverse cracks in the
 middle third of panels with reinforcing conforming to BP-1.1. Submit a repair plan with the location, type of repair,
 
 materials to be used and procedures to the Department for approval. Do not perform any repairs without Department
 approval.
 The Engineer may approve repair of isolated transverse or diagonal cracks with a full depth repair according to
 Item 255 and applicable standard construction drawings. Repair cracks by replacing the pavement the full width
 between longitudinal joints, perpendicular to the centerline and at least 6 feet (1.8 m) longitudinally. Install smooth
 dowel bars at the interface between the original pavement and the replaced pavement section. Locate and size the
 repairs to ensure that the repair limits are at least 7 feet (2.1 m) away from any transverse joint.
 The Engineer may approve repair of isolated longitudinal cracks within 15 inches (380 mm) of a tied longitudinal
 joint by routing and sealing the crack according to Item 423. For other longitudinal cracks, repair the same as for
 transverse or diagonal cracks stated above.
 The Engineer may approve repair of isolated spalled pavement with Item 256 Bonded Patching of Portland
 Cement Concrete Pavement.
 Repair all cement balls or mud balls by coring out the area full depth with a diamond core bit and replacing the
 removed concrete with the same concrete as in the pavement. Remove and replace any pavement panel with 5 or
 more cement balls or mudballs. Locate the limits of the repair along the longitudinal joints and at least 1-foot (0.3
 m) past the transverse joints to remove any existing dowel bars. Install smooth dowel bars at the transverse limits
 of the repairs. Install Type D (Drilled Tied Longitudinal) Joint along the longitudinal limits.
 451.18 Pavement Thickness and Concrete Strength.
 As determined by measurement of cores cut as specified in this section, construct the concrete not
 more than 0.2 inch (5 mm) less than the specified thickness. Core pavement at the direction of the Engineer and at
 locations the Engineer determines according to Supplement 1064.
 A.
 
 Thickness.
 
 For the purpose of coring, the Department will consider the entire pavement area of a specified thickness a lot.
 To determine the number of cores, each lot will be divided into sublots. A sublot consists of 2000 square yards
 (1650 m2) of a pavement lot or major fraction thereof.
 Take one random core for each sublot but not less than 3 cores for any pavement lot cored. If a core shows a
 deficiency in thickness of more than 1/2 inch (13 mm) from the specified thickness, take additional cores to
 determine the limits of the deficiency. Follow the procedures below:
 1. Take a core 5 feet (1.5 m) longitudinally on both sides of the deficient core. If both the cores are less than
 1/2-inch (13 mm) deficient in thickness, the zone of deficiency has been determined.
 2. If either or both 451.18.A.1 cores are more than 1/2 inch (13 mm) deficient in thickness, cut a core 50 feet
 (15 m) longitudinally from the deficient core(s). If the 50 foot (15 m) core(s) is more than 1/2 inch (13 mm)
 deficient, cut additional cores at 100 foot (30 m) longitudinal intervals until a core is less than 1/2 inch (13 mm)
 deficient; until the pavement ends; or until overlapping an adjacent pavement sublot’s core in the same lane.
 3. If a pavement sublot has cores more than 1/2 inch (13 mm) deficient in thickness and the sublot’s
 constructed width is greater than 12 feet (3.6 m) obtain cores transverse to the location of the deficient cores. Obtain
 transverse cores at a location 1/2 the distance from the deficient core to the furthest edge of pavement. Obtain a
 transverse core for each core more than 1/2 inch (13 mm) deficient.
 4. The Engineer will use the cores that measure less than 1/2 inch (13 mm) deficient in thickness to define
 the limits of the deficiency.
 If any deficient core is greater than 1 inch (25 mm) deficient in thickness determine the limits of over 1 inch
 (25 mm) deficiency by following 451.18.A.1 thru 4 to determine the limits. Remove and replace those areas greater
 than 1 inch (25 mm) deficient in thickness.
 The Engineer will calculate average thickness of concrete pavement placed as follows:
 When zones of deficient thickness greater than 1/2 inch (13 mm) to 1 inch (25 mm) are allowed to remain in
 place, the Engineer will calculate two average thicknesses. A Project Average Thickness (PAT) including all cores
 not more than 1/2 inch (13 mm) deficient. Cores that exceed the specified thickness by more than 1/2 inch (13 mm)
 
 will be considered as the specified thickness plus 1/2 inch (13 mm) when calculating the PAT. A second Deficient
 Zone Average (DZA) will include all cores with thickness deficiency greater than 1/2 inch (13 mm) to 1 inch (25
 mm). The pavement represented by each of the two averages, PAT or DZA, will be calculated and paid separately.
 The Engineer will determine and apply deductions to each separately placed width of pavement.
 For any pavement areas removed and replaced, re-core those areas following this section of the specifications.
 Include those core values into the calculations for average pavement thickness.
 Unless the Director requests, do not core any widening less than 5 feet (1.5 m) in width or any pavement area
 less than 2000 square yards (1650 square meters).
 Fill all core holes with concrete of the same proportions and materials used in the pavement.
 B. Strength. Obtain an additional core at the same location as the thickness core from each pavement sublot to
 determine compressive strength. .
 For concrete pavement bid items “with QC/QA”, the AASHTO accredited laboratory will test the QC cores
 for compressive strength according to ASTM C 42. Test the QC cores from 28 to 90 days of age. Notify the
 Engineer when the QC cores will be tested.
 The Engineer will require one QA core for every 10 sublots for verification testing of compressive strength.
 Obtain the QA core from the same location as the QC core tested for compressive strength. At least one QA core
 will be required per lot. Provide the QA cores to the Engineer for testing at District Testing. Notify the Engineer
 of the date that the corresponding QC core will be tested. The QA cores will be tested on the same date. The
 Engineer will verify the QC cores versus the QA cores according to 455.
 Calculate an average and standard deviation for each lot according to Supplement 1127. Determine the pay
 factors according to table 451.19-2.
 Do not calculate an average and standard deviation for high-early strength concrete QC cores. Determine the
 pay factors for individual sublots according to Table 451.19-2.
 For concrete pavements bid items “without QC/QA”, the Department will perform the strength testing. Provide
 the Engineer with the cores for strength testing. Pay factors for sublot cores will be calculated based on the highearly strength concrete pay factors in Table 451.19-2.
 451.19 Price Adjustments. Payment will be made at the unit bid price upon completion of any section of
 pavement. Final pay adjustments to the bid price will be made upon completion of the pavement operations and all
 thickness, strength and smoothness data is tabulated and pay adjustments applied according to 451.19.A through
 451.19.D.
 A. Pavement Thickness. Price adjustments for thickness deficiencies will be calculated according to Table
 451.19-1
 
 TABLE 451.19-1
 CONCRETE PAVEMENT THICKNESS PAY FACTOR (PFT)
 Deficiency in Thickness as Determined by Cores
 0.0 to 0.2 inch (0.0 to 5 mm)
 
 Proportional Part of Contract Price
 100 percent
 
 0.3 to 0.5 inch (6 to 13 mm)
 
 0.6 to 1.0 inch (15 to 25 mm)*
 
 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 [
 
 𝑃𝐴𝑇 6
 ]
 𝑃𝑆𝑇
 
 𝐷𝑍𝐴 6
 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 [
 ]
 𝑃𝑆𝑇
 
 Greater than 1.0 inch (25 mm)
 Remove and replace
 * The DCA will determine whether pavement areas from 0.6 inch (15 mm) to 1 inch (25 mm) deficient in thickness
 will be allowed to remain in place at the reduced price or must be removed and replaced.
 PAT = Project Average Thickness
 PST = Plan Specified Thickness
 DZA = Deficient Zone Average
 B. Concrete Strength. Record the compressive strength results for each sublot of concrete. High-early strength
 mixes, QC MS and QC FS, mixes, are calculated separately. Determine the strength pay factor according to Table
 451.19-2.
 TABLE 451.19-2
 CONCRETE PAVEMENT STRENGTH PAY FACTOR
 Design Strength = f’c from 499 or as per plan
 Individual Sublot Core Strength = x
 Project Average Strength (𝑥̅ ) = ∑𝑛1 𝑥 ÷ 𝑛
 Project Standard Deviation (δ) = √∑(𝑥 − 𝑥̅ )2 /(𝑛 − 1)
 Project Required Strength (f’cr) = f’c + 1.65 δ
 Strength Pay Factor (PFS) = 𝑥̅ / f’cr *
 * When PFS is greater than 1.00, pay the unit bid price
 For high-early strength sublots, determine the pay factor separately as follows:
 If the individual sublot core strength (x) is greater than f’c,
 PFS = 100% of the Unit bid price for the quantity represented.
 If the individual sublot core strength (x) is less than f’c, the
 PFS = (𝑥/f’c) of the Unit bid price for the quantity represented.
 C. Pavement Smoothness. When the Project plans include Proposal Note 420 determine a lump sum payment
 adjustment following the requirements of Proposal Note 420.
 D. Multiple Deficiencies. When a pavement exhibits multiple deficiencies for thickness and strength, the reduced
 unit price will be calculated for each deficiency and the lowest reduced unit price will be used. Adjustment for
 smoothness under 451.19.C will conform to the lump sum requirements of 451.19.C.
 451.20 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Reinforced Concrete Pavement by the number
 of square yards (square meters) completed and accepted in place. The width equals the pavement width shown on
 the typical cross-section of the plans plus additional widening as the Engineer directs in writing. The Department
 will field measure the length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp. The Department will determine the
 area based on the above width and length.
 451.21 Basis of Payment. Payment is full compensation for furnishing and placing all materials including
 reinforcing steel, dowels, and joint materials; for furnishing the 10-foot (3 m) rolling straightedge; and for coring
 
 and testing the pavement. For pavement found deficient in thickness or compressive strength, the Department will
 pay a reduced price according to 451.19.
 The Department will not pay extra for pavement with an average thickness in excess of that shown on the plans.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 Unit
 Description
 451
 451
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Reinforced Concrete Pavement Class ____
 Reinforced Concrete Pavement Class ____ with QC/QA
 
 ITEM 452 NON-REINFORCED PORTLAND CEMENT
 CONCRETE PAVEMENT
 452.01
 452.02
 452.03
 452.04
 
 Description
 Construction
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 452.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing a non-reinforced portland cement concrete pavement
 on a prepared surface.
 452.02
 
 Construction. The requirements of Item 451 apply, except as follows.
 
 Do not comply with the requirements of 451.08.
 Provide dowels at transverse contraction joints in mainline pavement, ramps, acceleration/deceleration lanes, or
 collector/distributor lanes. Dowels for contraction joints in concrete shoulders on mainline pavement, ramps,
 acceleration/deceleration lanes, or collector/distributor lanes are not required unless the contraction joint is located
 within 500 feet (150 m) of a pressure relief joint.
 Space contraction joints according to the standard construction drawings. If Item 452 pavement is specified for
 shoulders and is tied longitudinally to Item 451 or 305 pavement, match the joints in the shoulder pavement to the
 spacing and alignment of the adjacent pavement.
 Do not place construction joints within 6 feet (1.8 m) of another parallel joint.
 If making pavement repairs before Department acceptance under 451.17, repair all cracks exclusive of size or
 location
 452.03
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Non-Reinforced Concrete Pavement by the
 number of square yards (square meters) completed and accepted in place. The width equals the pavement width
 shown on the typical cross-sections of the plans plus additional widening as the Engineer directs in writing. The
 Department will field measure the length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp.
 452.04
 Basis of Payment. Payment is full compensation for furnishing and placing all materials, for surface
 testing, and for coring the pavement.
 For pavement found deficient in thickness or compressive strength, the Department will pay a reduced price
 according to 451.19.
 The Department will not make additional payment over the contract unit price for any pavement with an average
 thickness in excess of that shown on the plans.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 452
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Non-Reinforced Concrete Pavement, Class _____
 
 452
 
 Non-Reinforced Concrete Pavement, Class ______ with QC/QA
 
 ITEM 455 QUALITY CONTROL PLAN, TESTING AND ASSURANCE FOR QC/QA
 CONCRETE
 455.01
 455.02
 455.03
 455.04
 455.05
 455.06
 455.07
 
 General
 Quality Control Plan Basic Requirements
 Additional Quality Control Plan Requirements for Structures
 Additional Quality Control Plan Requirements for Concrete Pavement
 Department Quality Assurance
 QCP Submittal and Corrective Action
 Basis of Payment
 
 455.01
 General. Use this specification for items 451, 452, 305 and 511 when the bid item description requires
 QC/QA. This specification defines the minimum Quality Control Plan (QCP) requirements, the Contractor’s
 minimum quality control (QC) materials testing and the Department’s quality assurance (QA) materials verification
 testing requirements.
 Develop a QCP to assure that all materials and construction practices for the item will conform to the
 specifications. Establish the responsibilities, duties and frequency for both in-process controls and quality control
 testing at the concrete’s source and at the job site.
 455.02
 Quality Control Plan Basic Requirements. Submit a complete QCP that includes, at a minimum,
 the following:
 A. Basic Information. Provide the following information:
 1. The name and location of the Department inspected and approved concrete producer.
 2. The Department accepted Job Mix Formula (JMF) to be used for each item.
 3. The name and accreditation of the AASHTO accredited laboratory to be used for testing fresh and hardened
 concrete properties for structures or pavements. Provide notification to the Department immediately when there is
 a change in accreditation status.
 4. Name of the person(s) who is responsible for compliance with the QCP; acts as liaison to the Department;
 reports any non-specification test results and assures that adjustments are made to remedy problems.
 5. Names of all technicians from the AASHTO accredited laboratory who will perform project site inspection,
 sampling and testing. Provide additional technician names when plant sampling and testing is also required. Use
 ACI certified Concrete Field Testing Technicians - Grade I to perform concrete sampling and testing. Provide
 copies of their ACI certificates.
 6. Names of all technicians from the AASHTO accredited laboratory who will perform compressive strength
 testing. Use ACI certified Concrete Strength Testing Technicians to perform compressive strength testing. Provide
 copies of their ACI certificates.
 7. Calibration records of test equipment to be used on the project.
 8. Develop and provide example forms for reporting QC test results to the Engineer conforming to 455.03.C
 or 455.04.G.
 B. Minimum Quality Control at the Concrete Source. Address how the following items will be controlled in
 the QCP:
 1. Verify that the material sources are certified for the type of work in which they are to be used.
 2. Verify that aggregates, cementitious materials and admixtures sources and design weights match the
 proposed JMF.
 3. Describe how aggregates will be hauled, stockpiled and handled to minimize segregation, avoid
 contamination, and assure a uniform gradation.
 4. Describe procedures and frequency used to control and measure aggregate moistures.
 
 5. Provide the batching sequence and mixing procedures to be used to assure that material balling does not
 occur.
 6. Describe how adjustments to the SSD aggregate design weights in the JMF are made to compensate for
 moisture contained in the aggregates during batching.
 7. Describe how adjustments to mix water will be made to compensate for aggregate moistures to assure the
 JMF’s water-cementitious ratio (W/Cm) is not exceeded.
 8. Define how the batching tolerances of 499.06 are assured.
 9. Provide the information reported on the batch ticket and how it will be validated to meet the requirements
 of 499.07.
 10. Describe the method and frequency of assuring that the combined aggregate gradation remains within Zone
 II of the Coarseness Factor Chart. If adjustments are made to the JMF proportions, provide the individual aggregate
 gradations, combined aggregate gradation, and verification that the proportions remain within Zone II of the
 Coarseness Factor Chart to the Engineer prior to placement.
 11. If using a non-potable water source, describe the procedures and frequency to verify that the water meets
 the requirements of ASTM C1602.
 a. If a reclaiming system is used, describe the method and frequency of testing to ensure that the water
 contains no more than 0.06% chlorides.
 12. Describe how and when the water is removed from the mixer prior to batching a new load of concrete.
 13. Describe methods to verify that the storage and dispensing methods for the admixtures comply with the
 manufacturer’s recommendations.
 14. Describe methods to keep the concrete temperature within specifications and how to mitigate effects of
 changes to the set time.
 15. Define the desired slump and tolerance for concrete in each construction item.
 455.03
 Additional Quality Control Plan Requirements for Structures. In addition to basic QCP minimum
 requirements of 455.02, provide the following for structures:
 A. Material Quality Control Requirements. Provide the following controls for the concrete materials:
 1. Divide the concrete for the project into lots and sublots and define the placement sequence for each work
 item as follows:
 a. Division of Lots. A lot consists of concrete of the same JMF. Divide lots by substructure and
 superstructure items. Include approach slab concrete with the superstructure lot. Combine structural components
 requiring the same class of concrete with different reference numbers into a single lot. However, one exception is
 a slipformed parapet may be considered separately from a bridge deck of same class of concrete.
 b. Division into QC Sublots. Divide each lot into sublots of not more than 50 yd3 (40 m3) for obtaining
 QC samples. In no case should there be less than 3 sublots in a lot. The Engineer will approve the sublot division.
 2. Determine and define the sampling location based on placement method (i.e. pumping, tremie, direct chute
 deliver, etc.).
 a. Define in the QCP plan equipment and methods to be used for 455.03.A.3.b.
 3.
 
 Perform the following Quality Control Testing for Air content and slump at a minimum:
 
 Air Content. Sample the concrete to perform the QC testing at the point of placement. Use the following quality
 control procedures during placement:
 a. Sample and test the air content on at least the first three (3) loads of concrete delivered for each day’s
 placement. Ensure the air content is within the specified parameters in Table 499.03-1 prior to extending the testing
 frequency to each sublot.
 
 b. For concrete delivered to the point of placement by means of pumping equipment, describe the
 methods that will be used to provide back-pressure in the system in order to minimize the amount of air loss and
 maintain a continuous flow of concrete in the pipe lines and boom during the pumping operation. Obtain concrete
 samples at the point of placement without interrupting the continuous flow of concrete by either passing the pump
 line over a sampling container or obtain a composite sample from five different portions of the deposited concrete
 prior to vibration. Sample and test the air content at the point of placement for the first three (3) loads to ensure
 that it is within the specified parameters in Table 499.03-1 prior to extending the frequency to each sublot.
 c. When the Engineer determines concrete cannot feasibly be sampled at the point of placement, provide
 a trial placement of concrete to verify that the air content is within the limits of Table 499.03-1.
 If a load of concrete is tested and found to have an air content beyond the limits of Table 499.03-1, do not
 accept and place that load unless it can be adjusted to be within the specified limits. Do not adjust the air content
 using a defoaming agent.
 Notify the Engineer and test at least the next three loads for air content to ensure that the results are again
 within the limits of Table 499.03-1. The sampling frequency may then be extended back to one test for every sublot.
 Slump. Perform slump testing at the point of discharge when strength specimens are obtained. Ensure that the
 slump is within the specified parameters of Table 499.03-3.
 4. Establish who is responsible for reporting air and slump results to the Engineer within 1 day after each
 placement.
 5. Describe the methods for initial curing, transporting, curing, testing and reporting test results of the QC
 compressive strength specimens to the Engineer within five (5) days or the completion of testing.
 a.
 
 Define the unique sample identification and tracking method of concrete specimens.
 
 6. QC Compressive Strength Testing. Perform QC sampling for compressive strength, at the point of
 discharge for each sublot from the load randomly determined by the Engineer. The Contractor may sample at the
 point of placement if air content exceeds the limits of Table 499.03-1 at the point of discharge.
 For each sublot make one (1) set of three (3) – 4 x 8 inch (100 x 200 mm) QC compressive strength
 cylinders. Perform all required making, curing, transporting, capping and testing of the samples to conform to the
 applicable ASTM specifications.
 Have the AASHTO accredited laboratory perform the compression testing on the cylinders.
 7. Field Cured Strengths. Determine whether field cured cylinders, beams or maturity curve acceptance will
 be used for 511.13 and 511.14 strength testing. Define how many cylinders or beams will be made per placement.
 a. Field Cured Samples. Describe the methods for transporting, testing and reporting the test results of
 field cured samples for falsework removal and opening to traffic.
 b. Define the reporting methods to be used to keep the Engineer informed that field cured strength results
 conform to the requirements for construction, falsework removal and opening to traffic.
 If developing a maturity curve, provide the maturity curve to the Engineer with the QCP conforming to
 Supplement 1098.
 B. Construction Process Quality Control Requirements. In addition to the requirements of 455.02, Provide
 the following for the construction processes:
 1. Establish and define in the QCP the minimum required rate of concrete delivery for continuous placement
 for each construction item; determine if the plant capacity is capable of providing the concrete at the established
 rate; and determine how many trucks will be used to provide the concrete at the specified rate of delivery.
 2. Describe the procedures and equipment to be used for delivering and placing concrete for each item;
 methods of consolidating, finishing and grooving the concrete; and methods of curing the concrete.
 3. Describe methods and frequency of assuring the grade, super elevation, slab thickness, reinforcing steel
 cover, etc. meets the plan dimensions.
 
 4.
 
 Establish the orientation of the finishing machine on a skewed superstructure to conform to 511.07.
 
 5.
 
 Describe the methods to be used to meet cold or hot weather procedures as necessary.
 
 6. Describe methods to prevent the evaporation rate from exceeding the specification requirements and
 actions to be taken when ambient and concrete temperatures exceed the requirements of 511.07.
 7.
 
 Describe the methods of protecting concrete if inclement weather occurs.
 
 8.
 
 Describe how and when the vibrator frequency is verified to conform to 511.07.
 
 9. Describe the placement procedures to be used to assure that the tolerances for slipformed concrete meets
 the requirements of 511.08.
 10. Describe the methods and schedule for providing control joints in parapets according to 511.08.
 11. Describe the lighting plan equipment and methods, when necessary for placement according to 511.07.
 C. Reporting. For the laboratory tested QC air content results report the following information within one day of
 completing the testing. For the laboratory tested QC compressive strength results report the following information
 within five (5) days of completing the testing:
 1.
 
 Sample ID, as provided by the Department *
 
 2.
 
 Project number
 
 3.
 
 Producer name
 
 4.
 
 Class of concrete
 
 5.
 
 Batch ticket number
 
 6.
 
 Date sampled
 
 7.
 
 Lot and sublot identification
 
 8.
 
 Placement and sample location
 
 9.
 
 Air content
 
 10. Slump
 11. Concrete temperature
 12. Batch weight *
 13. Unit weight *
 14. Specimen size *
 15. Date tested *
 16. Age *
 17. Individual strength results and average strength *
 18. Type of fracture *
 19. Laboratory name
 20. Technician name
 * Not required when reporting air content test results.
 455.04
 Additional Quality Control Plan Requirements for Concrete Pavement. In addition to the
 requirements of 455.02, provide the following information:
 A. Division of Pavement into Lots. For the purpose of thickness and strength determination, a lot consists of the
 entire pavement area of the same pavement thickness and the same class of concrete. Areas using high-early
 strength concrete are considered a separate lot. In the QCP define the lots for the project. The Engineer will approve
 the lot division.
 
 B. Division of Lots into Quality Control Sublots. Provide the placement sequence and placement widths for
 the pavement work and determine the sublot division conforming to Supplement 1064. Provide the Engineer the
 proposed sublots. The Engineer will approve the sublot division.
 C. Material Control Requirements. During production of the concrete pavement, perform the following quality
 checks:
 1.
 
 Check the aggregate stockpile conditions, gradation and moisture condition daily.
 
 a.
 gradation.
 
 Provide the name and OAIMA Level II certification of the person(s) performing the aggregate
 
 b. Define the methods of reporting results to the Engineer including whether the concrete aggregate
 proportions still conform to the mix’s well graded requirements.
 2. For portable plants, assure that the plant is inspected by the Department prior to placing concrete. Describe
 the procedures and frequencies to verify the mixer blades condition and the scale, gage, meter and admixture
 dispenser operation.
 3.
 
 During paving, perform the following:
 
 a. Air, Slump and Temperature. Sample and test the concrete at least each ½ day of operation at the
 placement location.
 4. Testing for opening the pavement to traffic early according to 451.17. Describe the methods to be used to
 assure the modulus of rupture obtains 600 psi (4.2 MPa). Define the methods to report results to the Engineer.
 D. Pavement Cores for Compression and Thickness. Define at what age the sublot cores for strength and
 thickness will be taken. Define the age the cores will be tested for compressive strength. Take strength cores at the
 same location as the cores for thickness determination. Determine sublot core locations according to Supplement
 1064.
 1. Pavement Thickness Measurement. Define who will be measuring the pavement thickness according to
 Supplement 1064. Define the frequency of reporting pavement thickness results to the Engineer. When the sublot
 core’s thickness is deficient, follow the requirements of 451.18 for additional core locations to determine the
 deficiency’s limits.
 2.
 
 Define how the Engineer will be provided access to witness the measurements.
 
 3.
 
 Define the method and frequency of reporting pavement thickness results to the Engineer
 
 E. Concrete Strength. For each sublot, test the core strengths using an AASHTO accredited laboratory.
 1.
 
 Propose the method and frequency of reporting the results to the Engineer for acceptance.
 
 F. Construction Process Requirements
 1. Define the minimum required rate of concrete delivery for continuous placement and assure that the
 equipment and transportation is adequate to provide the concrete at that rate.
 2.
 
 Describe the methods of protecting the concrete in the case of inclement weather.
 
 3. Describe the methods and frequency of controlling and checking the plastic thickness during paving and
 reporting issues to the Engineer.
 4.
 
 Define fine grading methods and equipment
 
 5.
 
 Define the procedure and frequency of conditioning the subbase or subgrade before pavement placement.
 
 6. Define who will perform the HIPERPAV analysis required in 451.09 and the proposed timeframe the
 Engineer will have to review the report.
 7. Describe equipment and methods for consistently delivering and evenly spreading the concrete in front of
 the paver.
 
 8. Describe the procedure for dowel bar or load transfer device installation and methods for determining
 proper placement location after concrete placement. Assure methods conform with 451.09.B.
 9. Describe the type of tie bar or alternate bolt that will be utilized at each longitudinal joint location and
 methods of placement. Describe the methods and monitoring frequency that will be utilized to assure tie bars are
 placed and conform with 451.09.A in the finished pavement.
 10. Describe methods of monitoring the vibrator operation and frequency, time of day, station location and
 track speed according to 451.05.B.
 11. Describe methods that will be used to ensure that in place concrete conforms to the air entrainment and
 uniformity requirements after placement and finishing are complete.
 12. Define materials, methods and controls for curing and joint sealing and assuring application requirements.
 13. Describe joint sawing methods and proposed timing to the sawing operation.
 14. Describe finishing and pavement grooving methods.
 15. Pavement Smoothness.
 a.
 
 Define methods to check pavement smoothness conforming to 451.13 and reporting to the Engineer.
 
 b. If other smoothness tolerances are required in the contract define the methods to measure, evaluate,
 and report the results to the Engineer.
 G. Reporting Requirements.
 1.
 
 2.
 
 Report the following QC testing information to the Engineer daily.
 a.
 
 Project number
 
 b.
 
 Class of concrete
 
 c.
 
 JMF number
 
 d.
 
 Batch ticket number
 
 e.
 
 Date and time sampled
 
 f.
 
 Air content
 
 g.
 
 Slump
 
 h.
 
 Concrete temperature
 
 i.
 
 Aggregate moistures results
 
 j.
 
 Aggregate gradation results
 
 k.
 
 Laboratory name
 
 l.
 
 Technician name
 
 Report the pavement thickness measurements conforming to the form in Supplement 1064.
 
 3. Report the compressive strength test results from the QC cores sampled according to 451.18.B with the
 following information:
 a.
 
 Pavement lot
 
 b.
 
 Class of concrete
 
 c.
 
 JMF number
 
 d.
 
 Sublot number
 
 e.
 
 Core location
 
 f.
 
 Placement date
 
 g.
 
 Age at time of testing, in days
 
 h.
 
 Compressive strength.
 
 i.
 
 Name of Concrete Producer
 
 j.
 
 Name of Contractor
 
 k.
 
 Name of laboratory
 
 455.05
 Department Quality Assurance. The Department will perform Quality Assurance materials
 verification sampling and testing as specified or as deemed necessary.
 A. Structure Concrete. The Engineer will perform and determine random number locations for QC compressive
 strength testing of each sublot.
 1. Random Number Determination. The Engineer will determine a random number for each sublot to
 determine from which load the QC sample will be taken using the table in Supplement 1127 or a random number
 generator.
 2. Slump and Air. The Engineer will perform side-by-side air and slump field testing with the Contractor
 and compare results. If the difference between the Department’s and the Contractor’s test result is greater than the
 tolerances listed below, the Contractor and Engineer will determine the reason for slump or air content differences
 and make necessary adjustments. The Engineer may stop the placement until the reason for the difference is
 established and corrected. The Engineer will check one of the first three loads delivered. Once the results are within
 the tolerances listed below, the Engineer may reduce the QA sampling and testing frequency to 10% of the
 Contractor’s subsequent QC tests.
 Slump ±1 inch (25 mm)
 Air Content ±1%.
 3. Compressive Strength. The Engineer will obtain compressive strength QA samples from the same location
 as the Contractor’s quality control samples at a frequency of one QA sample for every 10 sublots, or at least one
 per lot. The Engineer will make six (6) 4 x 8 inch (100 x 200 mm) cylinders for each sample. The Engineer will
 mark the cylinders with identification and the Contractor shall provide initial curing at the project.
 After the initial curing at the project site, deliver three (3) QA cylinders to District Testing and three (3)
 QA cylinders to the AASHTO accredited laboratory for standard curing and testing. The AASHTO accredited
 laboratory will test the QA sample and the QC sample and report the test results on the form accepted by the QCP.
 Distinguish the QA from the QC results for the sublot.
 The Engineer will compare and verify that the tested QC and the matching tested QA test results are within
 14% of the Department tested QA result. If the comparison is favorable, the Contractor QC testing is considered
 verified.
 a. When the comparison of the results are more than 14%, investigate the results with the Engineer to
 determine the reason for the difference. If the reason for the difference cannot be determined to the Engineer’s
 satisfaction, the Engineer will require the Contractor to either non-destructively test or core the concrete represented
 by the cylinder tests to determine compressive strength. Hire a second independent AASHTO accredited laboratory
 to perform this additional testing. The Engineer will witness the testing and evaluate the results. The Department
 will reimburse the Contractor for all testing costs when the Department’s results are in error. If the QC results are
 found to be valid, use the QC results. If the QC results are not valid, use the core results to determine the
 compressive strength values for pay factors per 511.22.A.
 B. Pavement and Base Concrete. The Engineer will perform side-by-side sampling and testing with the
 Contractor and compare results.
 1. Air Content and slump. The Department will perform quality assurance testing of the air content on at
 least 10 percent of the Contractor’s QC samples. The results will be compared and if the difference between the
 Department’s and the Contractor’s test results is greater than ±1% or ±1.0 inch the Contractor and Engineer will
 determine the reason for difference and make necessary adjustments. The Engineer may stop the placement until
 
 the reason for the difference is established and corrected. Make any required modifications or changes to the QCP,
 the technician, and equipment before continuing paving.
 2. Compressive Strength. The Engineer will randomly select 1 out of every 10 QC core locations to have an
 additional core obtained as a QA strength sample according to Supplement 1127. The QA core sample will be
 provided to the Engineer and District Testing will cure and test the QA core at the date specified by the Contractor.
 The Engineer will compare and verify that the Department tested QA core and the matching Contractor
 tested QC core test result are within 13% of the District Testing QA result. If the comparison is favorable, the
 Contractor QC testing is considered verified.
 If the difference between core results is greater than 13%, the Engineer will investigate both the
 Contractor’s AASHTO accredited laboratory and District Testing for the accuracy of the equipment and procedures
 for conducting the compressive strength testing of the cores. If the investigation does not determine the reason for
 the discrepancy between cores, the Contractor will re-core the sublot in dispute and the core will be tested at OMM.
 The OMM core result will be compared to the Contractor’s QC core result. If the comparison is within 13%, the
 Contractor’s QC result will be accepted and considered verified. If not within the 13% range, the project sublots
 will be re-cored by the Contractor and tested by the Department. The results will be used for payment under
 451.19.B.
 455.06
 QCP Submittal and Corrective Action. Submit the proposed QCP to the Engineer for acceptance
 at least 10 days prior to placing concrete.
 If the submitted QCP is not accepted by the Engineer, revise and resubmit the QCP and provide an additional 10
 days for acceptance. Reschedule the concrete placement, when necessary, to allow time for the review and
 acceptance of the QCP.
 The QCP acceptance is based on the concept that the proposed QCP procedures will provide work meeting all
 specification requirements. If the accepted QCP is not being followed the Engineer will require compliance or resubmittal of any modifications for review and acceptance.
 When the actual work produced by the QCP does not conform to specification requirements, the Engineer will
 require modification of the QCP to return the work to conformance. When notified by the Engineer propose
 modifications to the QCP for acceptance. Do not continue work until the Engineer has either accepted the revised
 QCP or determined work can continue.
 455.07
 Basis of Payment. The cost of developing and implementing the QCP is incidental to the cost of the
 concrete sold with the QC/QA requirement.
 
 ITEM 499 CONCRETE—GENERAL
 499.01
 499.02
 499.03
 499.04
 499.05
 499.06
 499.07
 499.08
 
 Description
 Materials
 Concrete Mix Design
 Adjustments and Controls
 Equipment
 Handling, Measuring, and Batching Materials
 Batch Plant Tickets
 Mixing Concrete
 
 499.01
 Description. This specification consists of proportioning requirements for Portland concrete mix
 designs, mixing, and controls of Portland cement concrete.
 499.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Portland cement ..................................................... 701.01, 701.02, 701.04
 .................................................. 701.05 and 701.09 or blended cement[1]
 Microsilica ....................................................................................... 701.10
 Ground granulated blast furnace slag
 (GGBFS) ...................................................................................... 701.11
 Fly ash .............................................................................................. 701.13
 Carbonate Micro-Fines ................................................................... 701.14
 Fine aggregate [2][3] .......................................................................... 703.02
 Coarse aggregate[3]........................................................... 703.02, 703.13[4]
 Recycled Concrete Aggregate (RCA) ............................ Supplement 1117
 Air-entraining admixture ................................................................. 705.10
 Chemical admixture for concrete[5] ................................................. 705.12
 [1]
 If blended cement is used, provide mill certification of all the cement and pozzolanic components and final
 product for approval by the Office of Materials Management
 [2]
 703.02 natural sand or sand manufactured from stone as specified in Item 703.02.A.3 is required in 255,
 256, 451, 452, 526, and 511 deck slabs.
 [3]
 Aggregates may be standard gradation sizes from 703.02 and Table 703.01-1 or they may be a modified
 gradation defined with the mix design submittal and certified by the Office of Materials Management under
 Supplement 1069.
 [4]
 Applies only to 305, 451 and 452 concrete.
 [5]
 Admixtures shall contain no more than 50 parts per million chloride ions by weight of cement except for
 Type C accelerating admixtures or calcium chloride for QC-FS only
 Use water for concrete mixing free from sewage, oil, acid, strong alkalis, vegetable matter, clay, and loam.
 Potable water is satisfactory for use in concrete. Non-potable water will meet the requirements of ASTM C1602.
 Water from a reclaiming system will contain no more than 0.06% chlorides. Test the non-potable water monthly
 and maintain data verifying that the water meets the requirements. Provide the data at the Engineer’s request.
 499.03
 Concrete Mix Designs. Develop concrete mix designs with 1 inch maximum nominal size coarse
 aggregate according to ACI 301, Section 4 meeting the requirements of Table 499.03-1. Limit the pozzolan content
 of any mix design according to Table 499.03-2. The design air for concrete with 1” nominal maximum size
 aggregate is 7 percent. Develop concrete mix designs per this specification and Supplement 1126.
 Only use mix designs accepted by the Department and issued a JMF number.
 
 TABLE 499.03-1 CONCRETE MIX DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
 Quantities per Cubic Yard (Cubic Meter)
 Provide Concrete with 7±2% Air Content
 Cementitious
 Permeability [1]
 Design Strength
 Content [2]
 Aggregate
 Class
 Maximum
 psi (MPa)
 Minimum.
 Requirements
 (Coulombs)
 lbs (kg)
 QC 1
 4,000 (28.0) at 28 days
 2,000
 520 (236)
 Well-Graded
 QC 2
 4,500 (31.0) at 28 days
 1,500
 520 (236)
 Well-Graded
 QC 3
 1,500
 520 (236)
 Well-Graded or as per
 As per plan
 Special
 or as per plan
 or as per plan
 plan
 QC 4 Mass
 4,000 (28.0)
 2,000
 470 (213) [4] [5] Well-Graded or as per
 Concrete
 or as per plan [3]
 or as per plan
 or as per plan
 plan
 1 inch or 3/8 inch
 QC 5 [8]
 4500 (31.0) at 28 days
 N/A
 520 (236)
 nominal maximum size
 1 inch nominal
 QC MS
 See Supplement 1126
 N/A
 800 (363)
 maximum size
 1 inch nominal
 QC FS
 See Supplement 1126
 N/A
 900 (408)
 maximum size
 1 inch nominal
 QC Misc [6] 4,000 (28.0) at 28 days
 N/A
 550[7] (249)
 maximum size
 [1] AASHTO T277 Modified.
 [2] Cementitious Content includes cement, pozzolan, and carbonate micro-fines materials,
 denoted as Cm.
 [3] Strength for Mass Concrete (QC 4) may be tested at either 28 or 56 days.
 [4] Do not use Type III cement or accelerating admixtures in mass concrete.
 [5] The maximum fly ash or GGBFS content may be increased up to 50%.
 [6] For QC Misc mixes only –Water/Cementitious ratio limited to 0.50 maximum.
 [7] Cement or a combination of cement and up to15% fly ash or up to 30% GGBFS.
 [8] For QC 5 mixes with 3/8 inch nominal size, provide an air content of 8±2%.
 Determine the permeability by testing according to AASHTO T277 except moist cure the permeability samples
 for 7 days at 73 °F (23 °C) followed by 21 days of moist curing at 100 °F (38 °C). Perform permeability testing at
 28 days.
 Limit pozzolan materials as a percent of total cementitious content according to Table 499.03-2:
 TABLE 499.03-2 POZZOLAN MATERIALS
 MATERIAL
 
 MAXIMUM CONTENT (%)
 
 Fly Ash
 GGBFS
 Micro-Silica
 
 25
 30
 10
 [1]
 20
 Carbonate Micro-Fines
 When using multiple pozzolan materials, do not exceed the individual
 maximum contents above for each material. A combination of pozzolan
 materials may not exceed 50% of the total cementitious content by weight.
 [1]
 
 Not for use in QC 2 or QC 3 concrete.
 
 A. Slump. Maintain slump within the nominal slump range in Table 499.03-3. If below the maximum watercementititous ratio of the Job Mix Formula (JMF), adjust the quantity of water to meet slump requirements. Do not
 use concrete with a slump greater than the maximum shown in Table 499.03-3. Conduct tests on the plastic concrete
 for pavement at the point of placement or at an Engineer-designated location.
 
 TABLE 499.03-3 CONCRETE SLUMP
 Nominal Slump
 Maximum Slump
 inch (mm)[1]
 inch (mm)[2]
 Concrete pavement (305, 451, 452, 615)
 1 to 3 (25 to 75)
 4 (100)
 Structural Concrete (511, 610, 622)
 1 to 4 (25 to 100)
 5 (125)
 Superstructure concrete (511, 526)
 2 to 4 (50 to 100)
 4 (100)
 Non-reinforced concrete (601, 602, 611, 608, 609, 622)
 1 to 4 (25 to 100)
 5 (125)
 [1]
 This nominal slump may be increased to 6 inches (150 mm), provided the increase in slump is
 achieved by adding a chemical admixture conforming to the requirements of 705.12, Type F or G.
 [2]
 This maximum slump may be increased to 7 inches (180 mm), provided the increase in slump is
 achieved by adding a chemical admixture conforming to the requirements of 705.12, Type F or G.
 Type of Work
 
 B. Air Content. Ensure that the air content in all concrete at the point of placement is within the percentage
 range specified in Table 499.03-1.
 499.04 Adjustments and Controls. Provide the following adjustments and controls during batching and
 placement of the concrete:
 A. Batch the concrete to the proportions of the accepted JMF. Provide a workable and finishable mix. Adjustments
 to the JMF’s aggregate proportions up to 100 lbs (44 kg) for workability may be made. Adjustments greater than
 100 lbs (44 kg) may be made if approved by the Engineer. Maintain an absolute volume of 27.0 cubic feet/cubic
 yard for the adjusted concrete mix. For Well Graded JMF adjustments, maintain the combined aggregate gradation
 within the optimal zone II requirements for well-graded mixes as defined in Supplement 1126. If outside the optimal
 zone II of the Coarseness Factor Chart adjust the JMF’s proportions to maintain the combined gradation within
 Zone II and report the JMF changes to the Engineer.
 B. Handle, haul and store aggregates to minimize segregation, avoid contamination, and assure a uniform grading
 within the specified gradation. Do not combine aggregates from different sources or of different gradings in the
 same stockpile. Do not use segregated or contaminated aggregates.
 C. Remove all wash water by reversing each truck drum at the plant immediately prior to reloading.
 D. Adjust the SSD aggregate design weights in the JMF to compensate for the moisture contained in the
 aggregates and moisture the aggregates will absorb during batching. Adjust the mix water to compensate for the
 aggregate moistures.
 E. Use only compatible admixtures in the concrete. Dispense all admixtures according to the manufacturer’s
 recommendations. Furnish a volumetric dispenser for the Type F or G admixture or ensure that there is a gage on
 each truck-mounted Type F or G admixture dispensing tank. If any admixture is added at the job site, mix the load
 for a minimum of 5 minutes.
 F. Do not exceed the maximum water/cementitious ratio of the accepted JMF. Use a water-reducing admixture
 conforming to 705.12; proportionately increase the cementitious content; or develop and submit for acceptance a
 new JMF. Adjust the absolute volume of the aggregates if the cement content is increased.
 G. If during placement of concrete, cement or microsilica balling is observed, take corrective action with further
 mixing. If after corrective action, balling continues, reject the load. Revise the mixing process and/or loading
 sequence to prevent further balling.
 H. If slump loss occurs before placement of the concrete, the concrete may be “replasticized” with an admixture
 to restore plasticity. The Engineer will recheck the slump range and air content to ensure conformance to the
 specifications. If after “replasticizing” the components of the load are segregated, the Department will reject the
 load.
 I.
 
 Completely discharge the concrete from each delivery truck within the time requirements of 499.08.
 
 J. Provide sufficient quality control at the plant to assure conformance with this specification and project
 requirements.
 
 K. Use an approved set-retarding admixture conforming to 705.12, Type B or D when the concrete temperature
 exceeds a nominal temperature of 75 F (24 C).
 499.05 Equipment. Use a Department approved batch plant and trucks. Provide batching and mixing equipment
 meeting the following requirements:
 A. Batching Plants. Operate each plant so that aggregate materials are not segregated and there is no
 intermingling of the materials before batching. Use weighing mechanisms that allow a visible means of checking
 weights and produce a printed record. Use dispensing mechanisms for water and admixtures that allow a visible
 means of checking quantities and produce a printed record.
 Use cement and aggregate weighing mechanisms that are accurate to within 0.5 percent of the correct weight.
 Ensure that devices for weighing or metering water are accurate to 1.0 percent throughout the range used.
 Maintain a certification from a Sealer of Weights and Measures or a scale servicing company attesting to the
 accuracy of the weighing and metering devices. A Certificate of Performance issued by the National Ready Mixed
 Concrete Association may be used instead of the Sealer of Weights and Measures or a scale servicing company.
 Do not use plants with a certification or certificate older than 12 months
 Maintain the services of a scale servicing company or ten standard test weights to reach a capacity of 500
 pounds (227 kg) for testing the weighing devices at the batch plant. Ensure all device-testing weights are sealed by
 the Ohio Department of Agriculture every 3 years.
 The Engineer may test weighing and dispensing devices as often as necessary to ensure continued accuracy.
 B. Mixers. Provide mixers and agitators conforming to AASHTO M 157, Sections 10, 11.2, 11.5, and 11.6,
 except that the Department will allow mechanical counters.
 For bodies of non-agitating concrete hauling equipment, provide smooth, mortar-tight, metal containers
 capable of discharging the concrete at a satisfactory controlled rate without segregation. Provide covers when
 required by the Engineer. The Engineer will allow trucks having dump bodies with rounded corners and no internal
 ribs or projections for non-agitating hauling.
 C. Concrete Pumping and Conveying Equipment. Provide concrete pumping and conveying equipment in
 accordance with ACI 304.2R and ACI 304.4R. Conduct a pre-placement meeting to discuss concrete pumping and
 conveying procedures to maintain air content within specified limits per Table 499.03-1.
 499.06 Handling, Measuring, and Batching Materials. Do not stockpile aggregates from different sources or
 different gradations together. Do not use aggregates that have become segregated or mixed with foreign material.
 The Engineer may direct reworking or cleaning, or may reject aggregates that have become segregated or mixed
 with earth or foreign material.
 Prior to and during batching, maintain all coarse aggregates at a uniform moisture content.
 For all slag aggregates or other aggregates with a reported absorption above 3.0 percent, maintain the moisture
 contents at or above the ODOT-reported SSD for that aggregate as follows:
 A. Use appropriate stockpile watering systems capable of raising and maintaining aggregate moisture at or above
 SSD. Test the moisture content of the watered aggregate stockpiles at least five (5) locations to assure the stockpile
 is at or above SSD.
 B. Have processes to maintain the aggregate stockpile at SSD until stockpile draining for SSD consistency has
 begun. Twenty-four (24) hours before batching concrete with the aggregate, shut down the stockpile watering
 process to allow drainage and to establish a uniform moisture content.
 C. Test aggregate moisture content at least once per half day, but not less than twice per day, during concrete
 production. If the moisture content varies between tests by more than 1 percent increase the moisture testing
 frequency to assure correct batching information.
 D. Provide the moisture content test results as part of all quality control plant ticket information.
 
 Separately weigh the amounts of fine aggregate and coarse aggregate. Use a separate weighing device for
 cementitious materials.
 Batch each material to ensure weights are within the tolerance specified in Table 499.06-1, based on the amount
 specified in the approved JMF.
 TABLE 499.06-1 CONCRETE BATCHING TOLERANCES
 Material
 Cement
 Pozzolan
 Carbonate Micro-Fines
 Aggregates
 Water[1]
 Chemical Admixtures
 [1]Measured by weight or volume
 
 Batching Tolerance (%)
 ±1.0
 ±1.0
 ±1.0
 ±2.0
 ±1.0
 ±3.0
 
 499.07 Batch Plant Tickets. Furnish a concrete batch plant ticket to the Engineer for each load of concrete
 incorporated into the project. Provide computer generated batch tickets. At a minimum, include the information
 listed in Table 499.07-1 on each ticket:
 
 TABLE 499.07-1 EVERY BATCH TICKET
 Name of ready-mix batch plant
 Batch plant No.
 Batch plant location
 Serial number of ticket
 Date
 Truck number
 Class of concrete
 JMF Number
 Batch time
 Batch size
 Actual weights of cementitious
 material:
 Cement
 Fly ash
 GGBFS
 Microsilica
 Carbonate Micro-Fines
 Other
 Actual weights of aggregates:
 Coarse
 Intermediate
 Fine
 Other
 Actual weight of water
 Actual volume of admixtures:
 Air-entrainer
 Superplasticizer
 Water-reducer
 Retarder
 Other
 Aggregate moisture contents:
 Coarse aggregate
 Intermediate aggregate
 Fine aggregate
 Water-cementitious ratio,
 leaving the plant
 
 yd3 (m3)
 
 lb (kg)
 lb (kg)
 lb (kg)
 lb (kg)
 lb (kg)
 lb (kg)
 lb (kg)
 lb (kg)
 lb (kg)
 lb (kg)
 lb (kg)
 fl oz (mL)
 fl oz (mL)
 fl oz (mL)
 fl oz (mL)
 fl oz (mL)
 %
 %
 %
 
 Provide the information in Table 499.07-2 with batch tickets for each day’s first load of concrete and for each
 JMF. Include Table 499.07-2 information on the batch ticket or furnish the information on a separate computergenerated or handwritten form attached to the batch ticket.
 If during the concrete manufacturing process any of the information listed in Table 499.07-2 changes, resubmit
 Table 499.07-2 information with the first batch ticket supplied with the changed concrete.
 
 TABLE 499.07-2 FIRST TICKET EACH DAY, EACH JMF
 Cementitious Materials:
 Source:
 Grade or Type:
 Cement
 Fly ash
 GGBFS
 Microsilica
 Carbonate Micro-Fines
 Other
 Admixtures
 Brand:
 Type:
 Air-entrainer
 Retarder
 Superplasticizer
 Water-reducer
 Other
 The provided concrete batch ticket information is according to ASTM C 94/C 94M, Section 13.
 The Engineer may require supporting data to validate the basis for furnished aggregate moisture contents.
 499.08 Mixing Concrete. Use a central mix plant or in truck mixers to mix the concrete.
 When using a central mix plant, mix the concrete not less than 60 seconds Begin the mixing time when all
 materials are in the drum and end the mixing time when discharge begins. Include transfer time in multiple drum
 mixers in the mixing time. Remove the contents of an individual mixer drum before a succeeding batch is emptied
 into the drum.
 When concrete is mixed using a truck mixer for complete mixing, mix each batch of concrete at the rotation rate
 designated on the mixer as mixing speed for not less than 70 revolutions of the drum. Transport mixed concrete
 from the central mixers in truck mixers, truck agitators, or trucks having non-agitating bodies. Within 90 minutes
 after cement and water are combined, deliver and completely discharge concrete.
 When concrete is delivered in transit mixers and before discharging any of a batch, the Engineer may allow
 adding water within the specified water-cement ratio limits. Perform sufficient mixing, a minimum of 30
 revolutions at mixing speed, to adjust the slump and to regenerate the specified air content throughout the batch.
 When approved by the Engineer, the Contractor may use approved admixtures (705.12, Type F or G) for
 retempering the load to adjust the slump after the start of discharge. Mix for a minimum of 30 revolutions at mixing
 speed after addition of the admixture.
 Use admixtures containing no more than 50 parts per million chloride by weight of cement only when specified
 in the Contract Documents, the accepted JMF, or with the Engineer’s written permission.
 Ensure that the temperature of all concrete does not exceed 95 F (35 C) until incorporated into the work.
 
 500 STRUCTURES
 ITEM 501 STRUCTURES—GENERAL
 501.01
 501.02
 501.03
 501.04
 501.05
 501.06
 501.07
 
 General
 Verification of Dimensions
 Notification of Fabricator
 Shop Drawings
 Submittal of Engineered Drawings
 Test Reports
 Welded Attachments
 
 501.01
 General. This specification includes the general requirements for building the various items that
 constitute the completed structure.
 Perform the work, including fabrication, erection, and construction, so that the entire structure and all its
 component parts will function as designed.
 501.02
 Verification of Dimensions. Verify that all dimensions established by the Engineer are correct.
 501.03
 Notification of Fabricator. When furnishing materials under Items 513, 515, 516, 517, and 518,
 select a fabricator from the pre-qualified fabricators list in effect the date of the Contract letting. Before or at the
 preconstruction conference, provide a written notification to the DCA and OMM of the selected steel fabricators
 and precast concrete fabricators.
 501.04
 Shop Drawings. Provide shop drawings detailing structural steel, metal structural elements,
 prestressed concrete members, precast concrete structural elements, and other similar materials requiring either
 shop or field fabrication. Include the PID (Project Identification Number).
 A. Contractor Acceptance of Shop Drawings for Items 513 and 515. Submit shop drawings to the OMM and
 the District Office of Planning and Engineering before the start of fabrication on Item 513, UF Level or at least 3
 days before the pre-fabrication meeting, per 513.07 or 515.07 as follows:
 For structures carrying railroad traffic, submit four copies of the prepared shop drawings at least 40 days prior
 to the pre fabrication meeting to each railroad company involved for review and approval. Resolve all railroad
 comments prior to submitting drawings to OMM. The submission to OMM shall include one set of shop drawings
 accepted by each railroad company involved; copies of all documentation between the railroad(s) and the
 Contractor; four sets of Contractor accepted shop drawings, and the Contractor’s written acceptance letter. Also
 furnish the fabricator’s quality control specialist with one additional set of these drawings before the pre-fabrication
 meeting.
 For all other structures, the submission to OMM shall include a written acceptance letter and four copies of
 each drawing, unless additional copies are requested. Also, furnish the fabricator’s quality control specialist with
 one additional set of these drawings before the pre-fabrication meeting.
 Have competent individuals prepare and check the shop drawings The preparer(s) and checker(s) shall initial
 each sheet and shall be different individuals . Provide, on the cover sheet or submittal letter, the first name, last
 name and initials of each preparer and checker performing work on the shop drawings. Have an Ohio Registered
 Engineer sign, seal and date the shop drawing cover sheet or submittal letter according to ORC 4733 and OAC
 4733-35 confirming that the shop drawings meet the intent of the contract. If multiple preparers or multiple checkers
 created the drawing, then the cover sheet or submittal letter shall clearly indicated the portions for which each
 person is responsible. Have all questions and comments addressed before submitting the shop drawings.
 The Contractor’s written acceptance letter shall document acceptance of the shop drawings including
 confirmation of field verification, as required, and descriptions of issues resolved between the Contractor, the
 fabricator, or the Department.
 
 By accepting these shop drawings, the Contractor represents to the Department that all dimensions and
 elevations of existing conditions shown on the plans have been field measured and verified, and that these shop
 drawings comply with all the materials requirements, construction requirements, contract requirements, and
 performance criteria. The Contractor further represents that these drawings have been coordinated and verified with
 the details of the work to be performed by other fabricators and entities on the project. The Department will not
 make any allowance for additional cost or delays to the Contractor for incorrect fabrication as a result of failure to
 coordinate or perform this acceptance.
 If the Department requests changes on these shop drawings, or the Contractor makes changes in addition to
 those expressly requested, revise the shop drawings and submit a new cover sheet, signed, sealed and dated by an
 Ohio Registered Engineer with suitable revision marks to identify the changes.
 Schedule the pre-fabrication meeting after OMM receives the drawings. Fabrication may begin after the prefabrication meeting is complete or after receipt of Item 513, UF Level drawings.
 B. Fabricator Coordination of Shop Drawings for Items 516, 517, and 518. The Contractor and fabricator
 must coordinate these shop drawings. Ensure that shop drawings meet requirements for materials, field
 measurements, construction requirements, contract requirements, performance criteria, and similar data. The
 coordination must also include details of the work to be performed by other fabricators and entities on the project.
 The Department will not make allowance for additional cost or delays to the Contractor for incorrect fabrication as
 a result of failure to coordinate or perform this coordination.
 Submit two copies of the shop drawings to the Engineer and one copy to the District Office of Planning and
 Engineering with the materials delivered to the project. Do not incorporate material into the work until after
 submitting the drawings. Department approval of these shop drawings is not required.
 C. Shop Drawing General Requirements. Specific requirements are specified in Item 513, 515, 516, 517, or
 518.
 Shop drawings shall be neatly and accurately drawn on 11 x 17 inch or 22 x 34-inch (280 x 432 mm or 559 x
 864 mm) sheets. Submit the shop drawings electronically in pdf format.
 501.05
 Submittal of Engineered Drawings. Design and perform all procedures as directed by the AASHTO
 Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges or the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications except as
 modified below:
 Perform daily inspections to ensure the work governed by the Engineered Drawing is functioning as designed.
 Report malfunctioning work to the Engineer immediately.
 A. Projects with Railroad Involvement. Prepare and provide Engineered Drawings listed in this section as
 follows:
 Have competent individuals prepare, check and initial each Engineered Drawing. The preparer and checker
 shall be different individuals. Provide, on the cover sheet or submittal letter, the first name, last name and initials
 of each preparer and checker performing work on the Engineered Drawings. Have an Ohio Registered Engineer
 sign, seal, and date the cover sheet or submittal letter according to ORC 4733 and OAC 4733‐35. If multiple
 preparers or multiple checkers created the drawing, then the cover sheet or submittal letter shall clearly indicate the
 portions for which each person is responsible.
 Submit Engineered Drawings to all involved railway companies at least 50 days before planned construction
 begins. Obtain acceptance from all involved railroad companies. Furnish the Engineer copies of all correspondence
 with the railroad, documentation of railroad acceptance and the Engineered Drawings accepted by the railroad.
 Schedule an Engineered Drawing meeting to be held 7 days, or less after submitting railroad accepted drawings
 to the Engineer. The signatory Engineer responsible for the Engineered Drawing design, the Superintendent, the
 Engineer and the Inspector will participate in the meeting in person, via conference call or via video conference.
 The Engineer will invite the responsible designer of the Plans for assistance. The purpose of the meeting shall be
 to review the drawings; resolve all issues to the Engineer’s satisfaction and ensure all parties are in agreement with
 the work to commence. At the conclusion of the meeting, the Engineer will provide a written response to the
 submittal in accordance with 105.02. Do not begin work until the Engineer’s acceptance has been received.
 
 Perform all work in accordance with the ODOT accepted Engineered Drawings. Immediately cease all
 operations that deviate from the ODOT accepted Engineered Drawings. If a deviation is necessary, prepare revised
 Engineered Drawings as noted above and furnish the Engineer a copy of a revised Engineered Drawings including
 documentation of acceptance from all involved railroad companies. Schedule an Engineered Drawing meeting as
 noted above to be held 24 hours, or less at the discretion of the Engineer, after submitting the revised railroad
 accepted drawings. At the conclusion of the meeting, the Engineer will provide a written response to the submittal
 in accordance with 105.02. Do not begin work until the Engineer’s acceptance has been received.
 The Department will consider delays resulting from Engineered Drawing deviations as non-excusable in
 accordance with 108.06.E.
 This section applies to Engineered Drawings for the following:
 1.
 
 Bracing adjacent to the railroad tracks. Perform work according to 501.05.B.1.
 
 2.
 
 Demolition of structures over or within 14 feet of railroad tracks. Perform work according to 501.05.B.2.
 
 3. Erection of structural members over or within 14 feet of railroad tracks. Perform work according to
 501.05.B.4.
 B. Projects without Railroad Involvement. Prepare and provide Engineered Drawings listed in this section as
 follows:
 Have competent individuals prepare, check and initial each Engineered Drawing. The preparer and checker
 shall be different individuals. Provide, on the cover sheet or submittal letter, the first name, last name and initials
 of each preparer and checker performing work on the Engineered Drawings. Have an Ohio Registered Engineer
 prepare, sign, seal and date the cover sheet or submittal letter according to ORC 4733 and OAC 4733-35. If multiple
 preparers or multiple checkers created the drawing, then the cover sheet or submittal letter shall clearly indicated
 the portions for which each person is responsible.
 Schedule an Engineered Drawing meeting to be held 7 days, or less after submitting drawings to the Engineer.
 The signatory Engineer responsible for the design, the Superintendent, the Engineer and the Inspector will
 participate in the meeting in person, via conference call or via video conference. The Engineer will invite the
 designer of the contract Plans for assistance. The purpose of the meeting shall be to review the drawings; resolve
 all issues to the Engineer’s satisfaction and ensure all parties are in agreement with the work to commence. At the
 conclusion of the meeting, the Engineer will provide a written response to the submittal in accordance with 105.02.
 Do not begin work until the Engineer’s acceptance has been received.
 Perform all work in accordance with the accepted Engineered Drawings. Immediately cease all operations that
 deviate from the accepted Engineered Drawings. If a deviation is necessary, prepare revised Engineered Drawings
 as noted above and furnish the Engineer a copy of revised Engineered Drawings. Schedule an Engineered Drawing
 meeting as noted above to be held 24 hours, or less at the discretion of the Engineer, after submitting the revised
 drawings. At the conclusion of the meeting, the Engineer will provide a written response to the submittal in
 accordance with 105.02. Do not begin work until the Engineer’s acceptance has been received.
 The Department will consider delays resulting from Engineered Drawings deviations as non-excusable in
 accordance with 108.06.E.
 This section applies to Engineered Drawings for the following:
 1. Cofferdams and Excavation Bracing. If a complete design is not provided in the plans, provide Engineered
 Drawings for excavations when the edge line of a roadway used to maintain traffic is located within a distance of
 one-half times the excavation height or for excavations that expose any side of an excavation to a height exceeding
 eight feet.
 The Contractor may construct the design(s) shown on the plans without an Engineered Drawing submittal or
 prepare an alternate design. Submit Engineered Drawings for all alternate Cofferdam and Excavation Bracing
 designs. Perform all Work as specified below:
 a.
 
 Locate Cofferdams and Excavation Bracing according to the contract, if shown.
 
 b.
 
 Maintain temporary horizontal and vertical clearances according to the contract.
 
 c.
 
 Include the effects of AASHTO live, dead and temporary construction load surcharges as necessary.
 
 d. Design Cofferdams and Excavation Bracing to support the sides and bottom of an excavation for all
 phases of work in accordance with the latest AASHTO Guide Design Specifications for Bridge Temporary Works,
 Section 4 and the latest edition of either the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications or the AASHTO
 Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges.
 2. Demolition of Bridges or portions of Bridges in which the work endangers the public welfare, or life,
 health or property. Perform all Work as specified below:
 a. Provide temporary devices or structures necessary to protect traffic during all demolition activities.
 Provide traffic protection when demolition is located less than 12' horizontally from active traffic on structures of
 less than 25' vertical clearance. Increase the 12' minimum horizontal distance 1 foot for each 2 feet of additional
 height greater than 25'.
 b. Never lift the portions of structure being removed over active traffic. Before releasing traffic make
 the remaining structure stable.
 c. Design traffic protection devices or structures when over live traffic, for a minimum load of 50 pounds
 per square foot plus the weight of equipment, debris and any other load to be carried. Include any portion of the
 deck that cantilevers beyond the fascia beams or girders.
 d. In lieu of temporary devices or structures required in “a” above, provide a vertical barrier. Design the
 vertical barrier with rigid or flexible materials specifically designed for demolition containment. Extend the
 enclosure up to the bottom of the deck and down to the ground. Maintain all materials free of tears, cuts and holes.
 e.
 f.
 
 Maintain temporary horizontal and vertical clearances according to the contract.
 Locate structural members to be reused before performing any removal operations.
 
 g.
 
 Do not damage structural members being reused during any removal operation.
 
 h.
 
 Perform Work so that all members are stable during all operation and loading conditions.
 
 i. Provide the method and sequence of the removal operations. Include the type and location of equipment
 to be used during the demolition.
 j.
 
 Perform Work according to 501.05.B.6.
 
 3. Falsework for cast-in-place concrete slab bridges. Perform all work according to 508 and as specified
 below:
 a. Provide a camber table to account for the deflection of the falsework loaded with its self weight and
 the weight of wet concrete. Also include in the table, the specified camber to compensate for slab deflection after
 the falsework is released.
 b.
 
 Maintain temporary horizontal and vertical clearances according to the contract.
 
 c. As a minimum design falsework over waterways for a five year flood or with 75 percent of the
 effective waterway opening of the proposed structure. The Contractor is responsible for any damages caused by
 upstream flooding due to insufficient temporary structure size or the accumulation of debris or sediment in the
 channel.
 d. Support falsework foundations located within the ten year flood limits on rock, shale or piles driven
 to a minimum depth of 15 feet, and to sufficient penetration to carry superimposed loads or until refusal on rock.
 e. The incorporation of structural steel shapes, used as temporary support members, into a finished
 concrete slab superstructure is prohibited.
 f.
 Design falsework in accordance with the latest AASHTO Guide Design Specifications for Bridge
 Temporary Works, Section 2.
 4.
 
 Erection of steel or precast concrete structural members as specified below:
 
 a.
 
 Never lift structural members over active traffic. Before releasing traffic make structural members
 
 stable.
 b. Supply any temporary supports or braces necessary to maintain structural stability and prevent lateral
 movement until completion of all construction activities.
 c.
 
 Perform Work according to 501.05.B.6, 513 or 515.
 
 d.
 
 Do not field weld temporary members to permanent steel members.
 
 e.
 
 Maintain temporary horizontal and vertical clearances according to the contract.
 
 f.
 
 Provide drawings with at least the following information:
 
 (1) Site Plan of the work area showing permanent support structures (piers and abutments); roads;
 railroad tracks; waterways; overhead and underground utilities; and other information pertinent to erection.
 (2) Erection sequence for all members, noting any temporary support conditions, such as holding
 crane positions, temporary supports, falsework etc. Member reference marks, when reflected on the erection plans,
 should be the same used on the shop drawings.
 (3) Primary member delivery location and orientation.
 (4) Maintenance of Traffic during erection operations.
 (5) Location of each crane for each primary member pick, showing radius and crane support (barges,
 mats, etc.).
 (6) Capacity chart for each lifting equipment configuration and boom length used in the work.
 (7) Center of gravity locations for primary member.
 (8) Rigging weights, capacity and arrangement for primary member picks.
 (9) Lifting weight of primary member picks, including all rigging and pre-attached elements.
 (10) Details of any temporary lifting devices to be bolted or welded to permanent members, including
 method and time (shop or field) of attachment; capacity; and method, time, and responsibility for removal.
 (11) Blocking details for bridge bearings.
 5.
 
 Jacking and support of existing structures as specified below:
 
 a. Support the structure on temporary supports and brace as necessary to maintain structural stability
 and prevent lateral movement until completion of the permanent supports. Do not rely on jacks lifting system
 alone,(e.g. hydraulic system), to support the structure except during the actual jacking operation. Remove all
 temporary supports upon completion of the jacking procedure.
 b.
 
 Maintain a maximum differential jacking height of 1/4 inch between any adjacent beam lines.
 
 c.
 
 Maintain a maximum differential jacking height of 1 inch between any adjacent abutments or piers.
 
 d.
 
 Place jacks and any load plates at least 2 inches from the edges of any concrete substructure seats.
 
 e.
 
 Do not field weld temporary members to permanent steel members.
 
 f.
 
 Maintain temporary horizontal and vertical clearances according to the contract.
 
 6. When the total load applied to a structure during construction, (new or structure being rehabilitated),
 exceeds 75 percent of the legal limit, (The Legal Limit is 80,000 lbs. or percentage thereof if posted), the load
 effects on the structure shall be analyzed based on the operating level calculated by the Load Factor Rating Method
 as given in the AASHTO Manual for Bridge Evaluation.
 7.
 
 Structures for maintaining traffic in accordance with Item 502.
 
 a.
 501.05.A.
 b.
 
 For structures located over or within 14 feet of railroad tracks, submit plans in accordance with
 Perform Work according to 501.05.B.6..
 
 C. Corrective Work. Unless otherwise noted, before performing corrective work on structure items, 507, 511,
 513, 515, 516, 517 and 524, prepare a Corrective Work Plan (CWP). Submit three copies of the CWP to the
 Engineer for acceptance 30 days, or less at the discretion of the Engineer before construction begins. Have an Ohio
 Registered Engineer prepare, sign, seal and date each CWP. Obtain Department acceptance before beginning
 corrective work.
 Perform all work in accordance with the accepted CWP. Immediately cease all operations that deviated from
 the accepted CWP. If a deviation is necessary, furnish the Engineer three copies of a revised CWP. The revised
 CWP shall be signed, sealed and dated by an Ohio Registered Engineer. Obtain Department acceptance of revised
 CWP prior to performing corrective work.
 Perform all corrective work, including the preparation of the CWP and revisions at no expense to the
 Department. The Contractor shall reimburse the Department for all CWP review costs of the Designer of Record.
 The Department will consider delays resulting from all corrective work as non-excusable in accordance with
 108.06.E.
 501.06
 
 Test Reports
 
 A. Contractor Acceptance of Materials for Item 513. Submit certified test data to the Director showing
 compliance with the requirements of Item 711. Accompany all certified test data with copies of mill shipping
 notices or invoices showing the quantity and size of material being accepted.
 Check this material data and provide a letter of written acceptance. Submit the material data and letter of
 written acceptance to the Director so that the Director receives them at least 7 days before final shop inspection
 Item 513, Levels 1 through 6 or before final shop inspection Item 513, UF Level.
 Submit a single copy of this material data for each structure, except where the structure carries railway traffic.
 Submit one additional copy to each railway company involved.
 Additionally for Item 513, Levels 1 through 6 structural steel members, submit one copy of main material,
 certified test data with a letter documenting the QCFS acceptance to the QA shop inspector before the material
 passes check point one.
 The Department will not accept materials for final inspection at the fabrication shop until the Director receives
 the Contractor accepted material data.
 B. Fabricator Certification of Materials for Items 516, 517, and 518. Ensure that a letter of certification
 accompanies the fabricated material shipped to the job site, in a format approved by the Director, stating all
 materials conform to contract requirements. For these materials, the fabricator must retain certified test data, copies
 of mill shipping notices, or invoices showing the quantity and size of material being accepted. This data shall
 provide complete traceability to the producing mill and proof of domestic origin, as required by ORC 153.011.
 Do not deliver materials to the project without the certification letter.
 501.07 Welded Attachments.
 Prepare and provide a detailed request showing weld size, length, type and location for welding permanent or
 temporary attachments to main structural members not shown or permitted by contract. Submit request to the Office
 of Structural Engineering at least 20 days before construction begins. Obtain acceptance before performing work.
 Perform work according to 513.
 
 ITEM 502 STRUCTURES FOR MAINTAINING TRAFFIC
 502.01
 502.02
 502.03
 502.04
 502.05
 
 Description
 Design and Construction
 Maintenance
 Removal
 Basis of Payment
 
 502.01
 Description. This work consists of preparing plans, providing, maintaining, and subsequently
 removing temporary structures.
 502.02
 Design and Construction. As a minimum, design the temporary structure for a 5-year flood or with
 75 percent of the effective waterway opening of the proposed structure. The Contractor is responsible for any
 damages caused by upstream flooding due to insufficient temporary structure size or the accumulation of debris or
 sediment in the channel. Provide a clear roadway width of at least 23 feet (7.0 m) measured from face to face of
 guardrails. If the existing structure or approaches or both have sidewalks provide at least one sidewalk at least 5
 feet (1.2 m) wide with adequate connections to existing walks and in compliance with accessibility standards.
 Design the temporary structure according to the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications except that the
 design live loading, HL-93 may be reduced by 25 percent.
 Submit working drawings in accordance with 501.05.
 Drive piling to sufficient penetration to carry the superimposed loads according to Item 507, but not less than 24
 tons (24 metric tons) per pile. Perform dynamic load testing to determine required blow count if piles are not driven
 to rock.
 If the plans state that the existing superstructure may be used instead of new construction, do not alter it to meet
 either the above width or strength requirements. Instead, move or dismantle and re-erect with sufficient care to
 avoid any reduction of capacity. If the superstructure has been restricted by posting to loads less than permitted by
 statute, move the posting signs to the temporary road, unless the superstructure is strengthened to a legal load
 capacity. If planning to use the existing superstructure on the temporary road, notify the Engineer at least 3 days
 before the superstructure is moved to allow the Department to establish a detour. Complete the bridge within 48
 hours after traffic has been routed over the detour.
 502.03
 Maintenance. Maintain all portions of the temporary structure in good condition with respect to both
 safety and smoothness for travel as long as it is needed for maintenance of traffic. Satisfactorily maintain the
 channel and waterway opening.
 502.04
 Removal. If the temporary structure is no longer needed, take ownership and remove it from the site
 according to Item 202.
 502.05
 Basis of Payment. Payment is full compensation for erection, maintenance, performing dynamic load
 testing, and subsequent removal of temporary structures.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 Unit
 Description
 502
 
 Lump Sum
 
 Structure for Maintaining Traffic
 
 ITEM 503 EXCAVATION FOR STRUCTURES
 503.01
 503.02
 503.03
 503.04
 503.05
 503.06
 503.07
 503.08
 503.09
 503.10
 
 Description
 Classification
 Cofferdams and Excavation Bracing
 Protection for Excavation
 Footings in Rock
 Approval of Foundations
 Disposal of Excavated Material
 Backfill
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 503.01
 Description. This work consists of designing cofferdams and excavation bracing, and excavating
 materials not removed under other items of work that must be removed to enable construction of bridges, and other
 structures. Included in this work are:
 A. constructing, maintaining, and subsequently removing cofferdams and excavation bracing;
 B. dewatering and backfilling the excavation;
 C. protecting the excavation against collapse; and
 D. disposing of materials not required or suitable for backfill.
 503.02
 Classification. Excavation is classified as unclassified excavation, unclassified excavation including
 rock (or shale), or rock (or shale) excavation.
 503.03
 Cofferdams and Excavation Bracing. This item includes the preparation of an Engineered drawing
 according to 501.05 and the construction, maintenance, and subsequent removal of all cofferdams and excavation
 bracing. A cofferdam is an enclosure within a water environment constructed to allow dewatering for the purpose
 of creating a dry work environment. Excavation bracing is that required to safely support the sides of excavations,
 embankments, adjacent buildings, tracks, or other premises.
 Construct cofferdams and excavation bracing such that support members clear the top of the footings by at least
 1 foot (0.3 m). If this is not practical, support members shall be structural steel and left it in place. If bracing is to
 be left in place and the ends would not be visible when the structure is completed, burn off the steel ends flush with
 the concrete surface. If ends would be visible, form a 6 inch (150 mm) deep recess around the steel embedment
 and remove the external portion of the embedment to provide at least 3 inches (75 mm) of clearance to the finished
 concrete face. Completely fill the resulting recess with concrete.
 Where water is not encountered, the Contractor may place excavation bracing at the plan dimension of the footing
 and use it as formwork for footing concrete. Leave this sheeting in place at least to the top of the footing, or properly
 separate it from the footing concrete so that it may be removed without damaging the concrete.
 Where water is encountered, and cofferdams are necessary, construct them practically watertight before
 excavating below water level. Make provisions outside the footing to drain, collect, and remove water. When
 placing concrete, keep the excavation dewatered until the concrete is above the prevailing water level. Effectively
 protect footing concrete from erosion. If using a concrete seal to stop the flow upward from the bottom of a
 cofferdam, place the seal below the planned footing and consider it as a part of the cofferdam. The Department will
 not pay for a seal unless it is shown on the plans.
 Unless otherwise shown in the plans, design and construct cofferdams to accommodate a water elevation 3 feet
 (1.0 m) above the ordinary high water mark shown on the plans. If the actual water elevation exceeds 3 feet (1.0
 m) above the stated ordinary high water mark, the Department will reimburse the Contractor for any resulting
 damage to the work protected by the cofferdam provided the Contractor has exercised normal due diligence. If the
 actual water elevation exceeds 3 feet (1.0 m) above the ordinary high water mark and causes a delay to the project,
 the Department will grant the Contractor an excusable, non-compensable delay in accordance with 108.06.B.
 
 Establish a monument upstream of all proposed cofferdams to visually monitor the water elevation in the
 waterway. Maintain the monument throughout the project. Provide a visual mark on the monument that identifies
 the required high water elevation as defined above. Ensure that the monument can be read from the bank of the
 waterway. Have this elevation set and certified by an Ohio Registered Surveyor.
 Cofferdams may be designed and constructed to accommodate a lower water elevation; however, the Department
 will not reimburse the Contractor for repairs to work damaged nor grant additional time unless the water elevation
 exceeds 3 feet (1.0 m) above the ordinary high water mark shown on the plan.
 Submit any request for reimbursement for repair to work damaged or for delay to the Engineer with information
 substantiating that the water elevation was more than 3 feet (1.0 m) above the ordinary high water mark shown on
 the plans.
 503.04
 Protection for Excavation. Protect all excavations from caving. Do not disturb the material below
 the bottom of footings. Perform blasting in a manner that avoids damage to the material supporting the structure
 vertically or laterally and that avoids subsequent slides that damage the structure, road, or adjacent property. If the
 material below the bottom of footings not supported by piles is disturbed, remove it and fill the entire space with
 concrete at no expense to the Department. Under footings supported on piles, replace and compact the overexcavated or disturbed material as the Engineer directs. If backfilling is necessary to correct caving or slides,
 backfill according to 503.08.
 Excavation adjacent to railroad tracks are subject to the supervision of the involved railway company. Provide
 sufficient bracing to ensure the proper support of the roadbed and tracks.
 503.05
 Footings in Rock. Where rock or shale excavation is a separate pay item, fill the portion of the
 excavation into rock or shale that is below the top of footing with concrete.
 If removing rock or shale as part of Unclassified Excavation and the footing is designed to be keyed into the
 bedrock, confine the excavation into bedrock for the minimum specified depth of keying within the area bounded
 by the outer edge of the footing. Fill excavation outside these limits and within and below the keyed depth with
 concrete.
 503.06
 Approval of Foundations. Notify the Engineer when the excavation is to be completed to the depth
 shown on the plans. Do not place footings until the Engineer has approved the subfoundation.
 503.07
 Disposal of Excavated Material. Dispose of excavated material not needed or not suitable according
 to 105.16 and 105.17. Use other suitable excavation material for backfill.
 503.08
 Backfill. Backfill all excavations made under this item with materials conforming to 203.02.R, except
 behind abutments and below the approach slabs use materials conforming to Item 203 Granular Material Type B.
 Place and compact the backfill materials according to 203.06 and 203.07, except as modified by this subsection.
 Do not place backfill material against any structural element until the Engineer has approved the element.
 In bridge abutment areas compact backfill material to meet the compaction requirements in 203.07. Elsewhere,
 compact backfill material to 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry density.
 When a test section method is used for compaction acceptance: Use compaction equipment with a total weight
 or a centrifugal force of least 1 ton (0.9 metric tons). Supply the manufacturers’ information to verify this
 information. Use at least six passes to construct the production areas. Use at least 97 percent of the test section
 maximum dry density for acceptance of the production areas.
 The Contractor does not have to place backfill material around piers that are not within the embankment area or
 adjacent to a roadway or a railway in thin layers or compact it, but should leave the backfill material in a neat
 condition with a compensating allowance made for settlement.
 Backfill in front of abutments and around piers to the ground lines shown on the plans.
 Backfill all structural foundation units as soon as practical after the required conditions of this subsection are met
 to avoid the ponding of surface water and the accumulation of debris. Simultaneously backfill in front of and behind
 abutments, piers, wing walls, and retaining walls.
 
 Carefully backfill against waterproofed surfaces to avoid damage to the waterproofing material.
 503.09
 Method of Measurement. After the requirements of Items 201, 202, and 203 have been met, the
 Department will measure excavation on a lump sum basis or by the number of cubic yards (cubic meters) as follows:
 A. Bounded on the bottom. Bounded bottom plane of the footing, crossbeam, or wall.
 B. Bounded on the top
 1.
 
 In cut sections, by the surface of the remaining ground.
 
 2.
 
 In fill sections:
 a.
 
 If excavation is performed before embankment is placed, by the surface of the original ground.
 
 b.
 
 If excavation is performed after embankment is placed, by the surface of the embankment.
 
 C. Bounded on the sides
 1.
 
 For Unclassified Excavation, 1 foot (0.3 m) outside the outer edge of the footing, crossbeam, or wall.
 
 2.
 
 For Rock Excavation or Shale Excavation:
 a.
 
 If Rock Excavation is included in the Contract, by the outer edge of the footing or wall.
 
 b.
 
 If rock or shale is removed as part of Unclassified Excavation Including Rock and/or Shale:
 (1) Above the minimum specified depth of keying, the same as described in 503.09.C.1.
 (2) For the remainder of the excavation, the same as described in 503.09.C.2.a.
 
 For keys below footings, the Department will determine the volume of keys by the number of cubic yards
 (cubic meters) shown on the plans.
 The Department will measure Cofferdams and Excavation Bracing on a lump sum basis.
 503.10
 Basis of Payment. If an Item for Cofferdams and Excavation Bracing is not included in the Contract
 for payment, perform work according to 503.03 and the Department will pay for Cofferdams and Excavation
 Bracing under the contract unit price for excavation.
 The elevations shown on the plans for the bottoms of footings are considered as approximate. When excavation
 below plan elevation for footings is required, the Department will pay for the 3 feet (0.9 m) immediately below the
 plan elevation within the lateral limits described in 503.09.C.1 at the unit price bid for the class of excavation.
 The Department will consider additional excavation to a maximum depth of 1 foot (0.3 m) within the lateral
 limits described in 503.09 as incidental to the lump sum price. Excavation deeper than 1 foot (0.3 m) below plan
 elevation may be provided for as Extra Work, as described in 109.05.
 If Cofferdams and Excavation Bracing is a separate pay item, the lump sum price includes any extra cost involved
 for cofferdams for additional depth up to 3 feet (0.9 m) below plan elevation. Excavation deeper than 3 feet (0.9
 m) below plan elevation and the additional cofferdams necessitated by this excavation may be provided for as Extra
 Work, as described in 109.05. The Contractor shall provide additional fill material and subsequent excavation to
 provide the minimum cover over culverts to accommodate heavy earth moving equipment at no expense to the
 Department.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 503
 503
 
 Lump Sum
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Lump Sum
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Cofferdams and Excavation Bracing
 Unclassified Excavation
 
 503
 503
 
 Unclassified Excavation
 Unclassified Excavation Including Rock
 
 503
 503
 503
 503
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Unclassified Excavation Including Shale
 Unclassified Excavation Including Rock and/or Shale
 Rock Excavation
 Shale Excavation
 
 ITEM 504 SHEET PILING LEFT IN PLACE
 504.01
 504.02
 504.03
 504.04
 504.05
 
 Description
 Materials
 Driving
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 504.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and driving steel sheet piling to be left in place,
 including furnishing and installing any specified anchors or other attachments to structures.
 504.02
 Materials. Furnish new sheet piling conforming to 711.03. The Contractor may use used sheet piling
 in good condition that conforms to project requirements provided it is inspected and approved by the Engineer.
 504.03
 Driving. Drive steel sheet piling to the tip elevation shown on the plans. Thread each sheet pile with
 adjacent sheets. Use corner piles, junction piles, and interlocking connectors as necessary so that all sheet piles are
 interlocked.
 504.04
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Steel Sheet Piling Left In Place [Minimum
 Section Modulus of ____ cubic inches per foot (____ mm³/m)] of Wall by measuring the number of square feet
 (square meters) in the plane of the face of the sheeting, completed and accepted in place.
 504.05
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 504
 
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 
 Steel Sheet Piling Left In Place [Minimum Section Modulus
 of____ cubic inches per foot (____ mm³/m)] of Wall
 
 ITEM 505 PILE DRIVING EQUIPMENT MOBILIZATION
 505.01 Description
 505.02 Basis of Payment
 505.01 Description. This work consists of mobilizing pile driving equipment to and from the project site and, as
 necessary, to install the required piling.
 This work includes the fixed costs that are related to the installation of the required piling.
 505.02 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities, after the first service pile is installed,
 at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 505
 
 Lump Sum
 
 Pile Driving Equipment Mobilization
 
 ITEM 506 STATIC LOAD TEST
 506.01
 506.02
 506.03
 506.04
 
 Description
 General
 Test Procedure
 Basis of Payment
 
 506.01
 Description. This work consists of applying a static load to a driven pile and furnishing instruments
 and facilities to obtain load-displacement data required to determine the ultimate bearing value of the pile. When
 subsequent static load tests are specified, the Office of Geotechnical Engineering will determine whether
 subsequent static load tests are to be performed and the location of all piles to be tested.
 506.02
 General. Perform the static load test according to ASTM D1143, Procedure A: Quick Test, except as
 modified below.
 Use the hammer selected for driving the test pile to drive all piles represented by the test. If the Contractor finds
 it necessary to use a different hammer, the Office of Geotechnical Engineering will determine if an additional static
 load test is necessary.
 If using anchor piles to apply the load to the test pile, locate the anchor piles to provide a minimum clear distance
 of 8 feet (2.5 m) from the test pile. The Contractor may use battered piles as anchor piles, provided the horizontal
 forces in the anchor system are balanced and excessive bending stresses are not induced in the piles. The Contractor
 may also use bearing piles meeting these requirements as anchor piles. After the test has been completed, remove
 or cut off at least 1 foot (0.3 m) below the bottom of the footing or finished surface of the ground all anchor piles
 outside the limits of the footing. Cut off anchor piles, other than bearing piles, within the limits of the footing 3
 inches (75 mm) above the bottom of the footing. Redrive all bearing piles used as anchor piles that are displaced
 upward during the application of the test load according to the plan requirements.
 For the duration of the test, provide adequate facilities to record load and displacement readings. To avoid column
 buckling of the pile, ensure that tested piles are substantially vertical and that the load is applied to the pile at a
 point as near the ground surface as possible.
 Provide equipment and loading apparatus to apply a maximum test load of twice the ultimate bearing value. Have
 a Registered Engineer design the loading apparatus. Determine if piles on the plan order list for cast-in-place
 reinforced concrete piles have a pile wall thick enough to support the maximum test load of twice the ultimate
 bearing value. The minimum pile wall thickness to support twice the ultimate bearing value is:
 t (inch) =
 
 2 R (lb)
 113,000 D (inch)
 
 t (mm) =
 
 2 R (N)
 780 D (mm)
 
 Where:
 t = pile wall thickness in inches (mm)
 R = ultimate bearing value in pounds (N)
 D = diameter of pile in inches (mm)
 If the pile wall thickness for the test pile is less than t, before performing the static load test, either drive a test
 pile with a thicker pile wall, or fill the pile with concrete and allow the concrete to cure for 5 days. The static load
 test is unacceptable if the pile fails internally during the test due to improper installation or procedure by the
 Contractor.
 506.03
 Test Procedure. Apply the load at least 5 days after placing concrete in the pile or 72 hours after
 driving both the test pile and the anchor piles.
 Use displacement indicators as the primary system to measure axial movement of the test pile top, with a
 redundant secondary system as described in ASTM D1143.
 Apply the test load in increments of approximately one-tenth the ultimate bearing value. Between each load
 increment, keep the test load constant for 15 minutes. Add load increments until the test load reaches twice the
 ultimate bearing value or until continuous jacking is required to maintain the test load. Remove the test load in five
 
 approximately equal decrements, keeping the test load constant for 15 minutes between decrements. If it is
 necessary to remove and reapply the load during the test, use the same loading procedure to reapply the test load.
 Record test readings taken at 1, 2, 4, 8, and 15 minutes after completing application of each load increment.
 Record test readings taken at 1 and 15 minutes after each load decrement and after removing all load from the test
 pile.
 Determine the load test ultimate bearing value (Qf) using the Davisson criteria. First plot the displacement versus
 load on the pile (Q). Next, draw a line representing the theoretical elastic deformation of the pile, using the
 following equation.
 d=
 
 QL
 AE
 
 Where:
 d = Elastic deformation of pile in inches (mm)
 Q = Test load in pounds (N)
 L = Length of pile in inches (mm)
 A = cross-sectional area of pile in square inches (mm²)
 E = Elastic modulus of pile in lb/in² (MPa)
 for steel E=29,000,000 lb/in² (200,000 MPa)
 Draw the Davisson criteria line parallel to the theoretical elastic deformation but offset by the following formula:
 0.15 inch + 0.008×D (3.8 mm + 0.008×D)
 Where:
 D = Diameter or width of the pile in inches (mm).
 The test load ultimate bearing value (Qf) is the load corresponding to where the Davisson criteria line crosses the
 load-displacement curve. See the figure below.
 
 Within four days of completing the static load test, submit a report to the Engineer which contains the information
 required according to ASTM D 1143 and the load displacement graph described above.
 506.04
 Basis of Payment. If the Contractor subsequently finds it necessary to use a different hammer, the
 Office of Geotechnical Engineering will determine if an additional static load test is necessary; the Contractor shall
 complete any such additional test at no additional cost to the Department.
 The cost of furnishing test piles with thicker pile walls is included under Static Load Test.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 506
 506
 
 Lump Sum
 Each
 
 Static Load Test
 Subsequent Static Load Test
 
 ITEM 507 BEARING PILES
 507.01
 507.02
 507.03
 507.04
 507.05
 507.06
 507.07
 507.08
 507.09
 507.10
 507.11
 507.12
 507.13
 507.01
 
 Description
 General
 Materials
 Driving of Piles
 Determination of Required Driving Criteria
 Cast-in-Place Reinforced Concrete Piles
 Steel H-Piles
 Timber Piles
 Splices
 Defective Piles
 Prebored Holes
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and driving bearing piles.
 
 507.02
 General. Install piles of the specified type, length, and sizes shown on the plans. Furnish the piles
 according to the itemized order list shown on the plans. If additional length is needed to obtain bearing, furnish the
 additional length as determined by the Engineer. The length of the piles given in the order list is not necessarily
 based on available or practical lengths, but the estimated length from the bottom of each pile to the elevation of the
 cutoff. The Contractor may increase or decrease the pile lengths to suit the lengths available, to facilitate the method
 of operation, which may involve providing fresh heading as a result of hammer misalignment or a worn hammer
 cushion, or to provide lengths determined practical to have delivered to the project site and driven.
 507.03
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to the following:
 
 Reinforcing steel ................................................................................... 509
 Concrete, Class QC1 ............................................................................. 511
 Chemical admixture for concrete, Type F ....................................... 705.12
 Steel H-piles..................................................................................... 711.03
 Steel pile points................................................................................ 711.07
 Steel for reinforced concrete piles ................................................... 711.03
 Galvanized steel ............................................................................... 711.02
 Timber.............................................................................................. 711.26
 Provide a concrete slump from 6 to 8 inches (150 to 200 mm) with the use of a superplasticizer.
 507.04
 Driving of Piles. Drive piles to refusal on bedrock; until obtaining the required ultimate bearing value,
 which may include a modification for scour, set-up, or negative skin friction; or to the minimum penetration pile
 tip elevation shown on the plans.
 If piles begin to crush, immediately cease driving and repair or replace the pile. The counting of blows will cease
 until the crushed pile is either repaired or replaced.
 For piles subject to scour, notify the DGE if the required ultimate bearing value is obtained before the pile has
 penetrated 80 percent of its estimated depth before appreciably overdriving the pile. The DGE will study the
 conditions and determine the final penetration, the driving requirements, the use of another pile type, and the use
 of prebored holes.
 All piles raised during the driving of adjacent piles shall be driven down again.
 Use a hammer that will achieve the required ultimate bearing value for the pile and large enough to permit a
 dynamic load test to verify that the ultimate bearing capacity shown on the plans can be achieved.
 The ram of an air-operated or diesel hammer shall weigh at least 2700 pounds (12,000 N).
 
 The ram of a drop hammer for permanent piles shall weigh at least 3000 pounds (13,300 N). The height of fall
 for drop hammers shall not exceed 7 feet (2.1 m). Do not use drop hammers to drive piles that are to be driven to
 an ultimate bearing value in excess of 70 tons (620 kN).
 When using open ended diesel hammers, provide electronic equipment, such as a saximeter, or equivalent, for
 the Engineer’s use to accurately measure and record the stroke for each unit of length driven .
 Attach a gage to closed end diesel hammers, accessible to the Engineer, to monitor the pressure in the bounce
 chamber. Include a graph with the gage to convert pressure to energy.
 Attach an impact energy monitor, or a method to accurately measure the stroke within 2 inches (50 mm) to
 hydraulic hammers, accessible to the Engineer, to monitor the energy of each blow.
 Use securely anchored driving leads and a cap device with sliding jaws to engage the leads to guide the pile and
 maintain the pile alignment with the stroke of the hammer. Accurately align the travel of the hammer with the axis
 of the pile.
 Cushion the hammer and pile to prevent the impact of driving forces from damaging the top of the pile. Shape
 the cap and pile top to uniformly distribute the hammer blow to the top surface of the pile.
 Do not use a follower unless approved by the Office of Geotechnical Engineering. If the Office of Geotechnical
 Engineering does approve the use of a follower, account for the increased energy loss when determining the
 required driving criteria.
 If a static load test is required, the Contractor may not drive piles except the test and anchor piles before
 conducting the test and the required depth of penetration has been determined.
 Do not use water jets.
 After being driven, cut off the piles at the elevation and angle shown on the plans. Ensure that the actual pile
 embedment into the concrete is within 2 inches (50mm) of the embedment shown in the plans.
 Maintain a minimum radius of 15 feet (4.5 m) between simultaneous work of placing concrete and driving piles.
 If concrete is placed within the 15-foot (4.5 m) radius, suspend driving operations until the concrete has cured for
 5 days.
 507.05
 Determination of Required Driving Criteria. Determine the required driving criteria to achieve the
 ultimate bearing value of a driven pile as if the pile was a single isolated pile using the results of dynamic pile
 testing as specified in Item 523. The driving criteria may consist of a minimum blow count with a minimum hammer
 stroke, a minimum depth of penetration, or both.
 To determine the minimum blow count for battered piles, divide the minimum blow count for vertical piles with
 the same ultimate bearing value by an efficiency factor (D) that is less than one. This will result in an increased
 minimum blow count for the battered piles. Compute the efficiency factor (D) as follows:
 D=
 
 1 - (U × G)
 (1+G²)0.5
 
 Where:
 U = Coefficient of friction
 use 0.05 for double-acting air operated or diesel hammers,
 use 0.1 for single-acting air operated or diesel hammers, and
 use 0.2 for drop hammers.
 G = Amount of batter (H/V; 1/3, 1/4, etc.)
 507.06
 Cast-in-Place Reinforced Concrete Piles. Provide cast-in-place reinforced concrete piles
 conforming to one or more of the types described below. Measure the pile diameter as follows:
 A. Plain cylindrical casing, the outside diameter.
 B. Cylindrical casings with vertical fluting, the diameter of a circle circumscribing the outermost points or ridges.
 
 C. Cylindrical casing with circumferential corrugations, the average of the outside diameters measured at the
 bottom and top of the corrugations or continuously welded helical corrugations with diameters measured at tops of
 the corrugations.
 D. Tapered piles, the top diameter as determined in 507.06.A, 507.06.B, or 507.06.C, but the pile tip diameter
 shall not be less than 8 inches (200 mm).
 Ensure that the pile casings are watertight after being driven. If furnished, shoes or points shall not project more
 than 1/4 inch (6 mm) outside the vertical surface of the casing.
 For plain cylindrical casings, the minimum pile wall thickness, t, is the greater of either 0.250 inches (6.66 mm)
 or the thickness determined using the following formula:
 t (inches)
 =
 
 R (lb)
 900,00
 0
 
 t (mm)
 =
 
 R (N)
 157,60
 6
 
 Where:
 R = Ultimate bearing value in pounds (newtons)
 For fluted piles, the minimum pile wall thickness shall be t/1.4.
 For cast-in-place piles containing reinforcing steel, place reinforcing steel as stated in the second and third
 paragraph of 524.09 and place concrete according to 524.11.
 After installation, cover the tops of driven casings until the concrete is placed. Before placing concrete, remove
 accumulated water or other foreign matter in a driven casing. Place concrete for cast-in-place piles using methods
 that prevent voids, however, do not vibrate the concrete.
 507.07
 
 Steel H-Piles. Steel H-piles shall consist of structural steel shapes of the kind and size specified.
 
 The Engineer may allow installation of steel piles of the specified type, which the Contractor has from previous
 projects or stock, if the Contractor furnishes mill certifications and the pile sections are identified with the material
 specification number, grade, and heat number. This identification may be in the form of information painted on the
 steel piles or a tag physically attached to the steel.
 507.08
 Timber Piles. Provide timber piles of sufficient length to remove broomed or split portions caused
 by driving. Symmetrically trim piles right truncated cone at the tip. If steel shoes or points are specified, carefully
 shape the tip of the pile so that the steel shoe or point fits snugly and symmetrically.
 Handle and store timber piles to prevent warping.
 If specified, provide creosoted piles conforming to 712.06.
 507.09
 Splices. To the fullest extent practical, avoid splicing steel casings and structural shapes. Splice pile
 casings and structural shapes either before or after driving a segment. If spliced after driving a segment, splice the
 piles at least 3 feet (1 m) above the ground and inspect the splice while the pile is driven a minimum of 150 blows.
 Align segments to make the axis of all segments common.
 Use full penetration butt welds to splice steel pile casings according to AWS D1.1 and structural shapes according
 to AWS D1.5. Non-destructive testing is not required.
 Do not splice timber piles.
 Pile Points. When specified in the plans, select a product from the Department’s Approved List. Weld the pile
 points to the pile according to AWS D1.5 or the manufacturer’s written welding procedure supplied to the Engineer
 before the welding is performed. Submit a notarized copy of the mill test report to the Engineer.
 507.10
 Defective Piles. Install the piles, so that after driving, they are within 12 inches (300 mm) from the
 location shown on the plans for piles capped below final grade, and within 3.0 inches (75 mm) from the plan
 location for pile caps above the ground surface. Piles not meeting these location tolerances are defective piles.
 
 Pipe piles are defective if not water tight or if damage reduces the cross-sectional area by more than 20 percent.
 Provide the Engineer with a light that allows inspection of the entire length of the interior of a driven casing.
 Replace, repair, or drive a substitute pile beside the defective pile. The location tolerance for underground piles
 does not apply to substitute piles beside defective underground piles. The off-location limits do apply to the
 substitute pile that project above the ground. If a defective pile is removed, fill the hole remaining in the ground
 with sand. Cut off a defective pile left in place under a footing 3 inches (75 mm) above the elevation of the bottom
 of the footing. Cut off a defective pile left in place but not under a footing at least 1 foot (0.3 m) below ground
 level. Fill defective pipe piles left in place with concrete.
 When the outside rows of bearing piles are not located within tolerances specified above, increase the size of the
 footing to provide a minimum distance between the pile and footing edge of at least 75 percent of that shown on
 the plans.
 507.11
 
 Prebored Holes. Locate prebored holes as shown on the plans. Provide augured hole diameters:
 
 A. For round piles, from 2 inches (50 mm) less to 4 inches (100 mm) more than the pile diameter.
 B. For steel H-piles, from 6 inches (150 mm) less to 2 inches (50 mm) more than the pile’s diagonal dimension
 but shall be such as to produce satisfactory pile driving results.
 Backfill voids between the pile and the prebored hole with a granular material satisfactory to the Engineer.
 507.12
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure piles driven by the number of feet (meters).
 The Department will determine the sum as the lengths of all non-defective piles measured along the axis of each
 pile from the bottom of each pile to the elevation of cutoff. Unless a separate pay item is specified in the Contract,
 the Department will include Steel Points or Shoes in the measured length of driven piles. If a separate pay item is
 specified in the Contract, the Department will measure Steel Points or Shoes by the number of each.
 The Department will measure piles furnished by the number of feet (meters) of plan specified order length plus
 any additional order length specified by the Engineer. The Engineer will include the length of undriven piles as
 furnished, but the Contractor will not receive additional compensation for hauling the piles off the project.
 For plan specified prebored holes, the Department will measure Prebored Holes by the number of feet (meters)
 of prebored hole lengths for non-defective piles measured from the surface of ground at the time of boring to the
 bottom of the hole. The Department will not measure preboring to facilitate the pile driving operation.
 507.13
 Basis of Payment. When the Contractor elects to prebore to facilitate the pile driving operation,
 include the cost for preboring in the unit price bid for piles driven.
 The Department will consider the cost of furnishing and installing the reinforcing steel to be included in the unit
 price bid for piles driven.
 The Department will not pay for any splices due to the Contractor furnishing pile lengths shorter than plan order
 lengths. The Department will not pay for increased pile lengths made by the Contractor unless the Engineer
 determines that the additional lengths are needed to achieve bearing. If additional penetration is necessary in order
 to achieve the required bearing, the Department will pay for required splices at a negotiated price.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 507
 507
 507
 507
 507
 507
 507
 507
 
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 
 Steel Piles HP________, Furnished
 Steel Piles HP________, Driven
 ___" (___ mm) Cast-In-Place, Reinforced Concrete Piles, Furnished
 ___" (___ mm) Cast-In-Place, Reinforced Concrete Piles, Driven
 Timber Piles, Creosoted
 Timber Piles, Untreated
 Prebored Holes
 Steel Points or Shoes
 
 ITEM 508 FALSEWORK AND FORMS
 508.01
 508.02
 508.03
 508.04
 508.05
 
 Description
 Falsework
 Forms
 Oiling Forms
 Basis of Payment
 
 508.01
 Description. This work consist of designing and building of falsework and forms for the purpose of
 holding concrete in place until it has set up.
 508.02
 Falsework. Provide substantial and rigid falsework that does not unduly obstruct any waterway,
 highway, or railway. Arrange intermediate supports in the completed structure to produce the camber necessary to
 conform to the plan profile of the roadway.
 Do not allow the maximum deflection in the longitudinal falsework members at the edges of the concrete deck
 to exceed 1/2 inch (13 mm) or the amount obtained by the following formula, whichever is greater.
 d
 
 S  100
 1000
 
 S  2540 
 
 d 
 
 1000 
 
 
 Where:
 d = the maximum deflection in inches (millimeters)
 S = the distance between supports in inches (millimeters)
 For transverse falsework members, and for longitudinal falsework members other than those near the edges of
 the deck, increase the permissible deflection obtained from the above formula by 75 percent.
 To compensate for falsework deflection, build camber into the falsework. In addition to falsework defection,
 build the following amounts of camber into the falsework to compensate for slab deflection after falsework is
 released:
 A. Equal to 1/800 of the span for continuous spans.
 B. Equal to 0.000018 S³ (0.016 S³) for simple spans, where S is the length of the slab span in feet (meters) for
 camber expressed in inches (millimeters).
 Provide camber to conform to the profile grade.
 If the falsework does not rest in rock, shale, or other firm foundation material, support falsework on piling driven
 to sufficient penetration to carry the superimposed loads according to Item 507, but not less than 16 tons (16 metric
 tons) per pile. Perform dynamic load testing to determine required blow count if piles are not driven to rock. Do
 not use expansion anchors to support falsework on piers or abutments. Use double hardwood wedges as necessary
 to facilitate vertical adjustment.
 Remove and replace any part of the structure made unsatisfactory by incorrect camber, settlement or form
 deformation.
 Construct falsework for arches so it may be released gradually.
 Remove falsework only after the concrete conforms to 511.14 and before final acceptance of the structure. Cut
 off or pull falsework piling. Cut off piles to at least the slope line, riprap line, or stream bed.
 Locate the lower contact point of overhang falsework within 8 inches (200 mm) of the top of the rolled beam or
 steel girders bottom flange.
 Submit falsework plans for cast-in-place concrete slab superstructures according to 501.05.
 If a thickened edge is shown on the plans, the Contractor may develop the edge by sloping the bottom of the slab
 for a minimum of 9 feet (2.7 m) from the edge, instead of the section shown.
 Do not place spandrel walls, decks of arches, sidewalks and curbs, or any superimposed concrete to be completed
 after constructing the main supporting member or the deck until the falsework for the main supporting member has
 been removed or released.
 
 For continuous concrete slab or beam superstructures, do not place concrete on a span until the falsework and
 forms are complete for the adjacent spans. Do not release or remove falsework from a span until the concrete in
 adjacent spans has been placed a sufficient length of time to meet all requirements for the removal of falsework as
 set forth in 511.14. Inserts cast into prestressed members for the purposes of falsework support shall be galvanized
 according to 711.02 and shall be shown in the shop drawings according to 515.06.
 508.03
 Forms. Place all concrete in proper forms. Do not use unprotected sides of the excavation, instead of
 forms, unless as specified in 503.04 for rock or shale excavation. For dry excavation specified in 503.03, the
 Contractor may use the sheeting as forms for footings.
 Construct substantial, unyielding, and mortar tight forms, designed to produce a finished concrete conforming to
 the proper dimensions and contours. Make forms for exposed surfaces of approved material requiring a minimum
 number of joints or of dressed lumber of uniform thickness using form liner approved by the Engineer. Use forms
 and form liners to reduce the joints showing on the finished surface to a minimum. Arrange joints to coincide with
 rustication grooves shown on the plans. Properly brace or tie forms together using approved form ties that do not
 allow metal within 2 inches (50 mm) of an exposed surface of the finished structure after the forms are removed.
 For ties in the region of exposed surfaces, use an approved insert. Remove all forms and do not allow material,
 except reinforcing supports specified in 509.08, to remain in the concrete.
 In forming pier, intermediate, or end diaphragms for prestressed or post-tensioned concrete members, do not
 damage reinforcing steel, strands, or precast concrete in the placement of post installed anchors in these members.
 Properly brace diaphragm forms externally or use approved form tie inserts cast into these members.
 For concrete decks separated by an open median or temporarily separated by a closure section, construct
 falsework and forms for each deck or section of deck independent of the adjacent structure or remaining
 superstructure.
 Immediately before placing concrete, provide temporary openings at the base of column and wall forms and in
 the bottom of all narrow, deep members where necessary to facilitate cleaning or inspection.
 Provide a 3/4-inch (20 mm) bevel on all exposed edges using a triangular strip built into the forms.
 If rustication is used, fasten molding that is surfaced on all sides to the forms in such a manner that the molding
 remains in the concrete when the forms are removed. Do not remove this molding until the concrete has set
 sufficiently to prevent damage to the edges of the concrete.
 If weep holes through abutments or retaining walls are shown on the plans, form weep holes to obtain a smooth
 circular opening between 3 and 4 inches (75 and 100 mm) and a straight gradient of 0.08 through the wall.
 508.04
 Oiling Forms. Before placing reinforcing steel, coat the inside of forms with non-staining mineral
 oil or other approved material.
 508.05
 Basis of Payment. The Department will not separately pay for falsework and forms. The cost of this
 work is included for payment in the price bid for the item for which falsework and forms are used.
 The Department will not pay for removal and replacement of any part of the structure made unsatisfactory by
 settlement or form deformation.
 The Department will not pay for dynamic load testing required in 508.02 to determine blow count if piles are not
 driven to rock.
 
 ITEM 509 REINFORCING STEEL
 509.01
 509.02
 509.03
 509.04
 509.05
 509.06
 509.07
 509.08
 509.09
 509.10
 509.11
 
 Description
 Materials
 Care of Material
 Method of Placing
 Bending
 Approval of Placing
 Splicing
 Supports
 Epoxy Coated Reinforcing Steel
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 509.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and placing supports, mechanical connectors, tie wires,
 and reinforcing steel of the quality, type, size, and quantity designated, including steel dowels.
 509.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Epoxy coated reinforcing steel ........................................................ 709.00
 Reinforcing steel, deformed bars ........................... 709.01, 709.03, 709.05
 Spiral reinforcing steel ..................................................... 709.01 or 709.08
 Bar mats and wire fabric ........................................ 709.09, 709.10, 709.12
 Plastic supports ................................................................................ 709.15
 For metal bar supports used at or near the surface of the concrete, furnish either galvanized steel, stainless steel,
 epoxy coated steel or plastic coated steel.
 Provide sufficient additional reinforcing steel to replace reinforcing steel removed by the Department for
 sampling. Replace random samples in the structures with additional steel, spliced according to 509.07.
 When providing reinforcing steel for spiral cages, galvanized steel conforming to ASTM A767, Class 1, may be
 provided only for the spiral reinforcing steel in lieu of epoxy coated reinforcing steel. The galvanized coated
 reinforcing steel will meet all other requirements of 509. Where a sample splice is needed use the lap length
 requirements for epoxy coated. The Galvanized coating will be applied after the reinforcing has been fabricated. If
 the galvanized surface becomes damaged during handling in the field, repairs will conform to ASTM A780. Use
 bar supports and tie wires which are plastic coated or epoxy coated. Only suppliers certified under Supplement
 1068 may provide this reinforcing.
 509.03
 Care of Material. Upon delivery to the project and before use, stack reinforcing steel off the ground
 and keep it free from dirt, oil, grease, or avoidable rust. Before placing in the concrete, ensure the reinforcing steel
 is clean and free of loose rust.
 509.04
 Method of Placing. Place reinforcing steel in the positions shown on the plans, and firmly secure the
 steel during the placing and setting of concrete. Tie bars in the superstructure at all intersections, except tie bars at
 alternate intersections where bar spacing is less than 1 foot (0.3 m) in any direction. The Contractor may place up
 to 25 percent of the upper longitudinal bars in a bridge deck slab beneath the upper transverse bars to support the
 top mat. Do not drive or force reinforcing steel into concrete after its initially set.
 Welding on reinforcing is prohibited, except as permitted by 709.10 and 709.12. The Engineer will allow the
 Contractor to fabricate reinforcing bar cages for prestressed beams if fabrication is done in a manner satisfactory
 to the Director.
 Install reinforcing steel with at least the following clearances from the concrete surface:
 A. 2 1/2 inches [-0 inch, +0.5 inch] (65 mm [-0 mm, +13 mm]) to the top of sidewalks..
 B. 3 inches [-0 inch] (75 mm [-0 mm]) at the faces of footings placed against rock or earth.
 C. 1 1/2 inches [-0 inch, +0.25 inch] (38 mm [-0 mm, +6 mm]) to the bottom of a cast-in-place deck slab.
 
 D. 2 1/2 inches [-0.25 inch, +0.75 inch] (65 mm [-6 mm, +19 mm]) between the reinforcing steel and the top
 surfaces of cast-in-place concrete deck slabs.
 E. 2 inches [-0 inch, +0.5 inch] (50 mm [-0 mm, +13 mm]) at all other surfaces.
 509.05
 Bending. Bend reinforcing steel to the dimensions shown on the plans and in Table 509.05-1 (509.051M). Reject reinforcing steel showing transverse cracks.
 TABLE 509.05-1 STANDARD BENDS
 Dimension %
 
 A
 
 Dimension %
 
 A
 
 D
 
 D
 
 Dimension %
 
 A
 
 D
 
 Bar
 Nominal Dimensions
 180 Bend
 90 Bend
 135 Bend
 Bar Diameter Area Weight D
 A
 D
 A
 D
 A
 Size
 in
 in²
 lb/ft
 in
 in
 in
 in
 in
 in
 3
 0.375
 0.11 0.376 2 1/4
 5
 2 1/4
 5
 1 1/2
 4
 4
 0.500
 0.20 0.668
 3
 6
 3
 7
 2
 4 1/2
 5
 0.625
 0.31 1.043 3 3/4
 7
 3 3/4 8 1/2
 2 1/2 5 1/2
 6
 0.750
 0.44 1.502 41/2
 8
 4 1/2
 10
 7
 0.875
 0.60 2.044 5 1/4
 10 5 1/4
 12
 8
 1.000
 0.79 2.670
 6
 11
 6
 131/2
 9
 1.128
 1.00 3.400 9 1/2
 15 9 1/2 15 1/2
 10
 1.270
 1.27 4.303 10 3/4 17 10 3/4
 18
 11
 1.410
 1.56 5.313
 12
 19
 12
 20
 14
 1.693
 2.25
 7.65 18 1/4 27 18 1/4
 25
 18
 2.257
 4.00 13.60
 24
 36
 24
 33
 Tolerances: For diameter of bends, “D”, the tolerance may be plus or minus the diameter
 of the bar. Standard fabricating tolerances shall be in accordance with the CRSI
 Manual of Standard Practice. No weight allowances will be made for tolerances.
 TABLE 509.05-1M STANDARD BENDS
 Dimension %
 
 D
 
 A
 
 Dimension %
 
 D
 
 A
 
 Dimension %
 
 A
 
 D
 
 Bar
 Nominal Dimensions
 180 Bend
 90 Bend
 135 Bend
 Bar Diameter Area Weight D
 A
 D
 A
 D
 A
 Size
 mm
 mm² kg/m mm mm mm
 mm
 mm
 mm
 #10M
 9.5
 71
 0.560
 60
 130
 60
 130
 40
 105
 #13M
 12.7
 129
 0.994
 75
 155
 75
 180
 50
 115
 #16M
 15.9
 199
 1.552
 95
 180
 95
 215
 65
 140
 #19M
 19.1
 284
 2.235
 115
 205
 115
 255
 #22M
 22.2
 387
 3.042
 135
 255
 135
 305
 #25M
 25.4
 510
 3.973
 150
 280
 150
 345
 #29M
 28.7
 645
 5.060
 240
 380
 240
 395
 #32M
 32.3
 819
 6.404
 275
 430
 275
 455
 #36M
 35.8
 1006 7.907
 305
 485
 305
 510
 #43M
 43.0
 1452 11.38
 465
 685
 465
 635
 Tolerances: For diameter of bends, “D”, the tolerance may be plus or minus the diameter
 of the bar. Standard fabricating tolerances shall be in accordance with the CRSI
 Manual of Standard Practice. No weight allowances will be made for tolerances.
 
 509.06
 place.
 
 Approval of Placing. Before placing concrete, obtain the Engineer’s approval of reinforcing steel in
 
 509.07
 Splicing. Splice reinforcement only as specified or determined by the Engineer. Splice spiral
 reinforcement by lapping 1 1/2 turns. Do not replace spiral reinforcement removed for a material sample if the
 sample is from the end of the spiral and less than or equal to 30 inches (0.8 m) long.
 Mechanical connectors shall be capable of developing 125 percent of the yield strength of the connected bars.
 For threaded connections, do not reduce the nominal area of the bars shown in the plans without increasing the
 grade of the reinforcing bar shown in the plans. The total slip of the bar within the splice sleeve of the connector
 after loading in tension to 30.0 ksi (207 MPa) and relaxing to 3.0 ksi (21 MPa) shall not exceed the following
 measured displacements between gage points clear of the splice sleeve:
 A. For bar sizes up to No. 14: 0.01 in. (0.25 mm)
 B. For No. 18 bars: 0.03 in. (0.76 mm)
 Splice Nos. 14 and 18 (Nos. 45M and 55M) reinforcing steel bars with mechanical connectors.
 The Department will not permit lap splices for these size bars.
 Splice Nos. 14 and 18 (Nos. 45M and 55M) reinforcing steel bars with mechanical connectors. The Department
 will not permit lap splices for these size bars.
 Splice additional steel used to replace random samples as follows:
 TABLE 509.07-1
 Bar
 Size
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 11
 
 Lap Length (inches)
 Uncoated
 Epoxy Coated
 22
 27
 29
 35
 34
 41
 43
 52
 57
 69
 72
 87
 92
 111
 113
 137
 
 TABLE 509.07-1M
 Bar
 Size
 13M
 16M
 19M
 22M
 25M
 29M
 32M
 36M
 
 Lap Length (mm)
 Uncoated Epoxy Coated
 560
 690
 740
 890
 870
 1040
 1090
 1320
 1450
 1750
 1830
 2210
 2340
 2820
 2870
 3480
 
 509.08
 Supports. Use precast mortar blocks, metal supports, or plastic supports of adequate strength, of the
 proper depth, and in sufficient number to support reinforcing steel. Space supports for reinforcing steel no more
 than 4 feet (1.2 m) apart transversely and longitudinally. Metal supports shall have a shape that is easily enveloped
 by the concrete.
 Mortar blocks may only be used to support the lower matt of reinforcing steel in concrete that is cast directly
 against bedrock or soil.
 509.09
 Epoxy Coated Reinforcing Steel. Use plastic coated or epoxy coated bar supports and tie wires to
 protect the epoxy coating from physical damage, as specified in 709.00, during placement and to prevent electrical
 coupling between mats. Carefully handle and install bars to perform minimal patching at the job site. Repair
 physical damage to the epoxy coating with a patching material all damaged coating areas greater than 1/4-inch (6
 mm) square or 1/4-inch (6 mm) diameter; approximately 1/8-inch (3 mm) square or 1/8-inch (3 mm) diameter if
 the opening is within 1/4-inch (6 mm) of an equal or larger opening; or, a length of 6 inches (150 mm) regardless
 of area. Coating damage in cases where the damaged area is less than specified above need not be repaired. Use
 patching material of the same composition and quality as the original coating. Prepare the surface to a near white
 metal.
 If repair is required, clean and repair the damaged areas and allow adequate cure time before placing concrete.
 The Engineer will approve the installation once patching has been done as outlined above.
 
 509.10
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Epoxy Coated Reinforcing Steel by the
 number of pounds (kilograms) shown on the plans. Additional measurements or calculations are not required.
 If the Contractor believes the pay weight, as shown on the plans, is in error, the Contractor is responsible to prove
 this discrepancy by recalculating the total weight for the reference number involved. The Contractor shall submit
 its figures to the Engineer for review and approval. The number of pounds (kilograms) of reinforcing steel shall be
 the actual number of pounds (kilograms) of the various sizes incorporated in the concrete as shown on the plans,
 completed and accepted.
 If the weight of the reinforcing steel is recalculated, determine the number of pounds (kilograms) from the
 number, length, and weight of the bars as shown on the steel list of the plans, based on the weight per foot (meter)
 shown in the Table 509.05-1 (509.05-1M) with deductions for bars not used, and addition for extra bars used as
 directed by the Engineer.
 509.11
 Basis of Payment. The Department will not include the supports, mechanical connectors, and tie
 wires in the calculated weights but will consider them incidental to the price bid.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 509
 
 Pounds (Kilograms)
 
 Epoxy Coated Reinforcing
 
 ITEM 510 DOWEL HOLES
 510.01
 510.02
 510.03
 510.04
 510.05
 510.06
 
 Description
 Materials
 Drilling of Holes
 Placement
 Curing and Loading
 Basis of Payment
 
 510.01
 Description. This work consists of drilling holes into concrete or masonry, and furnishing and placing
 grout into the holes. The furnishing and placing of steel for dowels is included in Item 509.
 510.02
 Materials. Cement grout consists of one part of hydraulic cement conforming to Item 701 and three
 parts sand conforming to 703.03, by volume, and water.
 Furnish nonshrink, nonmetallic grout conforming to 705.20.
 510.03
 concrete.
 
 Drilling of Holes. Drill holes at the location and the depth shown on the plans without spalling the
 
 Drill holes for cement grout at least 1/2 inch (13 mm) larger in diameter than the dowel bar. Drill holes diameters
 for nonshrink, nonmetallic grout at least 1/16 inch (1.5 mm) larger in diameter than the dowel bar. Drill hole for
 encapsulated type nonshrink, nonmetallic grout as recommended by the manufacturer.
 Instead of drilling holes, the Contractor may install formed holes with laitance removed.
 510.04
 Placement. Do not install grout if the temperature of the concrete into which the grout is being placed
 is below 40 F (4 C). Force dowel bars into the holes, to the specified depth, spreading the grout around the bar
 and solidly filling the hole.
 Before installing cement grout and dowels, saturate cement grout dowel holes with water then blow out all excess
 water. Place enough cement grout to completely fill the holes during dowel installation. If cement grout does not
 completely fill the hole, remove the dowel, pour additional grout into the hole, and reinstall the dowel.
 Before installing nonshrink, nonmetallic grout and dowel, clean and dry the grout holes. Immediately after
 mixing, place a sufficient amount of nonshrink, nonmetallic grout to provide complete coverage around the dowel
 to ensure anchorage. If nonshrink, nonmetallic grout does not completely fill the hole, pour additional grout in until
 the hole is filled flush.
 Obtain the correct protrusion of the anchors or dowels, and hold dowels in the plan position within the holes until
 the grout has initially hardened.
 If horizontal holes are specified, provide a means of retaining the grout in the hole flush with the vertical face
 and remove this material after the grout has hardened. Do not use material for retaining the grout that bonds to the
 grout.
 510.05
 follows:
 
 Curing and Loading. Before applying any stresses to dowels, cure nonshrink, nonmetallic grout as
 Daily Minimum Ambient Temperature
 33 to 50 F (1 to 10 C)
 51 to 68 F (11 to 20 C)
 above 68 F (above 20 C)
 
 510.06
 
 Minimum Curing Time
 3 hours
 1 1/2 hours
 1 hour
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 510
 510
 
 Each
 Each
 
 Dowel holes with cement grout
 Dowel holes with nonshrink, nonmetallic grout
 
 ITEM 511 CONCRETE FOR STRUCTURES
 511.01
 511.02
 511.03
 511.04
 511.05
 511.06
 511.07
 511.08
 511.09
 511.10
 511.11
 511.12
 511.13
 511.14
 511.15
 511.16
 511.17
 511.18
 511.19
 511.20
 511.21
 511.22
 511.23
 511.24
 
 Description
 Materials
 Concrete
 Quality Control Requirements and Mass Concrete
 Mixing of Concrete
 Slump
 Placing Concrete
 Slipform Construction of Bridge Railing
 Construction Joints
 Work Stoppage
 Depositing Concrete Under Water
 Depositing and Curing Concrete During Cold Weather
 Removal of Forms
 Curing and Loading
 Surface Finish
 Roadway Finish
 Bridge Deck Grooving
 Sidewalk Finish
 Joints, Cracks, Scaling and Spalls
 Compressive Strength
 Air Content
 Pay Factors
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 511.01 Description. This work consists of providing falsework and forming, furnishing, placing, consolidating,
 finishing, and curing portland cement concrete. This work also includes diamond saw cutting longitudinal grooves
 into the surface of superstructure concrete. Construct falsework and forms as required in Item 508.
 511.02 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to 499.02, except as modified below.
 Use the same kind and color of aggregate for all concrete above the ground line in a given substructure unit and
 for all concrete in a given superstructure.
 Use high molecular weight methacrylate resin sealer conforming to 705.15.
 Use curing materials conforming to 705.05; 705.06 (white opaque); or 705.07;Type 1 or 1D.
 Use 1/4-inch (6 mm) gray sponge joint filler conforming to 711.28, or use preformed filler conforming to 705.03.
 Use preformed elastomeric compression joint seals conforming to 705.11.
 511.03 Concrete. Provide concrete for structures according to 499.03, using Class QC 1, QC 2, QC 3 or QC 4
 as specified in the Contract.
 At least 10 days before placing concrete, submit, in writing, the Department accepted Job Mix Formula (JMF)
 to the Engineer. The Engineer will review the mix design for conformance to contract requirements; otherwise the
 mix design is for the Engineer’s information.
 511.04 Quality Control Requirements and Mass Concrete. When the concrete bid item requires QC/QA,
 develop and submit a Quality Control plan (QCP) for the work and perform quality control testing of the concrete
 conforming to Item 455.
 When the concrete bid item requires QC/QA, The Engineer will perform Quality Assurance conforming to 455.
 When the concrete bid item does not require QC/QA, the Engineer will make acceptance test cylinders as follows:
 
 Structures of 20-foot (6.1 m) span or less.
 
 At least one set of test cylinders for each 50 cubic yards
 (35 m³) of concrete.
 
 Structures over 20-foot (6.1 m) span.
 
 A set of test cylinders from each 200 cubic yards (150 m³)
 of concrete, or fraction thereof that is incorporated into the
 work each day.
 
 With any 511 concrete bid item provide and maintain a Concrete Cylinder Curing Box (CCCB) capable of
 holding at least 12 4 × 8 inch (100 × 200 mm) cylinders at a temperature of 60 to 80 F (15 to 27 C) degrees no
 matter what the ambient temperature. The box will have a sealed lid. If the project has numerous 511 concrete bid
 items CCCB are not required for each bid item. Locate the CCCB at a site that is convenient to the concrete work
 and will eliminate handling damage to both the Contractor QC or QA cylinders and the Department Cylinders.
 Move the CCCB as needed during the project when the distance from the concrete work increases the possibility
 of cylinder handling damage.
 A. Mass Concrete Requirements. For concrete components with a minimum dimension of 5-ft (1.5-m) or
 greater, develop a concrete mix design QC-4 for mass concrete according to 499.03. Develop a Thermal Control
 Plan (TCP) to control placement of the mass concrete so that the highest maximum internal temperature of the
 placed concrete is not greater than 160 ⁰F (71 ⁰C) and the maximum differential concrete temperature does not
 exceed 36 ⁰F (20 ⁰C) over 28 days from time of placement.
 For drilled shafts with a dimension of 7-ft (2.1-m) diameter or greater, develop a concrete mix design QC-4
 for mass concrete, QC 4 according to 499.03. Develop a TCP to control placement of the mass concrete so that the
 highest maximum internal temperature of the placed concrete is not greater than 160 ºF (71 ºC).
 Submit the TCP to the Engineer for acceptance at least 10 calendar days prior to placement along with the
 approved JMF (s).
 As a minimum, the TCP shall include the following information:
 1.
 
 Duration and method of curing.
 
 2. Procedures to control concrete temperature at the time of placement. The mix shall contain no frozen
 pieces of ice after blending and mixing components.
 3.
 
 Methods and equipment used for controlling temperature differentials.
 
 4. Temperature sensor types, locations and installation details. As a minimum, concrete temperatures shall
 be monitored at the calculated hottest location, on at least 2 outer faces, 2 corners, and top surfaces.
 5. Temperature monitoring and recording system; operation plan; recording and reporting plan with example
 output; and a remedial action plan.
 6.
 
 Criteria for form removal to control the maximum temperature differential.
 
 As an alternative to the maximum differential concrete temperature specified above, the Contractor may
 propose maximum differential temperature limits based on strength gain with time. The TCP for the alternative
 proposal shall include the methods used to determine the temperature and supporting data and design to support
 the accuracy of the method chosen. Provide complete calculations and basis for increasing the maximum
 differential temperature specification. The TCP for the alternative proposal shall also provide the Engineer with
 tables that define ambient temperatures for acceptable concrete placement, the required temperature of the concrete
 for the ambient air temperature, the maximum predicted concrete temperature, the maximum predicted differential
 temperature, the time for removal of forms, the allowable air temperature for form removal, and the predicted
 maximum and differential temperature from placement to age of 28 days. The Department will consider all cracking
 of a mass concrete placement where the differential temperature exceeded 36 ºF (20ºC) the responsibility of the
 Contractor.
 Upon the Engineer’s acceptance of the TCP, continuously monitor all temperature sensors over the required
 age of the concrete. If the maximum limit or differential temperature limits are exceeded at any time, immediately
 take action to retard and reduce the out-of-specification temperatures. If a mass concrete placement temperature
 
 exceeds the specification limits of the currently accepted TCP, re-engineer, revise and resubmit the TCP. Do not
 place additional mass concrete until the revised TCP is accepted.
 The Department will consider in-place mass concrete that exceeds the temperature limits or that cracked, as
 defective and resulting delays as non-excusable. Determine the extent and effect of the damage and submit a
 proposed repair plan to the Engineer to return the concrete to acceptable quality. The Department will determine if
 the proposed repair methods are acceptable or if removal is required.
 511.05 Mixing of Concrete. Mix concrete according to 499.08.
 511.06 Slump. Within the slump ranges specified in 499.03, provide a slump that produces concrete that is
 workable in the required position, flows around reinforcing steel, and coats individual particles of coarse aggregate
 with mortar containing the proportionate amount of sand.
 511.07 Placing Concrete. Submit to the Engineer a description of proposed placing procedures and notify the
 Engineer at least 24 hours in advance of placing concrete. If the concrete bid item requires QC/QA, include the
 submittal as part of the QCP.
 Place and finish concrete to the lines and grades shown in the plans.
 Unless otherwise noted, the proposed beam seat elevations shown in the plans for prestressed beam
 superstructures are based on the design midspan camber for prestressed beams which are 30 days old (D30). Adjust
 each beam seat elevation using measured midspan camber data provided by the fabricator if available. In the
 absence of measured midspan camber, adjust each beam seat elevation using the following:
 ΔY = Dt – D30 ≥ 0
 Where:
 ΔY = Distance that each seat elevation shall be lowered from plan elevation to account for midspan camber
 growth rounded to the nearest 1/8-inch
 Dt
 
 =
 
 (1 + ψ) D0
 
 D30
 
 =
 
 Design Midspan Camber at Day 30 provided in the plans; inch
 
 D0
 
 =
 
 Design Midspan Camber at Day 0 provided in the plans; inch
 
 ψ
 
 =
 
 1.97 KS KF KTD
 
 KS
 
 =
 
 1.45 – 0.13 (V/S) ≥ 1.0
 
 V/S = Ratio of the prestressed concrete member’s volume-to-surface area exposed to the atmosphere. For
 each of the standard I-beam sections, this ratio is provided on PSID-1-13; inch
 KF
 
 =
 
 5/(1 + f′ci)
 
 f′ci
 
 =
 
 Compressive strength of prestressed concrete at release provided in the plans; ksi
 
 KTD
 
 =
 
 t/(61 - 4 f′ci + t)
 
 t = Age of prestressed concrete measured between release of prestressing force (eg. 0.75 days) and time of
 deck placement; days
 Provide the Engineer with revised plan sheets and Design Camber calculations or measured camber data signed,
 sealed and dated by an Ohio Registered Professional Engineer at least 7 days prior to constructing the beam seats.
 The revised plan sheets shall include the measured camber data (if available), Design Camber (D t) and beam age
 (t) assumed for establishing the revised elevations. Provide haunch reinforcement for prestressed I-beam members
 according to the ODOT Bridge Design Manual, Figure 302.5.2.3-2 as necessary to extend the beam’s composite
 reinforcement at least two inches into the deck thickness. All revisions resulting from adjusted beam seat elevations
 shall be clearly marked as revised. Do not begin work until the Engineer approves the revised plan.
 Provide coverage over or around reinforcing steel as described in 509.04.
 Conform to the following tolerances from plan dimensions:
 
 TABLE 511.07-1
 PLACEMENT TOLERANCES
 Deviation from plumb for exposed surfaces
 Vertical alignment (Deviation from a line parallel to the grade
 line)
 Longitudinal alignment (Deviation from a line parallel to the
 centerline or baseline)
 Width dimensions of walls for exposed surfaces
 Bridge Slab thickness
 Elevations of beam seats
 Slope, Vertical Deviation from Plane
 Slope, Horizontal Deviation from Plane
 
 ± ¾ inch (19 mm)
 ± ½ inch in 20 feet (13 mm in 6 m)
 Max. ±1 inch (25 mm)
 ±½ inch in 20 feet (13 mm in 6 m)
 Max. ±1 inch (25 mm)
 ±½ inch (13 mm)
 ±¼ inch (6 mm)
 ±1/8 inch (3 mm)
 ±0.2%
 ±0.4%
 
 Until discharged in the work, ensure that the temperature of all concrete does not exceed 95 F (35 C).
 When placing superstructure and approach slab concrete assure the ambient air temperature is 85 °F (30 °C) or
 less and not predicted to go above 85 °F (30 °C) during the concrete placement; and evaporation rates, determined
 according to Figure 1 in ACI 308, do not exceed 0.1 lbs/ft2/hour (0.5 kg/m2/hour).
 Determine and document the ambient air temperature, concrete temperature, deck surface temperature, relative
 humidity, and wind velocity, subject to verification by the Engineer. Measure data required in Figure 1 from within
 10 feet (3 m) of the area where the superstructure concrete is placed.
 Figure 1 does not apply to substructure items and formed parapets. Figure 1 applies to slip-formed parapets and
 approach slabs.
 To meet favorable atmospheric conditions, may require the Contractor to place concrete at night. At least 24
 hours before placing concrete at night, submit a lighting plan for the work area to the Engineer. Obtain the
 Engineer’s approval of the lighting plan before placing the concrete. Direct lights so that approaching traffic is not
 affected or distracted.
 Before placing a concrete deck on continuous steel beams or girders, complete all of the main beam or girder
 splices at least two piers beyond the pier or piers supporting the concrete.
 Before placing concrete for backwalls above the approach slab seat with steel expansion joints, backfill the
 abutments to within 2-feet (0.6 m) of the bridge seat elevation, erect structural steel or prestressed concrete beams
 and place superstructure concrete in the adjacent span,. Use the steel expansion joint as a template for the top of
 the backwall. If temporary bolts are used to support the backwall portion of an expansion device during the placing
 of the backwall concrete, remove the bolts after the concrete has taken its initial set and before a change in
 temperature causes superstructure movement sufficient to damage the backwall.
 Before placing concrete, assure the Engineer of an adequate and uniform source of supply of concrete to allow
 proper placing and finishing, and of the availability of coverings to protect the concrete from rain.
 Do not add or apply water to the concrete after it has left the truck and before applying curing materials according
 to 511.14.
 Before placing concrete, thoroughly clean all forms and structural steel that contact the concrete and ensure that
 the space to be occupied by the concrete is free of laitance, silt, dirt, shavings, sawdust, loose and built-up rust, and
 other debris.
 Deposit concrete using methods that ensure reinforcing steel is completely enveloped in concrete mortar and that
 allow inspection of concrete enveloping the reinforcing steel. Use a method or device to convey the concrete from
 the mixer to the work that prevents coarse aggregate separating from the mortar. If depositing concrete in shallow
 members, such as slabs, place it with as short a vertical drop as possible. Place the concrete over a section to
 
 maintain a practically horizontal surface. If using a chute, slope the chute to allow concrete to flow without
 segregation. Place concrete as near as possible to its final position.
 Drop concrete into the forms with a free-fall distance of 5 feet (1.5 m) or less. As necessary, use drop chutes to
 limit the free fall to 5 feet (1.5 m) and to ensure the delivery ends as vertical as possible.
 For concrete delivered to the point of placement by means of pumping equipment, ensure the air content at the
 point of placement is within the specified parameters of Table 499.03-1. Adjust the pumping pressure, boom angles
 and use pumping aids to lower the friction in the piping to meet the specified parameters. Provide a hose at the end
 of the line that is at least 0.5 inch (12 mm) smaller in diameter than the line on the boom to minimize free-fall and
 maintain a continuous flow of concrete in the pipe lines and boom during discharge.
 Deliver and distribute the concrete at a uniform and adequate rate no more than 10 feet (3 m) directly in front of
 the finishing machine by suitable mechanical equipment. For structures with a skew angle greater than fifteen (15)
 degrees, Orient the finishing machine according to 511.16. For structures with a skew angle greater than fifteen
 (15) degrees and up to fifty (50) degrees, load the concrete at the skew angle. For structures with a skew angle
 greater than fifty (50) degrees, load the concrete as close to the skew angle of the structure as possible, but do not
 allow the leading edge of the concrete placement to exceed twenty (20) feet (6.1 m) ahead of the finishing machine.
 Place concrete in structures using vibration. Furnish and use sufficient vibration equipment of the type and size
 approved by the Engineer to properly compact the concrete immediately after it is placed in the forms. The vibrators
 shall generally be of a type that is applied directly to the concrete and have a frequency of at least 4500 impulses
 per minute. If the concrete is inaccessible for this method of vibration, apply the vibrators to the outside of the
 forms.
 Do not move concrete using a vibrator. Vibrate freshly deposited concrete at the point deposited. Slowly insert
 and withdraw the vibrators vertically into the concrete until the concrete is thoroughly compacted but not
 segregated. During vibration, do not disturb partially hardened concrete.
 As necessary, spade along form surfaces, in corners, and in locations impossible to reach with vibrators to ensure
 smooth surfaces and dense concrete. Closely observe the results obtained on the first concrete placed, and, if
 necessary, modify the mix according to this specification to secure the best results.
 
 FIGURE 1 ACI 308-81
 511.08 Slipform Construction of Bridge Railing. If slipforming, provide finished concrete conforming to the
 following tolerances from plan dimensions:
 TABLE 511.08-1
 SLIPFORMED BRIDGE RAILING TOLERANCES
 Reinforcing steel cover
 Top width dimension
 Bottom width dimension
 Surface flatness
 Vertical alignment (Deviation from a line parallel to
 the grade line)
 
 -1/2 inch, +1/2 inch (-13 mm, +13 mm)
 -0, +1/4 inch (+6 mm)
 -0, +1/2 inch (+13 mm)
 1/4 inch in 10 feet (6 mm in 3 m)
 1/2 inch in 20 feet (13 mm in 6 m)
 Max. ±1 inch (25 mm)
 
 Tie all joints and splices in bridge railing reinforcing steel. Before placing concrete, perform a slipforming dry
 run to verify reinforcing clearance and rigidity of the reinforcing cages. Adjust and stabilize the cage as necessary
 to establish the required clearances and to ensure the cage will not move during slipforming. The Contractor may
 add any additional diagonal reinforcing steel between the front and rear vertical reinforcing faces to establish the
 required rigidity.
 Repair or patch honeycombing, cracking, tearing, and other defects immediately after concrete exits the slipform
 equipment. Completely fill defects with concrete without using water to smooth or close the surface. If the
 slipforming exhibits more than infrequent defects, stop work and make adjustments to produce a slipformed surface
 that does not require repairs. Do not broom finish the surface of the bridge railings.
 After the concrete initially sets, but before any shrinkage cracks develop, saw control joints 1 1/4 inches (32 mm)
 deep into the perimeter of the parapet. Generally, initial set is within 6 hours of batching of the concrete. Ensure
 that all joints are sawed within 24 hours of placement. Saw control joints using an edge guide, fence, or jig to
 ensure that the joint is straight, true, and aligned on all faces of the parapet. The joint width shall be the width of
 the saw blade, a nominal 1/4 inch (6 mm). After the concrete curing period specified in Item 511.14 has been
 reached, sawcut at least 4 inches (100 mm) deep around the perimeter of the front face, top and back face of the
 top portion of parapet, no lower than 12 and ½ inches (313 mm) above the top of the concrete deck slab. Caulk the
 control joints with a polyurethane or polymeric material conforming to ASTM C 920, Type S.
 Slip formed concrete requires different slumps than those listed in Item 499 or other plan specified concrete.
 Provide a slump such that the concrete exiting the slipform does not pull but is stiff enough to prevent waviness
 and sags in the finished surfaces. Cure slipform concrete according 511.14, Method A. Because slipformed concrete
 has a low water-cement ratio, timely application of the water cure is critical in helping control shrinkage cracks.
 Furnish platforms as necessary to protect traffic passing under the bridge from falling debris during the
 slipforming operation, to allow access for completing the finishing operation, and to allow the Engineer access to
 the outside of the parapet.
 The Engineer will inspect the slipformed surface for horizontal cracking no earlier than 21 days after completion
 of the slipforming operation. Repair all horizontal cracks by epoxy injection. If a concrete sealer was applied, repair
 damage to the sealer after completing the epoxy injection.
 511.09 Construction Joints. If construction joints are shown on the plans, place all concrete between
 consecutive joints in a continuous operation. Follow the requirements of 511.14 when placing concrete against a
 construction joint.
 Obtain the Director’s approval before placing any construction joint not shown on the plans or required by
 511.07.
 
 Before placing concrete, determine the location where the day’s concrete placing ends. If practical, end placing
 the day’s concrete perpendicular to the lines of principal stress and in regions of small shear. Do not install
 horizontal joints in concrete girders and beams.
 Form construction joints using bulkheads with keyways. Locate keyways clear of exposed surfaces by
 approximately one-third the thickness of the joint. Construct transverse or longitudinal construction joints in deck
 slabs with keys located between the reinforcing mats and having a depth of ¾ inch (19 mm).
 Where practical, avoid horizontal joints in piers, abutments, and retaining walls, otherwise locate horizontal
 joints 2 feet (0.6 m) or more above the normal water level.
 For construction joints not shown on the plans and above ordinary low water, in abutments, and in retaining walls
 that retain earth fills, install a 36-inch (1 m) strip of Type 2 membrane waterproofing according to Item 512 to the
 back of the joint.
 Avoid joints in cantilevered members.
 Dampen the surface of the concrete of the horizontal construction joints immediately before placing adjoining
 concrete.
 Place and protect horizontal construction joints between bridge slabs and superimposed curbs, parapets,
 sidewalks, and median strips in the same manner as the remainder of the slab. Cure the construction joints according
 to 511.14.
 Avoid disturbing the bond between protruding reinforcing steel and the deck concrete. If using the curb areas to
 place the deck, tie and brace the reinforcing steel to prevent its movement.
 Where walls or columns support slabs or beams, place concrete in wall or column to the bottom of the slab or
 beam and allow the concrete to settle for at least 2 hours before placing concrete in the slab or beam.
 511.10 Work Stoppage. If the work is unexpectedly interrupted by breakdowns, storms, or other causes,
 rearrange the freshly deposited concrete to provide a suitable construction joint. If this joint occurs at a section with
 shear stress, prevent a plane of weakness by providing an adequate mechanical bond across the joint by forming a
 keyway, inserting reinforcing steel, or by some other means satisfactory to the Engineer.
 511.11 Depositing Concrete Under Water. Except for cofferdam seals and drilled shafts, do not place concrete
 under water.
 511.12 Depositing and Curing Concrete During Cold Weather. If placing concrete when the atmospheric
 temperature is 32 °F (0 °C) or less, or if weather forecasts predict these temperatures during the curing period,
 follow the procedures of this subsection.
 Heat the water or aggregate, or both, as necessary to produce concrete with a temperature when placed of at least
 50 °F (10 °C) but not greater than 70 °F (21 °C).
 Place concrete against materials with a temperature of greater than 32 °F (0 °C). If necessary, heat the forms,
 reinforcing steel, and foundation materials before placing the concrete.
 Maintain the concrete surface temperature between 50 and 100 °F (10 and 38 °C) for a period of not less than 5
 days, except as modified in 511.12.C. After the minimum cure period of 5 days, reduce the concrete surface
 temperature at a rate not to exceed 20 °F (11 °C) in 24 hours until the concrete surface temperature is within 20 °F
 (11 °C) of atmospheric temperature.
 Install sufficient high-low thermometers to readily determine the concrete surface temperature. For deck slabs,
 install high-low thermometers to measure deck bottom surfaces, deck fascia surfaces, and deck top surfaces.
 Maintain the concrete curing temperature using a heated enclosure, insulated forms, or by flooding, except cure
 deck slabs less than 10 inches (250 mm) thick using more than just insulated forms.
 Remove falsework and open cold weather concrete to traffic according to 511.14.
 
 A. Heated Enclosure. Construct the heated enclosure to surround the top, sides, and bottom of the concrete.
 Construct strong and wind proof enclosures that contain adequate space to allow free circulation of air around the
 forms and concrete.
 Before placing concrete, construct the enclosure and heating devices to the extent allowed by the concrete
 operation. As the concreting operation progresses and as soon as possible after placing concrete, complete
 construction of the enclosures and apply heat. Supply heat by a method that continuously maintains a reasonably
 uniform temperature throughout the enclosures and does not discolor the concrete.
 Vent combustion-type heating devices outside the enclosure.
 If dry heat, other than free steam, maintains the enclosure temperature, immediately cover exposed concrete
 with two thicknesses of burlap. Continuously wet the burlap and, except for required rubbing of the concrete, do
 not remove the burlap during the heating period.
 If wood forms without liners are left in place more than 2 days after the placing of concrete, thoroughly wet
 the forms at least once each day for the remainder of the heating period. If forms are removed during the heating
 period, thoroughly drench the concrete with water and, for the remainder of the heating period, cover and wet the
 concrete with burlap as specified above.
 B. Insulation. Install sufficient thermometers to readily determine the concrete surface temperature. If the surface
 temperature approaches 100 °F (38 °C), loosen or otherwise vent the forms or insulation to keep the surface
 temperature within the limits specified above. If insulation does not maintain the minimum required temperature,
 promptly enclose the concrete as specified in 511.12.A or flood the concrete as specified in 511.12.C.
 Use a wind and water resistant insulating material. Ensure edges, corners, and other points of extreme exposure
 are adequately insulated. Place a tarpaulin or other Engineer approved waterproof cover over the insulation to
 protect the concrete top surface.
 C. Flooding with Water. The Contractor may flood the concrete with water provided flooding does not damage
 the concrete. Heat the water to a temperature from 50 to 100 °F (10 to 38 °C). The Contractor may stop using
 heated water after 48 hours if the concrete remains flooded to a depth of 1 foot (0.3 m) above its highest elevation
 for at least the next 120 hours.
 511.13 Removal of Forms. To facilitate finishing, remove forms from vertical surfaces that receive a rubbed
 surface finish as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently that rubbing will not damage it.
 511.14 Curing and Loading. Remove falsework and open structures to traffic only after the concrete has reached
 the strength specified by Table 511.14-1A for concrete bid items requiring QC/QA. Use Table 511.14.1B for
 concrete items not requiring QC/QA. Do not shorten the minimum required Method A curing time regardless of
 strength test results.
 TABLE 511.14-1A
 LOADING REQUIREMENTS FOR CONCRETE REQUIRING QC/QA
 Removing Falsework
 Traffic [3]
 
 Span[1]
 Any Span
 All pier caps
 Any
 
 Required Strength [2]
 Compressive Strength ≥ 0.85% f’c
 Or Flexural Strength (Center point)
 ≥ 650 psi (4.5 Mpa)
 
 [1] Span is defined as the horizontal distance between faces of the supporting elements when measured
 parallel to the primary reinforcement.
 [2] Field cured samples. The maturity curve method may be used for determining the strength
 according to Supplement 1098 in lieu of field curing samples
 [3] When placing concrete for a superstructure between October 15 and March 15, open the deck to
 traffic no sooner than 30 days after placement.
 
 TABLE 511.14-1B
 LOADING REQUIREMENTS FOR CONCRETE NOT REQUIRING QC/QA
 Age of Concrete in Days
 Span[1]
 No Beam Test Beam Test [2]
 Removing Falsework
 Over 10 feet (3 m)
 14
 5
 10 feet (3 m) or less and all pier caps
 7
 3
 [3]
 Traffic
 Any
 14
 7
 [1]Span is defined as the horizontal distance between faces of the supporting elements when
 measured parallel to the primary reinforcement.
 [2]Applicable only when the average modulus of rupture for two tests is not less than 650 psi (4.5
 MPa).
 [3]When placing concrete for a superstructure between October 15 and March 15, open the deck to
 traffic no sooner than 30 days after placement.
 Take enough specimens to verify compliance with the strength requirements of Table 511.14-1A. Obtain samples
 from the first and last sublots of continuously placed concrete for quantities of 500 yd3 or less, and one extra set of
 specimens for each additional 500 yd3 or fraction thereof. Obtain samples in equally spaced increments throughout
 the placement as directed by the Engineer. Delays in placements of more than 4 hours are not considered
 continuously placed and are to be treated as separate placements.
 If the air temperature surrounding the concrete is maintained between 32 and 50 °F (0 and 10 °C), and if the
 provisions of 511.12 do not apply, maintain the concrete above 32 °F (0 °C) for 7 days or until a successful strength
 test conforming to Table 511.14-1A, except this time shall not be less than 5 days.
 Do not apply loads to or perform work on new concrete until workers and construction materials will not damage
 the concrete or interfere with its curing. Allow at least 36 hours and until the field cured compressive strength
 cylinders or maturity results reach 85% f’c; or if using flexural beams, the average of two beam tests is greater than
 650 psi (4.5 MPa) before loading new concrete. Do not interfere with curing of new concrete.
 Cure concrete as follows:
 TABLE 511.14-2
 CURING REQUIREMENTS
 Location
 Curing Method [1]
 Superstructure concrete
 Method A
 Concrete to which sealer is applied
 Method A
 Construction joints
 Method A
 Top surface of concrete deck superstructure concrete Method A followed by Method B
 Concrete with waterproofing
 Method A or Method B
 All other concrete
 Method A or Method B
 [1]Method A is water curing. Method B is membrane curing. If using Method B on areas
 to be waterproofed, remove the curing membrane.
 Concrete curing methods are as follows:
 A. Method A, Water Curing. With the exception of the top surface of deck superstructure concrete, protect
 surfaces not covered by forms immediately after final finishing with two thicknesses of wet burlap. Keep burlap
 wet for at least 7 days by the continuous application of water. If forms are removed before 7 days, immediately
 drench the exposed concrete with water and cover it with burlap. Continuously apply water to the burlap for the
 remainder of the curing period.
 Instead of continuous application of water, with the exception of the top surface of deck superstructure
 concrete, the Contractor may cover the wet burlap with white polyethylene sheeting or plastic coated burlap
 
 blankets conforming to 705.06. Place plastic coated burlap blankets wet and with the burlap side against the
 previous layer of wet burlap. Sufficiently lap and secure adjoining plastic coated blankets or polyethylene sheets
 at the laps and edges to form a seal that maintains the concrete wet at laps and edges. Cover white polyethylene
 sheeting or plastic coated blankets containing holes or tears with an additional covering of plastic sheeting or
 blankets as directed by the Engineer.
 Cover the top surface of deck superstructure concrete with a single layer of clean wet burlap after it is bull
 floated if necessary, and finished. Keep the burlap wet by a continuous flow of water through soaker hoses and
 cover the hoses with a 4 mils (100 m) white opaque polyethylene film for 7 days. After 7 days, allow the surface
 of the deck to dry.
 After curing the top surface of the deck superstructure concrete for 7 days, remove the burlap and standing
 water. Within 12 hours after removing the burlap, apply a curing membrane and cure the concrete according to
 Method B.
 B. Method B, Membrane Curing. Immediately after the free water has disappeared on surfaces not protected
 by forms, apply curing material conforming to 705.07, Type 1 or 1D. If forms are removed before the end of the
 7-day curing period, apply curing material on the concrete exposed by removing the forms.
 Thoroughly mix curing material immediately before use. Apply the membrane curing material at the rate of at
 least 1 gallon per 200 square feet (1 L/5 m2) of surface and in a fine mist to provide a continuous, uniform, and
 water impermeable film without marring the concrete surface
 Do not allow workers, materials, and equipment on the concrete during the curing period, unless adequately
 protecting the membrane curing material from damage. .
 If the film is broken or damaged during the specified curing period, reapply curing material as specified above
 to the damaged or affected areas.
 511.15 Surface Finish. For concrete that is to be sealed according to 512.03, perform surface profiling according
 to 512.03.F, immediately after removing forms. Clean, dampen, and fill with mortar all cavities produced by form
 ties, honeycomb spots, broken corners or edges, and other defects. Use a mortar of the same proportions used in
 the concrete being finished. Finish other contiguous exposed surfaces on the structure in a similar manner and to
 the extent required to produce a uniform appearance.
 On all exposed surfaces, remove fins and irregular projections with a stone or power grinder, taking care to avoid
 contrasting surface textures.
 A. Grout Cleaning. If grout cleaning is shown on the plans or necessary for corrective work, wet the concrete
 surface and then uniformly cover the concrete with a grout consisting of one part cement, 1 1/2 parts fine sand
 conforming to 703.03, and sufficient water to produce a mortar with the consistency of thick paint. Use white
 portland cement in the grout in the quantity determined by the Engineer necessary to match the color of the concrete.
 Uniformly apply the grout with brushes or spray guns, completely filling air bubbles and holes. Immediately after
 applying the grout, vigorously scour the concrete surface with a cork or other suitable float. While the grout is still
 in a plastic condition and while the grout does not pull from the holes or depressions, finish the surface with a
 sponge rubber or other suitable float, removing excess grout. After the grout thoroughly dries, vigorously rub the
 surface with dry burlap, removing dried grout until there is no visible film of grout remaining on the surface.
 Perform the entire cleaning operation of each area on the same day. Remove dark spots or streaks that remain after
 the cleaning operation using a fine grained silicon carbide stone. Stop rubbing with the silicon carbide stone before
 the surface texture changes. Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer, perform grout cleaning during the final
 project clean up.
 B. Rubbed Finish. If a rubbed finish is shown on the plans, if possible, remove forms within 2 days after placing
 concrete. Finish the surface as specified above to correct defects. After the mortar used for finishing is thoroughly
 set, and for a minimum of 2 hours before starting the rubbed finish, thoroughly saturate the concrete with water.
 Rub surfaces to be finished with a medium coarse silicon carbide stone until all form marks, projections, and
 irregularities are removed, all voids are filled, and a uniform surface is obtained. Leave the paste produced by
 rubbing in place. Other than water, do not apply additional material to the surface. After placing concrete above
 
 the finishing area, obtain the final finish by rubbing the concrete with a fine silicon carbide stone and water until
 the entire surface is of a smooth texture and uniform in color. Protect surfaces with a rubbed finish from damage
 caused by subsequent construction operations. If damaged, clean and refinish the surface as specified above.
 511.16 Roadway Finish. Finish and test concrete deck slabs according to 451.13. Do not groove or broom finish
 a strip of surface 9 to 12 inches (220 to 300 mm) wide adjacent to curbs and barriers. Provide a broom drag finish
 on concrete deck slabs in the longitudinal or transverse direction.
 The Engineer will approve the finishing machine. Provide a self-propelled machine with forward and reverse
 drive mechanisms that enable precise control of machine velocity in both directions. The machine shall have two
 rotating rollers, leveling augers, and either a vibrating pan or vibrating rollers. Field verify that the vibrating
 frequency of the pans or rollers are from 1500 to 5000 pulses per minute. Do not use vibrating rollers that have fins
 protruding more then 1/4 inch (6 mm) from the roller. Use a finishing machine capable of finishing transversely
 while traveling in both directions across the deck. Provide screeds capable of rising above the concrete surface.
 Provide a finishing machine capable of finishing the full width of the decks between curbs or parapet walls. The
 wheels of the finishing machine shall run on temporary riding rails adequately supported on the structural steel or
 falsework of the deck. Make the rail and rail supports of steel and arrange the rail and rail supports so that the
 weight of the finishing machine and the operator cause zero vertical deflection while traveling across the deck.
 Ensure the rail is straight, with no sections exceeding a tolerance of 1/8 inch in 10 feet (3 mm in 3 m) in any
 direction. Elevate support rails a sufficient distance above the slab to allow the simultaneous hand finishing of areas
 not machine finished. Fabricate and install rail supports to allow removal to at least 2 inches (50 mm) below the
 top of the slab. Fill holes formed by the removal of rail supports during the final finishing of the slab.
 For structures with a skew angle greater than fifteen (15) degrees and up to fifty (50) degrees, place the finishing
 machine within 5°of the skew angle of the structure. For structures with a skew angle greater than fifty (50) degrees,
 place the finishing machine at fifty (50) degrees.
 511.17 Bridge Deck Grooving. After water curing the concrete and either before applying curing compound or
 some period after applying curing compound and before opening the bridge to traffic, saw longitudinal grooves
 into the deck, unless specified otherwide in the plans. If sawing grooves after applying the curing compound and
 the concrete deck is less than 30 days old, reapply the curing compound after removing standing water, within 12
 hours after sawing grooves in the deck.
 Use diamond blades mounted on a multi-blade arbor on self-propelled machines that were built for grooving of
 concrete surfaces. The groove machines shall have depth control devices that detect variations in the pavement
 surface and adjust the cutting head height to maintain the specified depth of the groove. The grooving machines
 shall have devices to control alignment. Do not use flailing or impact type grooving equipment. More than one size
 grooving machine may be required in order to saw the grooves as specified. Maintain a minimum of ¾ inch (19
 mm) to a maximum of 2 ¼ inches (56 mm) transverse distance between adjacent passes of the grooving machine
 head.
 Provide an experienced technician to supervise the location, alignment, layout, dimension, and grooving of the
 surface.
 Saw grooves parallel to the bridge centerline in a continuous pattern across the surface. Begin and end sawing 9
 to 12 inches (220 to 300 mm) from any device in place in a bridge deck, such as scuppers or expansion joints. Stop
 sawing a minimum of 2 inches (50 mm) to a maximum of 24 inches (600 mm) from skewed expansion joints.
 Maintain a clearance of a minimum of 2 inches (50 mm) and a maximum of 4 inches (100 mm) from the grooves
 to longitudinal joints in the deck. Maintain a minimum clearance of 9 inches (220 mm) to a maximum of 30 inches
 (750 mm) clearance between the grooves and the curb or parapet toe. However, at no point shall un-grooved
 portions of deck extend beyond edge line and into the temporary or permanent travelled lanes. Saw grooves in a
 uniform pattern spaced at 3/4 inch minus 1/4 inch or plus 0 (19 mm minus 6 mm or plus 0). Saw grooves
 approximately 0.15 inches (4 mm) deep and 0.10 inches (3 mm) wide.
 For staged, or phase bridge deck work, saw the grooves parallel to the final, permanent bridge centerline. If the
 different stages or phases of the bridge deck work occur within one construction season, any stage opened to traffic
 shall receive an interim coarse broom finish during placement, then saw the longitudinal grooves after the final
 
 stage. The interim broom finish will not be allowed as a surface texture when opened to traffic over a winter season.
 Saw longitudinal grooves in the deck prior to opening to traffic for a winter season.
 For bridge decks that widen from one end to the other, saw the longitudinal grooves parallel to the centerline of
 the roadway. On the side of the bridge that widens, saw the longitudinal grooves to follow the edge line. Saw
 longitudinal grooves in the gore areas, avoiding the overlapping of grooves.
 At the beginning of each work shift, furnish a full complement of grooving blades with each saw that are capable
 of cutting grooves of the specified width, depth, and spacing.
 If during the work, a single grooving blade on a machine becomes incapable of cutting a groove, continue work
 for the remainder of the work shift. The Contractor is not required to cut the groove omitted because of the failed
 blade. Should two or more grooving blades on a machine become incapable of cutting grooves, cease operating the
 machine until it is repaired.
 Continuously remove all slurry and remaining residue from the grooving operation and leave the deck surface in
 a clean condition. Prevent residue from grooving operations from flowing across shoulders or across lanes occupied
 by public traffic or from flowing into gutters or other drainage facilities. Remove solid residue before the residue
 is blown by passing traffic or by wind.
 Provide water as necessary to saw grooves according to this subsection.
 511.18 Sidewalk Finish. After placing, strike off the concrete with a template and finish the concrete with a float
 to produce a sandy texture.
 511.19 Joints, Cracks, Scaling and Spalls. After completing all curing operations and allowing the deck to
 thoroughly dry, seal the following areas with a high molecular weight methacrylate (HMWM) sealer. Flood the
 areas and squeegee off the excess material as specified in Item 512 before opening the deck to traffic:
 A. Transverse joints in the deck.
 B. Joints between the concrete deck and steel end dams.
 C. Longitudinal joints in the deck.
 D. Longitudinal joints between the deck and safety curb, barriers, and parapets, etc.
 E. Cracks discovered in the deck of the top and bottom surfaces before opening the deck to traffic, that are 10
 mils or 0.010 inches (0.254 mm) or less in width. For deck cracking on the top and bottom surface area, on more
 than 20% of the surface area, or that is 10 mils or 0.010 inches (0.254 mm) or more in width, or deck scaling that
 is greater than 0.250 inches (6.25 mm) deep, or on more than 20% of the deck surface area, or deck spalling on
 more than one area, or an area greater than 32 square yards (26.76 square meters), an investigation will be
 performed by OMM and proceed according to 108.02 to resolve the issue.
 511.20
 
 Compressive Strength. Sample and test concrete strength according to 511.04.
 
 A. Concrete Requiring QC/QA. When the bid item requires QC/QA, the Engineer will evaluate the QC
 compressive test sublot results according to Supplement 1127 and as follows:
 If a single reported compressive strength test result for a sublot of concrete is less than 88% f’c reevaluate the
 in place concrete as follows:.
 The Engineer will determine the location for evaluating the strength of the sublot represented by the low
 compressive strength concrete. Evaluate using either nondestructive testing or cores. The Engineer will accept the
 concrete if the reported nondestructive test results are greater than the specified f’c. The Department will use the
 original cylinder results for calculating the compressive strength pay factor (PFc) if non destructive testing is used.
 If cores are tested the core results will be used in place of the original cylinder results for pay factor determination.
 If the nondestructive test results are less than the specified f’c, the Department will require the concrete to be
 cored. The Engineer will determine the locations for the required concrete cores. Provide all concrete cores to the
 Engineer for testing by the Department. Patch core holes with approved patching material. If the core results are
 above 88% f’c, the Department will use the core strength results for calculating the compressive strength pay factor
 (PFc).
 
 If the core results indicate that the compressive strength of the concrete is below 88% f’c, submit a plan for
 corrective action to the Engineer for approval. If the corrective plan is not approved, the Engineer will require the
 Contractor to:
 1.
 
 Remove and replace the unacceptable sublot and retest the new sublot at no cost to the Department or
 
 2.
 
 Leave the unacceptable material in place and pay for the sublot with a pay factor of 0.75.
 
 If three or more sublot compressive strength acceptance test results are less than f’c but greater than 88% f’c
 the Engineer will require an investigation of the reasons for the consistent low strengths. Until the investigation is
 completed to the satisfaction of the Engineer no additional placements of the concrete JMF will be made.
 Investigations should include all facets of the concrete operation including batching, mixing, delivery, clean up,
 sampling, testing, quality control plan, etc. If the Engineer is unsatisfied with the results of the investigation, the
 JMF and the quality control plan will become not approved. Develop and submit a new JMF and quality control
 plan conforming to the requirements of 499.03 and 511.04. Pay factors under 511.22 for these low strength sublots
 will be based on the original reported cylinder strengths.
 B. Concrete Not Requiring QC/QA. When the bid item does not require QC/QA, the Engineer will evaluate the
 strength results following the requirements of Table 511.22-2 and as follows:
 If a single compressive strength test result is less than f’c the material will be considered unacceptable material
 and the Department will determine acceptance according to Item 106.07.
 If three or more compressive strength test results are less than f’c the Engineer will require an investigation of
 the reasons for the consistent low strengths. Until the investigation is completed to the satisfaction of the Engineer
 no additional placements of the concrete JMF will be made. Investigations should include all facets of the concrete
 operation including batching, mixing, delivery, clean up, sampling, testing, etc. If the Engineer is unsatisfied with
 the results of the investigation, the JMF will become not approved. Develop and submit a new JMF conforming to
 the requirements of 499.03.
 511.21
 Air Content. For concrete that requires QC/QA, test the air content of the concrete according to Item
 455. When QC/QA concrete is not required, the Department will test the air content as directed by the Engineer.
 A. Concrete Requiring QC/QA. Any concrete with air results outside the requirements of Table 499.03-1 that
 is placed into the structure is unacceptable material according to item 106.07. The amount of unacceptable material
 will be the amount represented by the test result. Reevaluate the unacceptable material at no cost to the Department
 as follows:
 1.
 
 Core the location containing the unacceptable concrete. Patch the core hole with approved material.
 
 a. For concrete with high air content, test a core for compressive strength. Concrete with a minimum
 strength of f’c may be left in place.
 b. For concrete with low air content, test the core to determine the in-place hardened air content, specific
 surface and spacing factor according to ASTM C 457. Remove and replace unacceptable materials with specific
 surface results less than 600 in-1 (25 mm-1) or spacing factor results are more than 0.008 in (0.20 mm).
 Hire an independent laboratory acceptable to the Department to perform the testing.
 B. Concrete Not Requiring QC/QA. Any concrete with air results outside the requirements of Table 499.03-1
 that is placed into the structure is unacceptable material, according to item 106.07. The amount of unacceptable
 material will be the amount represented by the test result. Reevaluate the unacceptable material at no cost to the
 Department as follows:
 1. The Department will core the location containing the unacceptable concrete. Patch the core hole with
 approved materials.
 a. For concrete with high air content, the Department will test a core for compressive strength. Concrete
 with a strength of f’c may be left in place.
 
 b. For concrete with low air content the Department will determine the in-place hardened air content,
 specific surface and spacing factor according to ASTM C 457. Remove and replace unacceptable materials with
 specific surface results less than 600 in-1 (25 mm-1) or spacing factor results of more than 0.008 in (0.20 mm).
 511.22 Pay Factors. Apply pay factors as follows:
 A. Concrete Requiring QC/QA
 The Department will use pay factors based on the percent within limits (PWL) to establish a final adjusted
 price. The PWL will be established per lot(s) accepted in the QCP for each bid item quantity of concrete. The
 Department will calculate a PWL according to Supplement 1127 using either the Contractor’s verified QC
 compressive test results or core results when the QC could not be verified. The compressive strength pay factor
 (PFC) from Table 511.22-1for the lot will be applied to each bid item represented in the lot. The Department will
 combine approach slab and deck concrete test results in the same lot to determine final pay factors.
 TABLE 511.22-1
 PAY FACTORS FOR CONCRETE REQUIRING QC/QA
 PWL
 85 % – 100 %
 84%
 83%
 82%
 81%
 80%
 79%
 78%
 77%
 76%
 75%
 < 75%
 
 PFC
 1.00
 0.995
 0.990
 0.985
 0.980
 0.975
 0.970
 0.965
 0.960
 0.955
 0.950
 See below
 
 If the PWL value determined for the lot of concrete is below 75%, submit a plan for corrective action to the
 Engineer for approval. If the corrective plan is not approved, the Engineer will require the Contractor to:
 1.
 
 Remove and replace the lot of unacceptable material at no cost to the Department, or
 
 2
 
 Leave the unacceptable material in place and pay for the lot of with a pay factor of 0.75.
 
 B. Concrete Not Requiring QC/QA
 For concrete items that the Department performs compression testing, the Department will use pay factors
 based on the individual compressive strength results for the quantity represented by the test results to establish an
 adjusted price to the items. The pay factors from Table 511.22-2 will be applied to items represented by the tests.
 TABLE 511.22-2
 PAY FACTORS FOR CONCRETE NOT REQUIRING QC/QA
 Individual Test Results
 ≥ f’c
 < f’c
 
 Pay Factor (PFC)
 1.00
 Follow 106.07
 
 511.23 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure the appropriate concrete item by the number of
 cubic yards (cubic meters) determined by calculations from plan dimensions, in place, completed and accepted.
 The Department will make deductions for portions of primary structural members embedded in concrete. The
 Department will not make deductions for the volume of reinforcing steel, conduits or embedded piles.
 Superstructure concrete includes the concrete in deflective parapets not having a metallic railing.
 
 The Department may measure deck concrete by either volume or area using plan dimensions.
 The Department will calculate separate quantities of concrete due to unacceptable compressive strength, 511.21
 and air content, 511.22.
 511.24 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities of concrete as follows.
 Work necessary to adjust seat elevations and deck haunches for prestressed beam members is incidental to the
 affected structural concrete items. The Department will pay for final quantities as measured and field verified.
 The Department will not pay for additional reinforcing steel required to adequately stabilize the cages.
 The Department will not pay for repairs to horizontal cracks by epoxy injection or, if a concrete sealer was
 applied, for repairs to the sealer after the completing the epoxy injection.
 The Department will not pay extra for any type of surface finish specified in 511.15, the cost being considered
 as included in the price bid for concrete.
 If the Contractor elects to saw the deck after applying the curing compound, the Department will not pay to
 reapply the curing compound.
 All costs for sealing as specified in 511.19 are incidental to the appropriate concrete item. The Department will
 not make separate payment for sealing.
 The Department will not pay separately for the concrete cylinder curing box (CCCB).
 The Department will not pay for the re-evaluation of low strength test results, 511.20.A.
 The Department will initially pay the full bid price to the Contractor upon completing the work. The Department
 will calculate the final adjusted payment for each item as follows:
 PF1 - The final adjusted pay per cubic yard (cubic meter) or square yard (square meter), for accepted quantities
 of concrete:
 PF1 = (Contract Bid Price) x PFC
 PF2 - The final adjusted pay per cubic yard (cubic meter) or square yard (square meter) for unacceptable
 quantities of concrete due to compressive strength or low air content and allowed to stay in place, according to
 511.20 or 511.21.
 PF2 = (Contract Bid Price) x 0.75
 Calculate the adjusted price per bid item by multiplying PF1 or PF2 by the appropriate quantities of concrete,
 then sum the values. Subtract the full bid price paid to the Contractor from the adjusted price to determine the
 difference. The Department will execute final adjustments by change order upon receipt of all test data.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 511
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Class ___ Concrete, _____
 
 511
 511
 511
 511
 
 511
 
 Class ___ Concrete, _____ with QC/QA
 Class QC 1 Concrete, Substructure
 Class QC 1 Concrete, Substructure with QC/QA
 Class QC 2 Concrete, Bridge Deck
 
 Class QC 2 Concrete, Bridge Deck with QC/QA
 
 511
 511
 511
 511
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Class QC 2 Concrete, Bridge Deck (Parapet)
 Class QC 2 Concrete, Bridge Deck (Parapet) with QC/QA
 Class QC 3 Concrete, _____ with QC/QA
 Class QC 4 Mass Concrete, Substructure with QC/QA
 
 ITEM 512 TREATING CONCRETE
 512.01
 512.02
 512.03
 512.04
 512.05
 512.06
 512.07
 512.08
 512.09
 512.10
 
 Description
 Materials
 Sealing of Concrete Surfaces
 Sealing Concrete Bridge Decks with HMWM Resin
 Soluble Reactive Silicate (SRS) Concrete Treatment
 Treating Concrete Bridge Decks with Gravity-Fed Resin
 Sealing Cracks by Epoxy Injection
 Waterproofing
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 512.01
 Description. This work consists of sealing and treating concrete surfaces, sealing cracks in concrete,
 and applying waterproofing to structures.
 512.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Asphalt cement ........................................................... 702.01 (PG 64 - 22)
 Asphalt primer for........................................... 702.02 (RC-70 or RC-250),
 waterproofing ............................................................................... 702.05
 HMWM Resin ................................................................................. 705.15
 Epoxy-Urethane Sealer ................................................................ 705.23.A
 Non-epoxy Sealer .........................................................................705.23.B
 Soluble Reactive Silicate (SRS) ...................................................... 705.24
 Gravity Fed Resin ............................................................................ 705.25
 Epoxy injection Materials ................................................................ 705.26
 Sand ..................................................703 with the following exceptions:
 Maximum moisture content of 0.5 of the percent of absorption when treated according to California Test
 226.
 Gradation:
 Sieve Size
 Total Percent Passing
 No. 4
 (4.75 mm)
 100
 No. 8
 (2.36 mm)
 90 to 100
 No. 20
 (850 µm)
 5 to 15
 No. 50
 (300 µm)
 0 to 5
 Emulsified asphalt primer, ......................................... 702.04 (MS-2, SS-1)
 Asphalt for waterproofing................................................................ 702.06
 Hot applied joint sealer .................................................................... 705.04
 Type 3 membrane primer................................................................. 705.04
 Waterproofing fabric ....................................................................... 711.24
 Sheet Type 2 membrane waterproofing ........................................... 711.25
 Sheet Type 3 membrane waterproofing ........................................... 711.29
 512.03
 Sealing of Concrete Surfaces. This work consists of applying an approved sealer on existing and
 new concrete surface areas after the concrete is cured and repairs completed and cured. Apply the sealer to locations
 described in the plans. Apply the sealer listed in the pay item description. Choose a type of sealer if no sealer is
 listed in the pay item description.
 A. Equipment. Use application equipment recommended by the sealer manufacturer. Use spray equipment,
 tanks, hoses, brooms, rollers, coaters, squeegees, etc., that are clean, free of foreign matter, oil residue and water.
 B. Mixing. Mix the sealer according to the manufacturer’s recommended procedures. Furnish the Engineer with
 the manufacturer’s application instructions. Do not mix or apply the sealer until the manufacturer’s written
 
 recommendations are supplied to the Engineer. Mix and maintain materials at a uniform consistency during
 application.
 C. Storage. Store all sealer components in tightly sealed containers, in a dry location, and as recommended by
 the manufacturer. Deliver unopened drums or containers of the sealer or sealer components to the job site with the
 manufacturer's numbered seal intact.
 D. Application submittals. At least five (5) days before sealing, provide the Engineer the sealer manufacturer’s
 written requirements for application equipment, mixing equipment, mixing procedures, mixing time, storage
 requirements, recoat times and temperatures, and MSDS sheets.
 E. Surface Condition. Apply sealers only to surfaces which are dry, free from dust, dirt, oil, wax, curing
 compounds, efflorescence, laitance, coatings and other foreign materials. Visually inspect all surfaces before
 applying sealer. Remove all structurally unsound surfaces and weak sections.
 Perform all concrete patching prior to surface profiling. Perform concrete patching on areas identified by the
 Engineer according to 519. Cure repaired areas for at least seven (7) days.
 Air dry all concrete surfaces for at least ten (10) days after completion of required curing.
 For accelerated cure of precast concrete, obtain the required 28 day strength and air dry the surfaces at least
 ten (10) days after completing accelerated cure.
 F. Surface Preparation and Profiling. Remove dust, dirt, oil, wax, curing compounds, efflorescence, laitance,
 coatings and other foreign materials from surfaces to be sealed.
 For Epoxy-Urethane sealers, use one or both of the following methods to produce a surface profile that feels
 and looks like 100 grit sandpaper or coarser. Provide the Engineer sandpaper for comparison. Perform the ASTM
 D7682-12, Method B, Standard Test Method for Replication and Measurement of Concrete Surface Profile Using
 Replica Putty to obtain a replica coupon of the prepared concrete surface on a flat, test section, on the first day of
 production, and as requested by the Engineer. With a micrometer, measure the surface profile obtained on the
 coupon, and provide the coupon to the Engineer.
 1.
 
 Water blast at 7,000 psi (48 MPa) minimum, or
 
 2. Abrasive blast, followed by air brooming or power sweeping, to remove dust and sand from the surface
 and opened pores.
 3.
 
 or use a combination of water blast and abrasive blast.
 
 Install suitable traps, filters, drip pans and other separation devices in the cleaning equipment so oil and other
 foreign material are not deposited on the surface.
 If the concrete surface had curing compound applied, acid test the surface after blasting to see if the curing
 compound was removed. Perform the acid test for every 500 square feet (47 square meters). Use a 30%, by weight,
 solution of hydrochloric acid. Apply 4 to 5 drops to the concrete surface. If foaming/fizzing occurs the curing
 compound is removed. Rinse the tested location with an ammonia solution to neutralize the concrete area tested (1
 cup ammonia to 5 gallons water).
 (NOTE: Muriatic acid and ammonia can be bought in a hardware store. Muriatic acid is used to clean masonry.
 Only dilute by pouring the acid into the water. DO NOT pour the water into the acid.)
 When surfaces show intermittent or no foaming, use chemicals or other cleaning compounds to remove the
 curing compounds. Only use products approved by the sealer manufacturer. Furnish the Engineer documentation
 of the sealer manufacturer’s approval and method to test if materials are removed.
 Ensure that all wastes generated by the surface preparation operation are managed in accordance with 107.19.
 G. Application and Coverage. Apply the sealer between twelve and (12) hours and 48 hours after surface
 preparation by water blasting methods. Apply the sealer within 48 hours after surface preparation by abrasive
 blasting methods Do not apply sealer if rain is anticipated within six (6) hours after application. Clearly mark where
 the sealer application stops if not continuous.
 
 1.
 
 Epoxy-Urethane sealers
 
 a. Apply the epoxy coat of the epoxy-urethane sealer at the coverage rate of 120 square feet per gallon
 (2.9 square meters per liter). Use a coverage rate of 150 square feet per gallon (3.6 square meters per liter) when
 the Laboratory’s qualified products list for the epoxy authorizes it. Apply the urethane coat of the epoxy-urethane
 sealer at a rate of 200 square feet per gallon (4.8 square meters per liter). When surfaces are not smooth and flat,
 adjust the given coverage rates by the following formulas to determine the correct coverage rate.
 (1) For surfaces using large stone liners and standard concrete =
 specified coverage rate (sq ft/gal [sq m/l]) × 0.8
 (2) For surfaces using large stone liners and porous concrete =
 specified coverage rate (sq ft/gal [sq m/l]) × 0.7
 (3) For surfaces using fluted liners and standard concrete =
 specified coverage rate (sq ft/gal [sq m/l]) × 0.5
 b. Provide documentation to the Engineer that the ambient, surface and material temperature is 50 ºF
 (10 ºC) or above, 5 ºF higher than the dew point, and the relative humidity is 80% or below during the application
 of the sealer.
 c.
 
 Apply with a brush, squeegee, roller or spraying equipment and as recommended by the manufacturer.
 
 d. Apply one coat of epoxy and one coat of the urethane top coat. Time between coats shall meet the
 manufacturer’s written recommendation provided to the Engineer during 512.03.D. Use epoxy and urethane from
 the same manufacturer. Achieve specified coverage regardless of the number of passes per coat.
 e. Tint so the final color is Federal Color Standard No. 17778 - Light Neutral. Pigment content shall be
 limited so as not to reduce sealing effectiveness of the second coat. Refer to the plans for colors for specific projects.
 f.
 
 Sags and runs are not acceptable in the sealer.
 
 g. For sealed sidewalks or other horizontal surfaces with repetitive foot traffic or vehicular traffic,
 integrate 1 1/2 lbs per square yard (0.8 kg/m²) of silica sand into the surface of the second coat to produce a nonskid
 surface satisfactory to the Engineer.
 2.
 
 Non-epoxy sealer
 
 a. Apply the sealer according to the manufacturer’s recommended mode of application and under the
 observation of the Engineer.
 b.
 
 Coverage.
 
 (1) Surfaces subject to abrasive wear (bridge decks, bridge deck shoulders and sidewalks);
 Minimum, one gallon (3.875 liter) of sealer for each 100 square feet (9.0 square meters).
 (2) Curbs, vertical surfaces of beams and deck slabs subject to direct roadway drainage; Minimum,
 one gallon (3.875 liter) for each 125 square feet (11.5 square meters).
 (3) Other surfaces (for example, parapets, abutments, pier caps and median dividers); Minimum, one
 gallon (3.875 liter) for each 150 square feet (14.0 square meters).
 Stone or fluted formed concrete surfaces may require additional sealer materials for coverage.
 c. Apply sealer on horizontal surfaces in a one-pass operation at the required coverage. An acceptable
 application procedure consists of saturating the surface and waiting a few seconds for the sealer to completely
 penetrate the concrete surface. Broom in the sealer if recommended by the manufacturer.
 d. Apply sealer on vertical surfaces to saturate the surface. The surface is saturated when runs of 6 to 12
 inches develop. Apply additional passes in 10 to 15 minute intervals until the coverage rate is achieved. Apply
 sealers with brush or roller if recommended by the manufacturer.
 
 e. After 10 to 15 minutes, squeegee off excess material on smooth finished or dense concretes where
 the required coverage is not absorbed.
 f.
 
 Tint clear non-epoxy sealers with a vanishing dye that will not damage the concrete.
 
 g. Do not apply sealer if the ambient temperature is below 40 °F (5 °C) or will fall below 32 °F (0 °C)
 within 12 hours after application.
 H. Test Site/Application. Apply epoxy-urethane or non-epoxy sealer to measured coverage areas, both on
 horizontal and vertical surfaces, and on different concrete types, demonstrating:
 1.
 
 The project’s visual effects for the epoxy-urethane sealer application at the required coverage rate.
 
 2. Visually, the absorption necessary to achieve the specified coverage rate for the non-epoxy sealer. Use at
 least 1/2 gallon (2 liter) of sealer, following the manufacturer’s recommended method of application, for the total
 of the test surfaces.
 3. Apply to the deck, safety curb or sidewalk for the horizontal test surfaces and use an abutment parapet or
 pier face for the vertical test surface so different textures are tested.
 I. Appearance. Epoxy-Urethane sealers: Uniform appearance and the final color shall visually match the test
 section. Recoating, removal and re-application or other methods recommended by the manufacturer will be
 required to correct final appearance. Non-Epoxy Sealers: The sealer shall result in a uniform appearance.
 J. Traffic. Allow traffic on deck shoulder areas after 12 hours of drying time for an epoxy-urethane sealer. Keep
 traffic off a non-epoxy sealer until the sealer is dry.
 K. Safety Precautions. Follow precautions defined on the manufacturer’s MSDS. Provide the Engineer a copy
 of the MSDS sheet for information before any work commences.
 L. Protection of Adjoining Surfaces and the Public. Protect the public during all operations, especially when
 applying sealer to the fascia or the underside portions of a bridge that spans an area used by the public.
 During sealing, mask off, or use other means of protection, for surfaces not being sealed. Protect asphalt and
 mastic type surfaces from spillage and heavy overspray. Do not apply sealers to joint sealants which have not cured
 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Joint sealants, traffic paints and asphalt overlays may be applied to
 the treated surfaces 48 hours after the sealer has been applied. Protect nearby steel, aluminum or glass surfaces
 when non-epoxy overspray could be deposited on those surfaces.
 M. Environmental Requirements. Protect plants and vegetation from overspray by covering with drop cloths.
 N. Superintendent. In addition to the requirements of 105.06, the Superintendent must successfully complete a
 Sealing of Concrete Surfaces training prequalification course offered by the Department. The course must have
 been completed within the past four years and an individual course certificate must have been received by the
 Superintendent. Present certificate to the Engineer prior to beginning the sealing of concrete surfaces work. Work
 will not be permitted to begin until after the Superintendent provides a valid course certificate.
 512.04
 Sealing Concrete Bridge Decks with HMWM Resin. This work shall consist of preparing and
 treating the concrete wearing surfaces of bridge decks with a penetrating sealer in accordance with these
 specifications, in reasonably close conformity with the plans and the manufacturer’s recommendation and as
 directed by the Engineer.
 A. Limitations. Do not perform this work during the period beginning November 1st and ending March 31st.
 B. Surface Preparation. Remove roadway dirt and debris from the area of the deck to be treated. Sweep, abrasive
 blast, then with the use of a manual or power broom sweep and blow with compressed air so that the surfaces to
 which the sealer is to be applied is dry and free of dust and dirt. Use high pressure compressed air to blow all loose
 material from visible cracks. Fit the cleaning equipment with suitable traps, filters, drip pans, driers and other
 devices to prevent oil and other foreign material from being deposited on the surface. Do not allow traffic on the
 clean surface prior to application of the sealer. Remove existing pavement markings using a method as specified
 in 614.11.G.1.a. The cost of removal is incidental to the Work. Remove all traces of asphalt or petroleum products
 and concrete curing seals by abrasive blasting prior to air sweeping.
 
 C. Installation. Provide a compatible promoter/initiator system capable of providing the same physical qualities
 of the hardened resin as if promoted/initiated with 2 percent cobalt naphthanate (6 percent) and 2 percent cumene
 hydroperoxide. Store materials at 65 to 80 °F (18 to 27 °C). Provide a system that has a resin gel time of not less
 than 40 minutes to not more than 1 1/2 hours at the time and temperature of application.
 Adjust the gel time to compensate for the change in temperature throughout the day. The temperature of the
 surfaces to be treated may range from 50 °F (10 °C) to 120 °F (49 °C). Arrange to have a technical representative
 on site to provide mixing proportions equipment suitability, and safety advice. Any conflict between these
 provisions and representative's advice shall be resolved at the job site. The technical representative shall remain at
 the job site until such time as he and the Engineer agree that the Contractor is qualified in all aspects of the
 application of the sealer.
 Do not allow the promoter and initiator, if supplied separate from the resin, to contact each other directly. Do
 not store containers of promoter or initiators together in a manner that will allow leakage or spillage from one to
 contact the containers or materials of the other.
 Machine application of the resin may be performed by using a two-part resin system utilizing a promoted resin
 for one part and an initiated resin for the other part. This two-part resin system may be combined at a spray bar
 through positive displacement atomization of the resin. Do not use compressed air to produce the spray.
 Use appropriate cleaning and flushing of equipment, tools, etc., with an appropriate solvent, as approved by
 the Engineer, in such a manner to minimize personal and environmental hazards. Advise workman that the resin
 will soften gum rubber soles, and a face-mask should be used to protect from accidental splashes. Clothing and
 leather saturated with resin will harden and become useless.
 Prior to resin application the surface to be treated shall be visibly dry and its temperature between 50 °F (10
 °C) and 120 °F (49 °C). Do not apply the resin within 24 hours after a rain or when rain is forecast within 12 hours
 or when the ambient air temperature is below 50 °F (10 °C). Pre-mark the deck to control mixed material usage
 and to provide a rate of application of approximately 100 square feet per gallon (2.45m²/L). The exact rate shall be
 determined by the Engineer prior to commencing full-scale deck treatment operations.
 Before using the material submit to the OMM copies of the manufacturer’s certified test data showing that the
 material complies with the requirements of this specification. The test data shall be developed by an independent
 approved testing laboratory, and shall include the brand name of the material, name of manufacturer, number of
 the lot tested and date of manufacture. When the material has been approved by the OMM, further testing by the
 manufacturer will not be required unless the formulation or manufacturing process has been changed, in which
 case new certified test results will be required. The manufacturer shall certify that the formulation is the same as
 that for which data has been submitted. The state reserves the right to sample and test delivered lots for compliance.
 Flood the deck surfaces resin, allowing penetration into the concrete and filling of all cracks. Limit the initiated
 mix of promoted resin to 5 gallons (19 L) at a time for manual application. A significant increase in viscosity shall
 be cause for rejection. Apply the treatment within 5 minutes after complete mixing. Redistribute excess material
 by squeegee or brooms within 10 minutes after application.
 Take all steps necessary to prevent the resin from flowing into lanes open to traffic. Broadcast sand over the
 entire treated area of the bridge deck by mechanical means to affect a uniform coverage of 0.80 to 1.2 pounds per
 square yard (0.43 kg/m² to 0.65 kg/m²). The sand shall be uniformly graded aggregate conforming to the quality
 requirements of 703 and shall conform to the following limits for grading:
 Sieve Size
 No. 4
 (4.75 mm)
 No. 8
 (2.36 mm)
 No. 20
 (850 µm)
 No. 50
 (300 µm)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 90 to 100
 5 to 15
 0 to 5
 
 It is the intention of the specification to allow the use of commercially available blast sands applied by a
 common lawn broadcast type seeder/spreader. Place sand between 10 to 15 minutes behind the resin spreading
 front and before any jelling of the resin occurs. If the surface contains large deep cracks, the low-viscosity liquid
 
 could run completely through the concrete slab. Apply a second coat in these areas after the first coat has started
 to cure.
 Before the monomer hardens, fill imperfections or spalls with standing liquid with commercial quality concrete
 or sandblast sand, and finished to a uniform surface. The sand shall have a maximum moisture content of 0.5 of
 the percent of absorption when tested in accordance to a California Test 226.
 Do not permit traffic and equipment on the tested deck until it is tack free and a minimum of 6 hours have
 elapsed since treatment and the sand cover adheres sufficiently to resist brushing by hand. Protect the treatment
 from moisture for not less than 4 hours after placement.
 512.05
 Soluble Reactive Silicate (SRS) Concrete Treatment. This item consist of the necessary labor,
 materials and equipment to prepare and treat portland cement concrete surfaces with a reactive silicate sealer
 meeting these specifications.
 A. Equipment. Use application equipment that is recommended by the manufacturer. Use spray equipment,
 tanks, hoses, brooms, rollers, coaters, squeegees, etc., that are thoroughly clean, free of foreign matter, oil residue
 and water prior to applying the treatment.
 B. Cleaning and Surface Preparation. . Do not begin sealing until all concrete repairs have been completed and
 reached the design strength of the patch material .
 Thoroughly clean the surface to remove dust, dirt, oil, wax, curing components, efflorescence, laitance,
 coatings and other foreign materials. Sweep, abrasive blast, then with the use of a manual or power broom sweep
 and blow with compressed air so that the surfaces to which the sealer is to be applied is dry and free of dust and
 dirt. Use high pressure compressed air to blow all loose material from visible cracks. Obtain the approval of the
 manufacturer or its representative before the use of chemicals and other cleaning compounds to facilitate the
 removal of these foreign materials. Apply the treatment within 48 hours following surface preparation.
 Fit cleaning equipment with suitable traps, filters, drip pans and other devices to prevent oil and other foreign
 material from being deposited on the surface.
 C. Test Application. Treat a measured test coverage area on horizontal and vertical surfaces of the different
 components of the structure to be treated for the purpose of demonstrating the desired physical and visual effect of
 an application or of obtaining a visual illustration of the absorption necessary to achieve the specified coverage rate
 prior to final application. In the latter case, use at least 1/2 gallon (2 L) of treatment following the manufacturer’s
 recommended method of application for the total of the test surfaces. Locate horizontal test surfaces on the deck
 and on the safety curb or sidewalk and locate vertical test surfaces on an abutment parapet and pier face so that the
 different textures are displayed.
 D. Application. Apply the concrete treatment to concrete surfaces as designated on the plans. Apply the SRS by
 thoroughly saturating the concrete surfaces at an application rate specified by the manufacturer.
 Apply the SRS when the concrete surface temperature is above 35 °F (2 °C). Use a surface thermometer on
 the concrete to establish the temperature of the concrete if the air temperature at the time of application is 45 °F (7
 °C) or below.
 Spread the SRS from puddles to dry areas.
 If unable to complete the entire application continuously, note and clearly mark the location where the
 application was stopped.
 E. Protection of Adjoining Surfaces and the Public. Protect by masking off or by other means adjoining
 surfaces of the structure which are not to be sealed when applying a treatment. Make provision to protect the public
 when treating the fascia of a bridge and/or portions of the underside of the deck of a bridge that spans an area used
 by the public.
 Protect asphalt and mastic type surfaces from spillage and heavy overspray. Do not apply joint sealants, traffic
 paints and asphalt overlays to the treated surfaces until 48 hours after the treatment has been applied. Cover
 adjoining and nearby surfaces of aluminum or glass where there is a possibility of the treatment being deposited
 on the surfaces.
 
 Protect plants and vegetation from overspray by covering with drop cloths. Follow precautions as indicated on
 the manufacturer’s MSDS.
 F. Opening to Traffic. Only allow traffic on deck after the treated area does not track. If there is any unreacted
 material on the surface after application(s), flush with fresh water, as recommended by the manufacturer. Contain
 all waste according to 107.19.
 512.06
 Treating Concrete Bridge Decks with Gravity-Fed Resin. This work shall consist of preparing and
 treating the concrete bridge deck with a gravity-fed crack welding system in accordance with these specifications
 in reasonably close conformity with the plans and the manufacturer’s recommendations and as directed by the
 Engineer.
 A. Limitations. Do not perform this work during the period beginning November 1st and ending March 31st.
 Prior to resin application insure that the surface to be treated is visibly dry with a temperature between 40 °F
 (4 °C) and 100 °F (38 °C). Do not apply the resin within 24 hours after a rain, during rain, when rain is forecast
 within 12 hours or when the ambient air temperature is below 40 °F (4 °C).
 B. Surface Preparation. First remove roadway dirt and debris from the area to be treated. Sweep abrasive blasted
 surfaces to which the sealer is to be applied, then manual or power broom swept and blown with compressed air so
 that they are dry and free of dust and dirt. Use high pressure compressed air to blow all loose material from visible
 cracks. Use a high pressure water blast followed by an air blast if particles are highly embedded in the cracks, to
 clean cracks. Fit the cleaning equipment with suitable traps, filters, drip pans, dryers and other devices to prevent
 oil and other foreign material from being deposited on the surface. Do not allow traffic on the clean surfaces prior
 to application of the sealer. Remove existing pavement markings using a method as specified in 614.11.G.1.a. The
 cost of removal is incidental to the Work. Remove all traces of asphalt or petroleum products and concrete curing
 by the abrasive blasting prior to air sweeping.
 C. Application Pre-mark the deck to control mixed material usage and to provide a rate of application of
 approximately 100 to 150 square feet per gallon (2.45 to 3.68 m²/L). The Engineer will determine the exact rate
 but will not exceed 150 square feet per gallon (3.68 m²/L). Flood the area to be sealed with resin. Allow the resin
 to penetrate into the concrete and fill all cracks. Mix the resin to a limit of 5 gallons (19 L) at a time for manual
 application. Reject resin with a significant increase in viscosity. Redistribute excess material by a squeegee within
 10 minutes after application. Front and back movement with the squeegee is recommended over cracks and patch
 perimeters to enhance penetration. Take all steps necessary to prevent the resin from flowing into lanes open to
 traffic. Broadcast sand over the entire sealed area of the bridge deck by mechanical means to effect a uniform
 coverage of 1 to 2 pounds per square yards (0.54 kg/m² to 1.08 kg/m²).
 Protect the treatment from moisture for not less than 6 hours after placement.
 D. Traffic. Do not permit traffic on the treated deck until the resin is tack free, a minimum of 6 hours has elapsed
 since treatment, and the sand cover adheres sufficiently to resist brushing off by hand.
 512.07
 Sealing Cracks by Epoxy Injection. This specification covers the repair of dry, moist or wet cracks
 or fractures that are 2 to 100 mils (50 to 2500 µm) in thickness in reinforced concrete members. The repair is by
 means of an epoxy injection system. This system shall consist of a paste epoxy used to seal the surface cracks and
 an injection epoxy used under low pressure, 200 psi (1400 kPa) max., to penetrate and fill the cracks and bond the
 crack surfaces together. Material for each epoxy shall consist of a two-component modified resin bonding system.
 The unmodified resin shall be known as Component A and the hardener as Component B.
 Arrange to have a manufacturer’s representative at the job site to familiarize him and the Engineer with the epoxy
 materials, application procedures and recommended pressure practice. This representative shall direct at least one
 complete crack or area injection and be assured prior to his departure from the project that the personnel are
 adequately informed to satisfactorily perform the remaining repairs.
 Furnish the Engineer a copy of the manufacturer’s comprehensive preparation, mixing and application
 instructions which have been developed especially for use with the proposed epoxy injection system. Ensure that
 any significant changes to these instructions which are recommended by the representative for an unanticipated
 situation have been approved by the Engineer prior to the adoption of such changes.
 
 Clean concrete surfaces adjacent to the cracks to be sealed only to the extent necessary to achieve an adequate
 bond with the paste epoxy, and only by procedures which will not cause abrasive grits or concrete dust to penetrate
 the cracks. Do not permit the use of solvents or thinners in cracks or on bonding surfaces.
 Install injection ports or tees in cracks to be injected. Space injection ports or tees at 6 to 12 inches (150 to 300
 mm) vertically and 6 to 18 inches (150 to 450 mm) horizontally but in no case closer together than the thickness of
 the concrete member if full depth penetration is desired unless otherwise specified or directed. Set ports or tees in
 dust free holes made either with vacuum drills or chipping hammers. Seal all surface cracks in the area to be
 repaired, after injection ports or tees have been inserted into the holes, with paste epoxy between ports to ensure
 retention of the pressure injected epoxy within the confines of the member. The Department will allow an
 alternative procedure of sealing the cracks before the injection holes have been made. Limit the application of paste
 epoxy to clean and dry surfaces. Limit substrate temperatures to not less than 45 °F(7 °C) during epoxy applications.
 Begin the epoxy injection at the bottom of the fractured area and progress upward using a port or tee filling
 sequence that will ensure the filling of the lowermost injection ports or tees first.
 Establish injection procedures and the depths and spacings of holes at injection ports or tees. Use epoxy with
 flow characteristics and injection pressure that ensure no further damage will be done to the member being repaired.
 Ensure that the epoxy will first fill the innermost portion of the cracked concrete and that the potential for creating
 voids within the crack or epoxy will be minimized.
 Remove the injection ports or tees flush with the concrete surface after the fractured area has been filled and the
 epoxy has partially cured (24 hours at ambient temperature not less than 60 °F (16 °C), otherwise not less than 48
 hours). Roughen the surfaces of the repaired areas to achieve uniform surface texture. Remove any injection epoxy
 runs or spills from concrete surfaces.
 Obtain two 4-inch (100 mm) diameter core samples in the first 100 linear feet (30 m) of crack repaired and one
 core for each 100 linear feet (30 m) thereafter. Take the core samples from locations determined by the Engineer
 and for the full crack depth. Cores will be visibly examined by the Engineer to determine the extent of epoxy
 penetration. Repair the core holes in the concrete with material specified in 705.21.
 512.08
 
 Waterproofing
 
 A. General. Apply an even and uniform coating of asphalt materials using brushes, squeegees, or spray
 equipment.
 If using spray equipment, provide portable power pressure type spraying equipment capable of being moved
 to the location of the waterproofing operation.
 Protect concrete surfaces not covered with waterproofing from overspray, spilling, or otherwise marring of the
 surface with the asphalt materials.
 Ensure that the edge of any exposed application is sharply defined true to line with a uniform exposure.
 Do not apply waterproofing fabric or membranes over attachments and hardware. Seal the discontinuities in
 waterproofing with Asphalt, 702.06, or hot applied joint sealer, 705.04.
 B. Preparation of Surface
 1. Asphalt Materials. Remove concrete projections. Using wire brushes and clear water, remove dirt and the
 outside film of cement. Before applying asphalt materials, ensure that the concrete is clean and dry and the concrete
 temperature is at least 40 F (4 C).
 2. Membranes. Remove protrusions from the concrete. Sweep off dirt and dust, and blow the concrete clean.
 Fill joints or cracks greater than 3/8 inch (10 mm) wide with portland cement mortar. In addition to the above,
 remove oil and grease from surfaces for Type 3 membranes using water and a detergent designed to remove oil and
 grease from concrete. Flush residual detergent from the surface. Do not allow traffic on the cleaned surface.
 C. Primer Coat. Apply the primer coat at the rate of 0.10 to 0. 20 gallon (0.50 to 1.00 L) of asphalt material per
 square yard (square meter).
 
 For primer coats applied between June 1 and September 1, use asphalt primer for waterproofing or emulsified
 asphalt primer conforming to 512.02.
 For primer coats applied between September 1 and June 1, use asphalt primer for waterproofing conforming
 to 512.02.
 If practical, apply asphalt emulsion using spray equipment.
 If subjected to traffic, spread sand on the primer coat for protection. Broom off excess sand before applying
 asphalt waterproofing.
 D. Type A Waterproofing. This type of waterproofing consists of one primer coat and at least two coats of
 asphalt material conforming to 702.06 to provide a total of at least 1 gallon (5 L) of asphalt per square yard (m²)
 on flat areas and at least 1/2 gallon per square yard (3 L/m²) on vertical or sloping surfaces. Start applying the
 waterproofing at the lowest point, and progress to a higher elevation. Uniformly cover the surface except apply
 more asphalt in corners and over construction joints. Apply the asphalt material at a temperature from 250 to 350
 F (121 to 177 C).
 E. Type B Waterproofing. This type of waterproofing consists of one primer coat, three coats of asphalt material
 conforming to 702.06, and two layers of waterproofing fabric conforming to 711.24 applied as follows:
 1. On a clean, dry, and well-primed surface, apply a thorough coating of asphalt at a temperature from 250
 to 350 F (121 to 177 C).
 2.
 
 Apply the coating at a rate of at least 1/3 gallon per square yard (1.5 L/m²) of surface.
 
 3.
 
 While the asphalt is hot enough to penetrate the fabric, lay the fabric according to the following:
 
 a. Surfaces Wider than Normal Fabric Strip. For the first strip, lay a half-width [normally 18 inches (0.5
 m) wide] strip of fabric. For the second strip use a full-width strip of fabric, and lap the entire width of the first
 strip. Lap each succeeding strip 2 inches (50 mm) more than half its full width. Lap the fabric strips in the direction
 of water flow.
 b. Surfaces with Same Width as Fabric Strip. For the first strip, lay a full-width strip. For the second
 strip, lay another full-width strip, covering the first.
 Lay each strip without wrinkles, folds, or pockets. Thoroughly coat the strip with asphalt for the full width
 of the lap before laying the succeeding strip. Each application shall entirely conceal the texture of the fabric.
 4.
 5.
 (m²).
 
 Apply a final coat of asphalt to provide a thorough covering for the fabric.
 For all three coats, use a total of at least 1 gallon (5 L) of asphalt waterproofing material per square yard
 
 Lap ends of fabric strips at least 12 inches (0.3 m), and stagger the end joints.
 F. Type E Waterproofing. This type of waterproofing consists of a cold applied liquid membrane waterproofing
 material conforming to 702.08. Apply the coating when the air temperature is 40 ºF (4ºC) or above, on a clean and
 dry surface, at a rate of 20 to 30 square feet per gallon (0.49 to 0.74 m²/L) to achieve a total thickness of 55 to 65
 mils (1375 to 1625 μm). Cover after cured according to the manufacturer’s recommendation and within 45 days of
 application.
 G. Type 2 Membrane Waterproofing. This type of waterproofing consists of a rubberized asphalt and peel-andstick waterproofing membrane 711.25. Follow manufacturer’s written recommendations for application of this
 product, which shall be provided to the project. After installing the primer coat, if required, remove the membrane’s
 release liner and place the adhesive side on the prepared concrete surface. Lay the membrane smooth and free of
 wrinkles. Lap joints in membranes by at least 1 inch (25 mm). Store membrane materials indoors at temperatures
 not to exceed 120 F (49 C).
 For precast concrete three- and four-sided structures, install Type 2 membrane on the exterior vertical and
 exterior top horizontal surfaces.
 
 H. Type 3 Membrane Waterproofing. This type of waterproofing consists of a primer coat conforming to
 705.04 and a waterproofing membrane consisting of a high density asphalt mastic between two layers of polymeric
 fabric conforming to 711.29. The application of this product shall follow the manufacturer’s written
 recommendations, which shall be provided to the project.
 Keep membrane and primer materials dry before installation.
 Heat the membrane primer in an oil primer heated, double-jacket kettle. Use a kettle that is clean and free of
 other materials with any obvious buildup scraped out. The Contractor may use a single-jacket kettle if the primer
 is capable of being heated in direct fire to the application temperature. Heat primers within the manufacturer’s
 recommended temperatures.
 On bridges with curbs, apply the primer and membrane 3 inches (75 mm) up the curb face. On prestressed box
 beam bridges with no approach slab, apply the primer and membrane 6 inches (150 mm) over the ends of the beams.
 On prestressed and slab bridges with approach slabs, apply the primer 2 feet (600 mm) out onto the approach slab.
 If the plans require a Type 3 membrane on the top exterior surface of precast concrete three- or four-sided
 structures, apply the primer and membrane to overlay the vertical exterior sides of the structure by 12 inches
 (300 mm).
 Apply primer no further than 5 feet (1.5 m) in front of the membrane using a squeegee to fill all voids and
 imperfections. Apply membrane from the low to the high side of the surface. Apply an extra bead of primer at the
 edge of the membrane. Lap joints in membranes by at least 3 inches (75 mm). After installing the membrane over
 the entire surface, seal joints in the membrane by applying primer and smoothing with a V-squeegee. If asphalt
 pavement is to be placed directly over the water proofing membrane, first apply tack coat as specified in 407
 without damaging the membrane.
 512.09
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Waterproofing, of the type specified, by the
 number of square yards (square meters) or on a lump sum basis.
 The Department will measure sealing of concrete surfaces by the number of square yards (square meters) of
 coated area projected to a two-dimensional surface.
 The Department will measure the removal of existing coatings from concrete surfaces in square yards (square
 meters) removed.
 The Department will measure the sealing of concrete bridge decks with HMWM resin and treating concrete
 bridge decks with SRS as the actual area in square yards (square meters ) of surfaces treated.
 The Department will measure the actual length in linear feet (meters) of crack repaired by epoxy injection.
 512.10
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 The Department will consider the cost for the obtaining and repairing the two cores used by the Engineer to
 determine the extent of the epoxy penetration as incidental to the work of repairing the concrete by epoxy injection.
 The Department will consider the removal of dust, dirt, oil, wax, curing compounds, efflorescence, laitance, and
 other foreign materials as incidental to the surface preparation of the concrete surfaces to be sealed. When the
 surface to be sealed contains an existing coating, the Department will consider all materials, equipment and labor
 to remove the existing coating as incidental to the removal of existing coatings.
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 512
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Sealing of concrete surfaces
 
 512
 512
 512
 
 Sealing of concrete surfaces(non-epoxy)
 Sealing of concrete surfaces(epoxy urethane)
 Sealing of concrete bridge decks with HMWM resin
 
 512
 512
 512
 512
 512
 512
 512
 512
 512
 
 Square yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square yard
 (Square Meter)
 Foot
 (Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 or Lump Sum
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter),
 or Lump Sum
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter),
 or Lump Sum
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter),
 or Lump Sum
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter),
 or Lump Sum
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Treating concrete bridge decks with SRS
 Treating concrete bridge decks with Gravity-Fed Resin
 Concrete repair by epoxy injection
 Type A Waterproofing
 Type B Waterproofing
 Type E Waterproofing
 Type 2 Waterproofing
 Type 3 Waterproofing
 Removal of Existing Coatings from Concrete Surfaces
 
 ITEM 513 STRUCTURAL STEEL MEMBERS
 513.01
 513.02
 513.03
 513.04
 513.05
 513.06
 513.07
 513.08
 513.09
 513.10
 513.11
 513.12
 513.13
 513.14
 513.15
 513.16
 513.17
 513.18
 513.19
 513.20
 513.21
 513.22
 513.23
 513.24
 513.25
 513.26
 513.27
 513.28
 513.29
 513.30
 
 Description
 Fabricator Approval Procedure
 Levels of Fabricator Qualification
 General
 Fabricator Documentation Responsibility
 Shop Drawings
 Levels 1 through 6, Prefabrication Meeting
 Materials
 Material Control
 Care of Material
 Workmanship and Straightening
 Finish
 Stiffeners
 Fillers
 Horizontally Curved Beams and Girders
 Joints and Splices
 Pin Holes
 Pins and Rollers
 Holes for High-Strength and Bearing Bolts
 High-Strength Steel Bolts, Nuts, and Washers
 Welding
 Stud Shear Connectors
 Threads for Bolts and Pins
 Shop Assembly
 Nondestructive Testing
 Shipping, Storage, and Erection
 Shop Coating
 Cleaning ASTM A 709/A 709M, Grade 50W (345W) Steel
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 513.01
 Description. This work consists of preparing shop drawings, furnishing and fabricating structural
 steel members, nondestructive testing, fabricator performed quality control, documentation, cleaning, shop coating,
 and erecting structural steel and other structural metals. Prepare shop drawings and erect structural steel according
 to Item 501 and the additional requirements below. Shop painting shall conform to Item 514. The work also includes
 any work to move existing steel structures to the plan location, making necessary repairs and alterations, and
 connecting or joining new and old construction.
 The terms “main,” “secondary,” or “detail,” as referred to in Item 513, are defined as follows: “main” refers to
 material, members, and fasteners that are primarily stressed by live load and structure weight; “secondary” refers
 to material, members, and fasteners that do not directly support live load or main members; “detail” refers to
 essential non-structural material, members, and fasteners.
 513.02
 Fabricator Approval Procedure. Select fabricators that are listed by the Department before the
 Contract letting date as evaluated by the Office of Materials Management and prequalified according to Supplement
 1078.
 The Office of Materials Management may accept subletting of processes that require specialized machinery or
 knowledge. Submit written requests for subletting to the Office of Materials Management. The Office of Materials
 Management will determine if the process is uncommon and will evaluate the qualifications of the proposed sublet
 fabricator. The fabricator’s quality control staff shall witness and perform quality control of the sublet work.
 
 513.03
 Levels of Fabricator Qualification. There are eight levels of fabricator qualification. The Office of
 Materials Management will classify each fabricator at the highest level of fabrication it is qualified to perform.
 Level
 SF
 
 UF
 
 1
 
 2
 
 3
 
 4
 5
 
 6
 
 Description of Capabilities
 Standard fabricated members described and paid for as Item 516, 517, and 518 and detailed
 by standard bridge drawings. Material and fabrication acceptance by certification with
 random Department audits of the work and documentation.
 Unique fabricated members not covered by standard bridge drawings and not designed to
 carry tension live load. Examples include curb plates, bearings, expansion joints, railings,
 catwalk, inspection access, special drainage, or other products. Examples also include
 retrofit cross frames, retrofit gusset plates, retrofit lateral bracing, or other miscellaneous
 structural members not included in Levels 1 through 6. Quality assurance of shop drawings,
 material test reports, and inspection according to Supplement 1078.
 Single span, straight, rolled beam bridges without stiffeners, Secondary and Detail materials
 designed to carry tension live loads such as retrofit moment plates. Case II Loading. Quality
 assurance of shop drawings, material test reports, and inspection according to Supplement
 1078.
 Multiple span, straight, rolled beam bridges without stiffeners. Case II loading. Quality
 assurance of shop drawings, material test reports, and inspection according to Supplement
 1078.
 Single or multiple span, straight, dog legged, or curved, rolled beam bridges including
 stiffeners. Case I or II Loading. Quality assurance of shop drawings, material test reports,
 and inspection according to Supplement 1078.
 Straight or bent welded plate girder bridges. Case I or II loading. Quality assurance of shop
 drawings, material test reports, and inspection according to Supplement 1078.
 Straight, curved, haunched, or tapered welded plate girder bridges. Case I or II loading.
 Quality assurance of shop drawings, material test reports, and inspection according to
 Supplement 1078.
 Truss bridges, fracture critical bridges, fracture critical members, or fracture critical
 components new or retrofitted. Case I or II loading. Quality assurance of shop drawings,
 material test reports, and inspection according to Supplement 1078.
 
 513.04
 General.
 Perform all steel fabrication including the shop application of coatings in a prequalified structural steel
 fabricating shop consisting of adequately sized permanent buildings with equipment, heat and light, and
 experienced personnel to satisfactorily perform all necessary operations. Perform flame cutting, air carbon-arc
 gouging, cambering, welding, cleaning, and painting inside permanent buildings that are maintained at the required
 environmental conditions. The fabricator may perform shop assembly of large pieces for fit-up of field connections
 outdoors. These provisions will not apply to steel requiring fabrication at the bridge site in the repair, alteration or
 extension of an existing structure.
 If repairing, extending, or altering existing structures, take measurements of the existing structure as required to
 accurately join old and new work. Include these measurements on shop drawings. Measurements shown on the
 plans that indicate the extent and nature of repair, alterations or extension shall not relieve the Contractor of this
 responsibility.
 At least two weeks before starting shop fabrication, the fabricator shall notify the Office of Materials
 Management and furnish a proposed fabrication schedule for the work.
 Unless the Office of Materials Management provides a written waiver of a hold or witness point inspection, the
 fabricator shall store members completed during the inspector’s absence in a manner that allows the inspector to
 completely and safely inspect the finished work.
 The fabricator shall not ship fabricated members performed under Item 513, UF Level or Levels 1 through 6
 from the shop without prior hold point inspections unless the Office of Materials Management waives the
 
 inspection. The Office of Materials Management will not conduct the scheduled final inspection until the fabricator
 completes and inspects with documentation, final fabrication and shop coatings and the Contractor documents
 approval of shop drawings and material test reports.
 The Office of Materials Management will not conduct a final fabrication inspection of SF Level members.
 Instead, the Office of Materials Management will conduct random inspections during the fabricator’s work.
 The fabricator shall provide an office with the following attributes:
 A. A minimum floor area of 120 square feet (11 m²).
 B. A minimum ceiling height of 7 feet (2.1 m).
 C. Adequate working and storage facilities with one locking file cabinet for the exclusive use of the Department’s
 inspector, lighting, and electrical outlets.
 D. Provisions for heating to a minimum temperature of 68 F (20 C) and adequately ventilated.
 E. A telephone with direct access to an outside trunk line for the exclusive use of the inspector.
 If using steel stamps for identification purposes, use the “mini-stress” or “stressless” type.
 513.05
 Fabricator Documentation Responsibility. The fabricator shall keep and maintain documentation
 records as specified in Supplement 1078.
 At the Department’s request, provide access to the above documents for audit, inspection, and copying.
 513.06
 
 Shop Drawing. Provide shop drawings conforming to 501.04 and the following requirements:
 
 Include details, dimensions, size of materials, match mark diagrams for field connections, a diagram identifying,
 by some unique mark, each area of a welded splice to be covered by a single radiograph, and other information
 necessary for the complete fabrication and erection of the metal work.
 For multiple span beam and girder bridges, include an overall layout with dimensions showing the relative
 unloaded vertical and horizontal position of beam or girder segments with respect to a full length base or work line.
 Account for camber and horizontal curvature of the beams or girders, and the effect of deck surface profile in this
 layout. Show required offsets for vertical and horizontal curvature at approximately each one-fourth of span length,
 at field splices, and at bearing points. For horizontally curved members, show the offset to a baseline strung from
 end to end of the member, every 10 feet (3 m) of length.
 Identify the grade (ASTM designation), CVN, fracture critical, or any special testing requirements for each piece
 of steel. Identify pieces made of different grades of steel with different assembling or erecting marks, even if the
 pieces have identical dimensions and detail.
 Identify the welding procedure by the WPS number at each joint and the location and identification numbers of
 all radiograph tests.
 Detail structural steel to fit under full steel dead load and prior to deck placement with the webs of primary
 members plumb.
 513.07
 Levels 1 through 6, Prefabrication Meeting. After providing the notice and schedule required by
 513.04 and at least 3 days after the Department receives shop drawings, conduct a prefabrication meeting at the
 fabricator’s facilities, or another location agreed to by all parties. The fabricator and its quality control specialists
 for fabrication and painting, the inspector, and the Contractor, or its designated representative, shall attend the
 meeting. The purpose of this meeting is to review any fabrication issues, including information on shop drawings,
 inspection, hold or witness points, unique fabrication items, special processes, and both the fabrication and project
 schedule. The fabrication quality control specialist shall conduct the meeting and record and distribute meeting
 minutes that document all issues discussed. Fabrication may begin after the prefabrication meeting is complete.
 513.08
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to 501.06.
 
 513.09
 Material Control. Identify and mark each piece of steel according to the shop drawings and the
 following requirements.
 
 Immediately after removing steel that is furnished in tagged lifts or bundles, mark the individual pieces of steel
 with the ASTM A 6/A 6M specification identification color code and heat number.
 The fabricator may furnish material from stock that is marked with the heat number and mill test report.
 If separated from the full-size piece furnished by the supplier, mark excess material placed in stock for later use
 with the heat number and, if provided, with the ASTM A 6/A 6M specification identification color code.
 During fabrication, clearly and legibly mark the specification identification color code and heat number on each
 piece of steel.
 Before cutting steel into smaller size pieces, clearly and legibly mark each smaller size piece with the ASTM A
 6/A 6M specification identification color code and heat number.
 Unless otherwise approved by the inspector, mark pieces of steel that will be subject to fabricating operations
 such as blast cleaning, galvanizing, heating for forming, or other operations that may obliterate paint color code
 and heat number markings with steel stamps or with a substantial tag firmly attached to the piece of steel. At
 locations acceptable to the Office of Materials Management, stamp the heat numbers into main material tested for
 CVN.
 Issue cutting instructions by cross-referencing the assembly marks shown on the shop drawings with the
 corresponding item covered on the mill purchase order. The fabricator’s system of assembly-marking individual
 pieces of steel and issuing cutting instructions shall provide a direct reference to the appropriate mill test report.
 The fabrication quality control specialist shall provide the Engineer with a letter documenting that the fabricator
 performed material control according to this specification.
 513.10
 Care of Material. Store structural material at the shop or field above the ground, upon platforms,
 skids, or other supports. Use straight structural steel with clean and dry surfaces before working it in the shop.
 Before using, clean all rusted or corroded material. Only use this material if it conforms to ASTM A 6/A 6M
 thickness tolerances after cleaning.
 513.11
 Workmanship and Straightening. If necessary to straighten rolled material, use methods that will
 not damage the member. If carefully planned and supervised, apply localized heat for straightening. Do not allow
 the temperature of the heated area to exceed 1150 F (620 C) as controlled by pyrometric stick or thermometers.
 Do not quench to accelerate cooling. Do not kink or offset the material if using mechanic or hydraulic force to
 camber or strengthen material. Do not cold bend fracture critical materials.
 Camber rolled beams as shown on the plans in the prequalified fabricating shop using heat or hydraulic jacks.
 Control heating as specified above and follow a formal shop heating procedure. Camber plate girders by trimming
 web plates before assembly. During fabrication, shipping, and erection, support and handle members to maintain
 camber.
 Fabricate structural steel to within the dimensional tolerances specified by Articles 3.5 of the AASHTO/AWS
 Bridge Welding Code, with the following modifications:
 A. Waviness, the deviation of the top or bottom surface of a flange from a straight line or plan curvature, shall
 not exceed 1/8 inch (3 mm) when the number of waves in a 10-foot (3 m) length is four or less, or 1/16 inch (1.6
 mm) when more than four, but sharp kinks or bends shall be cause for rejection.
 B. For the measurement of camber during lay down, position the bearing points both horizontally and vertically
 to plan dimensions 1/8 inch (3 mm).
 C. Measure camber as the vertical offset between the steel and the common base line extending from abutment
 bearing to abutment bearing. The maximum camber tolerance at mid-span shall be 0 inch (0 mm) and the greater
 of +3/4 inch (+19 mm) or the designed haunch height. Prorate the maximum camber tolerance at mid-span between
 the center of the span and each adjacent bearing to provide a smooth unbroken curve.
 D. Permissible difference in horizontal curvature of top and bottom flange at any point on centerline of member,
 when measured as specified in 3.5.1.4, shall not exceed 3/8 inch (10 mm)
 
 513.12
 Finish. Plane sheared edges of all main material to a minimum depth of 1/4 inch (6 mm) except for
 ASTM A 709/A 709M, Grade 36 (250) steel having a thickness of 5/8 inch (16 mm) or less. Remove fins, tears,
 slivers, and burred or sharp edges from steel members by grinding. If these conditions appear during the blasting
 operation, re-grind and re-blast the steel members to the required surface profile.
 The fabricator may flame cut structural steel. Provide a smooth surface, free from cracks and notches, and use a
 mechanical guide to provide an accurate profile. Roll and flame cut surfaces according to the AASHTO/AWS
 Bridge Welding Code, as amended by Supplement 1011.
 Provide a surface finish for bearing and base plates and other bearing surfaces that contact each other or concrete
 according to ANSI B46.1, Surface Roughness, Waviness and Lay, Part I.
 ANSI B46.1
 Steel slabs
 Heavy plates in contact in shoes to be welded
 Milled ends of compression members, milled or ground ends of
 stiffeners and fillers
 Bridge rollers and rockers
 Pins and pin holes
 Sliding bearings
 
 2000 mil
 1000 mil
 
 (50.0 µm)
 (25.0 µm)
 
 500 mil
 
 (12.5 µm)
 
 250 mil
 125 mil
 125 mil
 
 (6.4 µm)
 (3.2 µm)
 (3.2 µm)
 
 513.13
 Stiffeners. Place the bearing end of bearing stiffeners flush and square with the web and in a manner
 so at least 75 percent of the area of the bearing end is in contact with the inner surface of the flange. The other end
 of the bearing stiffener shall have a tight fit as defined below. Position bearing stiffeners to be vertical after erection.
 Weld intermediate stiffeners that are not used in pairs to the compression flange, and provide a tight fit for the
 tension flange. Weld intermediate stiffeners connected to cross frame angles to the top and bottom flange.
 A tight fit is defined as the contact between the stiffener and flange over some portion of the end of the stiffener
 and having no gap greater than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm).
 Clip stiffeners 2 1/2 inches (65 mm) along the web and 1 inch (25 mm) along the flange to clear flange-web
 welds and fillet or rolled shapes.
 When attaching stiffeners to the web and flanges, do not extend welds to the edge of the stiffeners or into the
 clip area. Terminate these welds 1/4 ±1/8 inch at the flange connections and 1/2 ±1/4 inch at the web connection.
 513.14
 Fillers. Detail the shop drawings to show fill plates that compensate for the misalignment of abutting
 elements due to differences in thickness of flanges and webs at the splice locations. Detail the fill plates to the
 nearest 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) in thickness, but not less than 1/8 inch (3 mm) thick. However, in the final shop
 assembly, furnish fills of sufficient thickness to compensate for misalignment of abutting elements due to standard
 rolling mill tolerances or due to differences in thicknesses of flanges and webs at the splice location. The actual
 fills used shall compensate for differences in total thickness or relative positions of more than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm)
 but with no fills less than 1/8 inch (3 mm) thick. Provide fill plates in bolted joints that are flush with the perimeter
 of the splice plates.
 513.15
 Horizontally Curved Beams and Girders. If members are to be heat curved, submit the detailed
 procedure, including necessary calculations, to the Office of Materials Management. Obtain the Office of Materials
 Management’s acceptance of the procedure before starting this work.
 Curve beams and girders using heat according to AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges, except
 that the fabricator may cut flanges for girders to obtain the required alignment.
 513.16
 Joints and Splices. In bolted construction where tension or flexural members are spliced, maintain a
 clearance of not more than 1/4 inch (6 mm) between the abutting surfaces of spliced members. For spliced
 compression members, face the abutting surfaces to provide a uniform bearing when properly aligned and
 completely bolted.
 In welded construction, prepare abutting surfaces as shown on the shop drawings. Verify the preparation for field
 welded butt joints in main members by a complete shop assembly according to 513.24.
 
 513.17
 Pin Holes. Bore pin holes after the member is fabricated and true to size, at right angles to the axis
 of the member and parallel to each other. Pin holes for up to 5-inch (127 mm) diameter pins shall not exceed the
 pin diameter by more than 0.020 inch (0.51 mm) and pin holes for larger pins shall not exceed the pin diameter by
 more than 0.031 inch (0.79 mm).
 513.18
 Pins and Rollers. Use pins and rollers made from cold rolled steel, accurately turned to size, straight
 and smooth, and entirely free from flaws. Pins over 9 inches (230 mm) in diameter shall be annealed. In pins larger
 than 9 inches (230 mm) in diameter, bore a hole not less than 2 inches (50 mm) in diameter the full length of the
 axis. Furnish one pilot and one driving nut for each size of pin.
 513.19
 Holes for High-Strength Bolts and Bearing Bolts. Provide cylindrical holes, perpendicular to the
 member, clean cut, and free of ragged edges. Remove burrs by countersinking not more than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm)
 or by grinding. Provide finished holes with a diameter not larger than the nominal diameter of the bolt plus 1/16
 inch (1.6 mm). The hole diameter shall not vary by more than 1/32 inch (0.8 mm) from a true circle for 85 percent
 of the holes in a contiguous group, and not more than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) for the remainder.
 Punch holes using a die with a diameter not exceeding that of the punch by more than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm). Ream
 and drill holes using twist drills and twist reamers. Wherever possible, direct the reamer by mechanical means.
 Sub-drill holes 3/16 inch (5 mm) less in diameter than the nominal diameter of the bolt, and ream the holes to
 size with the parts assembled, except:
 A. The fabricator may sub-punch main material conforming to ASTM A 709/A 709M, Grade 36 (250) steel that
 is less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) thick, and Grade 50 (345) or 50W (345W) steel that is less than 5/8 inch (16 mm)
 thick.
 B. The fabricator may drill full-size holes in materials assembled and adequately clamped together.
 C. The fabricator may punch full-size holes in secondary and detail material conforming to ASTM A 709/A
 709M, Grade 36 (250) steel that is less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) thick, and Grade 50 (345) or 50W (345W) steel that
 is less than 5/8 inch (16 mm) thick.
 D. The fabricator may make assemblies such as floor beams connected to girders and rolled beam spans connected
 by diaphragms through steel templates.
 Place all sub-punched or sub-drilled holes with sufficient accuracy such that after assembling (before reaming)
 a cylindrical pin 1/8 inch (3 mm) smaller than the nominal size of the punched hole may be entered perpendicular
 to the face of the member without drifting in not less than 75 percent of the contiguous holes in the same plane. All
 holes shall allow a pin 3/16 inch (5 mm) smaller than the nominal size of the punched holes to be inserted in the
 above manner.
 Do not plug located holes without written approval from the Office of Materials Management.
 Provide steel templates with hardened bushings in holes that are accurately located in relation to the centerline
 of the connection as inscribed on the template. The fabricator is not required to use hardened bushings when using
 a roto-broach, shell drill, or other similar tool, to make the holes.
 Ream and drill holes through multiple piles only if the plies of the joint are held tightly together with bolts or
 clamps and if sub-punched or sub-drilled, only if the joint is pinned. Disassemble and clean the piles of burrs and
 shavings before final assembly.
 The Contractor may drill or punch bolt holes full sized in unassembled pieces or connections, including templates
 for use with matching sub-sized and reamed holes, using suitable numerically controlled (N/C) drilling or punching
 equipment. If using N/C drilling or punching equipment, demonstrate the accuracy of the drilling or punching
 procedure to the inspector according to 513.24.
 After holes are reamed or drilled full size, 85 percent of the holes in any contiguous groups shall have no offset
 greater than 1/32 inch (0.8 mm) between adjacent plies. The remainder of the holes shall not be offset more than
 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) between adjacent plies.
 
 If requested in writing, the Office of Materials Management may consider other methods of preparing holes for
 high-strength bolts.
 513.20
 High-Strength Steel Bolts, Nuts, and Washers. Provide high-strength steel bolts, nuts, and washers
 conforming for all bolted connections including erection bolts for cross frames and lateral bracing to 711.09.
 A. General. Provide the Engineer with access to the work for observing the installation and the tightening and
 checking of the bolts.
 Determine the required bolt length by adding the value from Table 513.20-1 to the grip. The table values
 include an allowance for manufacturing tolerances and provide a bolt length for threads to protrude through the
 nut. Add 5/32 inch (4 mm) for each hardened flat washer used and 5/16 inch (8 mm) for each beveled washer used.
 Adjust the length, as determined by Table 513.20-1, to the next longer 1/4 inch (6 mm); when installed, the end of
 the bolt shall be flush with or project several thread lengths outside the face of the nut.
 TABLE 513.20-1
 To determine required bolt length, add to grip[1] (inches)
 Bolt Size (inches)
 1/2
 11/16
 5/8
 7/8
 3/4
 1
 7/8
 1 1/8
 1
 1 1/4
 1 1/8
 1 1/2
 1 1/4
 1 5/8
 1 3/8
 1 3/4
 1 1/2
 1 7/8
 [1]Total thickness of all connected material excluding washers.
 TABLE 513.20-1M
 To determine required bolt length, add to grip[1] (mm)
 Bolt Size (mm)
 M16
 24
 M20
 28
 M22
 31
 M24
 35
 M27
 38
 M30
 41
 M36
 47
 [1]Total thickness of all connected material excluding washers.
 Use bolts, nuts, and washers with a residual coating of lubricant when received. Bolts, nuts, and washers
 without their original lubrication shall not be used.
 B. Preparation. With the exception of metalizing, galvanizing, and both organic zinc and inorganic zinc primers,
 remove coatings from joint surfaces, including surfaces adjacent to the bolt heads, nuts, and washers. Remove
 lacquer, dirt, oil, loose scale, rust, burrs, pits, and other substances or defects that prevent solid seating of the parts
 or interfere with the development of complete frictional contact. Do not place gaskets or other yielding material
 between joint surfaces.
 C. Installation. For each bolt, place a hardened washer under the element (nut or bolt head) turned in tightening.
 If an outer face of the bolted parts has a slope of more than 1:20 with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis, use
 a smooth beveled washer to compensate for the lack of parallelism.
 If necessary, the Contractor may clip washers, at one location, not closer than seven-eighths of the bolt
 diameter from the center of the washer.
 During final assembly of the parts to be bolted, first install a sufficient number of drift pins to provide and
 maintain accurate alignment of holes and parts, then a sufficient number of bolts tightened to a snug tight condition
 
 to bring all the parts of the joint into complete contact. Replace any bolts that were installed before installing drift
 pins. Before releasing the member from the hoisting equipment, fill half the holes with drift pins and bolts tightened
 to a snug tight condition in at least 50 percent of the holes (preferably, half pins and half bolts) but use at least two
 drift pines in each flange and web of each beam or girder. Install bolts starting at the most rigidly fixed or stiffest
 point and progress toward the free edges.
 Use cylindrical drift pines that are not more than 1/32 inch (0.8 mm) smaller than the hole diameter.
 Bolts are snug tight when an impact wrench begins to impact the nut or when a man applies full effort using
 an ordinary spud wrench.
 Install bolts in the remaining open holes and tighten the bolts to a snug tight fit, after which all bolts shall be
 tightened completely by the turn-of-nut method.
 Where difficulty is experienced with the fit of the connection and the bolts are used to draw the elements into
 contact, check all bolts in the affected portion of the connection for a sustained snug tight condition.
 Replace drift pins with completely tightened bolts only after all the remaining holes are filled with completely
 tightened bolts.
 Do not field ream holes drilled full size during fabrication.
 After bolts are snug tight, the wrench operator shall match-mark the outer face of the nut with the flush or
 protruding portion of the bolt using a crayon or paint. The Engineer will use the match-marks to determine the
 relative rotation between the bolt and nut during final tightening using the turn-of-the-nut method.
 Commence tightening at the most rigidly fixed or stiffest point and progress toward the free edges, both in the
 initial snugging up and in the final tightening. If required because of wrench operation clearances, tightening may
 be done by turning the bolt. If used, provide impact wrenches of adequate capacity to perform the required
 tightening each bolt in approximately 10 seconds.
 Do not reuse galvanized A 325 bolts. Re-tightening previously tightened bolts that became loose by tightening
 adjacent bolts is not reuse.
 Follow the additional bolting requirements in 513.26.
 D. Bolt Tension. When all bolts in the joint are tight, the minimum bolt tension for each bolt size is shown in
 Table 513.20-2.
 TABLE 513.20-2
 Bolt Tension[1] (kips), minimum A 325
 Bolt Size (inches)
 1/2
 12
 5/8
 19
 3/4
 28
 7/8
 39
 1
 51
 1 1/8
 56
 1 1/4
 71
 1 3/8
 85
 1 1/2
 103
 [1]Equal to 70 percent of specified minimum tensile strengths of bolts, rounded off to the nearest kip.
 
 TABLE 513.20-2M
 Bolt Tension[1] (kN), minimum A 325M
 Bolt Size (mm)
 M16
 91
 M20
 142
 M22
 176
 M24
 206
 M27
 267
 M30
 327
 M36
 475
 [1]Equal to 70 percent of specified minimum tensile strengths of bolts, rounded off to the nearest kN.
 TABLE 513.20-3 NUT ROTATION FROM SNUG TIGHT CONDITION
 Disposition of Outer Faces of Bolted Parts
 Bolt Length
 (as measured from underside Both faces One face normal to bolt axis and Both faces sloped not more than
 of head to extreme end of
 normal to other face sloped not more than 1:20 from normal to bolt axis
 point)
 bolt axis 1:20 (bevel washer not used)
 (bevel washer not used)
 Up to and including 4
 1/3 turn
 1/2 turn
 2/3 turn
 diameters
 Over 4 diameters but not
 1/2 turn
 2/3 turn
 5/6 turn
 exceeding 8 diameters
 Over 8 diameters but not
 2/3 turn
 5/6 turn
 1 turn
 exceeding 12 diameters
 Attain the bolt tension specified in Table 513.20-2 by tightening all bolts, the applicable amount of nut rotation
 specified in Table 513.20-3 by the turn-of-nut method.
 Nut rotation is relative to bolt, regardless of the element (nut or bolt) being turned. Tighten bolts requiring 1/2
 turn and less within ±30 degrees and tighten bolts requiring 2/3 turn and more within ±45 degrees.
 E. Inspection.
 1. The Engineer will inspect the first completed connection of each bridge according to 513.20.E.2 below
 and subsequent connections the Engineer deems necessary. Thereafter, where the Engineer has approved the joint
 compactness and snug-tight condition of bolts prior to bolt tightening by the turn-of-nut method, the bolt tension
 as required in Table 513.20-2 shall be considered as attained if the amount of nut rotation specified by Table 513.203 is verified by the required match-marking.
 2. Furnish and use manual torque wrenches to inspect bolts. Perform test to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
 Calibrate the inspection torque wrenches at least once each workday using a device, approved by the Engineer, and
 capable of indicating bolt tension. Use three bolts, placed and tensioned individually, representative of the grade,
 size, length, and condition used in the structure to determine the job inspection torque according to 513.20.E.3.
 Place a washer under the part being turned.
 3. Tighten each of the three representative bolts, using any convenient manner, to the tension shown in Table
 513.20-2. Then, using the inspection wrench, apply a slow steady pull to the tightened bolt and measure the torque
 required to turn the nut or head 5 degrees, approximately 1 inch (25 mm) at a 12-inch (300 mm) radius in the
 tightening direction. Use the average torque measured in the tensioning of the three bolts as the job inspection
 torque.
 4. With the Engineer present, randomly select for inspection two bolts or 10 percent of the bolts, whichever
 is greater, from each connection represented by the 3-bolt sample described in 513.20.E.2. Using the inspection
 wrench, apply the job inspection torque in the tightening direction. The Engineer will accept the connection if the
 job inspection torque does not turn the nut or bolt head. If the job inspection torque turns a nut or bolt head, apply
 the job inspection torque to all the bolts in the connection and reinspect the connection as described above.
 
 F. Calibration Devices. The manufacturer of the calibration device or a qualified testing laboratory shall
 periodically examine each calibration device at least once each year and other times if requested by the Engineer.
 After calibration, the manufacturer or testing laboratory shall certify that each calibration device accurately
 indicates the actual bolt tension.
 513.21
 Welding. Perform welding by the shielded metal-arc, submerged arc, flux cored arc, or stud welding
 process. Only shielded metal arc (stick) welding is prequalified. All other welding processes require testing and
 approval by the Office of Materials Management. Consideration will be given to other methods of metal-arc
 welding if a written request is submitted to the Office of Materials Management.
 In other respects, the AASHTO/AWS Bridge Welding Code, as amended by Supplement 1011, shall govern the
 work.
 Post copies of the shop welding procedures at each welding location.
 Weld only fracture critical and main members when the fabrication quality control specialist and inspectors are
 physically at the facility. The fabricator shall not perform fracture critical welding without prior scheduling with
 the fabrication quality control specialist and the inspector. The fabrication quality control specialist shall witness
 the minimum percentages specified in Supplement 1078 and shall check all welding processes.
 For non-fracture critical welds, the fabrication quality control specialist shall perform frequent inspections, and
 check all welding processes.
 513.22
 Stud Shear Connectors. Perform stud welding according to the AASHTO/AWS Bridge Welding
 Code, as amended by Supplement 1011, and this subsection.
 In addition to the stud bend tests of Article 7.6.6.1 of the AASHTO/AWS Bridge Welding Code, perform bend
 tests of stud shear connectors at the start of each workday, when welding has been interrupted for an hour or more,
 when changing grounds, when changing weld settings, and when changing cable loop due to arc blow. Do not weld
 more than 500 studs without the welds being field bend tested in accordance with the specified procedure. The
 Contractor may leave in the bent position tested studs that show no sign of failure, as determined by the Engineer.
 Weld stud shear connectors to the top flanges of beams or girders after the steel has been erected and suitable
 scaffolding or deck forming has been provided. Studs may be welded to beam or girder webs, end dams, bearing
 plates, or to other secondary members and detail material in the shop. For galvanized structures with welded shear
 connectors, remove the galvanic coating by grinding at each connector prior to welding.
 513.23
 Threads for Bolts and Pins. Threads for pins shall conform to the Unified Standard Series ANSI
 B1.1-UNC (ANSI B1.13M) Class 2A (6g) for external threads and Class 2B (6H) for internal threads, except that
 pin ends having a diameter of 1 3/8 inches (35 mm) or more shall be threaded 6 threads to the inch (4.23
 mm/thread).
 513.24
 Shop Assembly. Remove paint, grease, oil, rust, loose mill scale, and protruding edges or burrs from
 all contact surfaces. Unless waived by the Office of Materials Management, do not assemble and weld flanges and
 webs to form girders or other similar members and do not accomplish fabrication or assembly that interferes with
 the repair of a butt weld until the fabrication quality control specialist for the A rated fabricators or the inspector
 for B and C rated fabricators examines and approves radiographs of all butt welds in the component parts.
 Perform fit-up work with the members assembled in unloaded positions as shown on the shop drawing layout
 required by 513.06. During shop assembly, adequately support members, especially at joints, to prevent
 misalignment or deflection and designate supports that prevent settlement during the fit-up, reaming or drilling of
 connections. The fabrication quality control specialist shall maintain records of the actual horizontal and vertical
 dimensions and relative positions of each assembly for each offset required by 513.06 and, upon request, furnish a
 copy to the inspector. Reposition members that become a part of two assemblies for the second assembly to the
 dimensions recorded for the first assembly.
 Using steel stamps, match-mark all connecting parts assembled in the shop for the purpose of reaming or drilling
 of holes for field connections or for fit-up of field welded connections before disassembly. Punch mark bearing
 centerlines.
 
 Continuous beam and plate girders, including sections adjacent to hinged, pin connected, sliding, or rocker
 bearing joints, shall have at least three adjacent segments assembled, and holes reamed or drilled while assembled.
 Check the fit-up of field welded connections by similar shop assembly.
 Shop assemble longitudinal or transverse beams and girders that are either framed or connected by diaphragms
 and floor beams to check fit-up of connections to be field welded, or to ream or drill holes for bolted connections.
 Assemble trusses in lengths of at least three abutting panels before drilling or reaming field connections.
 Include deck plates in the final shop assembly of bridges that involve railroad deck plates, even if welding of
 these deck plates takes place in the field.
 If the fabricator elects to use numerically controlled drilling or punching, the required assembly shall be
 performed as specified above. The Office of Materials Management will consider the Contractor’s written request
 to use other methods of checking hole alignment and match marking. If the Office of Materials Management does
 not consider, or disapproves the fabricator’s proposed methods of assembly, perform the work according to 513.19
 and 513.24.
 After fabrication, shop assemble deck expansion devices to check fit-up, straightness, and roadway cross-slope
 changes. Full width assembly is required with phased construction if expansion devices have interlocking fingers
 or have mechanical devices that require exact field alignment.
 The fabricator may fabricate part-width deck segments without the required shop assembly under the following
 conditions:
 A. The plans require a phased construction sequence.
 B. Shop drawings incorporate a lay down, similar to 513.06, defining vertical offset dimensions from a full length
 common baseline to all roadway changes including sidewalks, rounding, crowns, and field splice points of the
 expansion device.
 Secure parts not completely assembled in the shop with temporary bolts to prevent damage in handling and
 shipping. In the shop, bolt field splice plates into final position shift the splice plates laterally with respect to their
 final position so that the ends of the plates are flush with the ends of the member. Without the Office of Materials
 Management’s written acceptance, do not weld or tack-weld to bolted assemblies. Perform authorized welding
 according to 513.21.
 513.25
 Nondestructive Testing. Nondestructive testing shall conform to the AASHTO/AWS Bridge
 Welding Code, as amended by Supplement 1011 and as specified below.
 As the Engineer directs, perform ultrasonic or radiographic inspection of field welded repairs in main members
 for thick scabs, deep kerfs or nicks, and similar gross flaws. Ensure that all examined welds and base metal adjacent
 to a welded joint conform to the quality requirements specified in 513.21. Submit radiographs, field sketches
 showing specific locations, lengths and depths of the repair, and two copies of the radiographic or ultrasonic
 technical reports to the Office of Materials Management for acceptance. Receive the Office of Materials
 Management’s acceptance before performing construction activities making welds inaccessible for repair.
 The Contractor or fabricator shall notify the Department at least 48 hours before performing nondestructive
 testing. Provide this notice even if specific hold or witness point inspections are not required by Supplement 1078.
 The Office of Materials Management has the final authority to accept welds and will resolve controversies
 regarding the interpretation of radiographs, magnetic particle indications, or the acceptability of welds.
 A. Radiographic Inspection of Welds. Before inspection, grind welds smooth. Grind web splices only where
 radiographed, except grind outside fascia surfaces the full length. Inspect the following welds:
 1. The full length of all butt welds in flange material of plate girders or rolled beams. One hundred percent
 of butt welds in back up bars that remain in the structure.
 2. The top and bottom one-third of transverse web splices in plate girders or rolled beams and show any cope
 holes. If an unacceptable weld occurs, radiograph an adjoining 12-inch (300 mm) length of weld not previously
 inspected. If unacceptable flaws are found in this adjoining segment, radiograph the remainder of the weld.
 
 3.
 
 Butt welds in longitudinal stiffeners attached to tension areas of webs.
 
 4.
 
 Twenty-five percent of each longitudinal web splice as selected by the inspector.
 
 5.
 
 Full length of field flange cut repairs.
 
 6.
 
 Other welds specified in the Contract or AASHTO/AWS Bridge Welding Code.
 
 Use a steel stamp to make the radiograph identification mark shown on the shop drawing layout in the area
 marked “Weld Identification” of Figures 6.1A through 6.1D of the AASHTO/AWS Bridge Welding Code in a
 manner to make it visible in the radiograph of the area without resorting to superimposed like markings. Place steel
 stamped identification marks on flange plates so that after girder assembly the marks are on the inside of flange
 and outside the area fastened to the web. Identify films of repaired welds by the letter “R”. Do not place steel
 stamped identification numbers within the weld area. Use superimposed characters to make other required
 markings.
 Use film locations or a technique employed that will show the top and bottom images of the plate edge. Use
 films 4 1/2  17 inches (114  432 mm) where practical and a minimum film size of 4 1/2  10 inches (114  254
 mm).
 Supply a technical report for the RT testing similar to Annex III Form III-5 of the AASHTO/AWS Bridge
 Welding Code, and include the following: Project identification, member piece mark, description of the repairs
 made, and the qualification level of the technician.
 The Department will take ownership of contact films. For main material repairs, provide sketches that clearly
 show specific locations, lengths and depths of field cuts, or damages repaired by field welding.
 B. Magnetic Particle Inspection of Welds. Before magnetic particle inspection (MPI), complete welding
 required to fabricate each beam or girder, correct all visual defects, and clean the weld. If the fabricator’s quality
 control plan is acceptable to the Department and additional processing does not produce a potential for cracking,
 the Department may allow the Contractor to perform MPI before complete welding.
 Inspect welds using the procedure and techniques for the dry powder magnetic-particle examination of welds
 using the prod or the yoke method according to AWS 6.7.6. The prod test equipment shall have a functioning
 ammeter. Provide a prod magnetizing current of 100 amperes per inch (25 mm) of prod spacing but not less than
 400 amperes. Use only aluminum prods.
 Inspect at least 1 foot (0.3 m) for every 10 feet (3 m), or fraction thereof, for each size of weld in the following:
 1.
 
 Flange-to-web welds, including ends of girder after trimming.
 
 2.
 
 Moment plate to flange welds.
 
 3.
 
 Bearing stiffener welds.
 
 4.
 
 Other welds specified in the Contract or AASHTO/AWS Bridge Welding Code.
 
 5.
 
 Field weld repairs as directed by the Engineer.
 
 The inspector or the fabrication quality control specialist will select random test sections. Unless waived by
 the Office of Materials Management, the inspector will observe inspection by C-rated fabricators. Position test
 sections as necessary for the inspection and after considering the safety and convenience to the inspecting
 personnel.
 If a test section contains unacceptable defects, test 5-foot (1.5 m) segments on both sides of the test section,
 or, if less than 5-foot (1.5 m) segments are on both sides of the test section, test the full length of the weld. Retest
 welds requiring repair after repairs are complete.
 MPI will not locate all surface defects of Article 9.21 of the AASHTO/AWS Bridge Welding Code.
 Unacceptable welds have MPI results that indicate defects exceed the above quality standards.
 For each unacceptable defect, the fabricator shall record the piece mark, the location of the defect on the
 member, the defect description, and the proposed repairs.
 
 C. Ultrasonic Testing of Welds. Perform ultrasonic inspection of the following welds:
 1. Complete joint penetration flange-to-web, T, or corner joint welds: 25 percent for non-FCM, 25 percent
 compression or shear FCM, and 100 percent tension FCM.
 2.
 
 Complete penetration butt welds: 100 percent tension FCM and 25 percent compression FCM.
 
 3.
 
 Other welds: as specified in the Contract or AASHTO/AWS Bridge Welding Code.
 
 The fabrication quality control specialist shall provide the Engineer with specified certification, sketches,
 technician reports, and a letter documenting that the Contractor performed nondestructive testing according to this
 specification.
 513.26
 Shipping, Storage, and Erection. Repair or replace, at the discretion of the Office of Materials
 Management, members damaged by improper handling, storing, or erection.
 During transportation, place adequate blocking between members to prevent movement and facilitate unloading.
 Unless reinforced by additional plates, angles, or other material bolted in place, do not use field connection holes
 for tie-down. Band together bearing components.
 Place material stored in the fabricating shop or in the field on skids or blocks to prevent the metal from contacting
 the ground. Place and shore girders and beams in an upright position for shipping, and field and shop storage. Field
 splice plates shall be bolted with temporary bolts, which shall be removed and replaced, when field splice plated
 are placed in their final position or shifted laterally with respect to their final position. Keep material clean and
 properly drained. Install bearing devices and anchorages according to Item 516.
 Thoroughly clean bearing surfaces and surfaces to be in permanent contact before the members are assembled in
 the field.
 Before erecting structural steel, completely bolt up field splices and connections that started before steel erection.
 During erection, the Engineer will allow drifting to draw the parts into position, but do not enlarge the holes or
 distort the metal. Install drift pins and bolts according to 513.20. Fill at least three-fourths of the holes with
 completely tightened bolts in splices and connections subject to construction loads during erection. Complete
 permanent fastening of steel truss tension chord members before removing falsework. Permanently fasten
 compression chord members after the span is released sufficiently from the falsework to bring the compression
 chord joints into full bearing. Properly regulate and maintain elevations of panel points and ends of floor beams
 until the falsework is removed.
 Do not enlarge the holes of splices and connections between segments or elements of main members without
 approval by the Office of Materials Management.
 Adjust structures to the correct alignment and to the marked bearing centerlines before beginning permanent
 fastening. Do not permanently fasten cross frames and lateral bracing in continuous beam or girder spans until
 completing main connections in adjacent spans; however, install sufficient bracing to maintain structural stability.
 For erection bolts used to fasten cross frames, use not less than 5/8-inch (16 mm) diameter, and fully tighten bolts
 according to 513.20.
 Erect end cross frames and end dams in a manner that ensures bearing parts remain in bearing contact.
 Permanently fasten all intermediate cross frames before deck placement begins.
 The webs of primary members shall be plumb before deck placement begins.
 513.27
 the shop.
 
 Shop Coating. For steel surfaces specified to be coated according to Item 514, apply a prime coat in
 
 513.28
 Cleaning ASTM A 709/A 709M, Grade 50W (345W) Steel. Before the new steel is shipped, solvent
 clean, where necessary, all surfaces of ASTM A 709/A 709M, and Grade 50W (345W) steel that are to be left
 unpainted to remove all traces of asphalt cement, oil, grease, diesel fuel deposits, chalk, paint marks, and other
 soluble contaminants according to SSPC-SP 1 Solvent Cleaning. QCP #1 and QCP #2 shall apply according to
 Item 514.
 
 Shop blast unpainted Grade 50W material to SSPC-SP 6, commercial blast. QCP #3 shall apply according to
 Item 514.
 After placing superstructure concrete, clean, where necessary, the exterior surface and bottom flanges of all fascia
 beams or girders that are to be left unpainted to remove all traces of asphalt cement, oil, grease, diesel fuel or
 petroleum deposits, concrete, and other contaminants.
 Do not use acid for cleaning.
 513.29
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Structural Steel Members on a lump sum
 basis or by the number of pounds (kilograms).
 If payment is per pound (kilograms), submit weight computations to the Office of Materials Management based
 upon the accepted shop drawings. Deduct waste material, removed by burning, cutting, machining, holes, etc., but
 include groove weld bevels. Include the weight of all permanent fasteners, shop fillet welds, other metals and
 preformed bearing pads. Exclude the weight of paint or galvanized coatings. Exclude thickness or weight of
 members exceeding the plan requirements (due to overweight or other cause), unless authorized by the Department.
 As an option, measure and record the weight of structural members before painting in the presence of the inspector.
 Use the following unit weights for computations.
 Steel, cast steel, and deposited weld metal
 Cast iron
 Phosphor or leaded bronze
 Lead
 Preformed bearing pads
 
 lb/ft³
 490
 450
 550
 710
 710
 
 (kg/m³)
 (7850)
 (7210)
 (8810)
 (11370)
 (11370)
 
 The Department will measure Welded Stud Shear Connectors by the number of each installed and accepted.
 513.30
 Basis of Payment. If the fabricator’s proposed methods of assembly with numerically controlled
 drilling or punching fail to produce specified results and the Office of Materials Management directs the Contractor
 to perform work, as according to 513.19 and 513.24, the Department will not pay for this work.
 For steel surfaces specified to be coated according to Item 514, the cost of applying a prime coat in the shop is
 incidental to the bid for structural steel.
 The Department will not pay for repairing or replacing members damaged by improper handling, storing,
 transportation, or erection.
 The Department will pay for the accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 513
 513
 513
 513
 513
 513
 513
 513
 513
 513
 513
 513
 513
 513
 513
 
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Pound (Kilogram)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 Each
 
 Structural Steel Members, Level UF
 Structural Steel Members, Level 1
 Structural Steel Members, Level 2
 Structural Steel Members, Level 3
 Structural Steel Members, Level 4
 Structural Steel Members, Level 5
 Structural Steel Members, Level 6
 Structural Steel Members, Level UF
 Structural Steel Members, Level 1
 Structural Steel Members, Level 2
 Structural Steel Members, Level 3
 Structural Steel Members, Level 4
 Structural Steel Members, Level 5
 Structural Steel Members, Level 6
 Welded Stud Shear Connectors
 
 ITEM 514 PAINTING OF STRUCTURAL STEEL
 514.01
 514.02
 514.03
 514.04
 514.05
 514.06
 514.07
 514.08
 514.09
 514.10
 514.11
 514.12
 514.13
 514.14
 514.15
 514.16
 514.17
 514.18
 514.19
 514.20
 514.21
 514.22
 514.23
 514.24
 514.01
 
 Description
 Materials
 Superintendent
 Quality Control
 Testing Equipment
 Work Limitations
 Protection of Persons and Property
 Pollution Control
 Safety Requirements and Precautions
 Inspection Access
 Job Site Visual Standards
 Quality Control Point Photographic Verification and Documentation
 Surface Preparation
 Washing Shop Primer
 Handling
 Mixing and Thinning
 Coating Application
 Removing Fins, Tears, or Slivers
 Caulking
 Dry Film Thickness
 Final Inspection
 Repair Procedures
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 Description. This work consists of cleaning and painting all steel surfaces.
 
 514.02
 Materials. On existing steel, apply a three-coat paint system consisting of an organic zinc prime coat,
 an epoxy intermediate coat, and a urethane finish coat. The coating system shall conform to 708.02.
 On new steel, apply a three-coat paint system consisting of an inorganic zinc prime coat, an epoxy intermediate
 coat, and a urethane finish coat. The prime coat shall conform to 708.01, and the intermediate and finish coats shall
 conform to 708.02. Supply the intermediate and finish coats from the same manufacturer. The Contractor is
 responsible for ensuring the compatibility of the intermediate and finish coats with the prime coat.
 For caulking, use a single pack moisture cured polyurethane based material, which will not shrink or sag, capable
 of filling voids up to 1 inch (25 mm) wide. Only material that is listed on the OMM Qualified Product List website
 may be used.
 514.03
 Superintendent. In addition to the requirements of 105.06, the Superintendent must successfully
 complete a Bridge Painting pre-qualification course and training offered by the Department. The course must have
 been completed within the past four years and an individual course certificate must have been received by the
 Superintendent. Present certificate to the Engineer prior to commencing work. No work is permitted unless the
 Superintendent provides a valid course certificate.
 514.04
 Quality Control. Quality control consists of designating quality control specialists to control the
 quality of work in each phase established by Quality Control Points (QCPs). Control quality by inspection, tests,
 and cooperation with inspection and testing performed by the Engineer and inspector.
 A. Quality Control Specialist. Identify the individuals dedicated to performing duties as the painting quality
 control specialists before starting work in the field. Provide a quality control specialist for each structure, but one
 quality control specialist must be provided for every three structures for which work is progressing concurrently
 on this contract.
 
 Each quality control specialist must be, at a minimum, either a NACE (National Association of Corrosion
 Engineers) coating inspector Level 1-certified, or a SSPC (The Society for Protective Coatings) protective coating
 specialist, or a SSPC protective coating inspector Level 1, or a SSPC bridge coating inspector Level 1, or formally
 trained or retrained by, at a minimum, a NACE coating inspector Level 1 certified, or a SSPC protective coating
 specialist, or a SSPC protective coatings inspector Level 1, or a SSPC protective coatings inspector Level 1, or a
 SSPC bridge coating inspector Level 1. The training shall be adequate to ensure that the quality control specialist
 is able to use all the testing equipment and understands the requirements of this specification. Provide a copy of
 the NACE or SSPC certification or a copy of the trainer’s NACE or SSPC certification and a letter or certificate
 signed and dated by the trainer to the Office of Construction Administration. Ensure that the NACE or SSPC
 certification is current or retrain the quality control specialist every five years in accordance with the above
 requirements.
 The quality control specialist must successfully complete a Bridge Painting prequalification course offered by
 the Department. The training course must have been completed within the past four years and an individual course
 certificate must have been received by the quality control specialist.
 Select only a quality control specialist who is approved by the Department. The Office of Construction
 Administration will publish a list of approved Quality Control Specialists. Present all required certificates, letters
 of certification, and valid identification to the Engineer prior to commencing work.
 The quality control specialist will be immediately removed from their duties as the quality control specialist
 and disqualified from future duties as the quality control specialist if any quality control failure occurs. A quality
 control failure is defined as any of the following:
 1. The dry film thickness has been approved by the quality control specialist and it is later found that over
 20 percent of the spot measurements of any one member of a structure, such as a cross frame, web, flange, stiffener,
 or other parts of the structure are either under the minimum or over the maximum spot thickness.
 2. The dry film thickness has been approved by the quality control specialist and it is later found that the
 thicknesses of any area of a structure as described in 514.20 are either under the minimum or over the maximum
 specification thickness.
 3. Two separate occurrences when the surface preparation has been approved by the quality control specialist
 of any one member type, such as the cross frames, webs, flanges, stiffeners, or other parts of the structure and it is
 later found that the surfaces of those members were either not properly profiled or not properly cleaned as required
 by the Contract Documents. Occurrences are determined per structure.
 4. Two separate occurrences of the quality control specialist performing production duties not allowed by
 the Contract Documents. Occurrences are determined per structure.
 5. Two separate occurrences when the quality control specialist fails to perform any one of the duties
 assigned to the quality control specialist in the Contract Documents. Occurrences are determined per structure.
 Suspend work if the quality control specialist is not available or has been removed. The Engineer or Inspector
 will immediately provide written notification to the Office of Construction Administration of any quality control
 failure identified above. Resume work when a quality control specialist, qualified and approved as provided in
 514.04, is available.
 For work in the fabrication shop, each fabricator shall identify one or more full-time individuals who shall
 perform the duties of the painting quality control specialist.
 The quality control specialist may not be used to perform production duties including supervision, blasting,
 painting, waste disposal, mixing, operating or repairing equipment, or other tasks not associated with duties of the
 quality control specialist while the Contractor is performing work toward the completion of a Quality Control Point.
 Ensure that each quality control specialist is trained and equipped with Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS),
 product data sheets, tools, and equipment necessary to provide quality control on all aspects of the work. Each
 quality control specialist shall have a thorough understanding of the plans for the work, including any pertinent
 
 addenda, change order, or other contract documents, and these Specifications. Duties each quality control specialist
 shall perform include:
 1.
 2.
 QCP.
 
 Inspect equipment and abrasive at specified intervals.
 Approve the work and provide documentation that the work has been approved immediately before each
 
 3.
 
 Inspect the work with the Engineer or Inspector at each QCP.
 
 4.
 
 Verify the Contractor or fabricator performed work according to the Contract Documents.
 
 5.
 
 Cooperate with the inspection and testing performed by the Engineer and inspector.
 
 6.
 
 Document test results and compare test results with the Engineer’s and inspector’s test results.
 
 7.
 
 Notify Superintendent of nonconforming work.
 
 8. Stop work when test equipment is not available and when necessary to ensure the work is performed
 according to the Contract.
 The fabricator’s quality control specialists shall provide the Engineer with a letter that includes specified
 information or check point data documenting acceptance of the work and consisting of the following:
 1.
 
 Checks on the abrasive to ensure that it has not been contaminated with oil.
 
 2.
 
 The profile of the blasted surface.
 
 3. The air and steel temperature and dew point before blast cleaning and painting and at 4-hour intervals
 during the blasting and painting operation.
 4.
 
 Readings of the actual dry film thickness.
 
 5.
 
 The lot and stock number of the paint and the date of manufacture.
 
 6. Documentation that the paint mixer is functioning properly, that each spray operator has demonstrated the
 ability to paint, and that all spray equipment is used according to the manufacturer’s recommendation.
 B. Quality Control Points (QCP). QCPs are points in time when one phase of the work is complete and approved
 by the quality control specialist and ready for inspection by the Engineer or the inspector before commencing the
 next phase of the work. At a QCP, the quality control specialist shall provide quality control tests bearing his
 signature to the Engineer or Inspector. The Contractor or fabricator shall provide the Engineer and inspectors access
 to inspect all affected surfaces. If inspection identifies a deficiency, correct the deficiency according to the Contract
 Documents before starting the next phase of work. Discovery of defective work or material after a Quality Control
 Point is past or failure of the final product before final acceptance, shall not, in any way, prevent the Department
 from rejecting the final product or obligate the Department to final acceptance. Final acceptance will be
 determined according to 514.21, Final Inspection.
 Quality Control Points
 1. Solvent Cleaning
 2. Grinding Flange Edges
 3. Abrasive Blasting
 4. Containment/ Waste Disposal
 5. Prime Coat Application
 6. Remove Fins, Tears, & Slivers
 7. Washing of Shop Primer
 8. Intermediate Coat Application
 
 Purpose
 Remove asphalt cement, oil, grease, etc.
 Remove sharp corners
 Blast surfaces to receive paint
 Contain, collect, & dispose of abrasive blasting
 debris
 Check surface cleanliness, apply prime coat,
 check coating thickness
 Remove surface defects and slivers
 Remove all water soluble materials (salt, dirt,
 etc.)
 Check surface cleanliness, apply intermediate
 coat, check coating thickness
 
 New
 Steel
 Yes
 Yes
 Yes
 
 Existing
 Steel
 Yes
 Yes
 Yes
 
 No
 
 Yes
 
 Yes
 
 Yes
 
 Yes
 
 Yes
 
 Yes
 
 No
 
 Yes
 
 Yes
 
 Quality Control Points
 9. Caulking
 10. Finish Coat Application
 11. Final Review
 
 Purpose
 Caulk areas not sealed by the intermediate coat
 Check surface cleanliness, apply intermediate
 coat, check coating thickness
 Acceptance and check total system thickness
 
 New
 Steel
 Yes
 
 Existing
 Steel
 Yes
 
 Yes
 
 Yes
 
 Yes
 
 Yes
 
 Provide signed documentation of inspection, testing, conditions and material information to the Engineer on
 the following ODOT forms, or forms with the equivalent information.
 
 QCS
 QCP#1
 QCP#2
 QCP#3
 QCP#3
 QCP#4
 QCP#5
 QCP#5
 QCP#6
 QCP#8
 QCP#9
 QCP#8
 QCP#10
 QCP#10
 
 Inspection Documentation Sign Off for QCP’s
 Solvent Cleaning
 Grinding Flange Edges
 Abrasive Blasting
 QCS & Visual Standards Information for Abrasive Blasting Test Section
 Disposal of Hazardous/Non-Hazardous Waste
 Prime Coat Application
 Dry Film Thickness Readings for Prime Coats
 Grinding Fins, Tears and Slivers
 Dry Film Thickness Readings for Intermediate Coats
 Caulking
 Intermediate Coat Application
 Finish Coat Application
 Dry Film Thickness Readings for Finish Coats
 
 CA-S-7
 CA-S-12
 CA-S-12
 CA-S-13
 CA-S-11
 CA-S-14
 CA-S-15
 CA-S-2
 CA-S-16
 CA-S-2
 CA-S-16
 CA-S-17
 CA-S-17
 CA-S-2
 
 514.05
 Testing Equipment. For the project duration, provide the Engineer or inspectors with the test
 equipment listed below for the type of work at each work site with ongoing work. With the exception of the
 recording thermometer, the fabricator shall provide its quality control specialists with the test equipment listed
 below. The Contractor and fabricator shall maintain all testing equipment in good working order, and provide
 documentation or certification of calibration from the manufacturer. If the Contractor or Fabricator and the
 Engineer’s inspector are using different test equipment, the Contractor or Fabricator and the Engineer’s inspector
 will perform side-by-side testing and compare results. If the difference between the Department’s and Contractor’s
 or Fabricator’s tests results, such as blast profile, dry film thickness, temperature, dew point and relative humidity,
 are greater than 1%, the Contractor or Fabricator and the Engineer will determine the reason for the differences and
 make necessary adjustments.
 A. Film and a camera with the following features:
 1. Uses self developing color print film.
 2. Lens with auto focus system.
 3. Focuses from 2 feet (0.6 m) to infinity.
 4. Built-in fill flash.
 Or provide a digital camera with the following features:
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 
 5.0 Megapixel or greater resolution.
 Minimum 3× Optical zoom lens capability with automatic focus.
 Minimum 512MB Memory capability.
 Built-in flash.
 Photograph printer with docking capability compatible with the camera including supplies necessary
 to print. (i.e. Ink Cartridges, Photograph quality paper, and other consumables required for operation
 and photograph printing.)
 
 B. One Spring micrometer and extra-coarse replica tape or comparable electronic surface profile gauge for the
 measurement of abrasive blast profile depth within ±0.2 mils on the project at all times.
 C. One SSPC-PA2 Type 2 (electronic) non-destructive coating thickness gage, with a set of calibration thickness
 foils, (shims), and two sets of National Institute of Standards & Technology calibration plates. The first set of
 calibration plates shall be 1.5 to 8 mils (38 to 200 μm), Model No. 1362b, and the second set shall be 10 to 25 mils
 (250 to 625 μm), Model No. 1363b. Other certified coating thickness standard plates for ferrous substrates must be
 approved for use by the Office of Construction Administration.
 D. One Sling Psychrometer including Psychrometric tables, (or comparable electronic or digital equipment for
 the measurement of dew point, accurate within 2 °F (1 °C) and within one percent relative humidity).
 E. Two steel surface thermometers accurate within 2 °F (1 °C).
 F. Flashlight 2-D cell.
 G. SSPC Visual Standard for Abrasive Blast Cleaned Steel (SSPC-VIS 1).
 H. One recording thermometer capable of recording the date, time, and temperature over a period of at least 12
 hours.
 514.06
 Work Limitations. Apply the prime coat to new structural steel inside permanent buildings at the
 fabricator’s facility. If inside permanent buildings, the fabricator may perform year-round abrasive blasting and
 painting. Perform abrasive blasting and painting in the field from April 1 to October 31. The Department will not
 issue a time extension due to adverse weather during the month of April. The plans or other Contract Documents
 may require additional work limitations for specific bridges or projects.
 A. Temperature. Do not apply Inorganic Zinc Primer if the steel, air, and paint temperature is below 40 ºF (4
 ºC). Do not apply Organic Zinc Primer, Epoxy Intermediate, or Urethane Finish Coats if the steel, air, and paint
 temperature is below 50 ºF (10 ºC). Follow the paint manufacturers printed instructions for the minimum times to
 handle, recoat and cure the individual coats for specified conditions and thicknesses.
 Monitor and document that the temperatures listed below are maintained for minimum time frames listed
 below, after application of each coat, by using the recording thermometer. The Contractor may use a heated
 enclosure or building. Supply heat continuously and uniformly to maintain the required minimum temperature
 within the enclosure or building.
 Minimum Times to maintain temp. per coating.
 Primer (Organic Zinc)
 Intermediate (Epoxy)
 Finish (Urethane)
 
 50 F
 (10 C)
 4 hrs
 6 hrs
 8 hrs
 
 60 F
 (16 C)
 3 hrs
 5 hrs
 6 hrs
 
 70 F
 (21 C)
 2 hrs
 4 hrs
 4 hrs
 
 If combustion type heating units are used, vent the units away from the enclosure or building and do not allow
 exhaust fumes to enter the enclosure or building. Do not use open combustion in the enclosure or building.
 The fabricator may use radiant heat when painting new structural steel inside permanent shop buildings. Locate
 radiant heaters at least 10 feet (3 m) above all surfaces to be painted. Vent exhaust fumes to prevent fumes from
 contacting surfaces to be painted.
 B. Moisture. Do not apply paint:
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 
 If the steel surface temperature is less than 5 °F (3 °C) above the dew point.
 If the steel surface is wet, damp, frosted, or ice-coated.
 If the relative humidity is greater than 85 percent.
 During periods of rain, fog, or mist unless the above moisture criteria is met.
 
 If steel was abrasive blasted when the temperature of the steel was less than 5 °F (3 °C) above the dew point,
 reblast the steel when the steel temperature is at least 5 °F (3 °C) above the dew point.
 
 514.07
 Protection of Persons and Property. Collect, remove, and dispose of all rubbish, buckets, rags, or
 other discarded materials and leave the job site in a clean condition.
 Except for deck bottoms and backwalls which have not been sealed or are not to have a sealer applied, protect
 all portions of the structure, that are not to be painted from damage or disfigurement by splashes, spatters, and
 smirches of paint.
 If the Contractor causes any damage or injury to public or private property, the Contractor shall restore the
 property, to a condition similar or equal to the condition existing before the damage or injury.
 514.08
 Pollution Control. Comply with pollution control laws, rules, or regulations of Federal, State, or
 local agencies and requirements of this specification.
 514.09
 Safety Requirements and Precautions. Comply with the applicable safety requirements of the Ohio
 Industrial Commission and OSHA.
 Provide Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) at the preconstruction meeting for all paints, thinners, and abrasives
 used on this project. Do not begin work until submitting the MSDS to the Engineer.
 514.10
 Inspection Access and Lighting. In addition to the requirements of 105.10, furnish, erect, and move
 scaffolding and other appropriate equipment to allow the inspector and the Engineer the opportunity to closely
 observe all affected surfaces during all phases of the work and for at least 10 workdays after completely painting
 each structure to allow for the Final Inspection according to 514.21. Provide artificial lighting as necessary to
 supplement natural light with a minimum of 30 foot candles (325 LUX) at the surface of the steel for inspection,
 cleaning, and painting. Prevent glare that interferes with traffic, workers and inspection. Submit to the Engineer
 for information, complete details of the inspection access that complies with the applicable safety requirements of
 The Ohio Industrial Commission and OSHA. The details shall be reviewed, signed, stamped and dated by an Ohio
 registered Professional Engineer certifying that they meet these requirements. Maintain the in-place inspection
 access equipment employed during original painting activities or provide alternate inspection equipment such as
 platform lifts, bucket trucks, snooper trucks, or equivalent as approved by the Engineer. If scaffolding, or any
 hanger attached to the scaffolding, is supported by horizontal wire ropes, or if scaffolding is directly under the
 surface to be painted, comply with the following requirements:
 A. If scaffolding is suspended 43 inches (1092 mm) or more below the surface to be painted, place two guardrails
 on all sides of the scaffolding. Place one guardrail at 42 inches (1067 mm) above the scaffolding and the other
 guardrail at 20 inches (508 mm) above the scaffolding.
 B. If scaffolding is suspended at least 21 inches (533 mm) but less than 43 inches (1092 mm) below the surface
 to be painted, place one guardrail on all sides of the scaffolding at 20 inches (508 mm) above the scaffolding.
 C. If 514.10.A and 514.10.B do not apply, place two guardrails on all sides of scaffolding. Place one guardrail at
 42 inches (1067 mm) above the scaffolding and the other guardrail at 20 inches (508 mm) above scaffolding.
 D. Provide scaffolding at least 24 inches (610 mm) wide if guardrail is used and 28 inches (711 mm) wide if
 guardrail is not used and scaffolding is suspended less than 21 inches (533 mm) below the surface to be painted. If
 using two or more parallel scaffolding to achieve the proper width, rigidly attach the scaffolding together to prevent
 differential movement.
 E. Construct guardrail as a substantial barrier, securely fastened in place and free from protruding objects such
 as nails, screws, and bolts. Provide a properly located opening in the guardrail to allow the Engineer and inspector
 access onto the scaffolding.
 F. Construct guardrails and uprights of metal pipe, steel angles, or wood. If using pipe railing, provide pipe with
 a nominal diameter of at least 1 1/2 inches (38 mm). If using steel angle railing, provide 2  2  3/8-inch (50  50
  9 mm) steel angles or other metal shapes of equal or greater strength. If using wood railing, provide 2  4-inch
 (50  100 mm) nominal stock. Space uprights no more than 8 feet (2.4 m) on center. If using wood uprights, provide
 2  4-inch (50  100 mm) nominal stock.
 G. If the surface to be inspected is more than 15 feet (4.57 m) above the ground or water, and the scaffolding is
 supported from the structure being painted, provide a safety harness (not a safety belt) and lifeline for the Engineer
 
 and inspector. The lifeline shall not allow a fall greater than 6 feet (1.8 m). Provide a method to attach the lifeline
 to the structure that is independent of the scaffolding, cables, and brackets supporting the scaffolding.
 H. If scaffolding is more than 2.5 feet (762 mm) above the ground, provide an access ladder and equipment to
 attach the ladder onto the scaffolding capable of supporting 250 pounds (113 kg) with a safety factor of at least
 four. uniformly space rungs, steps, cleats, and treads no more than 12 inches (305 mm) on center. Extend at least
 one side rail at least 36 inches (914 mm) above the landing near the top of the ladder.
 I. If the distance from the ladder to the access point on the scaffolding exceeds 12 inches (305 mm), provide an
 additional landing that is capable of supporting a minimum of 1000 pounds (454 kg) and at least 24 inches (610
 mm) wide and 24 inches (610 mm) long. Size and shape the landing so that the distance from the landing to the
 point where the scaffolding is accessed does not exceed 12 inches (305 mm). Firmly attach the landing to the
 ladder; however, do not use the ladder to support the landing.
 J. In addition to the scaffolding requirements above, comply with all Federal, State, and local laws, ordinances,
 regulations, orders, and decrees.
 K. Furnish all necessary traffic control to allow inspection during and after all phases of the project.
 514.11
 Job Site Visual Standards. Before starting abrasive blasting, establish job site visual standards by
 preparing a test section, subsequent test sections, and by using photographs of approved test sections. Use job site
 visual standards and SSPC-VIS 1 standard for blasting. The Contractor or fabricator shall prepare an approximately
 20 to 30-square foot (2 to 3 m²) test section from a representative area on the first structure to be painted. After the
 Engineer or Inspector and the Contractor or fabricator agree the test area was blast cleaned to the requirements of
 the Contract Documents, photograph the test section and check the steel surface for the proper profile. After the
 Engineer or Inspector approves the test section and the job site visual standards are documented by photographs
 and replica tape, the Contractor or fabricator may start abrasive blasting. The quality control specialists and
 Engineer or Inspector will use the job site visual standards (photographs), the Plan, Specification and requirements
 to determine acceptance of blast cleaning procedures. In all cases of dispute, the SSPC-VIS 1 standard shall govern.
 If the Contractor, Engineer, Inspector, or fabricator believe the initial test section does not establish the proper
 visual standard for a different structure another test section on the different structure may be performed.
 514.12
 Quality Control Point Photographic Verification and Documentation. The Engineer or Inspector
 will take a sufficient number of photographs to document the condition of the work at Quality Control Points 3, 4
 and 11.
 514.13
 
 Surface Preparation.
 
 A. Solvent Cleaning (QCP #1). Solvent clean by methods described in SSPC-SP 1, areas containing oil, grease,
 asphalt cement, diesel fuel deposits, other petroleum products and contaminants.
 B. Grinding Flange Edges (QCP #2). Before abrasive blasting, round all exposed flange edges of all beams and
 girders to a radius of 1/8 ±1/16 inch (3 ±1.5 mm). This work has no weather and temperature restrictions. For shop
 painted steel, ground the sides of thermally cut material 1 ½ inch (40 mm) or thicker to remove the heat effected
 zone, as necessary, to achieve the specified surface cleaning.
 C. Abrasive Blasting (QCP #3). Do not abrasive blast areas that contain asphalt cement, oil, grease, or diesel
 fuel deposits. Before abrasive blasting, completely remove all dirt, sand, bird nests, bird droppings, and other debris
 from the scuppers, bulb angles, and pier and abutment seats.
 Abrasive blast all steel to be painted according to SSPC-SP 10 and as shown on the pictorial surface preparation
 standards for painting steel surfaces shown in SSPC-VIS 1. Maintain steel in a blast cleaned condition until it has
 received a prime coat of paint. The Contractor may commercial blast clean the back side of end cross frame
 assemblies that are 3 inches (75 mm) or closer to backwalls according to SSPC-SP 6.
 Cover and protect galvanized and metalized steel (including corrugated steel bridge flooring), adjacent
 concrete already or specified to be coated or sealed, and other surfaces not intended to be painted, from damage
 caused by blasting and painting operations. Repair adjacent coatings damaged during the blasting operation.
 Backwalls and bottoms of decks not sealed nor specified to be sealed do not need to be covered and protected.
 
 For field blasting use a recyclable steel grit, or a recyclable natural mineral, low dusting abrasive. Do not use
 silica sands, mineral slags, and other types of non-metallic abrasives that contain more than 0.5 percent free silica,
 by weight, have a chlorides salts content more than 25 ppm, and contain any organic material. For shop blasting
 use an abrasive that produces an angular profile. All abrasives shall provide a profile from 1.5 to 3.5 mils (40 to 90
 μm) as determined by replica tape according to ASTM D 4417, Method C. Adjust the abrasive size, blast hose
 nozzle pressure or other means in order to provide the 1.5 to 3.5 mil profile. Clean the abrasive of paint chips, rust,
 mill scale, and other foreign material after each use and before each reuse. Use equipment specifically designed for
 cleaning the abrasive.
 Check abrasives used at the job site or fabrication shop for oil contamination at the beginning of each shift and
 at 4-hour intervals. Also check each load of abrasive delivered to the job site or fabrication shop for oil
 contamination before use. Check for oil by placing a small sample of abrasives and tap water into a jar. Reject the
 abrasive if an oil film is detected on the water surface.
 To ensure that the compressed air is not contaminated, the quality control specialists shall blow air from the
 nozzle for 30 seconds onto a white cloth or blotter held in a rigid frame. If the cloth or blotter retains oil or other
 contaminants, suspend abrasive blasting until retests verify the problem was corrected. Perform this test at the start
 of each shift and at 4-hour intervals.
 The Contractor may simultaneously abrasive blast and paint the same bridge provided the abrasive blasting
 debris and dust does not contact freshly painted surfaces and does not contaminate paint during the curing period.
 For shop blasting, the fabricator may simultaneously abrasive blast and paint if the two operations are separated by
 distance or containment that prevents paint contamination.
 For surface preparation of new structural steel in the fabricator’s shop, the quality control specialist shall take
 replica tape readings as follows:
 1. For an automated blasting process, test the greater of 20 percent of the main members or one member per
 shift. These tests shall consist of taking five random readings per member.
 2. For a manual blasting process, test each main member. The test of a main member consists of taking five
 readings at random locations.
 3. For both an automated and manual blasting process, test 15 percent of all secondary members. The test of
 a secondary member consists of taking one random reading.
 Remove abrasives and residue from all surfaces to be painted. Keep all structural steel that was blast cleaned
 in the field or the fabricator’s shop dust free. Apply a prime coat to steel that was blast cleaned in the field within
 12 hours of the beginning of the abrasive blasting operation. Apply a prime coat to structural steel that was blast
 cleaned in the fabricator’s shop within 24 hours of the beginning of the abrasive blasting operation. If a prime coat
 is not applied within the times stated above, reblast the steel before applying the prime coat. Remove all dust or
 abrasives from adjacent work and from the finish coat.
 Provide the Engineer and Inspector with field wash facilities and an adequate supply of running potable water,
 soap, and towels for washing face and hands during the surface preparation operation. Properly contain, test, and
 dispose of the wastewater. Locate a wash facility at each bridge site and in an area that will not be contaminated
 by the blasting debris.
 D. Containment/Waste Disposal (QCP #4). Waste material generated by abrasive blasting operations in the field
 is a solid waste and may be a hazardous waste. Contain, collect, store, evaluate, and properly dispose of the waste
 material. Comply with all Federal, State, and local environmental protection laws, regulations, and ordinances
 including, but not limited to, air quality, waste containment, and waste removal. The Contractor is advised that
 various governmental bodies are involved with solid waste and hazardous waste disposal and the Contractor is
 responsible for complying with laws enforced by the various governmental bodies.
 To prevent contamination of the pavement or soil, park all equipment on ground covers free of cuts, tears, and
 holes.
 
 Clean equipment of spent abrasives or debris before bringing equipment to the project, moving equipment
 from one bridge site to another, and removing equipment from the project. Store debris cleaned from equipment
 with the debris from the structure that generated the debris.
 Erect an enclosure to completely surround (around, under and over the top on truss type bridges) the blasting
 operations. The Contractor may use the ground as the bottom of the enclosure if the ground is completely covered
 with plastic or tarps.
 Construct the enclosure of flexible materials such as tarpaulins (specifically designed for blasting
 containments), or construct the enclosure of rigid materials such as plywood. Maintain all materials free of tears,
 cuts, and holes. Overlap all seams a minimum of 6 inches (150 mm) and fasten the seams together at 12-inch (300
 mm) centers or in a manner that ensures a seal that does not allow openings between the edges of the containment
 material. Extend the vertical sides of the enclosure completely up to the bottom of the deck on a steel beam bridge
 and use bulkheads between beams to enclose the blasting area.
 Collect all debris from blasting operations, equipment, or filters, and all debris that fell to the ground. Store
 the debris in steel containers/drums with lids that are locked at the end of each workday. Store the debris in these
 locked drums while in the storage location and when hauled from the storage location to the disposal site. The
 storage location shall be at the bridge site unless, the Engineer and Contractor agree on an alternate storage location.
 Secure the storage location by surrounding the site with a 5 foot (1.5 m) high dumpster or a 5 foot (1.5 m) high
 chain link fence fabric supported by traffic sign drive posts 10 feet (3 m) apart. Drive the traffic signposts into the
 ground at least 2 feet (0.6 m) deep. Secure the dumpster or fencing with padlocks at the end of each day. The
 location of centralized cleaning stations for recyclable steel shall also be agreed by the Engineer and the Contractor.
 Test and evaluate the debris for disposal. Obtain the services of a testing laboratory to obtain directly from the
 project site and evaluate a composite representative sample of the abrasive blasting debris for each bridge site. The
 person taking the sample must be an employee of the testing laboratory.
 Take composite sample in the presence of the Engineer or Inspector, comply with the requirements of U.S.
 EPA Publication SW 846 and take individual samples from all containers that are on the site at the time of the
 sampling. Blend individual samples of equal size together to comprise one composite sample. Take one individual
 sample from each drum and four randomly spaced individual samples from each container other than drums.
 Take individual samples and place into clean glass or plastic containers.
 Prepare a chain of custody record (Chain of Custody) for all composite samples. The Chain of Custody must
 include the name of the person taking the sample, the name of the testing laboratory for which the person works,
 the date and time the sample was taken, the bridge sampled, the Township and Municipality where the bridge is
 located, and the signatures and dates of all persons in possession of the sample in the Chain of Custody.
 Sample the abrasive blasting debris within the first week of production blasting at each bridge. Cease all
 blasting and painting operations on the bridge from which waste was generated, if sampling is not performed within
 the first week of production blasting.
 Test composite samples for lead, chromium, cadmium and arsenic according to the U.S. EPA Publication SW
 846 Method 1311 (TCLP). Provide the Chain of Custody and test results to the District Regulated Waste Engineer
 (DRWE) immediately after the test results are available. If the DRWE determines the blasting debris is hazardous,
 as defined below, provide the Engineer with the names of the hauler and treatment facility. Perform all sampling
 and testing required by the hauler, treatment facility, or disposal facility.
 The existing paint removed from bridges may contain lead, chromium, cadmium or arsenic. The Contractor is
 responsible for taking the proper safety precautions to ensure workers in this environment are properly protected.
 1. Hazardous Waste. The blasting debris is hazardous if lead, chromium, cadmium or arsenic exceed any
 of the regulatory concentration limits shown below:
 
 SW 846 Analyte
 Lead
 Chromium
 Arsenic
 Cadmium
 
 Regulatory Concentration Limit
 5.0 mg/l
 5.0 mg/l
 5.0 mg/l
 1.0 mg/l
 
 Label all the containers of hazardous blasting debris “HAZARDOUS”. Post hazardous waste warning
 signs at obvious locations on the fenced enclosure.
 The Office of Construction Administration will obtain a generator number assigned to the State. After the
 Office of Construction Administration obtains the generator number, arrange for the hauling, treating, and
 disposing of the hazardous waste. Use a firm licensed by EPA to haul and dispose of the hazardous waste. This
 firm is also responsible for providing the completed Uniform Hazardous Waste Manifest (EPA Form 8700-22, or
 current version).
 In every case, properly dispose of all hazardous waste within 60 days after it is generated. If hazardous
 waste is not properly disposed of within 60 days, the Department will consider the Contactor in breach of its
 Contract and the Department will take the following actions:
 a. Immediately suspend all abrasive blasting and painting of structural steel on the Project until
 hazardous waste is properly disposed.
 b.
 
 Cease processing all pay estimates.
 
 c.
 
 Forward a breach of contract notification to the Contractor’s Surety.
 
 The Contractor is responsible for fines or liens assessed by any governmental agency that has jurisdiction
 over the disposal of this hazardous waste material.
 Decontaminate or dispose of all collection and containment equipment according to EPA guidelines.
 The Contractor shall inform the Department when all hazardous waste has been removed from the Project
 so the EPA Site ID Number (Hazardous Waste Generator Number) can be deactivated.
 2. Non-Hazardous Solid Waste. For all waste that is determined to be a Non-Hazardous Solid Waste by
 the DRWE, the Contractor is required to:
 a. Before disposing of any material, provide the Engineer with documentation that the disposal facility
 is licensed by the EPA to accept non-hazardous solid waste.
 b. Haul and dispose of the waste to the documented, non-hazardous solid waste facility.
 c. Obtain from the disposal facility and provide the Engineer with a receipt that documents disposal of
 waste material at the licensed disposal facility.
 d. Properly dispose of all waste within 60 days after it is generated.
 514.14
 Washing Shop Primer (QCP #7). Wash shop primed structural steel after it is erected and the
 concrete deck is placed and within 30 days of applying the intermediate coat.
 Wash the steel with potable water. Use equipment capable of delivering the water at a nozzle pressure of at least
 1000 pounds per square inch (7 MPa) and at a rate of not less than 4 gallons (15 L) per minute. The Contractor
 shall provide the Engineer with equipment specifications that verify both the delivery pressure and rate. Provide
 gauges on the equipment to verify the pressure during operation. Hold the nozzle a maximum of 12 inches (300
 mm) from the surface being washed. The surface is clean when clear rinse water runs off the structure. After rinsing
 the surface, inspect for remaining dirt and rewash dirty areas until clean.
 514.15
 Handling. Deliver all paint and thinner in original unopened containers with labels intact. The
 Engineer or Inspector will accept containers with minor damage provided the container is not punctured. Thinner
 containers shall be a maximum of 5 gallons (19 L). Before use, provide the Engineer with shipping invoices for all
 painting materials used on the Project.
 
 Supply containers of paint and thinner with labels clearly marked by the manufacturer to show paint
 identification, component, color, lot number, stock number, date of manufacture, and information and warnings as
 may be required by Federal and State laws.
 Store paint at the temperature recommended by the manufacturer and in a storage facility that prevents theft.
 Provide thermometers capable of monitoring the maximum high and low temperatures inside the storage facility.
 Before opening paint or thinner containers, check the labels to ensure the proper container is opened and the
 paint has not been stored beyond its shelf life. Do not use paint that exceeded its shelf life. Do not open containers
 of paint and thinner until required for use and then open the oldest paint of each kind first. Solvent used for cleaning
 equipment is exempt from the above requirements.
 Do not use paint that has livered, gelled, or otherwise deteriorated during storage. Properly dispose of unused
 paint and paint containers.
 514.16
 Mixing and Thinning. Thoroughly mix all ingredients immediately before use with a high shear
 mixer (such as a Jiffy Mixer). Do not mix paint using paddle mixers, paint shakers, or an air stream bubbling under
 the paint surface. After mixing, carefully examine the paint for uniformity and to ensure that no unmixed pigments
 remain on the bottom of the container. Before use, strain the paint through strainers that remove skins or undesirable
 matter but not pigment.
 Except for primer, mix paint as necessary during application to maintain a uniform composition. Continuously
 mix primer using an automated agitation system. Do not use hand-held mixers for primer paints.
 Do not add thinner to the paint without the Engineer’s or Inspector’s approval, and only add thinner if necessary
 for proper application as recommended by the manufacturer’s printed instructions. In the Engineer’s or Inspector’s
 presence, slowly add the amount of thinner recommended and supplied by the manufacturer to the paint during the
 mixing process. Do not mix other additives into the paint.
 Add catalysts, curing agents, or hardeners that are in separate packages to the base paint only after thoroughly
 mixing the base paint. With constant agitation, slowly pour the proper volume of catalyst into the required volume
 of base. Do not pour off liquid that has separated from the pigment before mixing. Use the mixture within the pot
 life specified by the manufacturer and dispose of unused portions at the end of each workday.
 514.17
 
 Coating Application
 
 A. General. Paint all structural steel, scuppers, expansion joints except top surface, steel railing, exposed steel
 piling, drain troughs, and other areas as shown on the plans. Paint galvanized or metalized surfaces if shown on the
 plans. Unless otherwise shown on the plans or specified below, apply paint to provide the specified coating
 thickness by brush and spray methods. Apply primer and intermediate paint per 708.01 and 708.02 to cover all
 visible steel surfaces. If gaps or crevices remain between adjacent coated steel surfaces after applying the
 intermediate coat, caulk according to 514.19. If brush and spray are not practical to paint places of difficult access,
 the Contractor may use daubers, small diameter rollers, or sheepskins.
 Use daubers, small diameter rollers, or sheepskins to paint the following areas:
 1.
 
 Where cross-frame angles are located within 2 inches (50 mm) of the bottom flange.
 
 2.
 
 Where end cross frames are within 6 inches (150 mm) of the backwall.
 
 3.
 
 Where there is less than 6 inches (150 mm) between the bottom of the bottom flange and the beam seat.
 
 B. Application Approval. The Engineer or Inspector may inspect the initial application of the prime,
 intermediate, and final coats. If the Engineer or Inspector discovers defects, adjust the method of application to
 eliminate the defects then continue applying the coat.
 C. Additional Information Pertaining to Shop Applied Paint. Apply a prime coat to all structural steel surfaces
 by brush or spray methods, including insides of holes, behind stiffener clips and contact surfaces of connection,
 and splice material that is to be fastened with bolts in the shop or field. Apply a mist coating from 0.5 to 1.5 mils
 (12.5 to 37.5 μm) on surfaces that are to be imbedded in concrete and on surfaces within 2 inches (50 mm) of field
 welds other than those attaching intermediate or end cross frames to beams or girders. Apply one coat of primer to
 
 pins, pin holes, and contact surfaces of bearing assemblies, except do not paint those containing self-lubricating
 bronze inserts. Once the prime coat is dry, apply erection marks, using a thinned paint of a type and color that is
 completely concealed by, and compatible, with the second coat.
 Do not handle or remove coated structural steel from the shop until the applied paint has met the requirements
 as specified by the paint manufacturer’s printed instructions.
 Reduce the thickness of thick films of inorganic zinc primer by screening, sanding, or sweep blasting. If the
 primer paint cured longer than 24 hours, apply a re-coating of primer paint according to the paint manufacturer’s
 printed instructions. Abrasive blast and re-apply the primer to the affected area if “mud cracking” occurs. If
 “checking” occurs, abrasive blast and reapply the primer or remove the “checking” by screening and evaluate the
 area by adhesion testing.
 If specified in the plans,furnish all necessary labor, materials and equipment to apply a three - coat paint system
 to Item 513 Structural Steel in the shop and touch up areas in the field.
 Repair damage to the paint system caused during storage, transportation, erection, bolting, welding, forming,
 concrete placement, and form removal operation, according to 514.22. Repair damage to the galvanized coating on
 the nuts, bolts and washers, in the field due to the bolt tightening or welding operations. Exercise extreme care
 while handling the steel during erection, and during subsequent construction of the bridge. Insulate the steel from
 the binding chains by softeners and pad all hooks and slings that are used to hoist/erect the steel members.
 Coating of Bolted Faying Surfaces
 Treat the surfaces indicated below as described in this specification:
 A. Faying surfaces of all bolted connections.
 B. All internal contact surfaces of filler and splice plates.
 C. Other surfaces indicated in the plans.
 Coat the faying surfaces of bolted splices with inorganic zinc primer in the shop. After erection is complete,
 field apply the final coatings of epoxy intermediate coat and urethane protective coats to overlap the shop coatings
 shown in Figure 1 with the field coats shown in Figure 2. For bolted crossframes, leave a minimum of one inch
 step back from faying surfaces, for epoxy intermediate and an additional one inch for urethane top coat.
 Remove and reassemble all shop bolted connections and shop bolted cross frames prior to the blasting and
 coating of the girders or beams. Separately blast and prime the parts, then reassemble and fully tighten the bolts
 using the turn of the nut method. After bolting is complete, shop apply the epoxy intermediate and urethane
 protective coats.
 
 After installation, solvent clean all galvanized nuts, bolts, and washers. Remove any contaminants on the nuts,
 bolts and washers, prior to the application of paint. Repair any damaged galvanized coating and remove any
 corrosion prior to the application of organic zinc by brush. Then apply the epoxy coat and the urethane coats.
 Erection marks added by the fabricator to highlight or enhance the required steel stamped erection marks must
 be made without damaging the paint system. Apply Erection marks only after the finish coat is cured and remove
 at the end of the project. Erection marks may be applied to the faying surfaces. These marks to the inorganic coating
 need not be removed but must be of a paint supplied by the IZEU system manufacture.
 Remove any oil, grease, asphalt cement, concrete or other contaminants from the surface of the IZEU system
 painted structural steel.
 D. Surface Cleanliness. All surfaces to be painted shall be free of dust, dirt, grease, oil, moisture, overspray, and
 other contaminants. If the surface is degraded or contaminated, restore the surface before applying paint. In order
 to prevent or minimize degradation or contamination of cleaned surfaces in the field, the prime coat of paint shall
 be applied within 12 hours of the beginning of the abrasive blasting operation as required in surface preparation
 above, for steel which is cleaned and painted in the shop, the prime coat of paint shall be applied within 24 hours
 of the beginning of the blasting operation.
 Schedule cleaning and painting when dust or other contaminants will not fall on wet, newly painted surfaces.
 Protect surfaces that do not receive paint or have already been painted from the effects of cleaning and painting
 operations. Before applying the next coat, remove overspray and bird droppings with a stiff bristle brush, wire
 screen, or a water wash with sufficient pressure to remove overspray and bird droppings without damaging the
 paint. Before applying the next coat, remove all abrasives and residue from painted surfaces with a vacuum system
 equipped with a brush type cleaning tool.
 Remove all visible abrasives on the finish coat that came from adjacent work.
 E. Brush Application. Apply the paint to produce a smooth coat. To ensure coverage, apply wet stripe coats
 using brushes, daubers, small diameter rollers or sheepskins to all edges, outside corners, crevices, welds, rivets,
 bolts, nuts and washers in addition to the spray application of each individual coating Apply stripe coat of organic
 zinc primer either before or after spray application of primer. Apply stripe coats of intermediate and finish coats
 before spray application of the respective coats. Apply additional paint as necessary to produce the required coating
 thickness.
 F. Spray Application (General). Apply paint using spray application as follows:
 Keep spray equipment clean so that dirt, dried paint, solvents, and other foreign materials are not deposited in
 the paint film. Remove solvent left in the equipment before using the equipment.
 Apply paint in a uniform layer with overlapping at the edges of the spray pattern. Paint the border of the spray
 pattern first, followed by painting the interior of the spray pattern. Complete painting a spray pattern before moving
 to the next spray pattern area. Within a spray pattern area, hold the gun perpendicular to the surface and at a distance
 
 that will ensure a wet layer of paint is deposited on the surface. Release the trigger of the gun at the end of each
 stroke. Each spray operator shall demonstrate to the Engineer or inspector the ability to apply the paint as specified
 before the operator sprays paint.
 If mud cracking occurs, the affected area shall be cleaned to bare metal in accordance with surface preparation
 above and repainted. Use spray equipment recommended by the paint manufacturer and suitable for use with the
 specified paint. Provide adequately sized traps or separators to remove oil and condensed water from the air.
 Periodically drain the traps during operations. To ensure that the traps or separators are working properly, test by
 blowing air from the spray gun for 30 seconds onto a white cloth or blotter held in a rigid frame. The Engineer or
 Inspector will verify the test results by inspecting the white cloth or blotter. If the cloth or blotter retains oil, water,
 or other contaminants, suspend painting until retests verify the problem was corrected. Perform this test at the start
 of each shift and at 4-hour intervals. This is not required for an airless sprayer.
 Do not use spray application unless the operation is totally enclosed as required for abrasive blasting, to prevent
 overspray damage to the ground, public and private property, vegetation, streams, lakes, and other surfaces not to
 be painted.
 G. Prime, Intermediate, and Finish Coat Application (QCP #5, #8, and #10). Apply paint as a continuous
 film of uniform thickness, free of all defects such as holidays, pin holes, mud cracking, checking, drips, runs, and
 sags. The Contractor is responsible for applying the manufacturer’s paint as necessary to satisfy the above
 requirement. Repaint all thin spots or areas missed before the next coat of paint is applied.
 Ensure that the paint manufacturer’s printed instructions for the minimum times to handle, recoat and cure the
 individual coats for specified conditions and thicknesses are followed for each coat of paint before applying the
 next coat. Comply with the manufacturer’s written instructions for the time interval between coats and apply the
 next coat when an additional coat will not cause detrimental film irregularities, such as lifting, wrinkling, or loss
 of adhesion of the undercoat. Do not exceed the following time intervals. If the prime coat is organic zinc, the
 maximum time between the prime and intermediate coats is 30 days. There is no maximum time between the prime
 and intermediate coats for an inorganic zinc primer. The maximum time interval between intermediate and finish
 coats is 13 days. These maximum recoat times include adverse weather days and the Engineer will not extend the
 times. If the next coating is not applied within the times stated above, remove the coatings and re-blast the steel
 according to SSPC-SP 10.
 If requested by the engineer, perform one or both of the following test to determine the hardness and or the
 adhesion of an individual coating or the coating system:
 1. Determine the hardness of an individual coat or the coating system by performing a Pencil Hardness Test
 according to ASTM D 3363. Meet or exceed scale of hardness HB for the coating.
 2. Perform Adhesion Testing according to ASTM D 4541, Type 4. Meet or exceed 400 psi adhesion between
 coats or between the paint system and the substrate, or 400 psi cohesion within paint coats.
 Stencil the Completion Date (month and year) of the finish coat and the letters of the applied paint system on
 the steel in 4 inch (100 mm) letters with black urethane paint. The appropriate letters for the paint systems are as
 follows:
 System Comprised of
 Inorganic zinc prime coat, epoxy intermediate coat, and urethane finish coat
 Organic zinc prime coat, epoxy intermediate coat, and urethane finish coat
 
 Letters
 IZEU
 OZEU
 
 Apply the date and paint system at four locations near the end of each outside beam on the outside web visible
 from the road or as directed by the Engineer.
 514.18
 Removing Fins, Tears, or Slivers (QCP #6). Use a grinder to remove all fins, tears, slivers, or any
 other burred or sharp edges that become evident after applying the prime coat. Retexture ground surfaces to produce
 a profile from 1.5 to 3.5 mils (40 to 90 μm) and reprime ground surfaces before applying the intermediate coat. The
 Contractor may begin removing fins, tears, and slivers after blasting and before priming. Temperature and weather
 restrictions do not apply to removing fins, tears, and slivers, but do to applying the prime coat.
 
 514.19
 Caulking (QCP #9). After the intermediate coat cures and before applying the finish coat, caulk gaps
 or crevices up to 1/2 inch (13 mm) wide. Follow the manufacturer’s recommendations for curing before applying
 the finish coat.
 514.20
 Dry Film Thickness (QCP #5, #8, and #10). Determine prime coat thickness; prime and intermediate
 coat thickness; and prime, intermediate, and finish coat thickness using a Type 2 magnetic gage as follows:
 Measure paint thickness at separate, evenly spaced, spot measurement locations over each 100-square feet (9 m²)
 of area of structural steel. Locate five spot measurements on each of the following locations: top flanges; bottom
 flanges; webs; cross bracing; stiffeners; etc. At each spot location, take three gage readings of either the substrate
 or the paint. Move the probe 1 to 3 inches (25 to 75 mm) for each new gage reading. Discard an unusually high or
 low gage reading that is not consistently repeated. The spot thickness measurement is the average of the three gage
 readings.
 The average of five spot measurements for each location in the 100-square foot (9 m²) area shall not be less than
 the specified thickness. No single spot measurement area shall be less than 80 percent of the specified minimum
 thickness nor greater than 150 percent of the maximum specified thickness when organic zinc is applied and 120
 percent of the maximum specified thickness when inorganic zinc is applied. Any one of three readings which are
 averaged to produce each spot measurement, may under run or overrun by a greater amount. Take five spot
 measurements per location for each 100-square foot (9 m²) area as follows:
 A. For all shop painted steel, regardless of size, randomly select and then measure one 100-square foot (9 m2)
 area within each 300 square foot (27 m²) unit of surface area that is painted.
 B. For structures not exceeding 300 square feet (27 m²) in area, measure each 100-square foot (9 m²) area.
 C. For structures not exceeding 1000 square feet (90 m²) in area, randomly select and then measure three 100square foot (9 m²) areas.
 D. For structures exceeding 1000 square feet (90 m²) in area, measure the first 1000 square feet (90 m²) as stated
 in section C and for each additional 1000 square feet (90 m²), or increment thereof, randomly select and then
 measure one 100-square foot (9 m²) area.
 E. If the dry film thickness for any 100-square foot (9 m²) area (sections C and D) is not in compliance with the
 requirements of this subsection, then measure each 100-square foot (9 m²) area.
 F. Measure other areas or revise the number of spot measurements as shown on the plans.
 Each coat of paint shall have the following thickness measured above the peaks:
 
 Prime
 Intermediate
 Subtotal
 Finish
 Total
 
 Min.
 Spec.
 Thickness
 3.0 mils
 (75 µm)
 5.0 mils
 (125 µm)
 8.0 mils
 (200 µm)
 2.0 mils
 (50 µm)
 10.0 mils
 (250 µm)
 
 Max.
 Spec.
 Thickness
 5.0 mils
 (125 µm)
 7.0 mils
 (175 µm)
 12.0 mils
 (300 µm)
 4.0 mils
 (100 µm)
 16.0 mils
 (400 µm)
 
 Min.
 Spot
 Thickness
 2.4 mils
 (60 µm)
 4.0 mils
 (100 µm)
 6.4 mils
 (160 µm)
 1.6 mils
 (40 µm)
 8.0 mils
 (200 µm)
 
 Max. Spot
 Thickness
 (Inorganic Zn)
 6.0 mils
 (150 µm)
 10.5 mils
 (263 µm)
 16.5 mils
 (413 µm)
 6.0 mils
 (150 µm)
 22.5 mils
 (563 µm)
 
 Max. Spot
 Thickness
 (Organic Zn)
 7.5 mils
 (188 µm)
 10.5 mils
 (263 µm)
 18.0 mils
 (450 µm)
 6.0 mils
 (150 µm)
 24.0 mils
 (600 µm)
 
 Remove paint with a film thickness greater than the maximum specified thickness unless:
 The paint does not exhibit defects such as runs, sags, bubbles, or mud cracking, etc.
 The manufacturer provides a written statement to the Engineer that the excessive thickness is not detrimental.
 
 For any spot or average of five spots at any location of a 100-square foot (9 m²) area that exceeds the maximum
 spot thickness, either remove and replace the coating according to 514.22 or prove to the Office of Construction
 Administration that the excess thickness will not be detrimental to the coating system. In order to prove to the
 Office of Construction Administration that the excess thickness will not be detrimental to the coating system, the
 Contractor must provide the Office of Construction Administration with the following information.
 Certified test data proving that the excessive thickness will adequately bond to the steel when subjected to thermal
 expansion and contraction. The thermal expansion and contraction test shall take place over five cycles of a
 temperature range from -20 to 120 °F (-49 to 49 °C). After the thermal contraction and expansion cycles have taken
 place, the tested system shall be subjected to pull off tests and the results compared to the results of pull off tests
 that have been performed on a paint system with the proper thicknesses.
 Perform the adhesion tests according to ASTM D 4541 Type IV. Document the preparation methods for the
 panels, including profile and level of cleanliness. Document the application methods, conditions and if any thinner,
 (percentage), was used. Test the panels according to the following:
 1. Lightly sand the coating surface and aluminum dolly, and apply a quick set adhesive. Document the type
 of adhesive.
 2.
 
 Allow adhesive to cure overnight.
 
 3.
 
 Scribe the coating and adhesive around the dolly before testing.
 
 4. Make a minimum of 4 trials to failure, and report the 4 trials. Reject trial if fracture occurs at the primersubstrate interface or pressure at failure is less than 400 pounds per square inch (2.8 MPa).
 a. Describe the test specimen as substrate A, upon which successive coating layers B, C, D, etc. have been
 applied including the adhesive Y which secures the dolly Z to the topcoat.
 b. Designate cohesive failures by the layers within which they occur as B, C, etc., and the percent of each.
 c. Designate adhesive failures by the interfaces at which they occur as A/B, B/C, C/D, etc, and the percent
 of each.
 In addition to the certified test results, the Contractor shall provide the Office of Construction Administration a
 written statement from the paint manufacturer stating that the excessive thickness is not detrimental.
 If the Office of Construction Administration does not approve the excessive coating thicknesses or the Contractor
 elects not to provide the required written statement from the paint manufacturer and the certified test results when
 required, the Contractor shall remove and replace the coating. The removal and replacement of the coating shall be
 done as specified in 514.19.
 514.21
 
 Final Inspection
 
 A. The Engineer will select locations for coating removal for inspection of surface preparation and dry film
 thickness. For all structures in which the supporting members are rolled beams or girders, remove a minimum of
 one location per 150 linear feet (46 m) of beam line for webs and flanges and 5 percent of all cross frame assemblies
 and other secondary structural members shall be selected for destructive testing. For all other bridge types with
 structural steel, remove one location for every 1,200 square feet (108 m²) of steel surface for destructive testing.
 Do not perform destructive testing on areas that have been painted with an inorganic zinc prime coat.
 B. At the selected areas, the Engineer will perform total dry film thickness testing using a type 2 magnetic gage.
 If the dry film thickness for that spot does not meet the requirements of 514.18, additional measurements will be
 taken to determine the extent of the deficient coatings.
 C. At the selected areas, where an organic zinc prime coat has been applied, remove at least 9 square inches (58
 cm²) of the new coatings by methods that will not damage the surface of the steel. Approved removal methods are
 scraping, sanding, or the use of solvents. Do not use power tools. Perform removal while in the presence of the
 Engineer. The Engineer will document and photograph the selected areas after removal of the new coatings. If work
 is found not to be in conformance with the specifications and pertinent contract documents, additional locations
 may be selected for testing.
 
 D. Make repairs of areas where the coatings were removed and other areas that were determined to be deficient.
 Make repairs according to 514.22. If the final destructive testing according to 514.21.C, reveals greater than 15
 percent of the areas inspected are not in complete conformance with the specifications and pertinent contract
 documents, the Department will require that surface preparation and painting of the structural steel be completely
 redone to meet the requirements of the Contract Documents at no additional cost to the Department.
 E. Final Acceptance shall be based upon the results of the surface preparation observations and dry film thickness
 measurements obtained from the final inspection. Final Acceptance will also take into consideration acceptable
 progressive project documentation and progressive field measurements in determining the final acceptability of the
 Bridge Paint System.
 Inspection access to the test locations to perform the required final inspection measurements shall conform to the
 requirements of 514.10.
 514.22
 Repair Procedures. Remove paint and correct defects or damaged areas, including areas damaged
 by welding, and in areas that do not comply with the requirements of this specification. Correct defects and
 damaged areas using the same paint as originally applied except the Engineer may approve using organic zinc to
 repair inorganic zinc in the field. Retexture the steel to a near white condition and a profile between 1.5 to 3.5 mils
 (40 to 90 μm). Measure the profile immediately before applying the prime coat to ensure the profile is not destroyed
 during the feathering procedure. See 514.13.C.
 Feather the existing paint to expose a minimum of 1/2 inch (13 mm) of each coat.
 During the reapplication of the paint, apply paint as follows:
 A. Apply the prime coat only to the surface of the bare steel and the existing prime coat exposed by feathering.
 Do not apply the prime coat to the adjacent intermediate coat.
 B. Apply the intermediate coat only to the new prime coat and the existing intermediate coat exposed by
 feathering. Do not apply the intermediate coat to the adjacent finish coat.
 C. Apply the finish coat only to the new intermediate coat and the existing finish coat that was feathered or lightly
 sanded. Do not apply the finish coat beyond areas that were feathered or lightly sanded.
 At the perimeter of the repair area, apply the prime and intermediate coats using a brush. Apply the finish coat
 using either brush or spray.
 The Contractor may need to apply several applications to obtain the proper thickness for each coat.
 During the application of the prime coat, the paint shall be continuously mixed.
 Perform all surface preparation and painting according to this specification. Instead of abrasive blasting, the
 Engineer may allow alternate methods of preparing the surface.
 Blend repair areas with the adjacent coating and provide a finished surface in the patched areas that is smooth
 and has an even profile with the adjacent surface.
 Submit, in writing, the method of correcting areas with runs to the Office of Construction Administration for
 approval.
 514.23
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Surface Preparation of Existing Structural
 Steel and Field Painting of Existing Structural Steel Prime Coat by the number of square feet (square meters) of
 structural steel painted or on a lump sum basis. The Department will measure Field Painting Structural Steel,
 Intermediate Coat and Field. Painting Structural Steel, Finish Coat by the number of square feet (square meters) or
 pounds (kilograms) of structural steel painted, or on a lump sum basis.
 The Department will determine the number of pounds (kilograms) of new structural steel painted by the accepted
 pay weight of the new structural steel.
 For steel beam and steel girder bridges, the Department will determine the surface area by taking a nominal
 measurement of the beams (i.e., two times the beam depth plus three times the flange width). In addition to this
 nominal measurement, the Department will add a percentage to account for incidentals such as cross frames,
 bearing assemblies, stiffeners, expansion joints, scuppers, etc. It is not necessary for the Engineer or Inspector to
 
 field measure every detail of the bridge to verify quantities. If there is a quantity dispute, exact field measurements
 of all painted surfaces and calculations will govern over the above percentage to account for incidentals.
 For extremely complex bridges, such as trusses, the Department will pay for painting on a lump sum basis.
 The Department will measure grinding fins, tears, slivers on existing structural steel by the number of man hours
 expended by the workers actually doing the grinding and will include the time when the workers are performing
 grinding and repairing prime coat and not limited to only the actual grinding duration (i.e., the Department will
 include all hours of the workers when assigned to grinding regardless of actual grinding time). The Department
 will not measure grinding fins, tears, and slivers on new steel but will consider it incidental to unit price for the
 new steel.
 514.24
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the Contract prices as follows:
 
 The Department may consider paint as eligible for payment for material on-hand as specified in 109.10, however,
 only paint that the Contractor can prove to the Engineer will be used during the construction season is eligible for
 payment. The Contractor shall provide the Engineer calculations indicating the total square feet (square meter) of
 steel to be painted during the construction season. The Contractor shall also provide calculations showing the total
 number of gallons (liters) required.
 If the Contractor causes damage or injury to public or private property, the Department will not pay for restoring
 the property to its original condition.
 The Department will not pay for repairing adjacent coatings damaged during the blasting operation.
 The Department will not pay for removing and replacing an area of coating because a spot or maximum average
 thickness exceeds the maximum spot thickness.
 The Department will not pay for additional testing required by any hauler, treatment facility, disposal facility or
 landfill.
 The Department will pay for caulking under Field Painting Structural Steel, Intermediate Coat.
 The Department will pay for final inspection access, test area preparation and test area repair at each selected
 area under Final Inspection Repair. The Department will not pay for accessing, inspecting, and repairing areas that
 are not found to be in conformance with the specifications and pertinent contract documents.
 All other requirements of this specification are considered incidental to the work.
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 514
 
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Lump Sum
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Lump Sum
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Lump Sum, Pound
 (Kilogram)
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Lump Sum, Pound
 (Kilogram)
 Man Hour
 Each
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Lump Sum
 
 Surface Preparation of Existing Structural Steel
 
 514
 514
 
 514
 
 514
 514
 514
 
 Field Painting of Existing Structural Steel, Prime Coat
 Field Painting Structural Steel, Intermediate Coat
 
 Field Painting Structural Steel, Finish Coat
 
 Grinding Fins, Tears, Slivers on Existing Structural Steel
 Final Inspection Repair
 Shop Painting and Field Touch-Up of Structural Steel
 
 Pound
 (Kilogram)
 
 ITEM 515 PRESTRESSED CONCRETE BRIDGE MEMBERS
 515.01
 515.02
 515.03
 515.04
 515.05
 515.06
 515.07
 515.08
 515.09
 515.10
 515.11
 515.12
 515.13
 515.14
 515.15
 515.16
 515.17
 515.18
 515.19
 515.20
 515.21
 515.22
 
 Description
 Fabricator Approval Procedure
 Levels of Fabricator Qualification
 General
 Fabricator Documentation Responsibility
 Shop Drawings
 Pre-Fabrication Meeting
 Materials
 Materials Approval
 Casting Beds
 Weather Conditions During Production
 Equipment
 Inspection Facilities
 Construction Methods
 Concrete
 Release of Prestressing Strands
 Fabrication tolerances
 Prestressed Member Acceptance and Repair
 Handling, Storage, Transportation, and Erection
 Safety Requirements
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 515.01
 Description. This work consists of preparing shop drawings, furnishing and manufacturing
 prestressed concrete bridge members, testing, fabricator performed quality control, documentation, shop coating,
 and handling, transporting, storing, and erecting prestressed concrete bridge members. Prepare shop drawings and
 erect prestressed concrete bridge members, according to Item 501 and the additional requirements specified below.
 Shop coating shall conform to Item 512.
 515.02
 Fabricator Approval Procedure. Select fabricators that are pre-qualified and evaluated by the
 Office of Materials Management (OMM) according to Supplement 1079 and listed by the Department before the
 Contract letting Date.
 515.03
 Levels of Fabricator Qualification. There are three levels of fabricator qualification. The OMM will
 classify each fabricator at the highest level of fabrication it is qualified to perform.
 Level
 1
 2
 3
 515.04
 
 Description of Capabilities
 Straight strand prestressed box beam members
 Straight strand prestressed I-beam members
 Draped strand prestressed I-beam members
 
 General. Produce all members according to Item 511, except as otherwise specified herein.
 
 515.05
 Fabricator Documentation Responsibility. The fabricator shall keep and maintain records for each
 project bid line number concerning:
 A. Fabricator plant approval.
 B. Shop drawing approval.
 C. Material test reports.
 D. Welding qualifications.
 E. Quality Control Plan (QCP) according to Supplement 1079.
 
 The fabricator shall provide access to the above records for audit, inspection, and copying. Provide a copy of the
 complete records at the completion and final shipment of the work. The Fabricator shall retain all documentation
 for at least 5 years from the date of final shipment from the fabrication shop.
 The fabricator shall document all Quality Control (QC) activities to verify the fabrication conforms to the
 specification requirements. QC activities include material quality checks, dimensional checks, weld inspections,
 strand tensioning procedures, release procedures, post-pour inspections, concrete strengths at release of strand and
 final strength of concrete before shipment, cleaning operations, coating applications, final QC inspections, repairs
 and all other QC procedures required to provide a prestress concrete member conforming to the specifications.
 Supplement 1079 defines the quality control plan evaluation process and quality control plan enhancement
 process
 The Department will perform a quality assurance (QA) evaluation of the fabricator’s quality control performance
 using forms in Supplement 1079 and will include both validation of the fabricator’s actual records of inspection
 and Department inspection.
 515.06
 
 Shop Drawings. Provide shop drawings conforming to 501.04 and the following requirements.
 
 Include all details, dimensions, dimensional tolerances, and size of materials, lifting devices, inserts, reinforcing
 steel supports, fabricator incorporated reinforcing, piece mark diagrams for field connection and erection of any
 steel and all prestress members, and all other information necessary for the complete fabrication and erection of
 the prestressed members. Show all items that will be incorporated into each prestressed member.
 Provide the detensioning procedure and pattern conforming to 515.16.
 515.07
 Pre-Fabrication Meeting. At least 3 days after the Department receives shop drawings, conduct a
 pre-fabrication meeting at the fabricator’s facilities, or another location agreed to by all parties.
 As part of the pre-fabrication meeting request, provide a initial fabrication schedule for the prestressed beam
 project including:
 A. Start date for fabrication of the project
 B. Expected phasing of fabrication, if any
 C. Number of workdays for the project and length of work day
 D. Quality control final inspection date
 The fabricator’s production manager, quality control specialists (QCS) for the project, the Department’s
 inspector, and the Contractor, or its designated representative, shall attend the meeting. The meeting is to review
 fabrication issues, including information on shop drawings, previous QC/QA inspection issues, QC and Quality
 Assurance inspection hold points, unique and special fabrication items, and special processes. The QCS will
 conduct the meeting and record and distribute meeting minutes that document all issues discusses. Begin fabrication
 when all meeting issues have been resolved.
 Office of Material Management may waive the pre-fabrication meeting if accepted by the Fabricator and the
 Contractor. If Contractor submitted shop drawings do not comply with the requirements of 515.06, no prefabrication meeting can be scheduled or waived.
 515.08
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Reinforcing steel ................................................................................... 509
 Concrete ........................................................................................... 515.15
 Portland cement ............................................................ 701.01 thru 701.09
 Aggregate * ...................................................................................... 703.02
 Air-entraining admixture ................................................................. 705.10
 Chemical admixtures for concrete ................................................... 705.12
 Prestressing steel .............................................................................. 711.27
 Transverse tie rods ........................................................................... 711.01
 Welded wire reinforcement ............................................................. 709.12
 
 * For fine aggregate, use natural sand for members without a separate wearing course. Modify coarse
 aggregate as follows:
 Do not allow more than 0.4 percent deleterious materials.
 For gradation, use No. 6, 67, 68, 7, 78, or 8 size coarse aggregate.
 515.09
 Materials Approval. The fabricator shall control, test, and validate material requirements for all
 materials either incorporated into the prestressed fabricated item or supplied under Item 515 as component parts to
 the fabricated items. The fabricator shall provide Supplement 1079 documentation to the inspector at the time of
 final inspection.
 The Department will not sample materials at the fabricator’s shop for Department approval. The Department will
 randomly sample materials to verify the fabricator’s performance.
 515.10
 Casting Beds. Use steel or concrete casting beds set above grade to ensure the beds remain above the
 accumulation of water resulting from production and curing operations. Design beds and abutments capable of
 safely resisting all forces applied to them without appreciable movement or deflection. These forces include
 compression and eccentric forces due to end-jacking operations, forces at hold down points when draped strands
 are used, and downward forces due to the dead weight of the members.
 515.11
 Weather Conditions During Production. Make temperature change adjustments to initial strand
 tensioning according to PCI Quality Control Manual MNL 116.
 A. Cold Weather. Conform to the requirements of this subsection if the ambient air temperature is below 50 °F
 (10 °C). Heat mixing water, aggregates, or both as necessary to produce a concrete temperatures from 50 to 70 °F
 (10 to 21 °C) when placed. Do not allow water heated above 150 °F (66 °C) to directly contact the cement. Do not
 place concrete against forms, reinforcing steel, prestressing strand, or other hardware materials with a temperatures
 below 32 °F (0 °C).
 Immediately prior to final stressing, obtain the temperature correction factor for prestressing strands using a
 thermometer that has been calibrated against a NIST-traceable thermometer. Define the frequency, location, and
 thermometer in the Quality Control Plan.
 Do not place concrete when the ambient temperature with sustained wind chill factor at the point of concrete
 placement is below 0 °F (-18 °C).
 B. Hot Weather. If the ambient temperature is above 90 °F (32 °C) cool the mixing water, aggregates, or both,
 as necessary to produce a concrete temperature from 70 to 90 °F (21 to 32 °C). Do not place concrete against forms,
 mild reinforcing steel, prestressing strand, or other hardware materials with a temperature greater than 120 °F (49
 °C).
 Water fog spray forms, mild reinforcing steel and strand just prior to placing the concrete. Cover beams
 immediately after casting to prevent surface drying.
 Do not place concrete when the ambient temperature at the point of concrete placement is above 100 °F (38
 °C).
 C. Inclement Weather. If a rainfall event begins after placement of concrete in the forms has begun, provide
 cover and complete only the beam that had concrete in it when the rain began. Provide immediate cover over
 previously poured concrete, not yet cured. Resumption of concrete placement is permitted after the rainfall stops.
 515.12
 Equipment. Provide hydraulic jacks of sufficient capacity and stroke to tension strands. Use either
 single or multiple strand tensioning. Provide tensioning jacks equipped with automatic cutoff valves and equipped
 with 6 inch (150 mm) minimum diameter gages that provide readings at 500-pound (2 kN) increments. Calibrate
 gages for the jacks with which they are to be used. Have a graph or table showing the calibration available for the
 inspector. Calibrate jacks according to a method acceptable to the Laboratory at least every 6 months or as required
 by the Director. Maintain calibration documentation as part of the project’s QC inspection records.
 Design the jacking system to ensure uniform stress in all strands. If simultaneously tensioning multiple strands,
 use approved types of dynamometers to equalize the initial stress on all strands before applying the full tensioning
 
 load with the master jack Provide dynamometers with sufficient capacity to ensure that the desired readings are in
 the middle to upper range.
 515.13
 Inspection Facilities. The fabricator shall provide the inspector office accommodations conforming
 to the following requirements:
 A. Minimum floor area of 120 square feet (11 m2).
 B. Minimum ceiling height of 7 feet (2.1 m).
 C. Adequate working and storage facilities, work space, lighting, electrical outlets, lockable files or cabinets with
 key.
 D. Heating and cooling capable of maintaining an ambient air temperature between 68 F (20 C) and 80 F (27
 C).
 E. Secure internet access.
 515.14
 Construction Methods. Use metal forms capable of producing members within the tolerances shown
 on the plans. Forms made of material other than metal may be used for bulkheads and voids and may be used for a
 single project for prestressed members requiring non-standard forms. Ensure that the surfaces of the forms in
 contact with the concrete are smooth and the joints between panels are tight. The soffit form shall have a plane
 surface at right angles to the vertical axis of the members and have the two bottom edges beveled 3/4 inch (19 mm)
 with a triangular strip built into the forms. Increase the length of the forms for elastic shortening and normal
 concrete shrinkage, and design the forms to accommodate this movement.
 Provide water-resistant formwork for box beam voids constructed of a material that resists breakage and
 deformation during placement of concrete. Provide form material that does not excessively increase the dead load
 of the beams.
 Prevent the release agent from contacting the prestressing strands or reinforcing steel.
 Install and assemble reinforcing steel according to the approved shop drawings. If authorized, weld reinforcing
 cages using welders qualified to AWS D1.4. Do not weld epoxy coated or galvanized reinforcing steel unless
 approved by Office of Material Management. Repair all coating areas damaged by welding according to the coating
 manufacturer’s instructions. Reject reinforcing steel with a loss of cross-section of reinforcing caused by welding.
 Provide a protective covering for the prestressed steel from the elements until the strand is pulled into the bed.
 Accurately place strands in the positions shown on the shop drawings. Do not use strands with kinks, bends, nicks,
 broken wires, scale, loose rust, or other defects. The fabricator may use slightly rusted reinforcing steel provided
 the rust is not sufficient to cause visible pits. Before placing the concrete, carefully clean the strands of all dirt,
 grease, oil, or other foreign matters. Do not splice strands within a member.
 Tension strands uniformly to the stress indicated on the shop drawings. If multiple stands are stressed
 simultaneously, use dynamometers to equalize the initial stress on all strands before applying full tension load with
 master jack. Measure the required stress in the strands using the calibrated jacking equipment gages, and check the
 measured stress by the elongation of the strands. If the stress from the gages and the measured elongation are not
 within a 5 percent tolerance of the design, stop stressing the strands and determine the reason for the differences.
 The quality control specialist shall keep a record of the jacking forces and elongations of all strands. Secure the
 strands by suitable anchorage devices capable of developing at least 85 percent of the ultimate strength of the
 strands. The anchorage shall not allow the strand to slip after the tensioning operation.
 If using draped strands, the loss of stress due to friction shall not exceed 5 percent. Tension the strands at both
 ends. The quality control specialist shall measure the loss due to friction by a procedure approved by the Office of
 Material Management. Place hold-down points within 3 inches (90 mm) of the locations shown on shop drawings
 and within 12 inches (0.3 m) of the locations shown on the plans.
 Unless otherwise shown in the plans, do not install inserts or holes in the beam web within a distance of 1.5 times
 the beam height from the end of the beam.
 
 515.15
 Concrete. The fabricator shall provide concrete mix designs to Office of Material Management. The
 submittal will include:
 A. Test data showing the mix achieves the required 28-day strength when cured by methods used for member
 fabrication. The strength of the concrete for the mix design approval and during production is determined using
 sets of two, 6 × 12-inch cylinders or three, 4 × 8-inch cylinders.
 B. w/c ratio (maximum =0.40)
 C. A design and maximum slump
 D. Test data showing the mix design achieves 2000 coulombs or less at 90 days when tested according to
 AASHTO T277. Use samples for the test that were mixed without corrosion inhibitors and that were cured with
 the same methods that will be used to produce the prestressed concrete bridge members. Do not apply additional
 cure to samples that have reached the required design strength.
 Changes in proportioning, cement, pozzolans or aggregate will require retesting and resubmittal. Office of
 Materials Management may waive the retests. Provide the waiver request in writing and include all information for
 the new mix design and a comparison to the previously tested and approved mix design(s).
 Deliver concrete according to Item 499 except that 499.03 and 499.04 does not apply. The plastic air content of
 the concrete before placement shall be 6 ± 2 percent. If the Department questions the concrete’s placed air content,
 obtain cores from the prestressed member and have hardened air testing performed by an independent testing lab
 acceptable to the Department. Beams with hardened air contents below 4 percent will be rejected. Add an approved
 corrosion inhibiting admixture at the approved dosage and document the dosage that has been incorporated into
 each batch of concrete.
 Maintain the mix design slump during production. Segregation of the mix is not acceptable. Do not exceed the
 maximum water-cement ratio during concrete production. When using admixtures to increase the slump, use Type
 F or G as described in 705.12. Do not use calcium chloride or admixtures containing calcium chloride.
 Sample and test the concrete for prestressed concrete members as specified below:
 TEST SPECIMEN REQUIREMENTS
 Cubic Yards per Bed
 Less than or equal to 30 cubic yards
 30 to 60 cubic yards
 Greater than 60 cubic yards
 
 Sampling Frequency
 First and last load per bed
 First and last load per bed plus
 one random sample.
 First and last load per bed plus
 2 random samples.
 
 Number of Cylinders
 Required
 Minimum of 4
 Minimum of 6
 Minimum of 8
 
 Determine strength, for both strand release and final shipping, by testing a group of cylinders, which consists of
 one cylinder from every sample location. Each group of cylinders shall have an average strength of what is specified
 in the shop drawings, and no individual cylinder shall have less than 95 percent of the specified strength.
 The inspector may require additional cylinders from locations were the concrete does not conform to mix design
 or placement requirements. Include these additional cylinders in the group of cylinders for determining release and
 final strength.
 The fabricator may place concrete in the bottom flange of a box beam before placing the interior forms and
 reinforcement for the upper portion of the member, provided continuous concrete placement is not interrupted for
 more than 45 minutes.
 Screed the top surfaces of non-composite members and finish the surface with a burlap drag or other means to
 provide a uniform surface with a gritty texture suitable for waterproofing.
 
 Screed the top surface of composite members and finish the surface with a wire broom, in a transverse direction
 and penetrating the finished surface approximately 1/4 inch (6 mm) + 1/16 inch (1.5 mm) – 1/8 inch (3 mm) at a
 maximum spacing of 1 -1/2 inches (38 mm).
 Immediately after final concrete placement and surface finishing, protect the concrete surface with a suitable
 enclosure until application of live steam or radiant heat. Assure the enclosure’s ambient temperature is at least 50
 °F (10 °C). Assure the plastic concrete’s temperature before initial set doesn’t rise more than 10 °F (5 °C) per hour.
 Limit the total rise before initial set to less than 40 °F (22 °C) and the maximum temperature to 100 °F (38 °C).
 Record the times and concrete temperatures before initial set.
 For curing with low-pressure steam, do not apply live steam directly onto the concrete forms if it causes localized
 high temperatures.
 For accelerated curing with radiant heat, apply radiant heat using pipes circulating steam, hot oil, or hot water,
 or using electric heating elements. Minimize moisture loss by covering all exposed concrete surfaces with plastic
 sheeting, 705.06, or by applying a liquid membrane curing compound, 705.07, to all exposed concrete surfaces.
 Before bonding field-cast concrete or other materials in the finished structure, remove the curing compound from
 the shear faces of composite members and other surfaces.
 Start initial application of the steam or heat 2 to 4 hours after final concrete placement. If using retarders, start
 applying the steam or heat 4 to 6 hours after final concrete placement. If determining the time of initial set according
 to ASTM C 403, these time limits do not apply. Record and report the actual time of concrete placement of the last
 load, placement of enclosure and initial set time.
 Apply live steam or radiant heat so the ambient temperature within the curing enclosure does not gain more than
 40 °F (22 °C) per hour until reaching the curing temperature. Do not exceed 160 °F (71 °C). Only use a maximum
 temperature of 180 °F (82 °C) if the fabricator documents to the Department that delayed ettringite or alkali silica
 reaction is not at issue. Maintain the maximum curing temperature until the concrete has reached the required
 release strength. De-tension the strands immediately upon completing the accelerated curing. Keep a record of the
 time the application of heat began, and curing temperatures throughout the entire curing process.
 Neatly fill cavities in the exposed surface of beams with nonshrink grout. Clean the concrete, and apply and cure
 the grout according to the manufacturer’s published recommendations. Reject beams with honeycombing that
 impairs the member’s performance.
 515.16
 Release of Prestressing Strands. Do not release prestressed strands until the concrete reaches a
 minimum strength of 4000 pounds per square inch (28.0 MPa), or plan defined release strength. Determine strength
 of concrete by testing cylinders produced according to AASHTO T 23 and cured in the same method as the member.
 Test cylinders in the fabricator’s laboratory. Assure all tested cylinders obtain the required strength of 4000 pounds
 per square inch (28.0 MPa) or the plan defined release strength. Provide the Department the ability to witness the
 cylinder testing by notifying the inspector before testing.
 Before releasing prestressed strands, loosen or remove forms and hold-downs and all other attachments
 restricting either horizontal or vertical movement of prestressed members. Release the strands immediately upon
 completing accelerated curing. Heat release and burn the strands simultaneously between each beam and at all
 exposed points between anchorages, and follow an approved pre-determined pattern, to equalize the forces being
 transferred to the various areas of the cross-section of the member. Submit any alternative strand release plans
 during the prefabrication meeting to OMM for approval. For heat release, use a low-oxygen flame to uniformly
 heat at least a 4 inch (100 mm) long section of strand before completely cutting the strand.
 515.17
 
 Fabrication Tolerances. Construct all members to conform to the following tolerances.
 
 BEAM DIMENSIONAL TOLERANCES
 Description
 
 Box Beam
 I Beam
 ±1/8" per 10 ft (1 mm/m) ±1/8" per 10 ft (1 mm/m)
 Length of beam
 max ±3/4" (19 mm)
 max ±1" (25 mm)
 -1/4" (6 mm)
 Depth of beam
 ±1/4" (6 mm)
 +1/2" (13 mm)
 Depth of I beam flange including fillets
 N/A
 ±1/4" (6 mm)
 -1/4" (6 mm)
 Beam (box)/Flange (I) Width
 ±1/4" (6 mm)
 +3/8" (10 mm)
 Flange Thickness excluding fillets
 -0
 a) Top
 ±1/4" (6 mm)
 +1/2" (13 mm)
 -1/8" (3 mm)
 b) Bottom
 ±1/4" (6 mm)
 +1/2" (13 mm)
 -1/4" (6 mm)
 Width Web
 N/A
 +3/8" (10 mm)
 -1/4" (6 mm)
 Width beam walls
 N/A
 +3/8" (10 mm)
 Width of Void
 ±1/2" (13 mm)
 N/A
 Height of Void
 ±1/2" (13 mm)
 N/A
 Box Beam Diaphragm spacing
 ±2" (50 mm)
 N/A
 Deviation from True Vertical
 ±1/8" (3 mm)
 1/8" per ft (8 mm per m)
 Deviation from Skew Angle
 ±1/2" (13 mm)
 ±1/2" (13 mm)
 BEAM ACCESSORY TOLERANCES
 Description
 Position of railing anchors
 Position of lifting devices
 Positions of anchor dowels and tie rods, inserts
 Deviation from skew angle
 
 Box Beam
 ±1/4" (6 mm)
 ±6" (150 mm)
 ±1/2" (13 mm)
 ±1/2" (13 mm)
 
 I Beam
 N/A
 ±6" (150 mm)
 ±1/2" (13 mm)
 ±1/2" (13 mm)
 
 BEAM STRAND TOLERANCES
 Description
 Strand tendon position
 Strand CG position
 
 Box Beam
 ±1/4" (6 mm)
 ±1/4" (6 mm)
 
 I Beam
 ±1/4" (6 mm)
 ±1/4" (6 mm)
 
 REINFORCING STEEL TOLERANCES
 Description
 Clear cover
 Splice lengths
 Stirrup spacing in anchorage zone
 Stirrup spacing outside anchorage zone
 Stirrup extension above top flange
 Reinforcement extension beyond beam end
 
 Box Beam
 -0
 +1/4" (6 mm)
 -1 1/2" (38 mm)
 ±1/4" (6 mm)
 ±1" (25 mm)
 -1/2" (13 mm)
 +1/4" (6 mm)
 -3/4” (18 mm)
 +0
 
 I Beam
 -0
 +1/4" (6 mm)
 -1 1/2" (38 mm)
 ±1/4" (6 mm)
 ±1" (25 mm)
 0
 +1” (25 mm)
 -3/4” (18 mm)
 +0
 
 BEAM SWEEP AND CAMBER TOLERANCES
 Description
 
 Box Beam
 ±1/8" per 10 ft (1 mm/m)
 Horizontal Sweep
 max ±3/4" (19 mm)
 Max Gap between beam
 1" (25 mm)
 + Sacrificial Haunch [2] or
 Deviation from Design camber (Dt) [1]
 1/8" per 10 ft (1 mm/m)
 max 1/2" (13 mm)
 Variation in camber between beams in same span
 max 1/2" (13 mm)
 [1]Design camber (Dt) calculated in accordance with 511.07
 [2] Unless otherwise noted, Sacrificial Haunch thickness is 2”
 
 I Beam
 ±1/8" per 10 ft (1 mm/m)
 max ±1" (25 mm)
 N/A
 + Sacrificial Haunch [2] or
 N/A
 
 515.18
 Prestressed Member Acceptance and repair. Throughout the fabrication process reject all
 prestressed members not meeting specification requirements.
 For all rejected members provide the Department with a complete description of the rejection, and unless waived
 by the Director, an Ohio registered professional engineer’s written evaluation of the criticalness of the rejection
 and the professional engineer’s proposed repair method that will repair the rejected member to an acceptable
 condition. The Department will determine the acceptability of the member and the repair procedure. If acceptable,
 the fabricator will only make repairs witnessed by the Department’s inspector unless waived by Director.
 Use the Precast/Prestress Concrete Institute’s Manual for the evaluation and repair of Precast, Prestressed
 Concrete Bridge Products MNL-137-06 as a general guide.
 The Department will not accept for shipping, prestressed members with measured camber exceeding the Design
 Camber (Dt), used to establish the seat elevations, according to 511.07, by more than the Sacrificial Haunch
 thickness, until a corrective work plan has been approved by the Engineer. The plan shall be signed, sealed and
 dated by an Ohio Registered Engineer and shall include all revised plan information necessary to place the deck to
 the plan thickness. If the prestressed members are acceptable, exclusive of the deviation from Design Camber, the
 Department will pay for all costs incurred resulting from measured camber exceeding Design Camber calculated
 for the actual beam age at the time of deck placement, as Extra Work, 109.05.
 515.19
 Handling Storage, Transportation, and Erection. Handle, store, transport, and erect the members
 in an upright position. The direction of support reactions during storage and transportation shall be the same as the
 member will experience in its in-service position. Do not ship prestressed members until the concrete obtains its
 28-day design strength and the inspector’s approval.
 Provide at least 30 inches (762 mm) horizontally between each beam for inspection. Provide at least 8 inches
 (200 mm) of vertical clearance from the bottom. Use storage support locations as close as practical to the in-service
 
 support locations. During storage, provide unyielding horizontal supports and bracing capable of maintaining the
 members in a vertical position.
 Transportation support locations shall be the sole responsibility of the fabricator with respect to member stresses
 and safe delivery to the job site. Obtain the Director’s written approval to transport the members in a position other
 than vertical.,
 Provide lifting devices capable of withstanding the required loads to lift and erect the members. During erection,
 accurately place the prestressed beams on their bearings to ensure a uniform load on all bearings. When shifting a
 member, lift the member up completely off of its bearings. Temporarily brace the first I-beam erected to its
 substructure support units in the vertical position before releasing the beam from the crane. Tie each subsequent Ibeam to the previously braced beam(s). Provide bracing after erection adequate to prevent sliding, tipping, or other
 movement that may result from high winds, creeping down the grade, or other causes, until placement of the
 diaphragms. Within any one day erect and brace at least 2 adjacent members in any one span before suspending
 operations for the day.
 Place box beams to ensure a correct fit of the keyways and to ensure proper grouting of the keyways. After
 placing the beams and installing tie devices, fill the longitudinal keyways using non-shrink keyway grouts, 705.22,
 approved by OMM. Mix, install, and cure the grout according to the manufacturer’s published recommendations
 to obtain a design compressive strength of 5000 pounds per square inch (34.5 MPa).
 Do not allow vehicular load on an individual prestressed concrete box beam until the grout in the keyway obtains
 the specified design strength of 5000 pounds per square inch (34.5 MPa).
 At the Director’s discretion, repair or replace members damaged by improper handling, storage, transportation,
 or erection.
 515.20
 Safety Requirements. Provide effective safety measures to prevent injuries to personnel due to
 breakage of strands or failure of anchorage devices during the tensioning operations. Provide adequate protection
 and assure the OMM inspector can perform inspection of beams and manufacturing processes. The Department
 inspector will report any inadequate safety precautions to the plant QCS and to OMM if fabricator remedial action
 is not taken. OMM inspectors will follow safety rules established by the fabricator, at a minimum. Where fabricator
 safety rules interfere with the inspectors’ duties, the process should be altered to allow the inspections to be
 performed while maintaining the required level of safety.
 515.21
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Prestressed Concrete Bridge Members by
 the number of members.
 The Department will measure the intermediate diaphragms by the number of each placed.
 515.22
 Basis of Payment. Payment for prestressed concrete beams include all inserts, sleeves, fittings,
 reinforcing steel fully or partially encased in the members, threaded rods, embedded inserts, embedded bearing
 sole plates, temporary bracing, fixed anchor dowels, and all transverse tie rods necessary to complete this work.
 The Department will consider all costs associated with all structural steel, including bolts, nuts, washers and plate
 washers for steel intermediate diaphragms, as well as concrete and reinforcing steel for cast-in-place concrete
 intermediate diaphragms as incidental to the intermediate diaphragms.
 The Department will pay for expansion joint end diaphragms, semi-integral diaphragms, pier diaphragms,
 bearing load plates, bearing pads, and other expansion materials, separately.
 The Department will not pay for repaired or replaced members damaged by improper handling, storing,
 transporting, or erecting.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 515
 515
 515
 
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 Prestressed Concrete Non- Composite Box Beam Bridge Members, Level 1
 Prestressed Concrete Composite Box Beam Bridge Members, Level 1
 Straight Strand Prestressed Concrete Bridge I-Beam Members, Level 2
 
 515
 515
 
 Each
 Each
 
 Draped Strand Prestressed Concrete Bridge I-Beam Members, Level 3
 Intermediate Diaphragms
 
 ITEM 516 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION JOINTS JOINT SEALERS AND
 BEARING DEVICES
 516.01
 516.02
 516.03
 516.04
 516.05
 516.06
 516.07
 516.08
 516.09
 
 Description
 Fabrication
 Coating
 Materials
 Expansion and Contraction Joints
 Joint Sealers
 Bearing Devices
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 516.01
 Description. This work consists of fabricating, assembling, constructing, coating, and installing
 expansion and contraction joints, vertical extension of structural expansion joints, joint sealers, or bearing devices
 of the type and size specified.
 516.02
 Fabrication. Fabricate metal joint armor and metal bearings according to Items 513. Select a
 fabricator that is at least pre-qualified at level SF. The Department will base final acceptance of fabricated members
 on the Engineer’s approval that the fabricated items that can be successfully incorporated into the structures. Submit
 mill test reports for structural steel, steel castings, bronze, and sheet lead certified according to 501.06.
 516.03
 Coating. Coat exposed steel bearings according to Items 513 and 514 that are to be attached to
 structural steel. Galvanize bearings according to 711.02 that are to be attached to concrete beams.
 Coat metal parts of expansion joints with metalized 100 percent zinc wire. Prepare the surface to be coated and
 apply coating as required by The Society of Protective Coatings SSPC-CS-23.00(1). Apply coating to a minimum
 thickness of 6 mils.
 Repair metalized coatings damaged during fabrication by removal of the damaged coating and reapplication as
 specified above. Repair metalized or galvanized coatings damaged during shipping, construction, or field welding
 according to 711.02.
 516.04
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 Structural steel ...................................................................................... 513
 Bearing bolts and anchor rods ......................................................... 711.10
 Painting ................................................................................................. 514
 Joint sealer, hot applied ................................................................... 705.04
 Preformed elastomeric compression stager ..................................... 705.11
 Neoprene Sheeting ........................................................................... 705.13
 Steel castings ................................................................................... 711.07
 Sheet copper..................................................................................... 711.15
 Bronze .................................................................... 711.16, 711.17, 711.18
 Sheet lead. ........................................................................................ 711.19
 Preformed bearing pads ................................................................... 711.21
 Elastomeric bearings ........................................................................ 711.23
 Preformed fillers .............................................................................. 705.03
 Swedged anchor bolts or bars* ........................................................ 711.10
 Non-Shrink,Non-Metallic Grout ..................................................... 705.20
 * Fabricated by deforming a minimum of 20 percent of the embedded bolt surface with deformations
 whose radial dimensions are 15 to 20 percent of the bar diameter.
 516.05
 Expansion and Contraction Joints. Ensure that expansion joints are completely open for the
 dimension specified for their full length. Remove stones, forms, or other materials that interfere with expansion.
 
 Finish the surface adjacent to preformed expansion joints to a smooth, uniform surface. Use methods that do not
 interfere with the free compression of the joint material to anchor the expansion joint materials. The joint material
 shall neatly fill the space, and have a uniform thickness for the full extent of the joint.
 For Integral and Semi-Integral Abutment Expansion Joint Seals, install a 3 foot wide neoprene sheet for
 waterproofing of the backside of the joint between the integral backwall and the bridge seat at locations shown in
 the plans. Secure the neoprene sheeting to the concrete with 1 1/4 inch by #10 gage (length × shank diameter)
 galvanized button head spikes through a 1 inch outside diameter, #10 gage galvanized washer. Maximum fastener
 spacing is 9 inches. Use of other similar galvanized devices, which will not damage either the neoprene or the
 concrete, will be subject to the approval of the Engineer.
 Center the neoprene strips on all joints. For horizontal joints, secure the horizontal neoprene strip by using a
 single line of fasteners, starting at approximately 6 inches from the top of the neoprene strip. For the vertical joints
 secure the vertical neoprene strip by using a single vertical line of fasteners, starting at approximately 6 inches from
 the vertical edge of the neoprene strip nearest to the centerline of roadway.
 For vertical joints, install two additional fasteners at 6 inches, center to center, across the top of the neoprene
 strip on the same side of the vertical joint as the single vertical row of fasteners is located. The vertical neoprene
 strips shall completely overlap the horizontal strips. Lap lengths of the horizontal strips that are not vulcanized or
 adhesive bonded, shall be at least 1 foot in length, or 6 inches in length if the lap is vulcanized or adhesive bonded.
 No laps are acceptable in vertically installed neoprene strips. The neoprene sheeting shall be 3/32 inch thick general
 purpose, heavy-duty neoprene sheet with nylon fabric reinforcement.
 516.06
 Joint Sealers. Before applying joint sealer to the surface, clean the concrete of foreign matter, curing
 compounds, oil, grease, dirt, free water, and laitance and clean steel by sand blasting.
 Apply joint sealer with a minimum depth of 1 inch (25 mm) at its thinnest section. Fill joints to within 1/4 inch
 (6 mm) of the roadway surface.
 Separate joint sealer from contact with asphalt concrete using a barrier of foil or other material that is impervious
 to the joint sealer.
 As required to prevent bonding of the joint sealer with a joint surface, place a suitable bond breaker barrier before
 applying the joint sealer.
 Remove joint sealer that did not bond to the joint face as intended within 24 hours after placing. Clean the joint
 by sandblasting and reseal the joint.
 Mix and place joint sealer according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Provide the Engineer with a copy of the
 manufacturer’s instructions.
 Protect joint sealer with an impervious masking tape during the application of concrete protective coatings
 containing mineral spirits.
 516.07
 Bearing Devices. For sliding plates, lubricate the sliding surfaces with flake graphite, and
 superimpose plates on each other with their edges flush.
 Install each bridge bearing to within ± 0.125 inch of its marked centerlines in the horizontal plane and oriented
 to within an angular tolerance of 0.20 rad. (1 degree).
 Accurately set, level and align elastomeric bearings, bearing plates, and bolsters. Set bearing plates and bolsters
 on 0.125 inch (3 mm) thick sheet lead, conforming to 711.19.
 Set bearing plates or bolsters on bridge seat areas that are flat and smoothly finished. If the bridge seat area is
 high or uneven, use a bushhammer or grinder followed by thin film of portland cement mortar or paste to fill the
 pitted surface to bring the seat area to the proper elevation and provide a level, even surface. If the bridge seat area
 is low, use steel plate shims of the same bearing area as the bearing plates and bolsters to bring the seat area to the
 proper elevation.
 Set elastomeric bearing pads directly on the concrete surface. If the beams seats are sealed with an epoxy or nonepoxy sealer prior to setting the bearings, do not apply sealer to the concrete surfaces under the proposed bearing
 
 locations. If these locations are sealed, or membrane cured, remove the sealer or membrane cure to the satisfaction
 of the Engineer before setting the bearings. Perform this removal at no expense to the Department.
 Position rockers, elastomeric bearings, and rollers so that, when the completed bridge is at 60 F (16 C), the
 rockers and elastomeric bearings are vertical and the rollers are centered on the base. If the steel is erected at an
 ambient temperature higher than 80 °F or lower than 40 ºF and the bearing shear deflection exceeds 1/6 of the
 bearing height at 60 ºF ± 10 ºF, raise the beams or girders to allow the elastomeric bearings to return to their
 undeformed shape at 60 ºF ± 10 ºF.
 Set anchor bolts for bearing devices that are clear of the beam or girder flanges, in the concrete after erecting the
 main structural steel, except as specified below for bearing devices at abutments. Place reinforcing steel in the
 bridge seat to not interfere with the drilling of anchor holes. Accurately set anchor bolts in the holes and embed the
 anchor bolts in non-shrink, non-metallic grout. Until the anchors’ are installed, prevent water from entering and or
 freezing in the anchor bolt holes.
 If structural steel interferes with the setting of the anchor bolts, set the anchor bolts before erecting the steel. The
 Contractor may determine the location of the bolts by using a template and form holes or embed the bolts when
 placing concrete or, drilling holes in the hardened concrete.
 Install anchor bolts to project at least 1/4 inch (6mm) beyond the nut when tightened. Damage or burr the threads
 on the projecting end of the bolt after the nut is tightened. The bolt threads shall not extend to the planes of the
 contact surfaces between the connected parts. Include the length of two additional threads to the specified thread
 length of the bolt to allow for thread runout. Washers no thicker than 1/4 inch (6mm) are permitted under the nut.
 Permanently fasten bearing devices to the abutments, steel beams, or girders after backfilling the abutments to
 within 2 feet (0.6 m) of the top of the bridge seat.
 Where the load plate of an elastomeric bearing is to be connected to the structure by welding, control the welding
 so that the plate temperature at the elastomer bonded surface does not exceed 300 °F as determined by use of
 pyrometric sticks or other temperature monitoring devices.
 516.08
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure the specified items by the number of each,
 square feet (square meters), pounds (kilograms), or feet (meters) horizontally along the joint centerline and between
 the outer limits of the fabricated joint.
 For deck resurfacing, the Department will measure Structural Steel Expansion Joints extending vertically by the
 actual horizontal length of joint.
 516.09
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 516
 
 Foot or Pound
 (Meter or Kilogram)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Each, Foot,
 Square Foot, Pound
 (Meter, Square Meter,
 Kilogram)
 Each, Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Each
 
 Structural Steel Expansion Joints
 
 516
 516
 516
 516
 516
 516
 516
 
 516
 516
 
 Structural Expansion Joints Including Elastomeric ___ Seals
 Elastomeric Compression Seals for Structural Steel Joints, ___ Width
 Folder Copper Strip ___
 Vertical Extension of Structural Expansion Joints
 ___ Preformed Expansion Joint Filler
 Joint Sealer
 Bearing Devices
 
 ___ inch (___ mm) Elastomeric Bearing Pad
 Elastomeric Bearing with Internal Laminates Only
 
 516
 
 Each
 
 516
 
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 
 ___  ___  ___ Elastomeric Bearing with Internal Laminates and
 Load Plate ___  ___  ___
 1/8-inch (3 mm) Preformed Bearing Pads
 
 ITEM 517 RAILINGS
 517.01
 517.02
 517.03
 517.04
 517.05
 517.06
 517.07
 517.08
 
 Description
 Fabrication
 Materials
 Construction Methods, General
 Steel and Iron Railings
 Aluminum Railings
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 517.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing, constructing, coating, and erecting the type of railing
 specified. This work also consists of providing and galvanizing structural posts, anchors, and connections.
 517.02
 Fabrication. Fabricate railing according to Item 513. Select a fabricator that is at least prequalified
 at level SF. The Department will base final acceptance of fabricated members on the Engineer’s approval that the
 fabricated items that can be successfully incorporated into the structures. Submit mill test reports for structural
 steel, steel castings, bronze, and sheet lead certified according to 501.06.
 517.03
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Concrete, Class QC 2 .................................................................... 499, 511
 Reinforcing steel ........................................................................... 509, 709
 Structural steel ...................................................................................... 513
 Preformed fillers (sponge rubber or PVC).......................... 705.03, 711.28
 Steel tubing ...................................................................................... 707.10
 Paint ...................................................................................................... 708
 Metal deep beam rail ....................................................................... 710.06
 Ductile iron casings. ........................................................................ 711.13
 Aluminum ........................................................................................ 711.20
 Timber.............................................................................................. 711.26
 Stainless steel fasteners.................................................................... 730.10
 Pipe .................................................................................................. 748.06
 Submit mill test reports for structural steel and aluminum according to 501.06.
 517.04
 Construction Methods, General. Construct railings as shown on the plans. Install posts for metal
 railings normal to the grade line. Install the tops of railings parallel to the grade line.
 Remove or release shoring or falsework supporting the superstructure before placing railing that has no expansion
 joints or that is on the concrete parapet.
 517.05
 Steel and Iron Railings. Unless specified to paint according to Item 514, galvanize all parts of steel
 and iron railings.
 Erect metal deep beam rail elements according to Item 606.
 517.06
 Aluminum Railings. Use alloy conforming to 711.20 for aluminum railings.
 Give the extreme outer surfaces of cast railing posts a 40-grit finish. The Contractor is not required to provide a
 special finish for other portions of railings. Do not scratch, dent, or cause other damage to railings that may affect
 the durability or appearance of the railing.
 Use galvanized steel anchor bolts and hexagon nuts conforming to 711.02. Coat the entire projecting portion of
 anchor bolts and fill the space between the bolts and post base with an aluminum-impregnated caulking compound.
 Where aluminum contacts concrete or stone masonry, thoroughly coat the contact surfaces with an aluminumimpregnated caulking compound or with a heavy asphalt material paint pigmented with aluminum powder or paste
 thereby providing an aluminum appearance. Where aluminum or aluminum shims contacts different metal,
 thoroughly coat the contact surface with an aluminum-impregnated caulking compound or place a synthetic rubber
 impregnated fabric gasket between the metals.
 
 Weld only where shown on the plans using inert gas shielded metal-arc or tungsten-arc method without flux, or
 by other approved methods.
 517.07
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Railing by the number of feet (meters) of
 railing including end posts. If deep beam guardrail is used, the Department will measure the length of railing
 between the first posts off the bridge excluding the first posts off the bridge. If hand rails or tubular backup rails
 are used, the Department will not measure any portions extending beyond the first posts off the bridge. If twin steel
 tube bridge railing is used, the Department will measure the length of the railing between the second post off the
 bridge including the second post.
 517.08
 Basis of Payment. The cost of hand rails or tubular backup rails extending beyond the measured
 limits are included for payment in the unit price bid for the measured length.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 517
 
 Foot (Meter)
 
 Railing (___)
 
 ITEM 518 DRAINAGE OF STRUCTURES
 518.01
 518.02
 518.03
 518.04
 518.05
 518.06
 518.07
 518.08
 518.09
 518.10
 518.01
 
 Description
 Fabrication
 Materials
 General
 Porous Backfill
 Pipe
 Scuppers
 Excavation
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 Description. This work consists of constructing drainage systems.
 
 518.02
 Fabrication. Fabricate scuppers according to Item 513. Select a fabricator that is at least pre-qualified
 at level SF. The Department will base final acceptance of all fabricated members on the Engineer’s approval that
 the fabricated items can be successfully incorporated into the structures. Submit mill test reports for structural steel,
 steel castings, bronze, and sheet lead certified according to 501.06.
 518.03
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Scuppers, structural steel and cast steel ................................................ 513
 Metal pipe ............................................................................................. 707
 Plastic pipe .......................................................................... 707.33, 707.45
 Other metals .......................................................................................... 711
 Geotextile fabric, Type A ................................................................ 712.09
 Reinforced thermosetting resin pipe ................................................ 707.80
 Furnish pipe specials of a grade at least as high as the type of pipe specified.
 Furnish porous backfill consisting of gravel, stone, or air-cooled blast furnace slag, with a No. 57 size gradation
 according to Table 703.01-1. The sodium sulfate soundness loss shall not exceed 15 percent.
 Furnish ACBFS conforming to Supplement 1027.
 518.04
 
 General. As shown on the plans, connect all parts to new or existing sewers or other outlets.
 
 When installing to superstructure, take into account the deflection of spans under full dead load.
 518.05
 Porous Backfill. Place porous backfill as shown on the plans. When not shown on the plans, place
 backfill at least 2 feet (0.6m) thick behind the full length of abutments, wing walls, and retaining walls. Measure
 the thickness of porous backfill normal to the abutment or wall face. The Contractor may leave undisturbed rock
 or shale within 18 inches (0.5 m) of the abutment or wall. Place 2 ft³ (0.23 m³) of bagged No. 3 aggregate at each
 weep hole to retain the porous backfill. Place the porous backfill for the full width of the trench and extend it to the
 bottom of the approach slab or base, as shown in the plans. Place porous backfill in loose lifts not to exceed 12
 inches. Run a plate compactor or tamper over the top of each lift for consolidation of approximately 85% of original
 layer thickness. If placed in loose lifts greater than 12 inches, flood the porous backfill at the appropriate moisture
 content for consolidation of approximately 85% of original layer thickness.
 518.06
 Pipe. For drain pipe leading down from the superstructure, use either galvanized steel pipe, 748.06,
 or plastic pipe, 707.45, or reinforced thermosetting resin pipe, 707.80. Provide specials, elbows, tees, wyes, and
 other fittings essential for a complete and satisfactory installation of the same material and quality as the pipe.
 Construct watertight joints of adequate strength. In steel pipe, weld joints or use clamp-type couplings having a
 ring gasket. In plastic pipe, make joints according to the applicable ASTM standard. In reinforced thermosetting
 resin pipe, make joints according to manufacturer guidelines and procedures. Securely fasten the pipe to the
 structure with hanger or clamp assemblies that are galvanized according to 711.02.
 Place subsurface pipe as shown in the plans. If the plans require drainage pipe in the porous backfill, provide
 plastic pipe conforming to 707.33.
 
 For corrugated metal pipe, perforated specials are not required and the Contractor may make bends with
 adjustable elbows conforming to the thickness requirements of the pipe specifications.
 518.07
 Scuppers. Construct secure and watertight connections, including the connections to adjacent
 concrete. Provide castings, true to form and dimension. Weld the joints of structural steel scuppers. Galvanize
 scuppers according to 711.02.
 518.08
 Excavation. Excavate all material encountered to the dimensions necessary to provide ample space
 at least to install pipe or other drainage facility behind abutments and for outlets.
 518.09
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Porous Backfill and Porous Backfill with
 Geotextile Fabric by the number of cubic yards (cubic meters) or lump sum. The Department will measure pipe
 specials by the same method as the pipe. If pipe is by the foot (meter), the Department will measure the pipe along
 its centerline.
 518.10
 Basis of Payment. The cost to backfill, if not separately itemized in the Contract, and excavation is
 incidental to the drainage facility that necessitates them.
 The Department will include bagged aggregate with porous backfill for payment.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 518
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter) or
 Lump Sum
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter) or
 Lump Sum
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Pound or Foot
 (Kilogram or Meter)
 Pound or Foot
 (Kilogram or Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 
 Porous Backfill
 
 518
 518
 518
 518
 518
 518
 
 Porous Backfill with Geotextile Fabric
 ___ inch (___ mm) ___ Pipe, Including Specials
 Scuppers, Including Supports
 Trough Horizontal Conductors
 Pipe Horizontal Conductors
 ___ inch (___ mm) Pipe Downspout Including Specials
 
 ITEM 519 PATCHING CONCRETE STRUCTURES
 519.01
 519.02
 519.03
 519.04
 519.05
 519.06
 519.07
 519.08
 
 Description
 Materials
 Removal of Disintegrated Concrete
 Preparation of Surface
 Placing of Reinforcing Steel
 Placing, Finishing, and Curing of Concrete
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 519.01
 Description. This work consists of removing all loose and disintegrated concrete; preparing the
 surface; furnishing and placing reinforcing steel including welded steel wire fabric, dowels, and expansion bolts;
 placing forms; and placing concrete patches, including curing of same.
 519.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Concrete, Class QC 5 .................................................................... 499, 511
 Dowels ............................................................... 709.01, 709.03, or 709.05
 Reinforcing steel ................................................................................... 509
 Welded steel wire fabric .................................................. 709.10 or 709.12
 519.03
 Removal of Disintegrated Concrete. Remove all loose and disintegrated concrete from the areas to
 be repaired in such a manner and to such an extent as to expose a sound concrete surface. Provide patches at least
 4 inches (100 mm) deep, except on top horizontal surfaces, provide patches at least 3 inches (75 mm) deep. Remove
 sound concrete (beneath the disintegrated concrete) for a depth of not less than 1/4 inch (6 mm) and not more than
 1 inch (25 mm), provided that the above minimum depth of patch is maintained. Make square or, preferably, slightly
 undercut shoulders having a depth of not less than the specified minimum depth of the patch at the edges of all
 patches.
 Only use pneumatic or hand tools that give results satisfactory to the Engineer in the removal of the disintegrated
 concrete and in preparing and shaping the areas to be patched.
 If working around reinforcing steel, avoid damaging or debonding any reinforcing steel that is un-corroded and
 completely embedded in sound concrete. Ensure there is no shattering of the concrete, beyond the area to be
 patched. If the area around the reinforcing steel is either embedded in unsound concrete or the reinforcing steel is
 exposed during removal, continue to remove the concrete around the reinforcing steel to completely expose the
 reinforcing and provide at least a 1 inch (25 mm) clearance around the reinforcing. The 1 inch (25 mm) clearance
 may be reduced to 1/2 inch (13 mm) if the patching concrete uses No. 8 coarse aggregate.
 Adequately support reinforcement that is loose, and tie it back into place. Replace reinforcement damaged during
 removing concrete.
 519.04
 Preparation of Surface. After removing all disintegrated and loose concrete, properly shape the area
 to be patched, and install dowels or expansion bolts as necessary to hold the wire fabric to be used in the patch.
 Thoroughly clean the surface of the area to be patched and all exposed reinforcing steel of all dirt, dust, or other
 foreign materials with water, air under pressure, or any other method that produces satisfactory results. Thoroughly
 drench the surface with clean water. Before placing the concrete, allow the surface to dry to a damp condition.
 519.05
 Placing of Reinforcing Steel. The Department will not require reinforcement for patches on top
 horizontal surfaces. Reinforce patches on other surfaces with welded steel wire fabric either 2  2 inch (50  50
 mm) using wire size number W 0.9, or 3  3 inch (75  75 mm) using wire size number W 1.4. Cover the entire
 area of the patch with the fabric, and place and hold the fabric approximately 1 inch (25 mm) from the completed
 exposed surface of the patch. Securely fasten the fabric to the reinforcing steel in the original structure exposed in
 removing the disintegrated concrete. If no reinforcing steel is exposed or it is not practical to fasten the fabric to
 exposed steel, install dowels or expansion bolts at a distance not to exceed 18-inch (0.5 m) centers in both
 directions, and fasten the fabric to these dowels or bolts.
 
 519.06
 Placing, Finishing, and Curing of Concrete. Place and finish Class QC 5 concrete according to
 Items 499 and 511.
 Remove the forms within 24 hours after placing the concrete, and finish all exposed surfaces by rubbing to match
 the surrounding concrete. Apply membrane curing according to 511.14, Method B, immediately after rubbing the
 surfaces.
 After curing and before final acceptance, sound all patched areas. Remove and replace all unsound or visibly
 cracked areas.
 519.07
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Patching Concrete Structures by the number
 of square feet (square meters) of the exposed surfaces of all completed patches, irrespective of the depth or
 thickness of the patch. If a patch includes corners or edges of members such as beams, curbs, and columns, the
 Department will measure all of the exposed surfaces. If a patch extends completely through a member of a slab,
 the Department will measure both exposed surfaces.
 519.08
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 
 The Department will not pay for replacing reinforcement damaged during concrete removal.
 The Department will not pay for removing and replacing of patched areas that are unsound or visibly cracked.
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 519
 
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 
 Patching Concrete Structures
 
 ITEM 520 PNEUMATICALLY PLACED MORTAR
 520.01
 520.02
 520.03
 520.04
 520.05
 520.06
 520.07
 520.08
 520.09
 520.10
 520.11
 520.12
 520.13
 
 Description
 Materials
 Removal of Concrete
 Reinforcement
 Preparation of Repair Area
 Mixing
 Proportions
 Pressures
 Preconstruction Testing
 Placing
 Inspection and Testing
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 520.01
 Description. This work consists of repairing the surface of concrete structures using pneumatically
 placed mortar where the depth of repair generally is less than 6 inches (150 mm).
 520.02
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 Reinforcing steel ................................................................................... 509
 Portland cement ........................................ 701.01 through 701.05, 701.09
 Fine aggregate ..................................................................... 703.02, 703.03
 Welded steel wire fabric. ................................................. 709.10 or 709.12
 Use water free from sewage, oil, acid, strong alkalis, vegetable matter, clay, and loam. Potable water is
 satisfactory for use in mortar.
 520.03
 Removal of Concrete. In areas to be repaired, remove all loose, soft, honeycombed, and disintegrated
 concrete, plus a 1/4-inch (6 mm) depth of sound concrete. Remove additional concrete as necessary to permit the
 placement of the minimum specified mortar thickness of not less than 1 1/2 inches (38 mm), except on top
 horizontal surfaces where it shall not be less than 3/4 inch (19 mm). Perform all work in such a manner as not to
 damage or shatter the concrete that is to remain in place. Make square or, preferably, slightly undercut shoulders
 at the edge of all repair areas.
 Encase reinforcing bars exposed after concrete removal, as required above, with pneumatically placed mortar. If
 these bars are less than 1 inch (25 mm) from the proposed finished surface of mortar, drive them back, if practical,
 into recesses cut in the masonry to obtain that coverage. If this is impractical because of large concentrations of
 reinforcing bars, provide the minimum specified mortar coverage by modifying the finish surface as the Engineer
 approves.
 If the bond between the concrete and a primary reinforcing bar has been destroyed, or if more than one-half of
 the periphery of a bar has been exposed, remove the adjacent concrete to a depth that will provide a minimum 3/4inch (19 mm) clearance around the bar, except where other reinforcing bars make this clearance impractical.
 Adequately support reinforcing that has become loose, and tie it back into place. Replace reinforcement that is
 damaged during construction operations.
 Only use pneumatic or hand tools that give results satisfactory to the Engineer in the removal of concrete and in
 preparing and shaping the areas to be repaired.
 If working around reinforcing steel, avoid loosening the steel, or shattering the concrete around it, beyond the
 repair area.
 520.04
 Reinforcement. If pneumatically placed mortar is specified to repair areas of unsatisfactory concrete,
 or for surface coverage of exposed reinforcing steel, place wire fabric in all areas where the thickness of the mortar
 patch is 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) or more. For areas where the thickness of the mortar patch exceeds 4 inches (100
 mm), use a single layer of wire fabric to reinforce each 4-inch (100 mm) thickness of patch or fractional part
 thereof. Use fabric that is either 2  2 inches (50  50 mm) using wire size number W 0.9, or 3  3 inches (75  75
 
 mm) using wire size number W 1.4. Place all fabric parallel to the proposed finished surface. Completely encase
 each layer of fabric in mortar that has taken its initial set before the succeeding layer of fabric is applied. Ensure
 that fabric supported adjacent to the prepared masonry surface is no closer than 1/2 inch (13 mm) to that surface.
 Overlap adjacent sheets of fabric by 6 inches (150 mm), and securely tie them together. Carefully pre-bend fabric
 before installation to fit around corners and into re-entrant angles. Never spring fabric into place.
 Place all steel items, including reinforcing bars and wire fabric, no closer than 1 inch (25 mm) to the proposed
 finished surface of mortar.
 Support wire fabric with anchor bolts except where existing reinforcing steel in the repair area is considered by
 the Engineer to be satisfactory for this purpose. Construct anchors of 1/4-inch (6 mm) minimum diameter expansion
 hook bolts, and ensure that each bolt has sufficient engagement in sound masonry. For repairs that are generally 4
 inches (100 mm) thick or less, space anchors no more than 12 inches (0.3 m) and 18 inches (0.5 m), center-tocenter, on overhead and vertical surfaces, respectively, and 36 inches (1.0 m), center-to-center, on top horizontal
 surfaces. For repairs that exceed 4 inches (100 mm) in thickness, ensure that the anchor bolts are capable of
 supporting three times the weight of suspended mortar and two times the weight of mortar on vertical surfaces. Use
 at least three anchors for each patch.
 If specified, thoroughly clean reinforcing exposed in the original structure, or exposed after removals as required
 above, and restore any appreciable reduction in steel area as directed.
 520.05
 Preparation of Repair Area. After removing all unsatisfactory concrete, properly shaping the sound
 concrete surface, placing dowels and expansion hook bolts, and restoring steel area as directed, and within 24 hours
 before placing the mortar, blast clean all surfaces to which the mortar is to bond, including exposed reinforcing
 steel, existing concrete, and the work face of any previously placed mortar, to remove all spalls, laitance, and
 contaminants detrimental to the achievement of an adequate bond. The Contractor may blast clean these surfaces
 using high-pressure water blasting with or without abrasives in the water, abrasive blasting with containment, or
 vacuum abrasive blasting. If a bonding compound is not specified, drench the prepared masonry surface with water
 and keep the prepared surface wet during the 2 hours preceding the placement of the mortar. Ensure that all surfaces
 are damp, but without free water, while placing mortar. The Engineer will approve the preparation and condition
 of all surfaces immediately before the application of the mortar.
 520.06
 Mixing. Thoroughly dry mix the materials in a batch mixer. Before placing the mixture in the hopper
 of the cement gun, remove all materials and lumps over 1/4 inch (6 mm) in size by screening.
 Apply the screened sand and cement to the masonry surface within 1 hour after being combined.
 520.07
 Proportions. Ensure that the mixture as placed in the hopper has a ratio of one volume of portland
 cement to three volumes of sand.
 520.08
 Pressures. Use at least 35 pounds per square inch (240 kPa) pneumatic pressure at the cement gun in
 placing the mixed material. If more than 100 feet (30 m) of hose or a greater lift than 25 feet (7.5 m) is used,
 increase the pressure proportionately. Maintain the water at a uniform pressure of not less than 25 pounds per
 square inch (170 kPa) above the pressure of the air on the gage at the cement gun.
 520.09
 Preconstruction Testing. Before the start of placing any mortar, perform a preconstruction test to
 verify the operation of the equipment, to confirm the application crew’s capability, and to ensure the pneumatically
 placed mortar will be of acceptable quality.
 Fabricate the test panel by gunning mortar onto the plywood bottom of an open box 4-foot (1.2 m) square and 4
 inches (100 mm) deep. Install reinforcement in the test panel that matches the largest size and tightest spacing
 found for the reinforcement in the bridge. Mount the box vertically and apply the mortar using the same personnel,
 equipment, and procedures that will be used on the project, until the box is full. Adjust the mixing water to provide
 mortar of the proper consistency, but do not exceed a total water content, including the free moisture in the
 aggregate and water added at the nozzle, of 4.5 gallons (17 L) per sack of cement (94 pounds = 42.6 kg).
 Take three cores from the test panel, and test them for compressive strength at an independent testing laboratory.
 Ensure that the strength at 28 days is a minimum of 4200 pounds per square inch (29.5 MPa) or at a minimum
 compressive strength of 3200 pounds per square inch (22.5 MPa) at 7 days.
 
 After taking the cores, break the test panel and allow the Engineer to carefully examine the interior portions.
 Ensure that they are substantially free of hollow areas and sand pockets, and ensure that the mortar is well bonded
 to the reinforcement.
 Have each crew proposed to perform this work fabricate a satisfactory panel before allowing that crew to apply
 mortar to the structure.
 520.10
 Placing. Place the premixed dry cement and sand by pneumatic equipment with the proper amount
 of water applied in the mixing nozzle for the correct placement consistency. Apply the mortar as dry as practical
 to prevent shrinkage cracking. Use shooting strips to ensure square corners, straight lines, and a plane surface of
 mortar, except as otherwise permitted by the plans or approved by the Engineer. Place shooting strips so as to keep
 the trapping of rebound at a minimum. At the end of each day’s work, or similar stopping periods requiring
 construction joints, slope the mortar off to a thin edge. In shooting all surfaces, ensure that the stream of flowing
 material from the nozzle impinges as nearly as possible at right angles to the surface being covered, and hold the
 nozzle 2 to 4 feet (0.6 to 1.2 m) from the working surface.
 Apply a sufficient number of mortar coats to obtain the required thickness. Finish mortar repairs flush with the
 original masonry surface, except as noted for areas of exposed reinforcing steel. On vertical and overhead surfaces,
 do not apply any coat thicker than 1 inch (25 mm), except as the Engineer approves, and place each coat so that it
 will neither sag nor decrease the bond of the preceding coat. If a successive coat is applied on mortar that has set
 for more than 2 hours, clean and dampen the mortar surface as required in 520.05 for the prepared masonry surface.
 Remove deposits of rebound from previous shooting, whether loose or cemented.
 After mortar has been placed to the desired thickness, cut off all high spots with a sharp trowel, or screed them
 to a true plane as determined by shooting strips or by the original masonry surface, or as directed. If using screeds,
 apply them lightly to all surfaces so as not to disturb the mortar for an appreciable depth, and work them in an
 upward direction when applied on vertical surfaces. Unless otherwise directed, give the finished mortar surface a
 flash coat about 1/8 inch (3 mm) thick. Take special care to obtain a sightly appearance on all exposed surfaces.
 Cover the pneumatically placed mortar patches with burlap or cotton mats, and keep them wet for 7 days after
 placing. If it is not practical to use mats, keep the surface wet by sprinkling for the same length of time. If the
 Engineer determines that the above curing procedures are impractical because of the inaccessibility of isolated
 repair areas, the Contractor may cure the final mortar surface according to 511.17, Method B. Do not place
 pneumatically placed mortar when the air temperature is below 50 F (10 C) or against a surface in which there
 remains any frost. Protect all mortar against cold weather according to 511.15.
 520.11
 Inspection and Testing. After curing and before final acceptance, sound all patched areas. Remove
 and replace all unsound or cracked areas. In addition to sounding all patches, the Department will base acceptance
 of the pneumatically placed mortar on 4-inch (100 mm) diameter cores taken from patched areas and tested for
 compressive strength. The Engineer will determine the location of the cores, with one core being taken for each
 200 square feet (20 m2) of pneumatically placed mortar. Drill the cores completely through the patched area and
 into the underlying sound concrete at least 1/2 inches. Ensure that the depth of the cores is at least 4 inches. The
 Engineer will visually inspect the cores at the site for hollow areas, sand pockets, and voids around reinforcing
 steel. Test the cores at an independent laboratory for compressive strength. The required minimum average
 compressive strength is 3000 pounds per square inch (21 MPa) at 7 days, with no single core test less than 2600
 pounds per square inch (18 Mpa).
 The Engineer will waive coring on small quantities or overhead patches if it is determined by sounding and visual
 inspection that the patches are sound.
 Remove, replace, re-inspect, and re-test all defective patches, as determined by sounding, visible cracks, or
 unacceptable cores.
 Fill core holes with concrete according to 519.
 520.12
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Pneumatically Placed Mortar by the number
 of square feet (square meters) as determined under Method A, unless Method B or another method is specified.
 
 A. Method A. The Department will measure the actual area of exposed surfaces of all completed, tested, and
 approved patches, irrespective of depth or thickness of the patch. If a patch includes corners or edges of such
 members as beams, columns, or curbs, the Department will include all of the exposed surfaces; or if a patch extends
 completely through a member or a slab, the Department will include both exposed surfaces.
 B. Method B. For unreinforced mortar repairs, the Department will measure the actual area of exposed surfaces
 of all completed, tested, and approved patches, irrespective of depth or thickness of patch. If a patch includes
 corners, or edges of such members as beams, columns, or curbs, the Department will include all of the exposed
 surfaces. For fabric reinforced mortar repairs, the Department will measure the actual surface area of fabric,
 complete and in place. The Department will consider fabric laps and layers of fabric closer than 2 1/2 inches (65
 mm), center-to-center of layer, as a single layer in area measurements. The Contractor and the Engineer will agree
 on the measured area of wire fabric before said fabric is encased in mortar, otherwise the Department will obtain
 the area of the patch for pay purposes as described for unreinforced mortar repairs.
 The Contractor is responsible for all test panels, coring repair of core holes, independent laboratory testing of the
 cores, and replacement of rejected areas and shall include them under Pneumatically Placed Mortar.
 520.13
 Basis of Payment. The Department will not pay for additional reinforcement to replace that damaged
 by the Contractor’s operations.
 The Department will not pay for removing, replacing, and re-inspecting of defective patched mortar as
 determined by sounding, visible cracks, or unacceptable cores.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 520
 
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 
 Pneumatically Placed Mortar
 
 ITEM 522 STRUCTURAL PLATE CORRUGATED METAL STRUCTURES ON
 FOOTINGS
 522.01
 522.02
 522.03
 522.04
 522.05
 
 Description
 Materials
 General
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 522.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing structural plate corrugated metal structures of specified
 dimensions, including metal bearing angles or channels as required, and erecting same on concrete footings.
 522.02
 Materials. Furnish plates and bolts conforming to 707.03 or 707.23. Furnish steel bearing angles or
 channels conforming to 707.03 or 711.01. Furnish aluminum bearing angles or channels conforming to 707.23.
 522.03
 General. Properly support the metal bearing angle or channel in the position shown on the plans
 before placing footing concrete.
 Erect the plates according to the manufacturer’s assembly instructions. Hold the unsupported edges of all plates
 in position using temporary props. Progressively install a sufficient number of bolts to hold the plates in position.
 Do not tighten bolts until tightening will not interfere with the adjustment and matching of additional sections. If
 using drift pins or pry bars, take care to prevent chipping or injury to the galvanized coating. Tighten the bolts to a
 final minimum torque of 100 foot-pounds (140 Nm).
 Within the limits of backfill, field coat the exterior of the 707.03 conduit above the limits of the bedding. The
 coating material and application shall conform to AASHTO M 243M. Thoroughly seal around all plate seams and
 bolts. Allow asphalt mastic material to dry for 48 hours and tar base material to dry for 28 hours before placing the
 conduit backfill.
 Backfill according to the requirements for 611.
 522.04
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure the actual number of feet (meters) of the
 corrugated metal structure, installed in place. The Department will determine the length by taking the average of
 the two side measurements, end to end, at the point of bearing.
 Excavation will be paid for under Item 203 or 503 as shown on the plans.
 Concrete footings will be paid for as a separate pay item.
 522.05
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 522
 
 Foot (Meter)
 
 ___' ___" (___ mm) Structural Plate Corrugated Metal Structure,
 ___-inch (___ mm)
 
 ITEM 523 DYNAMIC LOAD TEST
 523.01
 523.02
 523.03
 523.04
 523.05
 
 Description
 General
 Equipment
 Test Report
 Basis of Payment
 
 523.01
 Description. This work consists of establishing a driving criteria for all the piles of a specified shape,
 cross-section, and ultimate bearing capacity or as specified on the plans to be installed in the structure. This shall
 be accomplished by applying dynamic loads with a pile hammer during driving of production piles to determine
 driving requirements. Apply the dynamic load to the piles using a pile hammer that is operating at its normal
 operating level. Perform restrike tests when specified in the plans
 523.02
 General. Perform dynamic tests on a minimum of two piles. Perform signal matching analysis of the
 dynamic test data on at least one of the two test piles. Perform the test according to ASTM D 4945 to determine
 driving requirements to achieve the required ultimate bearing values for the piles to be installed in the structure.
 Perform restrike tests after piles have been driven and a minimum time specified in the plans has elapsed. When
 performing a restrike, warm the hammer before restriking the pile by applying at least 20 blows to another pile.
 Each restrike consists of performing dynamic testing on two piles and performing a signal matching analysis on
 one of the two piles tested.
 Use the hammer selected for driving the test piles to drive all piles represented by the test piles. If the Contractor
 subsequently finds it necessary to use a different hammer or multiple hammers to drive piles represented by
 dynamic load testing, or if the hammer performance varies subsequent to the dynamic test, complete additional
 tests at no additional cost to the Department.
 523.03
 Equipment. Supply all required dynamic testing equipment necessary to run the test set forth in
 ASTM D 4945. Supply personnel with an Advanced Master, or Expert Level Certification in High Strain Dynamic
 Pile Testing (HSDPT) from either Foundation QA or the Pile Driving Contractors Association (PDCA) to operate
 this equipment. Supply the Engineer a copy of the certificate showing that personnel operating dynamic testing
 equipment are currently certified. Supply all personnel and equipment needed to strike the test piles with the pile
 hammer.
 523.04
 Test Report. Perform the dynamic test and signal matching analysis and immediately provide the
 Engineer driving criteria for any piles to be driven within the next 48 hours. Within 48 hours after performing the
 dynamic pile test or restrike tests, supply the Engineer with a written report confirming driving requirements for
 piles represented by the test. Include in the report, the required blow count for:
 A. The different strokes of the ram at 6-inch (150 mm) intervals within the expected range of operation as
 determined by a wave equation analysis, when open ended diesel hammers and drop hammers are used.
 B. The selected bounce pressures when closed end diesel hammers are used.
 C. The operating air pressure and stroke when an air operated hammer is used.
 D. The selected output energy or stroke when a hydraulic hammer is used.
 Also include in the report a minimum depth of penetration if applicable.
 Submit an electronic version of the report and data files from the testing and analysis to the Office of
 Geotechnical Engineering and the Office of Construction Administration.
 523.05
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for dynamic load testing after being provided the written
 test at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 523
 523
 
 Each
 Each
 
 Dynamic Load Testing
 Restrike
 
 ITEM 524 DRILLED SHAFTS
 524.01
 524.02
 524.03
 524.04
 524.05
 524.06
 524.07
 524.08
 524.09
 524.10
 524.11
 524.12
 524.13
 524.14
 524.15
 524.16
 524.17
 
 Description
 Materials
 Contractor’s Installation Plan
 Hole Excavation
 Friction Type Drilled Shafts
 Casings
 Slurry
 Excavation Inspection
 Reinforcing Steel for Drilled Shafts
 Concrete for Drilled Shafts
 Free Fall Concrete Placement
 Tremie
 Pumped Concrete
 Construction Tolerances
 Inspection Records
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 524.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and installing drilled shafts. The lengths of the drilled
 shafts shown on the plans are estimated from available subsurface information. Furnish the proposed drilled shafts
 according to plan requirements, with the understanding that the actual length required is based on conditions
 encountered during construction and may differ from the estimated length shown on the plans.
 524.02
 
 Materials. Furnish material conforming to:
 
 Concrete, Class QC 5 or QC 4 for Mass Concrete ....................... 499, 511
 Epoxy coated reinforcing steel ............................................................ 509
 524.03
 Contractor’s Installation Plan. Submit, for the Engineer’s acceptance, a written installation plan of
 procedures to follow when excavating the hole, placing the concrete, and monitoring the concrete placement.
 Submit the installation plan at least 14 Calendar Days before constructing the drilled shafts. Include the following
 information:
 A. Details of the sequence proposed for the overall drilled shaft construction operation.
 B. Procedures for maintaining correct horizontal and vertical alignment of the excavation.
 C. If using a casing, method to advance the casing.
 D. If using a temporary casing, details of the methods to extract the temporary casing and to maintain the concrete
 slump to keep concrete workable by adding admixtures such as retarders or superplasticizers.
 E. If using slurry, details of the methods to mix, circulate, and de-sand the slurry. For polymer slurry, submit the
 manufacturer’s recommendations for use of the slurry.
 F. Details of methods to clean the shaft excavation.
 G. Details of reinforcement placement including support and centralization methods.
 H. Details of concrete placement including proposed operational procedures for free fall, tremie, or pumping
 methods.
 I. A list of proposed equipment to be used such as cranes, drills, augers, bailing buckets, final cleaning
 equipment, de-sanding equipment, slurry pumps, tremies, concrete pumps, casings, etc.
 Acceptance of the installation plan will not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for obtaining the required
 results.
 524.04
 Hole Excavation. Take precautions to prevent damaging existing structures and utilities. Precautions
 include, but are not limited to, selecting construction methods and procedures that will prevent excessive caving of
 
 the shaft excavation, and monitoring and controlling the vibrations from the driving of casing or sheeting or drilling
 of the shaft.
 When encountered, remove objects such as large boulders. Do not blast unless shown on the plans or authorized
 in writing by the Engineer.
 Unless otherwise shown on the plans, where drilled shafts are to be installed in conjunction with embankment
 placement, construct shafts after the placement of the fill and completion of any specified settlement periods.
 Excavate for the shafts to the dimensions and elevations shown on the plans. Use methods and equipment suitable
 for the intended purpose and materials encountered. Use either the dry method, wet method, temporary casing
 method, or permanent casing method as necessary to produce sound, durable concrete foundation shafts free of
 defects. When a particular method of construction is required on the plans, that method shall be used. If no particular
 method is specified for use, select and use a method based on site conditions.
 If the excavation operation is stopped, protect the shaft cavity by installing a safety cover. The Contractor is
 responsible for the safety of the shaft excavation, surrounding soil, and the stability of the sidewalls. If necessary
 to ensure such safety and stability, use a temporary casing, slurry, or other methods accepted by the Engineer.
 Unless cased to the full depth, do not leave excavations unfilled overnight.
 Use appropriate means, such as a cleanout bucket or air lift, to clean the bottom of the excavation of all shafts.
 Promptly notify the Engineer when unexpected obstructions are encountered.
 A. Dry Construction Method. Use the dry construction method only at sites where the groundwater table and
 site conditions are suitable to allow construction of the shaft in a relatively dry excavation, and where the sides and
 bottom of the shaft remain stable without any caving, sloughing, or swelling and may be visually inspected before
 placing the concrete. The dry method consists of excavating the drilled shaft hole, removing accumulated water,
 and loose material from the excavation, and placing the shaft concrete in a relatively dry excavation. The rate of
 flow of water into the hole should not be more than 12 inches (300 mm) within a 1-hour period. Do not place the
 initial concrete if there is more than 3 inches (75 mm) of water in the bottom of the hole.
 B. Wet Construction Method. Use the wet construction method at sites where a dry excavation cannot be
 maintained for placement of the shaft concrete. The wet method consists of using water or slurry to contain seepage
 and groundwater movement and placing concrete using a tremie or concrete pump. Additionally, use this method
 to maintain stability of the hole perimeter while advancing the excavation to its final depth, placing the reinforcing
 cage, and placing the shaft concrete. This method also consists of de-sanding and cleaning the slurry. For drilled
 shafts that are not socketed into the bedrock and during drilling operations, maintain a water or slurry fluid elevation
 inside the shaft excavation higher than the static water table. Unless demonstrated to the Engineer’s satisfaction
 that the surface casing is not required, provide temporary surface casings to aid shaft alignment and position and
 to prevent sloughing of the top of the shaft excavation. Extend surface casings from the ground surface to a point
 in the shaft excavation where sloughing of the surrounding soil does not occur.
 C. Temporary Casing Construction Method. Use the temporary casing construction method when the stability
 of the excavated hole and/or the effects of groundwater must be controlled. Remove temporary casings while the
 concrete remains workable. As the casing is being withdrawn, maintain a 5-foot (1.5 m) minimum head of fresh
 concrete in the casing so that all the fluid trapped behind the casing is displaced upward without contaminating the
 shaft concrete. As necessary, increase the required minimum concrete head to counteract groundwater head inside
 the casing. Extract casing at a slow, uniform rate with the pull in line with the shaft axis. Rotate, tap, push down,
 or vibrate the casing when necessary to extract it. Rotate the casing as little as possible to avoid deforming the
 reinforcing steel cage.
 D. Permanent Casing Construction Method. The permanent casing construction method generally consists of
 driving or drilling a casing to a specified depth before excavation begins. If full penetration of the casing to the
 specified depth cannot be attained, the Contractor may either excavate material within the embedded portion of the
 casing or excavate a pilot hole ahead of the casing until the casing reaches the desired penetration. Make the pilot
 hole no larger than one-half the diameter of the shaft and center the hole in the shaft. Do not over ream to the
 outside diameter of the casing unless specifically shown on the plans.
 
 Ensure that the casing is continuous between the elevations shown on the plans. Unless otherwise shown on
 the plans, do not use temporary casing instead of or in addition to the permanent casing.
 After installing the casing and excavating the shaft, place the reinforcing steel, then place the shaft concrete.
 After filling the permanent casing with concrete, pressure grout voids between the shaft excavation and the casing
 with cement grout. Submit the method of pressure grouting the voids to the Engineer for approval. Pressure grouting
 is required to ensure contact (bearing) between the casing and any surrounding soil layer that is used for lateral
 support.
 524.05
 Friction Type Drilled Shafts. Friction type drilled shafts are defined as drilled shafts that do not bear
 on bedrock and obtain their ability to support load from a combination of end bearing on the soil and adhesion
 between soil and concrete along the length of the shaft.
 For friction type drilled shafts, dry construction method may be used for cohesive soils only. If using a casing
 for the construction of a friction type drilled shaft, remove the casing completely or partially as shown on the plans.
 If enough water is entering the hole through the sides and bottom of the hole such that the supporting soils are
 being eroded, maintain a positive head of fluid in the excavation hole to ensure that water is not continuously
 flowing into the hole.
 If the Engineer determines that the hole sidewall has softened due to excavation methods, swelled due to delays
 in concreting, or degraded because of slurry cake buildup, over ream the sidewall to sound material. If the concrete
 is not placed the same day that the excavation is completed, protect the excavation with a temporary casing, and
 redrill the hole at least 6 inches (150 mm) larger in diameter, clean the excavation, and perform slurry test before
 concreting.
 524.06
 Casings. Use smooth, watertight, steel casings of sufficient strength to withstand handling and driving
 stresses and the concrete and surrounding earth pressures. Provide an outside diameter of the steel casing equal to
 or greater than the plan diameter of the shaft. If the plan diameter of the bedrock socket is same as the drilled shaft
 above the bedrock and a steel casing is used, provide a diameter of the bedrock socket as shown on the plans.
 Ensure that the diameter of the casing is large enough to allow the excavation of the bedrock socket.
 Where drilled shafts are located in open water areas, extend the casing a minimum of 12 inches (300 mm) above
 the water to protect the shaft concrete from water action during placement and curing of the concrete. Cut off the
 casing at the plan top of drilled shaft elevation after the concrete has cured. If practical, install the casing in a
 manner that produces a positive seal at the bottom of the casing to prevent piping of water or entry of other material
 into the shaft excavation.
 If it becomes necessary to remove a casing and substitute a longer or larger diameter casing through caving soils,
 stabilize the excavation with slurry or backfill before installing the new casing. The Contractor may use other
 methods accepted by the Engineer to control the stability of the excavation and to protect the integrity of the
 foundation soils.
 524.07
 Slurry. Slurry used in the drilling process shall be a mineral or polymer slurry. The mineral slurry
 shall have both a mineral grain size that remains in suspension and sufficient viscosity and gel characteristics to
 transport excavated material to a suitable screening system. Ensure that the percentage and specific gravity of the
 material used to make the suspension is sufficient to maintain the stability of the excavation and to allow proper
 concrete placement. Maintain the level of the slurry at a height sufficient to prevent caving of the hole.
 Thoroughly premix the mineral slurry with clean fresh water and allow adequate time for hydration before
 introduction into the shaft excavation. Agitate, circulate, and adjust the properties of the slurry to prevent the slurry
 from “setting up” in the shaft excavation.
 Perform control tests using suitable apparatus on the mineral slurry to determine density, viscosity, and pH.
 Conform to the acceptable range of values for these physical properties as shown in Table 524.07-1.
 
 TABLE 524.07-1 MINERAL SLURRY SPECIFICATIONS
 RANGE OF VALUES AT 68 °F (20 °C)
 Property
 Density lb/ft³ (kg/m³)
 Viscosity s/qt (s/L)
 pH
 
 Test Method
 Density Balance
 Marsh Cone
 pH Paper or meter
 
 Time of Slurry
 Introduction
 64.3 to 69.1
 (1030 to 1107)
 28 to 45
 (30 to 48)
 8 to 11
 
 Time of Concreting in Hole
 64.3 to 75.0
 (1030 to 1201)
 28 to 45
 (30 to 48)
 8 to 11
 
 If de-sanding is required, do not allow the sand content to exceed 4 percent by volume at any point in the shaft
 excavation as determined by the American Petroleum Institute sand content test.
 Determine density, viscosity, and pH values before and during the shaft excavation to establish a consistent
 working pattern.
 Before placing shaft concrete, use an approved slurry-sampling tool to take slurry samples from the bottom and
 at mid-height of the shaft. Eliminate heavily contaminated slurry that has accumulated at the bottom of the shaft.
 Ensure that the mineral slurry conforms to the requirements specified immediately before shaft concrete placement.
 Only use polymer slurry after demonstrating to the Engineer that the stability of the hole perimeter can be
 maintained while advancing the excavation to its final depth by excavating a trial hole of the same diameter and
 depth as that of the production shafts. Use the same polymer slurry in the trial hole as proposed for the production
 shafts. If using different sizes of the shafts at the project, use the same size trial hole as that of the largest diameter
 shaft, except the depth of the trial hole need not be more than 40 feet (12 meters). Only one trial hole per project is
 required. Do not use the trial hole excavation for a production shaft. After completing the trial hole excavation, fill
 the hole with sand. The acceptance of the polymer slurry does not relieve the Contractor of responsibility to
 maintain the stability of the excavation. Polymer slurry shall conform to the manufacturer’s requirements.
 524.08
 Excavation Inspection. Provide equipment for checking the dimensions and alignment of each shaft
 excavation. Determine the dimensions and alignment. Measure the final shaft depth after final inspection.
 Immediately before placing concrete, ensure that the bottom of the completed drilled shaft excavation is as clean
 as practical. Remove drilling spoils that adhere to the vertical sides of the bedrock socket.
 524.09
 Reinforcing Steel for Drilled Shafts. Place the reinforcing steel cage as a unit immediately after
 inspection of the excavation and before placing concrete. If not placing the concrete immediately after installing
 the cage, the Contractor may have to remove the cage before placing the concrete to verify the integrity of the
 excavated area and to ensure loose material is removed from the bottom of the hole.
 Tie and support the reinforcing steel so it remains within the required tolerances. Securely tie spacers at quarter
 points around the cage perimeter and space at intervals not to exceed 5 feet (1.5 m) along the length of the cage. If
 the size of the longitudinal reinforcing steel equals or exceeds 1-inch (25 mm) in diameter, the Contractor may
 increase the distance between the spacing devices to a maximum of 10 feet (3 m). Use spacers of adequate
 dimensions to ensure a minimum annular space between outside of cage and side of hole or casing of 3 inches (75
 mm) for shaft diameters up to 4 feet (1.2 m) and 6 inches (150 mm) for shaft diameters larger than 4 feet (1.2 m).
 The Contractor may use round plastic spacers.
 Maintain the top of the reinforcing steel cage no more than 6 inches (150 mm) above and no more than 3 inches
 (75 mm) below the required position. If the reinforcing steel cage is not maintained within tolerances, make
 acceptable corrections and do not construct additional shafts until the method of reinforcing steel cage support has
 been approved.
 When approved by the Engineer, the Contractor need not provide the reinforcing steel for the extended length of
 the drilled shaft if it is determined in the field that the Contractor must drill the shaft deeper than the estimated
 length.
 
 524.10
 Concrete for Drilled Shafts. For all drilled shafts, use Class QC 5 or QC 4 concrete for Mass
 Concrete,(drilled shaft diameter over 7 ft (2.1 m), according to Item 511 except as modified and supplemented as
 follows. The required slump is 6  1 inch (150  25 mm). Achieve the additional slump over 4 inches (100 mm)
 by using chemical admixtures conforming to 705.12, Type F or G. The maximum water-cement ratio shall not
 exceed 0.44. If placing concrete under water, add 10 percent more cement to the concrete mix. If placing concrete
 using a tremie, further increase the slump to 8  1 inch (200  25 mm), by using chemical admixtures.
 For wet method construction, place concrete in one continuous operation from bottom to top of the shaft. After
 the concrete has reached the top of the drilled shaft, continue pumping and remove all contaminated concrete until
 acceptable quality concrete is evident at the top of the shaft. Do not vibrate concrete with a vibrator. Carefully
 remove the casing so that the reinforcing steel cage is not deformed by the force of the downward flowing concrete.
 Do not place concrete in any drilled shaft excavation without acceptance from the Engineer. Inspect the drilled
 shaft excavation immediately before placing the concrete. Provide a light powerful enough to thoroughly inspect
 the reinforcing steel cage, the sides, and the bottom of the drilled shaft. The inspection for the wet construction
 method consists of only probing and measuring.
 If the elevation of the top of the shaft is below ground at the time of concrete placement, use a casing to prevent
 caving of materials into fresh concrete.
 524.11
 Free Fall Concrete Placement. The Contractor may place the concrete in a dry drilled shaft
 excavation using the free fall method provided the concrete falls to its final position through air without striking
 the sides of the hole, the reinforcing steel cage, or any other obstruction. Use a centering drop chute, at least 3 feet
 (1 m) long with the free fall method. Unless shown on the plans, there is no limit to the height of free fall. If the
 concrete placement causes the shaft excavation to cave or slough or if the concrete strikes the rebar cage or sidewall,
 reduce the height of free fall or the rate of concrete flow into the excavation, or both.
 If the Engineer determines that dewatering is not practical or placement by free fall method cannot be
 accomplished, place the concrete using a tremie or a concrete pump.
 524.12
 Tremie. The Contractor may use a gravity tremie to place concrete placement instead of a concrete
 pump in either wet or dry holes. For uncased wet holes, maintain the drilled shaft excavation full of slurry or water
 to such a depth that water does not flow into the shaft excavation at any time. To place concrete, use tremies
 consisting of a tube of sufficient length, weight, and diameter to discharge concrete at the shaft base elevation. If
 the tremie contains aluminum parts, do not allow these parts to contact the concrete. Use tremies with an inside
 diameter of at least 10 inches (250 mm). Ensure that the inside and outside surfaces of the tremie are clean and
 smooth to allow both flow of concrete and unimpeded withdrawal during concreting. Use tremies with a wall
 thickness adequate to prevent crimping or sharp bends that restrict concrete placement.
 For concrete placement, use water-tight tremies. Do not begin underwater placement until the tremie is placed to
 the shaft bottom elevation. Use valves, bottom plates, or plugs so concrete discharge can begin within one tremie
 diameter of the base. Either remove plugs from the excavation or use plugs of an Engineer approved material that
 does not cause a defect in the shaft if not removed. Construct the discharge end of the tremie to allow the free radial
 flow of concrete during placement operations. Immerse the tremie discharge end at least 10 feet (3 m) in concrete
 at all times after starting the flow of concrete.
 If the tremie line orifice is removed from the fluid concrete column during the concrete pour, and discharges
 concrete above the rising concrete level, consider the drilled shaft defective.
 524.13
 Pumped Concrete. Pump concrete into either wet or dry holes. For uncased wet holes, maintain the
 drilled shaft excavation full of slurry or water to such a depth that water does not flow into the shaft excavation at
 any time. Use concrete pump pipe at least 4 inches (100 mm) in diameter and constructed with watertight joints.
 Arrange the concrete pump equipment so no vibrations result that might damage fresh concrete. Arrange pipes
 carrying concrete from the pump to the shaft with a minimum number of bends. Anchor the pipe used to convey
 the concrete to the bottom of the drilled shaft excavation to the steel casing or another suitable stationary object to
 prevent the pipe from undulating during the initial placement of the concrete. Do not begin placing concrete until
 the pump line orifice is at the shaft base elevation.
 
 Do not use aluminum pipe as a conveyance for the concrete. Pump an adequate quantity of grout, mortar, or
 concrete without coarse aggregate through the equipment ahead of the specification concrete to provide lubrication
 to the pumping system. Do not place the concrete used for lubrication in the shaft. The lubrication process will not
 be repeated as long as the pumping operations are continuous. Operate the pump so a continuous stream of concrete
 without air pockets is produced. To prevent the contamination of the concrete placed initially at the bottom of the
 shaft, seal the outlet end of the pumping pipe with a diaphragm or plug that is flushed out when the hydrostatic
 pressure from the column of concrete exceeds that of the water in the shaft. Control the initial rate of concrete
 placement so not to lift or displace the cage of reinforcing steel. Use a watertight conveying system, and leave the
 outlet end well below the top of the freshly placed concrete. The preferred concrete placement procedure is to
 maintain the outlet end of the pumping system at approximately 10 feet (3 m) below the top of the fresh concrete.
 When the concrete reaches the top of the drilled shaft column, remove all laitance.
 If the concrete pump line orifice is removed from the fluid concrete column during the concrete pour, and
 discharges concrete above the rising concrete level, the drilled shaft shall be considered defective.
 524.14
 Construction Tolerances. For shafts supporting single columns, position the drilled shaft within 3
 inches (75 mm) of the plan location in the horizontal plane at the plan elevation for the top of the shaft. For shafts
 supporting footings, position the center within 6 inches (150 mm) of the plan location. Do not allow the vertical
 alignment of the shaft to vary from the required alignment by more than 1/4 inch per foot (21 mm/m) of depth.
 Construct the supported elements at the plan location. Perform all corrections required to construct the supported
 elements.
 524.15
 Inspection Records. Provide all necessary equipment and labor needed to obtain measurements for
 completing the Inspection Records. Obtain measurements before placing concrete.
 524.16
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Drilled Shafts by the number of feet
 (meters), measured along the axis of the drilled shaft from the required bottom elevation of the shaft to the proposed
 top plan elevation. The Department will not measure the length of reinforcing steel projecting from the drilled shaft
 into the pier column or the footing supported on Drilled Shafts as shown on the plans. If the drilled shaft extends
 into the bedrock, The Department will divide the total length of each drilled shaft into two segments. The length of
 the lower segment is the length of the bedrock socket, and the length of the upper segment is the length of the
 drilled shaft above the bedrock socket.
 If a steel casing extending down to bedrock is used, the Department will measure the bedrock socket from the
 bottom of the casing to the bottom of the drilled bedrock excavation. If the Engineer is assured that a portion of the
 metal casing is embedded in solid bedrock, and upon the Engineer’s concurrence, the Department may include the
 embedded distance as a part of the bedrock socket.
 524.17
 Basis of Payment. Payment is full compensation for performing required excavation; furnishing and
 placing steel casings; furnishing and placing reinforcing steel and concrete by free fall, pumping, or tremie method;
 removing casings; casings left in place; supplying equipment and performing slurry testing; supplying and
 disposing of slurry; and disposing excess excavated material.
 The Department will not pay for the cost of performing slurry tests before concreting.
 The Department will not make separate payment for the trial holes.
 The Department will not pay for corrections required to construct the supported elements.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 524
 524
 524
 
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 
 Drilled Shafts, ___" (___ mm) Diameter, above Bedrock
 Drilled Shafts, ___" (___ mm) Diameter, into Bedrock
 Drilled Shafts, ___" (___ mm) Diameter
 
 ITEM 526 APPROACH SLABS
 526.01
 526.02
 526.03
 526.04
 526.05
 526.06
 526.07
 526.08
 
 Description
 Materials
 Forming and Placing Reinforcing Steel
 Placing and Sampling Concrete
 Finishing and Curing
 Side Curbs
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 526.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing reinforced portland cement concrete approach slabs
 for bridges on the completed and accepted subgrade or subbase.
 526.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Concrete, Class QC 2* .......................................................................... 499
 Epoxy coated reinforcing steel ........................................... 509.02, 709.00
 Preformed joint filler ....................................................................... 705.03
 Joint sealer ....................................................................... 705.04 or 705.11
 * Use the same class of concrete used in the bridges superstructure that the approach slab is attached
 to unless otherwise shown in the plans. If the super-structure concrete class for the bridge is not
 identified in the plans use Class QC 2.
 526.03
 Forming, Furnishing and Placing Reinforcing Steel. Furnish true and straight steel or wooden side
 forms. Securely brace and hold forms to the line and grade shown on the plans. Do not allow forms to vary more
 than 1/8 inch (3 mm) from a 10-foot (3 m) straightedge. Do not remove forms for a minimum of 36 hours. Clean
 and oil forms after each use.
 Furnish reinforcing steel and place it in the position shown on the standard construction drawing and firmly
 secure the steel during placing and setting of the concrete. Tie reinforcing bars at all intersections, except tie
 reinforcing bars at alternate intersections where bar spacing is less than 1 foot (0.3 m) in any direction.
 526.04
 Placing and Sampling Concrete. Immediately before placing concrete according to Item 511.07,
 thoroughly moisten the subgrade or subbase with water in the amount and manner directed by the Engineer. When
 the bridge superstructure and the approach slab require QC/QA, make at least one set of test cylinders for each 50
 cubic yards (35 cubic meters) of concrete. Include the results of the cylinders into the LOT for the 511
 superstructure item.
 526.05
 Finishing and Curing. Mechanically screed, at a vibration frequency of 1500 to 5000 pulses per
 minute, the concrete surface to the proper elevation in one complete pass with a minimum of hand finishing. If the
 approach slab is to serve as a base for an asphalt concrete wearing course, texture the approach slab according to
 Item 305. If the approach slab is to serve as a wearing surface, test the surface according to 451.13, and diamond
 groove the surface according to 511.17. Cure approach slabs according to 511.14.A.
 Open approach slabs to traffic according to Table 511.14-1A or Table 511.14-1B.
 526.06
 Side Curbs. If concrete curb extends across the approach slab, construct side curbs of the dimensions
 required, and place the concrete curb at the same time as the approach slab. Finish the curb according to Item 609.
 526.07
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Reinforced Concrete Approach Slabs by
 the number of square yards (square meters) complete in place.
 526.08
 Basis of Payment. The Department will calculate the final adjusted payment per 511 and Supplement
 1127. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows which includes all concrete,
 curbs, reinforcing steel, dowels, joints and other materials:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 526
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Reinforced Concrete Approach Slabs
 
 526
 
 Reinforced Concrete Approach Slabs with QC/QA
 
 600 INCIDENTALS
 ITEM 601 SLOPE AND CHANNEL PROTECTION
 601.01
 601.02
 601.03
 601.04
 601.05
 601.06
 601.07
 601.08
 601.09
 601.10
 601.11
 601.12
 601.13
 601.14
 601.15
 
 Description
 Materials
 General Construction
 Riprap
 Grouted Riprap or Rock
 Crushed Aggregate Slope Protection
 Concrete Slope Protection
 Dumped Rock Fill
 Rock Channel Protection
 Detention Basin Filter, Infiltration Basin Filter, Infiltration Trench Filter or Bioretention Cell
 Paved Gutter
 Tied Concrete Block Mat
 Articulating Concrete Block Revetment System
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 601.01
 Description. This work consists of the excavation for and the construction of gutters, riprap, concrete,
 grouted items, tied concrete block mats, articulating concrete block revetment systems, crushed aggregate, or rock
 items for protecting slopes and channels.
 Use removed or excavated materials in the Work when the material conforms to the specifications; if not, then
 recycle or dispose of the material according to 105.16 and 105.17.
 601.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Curing ....................................................................... 451 or 705.07 Type 1
 Concrete, Class QC-Misc ............................................................. 499, 511
 Water for grout ................................................................................ 499.02
 Reinforcing steel. ............................................................................. 509.02
 Cement for grout ................................................................................... 701
 Structural Backfill Type 3 ............................................................... 703.11
 Sand for grout. ................................................................................. 703.03
 Rock and Aggregate Materials ........................................................ 703.19
 Coarse Aggregate............................................................................. 703.20
 Brick and blocks ................................................................................... 704
 Preformed expansion joint ............................................................... 705.03
 Joint sealer ....................................................................................... 705.04
 Geotextile Fabric, Type B................................................................ 712.09
 Provide steel Geotextile Fabric securing pins with washers for securing Geotextile Fabric. Use a steel washer
 having an outside diameter not less than 1 1/2 inches (38 mm). Use securing pins at least 18 inches (0.5 m) long
 and at least 3/16 inch (5 mm) in diameter that are pointed at one end and fabricated with a head to retain the steel
 washer.
 Ensure tied concrete block mats and articulating concrete block revetment systems are held together by
 galvanized steel wire, HDPE mesh, or stainless steel wire.
 601.03
 General Construction. Cure gutters, concrete slope protection, and grouted riprap according to Item
 451, except apply all the membrane cures at the rate of not less than 1 gallon per 200 square feet (1 L/5 m²) of
 surface.
 Mix and place all concrete according to Item 511. Finish to produce a sandy texture.
 
 601.04
 Riprap. Construct riprap according to one of the following four alternatives unless specifically
 itemized in the Contract. The Contractor may elect to use a different alternative at each location on the project.
 A. Type A - Provide Flat Stones or Broken Concrete. Ensure that individual pieces are roughly rectangular in
 cross-section with a minimum volume of 1/3 cubic foot (0.01 m³) and a minimum thickness of 3 inches (75 mm).
 Place individual pieces by hand in courses and so that the pieces overlap the joints in the course below. Place riprap
 with the flat surfaces roughly perpendicular to the slope and in contact with the courses immediately below and
 above. Fill spaces between larger pieces with spalls that are rammed into place to present an even and tight surface,
 pleasing in appearance and varying not more than 3 inches (75 mm) from that shown on the plans. When required
 by the plans, fill riprap with grout. Compact the backing as riprap construction progresses. Ensure that the thickness
 of the riprap, measured perpendicular to the slope, is not flatter than 9 inches (230 mm) and averages not flatter
 than 12 inches (0.3 m).
 B. Type B - Provide Articulating Concrete Block Revetment System. Ensure articulating concrete block
 revetment conform to 712.13 .
 C. Type C - Construct Concrete Riprap Using Cloth or Burlap Bags. After soaking the bags with water, fill
 them with approximately 2/3 cubic foot (0.02 m³) of concrete and place the bags by hand to the limits on the plans.
 Provide bags with approximate dimensions of 6  12  16 inches (150  300  400 mm).
 Stack the bags on the slope to ensure a minimum of 1/3 cubic yard (0.3 m³) of concrete for each square yard
 (square meter) of riprap in place as measured along the slope.
 Tie the open end of each bag and fold the tie under the bag. Place each tie or fold so that it overlaps the joint
 in the lower layer. After placing, pierce each bag in the lower layer to allow some concrete to flow out and bond
 with the top overlying layer.
 Stretchers are bags placed with the long length parallel to the streambed flow. Headers are bags placed with
 the long length perpendicular to the streambed flow. A layer runs horizontally at approximately the same elevation
 perpendicular to the protected slope grade.
 If the slope is 1.5:1 or steeper, make the bottom layer with two bags laid as stretchers. Place the next overlying
 layer as a header. Place the rest of the overlying upslope layers as stretchers.
 If the slope is flatter than 1.5:1, make the bottom layer with two bags as stretchers. Place all remaining layers
 as headers.
 Push or drive No. 4 (No. 13M) reinforcing bars approximately 18 inches (0.5 m) long and spaced
 approximately 12 inches (0.3 m) apart through the top three layers. When required by the plans, fill voids with
 grout.
 D. Type D - Construct a 6-inch (150 mm) Reinforced Concrete Slab. Reinforce the slab approximately
 midway between the top and bottom of the slab with steel bars or fabricated reinforcement equivalent to No. 3 (No.
 10M) round bars, spaced at 24-inch (0.6 m) centers in two directions, or wire fabric according to the standard
 construction drawing for pavement reinforcing. The Contractor may use formed construction joints. Extend
 reinforcement through all formed construction joints. Include cutoff walls as shown on the plans in the unit price
 bid for reinforced concrete slab.
 601.05
 Grouted Riprap or Rock. When specified, grout in place riprap cloth bags, riprap burlap bags, flat
 stones, precast blocks, broken concrete, rock, or tied concrete block mats. Make the grout by mixing one part
 portland cement, three parts sand, and enough water to allow the grout to flow into the joints and cracks.
 Prepare the grout in a mixing machine of an approved design and equipped with an accurate graduated regulating
 device for controlling the amount of water in each batch. Accurately measure and proportion the quantities for each
 batch, and ensure that the quantities are exactly sufficient for one or more sacks of cement.
 Immediately before applying grout, thoroughly wet all surfaces. Place the grout, filling all the joints or voids. Do
 not add water to the grout after it has been placed.
 601.06
 Crushed Aggregate Slope Protection. Furnish material conforming to 703.19. Place the material on
 the Geotextile Fabric so that the surface is flush with the embankment slopes. Use a thickness of 12 inches (300
 
 mm) unless a different thickness is specified. Extend the aggregate from the face of the abutments down to the toe
 of the slope or to normal water elevation, and a minimum of 3 feet (1 m) beyond the outer edges of the
 superstructures or as shown on the plans.
 601.07
 Concrete Slope Protection. Construct a concrete slab, 6 inches (150 mm) thick, extending over the
 embankment area under a bridge from the face of the abutment down to the toe of the slope and extending a
 minimum of 3 feet (1 m) beyond the outer edges of the superstructure or as shown on the plans. Thicken the bottom
 3 feet (1 m) of the concrete slab from 6 to 18 inches (150 to 460 mm) to provide resistance to sliding.
 Where pier columns extend through the slab, place 1-inch (25 mm) preformed expansion joint material around
 the columns and for the full thickness of the slab.
 Divide the surface into an equally spaced block grid pattern at approximately 4 to 5-foot (1.2 to 1.5 m) intervals.
 Make the block grid pattern with one direction horizontally at a constant elevation or as directed by the Engineer,
 and the other direction parallel to the superstructure centerline, skewed, or as directed by the Engineer. Saw or form
 the block grid pattern to make joints at a depth of not less than one-fourth the thickness of the slab and
 approximately 1/8 inch (3 mm) wide.
 601.08
 Dumped Rock Fill. Furnish material conforming to 703.19. Dump larger pieces at the outer face and
 smaller pieces in the inner surface of the protected area. Ensure a reasonably smooth and continuous surface
 conforming to the slope lines shown on the plans. Avoid concentration of fines and small pieces at any location in
 the completed dumped rock fill material. When required by the plans fill all voids with grout.
 601.09
 Rock Channel Protection. Furnish material conforming to 703.19. When specified with a filter,
 provide a filter consisting of geotextile fabric or a 6-inch (150 mm) bed of aggregate conforming to 703.19. When
 placing rock, exercise reasonable care to ensure that the finished surface of the protected channel conforms to the
 channel cross-sections shown on the plans.
 If geotextile fabric is used, prepare the surface to receive the fabric to a relatively smooth surface, free of
 obstruction and debris. With the long dimension parallel to the flow direction, loosely place the fabric without
 wrinkles and creases. Where joints are necessary, provide a 12-inch (0.3 m) minimum overlap, with the upstream
 strip overlapping the downstream strip. Place securing pins with washers at a minimum distance apart of 2 feet (0.6
 m) along the joints and at a minimum distance apart of 5 feet (1.5 m) everywhere else. When required by the plans
 fill all voids with grout.
 601.10
 Detention Basin Filter, Infiltration Basin Filter, Infiltration Trench Filter or Bioretention Cell.
 For Infiltration Basin Filter furnish course aggregate No. 57 or 67 conforming to 703.20. Use a thickness of 6
 inches (150 mm) unless a different thickness is specified. Place the material on the geotextile fabric so that the
 surface is flush with the elevation as specified. Prepare the surface to receive the geotextile fabric to a relatively
 smooth surface, free of obstruction and debris. With the long dimension parallel to the flow direction, loosely place
 the geotextile fabric without wrinkles and creases. Where joints are necessary, provide a 12-inch (0.3 m) minimum
 overlap, with the upstream strip overlapping the downstream strip. Place securing pins with washers at a minimum
 distance apart of 2 feet (0.6 m) along the joints and at a minimum distance apart of 5 feet (1.5 m) everywhere else.
 For Infiltration Trench Filter furnish course aggregate No. 1 or 2 conforming to 703.20. Place infiltration trench
 aggregate No. 1 or 2 on the geotextile fabric at the thickness specified. Prepare the surface to receive the geotextile
 fabric to be relatively smooth, free of obstruction and debris. With the long dimension parallel to the flow direction,
 loosely place the fabric without wrinkles and creases. Where joints are necessary, provide a 12-inch (0.3 m)
 minimum overlap, with the upstream strip overlapping the downstream strip. Place securing pins with washers at
 a minimum distance apart of 2 feet (0.6 m) along the joints and at a minimum distance apart of 5 feet (1.5 m)
 everywhere else.
 For Bioretention Cell furnish material as specified at the thickness specified.
 601.11
 Paved Gutter. Mix and place concrete paved gutters according to Items 499 and 511 and to the
 dimensions and shape shown on the plans or the standard construction drawing.
 
 When gutter constructed under this item is to be tied to an existing concrete base, pavement, or other rigid
 structure, match the type and location of the joints in the gutter with those in the adjoining pavement.
 When gutter constructed under this item is not tied to an existing concrete base, form impressed joints using a
 device or bar shaped to the gutter cross-section. Make the impression before initial setting of the newly placed
 concrete. Remove the device or bar as soon as the concrete is in such condition to retain its shape when the bar or
 device is removed. Form an impressed joint that is 3/8 inch (10 mm) wide at the surface; 1/4 inch (6 mm) wide at
 the bottom; and a depth equal to one-third the thickness of the concrete. Edge the joints to a radius not greater than
 1/4 inch (6 mm). Until the filler is placed, protect the joint from dirt or foreign matter. Fill the impressed joints in
 such a manner to confine the material to the joint and in no way mar the surface.
 Compact the subgrade for all paved gutters according to 204.03. When required by the plans fill all voids with
 grout.
 601.12
 Tied Concrete Block Mat. When specified, use Tied Concrete Block Mat Type ___ conforming to
 712.12 as shown on the plans. Place directly on the Geotextile Fabric. Install per the manufacturer’s
 recommendation.
 601.13
 Articulating Concrete Block Revetment System. When specified, use Articulating Concrete Block
 Revetment System Type _ conforming to 712.13 as shown on the plans. Install per the manufacturer’s
 recommendation.
 601.14
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Riprap, Articulating Concrete Block
 Revetment System, Crushed Aggregate Slope Protection, Concrete Slope Protection, and Tied Concrete Block
 Mats by the square yard (square meter) of the finished surface completed and accepted in place, with or without
 grout.
 The Department will measure Dumped Rock Fill and Rock Channel Protection (with or without filter), by the
 cubic yard (cubic meter), completed and accepted in place according to the dimensions shown on the plans,
 excluding rock filter, with or without grout. The Department may determine quantities by volume in the vehicle or
 by a job conversion weight of acceptable material delivered.
 The Department will measure Paved Gutter by the foot (meter) completed and accepted in place.
 601.15
 Basis of Payment. The Department will specify with grout in the pay item description when required.
 When the pay item calls out Tied Concrete Block Mat or Articulating Concrete Block Revetment System, include
 Geotextile Fabric material and installation in the price.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 601
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Riprap
 
 601
 601
 601
 601
 601
 601
 601
 
 Crushed Aggregate Slope Protection
 Concrete Slope Protection
 Tied Concrete Block Mat, Type _ __
 Articulating Concrete Block Revetment System, Type___
 Dumped Rock Fill, Type ___
 Rock Channel Protection, Type ___ with Filter
 Rock Channel Protection, Type ___ without Filter
 
 601
 601
 601
 601
 601
 601
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 
 Rock Channel Protection, Type ___ with Aggregate Filter
 Detention Basin Filter
 Infiltration Basin Filter
 Infiltration Trench Filter
 Bioretention Cell
 Paved Gutter
 
 ITEM 602 MASONRY
 602.01
 602.02
 602.03
 602.04
 602.05
 
 Description
 Materials
 Construction Requirements
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 602.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing headwalls, pipe cradles, collars, and other brick and
 masonry units of the types and sizes specified.
 Use removed or excavated materials in the Work when the material conforms to the specifications; if not, then
 recycle or dispose of the material according to 105.16 and 105.17.
 602.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Backfill ................................................................................................. 203
 Concrete, Class QC-Misc ........................................................499 and 511
 Water for grout and mortar .............................................................. 499.02
 Reinforcing steel .............................................................................. 509.02
 Cement for mortar................................................... 701.01 through 701.07
 Sand for mortar ................................................................................ 703.03
 Granular base .................................. Granular material, Type B, 703.16.C
 Brick and masonry units ........................................ 704.01, 704.02, 704.03
 Nonshrink mortar ............................................................................. 705.22
 Lime for mortar................................................................................ 712.04
 602.03
 
 Construction Requirements. Construct the designated items as shown on the plans.
 
 A. Excavate to dimensions that provide ample room for construction. Remove obstructions as necessary to
 perform this work.
 Protect the sides of all excavations from caving by providing suitable sheeting, shoring, and bracing. Use
 excavation methods that do not disturb the original material below the bottom of footers or below the additional 6
 inches (150 mm) required for precast structures.
 If the material found at the bottom of the headwall or below the additional 6 inches (150 mm) required for
 precast structures is not suitable for a foundation, excavate to further depth to provide a suitable foundation. Backfill
 the void left by the additional excavation with granular base. The Department will pay for this additional work
 according to 109.05.
 Backfilling shall follow completion of the work as closely as the construction will allow. Backfill with granular
 base or soil. Place backfill in 6-inch (150 mm) loose lifts.
 B. Compaction requirements are according to Item 203 except for the following:
 Four passes per lift with additional passes as required until 95 percent compaction is reached. Use compaction
 equipment with a minimum total weight of, or minimum centrifugal force of, 1 ton (0.9 metric ton). Supply the
 manufacturer’s specifications for this equipment to verify these requirements.
 C. Cast-in-place structures are headwalls, wingwalls, pipe cradles, collars, and other units. Construct cast-in-place
 structures according to the corresponding Standard Construction Drawing using methods specified in Items 499,
 511, and 509.
 D. Precast structures for half height headwalls are for circular conduits up to a maximum of 78 inches (1980 mm)
 and elliptical and pipe arch conduits up to a maximum 78 inches (1980mm) round equivalent. The shop drawings
 are kept on file at the certified precast facility per Supplemental 1073. Construct elliptical and pipe arch half height
 headwalls from templates of the actual conduit being supplied to the project to ensure the opening is outside
 diameter plus one inch. Ensure the precast structures and their shop drawings conform to the following additional
 requirements:
 
 1.
 
 All manufacturers are pre-approved according to Supplement 1073.
 
 2.
 
 All reinforcing steel will be epoxy coated.
 
 3.
 
 All HW-2.1 SCD require wire insert details.
 
 4.
 
 Attachment detail for metal or plastic conduit conforming to SCD HW2.1.
 
 5.
 
 Non-corrosive lifting devices.
 
 6.
 
 Maximum opening is conduit outside diameter plus 1 inch (25 mm) for each conduit material type.
 
 7.
 
 All openings to be filled with nonshrink mortar including all lifting device voids.
 
 8.
 
 Changes in pre-approved drawings are the same as non pre-approved drawings.
 
 9.
 
 Detail how the 6 inch (150 mm) extension is treated if required.
 
 10. Fill the void between the precast half height headwall and the conduit by using nonshrink mortar.
 11. Apply marking, either stamped or painted, to the headwall to ensure each headwall size is matched to the
 proper conduit size and material type.
 E. Pre-cast structures for wing walls and headwalls for use with Items 706.05, 706.051, 706.052, and 706.053.
 Do not use precast footings. The Contractor may provide precast wingwalls or headwalls in lieu of cast-in-place
 walls using the following criteria:
 1. Select fabricators that are prequalified and evaluated by the Office of Materials Management (OMM)
 according to Supplement 1073 and listed by the Department before the Contract Letting Date.
 2.
 
 All reinforcing steel shall be epoxy coated.
 
 3.
 
 Wall anchorage dowels shall be epoxy coated as per 709.00 or galvanized as per 709.16.
 
 4.
 
 Galvanize all connection hardware per 711.02.
 
 5.
 
 Install dowels per 510 using non-shrink, non-metallic 705.20 epoxy grout.
 
 6.
 
 Provide the entrained air requirements as per the applicable concrete specification.
 
 7.
 
 Provide Non-corrosive lifting devices.
 
 8.
 
 Fill all openings including all lifting hook voids with non-shrink mortar per 705.22.
 
 9. Provide shop drawings detailing precast concrete structural elements and calculations according to the
 AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications.
 10. Have competent individuals prepare and check the shop drawings. Provide a cover sheet containing the
 preparer(s) and checker(s): First Name, Last Name, Initials and Shop Drawing Content Responsibility. Preparer(s)
 and checker(s) shall initial each sheet for their content responsibility. The preparer(s) and checker(s) shall not be
 the same individual. Have an Ohio Registered Engineer review, approve, sign, seal and date the shop drawing cover
 sheet or submittal letter according to ORC 4733 and OAC 4733-35 confirming that the shop drawings meet the
 intent of the contract.
 11. Submit the shop drawings and calculations to the Engineer at least 7 days before construction begins.
 Department acceptance is not required.
 12. The Contractor’s written acceptance letter shall document acceptance of the shop drawings including
 confirmation of field verification, as required, and descriptions of issues resolved between the Contractor, the
 fabricator, or the Department.
 13. By accepting these shop drawings, the Contractor represents to the Department that all dimensions and
 elevations of existing conditions shown on the plans have been field measured and verified, and that these shop
 drawings comply with all the materials requirements, construction requirements, contract requirements, and
 performance criteria. The Contractor further represents that these drawings have been coordinated and verified with
 the details of the work to be performed by other fabricators and entities on the project. The Department will not
 
 make any allowance for additional cost or delays to the Contractor for incorrect fabrication as a result of failure to
 coordinate or perform this acceptance.
 14. If the Department requests changes on these shop drawings, or the Contractor makes changes in addition
 to those expressly requested, ensure that the shop drawings are accepted as above with suitable revision marks to
 identify the changes.
 15. Shop Drawing General Requirements:
 a.
 
 Provide a separate shop drawing for each culvert location.
 
 b.
 
 Provide on 11” x 17” sheets in pdf (portable document format).
 
 c.
 
 Show:
 i.
 
 All dimensions.
 
 ii. Inlet and outlet.
 iii. North arrow.
 iv. Roadway centerline stationing.
 v.
 
 All construction phases.
 
 vi. Precast piece labels
 vii. Holes for conduits, framed with diagonal reinforcing on both faces.
 viii. Reinforcing Lap lengths
 ix. Material strengths
 x.
 
 Weep holes locations
 
 xi. Lifting device locations.
 d. Label:
 i.
 
 Project Number
 
 ii. PID
 iii. County Route Section of the structure
 iv. Stream Name as show on plans
 v.
 
 Structure File Number or Culvert File Number as given on the plans
 
 vi. Fabrication facility where units are to be cast
 F. Masonry units structures are headwalls, pipe cradles, collars, and other units. Thoroughly wet masonry units
 before laying the mortar. Lay masonry units with full mortar joints. Take adequate precautions to prevent the mortar
 from freezing. Do not set masonry units having a temperature of 40 °F (4 °C) or less with mortar until heated.
 When required, heat to ensure that a temperature of 50 to 80 °F (10 to 27 °C) is obtained throughout the entire
 masonry units. Cure the exposed surfaces of the masonry units by covering with wet burlap for 48 hours or by
 applying curing membrane according to Item 511. Construct the masonry units structures according to the
 corresponding Standard Construction Drawing. Use one of the following mortars:
 1. One part Portland cement to two parts sand by volume. The Contractor may add lime in an amount not to
 exceed 10 percent of the cement by weight
 2.
 
 One part masonry cement to two parts sand by volume.
 
 602.04
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Brick Masonry, Block Masonry, and
 Concrete Masonry by the number of cubic yards (cubic meters) calculated from dimensions shown on the plans.
 
 602.05
 Basis of Payment. When a precast structure is used, payment is based on the number of cubic yards
 (cubic meters) required for the cast in place item and is considered full compensation for construction of the precast
 structure.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 602
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Brick Masonry
 
 602
 602
 
 Block Masonry
 Concrete Masonry
 
 ITEM 605 UNDERDRAINS
 605.01
 605.02
 605.03
 605.04
 605.05
 605.06
 605.07
 605.08
 605.09
 
 Description
 Materials
 Pipe Underdrains Construction
 Construction Underdrains
 Prefabricated Edge Underdrains
 Underdrain Outlets
 Aggregate Drains
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 605.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing unclassified pipe underdrains, shallow pipe
 underdrains, deep pipe underdrains, base pipe underdrains, or rock cut underdrains with or without a geotextile
 fabric, construction underdrains, prefabricated edge underdrains and aggregate drains.
 Use removed or excavated materials in the Work when the material conforms to the specifications; if not, then
 recycle or dispose of the material according to 105.16 and 105.17.
 605.02
 
 Materials.
 
 Concrete, Class QC-Misc ........................................................499 and 511
 Reinforcing steel .............................................................................. 509.02
 Geotextile Fabric, Type A ............................................................... 712.09
 Backfill unclassified pipe underdrains, shallow pipe underdrains, deep pipe underdrains, base pipe underdrains,
 or rock cut underdrains with or without a geotextile fabric, construction underdrains and aggregate drains with
 granular material consisting of No. 8, 9, or 89 size air-cooled blast furnace slag, limestone, or gravel. Use granular
 material with a maximum sodium sulfate soundness loss of 15 percent.
 Backfill prefabricated edge underdrains with granular material consisting of No. 8 size air-cooled blast furnace
 slag, limestone, or gravel. Use granular material with a maximum sodium sulfate soundness loss of 15 percent.
 For 605.02.A through 605.02.B, use the pipe of the same size and kind listed in the Proposal. If the kind of pipe
 is not specifically itemized in the Proposal, use types as listed below.
 A. Pipe for 605 Rock Cut Underdrains.
 Corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing (perforated) ................... 707.31
 Smooth-wall polyvinyl chloride underdrain Pipe ............................ 707.41
 Polyvinyl chloride corrugated smooth interior pipe
 (perforated according to 707.31) .................................................. 707.42
 Polyvinyl chloride solid wall pipe
 (perforated according to 707.31) .................................................. 707.45
 B. Pipe for 605 Unclassified Pipe Underdrains, Shallow Pipe Underdrains, Deep Pipe Underdrains, Base
 Pipe Underdrains
 Perforated concrete pipe .................................................................. 706.06
 Concrete drain tile, extra quality ..................................................... 706.07
 Perforated vitrified clay pipe ........................................................... 706.08
 Clay drain tile, extra quality ............................................................ 706.09
 Corrugated steel underdrains, Type III ............................................ 707.01
 Corrugated polyethylene
 drainage tubing, (perforated) ........................................................ 707.31
 Polyvinyl chloride plastic pipe ........................................................ 707.41
 Corrugated aluminum alloy pipe and
 underdrains, Type III.................................................................... 707.21
 C. Pipe for 605 Construction Underdrains
 
 6 inch (150 mm) Corrugated polyethylene drainage
 tubing (perforated) ....................................................................... 707.31
 D. Pipe for 605 Prefabricated Edge Underdrains. Use pipe conforming to 712.10.
 605.03
 
 Pipe Underdrains Construction. Construct underdrains as follows:
 
 A. Excavation. Excavate trenches to such dimensions allowing ample room for construction. Construct the trench
 width to at least 14 inches (350 mm) for 6-inch (150 mm) diameter underdrains, and to at least 10 inches (250 mm)
 for 4-inch (100 mm) diameter underdrains. Excavate the trench walls as vertical as possible, and excavate bell holes
 to allow proper placing of the underdrain. Remove obstructions encountered while excavating for the underdrains.
 Excavate trenches measured vertically from the subgrade to the bottom of the trench at a depth of 18 inches
 (450 mm) for base pipe underdrains, 30 inches (760 mm) for shallow pipe underdrains, and 50 inches (1270 mm)
 for deep pipe underdrains unless otherwise specified in the plans. Furnish a depth of 30 inches (760 mm) for
 construction underdrains unless otherwise specified in the plans. Excavate trenches for unclassified pipe
 underdrains to the depth specified in the plans.
 Excavate trenches to a depth of 6 inches (150 mm) below the rock, shale or coal depth required in 204.05 for
 Rock Cut underdrains unless otherwise specified in the plans.
 If underdrains are to be placed within or beneath an embankment, construct the embankment to the elevation
 of the top of the subgrade before trenching for the underdrain.
 If fabric is specified, line the underdrain trench with geotextile fabric. Place the geotextile fabric to completely
 surround the granular material. Overlap the geotextile fabric at the top of the trench. Match the overlap to the trench
 width. At other seams, overlap geotextile fabric a minimum of 12 inches (0.3 m).
 B. Laying Underdrain. Lay the underdrain true to line and grade with close fitting joints. Place the underdrain
 in the center of the trench . Use locking bands or smooth sleeve type couplers matching the underdrain material
 type to join 707.01, 707.31, 707.41, and 707.21. When bell and spigot underdrain is used, lay it with the bell end
 facing up grade. Set the underdrain on a solid bed shaped to fit the underdrain throughout its entire length. Make
 all necessary connections with branches, wyes, tees, transitions, and bends that match the underdrain material type.
 Close the upper ends of underdrains with suitable plugs.
 Lay perforated underdrain so that the perforations are in the bottom half of the underdrain.
 C. Backfilling. Inspect the underdrains before placing any granular material. Place the granular material for the
 full width of the trench around the underdrain, and extend it to the bottom of the pavement or base as shown on the
 plans. If underdrains are placed outside of the pavement or base area, extend the granular material to within 4 inches
 (100 mm) of the finished grade. Fill the remaining depth of the trench with 203 embankment material.
 D. Protection. Place the pavement over the underdrain trench within 90 days after placing the trench backfill. If
 the trench remains open for longer than 90 days, remove and replace backfill contaminated by soil.
 605.04
 
 Construction Underdrains. Construct construction underdrains as follows:
 
 A. Excavation. Construct the trench width to at least 10 inches (250 mm) with a minimum of 2 inches (50 mm)
 on each side of the underdrain. Excavate the bottom of the trench to allow proper placing of the underdrain. Remove
 obstructions encountered while excavating for the underdrains.
 B. Trench Depth and Backfill. Construct the trench depth to that shown on the plans or 30 inches (750 mm).
 Backfill the trench with granular material for the full width of the trench and to the full height of the trench.
 C. Outlet. Outlet the construction underdrains as possible into the ditch or drainage structures. There is no change
 in pipe types for the outlet.
 D. Removal. Construction underdrains are not to be removed at any time. If the construction practice used
 requires the construction underdrains to be removed then install replacements as soon as possible.
 605.05
 Prefabricated Edge Underdrains. Install the prefabricated edge underdrains against the outside wall
 of a 4-inch (100 mm) trench, and backfill the trench adjacent to the pavement with granular material. Place the
 
 granular material in one or more lifts with a vibratory compactor run over the final lift to compact the granular
 material before placing the asphalt plug. Place the first layer of the granular material simultaneously with the
 trenching operation to hold the edge underdrains flush against the trench wall.
 Splice the prefabricated edge underdrains as required before placing in the trench, using material furnished by
 the manufacturer and according to the manufacturer’s directions. Require the manufacturer to furnish all material
 required for the splices, and furnish any equipment required for splicing. Construct splices to prevent separation of
 adjoining sections of the prefabricated edge underdrain panels.
 605.06
 Underdrain Outlets. Construct pipe outlets concurrently with underdrains. Provide all outlets on the
 slope with a precast reinforced concrete outlet according to Item 611 and a tied concrete block mat Type 1 grouted
 according to 601.12.
 Construct the underdrains outlets according to Item 611 using outlet fittings. Require the manufacturer to supply
 outlet fittings that transition between the underdrains and the outlet pipe. Provide smooth-lined or corrugated outlet
 fittings. Have the underdrains and outlets on fractured slab projects, such as crack and seat, rubblized, or break and
 seat projects, in place and functional before fracturing the existing pavement.
 Mark all underdrain outlets with a wooden lath prior to final seeding. Clean all debris from the outlets after final
 seeding.
 605.07
 
 Aggregate Drains. Construct the aggregate drains after the completion of granular pavement courses.
 
 A. Excavation. Excavate trenches for aggregate drains to a minimum width of 12 inches (0.3 m) and to the depth
 shown on the plans. Slope the bottom of the trench to drain and keep it free from loose particles of soil. Excavate
 the trench to furnish a clean exposure of the granular pavement courses.
 B Placing and Backfilling. Use granular material for the drains. Place the aggregate to a minimum depth of 8
 inches (200 mm) above the bottom of the trench. The remaining depth of the trench backfill with suitable
 embankment material according to Item 203.
 605.08
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Unclassified Pipe Underdrains, Shallow
 Pipe Underdrains, Deep Pipe Underdrains, Base Pipe Underdrains Construction Underdrains, Rock Cut
 Underdrains, and Prefabricated Edge Underdrains by the number of feet (meters) completed and accepted in place,
 measured from end to end of each run.
 The Department will measure Aggregate Drains by the number of feet (meters) completed and accepted in place,
 measured along the bottom of the trench.
 605.09
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for pipe outlets under 611.
 
 The Department will pay for precast reinforced concrete outlets under 611 Precast Reinforced Concrete Outlet.
 The Department will pay for tied concrete block mats Type 1 grouted under 601 Tied Concrete Block Mat.
 Rock Cut Underdrains are placed in rock and all required trenching in the rock is included under Rock Cut
 Underdrain.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 605
 605
 605
 605
 605
 605
 605
 605
 
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 
 ____ " (____ mm) Unclassified Pipe Underdrains
 6" (150 mm) Construction Underdrains 707.31
 ____ " (____ mm) Shallow Pipe Underdrains
 ____ " (____ mm) Deep Pipe Underdrains
 ____ " (____ mm) Base Pipe Underdrains
 Aggregate Drains
 ____ " (____ mm) Rock Cut Underdrains
 ____ " (____ mm) Prefabricated Edge Underdrains
 
 ITEM 606 GUARDRAIL
 606.01
 606.02
 606.03
 606.04
 606.05
 606.06
 606.07
 606.08
 
 Description
 Materials
 Setting Posts
 Erecting Rail Elements
 Guardrail Rebuilt
 Impact Attenuators
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 606.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing or reconstructing guardrail, guardrail posts, bridge
 terminal assemblies, end terminals, and impact attenuators, including the furnishing, assembling, and erecting of
 all component parts and materials.
 Guardrail shall be deep beam rail Type MGS, 5, 5A, or 8. Appurtenances shall include bridge terminal
 assemblies, end terminals, and impact attenuators. Construction of the various types of guardrail include the
 furnishing, assembling, and erecting of all component parts and materials, complete in place, at the location shown
 on the plans or as directed, and according to the manufacturer’s recommendations where applicable.
 606.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Concrete, Class QC Misc, QC 1, QC 2....................................499 and 511
 Reinforcing steel .............................................................................. 509.02
 Deep beam rail and hardware .......................................................... 710.06
 Pressure treated guardrail posts
 and blockouts ............................................................................... 710.14
 Steel guardrail posts ......................................................................... 710.15
 Guardrail posts ................................................................................. 710.16
 Galvanizing ...................................................................................... 711.02
 For guardrail, use deep beam rail Type MGS. 5, 5A, or 8.
 606.03
 Setting Posts. Set or drive posts plumb in a manner that prevents battering or distorting of posts. Trim
 posts that are set or driven more than 1-inch (25 mm) above grade. Treat trimmed posts with a preservative material
 specified in 712.06. Backfill post holes with acceptable material, placed in layers, and thoroughly compacted.
 606.04
 Erecting Rail Elements. Erect standard design (single-faced) guardrail of the type shown on the
 plans. Erect barrier design (double-faced) guardrail as shown on the plans.
 Erect rail elements in a manner resulting in a smooth, continuous installation. Use shop-curved rail on curves
 with radii from 5 to 70 feet (1.5 to 22.4 m).
 Except where otherwise required, such as expansion joint bolts, draw bolts tight. Tighten bolts through expansion
 joints as tight as possible without preventing the rail elements from sliding past one another longitudinally. Provide
 bolts long enough to extend at least 1/4 inch (6 mm) beyond the nuts.
 Do not use splice bolts that extend more than 1/2 inch (13 mm) beyond the nuts. For double-faced guardrail,
 provide bolts that extend from 1/4 to 1 inch (6 to 25 mm) beyond the nuts.
 Fabricate all metal in the shop. Do not perform burning or welding in the field. The Engineer may approve
 making holes in the field, but only for special details in exceptional cases. The Engineer may approve field
 punching, cutting, and drilling if the Contractor demonstrates that its methods do not damage the surrounding metal.
 Repair galvanized surfaces that have been abraded such that the base metal is exposed, including threaded
 portions of all fittings and fasteners, and cut ends of bolts as specified by ASTM A 780, except the Department
 will not allow aerosol spray applications of paints containing zinc dust.
 Erect guardrail so that the bolts at expansion joints are located at the centers of the slotted holes. Splice the rail
 elements by lapping in the direction of traffic. Ensure that the plates at each splice make contact throughout the
 area of the splice.
 
 606.05
 Guardrail Rebuilt. As shown on the plans, rebuild existing guardrails. Unless otherwise shown on
 the plans, rebuild units of the same type and spacing of members as the existing guardrail.
 For re-erecting, obtain the rail element from specified salvage sources. Furnish the following new materials:
 posts, blockouts, bolts, washers, and incidental hardware as necessary to complete the guardrail, except: (1) existing
 steel posts and blockouts that are not damaged and have a good galvanized coating may be reused, and (2) reuse
 guardrail splice bolts that are undamaged and were not removed during salvage may be reused.
 606.06
 Impact Attenuators. Before installing the attenuator, make all corresponding shop drawings from
 the manufacturer available for the Engineer’s inspection. Include installation drawings and instructions with the
 shop drawings that completely describe the attenuator system.
 Grade the top of each foundation at the same elevation as the adjacent travel lane and/or paved shoulder.
 Adjust the location of the anchors to avoid pavement joints.
 The Contractor shall use approved proprietary impact attenuator products as required which can be found on the
 Office of Roadway Engineering’s website.
 606.07
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Guardrail, new or rebuilt, of the type
 specified by the number of feet (meters) from center-to-center of end posts, excluding anchor assemblies. If,
 however, end connections are made to masonry or steel structures, the Department will measure to the center of
 the normal post bolt slot. If rail element is used across a bridge, the Department will measure to the first post off
 the bridge.
 The Department will measure Anchor Assembly of the type specified by the number each assembly furnished
 and erected complete.
 The Department will measure Bridge Terminal Assembly of the type specified by the number of each assembly
 furnished and erected complete.
 The Department will measure Impact Attenuator of the type specified by the number of each furnished and
 erected complete.
 The Department will measure Guardrail Post of the kind specified by the number of each furnished and erected.
 606.08
 Basis of Payment. The additional costs associated with furnishing and installing extra-length posts
 instead of standard-length guardrail posts are incidental to Guardrail Post, 8-foot (2.44 m) or Guardrail Post, 9-foot
 (2.75 m).
 For the extra costs associated with furnishing and installing extra-length posts in lieu of standard-length guardrail
 posts, payment for 9-foot (2.75 m) guardrail posts is considered full compensation.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 606
 606
 606
 606
 606
 606
 606
 606
 606
 606
 
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 Guardrail, Type ___
 Guardrail, Barrier Design, Type ___
 Guardrail, Rebuilt, Type ___
 Anchor Assembly, Type ___
 Anchor Assembly, Barrier Design, Type ___
 Bridge Terminal Assembly, Type ___
 Impact Attenuator, Type ___
 Guardrail Post
 Guardrail Post, 8-foot (2.44 m)
 Guardrail Post, 9-foot (2.75 m)
 
 ITEM 607 FENCE
 607.01
 607.02
 607.03
 607.04
 607.05
 607.06
 607.07
 607.08
 607.09
 607.10
 
 Description
 Materials
 Clearing, Grading and Seeding
 Post Assemblies
 Horizontal Deflection
 Line Posts
 Fabric
 Barbed Wire
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 607.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and erecting fence and gates of the types designated.
 Construct fence in a manner that provides a rigid, taut fence closely conforming to the surface of the ground.
 Fence is designated by the following types:
 A. Type 47 [47-inch (1195 mm)] woven wire fence fabric, steel line posts, and one strand of barbed wire.
 B. Type 47RA [47-inch (1195 mm)] woven wire fence fabric, wood line posts, and no barbed wire.
 C. Type CLT [60-inch (1525 mm)] chain-link fence fabric with tension wire.
 607.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Concrete, QC Misc or QC 1 or QC 2.......................................499 and 511
 Reinforcing steel .............................................................................. 509.02
 Barbed wire ...................................................................................... 710.01
 Woven steel wire fence ................................................................... 710.02
 Chain-link fence............................................................................... 710.03
 Fence posts, braces, and dimension lumber..................................... 710.11
 Steel line posts and ties, Type 47 fence ........................................... 710.11
 Expansion shield anchors, self drilling ............................................ 712.01
 Seeding and Mulching .......................................................................... 659
 607.03
 Clearing, Grading and Seeding. Perform clearing and grading as necessary to construct the fence
 to the required alignment, and provide a reasonably smooth ground profile at the fence line. Perform fenceline
 seeding and mulching according to Item 659 Seeding and Mulching on all areas disturbed by the clearing and
 grading for the fence within 8 months of the activity. The Department will deduct the area paid for under Item 607
 Fenceline Seeding and Mulching from Item 659 Seeding and Mulching quantities as described in the plan, if
 applicable.
 607.04
 Post Assemblies. Securely brace end, corner, gate, and pull or intermediate anchor posts in position
 during the curing period of the concrete encasement. The Engineer will not require forms for post encasement.
 For Type 47 and Type CLT fence, ensure that the maximum spacing between intermediate anchor post
 assemblies, or between end post assemblies and intermediate anchor post assemblies, are 660 feet (200 m).
 607.05
 
 Horizontal Deflection. At points of horizontal deflection, construct the fence as follows:
 
 A. Type 47 Fence. If the fence changes alignment by more than 1 degree but not more than 4 degrees, install
 either steel line posts encased in concrete or wood posts without encasement at all horizontal deflection points. If
 the change in alignment is more than 4 degrees and less than 30 degrees, build an intermediate anchor post assembly
 at the deflection point. If the change in alignment is 30 degrees or more, build a corner post assembly at the
 deflection point.
 B. Type CLT Fence. If the fence changes alignment by more than 1 degree but not more than 4 degrees, install
 line posts encased in concrete at all horizontal deflection points. If the change in alignment exceeds 5 degrees,
 provide a post brace and truss rod in each fence panel adjacent to the post located at the angle point. If the change
 
 in alignment exceeds 5 degrees, construct the footings for all post located at deflection points as specified for end
 posts.
 607.06
 
 Line Posts. Set line posts according to the following:
 
 A. Type 47 Fence. Space line posts at intervals not to exceed 12 feet (3.6 m). Anchor line posts at the bottom of
 dips or depressions in the ground surface in concrete. If channels or streams cross the fence line, construct crossings
 as shown on the plans.
 On tangents, place line posts so that the fabric, when installed on the side toward the highway, is 2 feet (0.6
 m) from the Right-of-Way line. If adjacent to Right-of-Way lines with less than 5740 feet (1750 m) radius (in
 excess of 1 degree curvature), construct line posts on chords so that the fabric, when installed on the side toward
 the highway, is not less than 2 feet (0.6 m) or more than 8 feet (2.4 m) from the Right-of-Way line.
 Locate posts at points of horizontal deflection so that the fence fabric will bear against the post.
 B. Type CLT Fence. Protect the tops of driven line posts by drive caps or other method to prevent distortion of
 the exposed end. Space line posts at not more than 10-foot (3 m) centers, and place them so that, when the wire is
 fastened on the side toward the highway, it is 1 foot (0.3 m) from the Right-of-Way line.
 607.07
 Fabric. If setting posts in concrete, do not erect the fabric until after 5 days from the time of setting
 the posts when using regular concrete, or until after 3 days when using concrete with high early strength cement,
 Stretch and securely fasten Type 47 fabric to line posts using galvanized ties. At a minimum, use one tie each
 for the top and bottom horizontal wires and one tie for each alternate horizontal wire below the top horizontal wire.
 Fasten chain-link fabric to the line posts using clips or bands spaced approximately 14 inches (0.4 m) apart, and
 to the top rail or top tension wire using bands or tie wires at approximately 24-inch (0.6 m) intervals or less. Join
 successive rolls of fabric by weaving a single picket into the ends of the rolls to form a continuous mesh.
 607.08
 fabric.
 
 Barbed Wire. If barbed wire is specified, stretch and fasten it in the same manner as woven wire
 
 607.09
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Fence, Type ___ by the number of feet
 (meters), complete in place. The Department will measure along the top of the fence from outside to outside of end
 posts, exclusive of gates and other openings.
 The Department will count Gate, Type ___ by the number of complete units of the size and type specified.
 The Department will measure Fenceline Seeding and Mulching by the number of feet (meters) of fence. The
 Department will measure along the top of the fence from outside to outside of end posts, exclusive of gates and
 other openings.
 607.10
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Seeding and Mulching shall be paid under Item 607 Fenceline Seeding and Mulching
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 607
 607
 607
 
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 
 Fence, Type___
 Gate, Type___
 Fenceline Seeding and Mulching
 
 ITEM 608 WALKS, CURB RAMPS, AND STEPS
 608.01
 608.02
 608.03
 608.04
 608.05
 608.06
 608.07
 608.08
 608.09
 
 Description
 Materials
 Concrete Walks
 Asphalt Concrete Walks
 Crushed Aggregate Walks
 Concrete Steps
 Curb Ramps
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 608.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing walks, curb ramps, and steps as per plans,
 specifications and standard drawings.
 608.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Aggregate Base ..............................................................304.01 and 304.02
 Asphalt concrete Type 1 ....................................................................... 441
 Concrete, Class QC Misc or QC 1* ..................................................... 499
 Reinforcing steel .............................................................................. 509.02
 Crushed aggregate meeting grading requirements of ...................... 703.10
 Detectable Warning Devices ........................................................... 712.14
 Expansion joint material .................................................................. 705.03
 * Replacing Coarse aggregate in the concrete mixes with Recycled Concrete Aggregate conforming
 to Supplement 1117 is an option.
 608.03
 
 Concrete Walks. Construct concrete walks as follows:
 
 A. Excavation. Excavate to the required depth and to a width that allows installation and bracing of forms. Shape
 and uniformly compact the subgrade to a surface conforming to the plans.
 B. Forms. Use either fixed forms or slip-form methods. For fixed-form construction, use wooden or metal forms
 that extend the full depth of the concrete and that do not spring under the concrete pressure. For slip-form
 construction, perform the work according to 609.04.C.
 C. Placing and Finishing. Immediately before placing concrete, thoroughly moisten the subgrade. Deposit
 concrete in a single layer, strike it off with a template, and smooth it with a float to obtain a sandy texture. Do not
 plaster the concrete. Use a 1/4-inch (6 mm) radius edging tool to edge all outside edges and joints. Divide the
 surface of the walks into equally spaced rectangular blocks at approximately 5-foot (1.5 m) intervals. Saw or form
 transverse joints to a depth of not less than one-fourth the thickness of the slab and to a width of approximately 1/8
 inch (3 mm). Install 1/2-inch (13 mm) thick expansion joint filler between the walk and any fixed structure that
 extends the full depth of the walk. Install 1-inch (25 mm) thick expansion joint filler between the walk and the back
 of curb that is on a 250-foot (75 m) or smaller radius, such as at street intersections.
 D. Slope. Construct the surface of the walk with a maximum transverse slope rate of 0.02 and with the low side
 adjacent to the roadway.
 E. Curing. Cure concrete according to Item 451.
 608.04
 
 Asphalt Concrete Walks. Construct asphalt concrete walks as follows:
 
 A. Excavation and Forms. Excavate and construct forms according to 608.03.A and 608.03.B.
 B. Base. Place and thoroughly compact aggregate base in layers not exceeding 4 inches (100 mm) in depth.
 C. Asphalt Placement and Compaction. Place asphalt concrete in one or more courses to provide the required
 depth. Compact using a hand roller or power roller of a type and weight acceptable to the Engineer.
 608.05
 
 Crushed Aggregate Walks. Construct crushed aggregate walks as follows:
 
 A. Excavation. Excavate according to 608.03.A.
 B. Forms. Construct forms of wood or metal of acceptable rigidity and to the depth of the necessary loose
 material. Back forms with compacted soil to the height of the completed walk.
 C. Aggregate Placement and Compaction. Place aggregate in one or more courses to provide the required depth.
 Compact using equipment of a type and weight acceptable to the Engineer.
 608.06
 
 Concrete Steps. Construct concrete steps as follows:
 
 A. Excavation and Forms. Excavate and construct forms according to 608.03.A and 608.03.B.
 B. Placement and Finishing. Place and finish concrete according to Item 511, except finish the treads of steps
 to produce a sandy texture.
 C. Slope. Slope step treads at a rate of 0.01 and toward the next lower step.
 D. Curing. Cure steps according to 608.03.E.
 E. Railing. If specified, install hand railing according to Item 517.
 608.07
 Curb Ramps. Excavate, form, place, finish, and cure according to 608.03.A, 608.03.B, 608.03.C,
 and 608.03.E. Finish ramps to a rougher final surface texture than the adjacent walk and with striations transverse
 to the ramp slope using a coarse broom or other method approved by the Engineer.
 Provide detectable warning devices conforming to 712.14 in curb ramps. Install the detectable warning devices
 according to manufacturer’s written recommendations and standard drawings. Provide a warranty to conform with
 the requirements of 712.14. Provide the manufacturer’s written installation instructions and the 5-year warranty to
 the Engineer at or before the pre-construction meeting.
 608.08
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Concrete Walk, Asphalt Concrete Walk,
 and Aggregate Walk by the number of square feet (square meters) of finished surface, complete in place.
 The Department will measure curb ramps by the number of square feet (square meters) completed. The
 Department will measure detectable warnings in existing curb ramps and at grade crossings by the number of square
 feet (square meters) completed.
 The Department will measure Concrete Steps by the number of feet (meters), along the front edge of each tread.
 Where steps are constructed with integral walls, the Department will include the thickness of the integral walls
 with the tread width measurement.
 608.09
 Basis of Payment. Payment for walks, curb ramps, detectable warnings, and steps is full
 compensation for excavation, backfill, concrete cutting/sawing, base course material, reinforcing steel, hand
 railing, expansion joint materials, and any incidentals required to complete the installation as specified. The
 Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 608
 
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 
 Concrete Walk
 
 608
 608
 608
 608
 608
 
 Asphalt Concrete Walk
 Aggregate Walk
 Curb Ramp
 Detectable Warning
 Concrete Steps
 
 ITEM 609 CURBING, CONCRETE MEDIANS, AND TRAFFIC ISLANDS
 609.01
 609.02
 609.03
 609.04
 609.05
 609.06
 609.07
 609.08
 
 Description
 Materials
 Stone Curb
 Cast-in-Place Concrete Curb and Combination Curb and Gutter
 Asphalt Concrete Curb
 Concrete Median and Traffic Island
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 609.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and constructing curb, combination curb and gutter,
 medians, and traffic islands. This work also consists of excavating, backfilling, furnishing and installing joint
 materials, and disposing of surplus excavation and discarded materials according to Item 203.
 609.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Concrete,
 Class QC Misc or QC 1*................................................................... 499
 Preformed filler ............................................................................ 705.03
 Tie bar steel, epoxy coated ...................... 709.00, 709.01, 709.03, 709.05
 Coated dowel bars............................................................................ 709.13
 * Replacing Coarse aggregate in the concrete mixes with Recycled Concrete Aggregate conforming to
 Supplement 1117 is an option
 Furnish the best quality of Berea or Amherst gray sandstone, or sandstone of equal quality.
 Furnish asphalt concrete curb conforming to 441 Type 1 intermediate course. Conform the asphalt concrete to
 the composition requirements with the fine aggregate content set at the maximum allowed under this composition.
 Provided the Contractor meets the composition requirements, the Contractor may add mineral filler conforming to
 703.07. Add the mineral filler using a method approved by OMM.
 609.03
 
 Stone Curb
 
 A. Cutting and Dressing. Ensure that 95 percent of all straight curb pieces are at least 5-feet (1.5 m) long, with
 no pieces less than 42 inches (1.1 m). The Contractor may use a piece as short as 30 inches (0.8 m) for closure. For
 curves with a radius of 50 feet (15 m) or greater, the Contractor may use radially jointed straight curb pieces
 between 36 and 42 inches (0.9 and 1.1 m) long. For curves and corners with a radius of less than 50 feet (15 m),
 use pieces a minimum of 36-inches (0.9 m) long, and dress, joint, and set pieces to the radii specified. For all curves
 and corners, use curb sections that are approximately uniform in length.
 Dress all curb to a straight edge on top and on the exposed face and ends to a depth of at least 6 inches (150
 mm) below the gutter elevation. Dress the ends at right angles to the face for straight curb and radially for curb on
 curves. Do not allow slack or hollow joints. Do not leave any projections after dressing the ends of any curb section
 that exceed 1/8 inch (3 mm) from the plane of the end of that section. Cut the edge next to the gutter to a 3-inch
 (75 mm) radius and dress the top to a 1/4-inch (6 mm) bevel rising from the exposed face. Use a pitching tool on
 the edge at the back to hand dress curb to the specified width.
 B. Setting. Set the curb on a thoroughly compacted subgrade and with a 1 in 20 batter from the vertical backward
 from the gutter. Place a minimum 3-inch (75 mm) thick firm bed of aggregate material as a foundation for the curb.
 Use a heavy rammer to settle the curb into place. Place and compact a minimum 4-inch (100 mm) wide aggregate
 backfill behind the curb to within 6 inches (150 mm) of the top. Bring the balance of the backfill to the level of the
 top of the curb for a distance of 2 feet (0.6 m) behind the curb with soil or other acceptable material. Thoroughly
 tamp the backing in layers not exceeding 6 inches (150 mm) in thickness, loose measurement, with an approved
 tamper or rammer. Perform as much of the backfilling and tamping as is consistent with alignment of the curb at
 the time the stone is first set. Set curb on curves in plastic concrete 6-inches (150 mm) thick as shown on the plans.
 
 Extend concrete the width of the curb plus 6 inches (150 mm) behind the curb, and bring concrete up behind the
 curb to within 4 inches (100 mm) of the top.
 C. Joints. Set curbs such that below the dressed portions the space between ends of adjacent sections of curbing
 is not less than 1/8 inch (3 mm) at any point and not more than 4 inches (100 mm). Cushion the joints between the
 dressed portions of adjacent sections of curbing with 1/8-inch (3 mm) thick expansion joint material. Trim
 expansion joint material flush with the curbing on all edges.
 If placing sandstone curb after placing pavement, fill remaining joints with dry sand to within 2 inches (50
 mm) of the surface of the pavement, and fill to the pavement surface with asphalt concrete. Take care in filling this
 joint so that no asphalt concrete comes in contact with the exposed surface of the curb.
 D. Reusing Existing as New Curb. If specifically allowed by the plans, and to the extent available, use acceptable
 stone curb sections removed under Item 202 instead of furnishing new stone curb. Use salvaged curb at locations
 designated by the Engineer. Place all salvaged sections of curb continuously without interspersing salvaged and
 new curb sections. Haul and store salvaged curb as necessary. Cut, dress, set, and install joints in salvaged curbs
 according to the requirements for new curbs.
 609.04
 
 Cast-in-Place Concrete Curb and Combination Curb and Gutter.
 
 A. Forms and Joints. Use approved steel forms for curbs. Securely brace and hold forms to the line and grade
 shown on the plans. The Contractor may use approved flexible forms of steel or wood to construct curved curb
 with a radius of 200 feet (60 m) or less. Immediately before placing concrete, clean the inner surface of the forms,
 and coat this surface with a form release agent.
 Where curb and combination curb and gutter is not constructed integral with, or tied to, the base or pavement,
 construct 1/4-inch (6 mm) wide contraction joints at 10-feet (3 m) intervals using steel separator plates, a grooving
 tool, or a saw according to Item 451. For combination curb and gutter, construct the joint to an average depth of 2
 inches (50 mm) or more. For curb, construct the joint to an average depth of one-fifth or more of the curb height.
 Where expansion joints occur in the abutting pavement, separate the section being placed with 1-inch (25 mm)
 thick 705.03 preformed filler.
 Where the curb is integral with, or tied to, the base or pavement, construct the same type of joints as used in
 the pavement. Space joints identically with the joints in the base or pavement.
 Leave curb forms in place until their removal will not crack, shatter, or otherwise injure the concrete. Do not
 seal transverse joints in cast-in-place concrete curb and combination curb and gutter.
 If curbs are to later serve as a support for a finishing machine in the placing of a surface course, align supporting
 edges so that the distance between the curbs is within 1/2 inch (13 mm) from that specified.
 B. Placing. Place concrete in forms prepared as described above, and vibrate the concrete to eliminate all voids.
 Place concrete for curb that is integral with the concrete base or pavement while the base or pavement concrete is
 plastic. Where the presence of the finishing equipment on the forms at the end of the day’s run prevents completing
 the curb, install No. 5 (No. 16M) tie bars vertically in the pavement at 1-foot (0.3 m) intervals and in a line 3 inches
 (75 mm) inside of and parallel to the pavement edge. Install these tie bars to within 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) of the
 subgrade or subbase and 2 inches (50 mm) above the concrete base or pavement surface. Water cure this horizontal
 construction joint between the concrete base or pavement and the curb, or membrane cure the concrete base or
 pavement and remove the membrane before placing the curb. Immediately before placing the concrete curb, brush
 mortar (consisting of one part cement to two parts sand with enough water to form a workable mortar) into the
 surface area of the hardened concrete pavement or base where the curb is to be placed. Do not allow the mortar to
 dry before placing the curb on top of it.
 C. Slip-Form Placement. The Contractor may use a self-propelled machine to place concrete curb or curb and
 gutter. Force the concrete through a mold of the proper cross-section to obtain the proper density and cross-section.
 If using a track, set and secure the track on which the machine operates to the exact line and grade given by the
 Engineer. Use concrete of a consistency that provides the desired shape and remains as placed without slumping
 of the vertical faces.
 
 D. Finishing. Without adding extra mortar, float the top of the curb to thoroughly compact the concrete and
 produce a smooth and even surface. Round the edges of the curb using a tool specially designed for this purpose.
 Immediately after removing the forms, rub the exposed face of the curb with a float to eliminate unnecessary tool
 marks. Provide a finished surface free of irregularities and waves, and uniform in texture.
 E. Protection. Cure concrete according to Item 451.
 609.05
 Asphalt Concrete Curb. Use one of the following methods, or other method approved by the
 Engineer, to furnish and place an asphalt concrete curb of the required cross-section.
 A. Method A. After completing the surface course, paint or spray only the area to be occupied by the asphalt
 concrete curb with asphalt material conforming to 407.02. Apply the asphalt material at the rate of 0.15 gallon per
 square yard (0.7 L/m2). Place the curb with a hand-operated or self-propelled machine consisting of a hopper and
 power-driven screw, which forces the material through an extrusion tube. Force the material through a die attached
 to the end of the extrusion tube to obtain the proper density and cross-section.
 B. Method B. As an independent operation preceding the final rolling of the asphalt concrete surface course on
 which the curb is placed, place loose asphalt concrete of sufficient height. Shape the loose asphalt concrete by hand
 methods using suitable templates or by other means to produce the specified cross-section. Compact the loose
 asphalt concrete using a hand-operated mechanical vibrating tamper equipped with a compacting shoe of such
 shape that will produce the specified final cross-section dimensions of the curb.
 609.06
 
 Concrete Median and Traffic Island
 
 A. Forms and Joints. Securely brace and hold approved steel forms to the line and grade shown on the plans.
 The Contractor may use approved flexible forms of steel or wood to construct curves with a radius of 200 feet (60
 m) or less. Immediately before placing concrete, clean the inner surface of the forms, and coat this surface with a
 form release agent.
 Where medians and traffic islands are not anchored to the pavement, construct contraction joints at 10-foot (3
 m) intervals using steel separator plates, a grooving tool, or saw according to Item 451. Construct joints to a
 minimum depth of 2 inches (50 mm).
 Where the medians or traffic islands are anchored to the pavement, construct the same type of joints in the
 median or traffic island as used in the pavement. Construct joints to a minimum depth of 2 inches (50 mm) using
 steel separator plates, a grooving tool, or saw according to Item 451. Space the joints identically with the joints in
 the pavement.
 Leave forms in place until their removal will not crack, shatter, or otherwise injure the concrete.
 B. Placing. Immediately before placing a concrete median or traffic island on subgrade, bring the subgrade to a
 thoroughly moistened condition by sprinkling with water at such times and in such a manner directed by the
 Engineer.
 Place the concrete in forms prepared as described above, and vibrate the concrete to eliminate all voids.
 C. Slip-Form Placement. The Contractor may use a self-propelled machine to place medians and traffic islands.
 Force the concrete through a mold of the proper cross-section to obtain the proper density and cross-section. If
 using a track, set and secure the track on which the machine operates to the exact line and grade given by the
 Engineer. Use concrete of a consistency that provides the desired shape and remains as placed without slumping
 of the faces.
 D. Finishing. Without adding extra mortar, finish the top of the median or traffic island to a broom texture. Round
 the edges using a tool specially designed for this purpose. Immediately after removing the forms, rub the exposed
 faces with a float to eliminate unnecessary tool marks. Provide a finished surface free of irregularities and waves,
 and a uniform texture.
 E. Protection. Cure concrete according to Item 451.
 
 609.07
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Sandstone Curb, Curb, Combination Curb
 and Gutter, and Asphalt Concrete Curb by the number of feet (meters) complete in place, measured along the front
 face of the curb section.
 The Department will measure Concrete Traffic Island and Concrete Median by the number of square yards
 (square meters) or the number of cubic yards (cubic meters) complete in place.
 609.08
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 609
 609
 609
 609
 609
 
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Square Yard or
 Cubic Yard
 (Square Meter or
 Cubic Meter)
 Square Yard or
 Cubic Yard
 (Square Meter or
 Cubic Meter)
 
 Sandstone Curb
 Curb, Type ___
 Combination Curb and Gutter, Type ___
 Asphalt Concrete Curb, Type ___
 Concrete Traffic Island
 
 609
 
 Concrete Median
 
 ITEM 610 CELLULAR RETAINING WALLS
 610.01
 610.02
 610.03
 610.04
 610.05
 610.06
 610.07
 610.08
 610.09
 
 Description
 Approval by Department
 Materials
 Manufactured Units
 Excavation
 Backfill
 Wall Construction
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 610.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing retaining walls composed of a series of cells formed
 by assembling precast reinforced concrete or galvanized metal units to form stable walls.
 Concrete cellular walls consist of a series of rectangular or triangular cells formed by building up tiers of precast
 reinforced concrete units.
 Metal cellular retaining walls consists of pairs of columns, one column in the plane of the front of the wall and
 the other column in the plane of the rear of the wall. The column pairs are spaced longitudinally with overlapping
 S-shaped facing and rear members, and transversely with overlapping U-shaped members.
 610.02
 Approval by Department. Submit to the Department for acceptance, 30 days before the work is to
 begin, drawings of the units to be furnished. Only submit information for walls produced by manufacturers whose
 type of wall, and design of units comprising same, has been in successful commercial use for a period of at least 3
 years.
 610.03
 
 Materials. Furnish manufactured units conforming to:
 
 A. Concrete Cellular Wall. Use concrete conforming to Item 499, Class QC 1. Use reinforcing steel conforming
 to 509.02.
 B. Metal Cellular Wall. Provide units made from galvanized metal sheets. Use base metal conforming to
 AASHTO M 218. Ensure that both sides of the sheets are galvanized by the hot-dip process. Provide an average
 spelter coating of not less than 2 ounces per square foot (610 g/m 2) on each side of the sheet and a spelter coating
 of at least 1.8 ounces per square foot (550 g/m2) on any 2 1/4  2 1/2-inch (57  64 mm) area on each side of double
 exposed surfaces. Provide finished sheets that are free from injurious defects, such as blisters, flux, and uncoated
 spots.
 Use metal sheets with a minimum thickness of 0.057 inch (1.45 mm), unless otherwise shown on the plans.
 Furnish three copies of the manufacturer’s “Analysis and Coating Test Certificate” containing the following
 information covering each project or order on which galvanized metal walls are furnished.
 A. Heat or heats used for units.
 B. Analysis of each heat.
 C. Amount of spelter coating for each heat.
 D. Total units of each size and thickness.
 E. Name of Contractor.
 F. Name of County, Interstate, U.S., or State route number, and section.
 G. Project number or state purchase order number.
 Send one copy of the certificate to the Laboratory and two copies to the Engineer. With each copy of the
 certificate, include a written statement, signed by a person having legal authority to bind the manufacturer, that the
 information and test results are correct and that the material complies with all contract requirements.
 Furnish 5/8-inch (16 mm) diameter bolts, galvanized according to 711.02 and at least 1 1/4 inches (32 mm) long,
 measured from the underside of the bolt head.
 
 610.04
 
 Manufactured Units.
 
 A. Concrete Cellular Wall. Cast concrete cellular wall units in substantial, unyielding steel forms. Properly
 assemble, clean, and oil the forms before placing concrete in the forms. During the placing and setting of the
 concrete, hold the forms rigidly in place on a smooth and level platform.
 Secure the reinforcement to ensure that it remains in the required position while placing concrete.
 Vibrate the fresh concrete to fill all space in the form with concrete, to densify the concrete, and to surround
 the reinforcement. Reject units with segregated areas.
 Cure the units by covering with burlap, that is kept wet at least 7 days or by applying steam for at least 24
 hours.
 All openings to be filled with nonshrink mortar per 705.22 including all lifting device voids
 The Engineer will reject reinforced concrete units for any of the following reasons:
 1. Exposure of the reinforcing.
 2. Defects that indicate imperfect mixing, placing, or curing.
 3. Fractures and cracks.
 B. Metal Cellular Wall. Fabricate galvanized metal cellular wall units so that units of the same nominal size are
 fully interchangeable. Do not drill, punch, or drift holes to correct manufacturing defects. Replace all units with
 improperly punched holes.
 If possible, maintain a minimum forming radius of 1 inch (25 mm). Hot-dip galvanize all units formed with
 less than 1-inch (25 mm) radius after forming.
 610.05
 Excavation. Excavate according to Item 203. Obtain the Engineer’s approval that the bearing for the
 foundation of the walls is firm and to the proper elevation before erecting the wall.
 610.06
 Backfill. Below the elevation of the proposed ground line at the face of the wall, fill the cells formed
 by the units with soil as defined in 203.02.R. Above the elevation of the proposed ground line at the face of the
 wall, fill the cells with material conforming to 203 Granular Material Type B, except that the percent passing the
 No. 200 (75 m) sieve shall not exceed 5 percent.
 Place the material in layers that compact to a depth not to exceed 6 inches (150 mm). Compact the material to
 the density established by the Engineer using approved tampers or compactors. Add water as directed by the
 Engineer.
 Fill the space behind the wall according to 503.08, except as noted below.
 Backfill around the wall and in the interior cells, concurrent with wall erection and as close to the wall elevation
 as allowed by the type of construction.
 Do not use rolling equipment directly over a portion of the wall until placing at least 12 inches (0.3 m) of
 compacted fill.
 610.07
 Wall Construction. Construct the wall types as follows:
 A. Concrete Cellular Wall. Place sills to the required grade and alignment, and support the entire sill length on
 the foundation material. Do not shim the sill.
 Place and interlock the headers perpendicular to the sills and stretches. Use templates to ensure that members
 are placed in the proper position and with the proper face batter.
 Before placing sills, spread two layers of asphalt impregnated paper on all points of contact between the sills
 and the foundation material to ensure a uniform bedding.
 After constructing two tiers of the wall, check and, if necessary, adjust the alignment, grade, and batter of the
 units, and backfill to this height before adding subsequent units. Complete the remainder of the wall.
 B. Metal Cellular Wall. Use templates to ensure that members are placed in the proper position and with the
 proper face batter.
 
 After placing the columns and constructing two tiers of the wall, check and, if necessary, adjust the alignment,
 grade, and batter of the units, and backfill to this height before adding subsequent units. Complete the remainder
 of the wall.
 Carefully handle members, and remove and replace damaged members.
 610.08
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Cellular Retaining Wall by the number of
 square feet (square meters) of facial area complete in place.
 610.09
 Basis of Payment. Payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials, backfilling, including
 the interior filling, watering, and disposing of surplus materials.
 The Department will not pay for replacing any unit with improperly punched holes.
 The Department will not pay for removing or replacing members damaged during handling.
 The Department will pay for Excavation Not Including Embankment Construction under Item 203.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 610
 
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 
 Cellular Retaining Wall
 
 ITEM 611 PIPE CULVERTS, SEWERS, DRAINS,
 AND DRAINAGE STRUCTURES
 611.01
 611.02
 611.03
 611.04
 611.05
 611.06
 611.07
 611.08
 611.09
 611.10
 611.11
 611.12
 611.13
 611.14
 611.15
 611.16
 611.17
 
 Description
 Materials
 Definitions
 Submittals
 Excavation
 Bedding and Backfill
 Laying Conduit
 Joining Conduit
 Exterior Coatings and Membrane Waterproofing
 Drainage Structure Construction
 Field Paving of New or Existing Conduit
 Performance Inspection
 Conduit Evaluation
 Drainage Structure Evaluation
 Surface Settlements
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 611.01
 Description. This work consists of constructing conduits, and constructing and reconstructing
 drainage structures. This work also includes preparing installation plans, performing inspections, and providing
 reports and other required documentation.
 611.02
 Materials. Furnish pipe of the specified conduit type and size or one size larger with the approval of
 the Engineer. Conduit shown in the plans is designed for hydraulic capacity and durability only. Furnish conduit
 that meets the performance requirements of this specification and meets the durability and hydraulic capacity
 specified in the plans. If the material is not specified in the plans, furnish conduit conforming to any of the material
 requirements listed for that conduit type. All listed materials for each conduit type can meet the performance
 requirements. However, different materials may require varying installation procedures.
 The Contractor may furnish concrete or plastic pipe of the same type with greater strength than specified. The
 Contractor may furnish metal pipe with a greater thickness than specified, so long as the pipe has the same
 corrugation profile and is the same type.
 A. Type A Conduit – Culverts
 Non-reinforced concrete pipe, Class 3............................................ 706.01
 Reinforced concrete circular pipe .................................................... 706.02
 Reinforced concrete pipe, epoxy coated ......................................... 706.03
 Reinforced concrete elliptical pipe .................................................. 706.04
 Precast reinforced concrete box sections ......................................... 706.05
 Precast reinforced concrete 3-sided flat topped culverts ............... 706.051
 Precast reinforced concrete arch sections ..................................... 706.052
 Precast reinforced concrete round sections .................................... 706.053
 Vitrified clay pipe (extra strength only) .......................................... 706.08
 Corrugated steel conduits ................................................ 707.01 or 707.02
 Structural plate corrugated steel structures ...................................... 707.03
 Precoated, galvanized steel culverts ................................................ 707.04
 Bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches
 with paved invert ................................... 707.05 Type B or 707.07 Type B
 Corrugated aluminum alloy pipe ..................................... 707.21 or 707.22
 Aluminum alloy structural plate conduits........................................ 707.23
 Corrugated steel box culverts .......................................................... 707.15
 
 Polymer Precoated, Galvanized Steel Conduits with precoated
 galvanized smooth interiorliner...… ................................................ 707.18
 Aluminum coated Steel Conduits with precoated
 galvanized smooth steel interior liner….. ........................................ 707.19
 Galvanized Coated Steel Conduits with precoated
 galvanized smooth steel interior liner… .......................................... 707.20
 Corrugated aluminum box culverts ................................................. 707.25
 Corrugated polyethylene smooth lined pipe .................................... 707.33
 Polyethylene Plastic Pipe Based on Outside Diameter (OD) ......... 707.34
 Polyethylene Profile Wall Pipe ........................................................ 707.35
 Polypropylene Corrugated Double Wall Pipe ................................. 707.65
 Polypropylene Corrugated Triple Wall Pipe ................................... 707.69
 Steel reinforced thermoplastic ribbed pipe ...................................... SS 938
 Glass-fiber-reinforced polymer mortar pipe .................................... 707.75
 B. Type B Conduit – Storm or sanitary sewers under pavement
 Non-reinforced concrete pipe, Class 3............................................. 706.01
 Reinforced concrete circular pipe .................................................... 706.02
 Reinforced concrete elliptical pipe .................................................. 706.04
 Precast reinforced concrete box sections ......................................... 706.05
 Vitrified clay pipe (extra strength only) .......................................... 706.08
 Corrugated steel spiral rib pipe ........................................................ 707.12
 Bituminous lined corrugated steel pipe ........................... 707.13 or 707.14
 Polymer Precoated, Galvanized Steel Conduits with precoated
 galvanized smooth interior liner...… ............................................... 707.18
 Aluminum coated Steel Conduits with precoated
 galvanized smooth steel interior liner….. ........................................ 707.19
 Galvanized Coated Steel Conduits with precoated
 galvanized smooth steel interior liner… .......................................... 707.20
 Corrugated aluminum spiral rib pipe ............................................... 707.24
 Corrugated polyethylene smooth lined pipe .................................... 707.33
 Polyethylene Plastic Pipe Based on Outside Diameter
 (OD) ............................................................................................ 707.34
 Polyethylene Profile Wall Pipe ....................................................... 707.35
 Polyvinyl chloride corrugated smooth interior pipe ........................ 707.42
 Polyvinyl chloride profile wall pipe ................................................ 707.43
 Polyvinyl chloride solid wall pipe ................................................... 707.45
 Polyvinyl chloride drain waste and vent pipe .................................. 707.46
 Polyvinyl chloride ABS composite pipe.......................................... 707.47
 Polyvinyl chloride large-diameter solid wall pipe ........................... 707.48
 ABS drain waste and vent pipe ........................................................ 707.51
 Polypropylene corrugated double wall pipe .................................... 707.65
 Polypropylene triple wall pipe ......................................................... 707.69
 Steel reinforced thermoplastic ribbed pipe ...................................... SS 938
 Ductile iron pipe (sanitary) .............................................................. 748.01
 Polyvinyl chloride pipe (sanitary) ................................................... 748.02
 Glass-fiber-reinforced polymer mortar pipe .................................... 707.75
 C. Type C Conduit – Storm or sanitary sewers not under pavement
 Non-reinforced concrete circular pipe ............................................. 706.01
 Reinforced concrete pipe ................................................................. 706.02
 
 Reinforced concrete elliptical pipe .................................................. 706.04
 Precast reinforced concrete box sections ......................................... 706.05
 Vitrified clay pipe ............................................................................ 706.08
 Corrugated steel spiral rib pipe ........................................................ 707.12
 Bituminous lined corrugated steel pipe ........................... 707.13 or 707.14
 Polymer Precoated, Galvanized Steel Conduits with precoated
 galvanized smooth interior liner...… ............................................... 707.18
 Aluminum coated Steel Conduits with precoated
 galvanized smooth steel interior liner….. ........................................ 707.19
 Galvanized Coated Steel Conduits with precoated
 galvanized smooth steel interior liner… .......................................... 707.20
 Corrugated aluminum spiral rib pipe ............................................... 707.24
 Corrugated polyethylene smooth lined pipe .................................... 707.33
 Polyethylene Plastic Pipe Based on Outside Diameter (OD) ......... 707.34
 Polyethylene Profile Wall Pipe ........................................................ 707.35
 Polyvinyl chloride corrugated smooth interior pipe ........................ 707.42
 Polyvinyl chloride profile wall pipe ................................................ 707.43
 Polyvinyl chloride solid wall pipe ................................................... 707.45
 Polyvinyl chloride drain waste and vent pipe .................................. 707.46
 Polyvinyl chloride ABS composite pipe.......................................... 707.47
 Polyvinyl chloride large-diameter solid wall pipe ........................... 707.48
 ABS drain waste and vent pipe ........................................................ 707.51
 Polypropylene corrugated double wall pipe .................................... 707.65
 Polypropylene triple wall pipe ......................................................... 707.69
 Steel reinforced thermoplastic ribbed pipe ...................................... SS 938
 Ductile iron pipe (sanitary) .............................................................. 748.01
 Polyvinyl chloride pipe (sanitary) ................................................... 748.02
 Glass-fiber-reinforced polymer mortar pipe .................................... 707.75
 D. Type D Conduit – Drive pipes and bikeways
 Non-reinforced concrete pipe, Class 3............................................. 706.01
 Reinforced concrete circular pipe .................................................... 706.02
 Reinforced concrete elliptical pipe .................................................. 706.04
 Vitrified clay pipe (extra strength only) .......................................... 706.08
 Corrugated steel conduits ................................................ 707.01 or 707.02
 Structural plate corrugated steel structures ...................................... 707.03
 Corrugated aluminum alloy pipe ..................................... 707.21 or 707.22
 Aluminum alloy structural plate conduits........................................ 707.23
 Corrugated polyethylene smooth lined pipe .................................... 707.33
 Polyvinyl chloride corrugated smooth interior pipe ........................ 707.42
 Polyvinyl chloride profile wall pipe ................................................ 707.43
 Polyvinyl chloride solid wall pipe ................................................... 707.45
 Polyvinyl chloride large-diameter solid wall pipe ........................... 707.48
 Polypropylene corrugated single wall pipe...................................... 707.62
 E. Type E Conduit – Miscellaneous small drain connections and headers
 Non-reinforced concrete pipe .......................................................... 706.01
 Reinforced concrete circular pipe .................................................... 706.02
 Reinforced concrete elliptical pipe .................................................. 706.04
 Concrete drain tile, extra quality ..................................................... 706.07
 Vitrified clay pipe ............................................................................ 706.08
 
 Clay drain title, extra quality ........................................................... 706.09
 Corrugated steel conduit .................................................. 707.01 or 707.02
 Corrugated aluminum alloy pipe ..................................... 707.21 or 707.22
 Corrugated polyethylene drainage pipe ........................................... 707.32
 Corrugated polyethylene smooth lined pipe .................................... 707.33
 Smooth-wall polyvinyl chloride underdrain pipe (non-perforated). 707.41
 Polyvinyl chloride corrugated smooth interior pipe ........................ 707.42
 Polyvinyl chloride profile wall pipe ................................................ 707.43
 Polyvinyl chloride solid wall pipe ................................................... 707.45
 Polyvinyl chloride drain waste and vent pipe .................................. 707.46
 Polyvinyl chloride ABS composite pipe.......................................... 707.47
 Polyvinyl chloride large-diameter solid wall pipe ........................... 707.48
 ABS drain waste and vent pipe ........................................................ 707.51
 F. Type F Conduit – Conduit on steep slopes; underdrain outlets
 Corrugated steel conduits
 (steep slope conduit) ....................................... 707.05 Type C or 707.07
 Corrugated aluminum alloy pipe
 (steep slope conduit) .................................................... 707.21 or 707.22
 Corrugated polyethylene
 smooth lined pipe (underdrain outlets) ........................................ 707.33
 Smooth-wall polyvinyl chloride underdrain pipe
 (non-perforated underdrain outlets) ............................................. 707.41
 Polyvinyl chloride corrugated
 smooth interior pipe (underdrain outlets) ..................................... 707.42
 Polyvinyl chloride solid wall pipe
 (underdrain outlets) ...................................................................... 707.45
 G. For constructing or reconstructing drainage structures, furnish materials conforming to:
 Concrete, Class QC1. .................................................................... 511, 499
 Brick and masonry units ....................................................................... 704
 Precast reinforced concrete manhole, catch basin,
 and inlet sections .......................................................................... 706.13
 Precast reinforced concrete outlet .................................................... 706.15
 Preformed expansion joint filler ...................................................... 705.03
 Epoxy coated reinforcing steel ........................................................ 709.00
 Cast frames, grates, and covers.......................... 711.12, 711.13, or 711.14
 Welded frames and grates ..............................................711.01 and 513.17
 Steps ................................................................... 711.13, 711.30, or 711.31
 Resilient and flexible gasket joints .................................................. 706.11
 Curing materials.................................................................. 705.05, 705.07
 Curing membrane for inlets .....................................705.07, Type 1 or 1-D
 Mortar ................................................................................................... 602
 Nonshrink mortar… ......................................................................... 705.22
 H. For bedding and backfill, furnish materials conforming to:
 Bedding .................................................................................... 613, 703.11
 Structural Backfill .................................................................... 613, 703.11
 Final Backfill:
 Granular Structural Backfill ......................................................... 703.11
 Natural Soils ......................................................................... 703.16.A[1]
 
 Granular Embankment Materials ...........................................703.16.B[1]
 Granular Embankment Material Types A, B, C and D ..........703.16.C[1]
 Coarse aggregate ............................................................ Table 703.01-1
 Fine aggregate ........................................ 703.02.A, 703.03, or 703.05.A
 304 ............................................................................................ 703.17.A
 410, 411, and 617 .................................................................. 703.18.A[1]
 Low Strength Mortar Backfill (LSM) .............................................. 613
 [1]
 
 Use any type of material defined as suitable materials for embankment construction except for steel
 slag, PCS and RAP.
 
 I.
 
 For concrete collars and encasement, furnish materials conforming to:
 Concrete, Class QC 1 .................................................................... 511, 499
 Reinforcing steel ............................................................................. 509.02
 
 J.
 
 For field paving of conduit inverts, furnish materials conforming to:
 Concrete, Class QC5, QC Misc .................................................... 511, 499
 Coarse aggregate, size No. 7, 8, or 78 ............................................. 703.02
 Galvanized welded wire fabric ........................................................ 709.08
 For material in items not specified above, furnish materials conforming to:
 Mortar ................................................................................................... 602
 Nonshrink mortar ............................................................................. 705.22
 Concrete Sealers .............................................................................. 705.23
 Bituminous pipe joint filler .............................................................. 706.10
 Resilient and flexible gasket joints for:
 Concrete pipe ............................................................................... 706.11
 Vitrified clay pipe ........................................................................ 706.12
 Preformed flexible joint sealant ....................................................... 706.14
 Type 2 membrane waterproofing..................................................... 711.25
 Type 3 membrane waterproofing..................................................... 711.29
 Geotextile Fabric ............................................................... 712.09, Type A
 Joint wrap............................................................... ASTM C 877, Type III
 Buried liner waterproofing membrane............................................. 711.22
 For Class QC1 concrete, provide batch plant tickets according to 499.07.
 
 If a precast reinforced concrete box culvert (706.05) is specified, the Engineer may allow the Contractor to
 substitute either a precast reinforced concrete 3-sided flat topped culvert, a precast reinforced concrete arch culvert,
 or a precast reinforced concrete round section (706.051, 706.052, or 706.053). If a 706.051, 706.052, or 706.053 is
 specified, the Engineer may allow the Contractor to substitute one for the other. Refer to 611.04 for submittal
 requirements.
 If bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe or pipe arch with paved invert (707.05 or 707.07) is specified, the
 Contractor may furnish conduit with a coating conforming to 707.04.
 611.03
 
 Definitions. The following terms, when used in this specification, are defined as follows:
 
 Backfill. Material used to fill the trench or excavation, further defined as Structural Backfill and Final Backfill,
 not including the bedding material.
 Bed. The bottom of the trench or excavation.
 Bedding Material. Material placed above the bed and below the conduit or drainage structure.
 Conduit. Includes pipe, culverts, sewers, and drains. Conduits are classified as Type A, B C, D, E, and F.
 
 Corrugated Metal Conduit. Includes all conduit made from corrugated steel or corrugated aluminum. Either
 material may also have coatings. This includes all of the following types of materials: 707.01, 707.02, 707.03,
 707.04, 707.05, 707.07, 707.11, 707.12, 707.13, 707.14, 707.15, 707.17, 707.21, 707.22, 707.23, 707.24, and
 707.25.
 Cut. A situation where the top of the conduit is below the existing ground surface or where a proposed
 embankment is constructed at least 2 feet (0.6 m) above the top of the conduit before installation.
 Deflection. Uniform or symmetrical flattening or ovalization of the pipe’s cross-section.
 Design Service Life. The average usable life of a conduit or structure.
 
 Drainage Structures. Manholes, catch basins, inlets, inspection wells, junction chambers, and precast reinforced
 concrete outlets.
 Fill. A situation where the top of the conduit is above the existing ground surface in an area where an
 embankment will be constructed.
 Final Backfill. Material used to fill the trench or excavation above the Structural Backfill.
 Flexible Conduit. Plastic, corrugated metal, ductile iron (748.01), or steel casing pipe (748.06).
 Infiltration. Water or other material that enters the conduit or drainage structure through the joints or conduit
 connections in excess of the limits for soil tightness or for the type of joint specified.
 Lay Length. The length of a standard section of pipe as normally supplied by the manufacturer.
 Plastic Conduit. Corrugated polyethylene, polyvinyl chloride, or ABS conduit. This includes all of the following
 types of materials: 707.32, 707.33, 707.41, 707.42, 707.43, 707.44, 707.45, 707.46, 707.47, 707.51, 707.52, 707.62,
 707.65, 707.69, SS 938, and 748.02.
 Racking. Non-symmetrical deflection or ovalization of a pipe’s cross-section.
 Rigid Conduit. Concrete pipe, vitrified clay pipe, or clay drain tile. This includes all of the following types of
 materials: 706.01, 706.02, 706.03, 706.04, 706.05, 706.051, 706.052, 706.053, 706.08, and 706.09.
 Run of Conduit. The conduit placed between drainage structures, between a drainage structure and an open
 outlet, between an open inlet and a drainage structure, or between the open inlet and open outlet.
 Span. Span is the conduit opening measured along the centerline of the roadway. Multiple cell openings are
 considered one span if the clear distance between the openings is less than half of the smaller contiguous opening.
 Spring Line. A line along the length of the pipe at its maximum span. For circular pipes the spring line is located
 at mid-height of the pipe (rise divided by two).
 Structural Backfill. Material adjacent to the conduit used to fill the trench from the top of Bedding Material to
 12-inches above the top of conduit or greater as required by the manufacturer. For drainage structures, material
 used to fill the trench from the top of Bedding Material to subgrade in pavement or topsoil in vegetated areas.
 611.04
 
 Submittals
 
 A. Shop Drawings. Prepare shop drawings and calculations for C&MS items 706.051, 706.052, 706.053, and
 “Special Design” 706.02 as required below. Have competent individuals prepare and check the shop drawings and
 hydraulic calculations. Provide a cover sheet containing the preparer(s) and checker(s): First Name, Last Name,
 Initials and Content Responsibility. Preparer(s) and checker(s) shall initial each sheet for their content
 responsibility. The preparer(s) and checker(s) shall not be the same individual. Have an Ohio Registered Engineer
 review, approve, sign, seal and date the shop drawing cover sheet or submittal letter and hydraulic calculations
 according to ORC 4733 and OAC 4733-35. Submit load rating report in accordance to the most current version of
 ODOT’s Bridge Design Manual along with one copy of the shop drawings and one copy of the calculations to the
 Office of Structural Engineering for all structures with a 10 foot or larger span. Submit an additional copy of the
 shop drawings and calculations to the Engineer.
 1. If Reinforced Concrete Circular Pipe, 706.02, requires a “Special Design” with a specified D-load
 requirement other than Tables 706.02-1 through 706.02-4, submit shop drawings and design calculations. Design
 
 the pipe to meet the D-load requirements to ensure the performance of this specification. Include the following
 information in the submittal: all structural design and loading information, all material specifications, all
 dimensions, and the installation plan.
 2. Submittals for Precast reinforced concrete 3-sided flat topped culverts, precast reinforced concrete arch
 sections, or precast reinforced concrete round sections, (706.051, 706.052, or 706.053) shall include structural
 analysis methods, structural design criteria and calculations, structure details, and shop drawings. Include details
 for a precast slab bottom if required.
 3. To substitute a precast reinforced concrete 3-sided flat topped culvert (706.051), a reinforced concrete
 arch section (706.052), or a precast reinforced concrete round section (706.053) for one another, the submittal shall
 include hydraulic calculations. The proposed culvert shall meet or exceed the same hydraulic requirements as the
 specified culvert and minimum cover requirements. If the specified culvert is on pedestal walls, include the shop
 drawings for the pedestal wall design in the submittal because 3-sided flat topped culverts, arch culverts, and round
 sections require different pedestal wall designs.
 4. To substitute either a precast reinforced concrete 3-sided flat topped culvert, a precast reinforced concrete
 arch section, or a precast reinforced concrete round section (706.051, 706.052, or 706.053) placed on a precast or
 cast-in-place slab bottom for a precast reinforced concrete box culvert (706.05), the submittal shall include
 hydraulic calculations. The proposed culvert shall meet or exceed the same hydraulic requirements as the specified
 box culvert and minimum cover requirements. The Department may allow the bottom slab to be cast-in-place but
 will not issue a time extension for any delays resulting from the use of a cast-in-place bottom slab.
 Department approval of shop drawings and calculations is not required.
 B. Installation Plan. Submit a written installation plan to the Engineer for installing all conduit and drainage
 structures for review and acceptance.
 Submit the installation plan at least 15 days before any conduit or drainage structure work begins.
 Do not perform work without an accepted installation plan.
 Include the following required information for each conduit run:
 1. Trench and excavation cross-sections with dimensions.
 2. Completed CA-P-1A Conduit Installation Plan Form.
 3. Other installation details as necessary.
 4. Provide written confirmation from the conduit manufacturer that the pipe material and strength supplied are
 appropriate for the material and density requirements described in the installation plan for the backfill and bedding
 as well as the height of cover. Ensure the pipe material meets the durability design specified in the plans. This
 confirmation by the conduit manufacturer will not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for obtaining the
 required results.
 Include the following required information for each drainage structure:
 1. Trench and excavation cross-sections with dimensions.
 2. Completed CA-P-3A Drainage Structure Installation Plan Form
 3. Other installation details as necessary.
 Deviations from the installation plan during construction require a revision of the installation plan. Resubmit
 all revisions to the installation plan to the Engineer within 14 days of the change with the conduit manufacturer’s
 written confirmation that the conduit material and strength supplied are appropriate for the material and density
 requirements described in the newly revised installation plan for the backfill and bedding. If the conduit
 manufacturer does not provide this written confirmation to the newly revised installation plan, all the conduit
 installed according to the unconfirmed plan must be replaced. No new installation plans will be considered until
 all previous installation plans have been confirmed and accepted.
 
 Provide the conduit manufacturer's structural calculations when specified or within 10 days when requested
 by the Engineer. Ensure the conduit structural design is performed in accordance to AASHTO LRFD Bridge
 Design Specifications. Have an Ohio Registered Engineer sign and seal the calculations.
 For structural plate and metal pipe arch conduit with a span of 57 inches (1440 mm) or larger, ensure the
 manufacturer provides match-marked ends on the conduit. Include a layout drawing in the installation plan.
 For metal conduit with two structural plate thicknesses specified, identify the location of the thicker plates.
 For precast concrete 3-sided flat and arch topped structures (706.051 and 706.052) provide a 3 inch (75 mm) deep
 keyway centered on the leg and at least 6 inches (150 mm) wider than the thickness of the leg at the bottom. For
 precast concrete round sections (706.053) provide an 8-inch (200 mm) deep keyway for spans up to 24 feet (7.3 m)
 and a 10-inch (254 mm) deep keyway for spans greater than 24 feet, (7.3 m). Center the keyway on the precast arch
 base. The width of the keyway must be 8 inches (200 mm) greater than the thickness of the precast arch base. For
 non-vertical leg arches set on pedestal walls, a one sided keyway is acceptable if the required pedestal wall design
 thickness is not sufficient for a full keyway.
 C. Construction Inspection Forms. Perform work so that it can be verified by the Contractor’s representative
 doing the inspection. Submit construction inspection forms to the Engineer for each run of conduit and each
 drainage structure. Use construction inspection form CA-P-1 for conduit and use construction inspection form CAP-3 for drainage structures. Inspection form CA-P-3 is not required for precast reinforced concrete outlet structures
 706.15. Ensure that all deviations from the installation plan are noted on the construction inspection form. Ensure
 that the information on the construction inspection form is complete and accurate and that the form is signed by a
 representative of the Contractor certifying that the information on the form is accurate. The Contractor’s
 representative must make the following statement on the form:
 “I certify that the information on this form is accurate and all deviations from the current installation plan have
 been noted.”
 Submit each day’s construction inspection forms before the start of the next work day. If the Engineer gives
 notice that the information on the form is incomplete or not accurate, do not continue related work until complete
 and accurate forms are submitted and accepted by the Engineer.
 Construction inspection forms CA-P-1 and CA-P-3 require trench and bedding measurement checks to be
 taken every 50 feet with a minimum of two per run. Record measurements to the nearest 0.1 foot (30 mm). If these
 measurements are not taken, do not continue related work until the Contractor submits a plan in writing to the
 Engineer for approval that explains how these measurements will be determined.
 D. Performance Report. Provide a performance report for each performance inspection. Include the following
 in each performance report:
 1.
 
 Project number and County-Route-Section.
 
 2.
 
 Date of performance inspection.
 
 3.
 
 Type and size of conduit.
 
 4.
 
 Time of video recording.
 
 5.
 
 Location (e.g. station and offset) and viewing direction.
 
 6.
 
 Summary of all defects including type, measurement, and location.
 
 7. For remote inspections using a mandrel, indicate in the performance report, the size of the mandrel and
 how it was calculated. Document all locations where the mandrel was unable to advance through the conduit.
 8.
 
 For remote inspections using a crawler mounted camera with laser profiler, include:
 a.
 
 Three dimensional model of the conduit based on the laser profile measurements.
 
 b.
 
 Digital profile of conduit extracted from the inspection video.
 
 c.
 
 Calculations of the ovality, capacity and delta of the conduit
 
 d.
 
 Explanation as to why data was unattainable for any section of the conduit.
 
 9.
 
 Conduit Evaluation
 
 Submit a performance report to the Engineer within 14 days of completing the performance inspection of the
 conduit run or drainage structure. Submit the performance report in a digital format that allows the Department to
 make additional copies.
 611.05
 Excavation. Excavate as described in the installation plan. Record any deviations from the
 installation plan on the construction inspection forms and revise the installation plan.
 Excavate trenches along the centerline of the conduit. When installing conduit in a fill situation, construct the
 embankment to the elevation of the spring line for the conduit or higher before excavating the trench.
 Remove any unsuitable material exposed in the bed for the width of the trench and a depth of at least 6 inches
 (150 mm). Replace the unsuitable material with structural backfill, Type 1 or 2. Remove any rock or shale exposed
 in the bed to a depth of at least 6 inches (150 mm). Replace the rock or shale with structural backfill, Type 1 or 2.
 The Department will pay for this work according to 109.05, unless otherwise noted in the Contract Documents. If
 the Engineer changes the flow line by more than one foot (0.3 m), the Department will pay according to 109.05,
 unless otherwise noted in the Contract Documents.
 611.06
 Bedding and Backfill. Place and compact bedding and backfill as described in the installation plan.
 Record any deviations from the installation plan on the construction inspection forms and revise the installation
 plan.
 Wrap coarse aggregate bedding and backfill with geotextile fabric, Type A below groundwater elevation. Place
 geotextile fabric, Type A above coarse aggregate backfill for the full width of the trench. Shape the bedding with
 recesses to receive the bell of bell-and-spigot conduit. Loosen the bedding in the middle third to seat the conduit.
 If using LSM for bedding, also use LSM for backfill to at least 6 inches (150 mm) over the top of the conduit.
 Install bedding and backfill for Type F conduits for underdrain outlets according to 605.03.C. Conduit
 Manufactures may approve materials listed in 611.02 for Final Backfill for use as Bedding and Structural Backfill
 for Type F conduits on slopes 3:1 or greater. Conduit Manufacturers may approve materials listed in 611.02 for
 Final Backfill for use as Structural Backfill for conduit Types D and E and drainage structures not located in
 pavement. Identify the use of Final Backfill materials proposed for Bedding and Structural Backfill in the
 Installation Plan and cross-section details.
 Ensure compaction density complies with the installation plan by performing compaction testing according to
 Supplement 1015 and the manufacturer’s recommendation. Final Backfill shall meet or exceed the requirements of
 203. If Structural Backfill Type 3 or open graded material is used, vibrate, tamp or compact to the compaction level
 required by the manufacturer in the installation plan.
 611.07
 Laying Conduit. Maintain flows and drainage at all times until the new facilities are completed and
 in service. Any planned temporary diversion of flows and drainage is the responsibility of the Contractor. Maintain
 temporary diversion at no additional cost to the Department.
 Visually inspect all conduit before it is placed in the trench. Replace all conduit that is damaged as determined
 by the Engineer. Before installation, measure and record on the CA-P-1 the widest inside dimension of each lay
 length of conduit. This measurement is to be taken three times along each run of conduit. For corrugated metal
 conduit measure to the inside peak of the corrugations.
 Lay the conduit in the center of the trench at the invert elevation shown on the plans. Any deviation must be
 approved by the Engineer. If the Engineer does not approve the deviation, stop all related work until the conduit is
 relaid. Ensure that the conduit is in contact with the bedding for its full length and maintain the line and grade of
 the conduit. The Contractor’s representative doing the inspection will visually inspect all conduit before placing
 any backfill. Rejoin, re-lay, or replace conduits that have settled, or that are damaged.
 Lay all conduits as described in the installation plan and according to the following requirements. The installation
 plan cannot change the following requirements. Meeting these requirements does not relieve the Contractor of the
 responsibility for obtaining the required results. Record any deviations from the installation plan on the construction
 inspection forms and revise the installation plan.
 
 A. If the welded seam in a metal conduit is longitudinal, place the seam at the spring line.
 B. For all metal conduit, use only lifting devices that do not require a hole through the material.
 C. Lay metal conduit so that match marks align.
 D. For all metal conduit that is cut at a drainage structure or headwall, treat the cut end with the same coating as
 the conduit. Do not treat any cuts within the run.
 E. Where two structural plate thicknesses are specified, place the thicker plates according to the installation plan.
 F. Set precast reinforced concrete 3-sided flat topped culvert sections (706.051) in the keyway. Place the units in
 a 1/2-inch (13 mm) bed of mortar. If proper line and grade of the structure cannot be maintained on the bed of
 mortar, set the sections on 5  5-inch (125  125 mm) masonite or steel shims. Fill the entire keyway joint with
 mortar.
 G. Set precast reinforced concrete arch sections (706.052) in the keyway. Place the units on 5  5-inch (125  125
 mm) masonite or steel shims to provide a minimum 1/2-inch (13 mm) gap between the footing and the bottom of
 the leg. Fill the entire keyway joint with mortar.
 H. Set the precast reinforced concrete round sections (706.053) in the keyway. Place the units on masonite or steel
 shims to provide a minimum 1.5-inch (38 mm) gap between the footing and the bottom of the precast arch base.
 Fill the entire keyway joint with mortar. Provide 5000 psi. (34.5 MPa) mortar. For arches that gain structural
 continuity by a cast-in-place closure at the project site, provide concrete with the same compressive strength as the
 precast arch.
 I. For precast reinforced concrete culverts (706.05, 706.051, 706.052, and 706.053) fill the lifting devices with
 mortar. Cover the exterior of the lifting devices with joint-wrap material if they are outside the limits of the
 membrane waterproofing. Use joint-wrap with a minimum width of 9 inches (225 mm). Use only lifting devices
 that do not require a hole through the structure.
 J. The inlet of all rigid conduit used in a Type A application (open inlet) must have a bell. If field cutting is
 necessary to furnish a bell at the inlet, locate the cut end at an interior joint by removing part of a section within
 the run. Join the conduit as described below and encase the joint with a concrete collar to ensure a stable connection.
 K. The top and bottom of reinforced concrete pipe that has elliptical or quadrant mat reinforcing will be clearly
 marked on the pipe. Handle and place this pipe so that the markings remain in a vertical plane through the center
 of the pipe.
 L. Handle and place reinforced concrete pipe with auxiliary reinforcements (stirrups) with the centerline of the
 auxiliary reinforcement system (stirrups) in a vertical plane through the center of the pipe.
 M. Fill all lifting holes in rigid conduit with concrete according to the manufacturer’s recommendations or using
 a method approved by the Engineer.
 N. Immediately after placing conduit, construct the end treatments at both the outlet and inlet ends. Show this
 activity as part of the conduit construction on the progress schedule. These end treatments include headwalls,
 concrete riprap, rock channel protection, sod or other erosion control items.
 O. When conduit is installed under pavement, perform the following immediately after the completion of backfill
 placement and compaction: remove and dispose of all surplus material according to 105.17, clear the site, and
 replace all pavement necessary to restore traffic. Show this activity as part of the conduit construction on the
 progress schedule.
 P. Lay all conduit from outlet end to inlet unless approved by the Engineer.
 611.08
 Joining Conduit. Ensure the joints are clean and free from dirt or debris. Join the conduit sections as
 described below. Visually inspect all conduit, joints, and gaskets before placing any backfill. Rejoin, re-lay, or
 replace any conduit that does not meet the requirements.
 The Engineer may allow joint materials other than those listed below, provided the Contractor demonstrates the
 proposed material will result in durable, sealed joints.
 
 Join conduit as described in the installation plan and according to the requirements below. For conduit material
 not listed below, join conduit as recommended by the manufacturer. Record any deviations from the installation
 plan on the construction inspection forms and revise the installation plan.
 A. Corrugated Metal Conduit. Join corrugated metal conduit, Types A, B, C, D, and F, using either coupling
 bands or bell and spigot joints. Join the conduit according to the following requirements.
 1. Coupling bands. Furnish coupling bands conforming to 707.01 or 707.02, and having the same coating
 as the conduit being joined. Use either coupling bands with gaskets or wrap the joints with geotextile fabric, Type
 A.
 2. Bell and spigot joints. If using bell and spigot joints, place a gasket in the first corrugation of the spigot
 end and thoroughly lubricate the gasket and the bell end of the receiving conduit before assembly. Drive the spigot
 securely into the bell.
 3. For coorugated metal conduits with smooth steel interior liner, furnish a joint conforming to 707.18,
 707.19 and 707.20.
 B. Rigid Conduit. Join rigid conduit, Types A, B, C, D, and F, according to the following requirements.
 1. For all concrete pipe (706.01, 706.02, 706.04) that is not epoxy coated and vitrified clay pipe (706.08),
 seal the joints using one of the following methods:
 a. Fill the joint with bituminous pipe joint filler, providing a smooth transition on the inside and a
 complete seal on the outside.
 b. Use preformed flexible joint sealant to seal the joint. Before installing the joint sealant, prime both
 surfaces of the joint with asphalt based primer according to the joint sealant manufacturer’s recommendations.
 c. Use resilient and flexible gasket joints. If the conduit is a sanitary sewer pipe, test the joint for
 infiltration and exfiltration according to ASTM C 969 or ASTM C 1103. If any joint does not meet the test
 requirements, make corrections until the joint meets the test requirements.
 2. For epoxy coated concrete pipe (706.03), seal the joint using fibrated coal tar joint compound applied
 according to the conduit manufacturer’s recommendations.
 3. For precast reinforced concrete box culverts, precast reinforced concrete 3-sided flat topped culverts,
 precast reinforced concrete arch sections, and precast reinforced concrete round sections (706.05, 706.051,
 706.052, and 706.053), place the sections according to the installation plan. Clean the joint gap of all debris and
 apply one of the following:
 a. For joints in precast reinforced concrete box culverts (706.05), fill the top exterior joint gap and the
 bottom and side interior joint gap with mortar. Next, for any exterior joint not covered by membrane waterproofing,
 cover the exterior joint with a 9-inch (225 mm) wide strip of joint wrap in accordance with the manufacturer’s
 recommendation. Center the joint wrap on the joint.
 b. For precast reinforced concrete 3-sided flat topped culverts (706.051), fill the top keyway joint with
 nonshrink mortar. If the side or leg joints are tongue and groove types, fill the joints as described above for concrete
 box culverts. If the side or leg joints are keyway types, fill with nonshrink mortar. Prepare, place, and cure the
 nonshrink mortar according to the nonshrink mortar manufacturer’s recommendations. Wet all surfaces of the
 keyway joint, but do not allow free standing water in the joint. Next, cover the exterior joint with a 12-inch (300
 mm) wide strip of joint wrap. Center the joint wrap on the joint. Use a continuous length of joint wrap sufficient to
 extend from the bottom of the vertical face on one side to the bottom vertical face on the other side. Apply
 membrane waterproofing to the precast sections after they are installed.
 c. For precast reinforced concrete arch sections and precast reinforced concrete round sections (706.052
 and 706.053), install a 7/8 x 1 3/8-inch (24 x 34 mm) preformed flexible joint sealant (706.14) along the outside
 joint chamfer. Use a continuous length of joint sealant sufficient to extend from the bottom of the vertical face on
 one side to the bottom vertical face on the other side. Before installing the joint sealant, prime the joint chamfer
 with a primer according to the joint sealant manufacturer’s recommendations. For 706.052 and 706.053, cover all
 exterior joints with a 12-inch (300 mm) wide strip of joint wrap centered on the joint. Use a continuous length of
 
 joint wrap sufficient to extend from the bottom of the vertical face on one side of the structure to the bottom vertical
 face on the other side. Next, apply all waterproofing as shown on the plans. Apply membrane waterproofing to the
 precast sections after they are installed.
 d. For precast reinforced concrete box culverts, precast reinforced concrete 3-sided flat topped culverts,
 precast reinforced concrete arch sections, and precast reinforced concrete round sections (706.05, 706.051,
 706.052, and 706.053), apply an approved epoxy-urethane sealer per the plans to all top surfaces not covered by
 membrane waterproofing. Extend sealer 1 foot (0.3 m) below the backfill on all sides of the culvert sections
 including the joint.
 C. Plastic Conduit. Join plastic conduit, Types A, B, C, D, and F, using either coupling bands, bell and spigot
 joints, or bell-bell couplers. Join the conduit according to the following requirements.
 1. Coupling bands. Furnish coupling bands of the same size as the conduit and that engage at least two full
 corrugations on each conduit section. Furnish gasketed coupling bands of the same material as the plastic conduit.
 2. Bell and spigot joints. If using bell and spigot joints, drive the spigot securely into the bell. For gasketed
 joints, ensure that the gasket is properly seated after joining.
 3.
 
 Bell-bell couplers.
 
 If using bell-bell couplers, drive the conduit securely into the coupler.
 
 D. Type E Conduit. Join Type E conduits with open joints by butting the ends and wrapping with a minimum 4inch (100 mm) wide tarred paper or tarred burlap. Place soil around this material to hold it in place during
 backfilling.
 611.09
 Exterior Coatings and Membrane Waterproofing. Apply exterior coatings and membrane
 waterproofing as specified below. Protect the exterior coatings and membrane waterproofing from damage during
 placing of the bedding, backfill, and embankment.
 A. For 611.08.B.3. concrete conduit, clean the surfaces before placing the membrane waterproofing. Apply
 membrane waterproofing as specified. Apply the membrane waterproofing to all surfaces that will be in contact
 with the backfill (top and sides) according to the membrane waterproofing manufacturer’s recommendation.
 B. For structural plate metal structures and corrugated metal box culverts (707.03, 707.15, 707.23, and 707.25),
 apply waterproofing by one of the following methods.
 1. Coat the exterior of the conduit above the limits of the bedding and within the limits of backfill. Ensure
 that all plate seams and bolts are thoroughly sealed. Furnish coating material and apply it according to AASHTO
 M 243. Allow asphalt mastic material to dry 48 hours and tar base material to dry 28 hours before placing the
 conduit backfill. Rib stiffeners do not need to be coated.
 2. Construct buried liner waterproofing membrane protection in the fill according to the manufacturer’s
 recommendations. The buried liner waterproofing membrane protection must be a continuous sheet placed over
 the conduit and extend at least 10 feet (3.3m) outside of the paved shoulder and for the width of the trench. Seams
 constructed in the field are not acceptable.
 611.10
 Drainage Structure Construction. Install drainage structures as shown on the plans and standard
 construction drawings. Maintain flows at all times until the new facilities are completed and in service.
 Visually inspect all precast drainage structures before they are placed. Replace all drainage structures that are
 damaged as determined by the Engineer.
 Install each drainage structure casting to the elevation, station, and offset shown on the plans. Any deviations
 must be approved by the Engineer. If the Engineer does not approve the deviation, stop all related work until the
 drainage structure is reinstalled. The offset is to the center of the casting. Place each manhole base so that it is in
 alignment with the pipe and its invert elevation according to the standard construction drawings. Use flat slab top
 manholes as shown on the standard construction drawing. Do not remove the flat slab top manhole lifting devices.
 Locate or cut conduits so any protrusion inside the structure wall is minimized.
 Set iron frames, tops, and covers in mortar with a flush joint.
 
 Prevent earth or debris resulting from construction operations from entering the drainage structure. Remove any
 debris resulting from construction.
 Thoroughly grout the underdrain outlet pipe to the precast reinforced concrete outlet with a flush mortar joint.
 Take adequate precautions to prevent concrete or mortar from freezing. Preheat the brick, concrete block, or
 precast concrete structure throughout the entire mass to a temperature between 50 to 80 F (10 to 27 C) before
 placing mortar if the ambient temperature is 40 F (4 C) or less.
 A. Brick and Block Masonry. For brick and block masonry drainage structure construction thoroughly wet
 the units before placing in mortar. Lay the units with a flush mortar joint. Cure the exposed surfaces of all brick
 and block masonry by covering with wet burlap or by applying a curing membrane according to 705.07. Keep
 burlap wet for at least 48 hours.
 B. Modular Precast Concrete. For precast concrete modular drainage structures furnish precast bases on a
 compacted bed with or without a bedding material as described in the installation plan. Ensure that the bed is level
 and uniformly supports the entire area of the base. Seal all joints between modules as described above for concrete
 conduit.
 All penetrations through precast drainage structures must be either manufactured or cored.
 After placing the conduit, grout all openings less than 4 inches (100 mm) between the pipe and structure with
 mortar. Grout all openings greater than 4 inches (100 mm) between the pipe and structure with non-shrink mortar.
 Furnish the same curing membrane for barrier inlets as that used on the barrier. Apply the curing membrane
 according to 622.07.
 C. Reconstruction to grade. When reconstructing an existing manhole, catch basin or inlet to grade, follow the
 procedure below.
 1.
 
 Carefully remove and clean the existing castings.
 
 2. Remove the existing walls of manholes down to the spring line of the conduit or below as necessary.
 Remove existing walls of catch basins and inlets below the window openings, grates, or any points of wall failure.
 3. Using the salvaged casting, reconstruct the structure to the new grade, conforming as nearly as practicable
 to the existing dimension and type of construction.
 D. Adjustment to grade.
 the procedure below.
 
 When adjusting an existing manhole, catch basin, or inlet to match grade, follow
 
 1. Carefully remove and clean the existing frame, adjust the height of supporting walls, and reset the existing
 frame in mortar or concrete to the new grade.
 2. Carefully remove the existing cover or grate and install a casting or an acceptable adjusting device on file
 at the Laboratory or an adjusting device approved by the Engineer to the new grade and install according to the
 adjusting device manufacturer’s recommendations.
 611.11
 Field Paving of New or Existing Conduit. Field pave the bottom of the conduit with concrete as
 shown on the plans. Installation Plans are not required for field paving of existing conduits. Include any field paving
 details in the Installation Plan for all new conduit.
 For new pipe installations, do not pave until at least 4 feet (1.2 m) of fill is placed on top of the conduit or the
 top of subgrade is reached. If the paving is placed before completion of the entire fill, clean any gaps between the
 conduit and concrete paving, and then fill with heated bituminous material conforming to 705.04.
 Reinforce the paving with 2 x 2-W0.9 x W0.9 galvanized welded wire fabric or epoxy coated reinforcing steel
 meeting the material requirements of 509.02. Provide galvanized wire fabric or epoxy coated reinforcing steel with
 a width 4 inches (100 mm) less than the finished paving. Provide support beneath the mesh where necessary using
 galvanized support chairs or #4 epoxy coated reinforcing steel. Securely fasten the mesh to the conduit near each
 edge and at the center of the mesh at points not more than 4 feet (1.2 m) apart along the flow line of the culvert.
 Securely fasten the epoxy coated reinforcing steel to the conduit at each end and along the length of the steel not
 
 more than 4 feet (1.2 m) apart. Repair any damage to the galvanizing or other coating material caused by placement
 or by tack welding. Use wire brushing and zinc rich paint to make the repairs.
 For aluminum structural plate, securely fasten the mesh to the circumferential seam bolts with galvanized tie
 wire.
 Construct paving so that it is 3 inches (75 mm) thick measured from the top of the corrugations of the conduit to
 a height equal to 1/3 of the rise. Maintain the position of the mesh while placing concrete. After placing the concrete,
 strike it off with a template to produce the proper radius, and finish with a float to produce a smooth finish. Cure
 the concrete according to 451.11.
 When field paving existing conduits, maintain flows in accordance with 611.07.
 When standing water is encountered and cofferdams are necessary, construct and pay for cofferdams per Item
 503.
 611.12
 Performance Inspection. Notify the Engineer at least five workdays before conducting a
 performance inspection. Ensure the Engineer is present during all performance inspection activities.
 For all Type A, B, and C conduits, inspect all lengths greater than 20 feet with slopes of 25 percent or less and
 all new drainage structures. Performance inspections are not required for all Type D, E and F conduits. A
 performance inspection is not required for projects that meet all of the following:
 All conduit is Type C
 Conduit plan quantities are less than 100 feet (30.5m)
 All conduit has less than 16 feet (4.8m) of maximum fill height
 In each phase of construction of a conduit, perform the inspection no sooner than 30 days and no later than 90
 days after the completion of the finished grade when not below pavement and after the completion of the rough
 subgrade when any portion of the conduit is below pavement. The Engineer may permit inspection beyond the 90
 day limit. If any corrections are made to the installed pipe after the completion of the finished grade or rough
 subgrade and prior to the performance inspection, wait 30 days after the correction was made to do the performance
 inspection. If the contract duration will not permit a 30 day waiting period then the Engineer may adjust the waiting
 period.
 Visually inspect for surface settlements within the trench limits or within 4 feet of a drainage structure. Document
 all locations of surface settlement in the inspection report.
 Furnish a video recording of all conduit and drainage structure inspections. On the recording, identify the date
 and time of the inspection, a description of the conduit or drainage structure being inspected, the location, and the
 viewing direction. Record the entire run of conduit being inspected. Provide a source of light that allows all areas
 of concern to be readily observed on the video recording. Furnish the video recording in a digital, reproducible
 format on one of the following media types: Portable hard drive, flash drive or as determined appropriate by the
 Engineer. Provide the video files with a naming format consistent with the Installation Plan references or as
 determine acceptable by the Engineer.
 Ensure that the condition of the conduit will allow an accurate inspection. Perform a manual inspection on
 drainage structures. Perform either a manual inspection or remote inspection as follows:
 Non-circular conduits
 Manual inspection
 Conduits with a rise of 48 inches (120000 mm) and greater
 Manual inspection
 Conduits with a rise of 36 inches (900mm) up to 48 inches (1200mm) Manual or Remote inspection
 Conduits with a rise of 12 inches or greater up to 36 inches (300 to
 Remote inspection
 900 mm)
 Conduits with a rise less than 12 inches (300 mm) and Type D, E, and F conduits – Remote inspection as directed
 by the Engineer. The Department will pay for this inspection according to 105.10.
 
 A. Manual Inspection. Perform a manual inspection by entering the conduit or drainage structure to record video
 and to make measurements. If the conduit or drainage structure is considered a confined space, provide entry for
 all project inspection personnel according to OSHA requirements.
 Measure the deflection of the conduit using either a metal tape, fabric tape or equipment accepted by the
 Engineer and read to the nearest ½ inch (10 mm). Measure crack width using either a crack comparator or a feeler
 gage capable of measuring 0.01 inch (0.25 mm). Measure joint gaps using a tape or ruler and read to the nearest ½
 inch (10 mm). Other measuring devices may be used if approved by the Engineer. Record the measurements and
 include them in the performance report. Measure the following:
 1.
 
 For all conduits, measure the location, length, and greatest width of each crack.
 
 2. For flexible conduit, measure the smallest inside diameter three times for each conduit section in the run.
 Take the first measurement vertically from the crown to invert (12 o’clock to 6 o’clock positions). Take the second
 measurement by rotating 60 degrees from vertical (2 o’clock to 8 o’clock positions). Take the third measurement
 by rotating 120 degrees from vertical (4 o’clock to 10 o’clock positions). For all measurements, stretch tape to full
 extent across inside of pipe. For corrugated metal conduit, the inside diameter is defined as the distance between
 the inside peaks of the corrugations.
 3.
 
 For all conduits, measure the widest gap at each joint in the run.
 
 4. For conduit with manufactured seams, measure the location, length, and greatest width of any separation
 at the seam.
 5. For drainage structures, measure the location, length and greatest width of each crack and the widest gap
 at each conduit entering the drainage structure.
 Record the location of any other defect not listed above and describe the defect. For each measurement location
 in a conduit, record the length from the nearest drainage structure.
 B. Remote Inspection. Perform a remote inspection by using a crawler mounted camera to record video and
 using equipment described below to make measurements. Use equipment that meets the requirements of
 Supplemental Specification 902. Remove all debris from the conduits being inspected according to 107.19. Dewater
 the conduit if the water level hinders the performance of the equipment.
 Based on the type of conduit, make measurements using the equipment listed in the following table. Also
 record the location of any other defect not listed below and describe the defect.
 TABLE 611.12.B
 Conduit Type
 Rigid conduit and 707.11, mortar lined
 corrugated steel pipe
 
 Measurement Equipment
 Crawler mounted camera according to
 902.01with crack measuring
 capabilities according to 902.02 C
 Plastic conduit, 707.12, corrugated steel spiral Crawler mounted camera with laser
 rib conduit, 707.24, corrugated aluminum
 profiler according to 902.02 A, B, and
 spiral rib conduit, 748.01, ductile iron pipe
 C or Mandrel according to 902.03 and
 and 748.06, steel casing pipe, and Circular
 Crawler mounted camera according to
 corrugated metal conduit not listed below
 902.01 with crack measuring
 capabilities according to 902.02 C
 The following types of corrugated metal
 Crawler mounted camera with laser
 conduit: 707.04, precoated, galvanized steel
 profiler according to 902.02 A, B, and
 culverts; 707.05 and 707.07, bituminous
 C
 coated corrugated steel pipe with paved
 invert; 707.13 and 707.14, bituminous lined
 corrugated steel pipe
 
 Type of
 Measurement
 Joint gaps
 Crack widths
 Joint gaps
 Crack widths
 Deflection
 
 Joint gaps
 Crack widths
 Deflection
 
 611.13
 Conduit Evaluation. Have an independent Registered Engineer review the conduit Performance
 Inspection and record all defects listed in Table 611.13 or as otherwise identified from the inspection. Provide all
 recorded defects and the recommended repairs to the Engineer. Evaluate the defects to ensure structural stability
 and hydraulic capacity are in conformance with the contract documents and as prescribed by AASHTO LRFD
 Bridge Construction Specifications, Section 26 for metal conduit, Section 27 for concrete conduit, and Section 30
 for plastic conduit with modifications according to this specification. The independent Registered Engineer cannot
 be an employee of the Contractor or the conduit manufacturer.
 When using a laser profiler, the conduit deflection must be calculated from the actual inside diameter at the
 measured location or calculated by inputting the nominal diameter. When using a mandrel, the mandrel must be
 sized according to Supplemental Specification 902. If the evaluation determines repairs are not necessary and
 repairs are not required based on the type or size of the defect in Table 611.13, have the independent Registered
 Engineer make the following statement in the evaluation:
 “I certify that repairs are not required to address the defects identified during the conduit evaluation. The conduit
 will function in accordance with the contract documents.”
 If the evaluation determines repairs are necessary, or if repairs are required based on the type or size of the defect
 in Table 611.13, have the independent Registered Engineer prepare, sign, seal, and date plans for the repair. The
 independent Registered Engineer must make the following statement on the repair plans:
 “I certify that this repair plan was designed to ensure the repaired conduit will function structurally and provide
 hydraulic capacity in accordance with the contract documents.”
 TABLE 611.13
 Evaluate if infiltration is observed.
 Evaluate all racking, buckling or denting.
 Evaluate all vertical sags and overall vertical alignment of the conduit recorded in CA-P-1.
 Metal
 Evaluate if the joint gap exceeds the Manufacturer’s tolerance*.
 Conduit Repair or replace conduit if the joint gap exceeds the Manufacturers tolerance* .
 Repair all damage to coatings.
 Repair or replace conduit if the Performance Inspection per 611.12 indicates a deflection > 7.5%.
 Replace conduit if the Performance Inspection per 611.12 indicates a deflection > 12%
 Evaluate if infiltration is observed.
 Evaluate if joint gap exceeds the Manufacture’s tolerance*.
 Rigid
 Evaluate all vertical sags and overall vertical alignment of the conduit recorded in CA-P-1.
 Conduit Repair or replace conduit if the joint gap exceeds the Manufacturers tolerance* .
 Repair or replace conduit if cracks > 0.10 inch.
 Repair or replace conduit if spalls or slabbing are observed.
 Evaluate if infiltration is observed.
 Evaluate all racking, bulging or buckling.
 Evaluate if joint gap exceeds the Manufacturers tolerance*.
 Plastic
 Evaluate all vertical sags and overall vertical alignment of the conduit recorded in CA-P-1.
 Conduit Evaluate all cracks.
 Repair or replace conduit if the joint gap exceeds the Manufacturer’s tolerance*.
 Repair or replace conduit if Performance Inspection per 611.12 indicates a deflection > 7.5%.
 Replace conduit if the Performance Inspection per 611.12 indicates a deflection > 12%
 * Note: The tolerance is defined as the maximum joint gap listed in the Installation Plan.
 Submit the evaluation, repair plans, and revised installation plan to the Engineer at least 7 days before performing
 the repairs. Provide written confirmation from the conduit manufacturer that the repair methods are appropriate.
 The Department may review the submittal, but Department acceptance is not required. If the Department does not
 review the plan, proceed with the repairs 7 days after delivering the submittal to the Engineer. If the Department
 
 reviews the submittal and determines it does not conform to the Contract, revise, resubmit, and proceed with the
 repairs only after the Department accepts the resubmittal.
 Perform the repair at no additional cost to the Department. Perform an inspection to evaluate the repaired portion
 of the conduit and any conduit potentially affected by the repair work 30 days after the repair has been made.
 Perform the inspections according to 611.12 and at no additional cost to the Department. Have an independent
 Registered Engineer evaluate the inspection according to 611.13 and at no additional cost to the Department.
 611.14
 Drainage Structure Evaluation. Have an independent Registered Engineer evaluate the drainage
 structures and any defects listed in the table below. The independent Registered Engineer cannot be an employee
 of the Contractor or drainage structure manufacturer.
 TABLE 611.14
 Defects requiring evaluation
 Connection between conduit and drainage structure has free flowing water, infiltration or has
 not been constructed in accordance with 611.10.
 Grate is more than 0.1 ft (30 mm) from horizontal or vertical location documented on
 construction inspection form CA-P-3.
 Invert elevation is more than 5 percent of the conduit diameter or 0.1 ft (30 mm) from plan
 elevation, whichever is greater as documented on construction inspection form CA-P-1
 Grates do not properly seat in the frame.
 Grates are not placed on the required slope.
 Grates or frames are broken or cracked.
 Drainage structure does not match the details on the standard construction drawing.
 Steps do not line up.
 Manhole top does not match plans.
 If the evaluation determines repairs are not necessary, have the independent Registered Engineer make the
 following statement in the evaluation:
 “I certify that repairs are not required to address the defects identified during the drainage structure evaluation.
 The drainage structure will function in accordance with the contract documents.”
 If the evaluation determines repairs are necessary have the independent Registered Engineer prepare, sign, seal,
 and date plans for the repair. The independent Registered Engineer must make the following statement on the repair
 plans:
 “I certify that this repair plan was designed to ensure the structure will function structurally and provide hydraulic
 capacity in accordance with the contract documents.”
 Perform the repair at no additional cost to the Department. Perform an inspection to evaluate the repaired portion
 of the drainage structure and any conduit potentially affected by the repair work 30 days after the repair has been
 made. Perform the inspections according to 611.12 and at no additional cost to the Department. Have an
 independent Registered Engineer evaluate the inspection according to 611.14 and at no additional cost to the
 Department.
 611.15
 Surface Settlements. Repair any surface settlement within the trench limits or within 4 feet (1.2 m)
 of a drainage structure. Have an independent Registered Engineer evaluate the conduit according to 611.13 or the
 drainage structure according to 611.14. Perform all repair work at no additional cost to the Department.
 611.16
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure conduit by the number of feet (meters),
 measured from center-to-center of small drainage structures or between open ends including the length of pipe
 bends and branches. The Department will not deduct conduit length for catch basins, inlets, or manholes where the
 distance measured in the direction of flow, including bends, is 6 feet (2 m) or less. Where the location of a drainage
 structure or an open end is changed with the approval of the Engineer to accommodate full conduit sections, the
 Department will measure the length placed. Conduits placed on slopes steeper than 3H:1V or with beveled or
 skewed ends will be measured along the invert.
 
 The Department will measure field paving of existing pipe by the number of feet (meters).
 The Department will measure Manholes, Inlets, Catch Basins, Inspection Wells, Junction Chambers, and Precast
 Reinforced Concrete Outlets, whether new, reconstructed, or adjusted to grade, by the number of each type of
 structure complete and accepted.
 611.17
 Basis of Payment. Payment for all inspections is included with the contract unit price of the
 corresponding pay item. When a pay item calls for concrete encasement, the Department will pay for furnishing
 and placing the concrete encasement and for any additional excavation required under the contract unit price for
 the encased conduit. When a pay item calls for conduit to be field paved, all work and materials necessary for the
 item are included in the contract unit price for each conduit.
 All required repairs, including any settlement problems, must be made prior to acceptance. Payment for the repair
 is included with the contract unit price of the corresponding pay item. The Department will not make additional
 payment for repair work on conduit installed under this specification.
 All conduits and drainage structures installed without required submittals per 611.04 are considered
 unacceptable materials per 106.07.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 611
 611
 611
 611
 
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 
 611
 
 Foot (Meter)
 
 611
 
 Foot (Meter)
 
 611
 
 Foot (Meter)
 
 611
 
 Foot (Meter)
 
 611
 611
 611
 611
 611
 611
 611
 611
 611
 611
 611
 
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 ___" (___ mm) Conduit, Type ___
 ___  ___ Conduit, Type ___
 ___" (___ mm) Conduit Reconstructed, Type ___
 Type ___ Precast Reinforced Concrete Three-Sided Flat Topped
 Culvert, ___' (___ mm) Span  ___' (___ mm) Rise
 Type ___Precast Reinforced Concrete Arch Sections,
 ___' (___ mm) Span  ___' (___ mm) Rise
 Type ___ Precast Reinforced Concrete Round Sections,
 ___' (___ mm) Span  ___' (___ mm) Rise
 ___' (___ mm) Rise  ___' (___ mm) Span Conduit, Type A
 Corrugated Steel Box Culvert, ___' (___ mm) Minimum Cover,
 ___' (___ mm) Maximum Cover
 ___' (___ mm) Rise  ___' (___ mm) Span Conduit, Type ___
 Corrugated Aluminum Box Culvert, ___' (___ mm) Minimum Cover,
 ___' (___ mm) Maximum Cover
 ___" (___ mm) Conduit, Type ___, with Field Paving of Pipe
 ___" (___ mm) Conduit, Type ___, Field Paving of Existing Pipe
 Conduit, Type F for underdrain outlets
 Manholes
 Inlets
 Catch Basins
 Inspection Wells
 Junction Chambers
 Manhole, Catch Basin or Inlet Reconstructed to Grade
 Manhole, Catch Basin, or Inlet Adjusted to Grade
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Outlet
 
 ITEM 613 LOW STRENGTH MORTAR BACKFILL
 613.01
 613.02
 613.03
 613.04
 613.05
 613.06
 613.07
 613.08
 613.09
 613.10
 
 Description
 Materials
 Mix Proportioning
 Mix Adjustment
 Alternate Mixes
 Mixing Equipment
 Mixing the Materials
 Placing Mortar
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 613.01
 Description. This work consists of placing a low strength mortar backfill around conduits and at other
 locations. Perform the work for this item according to Items 611 and 499, except as modified below.
 613.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Cement ............................................................................. 701.01 or 701.04
 Fly Ash............................................................................................. 701.13
 Furnish fine aggregate consisting of foundry sand, natural sand, sand manufactured from stone, gravel, or aircooled blast furnace slag. Conform to the fine aggregate gradation requirements of 703.05. Use fine aggregate that
 is fine enough to stay in suspension in the mixture to ensure proper flow.
 Furnish an air-entraining admixture that is designed for use in low strength mortar mixtures (also called
 controlled density fill or flowable fill).
 613.03
 Mix Proportioning. Furnish a low strength mortar mixture listed below or provide an alternate mix
 conforming to 613.05.
 TABLE 613.03-1
 Type 1[1]
 Type 2
 Type 3
 lb/yd³ kg/m³
 lb/yd³
 kg/m³
 lb/yd³ kg/m³
 Cement
 50
 30
 100
 59
 0
 0
 Fly Ash, Class F
 250
 148
 [2]
 [2]
 1500
 890
 [4]
 Fly Ash, Class C
 0
 0
 0
 0
 297
 297
 [3]
 Fine Aggregate
 2910
 1726
 2420
 1436
 0
 0
 Water (Target)
 500
 297
 210-300 125-178
 850
 504
 [1] The Contractor may add an air-entraining agent specifically designed for the use in the low strength
 mortar mixture.
 [2] Entrained air is substituted for fly ash in this mix. (Approximately 25 percent)
 [3] Saturated Surface Dry
 [4] Class C Fly Ash may be substituted for Class F Fly ash in Type 1 mixes with an approved mix design
 meeting the alternate mix design criteria of this specification.
 These mixtures of materials are expected to yield approximately 1 cubic yard (1 m3) of material of a flowable
 consistency. Make small adjustments, as necessary, in the amounts of the materials in a mix to achieve the final
 product.
 613.04
 Mix Adjustment. Make one or more 1 cubic yard (1 m3) trial batches at different water contents to
 ensure a flowable material. The mixture is too dry if cracks develop in the mixture as it flows into place.
 Adjust the proportions to maintain the total absolute volume. For large adjustments, see 613.05.
 In order to expedite the settlement of a Type 1 mixture without entrained air, bleed water may appear on the
 surface immediately after the material is struck off. A delay in bleeding indicates there are too many fines in the
 mixture. The Contractor may reduce the fly ash quantity in increments of 50 pounds (30 kg) until the mixture is
 
 bleeding freely. Add approximately 60 pounds (36 kg) of sand to replace each 50 pounds (30 kg) increment of fly
 ash to maintain the original yield.
 613.05
 Alternate Mixes. The Contractor may submit alternate mixes for approval. Furnish the mix design
 and test data from an independent test laboratory 30 days before the intended usage for approval.
 Submit an alternate mix design for all mixes that:
 A. Vary more than 300 pounds (178 kg) in fine aggregate, 100 pounds (59 kg) in water, 20 pounds (12 kg) in
 cement, or 200 pounds (119 kg) in fly ash from the 613.03 mixes. These are considered large adjustments.
 B. Have less than 50 pounds (30 kg) of cement in the Type 1 mixes or less than 100 pounds (59 kg) of cement in
 the Type 2 mixes.
 C. Use alternate materials.
 D. Contain foundry sand.
 E. Contain fly ash not conforming to 701.13.
 F. Use fine aggregate gradations other than 703.05.
 The Contractor may use foundry sand if it meets the requirements of the Division of Surface Water Policy
 400.007 “Beneficial Use of Non-Toxic Bottom Ash, Fly Ash and Spent Foundry Sand and Other Exempt Wastes,”
 and all other regulations. Ten days before using a mixture containing foundry sand on the project, submit written
 permission from the Ohio EPA to the Engineer. The Contractor may elect to have an independent ODOT consultant
 pre-qualified in remedial design environmental site assessment review the proposed usage. The consultant will
 provide all documentation utilized to ensure that the proposed usage obeys all Ohio EPA regulations. The
 consultant shall coordinate all EPA required meetings, documentation, and testing requirements. The consultant
 shall certify the report or reports to the Department.
 Provide alternate mixes with an unconfined compressive strength between 50 and 100 pounds per square inch
 (345 and 689 kPa) at 28 days when tested according to ASTM D 4832. Ensure that the long term (12-month)
 unconfined compressive strength is less than 100 pounds per square inch (689 kPa).
 Ensure that the final mix has the required strength, fills the voids of the intended usages and sets up within 12
 hours (4 hours for Type 3 or Type 3 alternate mixes). The proportioning, yield, consistency, workability,
 compressive strength, and all other requirements are the sole responsibility of the Contractor.
 613.06
 Mixing Equipment. Provide the mixing capacity and delivery equipment to place the material
 without interruption as much as practical. Deliver and place Type 1 and 2 mixes or Type 1 and 2 alternate mixes
 from ready mixed concrete trucks, or deliver them from a batch plant.
 Deliver and place Type 3 mix using volumetric mobile mixers. Calibrate volumetric mixers properly and
 sufficiently mix the materials in the mixer to produce a uniform material.
 613.07
 
 Mixing the Materials. Discharge the mixture within 2.5 hours after adding water.
 
 613.08
 Placing Mortar. Unless specifically shown on the plans, do not place the mortar within 3 feet (1 m)
 of the subgrade elevation. Discharge the flowable material from the mixer by any reasonable means into the space
 of the plan intended usage. Bring the fill material up uniformly to the fill line shown on the plans. The Contractor
 may begin placing the other fill material over low strength mortar backfill material as soon as the surface water is
 gone. The Engineer reserves the right to reject the mix if a flowable mixture is not produced.
 Before placing the low strength mortar backfill as backfill for 611 Conduit, secure the conduit to prevent it from
 floating during placement of the flowable material.
 613.09
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Low Strength Mortar Backfill by the
 number of cubic yards (cubic meters) completed and accepted in place, computed from the plan lines. The
 Department will not pay additional compensation for over excavated areas or for a change in the material blends.
 613.10
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 613
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Low Strength Mortar Backfill
 
 613
 
 Low Strength Mortar Backfill (Type ___)
 
 ITEM 614 MAINTAINING TRAFFIC
 614.01 Description
 614.02 Traffic Facilities
 614.03 Traffic Control - General
 614.04 Work Zone Marking Signs
 614.05 Road Closed
 614.055 Surface Condition Signs
 614.06 Detour Signing
 614.07 Traffic Maintained
 614.08 Flaggers
 614.09 Law Enforcement Officer
 614.10 Work Zone Traffic Signals
 614.11 Work Zone Pavement Markings
 614.115 Work Zone Raised Pavement Markers
 614.12 Pavement Marking Operations
 614.13 Asphalt Concrete for Maintaining Traffic
 614.14 Performance
 614.15 Method of Measurement
 614.16 Basis of Payment
 614.01
 Description. This work consists of maintaining and protecting vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian
 traffic according to these provisions. For through traffic, the Special Provisions or the plans will designate whether
 the highway will be closed with detours, roads and run-arounds provided or whether traffic will be maintained
 through all or portions of the project.
 614.02 Traffic Facilities. Construct and maintain facilities for vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic of the
 highway, including all walks, bicycle lanes, roads, bridges, culverts, and traffic control devices. The Department
 will maintain public highways used as a detour beyond the work limits of the contract.
 A. For local traffic, provide and safely maintain drives, roads, run-arounds, walks, structures, and other facilities.
 Provide safe vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian ingress and egress for all property adjacent to any improvement.
 Provide approaches and crossings of intersecting highways, bicycle lanes, and maintain them in a safe condition.
 Maintenance includes snow and ice removal as needed.
 B. When the highway under construction is being used by through traffic, including periods of suspension of the
 Work, maintain it so that it is smooth, free from potholes, ruts, ridges, bumps, and other pavement deficiencies.
 Furnish proper maintenance of traffic facilities and proper provisions for traffic control as per 105.14. For the
 portions of highway being used, provide the necessary outlets to allow free drainage. Maintain pipe trenches or
 other openings left in hard surface pavements with material of comparable quality. Contractor maintenance
 responsibilities, including pothole patching begins for a section of highway when the Contractor begins the Work
 in that section and ends with the acceptance of the Work under 109.11 or 109.12. The two directions of a divided
 highway are considered separate highway sections and the start of Work on one direction does not begin
 maintenance responsibilities on the other direction.
 C. Remove from the Project as necessary, abrasives and salt residues left by Department or local government
 snow and ice control operations.
 D. Ensure positive drainage into structures that have inlet windows without grates during pavement overlay
 operations when traffic will be maintained on a pavement course lower than the inlet window. Provide a minimum
 of 2 inch (50 mm) holes spaced at 2 feet (0.6 m) or a minimum of three 4 inch (100 mm) holes spaced at 4 feet (1.2
 m) drilled into the vertical wall of the existing drainage structure below the inlet window. Place steel or iron plating
 of at least ¼ inch (6 mm) thickness that completely covers the drilled holes prior to construction of the finished
 pavement course.
 614.03
 Traffic Control General. Conform to the requirements of the plan, standard construction drawings
 shown on the plans, and the OMUTCD, for the installation, maintenance, and operation of all traffic controls and
 
 traffic control devices. When the plans or standard construction drawings do not cover a specific traffic control
 situation, place the necessary traffic control devices according to the OMUTCD and use the procedures required
 by the OMUTCD.
 Furnish cones, drums, portable sign supports, Type 3 barricades, portable changeable message signs, arrow
 boards, and impact attenuators that are pre-qualified according to the Department’s Approved List.
 Furnish cones, drums, signs, sign supports, barricades and other traffic control devices that are certified to meet
 NCHRP 350 or MASH Test Level 3: Do not use heavy non-yielding devices or supports that are not crashworthy.
 Use Type G, H or J reflective sheeting complying with 730.19, 730.192 and 730.193, respectively, for faces of
 construction signs, barricades, vertical panels, object markers, and stripes on glare screen panels. In addition, the
 Contractor may also use Type G sheeting referred to as damage control for these devices, provided it meets 730.19.
 Use fluorescent orange reflective sheeting for all orange construction signs, object markers, and stripes on glare
 screen paddles. Use standard orange or fluorescent orange reflective sheeting for the orange portions of drums,
 cones, barricades and vertical panels.
 Furnish orange drums with reboundable reflective sheeting complying with the requirements of 730.191 and in
 conformance with the OMUTCD. Drums of colors other than orange shall not be permitted on the project. Ensure
 that owner identification markings on construction drums are no more than 1 inch (25 mm) in character height and
 are located at least 2 inches (50 mm) below the reflectorized bands or on the top or bottom horizontal surfaces of
 the drum. Ballast the drums according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 Furnish traffic cones consisting of a highly visible orange predominant color. Traffic cones of colors other than
 highly visible orange shall not be permitted on the project. Ensure that the pavement markings for traffic
 maintenance conform to Item 640.
 Furnish warning signs in advance of channelizing devices such as barricades, drums, vertical panels, and cones.
 Furnish object markers that are a minimum size of 6 x 12 inches and that consists of reflective sheeting adhered
 to an aluminum or plastic plate.
 Keep retroreflective materials clean and in good condition.
 Equip all project motor vehicles with photo strobe lights, LED warning lights, or rotating beacons meeting Class
 1 specifications for color and intensity as defined by the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE).
 Photo strobe lights, LED warning lights, or rotating beacons shall be horizontally visible from all directions (360
 degrees) at a distance of 100 feet minimum. In order to ensure this visibility, the light shall in no way be obstructed
 from view by any signs or appurtenances on the vehicle.
 Activate the photo strobe lights, LED warning lights, or rotating beacons and all hazard lights anytime the vehicle
 is entering, exiting or operating in a traveled lane at a speed less than the posted speed within the limits of the work
 zone or one mile of either end of the work zone.
 In addition, equip all project motor vehicles and trailers having a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds
 or greater, in single or combination, with conspicuity tape. Also, delineate all NCHRP 350 Category IV equipment
 (arrow boards, portable changeable message signs, etc.) with conspicuity tape.
 Conspicuity Tape: Use red and white, Type G, H, or J retroreflective sheeting that complies with 730.19, 730.192,
 and 730.193.
 A. Apply one 2-inch wide (minimum) horizontal stripe of Type G, H, or J retroreflective sheeting to a minimum
 of 50 percent of the length of each side of the payload portion of the motor vehicle, rearward from the back of the
 cab, NCHRP 350 Category IV equipment and trailers. Space lengths of tape evenly over the length of the payload
 portion of the motor vehicle rearward from the back of the cab, NCHRP 350 Category IV equipment, and trailers.
 The centerline for each strip of retroreflective sheeting shall be between 15 inches and 60 inches above the road
 surface when measured with the vehicle empty or unladen, or as close as practicable to this area.
 B. Outline the lower rear facing area of the motor vehicle, NCHRP 350 Category IV equipment, and trailers with
 2-inch wide (minimum) horizontal stripe of Type G, H, or J retroreflective sheeting. Apply the lower horizontal
 
 markings extending the width of the motor vehicle, NCHRP 350 Category IV equipment, and trailer as close as
 practical to the edge of the motor vehicle, NCHRP 350 Category IV equipment, and trailer. The centerline for each
 strip of lower horizontal retroreflective sheeting shall be between 15 inches and 72 inches above the road surface
 when measured with the vehicle empty or unladen, or as close as practicable to this area.
 C. Outline the upper rear facing area with two pairs of strips of 2-inch wide (minimum) retroreflective Type G,
 H, or J sheeting, each pair consisting of strips 12 inches long, must be positioned horizontally and vertically on the
 right and left upper corners of the rear of the body of each motor vehicle or trailer, as close as practicable to the top
 of the motor vehicle or trailer and as far apart as practicable. If the perimeter of the body, as viewed from the rear,
 is not square or rectangular, the strips may be applied along the perimeter, as close as practicable to the uppermost
 and outermost areas of the rear of the motor vehicle or trailer on the left and right sides.
 Escort transport or delivery vehicles without proper photo strobe lights, LED warning lights, or rotating beacons
 or conspicuity tape to and from the work zone only with the approval of the Engineer. This exception is intended
 for limited use at the discretion of the Engineer and will only be considered following a written request by the
 Contractor. Otherwise, equip all project vehicles with photo strobe lights, LED warning lights, or rotating beacons
 and conspicuity tape as described herein.
 All temporary traffic control devices shall conform to the Quality Standards for Temporary Traffic Control
 Devices and Acceptable Delineation Methods for Vehicles.
 614.035
 Storage of Equipment, Vehicles and Material on Highway Rights-of-Way. Unless otherwise
 permitted by the Engineer, locate all equipment, vehicles, and material stored or parked on highway rights-of-way:
 A. At least 6 feet behind the face of Existing Barrier and not within the 75 foot long by 20 foot wide Recovery
 Area behind the Existing Barrier run, or;
 B. Not less than 30 feet from the nearest edge of the traveled way, or;
 C. At least 6 feet behind raised curbs.
 Additionally, at night, encompass any such equipment, vehicles or material with drums, equipped with Type A
 warning lights, spaced at 5 feet on center.
 For locations with traffic approaching from more than one direction or side (e.g., medians, between mainline and
 ramps, etc.), ensure the requirements are met for all traffic approaches.
 Existing Barrier, for purposes of 614.035 only, includes and is limited to: existing permanent guardrail, existing
 concrete barrier, temporary or new permanent guardrail installed in accordance with the plans, temporary portable
 barrier installed in accordance with the plans, or new permanent concrete barrier installed in accordance with the
 plans. Other types of barrier not listed, such as cable barrier, are excluded as a means of protecting drivers from
 stored equipment, vehicles and material on highway rights-of-way.
 Recovery Area, for purposes of 614.035, shall have slopes 3:1 or flatter and be free of workers, hazards,
 equipment, vehicles, drop-offs, and material storage. The Recovery Area length is to begin at the terminus of the
 Existing Barrier run. Any gating impact attenuator length shall not be included as part of the Recovery Area length.
 614.04
 Work Zone Marking Signs. Furnish, install, maintain, and subsequently remove work zone marking
 signs and their supports within the work limits according to the following requirements:
 A. Erect a NO EDGE LINES sign in advance of any section of roadway lacking OMUTCD standard edge line
 markings. Ensure these signs are in place before opening the roadway to traffic. Erect these signs on each entrance
 ramp, 25 to 200 feet beyond the far shoulder or curb line of intersecting through roads to warn entering or turning
 traffic of the conditions, and at least once every 2 miles (3 km) along the roadway. Remove these signs when they
 no longer apply.
 B. Erect a DO NOT PASS sign at the beginning and a PASS WITH CARE sign at the end of each no passing
 zone lacking OMUTCD standard center line markings.
 
 614.05
 Road Closed. When the highway is closed to traffic, furnish, erect, maintain, and subsequently
 remove advanced warning signs and supports, barricades, ROAD CLOSED signs on the barricades, and Type B
 yellow flashing lights at the following locations:
 A. Work limits of the project.
 B. Work limits on all intersecting roads.
 C. Any other points specified in the Contract.
 Throughout construction, furnish, erect, maintain, and subsequently remove all signs, lights, barricades and other
 traffic control devices required by the OMUTCD, plans, or standard construction drawings for the maintenance of
 local traffic.
 614.055 Surface Condition Signs. Erect a GROOVED PAVEMENT sign 250 feet (75 m) in advance of any
 section of roadway where traffic must travel on a planed surface. Ensure these signs are in place before opening
 the roadway to traffic. Erect these signs on each entrance ramp and at intersections of through roads to warn entering
 or turning traffic of the conditions. Payment for these signs to be included in Item 614 Maintaining Traffic.
 614.06
 
 Detour Signing.
 
 A. Department Detour Signing. When the Contract Documents do not require the Contractor to furnish the
 signing for designated detour routes, the Department will furnish, erect, maintain, and subsequently remove the
 detour routing signs and supports required on the designated detour highways outside the Project.
 B. Contractor Detour Signing. When the Contract Documents provide a pay item for Detour Signing and the
 plans provide a detour-signing plan, provide, maintain, and subsequently remove all required detour signing and
 supports according to the detour signing plan.
 614.07
 Traffic Maintained. Where the highway under construction is being used by through traffic,
 including periods of suspension of the work, furnish and maintain pavement markings, lights, construction signs,
 barricades, guardrail, sign supports, and such other traffic control devices. Maintain pre-existing roadside safety
 hardware at an equivalent or better level than existed prior to project implementation. Also, provide law
 enforcement officers, watchmen, and flaggers as necessary to maintain safe traffic conditions within the work limits
 as directed by the Engineer.
 The Department will furnish and erect regulatory signs and guide signs, unless otherwise shown on the plans,
 within the work limits on all traffic maintained projects. The Contractor is responsible for maintenance of these
 signs. The Engineer will approve the erection and removal of any regulatory signs not shown on the plans.
 Keep existing signs including 630.09 Specific Service and Tourist-Oriented Directional Signs and traffic control
 devices in use within the work limits during the construction period unless otherwise indicated on the plans. If
 existing signs and other traffic control devices must be relocated or modified as a consequence of the work, provide
 suitable supports and modify the devices with prior approval of the Engineer and the concurrence of the maintaining
 agency. Keep existing STOP or YIELD signs functioning at all times. The Contractor may adjust the position of
 these signs with the Engineer’s approval. Relocate existing signs that must be adjusted laterally according to the
 OMUTCD. Restore relocated or modified signs to the position and condition that existed before construction as
 directed by the Engineer. When signs are to be covered, provide an opaque covering that covers the entire message,
 symbol and all of the sign within the border. Do not use fastenings that damage the sign or reflective face; however,
 the Contractor may use rivets to attach rigid overlay panels. Do not apply adhesive tapes directly to the face of the
 sign.
 When an existing signal operation must be interrupted for a period of time, provide a traffic control method
 approved by the Engineer.
 Whenever it is necessary to divert the flow of traffic from its normal channel into another channel, clearly mark
 the channel for such diverted traffic with cones, drums, barricades, vertical panels, pavement markings, or arrow
 boards. Also use this method of marking where working adjacent to the part of the highway in use by the public.
 Obtain the approval of the Engineer before closing a traffic lane or establishing a one-way traffic operation.
 
 614.08
 Flaggers. Whenever one-way traffic is established, use at least two flaggers unless the Engineer
 authorizes otherwise, and erect signs, cones, barricades, and other traffic control devices according to the
 OMUTCD. Reflectorize traffic control devices as previously noted. Maintain positive and quick means of
 communication between the flaggers at the opposite ends of the restricted area.
 Equip flaggers according to the standards for flagging traffic contained in the OMUTCD. During a flagging
 operation, other than an intersection or a spot location best controlled by a single flagger, ensure that each flagger
 uses a STOP/SLOW paddle conforming to the OMUTCD. Mount the paddle on top of a 6 1/2-foot (2 m) handle.
 Ensure that each face of the paddle is made of Type G reflective sheeting meeting the requirements of 730.19.
 While flagging, do not allow flaggers to perform other work activities. The Contractor may, instead of using
 flaggers, or supplemental to them, furnish, install, maintain and operate a traffic signal or signals, for the purpose
 of regulating traffic according to a written agreement approved by the Engineer.
 The Contractor may (supplemental to using flaggers) furnish, install, maintain and operate automated flagger
 assistance devices (AFADs) with incidental items, for the purpose of assisting the flagger(s) in regulating traffic
 according to a written agreement approved by the Engineer. AFADs shall be furnished per the Department’s
 Approved List and shall be used in accordance with Supplemental Specification 830.
 614.09
 Law Enforcement Officer. When shown on the plans, furnish the services of a law enforcement
 officer and patrol car equipped with flashing lights.
 614.10
 Work Zone Traffic Signals. If shown on the plans, furnish, erect, maintain, and subsequently remove
 signal equipment conforming to Items 632 and 732, and signal controller equipment of a proper type and capacity
 to provide the required operation. Furnish and install Uninterruptible Power Supplies (UPS) conforming to 733.09.
 Subject to the Engineer’s approval, the Contractor may use new equipment that is to be installed later on the project,
 or may install used equipment in good condition provided such used equipment meets current Department
 specifications. The performance test in 632.28 and the working drawing requirements of 632.04 are waived.
 Recondition used equipment as necessary to ensure proper operation. Operate work zone traffic signals conforming
 to the requirements of the OMUTCD and subject to the approval of the Engineer.
 Procure and pay for electric power for work zone traffic signals. Do not alter the operation of an approved work
 zone traffic signal without the Engineer’s approval. Correct any malfunctions or failures without delay. Cover or
 remove work zone traffic signals not in use.
 614.11
 Work Zone Pavement Markings. Furnish, install, maintain, and, when necessary, remove work
 zone retroreflective pavement markings on existing, reconstructed, resurfaced or temporary roads within the work
 limits, according to the following requirements.
 A. Acceptability and Expected Duration. The Engineer will evaluate the markings according to the three
 performance parameters contained in Supplement 1047. Repair or replace the markings when the numerical rating
 is seven or lower for durability, visual effectiveness and night visibility. Repair or replace unsatisfactory markings
 immediately and at no additional cost to the Department, if the markings were in place for 120 calendar days or
 less. The Department will compensate under the applicable contract pay item for work zone pavement marking for
 the ordered replacement of worn markings after 120 calendar days under traffic.
 B. Work Zone Marking Specifications. Equip traffic paint striping equipment for Class I and Class III
 markings with a computerized Data Logging System (DLS) conforming to 641.04 when the length of marking
 exceeds 0.5 miles (0.8 km) of continuous line equivalent. Furnish the Engineer daily, biweekly and final DLS
 reports according to 641.04.
 Unless otherwise shown on the plans, the Contractor may use 740.02 Type 1 or Type 1A paint or 740.06 Type
 I or Type II preformed material for work zone pavement markings. Furnish painted markings according to Item
 642 except that:
 1.
 1.
 
 For Class I or Class II work zone pavement markings, use the specified application rate from Table 614.11-
 
 TABLE 614.11-1
 4
 Type of Pavement Marking
 Solid Line
 10-foot Dashed Line
 4-foot Dashed Line
 Dotted Line
 Arrows, Symbols, and Words
 Glass Beads: 740.09, Type A
 
 22
 5.5
 2.2
 7.3
 
 Line Width (inch)
 6
 8
 12
 Gallon per Mile of Line
 33
 44
 66
 8.25
 --3.3
 --10.95
 --1.4 gallons per 100 square feet
 15 pounds per 100 square feet
 
 24
 132
 ----
 
 TABLE 614.11-1M
 100
 Type of Pavement Marking
 Solid Line
 3.0 m Dashed Line
 1.2 m Dashed Line
 Dotted Line
 Arrows, Symbols, and Words
 Glass Beads: 740.09, Type A
 2.
 
 52
 13
 5.2
 17.3
 
 Line Width (mm)
 150
 200
 300
 Liter per Kilometer of Line
 78
 157
 19.5
 -7.8
 -25.95
 -0.6 liters per square meter
 7.3 kg per square meter
 
 600
 314
 ----
 
 For Class III work zone markings, use the specified application rate from Table 614.11-2.
 TABLE 614.11-2
 4
 Type of Pavement Marking
 Solid Line
 10-foot Dashed Line
 Dotted Line
 Arrows, Symbols, and Words
 Glass Beads: 740.09, Type A
 
 12
 3
 4
 
 Line Width (inch)
 6
 8
 12
 Gallon per Mile of Line
 18
 24
 36
 4.5
 --6
 --0.75 gallons per 100 square feet
 7.5 pounds per 100 square feet
 
 24
 72
 ---
 
 TABLE 614.11-2M
 100
 Type of Pavement Marking
 Solid Line
 3.0 m Dashed Line
 Dotted Line
 Arrows, Symbols, and Words
 Glass Beads: 740.09, Type A
 
 28
 7
 9.4
 
 Line Width (mm)
 150
 200
 300
 Liter per Kilometer of Line
 42
 56
 84
 10.5
 --14.1
 --0.3 liters per square meter
 3.7 kg per square meter
 
 600
 168
 ---
 
 Ensure that Type I and II preformed material conform to 740.06, except do not place any preformed material
 containing metal on any surface unless it will be removed later. Remove work zone pavement markings of 740.06
 preformed material before placement of 642 or 644 surface course markings at that location. Ensure that preformed
 material conforms to Item 645.
 C. Work Sequence. Ensure that work zone markings are complete and in place on all pavement, including ramps,
 before exposing the pavement to traffic. When work zone markings conflict with the traffic pattern, remove them
 according to 641.10.
 
 D. Layout and Premarking. Layout and premark all Class I and Class III Markings according to 641.06. Obtain
 the Engineer’s approval of the layout and premarking lines before marking operations are started.
 E. Tolerances. Place lines for final surfaces according to the tolerances of 641.07. On surfaces other than final,
 the Department will allow tolerances twice that in 641.07.
 F. Classes of Work Zone Pavement Markings.
 1. Class I Markings (Full Pattern, Full Rate). Use Class I Markings on all surfaces exposed to traffic for
 more than 14 days prior to application of final markings and to over-winter the project, with the following
 exception: Do not use Class I Markings on a surface course if thermoplastic, spray thermoplastic or epoxy final
 markings are to be applied to the surface course. If thermoplastic, spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are
 to be applied to the surface course, use Class III Markings on that course. Apply Class I work zone markings to the
 standard dimensions as defined in Item 641, except as follows:
 a.
 
 Edge Lines. Class I edge lines shall match existing edge line in width, 4 or 6 inches (100 or 150 mm).
 
 b.
 
 Lane Lines. Class I lane lines shall match existing lane line in width, 4 or 6 inches (100 or 150 mm).
 
 c. Channelizing Lines. Class I channelizing lines shall match existing channelizing line in width, 8 or 12
 inches (200 or 300 mm).
 2. Class II Markings (Abbreviated, Full Rate). Use Class II Markings for short-term use when traffic is
 to be maintained in parallel lanes nominally in the same location as permanent lanes and where tapers or transitions
 are not required or other features will not likely divert traffic from the intended path. Class II Markings are limited
 to center lines, lane lines and gore markings defined as follows:
 a. Center Lines. Class II center lines consist of single, yellow 4-inch (100 mm) wide by a minimum of
 4 feet (1.2 m) long dashes spaced at a maximum of 40 feet (12.0 m) intervals. No Passing Zones must be marked
 with Class I or Class III Markings or final markings within 3 calendar days according to 614.11.H.1. Passing Zones
 must be marked with Class I or Class III Markings or final markings within 14 calendar days according to
 614.11.H.2.
 b. Lane Lines. Class II lane lines consist of white and shall match existing lane lines in width, 4 or 6
 inches (100 or 150 mm), by a minimum of 4 feet (1.2 m) long dashes spaced at a maximum of 40 feet (12.0 m)
 intervals. Class II Lane Line Markings must be marked with Class I or Class III Markings or final markings within
 14 calendar days according to 614.11. H. 3.
 c. Gore Markings. Class II gore markings are continuous, white 24-inch (600 mm) wide lines in a
 chevron crosshatched pattern placed within the theoretical gore of an exit ramp or diverging roadways. Class II
 Gore Markings must be marked with Class I or Class III Markings or final markings within 14 calendar days
 according to 614.11.H.3.
 Computerized Data Logging Systems (DLS) are not required for Class II Markings.
 3. Class III Markings (Full Pattern, Low Rate). Use Class III Markings on surface courses that are
 expected to receive thermoplastic, spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings within 30 days. Class III Markings
 use a lower application rate which reduces the surface preparation needed prior to application of thermoplastic,
 spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings. If Class III Markings have been applied and weather conditions are
 expected to prevent thermoplastic, spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings application for 30 days or more,
 re-apply Class III Markings if thermoplastic, spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings application is expected
 to occur within 30 days or apply Class I Markings as necessary to carry the project through the season or over the
 winter.
 Apply Class III work zone markings to the standard dimensions as defined in Item 641 except as follows:
 a.
 
 Edge Lines. Class III edge lines shall match existing edge line in width, 4 or 6 inches (100 or 150 mm).
 
 b.
 
 Lane Lines. Class III lane lines shall match existing lane line in width, 4 or 6 inches (100 or 150 mm).
 
 c. Channelizing Lines. Class III channelizing lines shall match the existing channelizing line in width, 8 or
 12 inches (200 or 300 mm).
 
 G. Conflicting Markings. Conflicting markings are considered to be any markings not actively in use, not behind
 channelizing devices or portable barrier and/or could be misinterpreted by the traveling public or cause confusion
 to the driver as determined by the engineer. Before placing work zone markings, remove or cover all conflicting
 existing markings visible to the traveling public.
 1.
 
 Removal and Covering of Markings.
 
 a. Removal Methods. Remove the markings so that less than 5% of the line remains visible. Repair
 damage to the pavement that results in the removal of more than 1/8 inch of pavement thickness.
 Use sand, shot, or water blasting to remove markings on all asphalt or concrete pavement surfaces.
 Use only sand, shot, or water blasting for removal of all pavement markings in preparation for placing
 Item 422 Chip Seal or Item 421 Microsurfacing.
 A grinder may only be used to remove markings on temporary pavement or pavement that will be covered
 or removed prior to project completion (e.g., intermediate asphalt course). When a grinder drum is mounted to a
 skid steer loader, the drum must be able to accommodate a minimum of 150 teeth.
 b. Covering Conflicting Markings. With the Engineer’s approval, use removable, non-reflective,
 preformed blackout tape to cover conflicting markings. Remove or replace the blackout tape within 15 days of
 installation. Furnish products according to the Departments Qualified Products List (QPL).
 2. Raised Pavement Markers. Remove the prismatic retro-reflector within any raised pavement marker that
 is in conflict with the work zone pavement markings. When the work zone pavement markings are removed and
 the raised pavement marker is no longer in conflict, thoroughly clean the recessed reflector attachment area of the
 casting and install a new prismatic retro-reflector of the same kind and color. The cost for this work is incidental
 to the various pay items.
 H. Allowable Duration of Work Zone Markings.
 1. No Passing Zones. When existing permanent no-passing-zone markings are removed or obliterated as the
 result of a construction operation (pavement grinding, asphalt concrete pavement overlays, etc.) and the section of
 pavement continues to be used by the traveling public, place Class I Center Line Markings or final center line
 markings as specified by the plan within 3 Calendar Days unless thermoplastic, spray thermoplastic or epoxy final
 markings are to be applied on the surface course. If thermoplastic, spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are
 to be applied on the surface course, place Class III Center Line Markings or final center line markings as specified
 in the plan within 3 Calendar Days.
 a. Subsequent Work in No Passing Zones. If, after the original markings are removed or obliterated,
 the Contractor returns to the subject no passing zone and places a plan-specified pavement course within the 3Calendar Day limit, or performs work in preparation for a subsequent pavement course, the Contractor shall have
 temporarily satisfied the conditions of the previous paragraph. In this event, the 3-Calendar Day limit will begin
 again.
 b. Liquidated Damages. For each Calendar Day beyond 3 days that this work remains incomplete, the
 Department will assess liquidated damages in the amount of $1000 per Calendar Day. The Department will treat
 the time for the completion of no-passing-zone markings as an interim Completion Date.
 2. Passing Zones. Sections of pavement where passing is permitted in both directions must be marked with
 Class I Center Line Markings or final center line markings as specified by the plan within 14 Calendar Days unless
 thermoplastic, spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are to be applied on the surface course. If thermoplastic,
 spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are to be applied on the surface course, place Class III Center Line
 Markings or final center line markings as specified in the plan within 14 Calendar Days.
 3. Allowable Duration of Class II Lane Lines and Gore Markings and Absence of Edge lines. Any time
 existing permanent lane lines, gore markings, or edge lines have been removed or obliterated as the result of a
 construction operation (pavement grinding, asphalt pavement overlays, pavement widening, etc.) and the section
 of pavement continues to be used by the traveling public, place Class I Markings or final markings as specified by
 
 the plan within 14 Calendar Days unless thermoplastic, spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are to be
 applied on the surface course. If thermoplastic, spray thermoplastic or epoxy final markings are to be applied on
 the surface course, place Class III Markings or final markings as specified in the plan within 14 Calendar Days.
 a. Subsequent Work. If, after the original markings are removed or obliterated, the Contractor returns
 to the subject section of pavement and places a plan-specified pavement course within the 14-Calendar Day limit,
 or performs specified work that requires a lane closure (except routine maintenance required by 614.02), the
 Contractor shall have temporarily satisfied the conditions of the previous paragraph. In this event, the 14-Calendar
 Day limit will begin again.
 b. Liquidated Damages. For each Calendar Day beyond 14 days that this work remains incomplete, the
 Department will assess liquidated damages in the amount of $1000 per Calendar Day. The Department will treat
 time for the completion of these markings as an interim Completion Date.
 (1) Continuous Project. If a section of pavement is in a continuous part of the project, then a new
 14-day limit for renewed work on a section applies to all sections in that part.
 (2) Project in Sections. If the project is in parts and the traveling public could not discern the parts
 as one continuous project, then a new 14-day limit in one part will not apply to the other parts.
 (3) Freeways and Divided Highways. Treat the two directional sides of a freeway as separate parts.
 Work on one side of a freeway does not create a new 14-day limit for the other side.
 I. Removal of Work Zone Markings. Remove work zone retroreflective pavement markings when necessary.
 Accomplish removal of work zone pavement marking by using removal methods specified in 614.11.G.1.a for
 removal of existing markings.
 614.115
 Work Zone Raised Pavement Markers. Furnish, install, maintain and subsequently remove work
 zone raised pavement markers (WZRPMs). Work zone raised pavement markers may serve as a substitute for, or
 supplement to, work zone pavement markings. They are provided in both yellow and white versions to match the
 appropriate pavement marking color.
 White units provide reflectorization in one direction while yellow units may provide reflectorization in either
 one direction or two. They are available as units which are readily visible both night and day as a result of
 retroreflectors and brightly colored (white or yellow) housing (Type A) or visible only at night due to their
 retroreflectors (Type B).
 A. Materials. Furnish materials according to the Department’s Approved List.
 Only use adhesives that are recommended by the reflector manufacturer and are not epoxy.
 Provide markers of sufficient strength and properly shaped so as not to be dislodged or broken by impacts from
 vehicle tires, including those of high pressure truck tires loaded to 4500 pounds (2040 kilograms).
 Provide reflectors having an area of 0.35 square inches (225 square millimeters) for Type A or 3.0 square
 inches (1935 square millimeters) for Type B with brightness or specific intensity (when tested at 0.2 degree angle
 of observation and the following angles of incidence) meet or exceed the following:
 WZRPM SPECIFIC INTENSITY
 Type
 A
 A
 B
 B
 B
 
 Incidence Angle
 0
 20
 0
 20
 45
 
 White
 1.0
 0.4
 3.0
 1.2
 0.3
 
 Yellow
 0.6
 0.24
 1.8
 0.72
 0.2
 
 Angle of incidence: Formed by a ray from a light source to the marker and the normal to the leading edge of
 the marker face (also horizontal entrance angle)
 Angle of observation: Formed by a ray from a light source to the marker and the returned ray from the marker
 to the measuring receptor
 
 Specific intensity: The mean candlepower of the reflected light (at given incidence and divergence angles) for
 each footcandle (10.7 lux) at the reflector (on a plane perpendicular to the incident light)
 Type A markers, when viewed from above, have a visible area of not less than 14 square inches (9030 square
 millimeters). When viewed from the front, parallel to the pavement, as from approaching traffic, Type A markers
 have a width of approximately 4 inches (100 mm) and a visible area of not less than 1.5 square inches (970 square
 millimeters).
 B. Patterns. The patterns of WZRPMs required for the various types of pavement markings are shown in Table
 614.115-1.
 TABLE 614.115-1
 SUPPLEMENTAL DELINEATION (TYPE A OR B)
 Type of Line
 Edge Line
 Lane Line
 Dashed Center Line
 Double Center Line
 Channelizing Line
 Exit Gore (Outline)
 
 Color
 1-way white or yellow
 1-way white
 2-way yellow
 2-way yellow
 1-way white
 1-way white
 
 Spacing
 20 ft (6.0 m) c/c
 40 ft (12.0 m) c/c or at center of gap
 40 ft (12.0 m) c/c or at center of gap
 2 units; 20 ft (6.1 m) c/c
 10 ft (3.0 m) or 20 ft (6.0 m) c/c
 10 ft (3.0 m) c/c
 
 SIMULATED DELINEATION (TYPE A ONLY)
 Type of Line
 Edge Line
 Edge Line on 1-Lane, 2-Way
 
 Color
 1-way white or yellow
 1-way white and 1-way yellow
 
 Lane Line
 
 1-way white
 
 Dashed Center Line
 
 2-way yellow
 
 Spacing
 10 ft (3.0 m) c/c
 white & yellow units back-to-back[2] 10 ft
 (3.0 m)
 3 units at 5 ft (1.5 m) c/c 30 ft (9.0 m) gap
 3 units at 5 ft (1.5 m) c/c
 30 ft (9.0 m) gap
 2 units[1]; 10 ft (3.0 m) c/c
 5 ft (1.5 m) c/c
 5 ft (1.5 m) c/c
 
 Double Center Line
 2-way yellow
 Channelizing Line
 1-way white
 Exit Gore (Outline)
 1-way white
 [1]Place units side by side about 4 inches (100 mm) apart.
 [2]Face the proper color and reflector to the oncoming traffic. Place the units back to back about one quarter inch
 (6.0 mm) apart.
 C. Installation. Attach work zone raised pavement markers to clean, dry and sound pavement. Remove all loose
 gravel, sand and dirt from the area of the line. The minimum pavement temperature for installation is 50 F (10
 C). When markers are being attached to new concrete pavement with curing compound remaining, remove the
 curing compound membrane by sandblasting or other mechanical cleaning method. Install markers in accordance
 with the manufacturer's recommendations.
 Work zone raised pavement markers are not suitable for use from October 15 to April 1. If the Contractor
 elects to start or continue work zone pavement markers during this period, and they fail or are subsequently
 removed or destroyed by snow and ice control activities, immediately, at his expense, provide a substitute traffic
 guidance system which is effective during day and night and which is acceptable to the Engineer. Other than for
 replacement of failed WZRPMs, new installations of WZRPMs are not permitted from October 1 to April 1.
 Place markers accurately to depict straight or uniformly curving lines. The longitudinal location of WZRPMs
 are described in Table 614.115-1 except that the spacing of an individual WZRPM may be varied by as much as 2
 feet (0.6 m) or 10 percent of the nominal spacing in order to avoid poor pavement conditions, but the average
 
 spacing remains unchanged. Poor pavement conditions include separated joints, cracks, deteriorated pavement,
 usually uneven pavement or where pavement marking material will interfere with the bond.
 The lateral location of WZRPMs follows:
 1. Edge Lines: Install the WZRPM 12 inches (300 mm) outside the work zone pavement marking, if any, or
 the theoretical edge of the lane. This offset may vary +6 inches (150 mm) as necessary to avoid poor pavement
 conditions.
 2. Lane lines and dashed center lines: Install the WZRPM in the center of the gap between pavement marking
 dashes, if any. If a pavement joint exists, locate the marker approximately 2 inches (50 mm) clear from the joint
 (and to the left of it for lane lines). Otherwise, center the WZRPM on the theoretical edge of the lane.
 3. Double center line: Install each WZRPM of the pair in line with the appropriate pavement marking stripe,
 if any. If the edge of lane is demarcated by a crack or joint, the pair of WZRPMs straddle the joint and install each
 approximately 2 inches (50 mm) clear from the joint. Otherwise center the pair on the theoretical edge of lane.
 4. Channelizing Line: Install the WZRPM in line with the pavement marking stripe or immediately adjacent
 to the line, except when used at exit gore outlines where the WZRPM is installed within the painted gore vee and
 approximately 12 inches (300 mm) from the pavement marking stripe. Do not install WZRPMs directly on a painted
 line.
 D. Replacement. Maintain WZRPMs in good condition. A marker will be considered to have failed when the
 marker is broken, the marker is worn to the extent that daytime visibility is significantly diminished or of an
 unacceptable color (type B only), the reflector is broken or detached, the marker is detached from the adhesive, the
 adhesive is detached from the pavement or the marker or reflector is covered by tar or paint.
 Individual replacement of each failed marker as it occurs is not recommended due to increased exposure of
 workers to traffic. However, maintain the following minimum levels of marker effectiveness:
 1.
 
 For a given line, no more than 20 percent of the WZRPM units failed in any manner;
 
 2. For a segment of any line, the number of failed units does not exceed the maximums permitted in Table
 614.115-2.
 TABLE 614.115-2
 
 Line Type
 Edge
 Center,
 Double/Solid
 Lane or
 Dashed Center
 Channelizing
 
 Normal Spacing
 Feet (Meter)
 10 (3.0)
 20 (6.0)
 20 (6.0)
 10 (3.0)
 40 (12.0)
 5 (1.5)
 20 (6.0)
 10 (3.0)
 5 (1.5)
 
 Segment
 Length
 Feet (Meter)
 5 (1.5)
 100 (30.0)
 100 (30.0)
 50 (15.0)
 200 (60.0)
 1-Stripe
 100 (30.0)
 50 (15.0)
 25 (7.5)
 
 Normal No.
 Maximum
 Contained No. Permitted
 In Segment
 To Fail
 6
 
 3
 
 12
 
 6
 
 6
 
 3
 
 6
 
 3
 
 Replace all failed units within any line or segment before conditions deteriorate below the minimums
 established in Table 614.115-2. Replace all failed units within the line or segment within 24 hours after notification
 by the Engineer.
 E. Removal. Accomplish removal of work zone raised pavement markers in such a manner that no adhesive
 remains on the pavement. Do not cause permanent pavement surfaces to be scarred, broken or significantly
 roughened.
 614.12
 Pavement Marking Operations. Perform moving marking operations with a truck equipped with
 necessary flashers and signs, and protect the operations with a similarly equipped vehicle or vehicles separated a
 
 sufficient distance to provide adequate advance warning. Use the extreme left or right lane for the marking
 operation when possible. Where three or more lanes exist in one direction, perform the marking operation so that
 traffic passes on one side only.
 Protect stationary marking operations in intersections, school zones, gores and other areas with traffic control
 devices such as advance warning signs and cones.
 For stationary operations such as loading material and cleaning equipment, make every effort to have all
 equipment completely off the traveled way. When equipment cannot be removed from the traveled way, operate
 all traffic control devices on the vehicles and station flaggers and vehicles to protect the worksite and the traveling
 public while maintaining traffic.
 614.13
 Asphalt Concrete for Maintaining Traffic. The Contractor may use either a Type 1 or Type 2 mix
 of Item 441 asphalt concrete PG 64-22, or an asphalt concrete surface course the Engineer approves.
 Where materials are placed in small quantities or under adverse conditions, the Engineer may waive specification
 requirements for placing and finishing if, in the judgment of the Engineer, it is determined that the Contractor can
 obtain satisfactory results in providing a smooth and durable pavement surface.
 This material is intended to be used to maintain pavement free from defects as described in 614.02.B.
 614.14
 Performance. If, in the opinion of the Engineer, the Contractor is not furnishing proper maintenance
 of traffic facilities and proper provisions for traffic control, the Department may take the necessary steps to place
 them in proper condition, and the Department will deduct the cost of such services from any money that may be
 due or become due the Contractor.
 Identify all pavement deficiencies within the work area. Repair deficiencies as soon as possible and within 24
 hours from notice of the deficiency.
 614.15
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Work Zone Marking Signs as the number
 of sign installations, including the sign, necessary supports, and all attachment hardware. The Department will
 include all other work zone signs under Maintaining Traffic unless separately itemized.
 The Department will measure Work Zone Pavement Markings complete in place, by class and material, in the
 units designated. Line quantities will be the length of the completed stripe, including gaps, intersections and other
 sections of pavement not normally marked. Work Zone Pavement Markings will include the layout, application
 and removal of the markings, when required.
 The Department will measure line quantities as the length of the completed stripe, including gaps, intersections,
 and other sections of pavement not normally marked.
 The Department will measure Sign Months for Portable Changeable Message Signs by the number of months
 each sign is at the project or project storage yard and immediately available to the project for use. Measurement
 will begin when each unit is in active service and will continue until the Engineer determines the Portable
 Changeable Message Sign is no longer needed for the remaining duration of the project. A Sign Month will be
 deducted if a PCMS is not working properly for more than 24 hours in one sign month or if the Contractor removes
 the PCMS from the project/project storage yard without the Engineer’s determination that it is no longer needed
 for the project.
 614.16
 Basis of Payment. The Department will make partial payments according to 109.09 and as modified
 by the following schedule:
 A. If the project duration from first day of physical work to original completion date is greater than or equal to 45
 calendar days,
 1. The Department will pay 30 percent of the lump sum amount bid for Maintaining Traffic with the first
 estimate, but not sooner than 15 days after the start of work at the project site.
 2. The Department will pay the remaining 70 percent of the lump sum amount bid for Maintaining Traffic
 according to 109.09.
 
 B. Unless separately itemized, the lump sum price bid for Maintaining Traffic shall include the cost of removal
 or covering of conflicting pavement markings, layout, application and removal of pavement markings when
 required, maintaining the existing highway in a safe condition for public use, removing abrasive and salt residue
 remaining from snow and ice control performed by the Department or local governments, providing flaggers and
 their equipment, and furnishing, maintaining in an acceptable condition, and subsequently removing the following
 work zone traffic control items as required by the Contract Documents:
 1.
 
 Signs, supports, and warning lights.
 
 2.
 
 Drums, cones, gates, barricades, and vertical panels.
 
 3.
 
 Arrow boards.
 
 4.
 
 Work zone traffic signals.
 
 5.
 
 Lighting for work zone signals and flaggers.
 
 C. If traffic permanently damages beyond use any of the following items, the Department will compensate the
 Contractor for the fair market value of the damaged item according to 109.05 provided the Contractor has pursued
 but failed to obtain compensation from the motorist. Follow the procedures given in 107.15 for compensation for
 traffic damage to completed permanent items of Work, to obtain compensation from the motorist before requesting
 compensation from the Department.
 1.
 
 Arrow board.
 
 2.
 
 Work zone signal, pole, or controller.
 
 3.
 
 Lighting unit or pole.
 
 4.
 
 Changeable message sign.
 
 5.
 
 Work Zone Impact Attenuator
 
 The lump sum price bid for Detour Signing includes the cost of the Contractor furnishing, installing, maintaining,
 and removing the detour signing shown on the plans and their necessary supports.
 The Department will pay for the following items under their associated item numbers: 502 Bridges, 615 Roads
 and Pavement, 622 Concrete Barrier. The Department will pay for aggregate and calcium chloride authorized by
 the Engineer and used for Maintaining Traffic under Items 410 and 616.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 614
 614
 614
 614
 614
 614
 
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each, Mile, Foot
 (Kilometer, Meter)
 Each
 Sign Month
 Each
 Each
 Hour
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Mile (Kilometer)
 
 Maintaining Traffic
 Detour Signing
 Replacement Drum
 Replacement Sign
 Object Marker, ___ - Way
 Work Zone Pavement Markings
 
 614
 614
 614
 614
 614
 614
 614
 614
 614
 
 Work Zone Raised Pavement Marker
 Portable Changeable Message Sign
 Work Zone Speed Limit Sign
 Work Zone Marking Sign
 Law Enforcement Officer with Patrol Car
 Barrier Reflector
 Work Zone Crossover Lighting System
 Work Zone Impact Attenuator
 Work Zone Lane Line, Class ___, ___*,___**
 
 614
 614
 614
 614
 614
 614
 614
 614
 614
 
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Work Zone Center Line, Class ___, ___**
 Foot (Meter)
 Work Zone Channelizing Line, Class ___, ___*,___**
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Work Zone Edgeline, Class ___, ___*,___**
 Foot (Meter)
 Work Zone Gore Marking, Class II, ___**
 Foot (Meter)
 Work Zone Stop Line, Class I, ___**
 Foot (Meter)
 Work Zone Arrow, Class I, ___**
 Foot (Meter)
 Work Zone Crosswalk Line, Class I, ___**
 Foot (Meter)
 Work Zone Dotted Line, Class I, ___**
 Cubic Yard
 Asphalt Concrete for Maintaining Traffic
 (Cubic Meter)
 * Width of marking (4” or 6” for Lane Lines and Edgelines; 8” or 12” for Channelizing Lines).
 ** Type material (642 paint; 740.06, Type I or Type II; or left blank to allow any of the three.)
 
 ITEM 615 ROADS AND PAVEMENTS FOR MAINTAINING TRAFFIC
 615.01
 615.02
 615.03
 615.04
 615.05
 615.06
 615.07
 615.08
 615.09
 615.10
 
 Description
 Fences
 Earthwork
 Guardrail
 Pavement
 Sidewalk
 Maintenance
 Removal
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 615.01
 Description. This work consists of providing, maintaining, and subsequently removing roads and
 appurtenances, and pavements for maintaining traffic.
 615.02
 Fences. If necessary, replace permanent fencing with temporary fencing while occupying any
 temporary Right-of-Way, provide, erect, and maintain comparable temporary fencing during the period of
 construction. Take ownership of the existing fence. The Contractor may use this material in the erection of the
 temporary fence.
 Before occupancy of the temporary Right-of-Way is terminated and before removal of the temporary fence, the
 Engineer will notify the property owner to reinstall permanent fencing according to the Right-of-Way settlement.
 615.03
 Earthwork. Excavate and construct embankment necessary for providing and maintaining temporary
 roads and any associated drainage facilities, as well as subsequent removal of temporary roads and restoration of
 the areas to their original condition, according to Item 203. Construct adequate side ditches in cut sections, and
 provide drainage pipe and culverts where necessary. Ensure the side slopes are not steeper than 1.5:1, unless
 otherwise shown on the plans.
 615.04
 Guardrail. Where the height of the embankment is 5 feet (1.5 m) or more, measured at the outside
 edge of the paved surface, and the side slope is steeper than 4:1, provide guardrail at a distance of at least 1.5 feet
 (0.5 m) from the edge of the required width of the surface course. Conform to one of the types of guardrail specified
 in Item 606, except that the Department will allow the Contractor to re-use material in good condition.
 615.05
 Pavement. Ensure that the pavement surface is constructed to the width shown in the plans, of the
 materials, and in the manner specified.
 Prepare the subgrade in accordance with 204.03 and 204.04.
 Provide subgrade conforming to Item 204.03. Soft subgrade will be determined and replaced according to Item
 204.04.
 Where Class A or Class B pavement is shown on the plans, provide either rigid pavement or flexible pavement
 conforming to the following minimum requirements:
 
 MINIMUM COURSE THICKNESS REQUIRED
 Pavement Type
 Rigid
 
 Course Make-Up
 Class A
 Class B
 452
 9 in (230 mm)
 7 in (180 mm)
 [1]
 441 Type 1
 1-1/4 in (32 mm)
 1-1/4 in (32 mm)
 [2] [5]
 441 Type 2
 1-3/4 in (45 mm)
 1-1/2 in (38 mm)
 Flexible [6]
 [3] [5]
 302
 5-1/2 in (140 mm)
 3-1/2 in (90 mm)
 [4] [5]
 304
 6 in (100 mm)
 6 in (100 mm)
 [1]Meet surface course requirements.
 [2]Meet intermediate course requirements.
 [3]The Contractor may use 301 or 441 Type 2 intermediate course.
 [4]The Contractor may use 2-1/2 inches (65 mm) 301, 302, or 441 Type 2 intermediate course in lieu of 6 inches
 (150 mm) of 304.
 [5]The Engineer may waive maximum placement lift thicknesses if quality control testing conforming to
 Supplement 1055 is performed and a final density between 93 and 96.5 percent is achieved.
 [6]The Contractor may use 442 in lieu of 441.
 For the indicated pavement type and courses, conform to the requirements of the specified items except as
 modified below.
 For rigid pavements, conform to Item 452. Tiebars or hook bolts for longitudinal joints are not required. Use
 dowels only at transverse expansion and construction joints. Conform to the quality requirements set forth in 499.02
 for the materials, except the requirements of 703.13. Use Class QC-1 concrete. For any part of the 452 pavement
 that is to be incorporated into the permanent pavement, the above exclusions do not apply and conformance to
 Items 452 and 499 is required.
 For a 441 course, if the Contractor spreads and finishes the materials by acceptable hand methods, the Department
 will waive the requirements for smoothness.
 Use a PG 64-22 asphalt binder for temporary asphalt pavement. If any part of the temporary pavement will be
 incorporated into the project permanently, then use the contract-specified PG asphalt binder grade for the pavement
 course.
 For a 304 course, if the Contractor spreads the aggregate by approved hand methods, the Department will not
 require side forms. If the 304 course is to be removed, the Contractor may use reclaimed asphalt concrete or
 Portland cement concrete pavement.
 Determine the thickness of the courses by field measurement.
 615.06
 Sidewalk. If temporary walks are required, provide the type of walk shown in the plans in accordance
 with Item 608.
 615.07
 Maintenance. Maintain all portions of the temporary facilities in good condition with respect to both
 safety and smoothness for travel as long as it is needed for maintenance of traffic. If the Engineer determines that
 the Contractor is not properly maintaining the temporary facilities, the Department may put them into proper
 condition according to 105.15.
 615.08
 Removal. If the temporary facilities are no longer needed, remove them, except such portions of the
 embankment as are shown on the plans to be a part of the new roadway embankment, and leave the area in a neat
 condition.
 Take ownership of all material removed, unless otherwise shown on the plans. Use all suitable material in the
 work or legally use, recycle, or dispose in accordance with 105.16 and 105.17.
 615.09
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure the quantity of Pavement by the number of
 square yards (square meters) of pavement surface placed, maintained, and removed as directed, measured complete
 in place.
 The Department will measure areas of soft subgrade, undercut and replaced, according to 204.08.
 
 615.10
 Basis of Payment. Payment for Roads for Maintaining Traffic includes the installation, maintenance,
 and removal of all fencing, earthwork, guardrail, sidewalk, and all other items as necessary to provide a complete,
 functional, and safe installation for public use.
 The Department will pay for areas requiring undercut and replacement conforming to 204.04 according to
 204.09.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 615
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Lump Sum
 
 Pavement for Maintaining Traffic, Class A
 
 615
 615
 
 Pavement for Maintaining Traffic, Class B
 Roads for Maintaining Traffic
 
 ITEM 616 DUST CONTROL
 616.01
 616.02
 616.03
 616.04
 
 Description
 Construction Requirements
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 616.01
 Description. This work consists of applying water or dust palliative for the alleviation or prevention
 of dust nuisance originating from earthwork construction operations from within the project construction limits.
 616.02
 Construction Requirements. Perform dust control operations at the time and location and in the
 amount ordered by the Engineer. Maintain control of the application of water or dust palliative at all times to
 minimize dust but not to create saturated soil conditions. The Engineer will determine whether water or dust
 palliative is to be used to alleviate or prevent dust nuisance, and the amounts of each material to be used. Do not
 apply calcium chloride to areas that will be subsequently seeded or sodded.
 Furnish and apply water used for dust control by means of tanks equipped with suitable sprinkling devices.
 Use dust palliative consisting of 712.02 calcium chloride or a brine solution containing a minimum of 30 percent
 by weight of calcium chloride. Spread the calcium chloride uniformly over the surface.
 616.03
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Water by the number of M gallons (1000
 gallon units) (cubic meters) applied and measured either in tanks, tank wagons, or trucks of predetermined capacity;
 or by means of meters of a type and furnished and installed by the Contractor at no expense to the Department; or
 determined by weight conversion.
 The Department will measure Calcium Chloride by the number of tons (metric tons) by weight measurement,
 furnished and applied. When brine is used, the Department will determine the weight of calcium chloride by
 multiplying the number of gallons (cubic meters) by the factor 0.0024 (0.575).
 616.04
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 616
 
 M Gallons
 (Cubic Meter)
 Ton (Metric Ton)
 
 Water
 
 616
 
 Calcium Chloride
 
 ITEM 617 RECONDITIONING SHOULDERS
 617.01
 617.02
 617.03
 617.04
 617.05
 617.06
 617.07
 
 Description
 Materials
 Prosecution
 Shoulder Preparation
 Furnishing and Compacting Additional Aggregate
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 617.01
 Description. This work consists of preparing the shoulder, and furnishing and compacting additional
 aggregate on the existing or prepared shoulder.
 Use removed or excavated materials in the Work when the material conforms to the specifications; if not, then
 recycle or dispose of the material according to 105.16 and 105.17.
 617.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to 703.18.
 
 617.03
 Prosecution. If reconditioning shoulders as part of a resurfacing project and traffic is maintained,
 place shoulder material along with the paving operations as rapidly as possible. Complete all shoulder
 reconditioning within four days following the placement of the surface course or any course that results in a dropoff of 2.0 inches (50 mm) or greater.
 617.04
 Shoulder Preparation. If shoulder preparation is specified, loosen the existing surface to a depth of
 1 to 2 inches (25 to 50 mm). If the surface is an asphalt mix or seal, cut the surface along the edge of the pavement
 with a blade or disc to give a straight vertical edge. Reduce pieces of loosened material that exceed approximately
 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) in size to at least this maximum size or consider these pieces unsuitable material. Remove
 and dispose of oversized or other unsuitable material that would interfere with placing of aggregate. Reshape the
 loosened material as necessary to conform to the requirements for placing aggregate.
 617.05
 Furnishing and Compacting Additional Aggregate. Spread aggregate with approved spreaders. Do
 not dump or store aggregate on the pavement. Remove spilled aggregate from the pavement as spreading
 progresses.
 Where the shoulder is relatively level, compact the material using crawler-type tractors, tamping rollers, trench
 rollers, suitable pneumatic tire rollers, or other suitable equipment. Use a minimum of four passes with compaction
 equipment weighing at least 6 tons (5 metric tons). Perform the final compaction of the surface of the shoulder
 using a pneumatic tire roller. Where it would be unsafe to use the above compaction equipment due to the grade or
 width of the shoulder, use a side-mounted roller or side-mounted vibrating plate compactor that is securely attached
 to a tractor or other construction equipment. The side-mounted roller or side-mounted vibrating plate compactor
 must be able to adequately compact the aggregate while the equipment to which it is mounted remains on the paved
 surface. Use a minimum of four passes with the side-mounted roller and two passes with the side-mounted vibrating
 plate compactor. Compact the aggregate immediately after the spreading operation to prevent the loss of contained
 moisture and displacement of the material.
 Apply water as directed by the Engineer when required to aid compaction and to prevent segregation of the
 material.
 617.06
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Shoulder Preparation by the number of
 square yards (square meters).
 The Department will measure Compacted Aggregate, by the number of cubic yards (cubic meters) in place
 computed from the profile grade and typical sections.
 The Department will measure Water by the number of M gallons or 1000 gallon units (cubic meters) according
 to 616.03.
 If the plans provide for the use of aggregate in a variable width or depth course and the Department cannot readily
 calculate the quantity from profile grade and typical sections, the Department will measure the cubic yards (cubic
 meters) by converting from weight using the following conversion factors:
 
 TABLE 617.06-1
 Material
 Conversion Factor
 Crushed stone
 3800 lb/yd3
 2250 kg/m3
 Crushed gravel
 3900 lb/yd3
 2310 kg/m3
 [1]
 Crushed slag
 less than 90 lb/ft3 (1450 kg/m3)
 3600 lb/yd3
 2140 kg/m3
 90 to 100 lb/ft3 (1450 to 1600 kg/m3)
 4000 lb/yd3
 2375 kg/m3
 more than 100 lb/ft3 (1600 kg/m3)
 4500 lb/yd3
 2670 kg/m3
 Recycled Portland Cement Concrete
 3400 lb/yd3
 2020 kg/m3
 Recycled Asphalt Pavement
 4000 lb/yd3
 2375 kg/m3
 [1]Based on average dry rodded weight of standard sizes of slag aggregates on record at the Laboratory.
 The conversion factors listed are the long gradation weights. These numbers are based on the dry
 rodded weights of No. 67, 57, or 8 gradation. The Department will determine slag weights based on
 weights obtained from the original source.
 The Department will classify salvaged or mixed materials according to the material that makes up the majority
 of the mixture.
 The moistures of the delivered material will be less than 2 percent above saturated surface dry condition or the
 payment will be based on the dry densities and dry weights.
 Furnish freight bills or certified weigh bills according to Item 109.
 617.07
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 617
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 M Gallons
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Shoulder Preparation
 
 617
 617
 
 Compacted Aggregate
 Water
 
 ITEM 618 RUMBLE STRIPS ON SHOULDERS
 618.01
 618.02
 618.03
 618.04
 618.01
 
 Description
 Construction
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 Description. This work consists of grinding depressions (rumble strips) in paved shoulders.
 
 Construct rumble strips according to the standard construction drawings.
 618.02
 Construction. Furnish equipment with a rotary cutting head that will grind the depressions to the
 required dimensions. Equip the cutting head with a pattern of cutting tips to produce a smooth cut with
 approximately 0.06 inches (1.5 mm) between peaks and valleys. Ensure that the cutting head is on its own
 suspension system, independent from that of the power unit, to allow the head to align itself with the slope of the
 shoulder or any irregularities in the shoulder surface. Equip the cutting tool with guides or a guidance system,
 clearly visible to the operator, to provide for consistent alignment. Take effective measures to control dust during
 the grinding operation. Remove and dispose of all grinding materials deposited on the roadway pavement in a
 manner approved by the Engineer and before opening the roadway to traffic.
 618.03
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Rumble Strips by the number of feet
 (meters) or mile (kilometer) as the sum of the lengths of the individual segments. The Department will measure
 lengths along the inside edge of the shoulder, from the center of the first depression in a segment to the center of
 the last depression in that segment. If Rumble Strips are provided on more than one shoulder, the Department will
 measure lengths separately for each shoulder segment and add the individual lengths together to obtain the total
 length.
 618.04
 Basis of Payment. The Department will not pay for repairing surface damage and extraneous marks
 caused by the Contractor’s operations.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 618
 618
 618
 618
 
 Feet (Meter),
 Mile (Kilometer),
 Feet (Meter),
 Mile (Kilometer),
 
 Rumble Strips, (Asphalt Concrete)
 Rumble Strips, (Asphalt Concrete)
 Rumble Strips, (Concrete)
 Rumble Strips, (Concrete)
 
 ITEM 619 FIELD OFFICE
 619.01
 619.02
 619.03
 619.04
 
 Description
 General
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 619.01
 Description. This work consists of providing, maintaining, and subsequently removing a field office
 for the exclusive use of the Department for the duration of the Contract at a location approved by the Engineer.
 619.02
 General. Furnish a completely functional field office of the type specified in the Contract by the date
 directed by the Engineer.
 Furnish each field office with a means for maintaining a room temperature between 68 and 80 F (20 and 27 C).
 Furnish electric service for each field office.
 Furnish potable hot and cold water for each field office.
 Furnish neat, sanitary, enclosed toilet accommodations for each field office. Furnish associated lavatory and
 sanitary supplies. Portable facilities may be provided with the approval of the Engineer.
 For projects requiring moisture and density control of construction materials, provide the field office with a
 lockable wood or metal storage box of sufficient size to store a nuclear density gauge and with a working electrical
 connection to charge the gauge. Provide two independent lock systems: one that locks the box the gauge is stored
 in; and the second one that locks the box to the facility within which the box is housed. The second lock system
 may consist of bolting the box to the office floor or wall. The storage box must be at least 15 feet (5 meters) from
 any occupied work area.
 For the type of field office specified, provide the items indicated in Table 619.02-1
 
 TABLE 619.02-1 FIELD OFFICE
 Item
 Type A Type B
 Type C
 Minimum ceiling height, ft (m)
 7 (2.1)
 7 (2.1)
 7 (2.1)
 Floor space, ft² (m²)
 150 (14) 500 (46) 1000 (93)
 Separate enclosed room, ft² (m²) (Part of specified floor space)
 0 (0)
 0 (0)
 100 (9)
 [1]
 Telephone service & telephones
 2
 2
 2
 Internet service connection [5]
 1
 1
 1
 Multi-Function copier that is setup for scanning, printing, faxing and
 1, 11×17 1, 11×17
 1, 11×17
 copying. [2]
 Calculator with tape
 1
 2
 3
 Desk and chair set
 1
 3
 5
 1
 2
 3
 Work table, 30  72-inch (750  1800 mm)
 4-drawer, legal size, lockable metal file cabinet
 --1
 2
 2-drawer, metal file cabinet
 1
 2
 2
 [3]
 Portable fire extinguishers
 1
 1
 2
 [4]
 Plan rack
 1
 1
 2
 All-weather parking spaces
 8
 16
 20
 [1]For each telephone specified, provide the telephone itself, all wiring necessary to connect the phone and multifunction copier to the phone company system, and a working separate phone number for each telephone.
 Connect one phone to a recorded answering device. For Types B and C, provide one speakerphone.
 [2]Copier must meet minimum specifications provided for each field office type. Contractor responsible for paper
 supplies, copier supplies, and maintenance of copier.
 Type A:
 Copy/Print Speed: 20 Pages Per Minute (Letter), 15 Pages Per Minute (Legal), 12 Pages Per Minute (Ledger)
 or higher
 Duplex printing support
 Automatic document feeder with 40 sheet duplexing document feeder
 Copier Memory: 256 MB
 Data Security Kit
 Paper Capacity - 250 sheet × 2 trays, 50-sheet Bypass tray
 Network Interface: 10/100Base-TX, 1000Base-TX
 Analog Fax Support Included with machine
 Color Scanning with following requirements:
 Up to 600 × 600 dpi
 Scan Area up to 11" × 17"
 Scanning Protocol Support - TCP/IP, SMTP, SMB, FTP, POP3, NCP
 File Scan Types Supported: Single Page TIFF, JPEG, PDF, Multi- Page TIFF, PDF, and
 Scanning Support for Scan-to-Email, SMB (Folder), URL, and TWAIN
 Network protocol support for TCP/IP
 Client and Server Print Driver Support for PCL Print Drivers
 Server Operating System Support for Windows Server 2008 and Windows Server 2008 R2 (32 Bit/64 Bit)
 Client Print driver support for Windows XP/Windows 7 (Both PCL/(32 Bit and 64 Bit))
 Minimum print/copy resolution of 600 × 600 dpi
 Type B and C:
 Color Print/Copy/Scan
 Copy/Print Speed: 30 Pages Per Minute (Letter), 15 Pages Per Minute (Legal), 15 Pages Per Minute (Ledger)
 or higher
 
 Duplex printing support
 Automatic document feeder with 50 sheet duplexing document feeder
 Copier Memory: 1 GB
 Installed HDD: 40 GB
 Data encryption and HDD Erase Support included with machine
 Internal Stapler Support
 Paper Capacity - 250 sheet × 2 trays, 50-sheet Bypass tray
 Network Interface: 10/100Base-TX, 1000Base-TX
 Analog Fax Support Included with machine
 Color Scanning with following requirements:
 Up to 600 × 600 dpi
 Scan Area up to 11" × 17"
 Scanning Protocol Support - TCP/IP, SMTP, SMB, FTP, POP3, NCP
 File Scan Types Supported: Single Page TIFF, JPEG, PDF, Multi- Page TIFF, PDF, and OCR PDF
 Scanning Support for Scan-to-Email, HDD, SMB (Folder), URL, and TWAIN
 Network protocol support for TCP/IP
 Client and Server Print Driver Support for PCL Print Drivers
 Server Operating System Support for Windows Server 2008 and Windows Server 2008 R2 (32 Bit/64 Bit)
 Client Print driver support for Windows XP/Windows 7 (Both PCL/(32 Bit and 64 Bit))
 Minimum print/copy resolution of 600 × 600 dpi
 Secure printing with password or pin from client to copier
 [3]Type 2-A:10-B:C, 5-pound (2.27 g) size
 [4]Capable of handling the breakdown of 22  34-inch (559  864 mm) sized plans into ten sections.
 [5]Provide a broadband internet connection capable of minimum download speeds as follows:
 10 Mbps download 2 Mbps upload - Network Latency less than 50 milliseconds. If speeds are not available
 through an individual or singular circuit, provide the highest speed available in the area and install multiple
 circuits to achieve the specified speeds. When multiple broadband services are available the following is the
 preferred order: Cable, DSL, Cellular, and Wireless Radio (Satellite Communication is not compatible with
 ODOT VPN connection and will not be accepted). Supply modems capable being configured in Bridge Mode.
 If a cellular network is used, provide the cellular equipment, including software and router equipment to connect
 to the ODOT provided Cisco ASA 5505 firewall. Supply ODOT with all documentation for the broadband
 circuit including all username/user ids, passwords and account information. Verify that the broadband internet
 connection is active and working as specified. ODOT IT personnel will confirm that bandwidth and network
 latency are compliant with the required field office specifications. All field office Internet connections are for
 ODOT use only.
 With the Engineer’s written approval, the Contractor may modify the requirements for the field office.
 Maintain all utility services (e.g., electric, security, telephone, water) for the duration of the project.
 619.03
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Field Office, Type ___ by the number of
 months the office is maintained. A partial month at the end of the project will be paid as a full month.
 619.04
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 619
 
 Month
 
 Field Office, Type ___
 
 ITEM 620 DELINEATORS
 620.01
 620.02
 620.03
 620.04
 620.05
 620.06
 620.07
 
 Description
 Materials
 Layout
 Removal
 Installation
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 620.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and installing delineators, removing existing
 delineators for disposal, and restoring the surface where delineators are removed.
 620.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Reflectors ......................................................................................... 720.01
 Posts, flexible ................................................................................... 720.03
 Steel hardware ................................................................................. 730.08
 Brackets ........................................................................................... 730.09
 Stainless steel hardware ................................................................... 730.10
 Aluminum hardware ........................................................................ 730.17
 Reflective sheeting.......................................................... 730.192, 730.193
 Delineators consist of reflectors mounted on flexible posts or brackets. Reflectors are reflective sheeting adhered
 to either a flexible post or an aluminum plate. The colors of reflectors of each type are:
 Type C White
 Type D Yellow
 Type E Red
 Delineator reflector and flexible post color shall match that of the nearest edge line.
 620.03
 Layout. Lay out all delineator locations to ensure their proper placement. The Engineer will approve
 the layout before installation is started.
 620.04
 Removal. Remove delineators, including reflectors, posts, brackets, and miscellaneous hardware. The
 delineator becomes the property of the Contractor. Remove and dispose of concrete for delineator post embedment.
 Restore surfaces where delineator posts or concrete for embedment are removed.
 620.05
 Installation. Install delineators facing traffic, except install red reflectors facing wrong-way traffic.
 Do not remove the protective paper covering the face of flexible post-mounted reflectors until after installation.
 Ensure that posts are not more than 1:50 out of plumb. If soil conditions may cause the post to be out of plumb, the
 Contractor may drive a pilot shaft before installation.
 Install flexible posts using methods and equipment that conform to the post manufacturer’s recommendations.
 620.06
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Delineator by the number, including
 reflectors, supports and hardware, in place, completed and accepted.
 The Department will measure Removal of Delineator, by the number.
 620.07
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 620
 620
 
 Each
 Each
 
 Delineator
 Removal of Delineator
 
 ITEM 621 RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS (RPM)
 621.01
 621.02
 621.03
 621.04
 621.05
 621.06
 621.07
 621.08
 621.09
 621.10
 
 Description
 Materials
 Layout
 Installation RPM Casting
 Installation RPM Retroreflector
 Reflector Replacement
 Reflector Color
 Raised Pavement Markers Removed
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 621.01
 Description. This work consists of preparing the pavement and furnishing and placing plowable
 raised pavement marker castings (RPMs) and prismatic retroreflectors, and removing existing RPMs for disposal.
 621.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Castings............................................................................................ 721.01
 Prismatic Retroreflectors and Adhesive .......................................... 721.02
 Casting adhesive .............................................................................. 721.03
 621.03
 Layout. Before placing RPMs, lay out the location of all RPMs. Locate RPMs within 5 percent of
 specified spacing. Do not place RPMs under the following conditions:
 A. On pavement surfaces with cracking, spalling, or failure of underlying base material.
 B. Within 1 foot (0.3 m) of active signal detector loop wires. Exercise care to ensure that detector lead-in cables
 are not cut.
 C. Over pavement markings except with the Engineer’s approval.
 D. Closer than 2 inches (50 mm) to a pavement construction (transverse or longitudinal) joint or within an
 intersection.
 E. Within 3 feet (1 m) of a bridge expansion joint.
 If the initial location of a RPM is determined to violate one of the aforementioned conditions, relocate the affected
 RPM longitudinally. Relocate the RPM within a distance not exceeding 25 percent of the specified RPM spacing.
 If necessary to relocate the RPM to a distance greater than 25 percent of the specified RPM spacing, do not install
 the affected RPM.
 RPMs along double yellow centerline are to be placed in line or on line, but no closer than 2 inches (50 mm) to
 a pavement construction (transverse or longitudinal) joint. RPMs installed along a channelizing line are to be placed
 no more than 1 inch (25 mm) from the edge of the painted line and no closer than 2 inches (50 mm) to a pavement
 construction (transverse or longitudinal) joint. Place the RPMs installed along a lane line or dashed yellow
 centerline between and in line with the dashes no closer than 2 inches (50 mm) to a pavement construction
 (transverse or longitudinal) joint.
 Install replacement RPMs within 3 feet (0.9 m) longitudinally of the damaged or missing RPM.
 621.04
 Installation RPM Casting. Cut parallel slots with 1/16 to 1/8 inch (1.5 to 3 mm) clearance on each
 side for installing RPM castings.
 Pavement cuts should be inspected prior to adding casting adhesive.
 When a casting is inserted in the cut without casting adhesive to test proper cut, at least 3 of the 4 leveling
 lugs/tabs must contact the pavement surface and all four keel-ends of castings must be below the pavement surface.
 Each casting must be centered lengthwise and should have 1/16 to 1/8 inch (1.5 to 3 mm) clearance between
 pavement cut and casting for casting adhesive to bond properly. Only the leveling lugs/tabs should be in contact
 
 with the pavement surface after insertion of casting in pavement so that a minimum of 1/16 inch (1.5 mm) of casting
 adhesive is the bonding adhesive between the casting and pavement. The casting adhesive must fill all voids.
 The pavement cut must be completely dry and free of dust, dirt or any other material that will interfere with the
 adhesive bond to the casting and the pavement. Casting adhesive on the active reflector face must be removed
 immediately.
 Install the RPM casting within 24 hours after cutting the slots into the pavement. On new pavement surfaces, the
 Contractor may begin RPM placement as soon as the pavement markings for that section are completed and dry.
 Ensure that the RPM casting is free of dirt, dust, oil, grease, rust, moisture, or any foreign matter that impairs
 adhesion to the pavement.
 Place RPMs when the pavement surface temperature and the ambient air temperature are at least 40 F (5 C)
 and the pavement is dry. Heat both parts of the RPM casting adhesive to 100  10 F (38  5 C) during installation
 when either the pavement surface or ambient air temperature is between 40 and 50 F (5 and 10 C).
 Ambient Air Temperature
 F
 (C)
 100
 (38)
 90
 (32)
 80
 (27)
 70
 (21)
 60
 (16)
 50
 (10)
 40
 (5)
 
 Minimum Period Protected from Traffic
 Minutes
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 45
 60
 
 Do not allow traffic on the RPMs until the adhesive has cured.
 Two component approved casting adhesive is used to fill the pavement cut to within approximately 3/8 inch (9
 mm) of the top of the pavement cut. A minimum of 3 of the 4 leveling lugs/tabs must be in contact with the
 pavement surface and the casting adhesive should ooze out from under the casting from all sides filling all voids
 around the casting and be level with the pavement surface.
 Mix the casting adhesive according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Complete the mixing operation and
 placing of the RPMs rapidly. Do not use any mixed batch that becomes so viscous that it cannot be readily extruded
 from under the RPM with light pressure.
 621.05
 Installation RPM Retroreflector. Attach the reflector to the casting before installation or after the
 adhesive in the pavement slots has cured.
 Remove all dirt, dust, oil, grease, rust, moisture, parts of damaged reflectors, or any foreign matter that impairs
 adhesion of the reflector to the casting.
 Peel the release liner from the back of the reflector with butyl pad. Apply a wide bead (approximately 3/8 inch
 (9 mm)) of reflector adhesive sufficient to squeeze out on all sides when pressure is applied to seat the reflector.
 Apply approximately 100 pounds (45 kg) of pressure on the reflector or foot pressure for 1 to 3 seconds. Do not
 allow adhesive material on the reflective surface of the reflector. Any adhesive on the active reflector must be
 removed immediately.
 Apply the reflector when the pavement surface temperature and the ambient air temperature are at least 35 F
 (2 C) and the casting surface is dry. Do not attach the reflector to the casting when rain over the work site is
 imminent.
 621.06
 Reflector Replacement. Replace damaged, non-retroreflective, or missing reflectors within the
 existing marker installations where the casting remains intact with the appropriate reflector type. The Engineer will
 determine the location of replacement reflectors.
 Perform the cleaning and attachment procedure for replacing reflectors within existing RPM installations
 according to 621.05.
 
 621.07
 
 Reflector Color. Use the appropriate reflector color for the following applications:
 
 A. Channelizing Lines. White/red two-way reflectors with white facing traffic.
 B. Lane Lines. White one-way or white/red two-way reflectors as specified, with white facing traffic.
 C. Edge Lines. One-way reflectors facing traffic matching the edge line color or two-way reflectors with the edge
 line color facing traffic and red in the opposite direction.
 D. Center Lines. Yellow two-way reflectors.
 621.08
 Raised Pavement Markers Removed. As designated, remove existing raised pavement markers. Fill
 all depressions caused by removing the castings with asphalt concrete by the end of the next workday. Remove all
 standing water from the hole before filling. Compact the asphalt concrete flush with the pavement. Removed raised
 pavement markers become the property of the Contractor.
 621.09
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure RPMs by the number of each furnished,
 complete with reflectors, in place, and accepted.
 The Department will measure RPM, Reflectors by the number of each, complete in place, for use on existing
 RPM castings in the pavement, and accepted.
 The Department will measure Raised Pavement Markers Removed by the number. Payment will include the cost
 of asphalt concrete to fill depressions caused by removal of the castings.
 621.10
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 621
 621
 621
 
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 RPM
 RPM Reflector
 Raised Pavement Marker Removed
 
 ITEM 622 CONCRETE BARRIER
 622.01
 622.02
 622.03
 622.04
 622.05
 622.06
 622.07
 622.08
 622.09
 
 Description
 Materials
 Placing Concrete
 Portable Barrier
 Joints
 Finish
 Curing
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 622.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and placing portland cement concrete barrier on the
 accepted and prepared subgrade, subbase course, or existing pavement. This item also consists of furnishing,
 placing, maintaining, and removing portable barrier.
 622.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Concrete, Class QC 1 * ......................................................................... 499
 Reinforcing steel and wire fabric ..................................................... 509.02
 Forms .............................................................................................. 515.14
 Preformed filler ............................................................................... 705.03
 Curing materials..................................... 705.05, 705.06, or 705.07 Type 2
 Precast concrete .............................................................................. 706.13
 Dowel bars .................................................................... 709.01 thru 709.05
 Steel ................................................................................................. 711.01
 * Replacing Coarse aggregate in the concrete mixes with Recycled Concrete Aggregate conforming to
 Supplement 1117 is an option
 622.03
 Placing Concrete. Construct concrete barrier by cast-in-place, precast, or slip-form methods. For
 slip-form construction, conform to 609.04.C.
 622.04
 Portable Barrier. Furnish individual sections not less than 10 feet (3 m) long. If intending to use the
 barrier at one location on the project, the Contractor may slip-form barriers in place without joints, or with grooved
 or sawed joints to facilitate removal. As directed by the Engineer, repair or replace barrier sections damaged during
 handling or by traffic, for the life of the project. The Contractor may substitute approved proprietary portable barrier
 products which can be found on the Office of Roadway Engineering’s website.
 622.05
 Joints. Construct joints for cast-in-place or slip-formed barrier of the type and dimensions and at the
 locations specified.
 A. Contraction Joints. The Contractor may construct unsealed contraction joints by either sawing, using metal
 inserts inside the forms, using a grooving tool, or using full-width 3/4-inch (19 mm) thick preformed joint filler
 conforming to 705.03. Make joints that are sawed, tooled, or formed by inserts a minimum of 1/8 inch (3 mm) wide
 and 3 inches (75 mm) deep. Saw joints as soon as curing allows sawing to the required depth with minimal spalling
 of the concrete surface.
 B. Expansion Joints. Use 3/4-inch (19 mm) preformed joint filler conforming to 705.03 to construct expansion
 joints at locations as shown in the plans.
 C. Horizontal Construction Joints. If and as shown on the plans, the Contractor may place horizontal
 construction joints.
 622.06
 Finish. Immediately following removal of fixed forms or slip-form construction, check the surface
 of the barrier with a straightedge and correct all irregularities of more than 1/4 inch in 10 feet (6 mm in 3 m). Finish
 and make corrections to the barrier surface according to 511.18.
 
 622.07
 Curing. Cure concrete according to 511.14, Method B and the following additional requirements.
 Apply the curing compound using an approved mechanical sprayer equipped with a shield to protect the spray from
 wind. For small areas, the Engineer will allow the use of other acceptable methods.
 Do not apply any load or conduct any work that will damage newly placed concrete. Allow a minimum of 36
 hours of cure time to elapse on any concrete placed first at a horizontal construction joint. The Contractor may cure
 precast sections according to 515.15. With the Engineer’s approval, the Contractor may also use radiant heated
 forms for curing.
 The Contractor may use 511.14, Method A for curing of short sections of barrier (leave-outs); however, before
 the curing is completed for any leave-outs, apply material conforming to 705.07, Type 2 at the normal rate specified
 in 511.14, Method B.
 The Contractor may cure horizontal construction joints between the foundation and the upper portion of the
 barrier, and between portions of the upper barrier placed separately according to 511.14, Method A or B. Do not
 remove the membrane before placing the next portion of the concrete barrier.
 622.08
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Concrete Barrier by the number of feet
 (meters) along the centerline of the top of the barrier, including all transitions, and bridge pier sections as specified,
 complete in place excluding end anchorages and excluding sections.
 The Department will measure Reinforced End Anchorages of the type specified by the number each complete in
 place.
 The Department will measure End Sections of the type specified by the number each complete in place.
 The Department will measure Portable Barrier and Portable Barrier, Bridge Mounted by the number of feet
 (meters) for each application of the barrier placed according to the plans. The Department will measure each reuse of barrier sections at a different location required by the plans separately.
 The Department will not measure repaired or replacement barrier sections damaged during handling or by traffic.
 622.09
 Basis of Payment. The cost of all inserts, sleeves, fittings, connectors, reinforcement, dowels,
 preformed filler, excavation, aggregate base, and backfill is incidental to these items.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 622
 622
 622
 622
 622
 
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 
 Concrete Barrier, Type ___
 Concrete Barrier End Anchorage, Reinforced, Type ___
 Concrete Barrier End Section, Type ____
 Portable Barrier, ___" (___ mm)
 Portable Barrier, ___" (___ mm) Bridge Mounted
 
 ITEM 623 CONSTRUCTION LAYOUT STAKES
 AND SURVEY MONUMENTS
 623.01
 623.02
 623.03
 623.04
 623.05
 623.06
 623.07
 623.08
 623.09
 623.10
 623.11
 
 Description
 Materials
 Definitions
 Verification
 Placement, Protection and Restoration of Survey Monuments
 Primary Project Control
 Right-of-Way Staking
 Construction Layout Staking
 Providing Electronic Instrumentation
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 623.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing, placing, and maintaining construction layout stakes
 necessary to perform the Work under the Contract. This work also includes verification, placement, protection, and
 necessary restoration of primary project control monuments, monument assemblies, reference monuments (which
 include centerline monuments and centerline reference monuments), and Right-of-Way monuments.
 Ensure that all work associated with locating and setting reference monuments, Right-of-Way monuments, and
 steel rods in monument assemblies is performed by a Registered Surveyor. Ensure that all other surveying and
 layout work described below is supervised by a Registered Engineer or a Registered Surveyor.
 623.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Concrete, Class QC Misc or QC 1 ........................................................ 499
 Cast frames and covers ...................................... 711.12, 711.13, or 711.14
 Concrete sand (fine aggregate) .................................................... 703.02.A
 Stainless steel bolts .......................................................................... 730.10
 Steel rods ......................................................................................... 709.01
 Pipe .................................................................... 706.07, 706.09, or 707.45
 623.03
 
 Definitions
 
 A. Survey Monuments. Includes primary project control monuments (including azimuth marks and temporary
 benchmarks), monument assemblies, centerline monuments, centerline reference monuments, and Right-of-Way
 monuments.
 B. Primary Project Control Monument. A surveyed position that is established and constructed according to
 the Department’s Survey and Mapping Specifications. Primary project control monuments will have associated
 azimuth marks and may have associated temporary benchmarks.
 C. Monument Assembly. A surveyed position typically set inside pavement that consists of a steel rod housed
 inside a monument assembly box with a cast frame and cover according to SCD RM-1.1.
 D. Reference Monuments
 1. Centerline Monument. A surveyed position outside of pavement that consists of a steel rod and
 aluminum cap encased in concrete according to SCD RM-1.1 that defines the centerline.
 2. Centerline Reference Monument. A surveyed position outside of pavement that consists of a steel rod
 and aluminum cap encased in concrete according to SCD RM-1.1, that defines the centerline based on a specific
 offset from that centerline.
 E. Right-of-Way Monument. A property boundary monument set according to SCD RM-1.1 to comply with
 Ohio Administrative Code Section 4733-37, “Standards for Boundary Surveys in the State of Ohio” and recited in
 the Right-of-Way deeds to convey the property or easement rights. Right-of-Way monuments are set at property
 corners, property line intersections, points along the Right-of-Way and angle points on the Right-of-Way.
 
 F. Azimuth Mark. A project control monument set at the end points of the project for use as a “backsight” point.
 G. Temporary Benchmark. A vertical position transferred from a primary project control monument.
 623.04
 Verification. Verify the position of all survey monuments shown in the Contract Documents prior to
 construction activities. Use standard acceptable surveying measurement techniques suitable to meet the
 requirements of Ohio Administrative Code Section 4733-37, “Standards for Boundary Surveys”. Have a Registered
 Surveyor prepare a verification report with the coordinates, station, offset, and a description of each survey
 monument found before beginning earth moving, resurfacing, or paving activities. Include the size, material,
 condition, any cap stamping or markings, and note any differences from the plan locations of the survey
 monuments. Have the Registered Surveyor sign and seal the verification report and submit it to the Engineer and
 the District Survey Operations Manager. If additional survey monuments not shown in the Contract Documents are
 encountered, protect, reference, and preserve them in the same manner as survey monuments that are shown in the
 Contract Documents. Include the additional survey monuments in the verification report.
 623.05
 Placement, Protection and Restoration of Survey Monuments. When specified in the Contract
 Documents, locate, construct, and position primary project control monuments according to the Department’s
 Survey and Mapping Specifications. Construct all other survey monuments according to SCD RM-1.1.
 Do not disturb survey monuments, cornerstones, or boundary monuments during construction unless specified
 in the Contract Documents. Restore survey monuments damaged or destroyed by construction activities, unless
 directed otherwise by the Engineer.
 Have a Registered Surveyor prepare a report and drawing with the coordinates, station, offset, and description of
 each survey monument that is constructed or restored. Have the Registered Surveyor sign and seal the verification
 report and submit it to the Engineer and the District Survey Operations Manager.
 If the Department must repair, replace, or resurvey the location of any survey monuments, cornerstones, or
 boundary monuments that are damaged, destroyed, or made inaccessible by the Contractor or its employees,
 subcontractors, or their agents, then the Engineer will deduct the costs incurred by the Department from the
 estimates to the Contractor.
 623.06
 Primary Project Control. Primary project control governs all positioning for Department projects.
 Use project control information provided in the plans for all project related survey operations. Establish and
 construct primary project control monuments according to the Department’s Survey and Mapping Specifications.
 623.07
 Right-of-Way Staking. Stake Right-of-Way lines where work will be performed before beginning
 the work. Stake Right-of-Way lines by placing tall stakes, properly identified and readily discernible, at points of
 change in width or direction of the Right-of-Way line and at points along the line so that at least two stakes can be
 seen distinctly from any point on the line. The Engineer will not require the Contractor to set additional stakes to
 locate a utility line that is not included as a pay item in the contract, or to determine the property line between
 properties.
 623.08
 Construction Layout Staking. Furnish construction layout staking as required to construct the
 project and along both sides of the centerline of construction, 3 feet (1 m) outside of the grading limits at maximum
 spacing intervals shown in the table below. Replace staking as directed by the Engineer.
 TABLE 623.09-1
 MAXIMUM SPACING OF CONSTRUCTION LAYOUT STAKES
 Length of project
 Less than 1/2 mile
 1/2 mile to 1 mile
 Over 1 mile
 
 Spacing
 200 feet
 500 feet
 1000 feet
 
 Length of project
 Less than 1 km
 1 km to 2 km
 Over 2 km
 
 Spacing
 50 m
 200 m
 500 m
 
 Before performing a portion of the Work, submit a copy of the construction layout notes for that portion to the
 Engineer. The construction layout notes must contain information sufficient for the Engineer to verify the
 construction layout.
 
 The Contractor is responsible for having the finished Work conform to the lines, grades, elevations and
 dimensions shown on the plans. Any inspection or checking of the Contractor’s layout by the Engineer and the
 acceptance of all or any part of it does not relieve the Contractor of that responsibility.
 The removal of construction layout stakes at the completion of the Work is a final cleanup item that is required
 as a condition of full payment for Item 624 Mobilization.
 623.09
 Providing Electronic Instrumentation. If specified as a pay item, provide the Engineer with
 electronic instrumentation so that the Department can verify the construction layout, perform check sections, and
 document pay items. Provide a survey-grade, global navigation satellite system (GNSS) receiver and data collector.
 Provide equipment that meets the requirements of the Department’s Survey and Mapping Specifications.
 Provide equipment, software, and all three dimensional models needed to verify layout, perform check sections,
 and document pay items. Train the Engineer on how to use the provided equipment and software and provide
 technical assistance during the duration of the Work.
 Upon completion of the Work, the electronic equipment, computer and software will remain the property of the
 Contractor.
 If using GNSS methods to construct the project and a pay item for providing electronic instrumentation is not
 specified, provide the Engineer with the three dimensional models in electronic format when requested. Provide
 the models at no additional expense to the Department.
 623.10
 Method of Measurement. Estimated quantities for replacement of Primary Project Control
 Monuments, Monument Assemblies, Reference Monuments, and Right-of-Way Monuments expected to be
 destroyed that are within the project construction work limits are included in the Contract Documents. Estimated
 quantities for new monuments are also included in the Contract Documents.
 Primary project control monuments, monument assemblies, reference monuments, Right-of-Way monuments,
 and boundary monuments on or outside the project construction work limits are the Contractor’s responsibility to
 protect and restore as required. The Department will not pay for restoration of these items.
 623.11
 Basis of Payment. Payment for Construction Layout Stakes and Surveying includes payment for
 Right-of-Way staking and verifying the location of existing survey monuments. The Department will consider the
 cost for locating new survey monuments to be included in the unit price bid for the survey monument. The
 Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 623
 623
 623
 623
 623
 623
 623
 
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 Construction Layout Stakes and Surveying
 Providing Electronic Instrumentation
 Primary Project Control Monument, Type A
 Primary Project Control Monument, Type B
 Monument Assembly
 Reference Monument
 Right-of-Way Monument
 
 ITEM 624 MOBILIZATION
 624.01
 624.02
 624.03
 624.04
 
 Description
 Limitation
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 624.01
 Description. This work consists of the preparatory work and operations including, but not limited to,
 those necessary for the movement of personnel, equipment, supplies, and incidentals to the project site; for the
 establishment of all field offices, buildings, and other facilities necessary for work on the project; for all other work
 and operations that must be performed or costs incurred before beginning the Work on the other contract items;
 and for demobilization.
 If Mobilization is not included as a pay item in the Contract, the Department will not pay for this work separately
 but will consider it incidental to the other Contract Items.
 624.02
 Limitation. The Department will limit the sum of the partial payments specified in 624.04.A and
 624.04.B to the amounts shown in Table 624.02-1 under “Maximum Total of Partial Payments”. The Department
 will pay the balance of the lump sum amount bid, as specified in 624.04.C.
 TABLE 624.02-1
 Total Contract Amount
 More than
 Up to, inclusive
 ($)
 ($)
 0
 50,000
 50,000
 100,000
 100,000
 200,000
 200,000
 500,000
 500,000
 1,000,000
 1,000,000
 2,000,000
 2,000,000
 5,000,000
 5,000,000
 10,000,000
 10,000,000
 20,000,000
 20,000,000
 40,000,000
 40,000,000
 60,000,000
 60,000,000
 80,000,000
 80,000,000
 --
 
 Maximum Total of Partial
 Payments
 ($)
 0
 2,000
 4,000
 10,000
 20,000
 40,000
 100,000
 200,000
 400,000
 800,000
 1,200,000
 1,600,000
 2,000,000
 
 If the lump sum amount bid for Mobilization exceeds the total shown in Table 624.02-1 for partial payments, the
 Department will pay the excess upon completion of the project.
 624.03
 performed.
 
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Mobilization as a unit, acceptably
 
 624.04
 Basis of Payment. The Department will make partial payments according to 109.09 and as modified
 by the following schedule:
 A. The Department will release 50 percent of the lump sum amount bid for Mobilization or 50 percent of the
 amount shown in 624.02, whichever is less, to the Contractor with the first estimate payable, but not sooner than
 15 days after the start of work at the project site.
 B. The Department will release an additional 40 percent of the lump sum amount bid for Mobilization or 40
 percent of the amount shown in 624.02, whichever is less, with the first regular estimate after 10 percent of the
 original total contract amount, including payments for delivered materials but excluding Mobilization, is earned.
 
 C. Upon completion of all work on the project, including final cleanup, the Department will release payment of
 the remaining 10 percent of the lump sum amount bid for Mobilization and any amount of the lump sum price bid
 for Mobilization, in excess of the total amount shown in 624.02 for partial payment. Final cleanup includes but is
 not limited to the removal of construction layout stakes and sediment and erosion control items.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 624
 
 Lump Sum
 
 Mobilization
 
 ITEM 625 HIGHWAY LIGHTING
 625.01
 625.02
 625.03
 625.04
 625.05
 625.06
 625.07
 625.08
 625.09
 625.10
 625.11
 625.12
 625.13
 625.14
 625.15
 625.16
 625.17
 625.18
 625.19
 625.20
 625.21
 625.22
 625.23
 
 Description
 Definitions
 Codes
 Permits
 Materials
 Shop Drawings
 Incidentals
 Luminaires
 Luminaire Supports
 Foundations
 Junction Boxes (Handholes) & Pull Boxes (Manholes)
 Raceways and Conduits
 Trenching
 Jacking or Boring
 Power Service (Control Equipment)
 Grounding
 Wiring and Cabling
 Connections
 Testing of Installations
 Plastic Caution Tape
 Removal of Lighting Equipment
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 625.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and installing highway lighting equipment complete
 and ready for service. This work shall also include necessary excavation and backfill, disposal of discarded
 materials, restoration of disturbed facilities and surfaces, and testing as specified.
 625.02
 Definitions. Lighting terminology herein is defined in the American National Standard Practice for
 Roadway Lighting.
 625.03
 Codes. Follow the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the State of Ohio, The National Electrical
 Safety Code and local codes where applicable.
 625.04
 
 Permits. Obtain all permits required as an incidental to the construction of the lighting installation.
 
 625.05
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Concrete QC Misc or QC 1 .......................................................... 499, 511
 Reinforcing steel .............................................................................. 509.02
 Sand ................................................................................................. 703.06
 Cable ................................................................................................ 725.02
 Unit type duct-cable systems ........................................................... 725.03
 Conduit .............................................................. 725.04, 725.051, 725.052
 Pull boxes.................................................. 725.06, 725.07, 725.08, 725.12
 Junction boxes ................................................................................. 725.10
 Luminaires ....................................................................................... 725.11
 Lamps .............................................................................................. 725.11
 Cable connectors and connector kits ............................................... 725.15
 Cable splicing kits............................................................................ 725.15
 Ground rods ..................................................................................... 725.16
 Power service components .............................................................. 725.19
 Wood service poles .......................................................................... 725.19
 Multiple cell conduit ........................................................................ 725.20
 
 Anchor bolts and nuts ...................................................................... 725.21
 Light poles ....................................................................................... 725.21
 Light towers ..................................................................................... 725.21
 Portable power units ........................................................................ 725.21
 Plastic caution tape .......................................................................... 725.22
 625.06
 Shop Drawings. Submit, to the Engineer prior to incorporation, two copies of the shop drawings and
 catalog cuts which identify and describe each manufactured item which is being incorporated into the construction.
 Certify in writing that each manufactured item is in conformance with all contract requirements for that item.
 Ensure that the documents describing each item indicate the project number (including the construction year) and
 the bid reference number under which the item is being installed and that the documentation contains all of the
 information needed to allow the Engineer to determine that the item to be supplied meets all applicable
 requirements along with all of the information needed by the maintaining agency to obtain an identical replacement
 unit from the manufacturer. When a given item is to be incorporated into the construction under multiple bid item
 reference numbers, furnish a separate and complete documentation package for each bid item reference number
 under which the item is to be installed. When multiple items are to be incorporated under a single bid reference
 number, submit the documentation for all such items together.
 625.07
 Incidentals. Furnish and install all incidentals necessary to provide a complete and practical working
 unit or system.
 625.08
 Luminaires. A luminaire consists of a housing with a lamp, a lamp socket, the optical components
 to direct the output from that lamp, and the electrical components needed to operate the lamp.
 Ensure that luminaires of the same type (i.e. high mast, low mast, conventional, underpass, post top, etc) in a
 given installation (i.e. interchange, rest area, weigh station, etc.) are of the same brand.
 Align each luminaire vertically and horizontally to the roadway as specified. Where the profile grade exceeds 4
 percent and the luminaire is mounted less than 60 feet (18 m) above the roadway, adjust the luminaire to be
 perpendicular to the roadway rather than gravimetric level.
 At the locations designated in the plans or as directed by the Engineer, furnish and install glare shields obtained
 from the manufacturer of the luminaire.
 Apply a clearly-visible, liberal coating of metal-free molybdenum disulfide and graphite-based anti-seize
 compound to all fasteners used in accessing the lamp for replacement.
 After all other work has been completed, clean the reflector, refractor and other components of the optical
 assembly just prior to leaving the job.
 625.09
 
 Luminaire Supports. Luminaire supports fall into three categories: bracket, light pole, light tower.
 
 A bracket is the attaching hardware used to mount a luminaire onto the face of a wall or pier cap, or hang a
 luminaire from the bottom of a deck or beam or other similar installation. A bracket is often supplied for the
 luminaire by the luminaire manufacturer to facilitate the installation of the luminaire. A more complex situation
 will require extensive work to fabricate a bracket for the situation.
 A light pole is the pole with one or more fixed brackets or arms for supporting luminaires above the roadway to
 be lighted. A light pole also includes a lower portion of the pole which is embedded or a mounting plate, any base
 for housing components or wiring, and when specified a breakaway device such as a frangible base, frangible
 couplings or slip plates.
 A light tower is a shaft with a base plate, head frame, ring or similar structure on which one or more luminaires
 are mounted with a mechanism for lowering the mounting ring and luminaires for servicing and a lightning
 protection system.
 Ensure that luminaire supports of the same type (i.e. high mast, low mast, conventional, underpass, post top, etc.)
 in a given installation (i.e. interchange, rest area, weigh station, etc.) are of the same brand.
 Plumb each light pole and each light tower. When shims are used, use only shims of an approved design and
 installed in an approved manner. Do not install more than the minimum number needed to plumb the pole and
 
 neither exceed the maximum allowed total thickness of the shim pack nor the maximum number of shims permitted.
 When leveling nuts are used, ensure that such nuts are installed in approved locations and that both the anchor and
 the leveling nuts are properly tightened according to AASHTO LTS-6 (Specifications for Structural Supports for
 Highway Signs, Luminaires, and Traffic Signals, 2013) section C5.17.5.2.
 Ensure that the grounding connections for each light pole or light tower have been made and that the resultant
 ground is within the earth resistance limit specified
 Apply a suitable lubricant to prevent seizing to each cover fastener and install all such fasteners.
 After erection, the Engineer shall inspect each pole for defects in the surfaces and determine for each defect
 discovered whether the defect is minor enough that the Contractor may be allowed to field repair the finish or major
 enough that the Contractor must replace the pole. Make finish repairs and provide and install replacement poles as
 directed by the Engineer for no additional charge to the project.
 Label each light pole and light tower with the alpha numeric identifier. Place the identifier on the quadrant of the
 surface of the pole that faces oncoming traffic at approximately 7 feet (2 meters) above the roadway surface. Apply
 the identifier letters and numerals when the ambient air temperature, the temperature of the labeling material and
 the temperature of the surface to which the labels are applied are all above 40° F (4° C). Identification of the light
 poles or light towers and the removal of any previous such identifier in the case of light poles or light towers being
 reassigned shall be considered as incidental work.
 625.10
 
 Foundations. Excavate for each foundation to the dimensions given.
 
 If a cave in should occur during excavation, excavating using casing, sleeving or other methods may continue
 with the approval of the Engineer.
 Where, in the opinion of the Engineer, the excavation for a foundation has revealed an unstable condition at the
 bottom of the excavation, drill the foundation shaft deeper, enlarge the diameter of the drilled shaft, or make other
 modification to the foundation as directed by the Engineer who shall initiate the appropriate arrangements to
 compensate the Contractor for the addition work required.
 When rock is encountered, continue excavation to a minimum of 3 feet (1 meter) into rock. The Engineer may
 then decrease the total depth of the foundation to not less than 6 feet (2 meters) for a light pole or 10 feet (3 meters)
 for a light tower.
 Reinforce each foundation with steel as specified and such steel reinforcing shall be placed in accordance with
 509.
 Install the anchor bolts for the light pole or light tower in each foundation using anchor bolt setting templates.
 Place Class QC Misc or QC 1 concrete for the foundation in accordance with 511 except that forms will not be
 required for portions of foundations extending more than 6 inches (150 mm) below the ground line, unless the soil
 does not have sufficient stability to stay in place during the placing of the concrete.
 Finish the top of each foundation smooth and level.
 After forms have been removed, backfill the excavated spaces around each foundation with suitable material
 placed and tamped in thin layers as directed by the Engineer.
 625.11
 
 Junctions Boxes (Handholes) & Pull Boxes (Manholes).
 
 Furnish and install a junction box of the size and type specified. Furnish each junction box embedded in concrete
 with a drain. Lubricate each cover screw with a compound to prevent the screw from seizing and install all cover
 screws.
 Furnish and install a pull box of the size and type specified. Excavate for each pull box as nearly as practicable
 to the outside dimensions of the pull box. Install a 6 inch (150 mm) gravel base with a 4 inch (100 mm) underdrain
 to a suitable outlet below each pull box. After setting the pull box to proper grade, backfill the excavated spaces
 around the pull box with suitable material placed and thoroughly tamped in thin layers.
 When a pull box is to be installed in a paved area, remove an adequate area of the paving by saw cutting the sides
 of the area to be removed, or by removal of the paving back to an expansion joint as instructed by the Engineer.
 
 After setting the pull box to proper grade, backfill the excavated spaces around the pull box with suitable material
 placed and thoroughly tamped in thin layers, and restore the pavement base and paving to match the surround.
 Metal pull box lids shall be bonded by attachment of the equipment grounding conductor to the frame diagonal
 and a braided strap.
 625.12
 Raceways and Conduits. Furnish and install conduit of the sizes and types specified. When the
 location, type or size of a conduit has not been indicated, submit to the Engineer working drawings showing the
 location and size and type of each such conduit along with the number and size of wires contained in each such
 conduit and secure the approval of the Engineer prior to installing the conduit. Use of consuit material shall comply
 with the NEC.
 When not otherwise specified, all conduit and fittings on an individual run of conduit shall be of the same material
 except for approved manufactured transition fittings required at end of the run when the item into which the conduit
 terminates is not of the same material as the conduit. HDPE conduit shall not be used where exposed, or within
 buildings.
 Install each conduit with a minimum amount of bending and ensure that the total bending between adjacent access
 points (junction boxes, pull boxes, light poles, control equipment enclosures, etc.) does not exceed 270 degrees.
 Do not bend any conduit to a bend radius of less than 12 times the internal diameter of the conduit. Bend each
 conduit in such a manner as to avoid damage to the conduit and any protective coating and such that the internal
 diameter of the conduit will not be reduced.
 Remove the rough edges from the cut end of each conduit. In addition, ream the cut end of each metallic conduit.
 Bush each end of each conduit to further protect the wire insulation and cable jackets from damage.
 Where threads have been cut onto ferrous metallic conduit after galvanizing, paint the threaded area with a ULListed anti-corrosion compound in such a manner that there will be no unprotected surfaces.
 Make each conduit joint tight to provide structural integrity in all conduits and to electrically bond the jointed
 sections of metallic conduit. Provide an equipment grounding conductor that is not in a jacketed cable assembly in
 metallic conduits when not otherwise available and bond the conduit to this grounding conductor.
 Securely fasten onto or build into the structure each conduit.
 Install the appropriate expansion or deflection joint in each conduit at all locations where movement must be
 accommodated (such as expansion joints on structures) and install suitable bonding to assure electrical continuity
 of the grounding system.
 Bond all metallic items enclosing electrical conductors together and to good earth ground.
 Furnish each enclosure, junction box, pull box and conduit with a drain. When the low point of a conduit does
 not occur at a drained access point, install a T coupling at the low point of the run and route the side outlet to drain.
 Where underground conduits are to be encased in concrete, use Class QC Misc or QC 1 concrete and furnish a
 minimum of 3 inches (75 mm) of concrete on all sides using spacers.
 After installation of the conduit and prior to installing the cables, run a mandrel whose diameter is at least 90%
 of the interior diameter of the conduit through the conduit.
 If the new conduit contains cabling, install a flat woven polyester pulling tape, rated for 600 pound minimum, in
 the conduit.
 If the new conduit is to remain empty, install an HDPE insulated copper tracer wire, 12 AWG minimum, in the
 conduit. Allow for 10 feet of slack in each adjacent pull box.
 Temporarily seal the ends of a conduit immediately after placement of conduit when the conductors or cable
 cannot be installed promptly.
 After installing the wire or cable and conduit bushings, seal all open conduit ends. Use polymer-based, mineralfilled reusable non-drying elastic duct sealing putty identified for use with the cable insulation, shield or other
 components. Do not use expanding foams or foam of any kind.
 
 625.13
 Trenching. Follow the routing shown on the plan. Keep the trench within 6 inches (150 mm) of the
 designated line where the trench is adjacent to and parallel with a curb or pavement.
 In unpaved areas, a plow may be used in lieu of trenching with the approval of the Engineer. Use a machine that
 can install the duct uniformly at the specified depth without stretching or abrading the duct and which leaves a
 narrow self closing slit which presents no significant hazard during the self closing period.
 In unpaved areas, make the trench a minimum of 2 feet (0.6 m) deep and not more than 12 inches (300 mm) in
 width. Backfill the trench in layers not more than 4 inches (100 mm) in loose depth and compact each layer with a
 mechanical tamper or other approved method as directed by the Engineer. Use suitable soil to backfill a trench in
 earth. Use granular material to backfill a trench in an aggregate. Ensure that the backfill material around and in the
 first 4 inches (100 mm) above the top of unit type duct cable not encased in concrete is sand or earth with no stones
 larger than 1/2 inch (13 mm).
 In paved areas, either make a slit or T type trench. Cut the pavement along existing joints or grooves where
 possible. Mark the pavement with cut lines and secure the Engineer’s approval of the location of the cut before
 cutting the pavement.
 625.14
 Jacking and Boring. In addition to the requirements of 625.12 to furnish and install conduit, use
 jacking or horizontal boring when the plan calls for such methods to be used. Use these methods in lieu of trenching
 only with the approval of the Engineer.
 Jack only rigid galvanized steel conduit. Use only a machine designed for jacking conduit not the bucket or blade
 of a machine designed for earthwork.
 Horizontal boring may be used to install any conduit or duct which has the adequate strength, flexibility and
 joints to withstand the process. Make the diameter of the bore no more than 5 percent larger than the outside
 diameter of the conduit or duct being installed.
 625.15
 Power Service. Furnish and install all equipment necessary to provide a complete electrical service
 to the roadway lighting facilities. Follow the National Electrical Code (NEC) Article 400 for enclosures, in the
 construction of all enclosures for power service and lighting control centers.
 The power service equipment includes, but is not necessarily limited to: poles or other support structure for the
 mounting of the equipment, hardware for dead ending an overhead service drop or trench and conduit for receiving
 an underground service line, NEC Article 285 Type 1 (Surge Arrestor) surge protector device (SPD), meter base,
 customer service disconnect, magnetically held lighting contactor, photoelectric cell and Hand-Off-Automatic
 switch for control of contactor, overcurrent protection devices for each individual lighting circuit, enclosures,
 conduits, fittings, cables and connectors.
 Assure all control equipment included in the power service is capable of operating within the provided
 enclosure(s) over appropriate temperature and humidity conditions. Assure that power service equipment that
 includes daytime lighting controls shall operate continuously with the enclosure placed in a location fully exposed
 to sunlight and daytime temperature of 100°F ambient.
 Construct the lighting electrical system to provide selective coordination of overcurrent devices per NEC
 240.12(1). Overload indications per NEC 240.12(2) are allowed but not required as part of a standard ODOT
 lighting control system. Provide to the Engineer:
 A. individual catalog sheets and device time-current curves and/or tables and
 B. combined graphical overlays that document acceptable installed overcurrent device coordination.
 Provide this documentation for all installed overcurrent devices, including the service disconnect fuses, the
 lighting control center branch circuit breakers, and tower circuit breakers/ pole fuses (if present). Tabular data, if
 used, shall include the following time points as a minimum: 0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5,1, 10, 100, and 300
 seconds and additional points as needed to clearly show the overcurrent device operating characteristics. Include
 minimum melt time and maximum clearing time for fuses; include minimum and maximum clearing time for circuit
 breakers. Provide documentation of the utility-installed transformer ANSI fuse link type (e.g., K or T) and fuse
 rating (if available). Provide documentation of the utility-installed power service size (in kVA).
 
 Provide to the Engineer a compiled list or catalog sheets showing the Short-Circuit Current Rating (SCCR) of
 all fuses and fuse holders, circuit breakers, switches and contactors, pursuant of the requirements in NEC Article
 110.10.
 If the power service has multiple enclosures, mark each enclosure in white letters engraved on a black plastic
 placard with the function of the equipment contained therein such as “SERVICE DISCONNECT”, “LIGHTING
 CONTACTOR”, “LIGHTING PANEL”, or other appropriate designation. Apply a durable, weatherproof adhesive
 arc and shock hazard warning label to the outside of each electrical enclosure that contains applicable voltage
 and/or arc hazard levels.
 When an apparatus enclosure contains circuits above the 600 volt class, mark the enclosure in white letters on a
 red plastic placard with the warning “DANGER-HIGH VOLTAGE” on each enclosure door.
 Install each photoelectric cell facing North unless the Engineer directs that a specific cell face otherwise to reduce
 interference from surround lighting.
 Bond all metallic portions of the supporting structure, equipment housings and conduits properly and to an
 adequate earth ground.
 Install a wood or plastic wire moldings from grade to 3 feet (1 meter) above grade over any grounding cables
 installed on a wood pole.
 Coordinate and cooperate with the power company in the making of the connections to establish electrical
 service. Charges made by the power company for establishing of the account, extension of company facilities,
 connection of customer equipment to the power company facilities and energy will be borne by the maintaining
 agency.
 625.16
 
 Grounding. Connect each light pole or light tower to a local earth ground.
 
 Connect each power service to a local earth ground.
 Provide continuity of grounding by bonding the metallic portions of fixtures, apparatus enclosures, supports,
 conduits, raceways, junction boxes and pull boxes together and connecting to earth ground. At a light pole or a
 light tower, install a bonding cable between the grounding bushing on each metal conduit and the ground lug or
 bolt in the pole base. At a junction box or a pull box, install a grounding bushing on each metallic conduit not
 bonded to the box through the conduit connector, and install a bonding cable between the grounding bushings on
 the conduits and the ground lug or bolt in the box.
 For a light pole, light tower, power service or other such item mounted independently, install one or more
 grounding electrodes.
 For a luminaire, light pole, light tower, switch enclosure, or other such item mounted in or on major highway
 structures (i.e. bridges), connect the item to the structure grounding system.
 For a lighting contactor, lighting circuit panel or other such item mounted in a building (i.e. motorists services
 building, weigh station scale house, etc.), connect the item to the grounding system provided for the building.
 For each bridge, wall, or other structure having electrical elements contained therein or attached thereto, furnish
 all materials necessary including grounding electrodes and install a complete structure grounding system to bond
 all exposed metallic portions of the structure (i.e. beams, railings, etc.) electrically together and connect those items
 to good earth ground. In the case where structures are separate but adjacent, connect the multiple structures together
 to avoid any difference in earth potential between the structures.
 Make the permanent connection between the each ground rod and the grounding conductor by exothermic
 welding.
 If the earth resistance measurement exceeds 10 ohms for a ground for a traffic signal controller or a light tower
 or 25 ohms for any other ground, install a second ground rod at least 10 feet (3 meters) from the first and temporarily
 connect the second rod to the first. If the earth resistance still exceeds the above specified values, permanently
 connect the first two rods using the same type of cable used for the grounding conductor and continue to add rods
 one at a time as directed by the Engineer.
 
 Where rock does not permit the driving of ground rods, develop an earth connection by constructing a grid from
 the partially driven rods supplemented by buried bare cable as directed by the Engineer.
 625.17
 Wiring and Cabling. Furnish and install electrical wires and cables of the types and sizes required
 with no in-line splices between terminations at devices unless specifically called for by the plan or directed by the
 Engineer.
 Install wire mesh cable grips on vertical runs of wire or cable in poles and attach said grips to the “J” hook at the
 tops of the poles in such a manner as to prevent the weight of the vertical run from abrading the wire insulation or
 cable jacket where the wire or cable passes into or from the pole.
 Identify all wires and cables, except bare ground bonding cables, as to circuit and function with tags or bands in
 the base of each light pole or light tower, each junction box or pull box, each apparatus cabinet, and other similar
 locations.
 Pay out each wire, cable and duct cable by “unwinding” it from the shipping reel, spool or coils and not allow
 the wire cable or duct-cable to “spiral” from off the side of the spool reel or coil. In addition when wire cable or
 duct cable is being placed in trench, move the reel spool or coil along the side of the trench to allow the wire or
 cable to pay out into the trench as directly as practical. Seal the ends of each run of duct cable in the same manner
 as conduit as each run is installed.
 Do not install duct cable when the temperature of the duct-cable cannot be kept above 32 °F (0 °C) except with
 the permission of the Engineer.
 If the end of a wire or cable or duct must stand exposed to the elements or construction activities, protect said
 exposed end by enclosing it in a plastic bag or wrapping it with tape until the termination or connection can be
 made.
 625.18
 Connections. Make each wire and cable connection above grade (i.e. bases of light poles or light
 towers, junction boxes on structure or in concrete barrier medians, etc.) with an approved cable connector kit. Use
 quick disconnect type kits in the base of each light pole with a fused type in each line or phase conductor. Plug
 unused line side wire opening in each connector kit installed in the base of the light pole at the outer end of a circuit.
 Make each cable connection below grade (i.e. pull boxes, junction boxes in retaining walls, etc.) with a cable
 splicing kit.
 Protect partially assembled connections from damage and the elements.
 625.19
 Testing of Installations. Furnish equipment and personnel to perform each test as an incidental to
 the construction of the lighting installation. The Engineer shall witness each test and judge the results.
 A. Equipment Calibration. Submit to the Engineer the types, styles, or catalog numbers of all testing equipment
 to be used for such tests. Include a current Certificate of Calibration for each instrument showing that the instrument
 is in current calibration using standards traceable to The National Institute of Standards in accordance with the
 manufacturer's recommended process by a service center authorized by the manufacturer to calibrate the
 instrument. Certify and demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Engineer that the instrument has remained sealed
 since the calibration, and that the manufacturer's recommended process for ensuring that the instrument is in
 working order and producing valid results has been followed in conducting the test.
 B. Grounding Electrodes and Grounding Systems. Furnish two certified copies of the completed test records
 to the Engineer on test reporting forms supplied to the Contractor by the Engineer or on alternate forms approved
 by the Engineer.
 Measure the earth resistance in ohms of each ground immediately after it is installed and before the ground is
 attached to the item being grounded.
 When the ground connection is by driven ground rods, measure each rod separately. In the event that a ground
 rod has a high resistance and additional rods are being added, measure the earth resistance of the combined group.
 
 Measure a structure grounding system at each point where an exposed metallic item is to be connected to the
 system. Where driven ground rods are used as the electrodes of the structure grounding system, measure each
 ground rod separately prior to measuring the system.
 Measure each ground grid at the each point where equipment is to be connected to the grid.
 C. Circuit Continuity. Upon completion of each lighting circuit but prior to energizing the circuit, verify the
 continuity of each conductor of the lighting circuit from the power service to the load side socket in the line side
 of the quick disconnect connector kit in the base of each light pole and the line side of each disconnect switch at
 each light tower, lighted sign and underpass lighting system shall be verified. Demonstrate that there is no cross
 connection between the conductor being tested and any other conductor (including conductors for other circuits)
 or earth ground. Conduct this test by applying a low test voltage between the conductor under test and one of the
 companion conductors for the same circuit and demonstrating that the test voltage is available between only those
 two conductors at the power service; the load side socket in the line side of the quick disconnect connector kit in
 base of each light pole; and the line side of each disconnect switch for a light tower, a lighted sign or an underpass
 lighting system and repeating the process until all possible pairs have been so checked. Throughout this test, ensure
 that each disconnect switch is in the open position and that the load side of each connector kit is unplugged.
 Temporarily disconnect the grounded neutral conductor from earth ground and check all pairings involving the
 neutral after which again connect the neutral to earth ground and check all pairings, both those involving the neutral
 and those that do not.
 D. Cable Insulation. After the continuity of a conductor has been verified, test the insulation of that conductor
 and its connections. Ensure that each disconnect switch is in the open position and that the load side of each quick
 disconnect connector kit is unplugged during this test. Temporarily disconnect a grounded neutral conductor from
 earth ground when it is being tested. In addition, when a grounded neutral is under test and the circuit utilizes local
 equipment earthing rather than a continuous equipment grounding back to the power service, temporarily connect
 one of the companion line conductors to provide the equivalent of the continuous equipment grounding cable.
 When the circuit conductor is comprised of both new wire or cable and wire or cable installed prior to the
 current project, test the insulation by the megohmmeter method and the resistance of the conductor under test to
 earth ground or any other conductor shall exceed 10 megohms.
 When the circuit conductor is comprised of entirely new wire or cable, test the insulation by the high potential
 method in accordance with Supplement 1003.
 E. Lowering Device Operation. Demonstrate to the Engineer that lowering devices on any luminaire supports
 so equipped operate properly by lowering and raising the luminaire assembly through the full range of motion of
 the device for each device on two separate occasions at least 10 days apart. The Engineer shall record the dates of
 operation for each device and in case of failure the details of both the failure and the date and details of the
 correction. The Engineer will consider a particular unit satisfactory when the device has operated twice in
 succession on separate occasions without malfunction.
 F. System Performance. Prior to acceptance and after all other tests are done, the completed lighting system
 shall be operated on electrical energy from the power company through the permanent customer service connection
 in its intended normal manner for ninety consecutive days. Notify the Engineer at least 3 days prior to the
 commencement of this performance test. In addition to the beginning and ending dates of the test period, the
 Engineer shall record the date and details of each failure and the date and details of the repair. The Engineer will
 consider the performance satisfactory when the lighting installation has operated for ninety consecutive days
 without a failure due to the workmanship of the Contractor.
 625.20
 Plastic Caution Tape. Install tape approximately 6 to 10 inches (150 to 250 mm) below the final
 finished grade. Place with the printed side up and parallel with the finished surface. Insure that the tape is not
 pulled, distorted or otherwise misplaced in completing the trench backfill.
 625.21
 
 Removal of Lighting Equipment.
 
 A. Luminaire Removal. Remove the luminaire from its support taking care not to damage the luminaire, support
 or wiring connections. If the luminaire is to be reused within the same project, carefully store the luminaire on the
 
 project site. If the luminaire is to be reused, but not within the same project, carefully store the luminaire on the
 project site for pick up by the owner. If the luminaire is not to be reused, properly dispose of the luminaire off the
 project site.
 B. Luminaire Support Removal. Remove the luminaire support taking care not to damage the luminaire support,
 foundation or structure to which it is attached or wiring connections. If the luminaire support is to be reused within
 the same project, carefully store the luminaire support on the project site. If the luminaire support is to be reused,
 but not within the same project, carefully store the luminaire support on the project site for pick up by the owner.
 If the luminaire support is not to be reused, properly dispose of the luminaire support off the project site.
 C. Luminaire Support Foundation Removal. Remove the luminaire support foundation a minimum of one foot
 (0.3 m) below finished grade or clear of proposed construction, backfill the resultant depression with compacted
 soil and restore the disturbed area.
 D. Pull Box Removal. Remove the pull box, properly dispose of it off the project site, backfill the resultant
 depression and restore the disturbed area.
 E. Disconnect Existing Circuit. Disconnect the portion of the lighting circuit to be removed or abandoned from
 the portion of the circuit to remain in service at the designated node point. Remove the cable from the link no longer
 to remain in service from the node point enclosure. Remove the conduit or duct for the link no longer in service
 from the node point enclosure and properly close the resultant openings in the enclosure unless the conduit or duct
 is to be left in place to allow another circuit link to enter the node enclosure.
 F. Power Service Removal. Remove the existing power service equipment and properly dispose of the
 equipment off the project site. Equipment to be removed includes the wood pole or other supporting structure,
 foundation work pads, equipment enclosures, photoelectric cell and associated conduits, wiring, overhead or
 underground service lateral and all other appurtenances. Cut the cable enclosed in conduit which runs into the
 ground at the lower end of the bend to horizontal approximately 2 feet (0.6 m) below grade. Backfill the resultant
 depression and restore the disturbed area.
 Coordinate with the power company to insure that the company disconnects the service and that items which
 belong to the power company that are removed, such as the meter base, are returned to the power company.
 625.22
 Method of Measurement. Bracket arms will be included with the light pole, light tower or
 combination support on which they are mounted for payment. However, when a bracket arm is to be mounted onto
 an existing support or a support provided by another aspect of the project, it may be a separate item for the purpose
 of payment in which case payment will be made for each bracket arm.
 Transformer bases will be included with the light pole, light tower or combination support on which they are
 mounted for payment. However, when a transformer base is to be fitted to an existing light pole, it may be a separate
 item for the purpose of payment in which case payment will be made for each transformer base.
 Light pole anchor bolts will be furnished with the light pole and the setting of the anchor bolts included with the
 foundation. However, in the case of a light pole mounted onto structures such as bridges and retaining walls where
 the bolts normally furnished with the light pole are not of the proper length and shape and/or the setting of the bolts
 must be done when the structure is constructed rather than being at the time of construction of the light pole
 foundation, the bolts shall be a separate item for payment in which case payment will be for each bolt with the
 count being the number of bolt ends projecting for the anchoring of the light pole. Separate payment shall also be
 made when the bolts are being set in a normal light pole or light tower foundation but the light pole or light tower
 is not being furnished by the Contractor or by others to the Contractor.
 Foundations for light poles or light towers include excavation, dewatering, sleeving, casing, reinforcing steel,
 raceways, concrete, backfilling, and when required the 8 foot or 10 foot foundation section of concrete barrier, and
 the disposal of surplus excavation. For light poles or light towers mounted on median barrier or retaining walls, the
 junction box at the point where the stub conduit to the light pole or tower joins the main lighting circuit raceway
 and the stub conduit from the junction box to the light pole or light tower are also included. Anchor bolts, conduit
 ells and surface restoration not included elsewhere are also included with the foundation. Junction boxes include
 the drain.
 
 Pull boxes include the aggregate for base.
 Power service includes the control equipment, the support and foundations on which the equipment is mounted,
 the pull boxes with underdrain for gathering the lighting circuits into the control equipment at the power service
 location, ground rods and incidentals required for a completed power service. Also included are any poles, conduits,
 wire and cable to be provided by the owner to receive the incoming power from the power company.
 Structure grounding system includes any ground rods or ground grids required as part of the system.
 Ground grids include any ground rods required as part of the grid and includes the associated grounding
 conductor and connections from the resultant grid to the first point (or points) of connection. Ground grids that
 result from the addition of ground rods as a result of earth ground resistance measurements will be the sum of each
 ground rod installed such sum will also include all connecting cable and trenching.
 A ground rod includes the associated grounding conductor and connections from the rod to the first point of
 connection.
 Trench will be measured to the center of a light pole foundation, the center of a light tower foundation, the center
 of a pull box, the center of the pole of an embedded pole mounted power service, the center of the foundation for
 a power service with a foundation, or the wall of the building when the power service for the lighting in, on or
 within the building with no allowance for elevation change. The payment for trench includes all excavation,
 granular and other backfill material, compaction, disposal of surplus materials and restoration to match surrounding
 surface including any seeding, sodding or other plantings which were disturbed and the replacement of any minor
 items such as guardrail or fence panels, and return to former position and mounting of items such as trash
 containers, planter boxes or parking meters and small signs which were temporarily moved to facilitate the
 trenching. The payment for trench in paved areas includes the aforementioned and in addition sawing and removal
 of pavement, along with the repaving over the trench. Trench in paved areas shall be separated for payment into
 Type A for pavements or sidewalks less than 6 inches (150 mm) thick and Type B for pavements 6 inches (150
 mm) or greater.
 Conduit will be measured to the center of a light pole foundation, the center of a light tower foundation, the
 center of a pull box, the center of the pole of an embedded pole mounted power service, the center of the foundation
 for a power service with a foundation, or the wall of the building when the power service for the lighting in, on or
 within the building with no allowance for elevation change. The payment for conduit includes couplings (plain,
 expansion, and alignment), bends, hubs, bushings, condulets and other such appurtenances but not junction boxes
 and pull boxes. Conduit to be encased in concrete or installed by jacking or boring will be paid separately from
 conduit to be traditionally installed. Concrete and other materials for encasement or the jacking or boring are
 included with such conduit where specified.
 Distribution cable will be measured to the center of foundation, pull box, junction box or power service, plus an
 allowance of 5 feet (1.5 meters) at each pull box and terminating points for slack and connections end except for a
 power service where the allowance will be 10 feet (3 meters) to allow for slack and connections with the sum
 multiplied by the number of conductors required.
 Pole and bracket cable will be measured as the light pole support height plus the designated arm length with the
 sum multiplied by the number of conductors required. For twin arm poles the sum shall be increased by the length
 of the second arm plus the length of the first arm.
 Duct cable will be measured to the center of foundation, pull box, junction box or power service, plus an
 allowance of 5 feet (1.5 meters) on each end except for a power service where the allowance will be 10 feet (3
 meters) to allow for slack and connections with no multiplier for the number of conductors. Duct-cable includes
 the cable(s) and being a factory assembly is differentiated by the number and size of the conductors in each
 assembly.
 Plastic caution tape will be measured to the center of a light pole foundation, the center of a light tower
 foundation, the center of a pull box, the center of the pole of an embedded pole mounted power service, the center
 of the foundation for a power service with a foundation, or the wall of the building when the power service for the
 lighting in, on or within the building with no allowance for elevation change.
 
 625.23
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 625
 
 Each
 
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 625
 
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 
 Luminaire, (Functional Type), (Housing Size if Conventional),
 (Light Distribution), (Lamp Wattage), (Light Source), (Voltage)
 Glare Shield
 Light Pole, (Pole Style),(Design Number)
 Light Tower,(Design Number)
 Light Pole Anchor Bolts
 Light Pole Foundation
 Light Tower Foundation
 Junction Box, (Length × Height × Depth)
 Pull Box, (Material Type), (Length × Height × Depth)
 Conduit, (Material Type), (Nominal Diameter)
 Trench
 Trench in Paved Area,(Type)
 Conduit Jacked or Drilled,(Material Type), (Nominal Diameter)
 Power Service
 Ground Rod
 Ground Grid
 Structure Grounding System
 Pole and Bracket Cable, (Size of Conductors in AWG), (Voltage Rating)
 Distribution Cable, (Size of Conductors in AWG), (Voltage Rating)
 Duct Cable, (Duct Diameter) with (Number of Conductors),
 (Size of Conductors in AWG), (Voltage Rating) Conductors
 Connection
 Service to Underpass Lighting
 Portable Winch Drive Power Unit
 Luminaire Removed
 Luminaire Support Removed
 Luminaire Support Foundation Removed
 Pull Box Removed
 Disconnect Circuit
 Power Service Removed
 Plastic Caution Tape
 
 ITEM 626 BARRIER REFLECTORS
 626.01
 626.02
 626.03
 626.04
 626.05
 626.06
 
 Description
 Materials
 Layout
 Installation
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 626.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and installing barrier reflectors on guardrail blockouts,
 concrete barrier, retaining wall, and bridge parapets.
 626.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Barrier Reflectors............................................................................. 726.01
 Conform to the manufacturer’s recommendations for corrosion resistant fasteners, brackets, or adhesives.
 Use barrier reflectors that are mountable on guardrail blockouts, concrete barriers, retaining walls, and bridge
 parapets. For wall or parapet mount, the barrier reflector may not extend further than 5 inches (125 mm) in a
 horizontal direction towards the traffic lanes.
 626.03
 Layout. Lay out all locations to ensure proper placement. The Engineer will approve the layout before
 installation of the reflectors.
 Furnish reflectors at the beginning and the end of all barrier runs and at least one additional point evenly spaced
 between the termini. Space the reflectors at 100 feet (30 m) on tangents and on curves of less than 5 degrees (more
 than 350 m radius). Space the reflectors at 50 feet (15 m) for curves of greater than 5 degrees (350 m radius or
 less).
 The Contractor may vary the spacing on tangents and curves of less than 5 degrees (more than 350 m radius)
 from 65 feet to 125 feet (20 m to 40 m) in the final 250 feet (80 m) to achieve even spacing of the reflectors.
 If using a buffer end section or similar device on the end of the guardrail, place the first reflector so that it is
 visible to approaching traffic.
 If tying guardrails, barriers, retaining walls, or bridge parapets together in a continuous run, use the total length
 of the run for determining the number and location of reflectors.
 If installing a run of rail or barrier that is at varying distances from the edge of pavement, place a reflector where
 the run first approaches closest to the pavement. If this results in spacing greater than 125 feet (40 m), or 65 feet
 (20 m) in cases where 50-foot (15 m) standard spacing is required, install an additional reflector. If a nonreflectorized impact attenuator is in place, place an additional reflector on the face of the attenuator nearest to, and
 directed toward, approaching traffic.
 626.04
 Installation. Attach the reflector with a suitable corrosion resistant fastener or adhesive conforming
 to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 On concrete barriers, retaining walls, and bridge parapets, place the top of the reflector so its height is 26 inches
 (650 mm) above the near edge of pavement, except that the top of the reflector is at least 3 inches (75 mm) below
 the top of the concrete barrier.
 Install guardrail blockout reflectors on top of the blockout or on the side of the blockout away from traffic. Install
 guardrail blockout reflectors on the top or side of the blockout nearest the edge of pavement. Install the guardrail
 blockout reflector so that the reflective surface is above the guardrail.
 For guardrail blockout reflectors that are installed on top of the blockout, angle the reflective face approximately
 5 degrees towards the nearest travel lane.
 Remove loose concrete, rust, dirt, and other loose material from the surface of the concrete barrier using a wire
 brush. Remove dust created by wire brushing before applying adhesive. Apply adhesive to clean and moisture-free
 surfaces according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 
 Ensure that the reflector face is clean and free of dust, dirt, adhesive, or any foreign material after installation.
 Except if mounted on a guardrail blockout, rotate the reflective face of one-way reflectors upward from the
 vertical (or plumb) position 2 to 3 degrees to facilitate “rain washing” of the reflector face.
 When replacing reflectors on a concrete surface, locate the new reflector approximately 3 inches (75 mm)
 horizontally in either direction from the old location.
 Use barrier reflectors that are the same color as the adjacent edge line.
 Use one-way and bi-directional barrier reflectors in accordance with the following guidelines:
 BARRIER REFLECTORS
 COLOR & DIRECTION
 Two-Lane, Two-Way
 Interchange Ramp
 Multilane Undivided
 Multilane Divided
 Multilane Divided with median barrier*
 Multilane Divided without median barrier
 *concrete wall, guardrail or cable rail
 
 One-Way Reflector
 
 Bi-Directional Reflector
 
 Left Edge
 
 Right Edge
 
 Left Edge
 NA
 Yellow/Red**
 NA
 Yellow/Yellow
 
 NA
 
 White
 White
 
 Right Edge
 White/White
 White/Red
 White/White
 
 ** if median concrete wall is present
 The Department will classify the reflectors as follows:
 Mounting Location
 Concrete barrier, retaining walls, bridge rail or bridge parapets
 Type 1
 Barrier Reflector
 Guardrail
 Type 2
 Corrosion Resistant Metal Guardrail Blockout Reflector
 Type 3
 Acrylic or Polycarbonate Plastic Guardrail Blockout Reflector
 Type 4
 Spring Loaded Guardrail Blockout Reflector
 Type 5
 L-Type Guardrail Blockout Reflector
 626.05
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Barrier Reflector by the number of each in
 place, completed and accepted.
 If a bi-directional reflector consists of two one-way reflectors mounted back-to-back, the Department will
 measure it as one bi-directional reflector.
 626.06
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 626
 
 Each
 
 Barrier Reflector, Type ____ , (One-Way or Bi-Directional)
 
 ITEM 630 TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGN SUPPORTS
 630.01
 630.02
 630.03
 630.04
 630.05
 630.06
 630.07
 630.08
 630.09
 630.10
 630.12
 630.13
 630.14
 630.15
 
 Description
 Materials
 Shop Drawings
 Sign Fabrication
 Foundations
 Sign Supports
 Sign Erection
 Sign Shipment and Storage
 Specific Service and Tourist-Oriented Directional Signs
 Covering of Signs
 Removal and Delivery, Storage, Reerection, or Disposal of Signs and Supports
 Inspection
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 630.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and installing traffic signs, sign supports, and
 foundations complete and ready for service. This work also includes necessary excavation and backfill, disposal of
 discarded materials, and restoration of disturbed facilities and surfaces to a condition equal to that existing before
 this work started.
 630.02
 Materials. The acceptance of materials and products is based on Certified Test Data, furnished in
 triplicate, or on test results of samples according to 106.02, as required by the Laboratory.
 Transfer manufacturers’ guarantees or warranties on all traffic sign material to the Department or other
 maintaining agency upon completion and acceptance of the project.
 Furnish materials conforming to:
 Concrete, Class QC Misc or QC 1 ................................................ 499, 511
 Steel:
 Structural steel .............................................................................. 711.01
 Reinforcing steel .......................................................................... 509.02
 U-channel posts .......................................................................... 730.015
 Square posts ............................................................................... 730.016
 Wooden Box Beam .................................................................... 730.017
 Tube and pipe ............................................................................... 730.01
 Anchor bolts and nuts .................................................................. 730.02
 Poles and arms ............................................................................. 730.03
 Base and arm plates ...................................................................... 730.04
 Handhole covers ........................................................................... 730.05
 Pole caps....................................................................................... 730.06
 Arm caps ...................................................................................... 730.07
 Hardware ...................................................................................... 730.08
 Stainless steel ............................................................................... 730.09
 Stainless steel hardware ............................................................... 730.10
 Messenger wire ............................................................................ 732.18
 Aluminum:
 Sheet and plate ............................................................................. 730.11
 Extrusions..................................................................................... 730.12
 Tube and pipe ............................................................................... 730.13
 Castings ........................................................................................ 730.14
 Forgings ....................................................................................... 730.15
 Welding rods ................................................................................ 730.16
 
 Hardware ...................................................................................... 730.17
 Other materials:
 Decals ........................................................................................... 725.21
 Reflective sheeting, Type F.......................................................... 730.18
 Reflective sheeting, Type G ......................................................... 730.19
 Reflective sheeting, Type H ....................................................... 730.192
 Reflective sheeting, Type J ........................................................ 730.193
 Nonreflective acrylic opaque sheeting ........................................ 730.20
 Silk screen inks ............................................................................ 730.22
 Transparent acrylic electronic cuttable films .............................. 730.23
 630.03
 Shop Drawings. Furnish shop drawings according to 625.06. Submit sign support certified drawings
 that cover all design types such as ground mounted, rigid overhead, span wire mounted, and overpass structure
 mounted supports. On the drawings, show overall height, sign clearance above foundation, span length, sign
 locations, sign overall heights and widths, and glare shield height and location, if applicable.
 630.04
 Sign Fabrication. Sign types include flat sheet, double faced, extrusheet, and temporary overlay. Flat
 sheet signs consist of one-piece units made of aluminum. Double faced signs consist of flat sheet aluminum or
 extruded aluminum blanks with legend on both sides. Extrusheet signs consist of a number of horizontal panels
 assembled to form a complete sign. Temporary overlay signs consist of an aluminum sheet covering portions or
 entire surfaces of extrusheet signs.
 Prior to reflective sheeting application, clean aluminum sign surfaces either by total immersion in a tank
 containing an alkaline solution of the manufacturer’s specification or by steam cleaning with an alkaline solution
 of the manufacturer’s specification, followed by a thorough rinsing with running water. After cleaning, etch the
 surface with an acid solution, and dry. Do not allow cleaned and etched surfaces to become contaminated by contact
 with oil or grease. Drill or punch bolt holes to finish size.
 Use sign legends according to the OMUTCD and the Sign Designs and Markings Manual. For projects sold
 before July 14, 2016 use Clearview font or the Standard Alphabets for Traffic Control Devices for positive contrast
 legends on freeway and expressway guide signs and on all other guide signs when permitted in the Sign Designs
 and Markings Manual. For projects sold on or after July 14, 2016, use the Standard Alphabets for Traffic Control
 Devices for positive contrast legends on all guide signs. Do not revise overall sign sizes from what is shown in the
 plans. The edge space between the border and the text may be adjusted from what is normally used to achieve the
 sign widths shown. Do not use Clearview font for projects sold on or after July 14, 2016. For negative contrast
 legends, use the Standard Alphabets for Traffic Control Devices. Use capital legends and upper/lower case legends
 in accordance with the Sign Designs and Markings Manual. When either is permitted in the Sign Designs and
 Markings Manual, use upper/lower case legends.
 For flat sheet, double faced mile marker, double faced street name and ground mounted extrusheet signs, use
 Type G, H or J reflective sheeting for background and reflective legends. For overhead extrusheet signs, use Type
 G, H or J reflective sheeting for the background, and use Type H or J reflective sheeting for reflective legends,
 shields and symbols (including hazardous material plaque, airport symbol, arrows and borders). Apply reflective
 sheeting to the surface according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, with no blisters, wrinkles, tears, or
 blemishes. Do not use reboundable or damage control sheeting for permanent signs.
 For reflective legends on flat sheet, double faced mile marker and double faced street name signs, use reverse
 silk screen transparent ink, transparent acrylic electronic cuttable film, or direct applied reflective sheeting copy.
 When using direct applied reflective sheeting copy, apply all legend on a sign with the same rotation angle
 orientation. For nonreflective legends, use direct silk screen black ink or direct applied nonreflective acrylic opaque
 black sheeting copy. For double faced mile marker signs, use flat sheet aluminum and apply reflective sheeting and
 legend to both sides. For double faced street name signs, use extruded aluminum blanks with a minimum thickness
 of 0.063 inch (1.6 mm) and thicker, stiffened edges, and apply reflective sheeting and legend to both sides.
 Extrusheet panels consist of flat sheet aluminum reinforced with aluminum extrusions attached by spot welding.
 Panels extruded in a single operation may be used in lieu of spot welded panels. Do not use extruded panels and
 
 spot welded panels in the same sign. Bolt together the minimum number of full length, sheeted panels to achieve
 the sign height, using aluminum bolts, washers, lock washers and nuts. For reflective legends, shields and symbols
 (including hazardous material plaque, airport symbol, arrows and borders) use direct applied reflective sheeting.
 Apply all reflective legend on a sign with the same rotation angle orientation. For nonreflective legends, use direct
 applied nonreflective acrylic opaque black sheeting copy.
 For temporary overlay signs, use 0.080-inch (2.0 mm) thick flat sheet aluminum, with a maximum panel size of
 8  4 feet (2.4  1.2 m). Apply sheeting and legend as described above for extrusheet signs. Attach temporary
 overlays to extrusheet signs in the shop or field using aluminum blind rivets at a maximum spacing of 18 inches
 (0.5 m) on the peripheries of the temporary overlays and 24 inches (0.6 m) within the interior.
 Use fluorescent yellow-green reflective sheeting for the following signs and plaques: School (S1-1), School Bus
 Stop Ahead (S3-1), SCHOOL BUS TURN AHEAD (S3-2), SCHOOL ENTRANCE (S3-H3), SCHOOL (S4-3P),
 School Speed Limit Ahead (S4-5, S4-5a), yellow portions of School Speed Limit (S5-H1), Pedestrian Crossing
 (R1-6, R1-6b, R1-9), Bicycle (W11-1), Pedestrian (W11-2), Handicapped (W11-9), Bicycle/Pedestrian (W11-15),
 Trail Crossing (W11-15a), Playground (W15-1), and SAFETY ZONE (W15-H2). Fabricate supplemental warning
 plaques [such as Advisory Speed (W13-1P), SHARE THE ROAD (W16-1P), Distance (W16-2P, W16-2aP, W163P, W16-3aP), Supplemental Arrow (W16-5P, W16-6P, W16-7P) and AHEAD (W16-9P)] from fluorescent
 yellow-green reflective sheeting when used with a sign above.
 Use fluorescent yellow reflective sheeting for all yellow signs, yellow portions of multi-colored signs, and yellow
 sign post reflectors, except for signs and portions of signs required to be fabricated with fluorescent yellow-green
 reflective sheeting.
 For lighted signs, cover glare shield and rectangular luminaire support tube with nonreflective acrylic sheeting
 matching the predominant sign color.
 Furnish 4  2.5 inch (100  62 mm) sign identification stickers of Type F reflective sheeting as shown in Figure
 1. For signs fabricated in English based sizes, use white stickers with red ink legend. For signs fabricated in hard
 metric based sizes, regardless of the sign message units contained on the sign face, use yellow stickers with red ink
 legend. Place the stickers on the back side of the sign in the lower right corner of rectangular signs, or in an
 equivalent location for other sign shapes, approximately 3 inches (75 mm) from side and bottom sign edges (for
 smaller signs, these dimensions may be reduced). Position the sticker so it can be read horizontally and is clearly
 visible, not near bolt holes or rivets, and not obstructed by the sign support when erected.
 Silk screen the fabrication data onto the face of the sticker, and include the sheeting manufacturer identification
 code and year of fabrication. Alternatively, the numbers 0-1-2-3-4-5-6-7 and 13-14-15-16-17 may be silk screened
 onto the sticker with the correct sheeting manufacturer identification code and fabrication year punched out,
 respectively. At the time of sign erection, indicate the erection data by scratching out the appropriate month and
 year.
 FIGURE 1
 Sticker design:
 PROPERTY OF THE STATE OF OHIO
 UP TO $2500 FINE AND 5 YEARS
 IMPRISONMENT FOR DAMAGING
 OR REMOVING THIS SIGN
 OHIO REV. CODE SEC. 4511.17
 MANU ID *
 FAB. **
 EREC 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
 
 *ID No.
 
 11
 
 12
 
 **Year of Manufacture
 
 Alternate design:
 PROPERTY OF THE STATE OF OHIO
 UP TO $2500 FINE AND 5 YEARS
 IMPRISONMENT FOR DAMAGING
 OR REMOVING THIS SIGN
 OHIO REV. CODE SEC. 4511.17
 01234567
 13 14 15 16 17
 EREC 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
 
 12
 
 Fabricate sign post reflectors with flat sheet aluminum and Type G, H or J reflective sheeting. Install red sign
 post reflectors on each post with the following post-mounted signs: Stop (R1-1), Yield (R1-2), Do Not Enter (R51), and Wrong Way (R5-1a). Install yellow sign post reflectors on each post with the following post-mounted signs:
 One-Direction Large Arrow (W1-6), Two-Direction Large Arrow (W1-7), Chevron Alignment (W1-8), and Stop
 Ahead (W3-1).
 630.05
 Foundations. Locate sign support foundations so the plane of the sign surface is at a right angle to
 the roadway lanes served (except for signs not intended for this orientation). Install foundations in accordance with
 632.14. Furnish and install a ground rod at each rigid overhead and span wire sign support foundation, in
 accordance with 625.16.
 Before placing foundation concrete for embedded supports, brace the supports in a vertical position. Seven days
 after concrete placement, remove bracing for embedded supports and erect signs.
 630.06
 Sign Supports. Sign supports consist of ground mounted, rigid overhead, span wire, and overpass
 structure mounted types. Fabricate sign supports according to the applicable requirements of AWS D1.1 Structural
 Welding Code-Steel. The approval of fabricators according to 501.03 will not apply. Hot-dip galvanize steel
 structural members according to 711.02. Galvanize steel hardware according to 730.08.
 Tighten threaded fasteners, except anchor bolt nuts, by the “turn of the nut” method according to 513.20.
 Furnish anchor bolts with a leveling nut, plain washer, and anchor nut conforming to 730.02. Use anchor nuts
 with a plain washer against the base plate upper surface.
 Tighten anchor bolt nuts according to 513.20, except that under Table 513.20-3, use the “nut rotation from snug
 tight condition” from 1/12 to 1/6 turn instead of 1/3 turn.
 Apply anaerobic adhesive complying with Federal Standard MIL S 46163, Type II, Grade N to anchor bolts and
 other threaded connections 1/2-inch (13 mm) diameter or larger, according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 A. Ground Mounted Supports. Ground mounted supports consist of structural sections of the material and
 weights required. Drive the ground mounted supports into the earth or embed them in concrete, as specified. Install
 supports in exposed locations in accordance with the performance requirements of NCHRP 350. The support
 lengths shown on the plans are approximate. Determine the exact length of supports before fabrication.
 1. Post Supports. Mark each driven post with a line of paint 6 inches (150 mm) above the specified driving
 depth. Drive posts to the specified depth without bending, distortion, or end mutilation. Do not splice posts.
 Do not place posts in drainage ditches. If unable to install the post at the specified location, relocate the post
 with the Engineer’s approval.
 Install posts located in paved areas through a hole provided by sleeving or core drilling. After the post is in
 position, patch the hole with asphalt concrete or an approved asphalt material.
 For groupings of flat sheet signs in multiple arrangements mounted on posts, provide sign backing assemblies.
 
 For one-way and street name sign supports, use square posts for mounting signs at right angles to other signs
 on the post.
 For temporary sign supports and their placement, conform to the OMUTCD.
 2. Structural Beam Supports. Furnish ground mounted structural beam supports from rolled steel sections.
 Furnish slip base connections when specified. Bolt the pieces of each beam together, and preload the assembly
 bolts before delivery to the project. Carefully handle assembled breakaway beams during transportation and
 erection. Upon erection, perform the final specified torquing on all threaded fasteners.
 At least 4 weeks after erecting signs on breakaway beams, inspect the breakaway feature for evidence of
 shifting or loose fasteners. Re-torque all loose fasteners to specified values. Loosen and re-torque slip base plate
 fasteners even if no shifting or looseness is detected. Apply anaerobic adhesive to the re-torqued nuts.
 3. Pipe Supports. Furnish ground mounted pipe supports from structural steel pipe and tubing. Furnish
 bolt down anchor installations in existing concrete. Furnish triangular slip base connection when specified.
 4. Wooden Box Beam Supports. Furnish wooden box beam supports from laminated veneers pressure
 treated with wood preservative. Install breakaway feature after installation for supports in exposed locations.
 B. Rigid Overhead Supports. Rigid overhead supports consist of single poles with cantilevered arms, or span
 types supported between end frames. Furnish anchor bolts and conduit ells [at least one 2-inch (50 mm) minimum
 diameter] for installation in the foundation. Upon erection, set support poles and end frames on their foundations,
 and plumb using the leveling nuts followed by secure tightening of all leveling and anchor nuts on the anchor bolts.
 Plumb poles supporting cantilevered signs following erection of signs as required. Ensure that a minimum of one
 full thread remains on each anchor bolt above the top of the anchor nut after final tightening. Do not use concrete
 grouting in the space between the foundation surface and support base.
 Do not provide cover bases or individual anchor bolt covers on support anchor bases regardless of support
 location.
 Furnish overhead sign supports with sign attachment assemblies for attaching extrusheet signs and/or sign
 hanger assemblies for mounting flat sheet signs to the support chords.
 When specified, furnish sign support identification stickers of Type F reflective sheeting listing the support
 type, design number, span/arm length, county, route, and section number (example: TC-7.65, design 6, 80 ft span,
 CUY-90-17.58). Apply stickers only when the ambient temperature is above 40 F (4 C). Locate the sticker
 approximately 8 feet (2.4 m) above groundline on the quadrant of the sign support facing approaching traffic.
 Identify sign supports spanning opposing directions of traffic with two stickers, each on a support member facing
 traffic.
 Rigid span supports consist of a box truss supported by single plane truss end frames. Fabricate box trusses
 from aluminum or steel tubular members with built-in camber, and mark each section “TOP”. Do not erect box
 trusses unless at least one sign or damping device approved by the Engineer is installed within 8 hours. Provide for
 the attachment of a luminaire bracket arm on combination overhead sign supports.
 C. Span Wire Supports. Furnish span wire sign supports with sign hanger and messenger wire assemblies.
 Furnish anchor bolts and conduit ells [at least one 2-inch (50 mm) minimum diameter] for installation in the
 foundation.
 Achieve a span wire sag under load of 4 to 5 percent of the span. Adjust poles to be essentially vertical after
 span wire tensioning. Securely tighten all leveling and anchor nuts on the anchor bolts. Ensure that a minimum of
 one full thread remains on each anchor bolt above the top of the anchor nut after final tightening.
 Do not provide cover bases or individual anchor base covers on support anchor bases regardless of support
 location.
 When specified, furnish sign support identification stickers as described in 630.06.B.
 D. Overpass Structure Mounted Supports. Mount the supports on the overpass structure so the bottom of the
 signs are in a level position, regardless of bridge slope.
 
 E. Sign Attachments. Use sign attachment assemblies to attach extrusheet signs to rigid overhead supports. Use
 sign hanger assemblies to attach flat sheet signs to span wire or rigid overhead supports. Use sign support
 assemblies to attach flat sheet or extrusheet signs to poles or bridge parapets. Use sign backing assemblies for
 groups of signs attached to a sign post, and to attach exit number or supplemental panels to an extrusheet sign.
 630.07
 Sign Erection. Erect signs on ground mounted or overhead supports according to the schematic
 signing layout. Mount overhead signs so that the bottom of the signs are in a level position regardless of the sag of
 supporting messenger wire, mast arm rise, chord member or overpass slope. Do not remove an existing sign until
 the replacement sign is either erected or available for immediate erection. Do not erect a replacement sign on a new
 support more than 24 hours before the removal of the existing sign.
 A. Flat Sheet Sign Erection.
 Use steel bolts, wide washers, lock washers and nuts. Use bearing plates between the sign and U-channel post
 at each bolt. Field drill signs mounted on messenger wire or mast arms to match holes in brackets.
 B. Extrusheet Sign Erection.
 Use self-aligning aluminum mounting clips, stainless steel T-bolts, stainless steel washers, and stainless steel
 nylon insert lock nuts, to attach extrusheet signs to sign attachment assemblies, beam or U-channel post supports,
 and for U-channel post sections used to attach exit number and supplemental panels to extrusheet signs. Use
 aluminum bolts, washers, lock washers, and nuts to assemble extrusheet signs shipped in two pieces. Tighten nuts
 and lock nuts using hand tools only. Do not use pneumatic, hydraulic, battery, electric or other power-assisted tools.
 630.08
 Sign Shipment and Storage. Package and ship finished flat sheet signs to assure adequate protection
 of the sign face, using methods and materials as recommended by the reflective sheeting manufacturer.
 Ship extrusheet signs up to 8 feet (2.4 m) high completely assembled. Extrusheet signs over 8 feet (2.4 m) high
 may be shipped in two pieces for field assembly. Keep extrusheet signs rigid by back bracing or crating.
 Store signs, whether provided by the Contractor or furnished by the Department, off the ground in a vertical
 position with adequate covering or shelter to prevent packing material from getting wet. Immediately remove
 packing material that does become wet from contact with sign faces to prevent damage to the reflective sheeting.
 Identify extrusheet signs on a detachable form on the sign back giving the project number and year, sign reference
 number, sign legend sketch, and station location. Identify the underlying sign for signs shipped with an attached
 temporary overlay sign.
 630.09
 Specific Service and Tourist-Oriented Directional Signs. Maintain existing Specific Service (logo)
 signs and Tourist-Oriented Directional Signs (TODS) in accordance with 614.07 unless indicated in the plans.
 630.10
 Covering of Signs. Install temporary covers, and subsequently remove and dispose of them as shown
 on the plans or as directed by the Engineer. For the covering material, use a sturdy opaque material and obtain the
 Engineer’s approval of the proposed method of covering and attachment.
 630.12
 Removal and Delivery, Storage, Reerection, or Disposal of Signs and Supports. Carefully
 dismantle signs and sign supports indicated for removal. Either deliver to the Department facility as designated by
 the plan , store on the project, re-erect, or dispose of removed signs and sign supports. To ensure maintenance of
 adequate traffic control at all times, remove signs only with the Engineer’s approval.
 Remove sign supports in a manner to avoid damage. Remove sign service to the support by disconnecting and
 removing cables at the service pull-box. Ensure that connection of remaining cables conforms to 625.18. Remove
 support foundations to at least 1 foot (0.3 m) below subgrade or finished groundline. Backfill and restore surfaces
 to a condition equal to that existing before the work started and dispose of surplus material according to 105.16,
 105.17 and 611.15 at no cost to the Department.
 Furnish mounting hardware for signs to be re-erected. Field drill as necessary. Furnish anchor bolts and conduit
 ells for installation in the foundation for overhead sign supports to be re-erected.
 Remove temporary overlay signs so as not to damage the underlying sign.
 
 630.13
 Inspection. After erection, the Engineer will inspect signs under both day and night conditions.
 Correct deficiencies in lateral position or visibility to the Engineer’s satisfaction.
 630.14
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Ground Mounted Post Support by the
 number of feet (meters) measured from the bottom of the support to the top of the support, and will include driving,
 hardware for anchor base installation, and furnishing and placing of patching materials for excavations in paved
 areas. The Department will not measure the overlap length of post for the anchor base installation.
 The Department will measure Foundations for ground mounted pipe supports, ground mounted structural beam
 supports, rigid overhead sign supports and span wire sign supports by the number of each for one pipe, structural
 beam, pole, end frame or strain pole, and will include excavation, dewatering, sleeving, casing, reinforcing steel,
 concrete, backfilling raceways, and when required the 10 foot (3m) foundation section of concrete barrier, and the
 disposal of surplus excavation. Sealing of the 10 foot foundation section of concrete barrier shall be paid for under
 Item 512 when specified in the plans.
 The Department will measure Ground Mounted Structural Beam Support by the number of feet (meters)
 measured from the bottom of the foundation to the top of the sign, and will include furnishing and placing of
 patching materials for excavations in paved areas.
 The Department will measure Ground Mounted Pipe Support by the number of feet (meters) measured from the
 bottom of the foundation to the top of the sign and will include u-bracket, tubing, posts and hardware for sign
 attachment, bolt-down anchor and furnishing and placing of patching materials for excavations in paved areas.
 The Department will measure Ground Mounted Wooden Box Beam Support by the number of feet (meters), and
 will include excavation, backfilling, disposal of surplus material, and installation of breakaway feature.
 The Department will measure One Way Support and Street Name Sign Support by the number of feet (meters)
 measured from the bottom of the support to the top of the support, and will include driving, hardware for anchor
 base installation, and furnishing and placing of patching materials for excavations in paved areas. The Department
 will not measure the overlap length of post for the anchor base installation.
 The Department will measure Temporary Sign Support by the number of feet (meters) or the number of each
 furnished, erected, maintained, and removed.
 The Department will measure Breakaway Structural Beam Connection by the number of each set of connection
 parts with necessary welding and drilling of holes as required for the breakaway function in one beam, and will
 include base plates, fuse plate, hinge plate, bolt retainer plate, and bolts assembled to specified torques.
 The Department will measure Triangular Slip Base Connection by the number of each set of connection parts
 with the necessary welding and drilling of holes as required for the breakaway function in one pipe and will include
 slip plate, slip base casting, locking collar, bolt retainer plate, coiled pin and bolts assembled to specified torques.
 The Department will measure Overhead Sign Support by the number of each, and will include anchor bolts and
 conduit ells furnished for the foundation, sign attachment assemblies, sign hanger assemblies and identification
 stickers when specified.
 The Department will measure Combination Overhead Sign Support with light pole extension by the number of
 each, and will include anchor bolts and conduit ells furnished for the foundation, sign attachment assemblies, sign
 hanger assemblies and identification stickers when specified. Bracket arms and roadway lighting luminaires are
 not included.
 The Department will measure Sign Attachment Assembly by the number of separately itemized assemblies, and
 will include one overhead sign bracket, U-bolts, clamps, and miscellaneous hardware.
 The Department will measure Luminaire Support Assembly by the number of separately itemized assemblies,
 and will include one support arm, other necessary structural members, and miscellaneous hardware.
 The Department will measure Span Wire Sign Support by the number of each support, and will include two strain
 poles with span wire clamps and anchor shackles, anchor bolts and conduit ells furnished for foundations,
 messenger wire, clamps, thimbles, and sign hanger assemblies with hangers, braces, lengths of post, and
 miscellaneous hardware.
 
 The Department will measure Overpass Structure Mounted Sign Support by the number of each support, and
 will include attachment work and hardware, to attach one individual sign.
 The Department will measure Sign Hanger Assembly by the number of each, and will include all parts necessary
 to attach one individual sign.
 For pole mounted sign supports, the Department will measure Sign Support Assembly by the number of each,
 and will include brackets, hardware, and posts sufficient to attach each sign or set of signs to an individual pole.
 For bridge mounted sign supports, the Department will measure Sign Support Assembly by the number of each,
 and will include post, hardware, and attachment work.
 The Department will measure Sign by the number of square feet (square meters) of signs, and will include the
 furnishing of identification stickers, sign backing assemblies, mounting bolts, washers, nuts, bearing plates, clips,
 and rivets. For square, rectangular, circular, or irregular shaped signs, the Department will determine measurement
 by multiplying the largest dimensions of width and height. For triangular shaped signs, the Department will
 determine measurement by multiplying the largest dimension of width and one-half the largest dimension of height.
 The Department will include the area of the glare shields for lighted signs as an integral part of the sign.
 The Department will measure Sign Post Reflector by the number of each, and will include the furnishing of
 mounting bolts, washers and nuts.
 The Department will measure Sign, Double-Faced by the number of each, and will include mounting fittings and
 hardware.
 The Department will measure Sign Erected by the number of square feet (square meters) of signs erected, and
 will include mounting hardware, the assembly of signs that are in more than one piece and the installation of
 required sign backing assemblies. The Department will exclude the furnishing of signs. For square, rectangular,
 circular, or irregular shaped signs, the Department will determine measurement by multiplying the largest
 dimensions of width and height. For triangular shaped signs, the Department will determine measurement by
 multiplying the largest dimension of width and one-half the largest dimension of height. The Department will
 include the area of the glare shields for lighted signs as an integral part of the sign.
 The Department will measure Sign Backing Assembly by the number of separately itemized assemblies, and will
 include back bracing for each group of flat sheet signs attached to a post or posts, or a single assembly for backing
 posts used to attach an exit or supplemental panel to a guide sign.
 The Department will measure Covering of Sign by the number of square feet (square meters) of sign face covered,
 and will include the subsequent removal and disposal of the covering.
 The Department will measure Removal and Delivery, Storage, Reerection, or Disposal of Sign by the number of
 each sign removed and delivered, stored, re-erected or disposed of. Major signs are defined for measurement as
 being 40 square feet (3.7 m²) or larger.
 The Department will measure Removal and Delivery, Storage, Reerection, or Disposal of Support by the number
 of each support removed and delivered, stored, re-erected or disposed of, and will include removal of foundations
 and restoration of surfaces. With reerection, the Department will include furnishing of anchor bolts, conduit ells,
 necessary field drilling, and hardware.
 630.15
 Basis of Payment. The Department will not pay for relocating posts from their planned location
 without prior approval by the engineer.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 630
 630
 630
 630
 630
 
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 
 Ground Mounted Structural Beam Support Foundation
 Ground Mounted Pipe Support Foundation
 Rigid Overhead Sign Support Foundation
 Span Wire Sign Support Foundation
 Ground Mounted Support, ___ Post
 
 630
 630
 630
 630
 630
 630
 
 630
 
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 or Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Each
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Each
 
 630
 
 Each
 
 630
 
 Each
 
 630
 
 Each
 
 630
 
 Each
 
 630
 630
 630
 630
 630
 630
 630
 630
 630
 630
 630
 630
 630
 630
 630
 630
 
 Ground Mounted Structural Beam Support, ___ Beam
 Ground Mounted Support, Pipe
 Ground Mounted Wooden Box Beam Support,_____Beam
 One-Way Support, ___ Post
 Street Name Sign Support, ___ Post
 Temporary Sign Support, ___ Post
 Breakaway Structural Beam Connection
 Triangular Slip Base Connection
 Overhead Sign Support, Type TC-___, Design___
 Combination Overhead Sign Support, Type TC-___, Design___
 Sign Attachment Assembly
 Luminaire Support Assembly
 Span Wire Sign Support, Type TC-17.10, Design ___
 Overpass Structure Mounted Sign Support, Type TC-___, Design___
 Sign Hanger Assembly, (Span Wire, Mast Arm)
 Sign Support Assembly, (Pole or Bridge Mounted)
 Sign, (Flat Sheet, Ground Mounted Extrusheet,
 Overhead Extrusheet, Temporary Overlay)
 Sign, Double-Faced, (Street Name, Mile Marker)
 Sign Erected, (Flat Sheet, Extrusheet, Temporary Overlay)
 Sign Backing Assembly
 Sign Post Reflector
 Covering of Sign
 Removal of Ground Mounted (Major) Sign and (Delivery, Storage,
 Reerection, or Disposal)
 Removal of Ground Mounted (Structural Beam, Post, Pipe,
 Wooden Box Beam) Support and (Delivery, Storage or Disposal)
 Removal of Overhead Mounted Sign and
 (Delivery, Storage, Reerection, or Disposal)
 Removal of Overhead Sign Support and
 (Delivery, Storage, Reerection, or Disposal), Type TC-___
 Removal of Overlay Sign
 
 ITEM 631 SIGN LIGHTING AND ELECTRICAL SIGNS
 631.01
 631.02
 631.03
 631.04
 631.05
 631.06
 631.07
 631.08
 631.09
 631.10
 631.11
 631.12
 631.13
 
 Description
 General
 Materials and Equipment
 Sign Service
 Signs Wired
 Disconnect Switch
 Luminaire
 Controls
 Electrical Signs
 Removal
 Inspection and Testing
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 631.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and installing sign lighting or electrical sign equipment,
 complete, tested, and ready for service.
 631.02
 General. Perform installations according to the National Electrical Safety Code, the National
 Electrical Code and local codes for the area of installation. Furnish overhead sign lighting and integrate electric
 power with roadway lighting circuits.
 Furnish shop drawings according to 625.06.
 Conform to the requirements of Supplement 1063 for the installation or testing of electrical items installed under
 631.08 and 631.09.
 Protect wire and cable by installing entirely within support structure interiors, enclosures, junction boxes, and
 rigid or flexible conduit. Ensure that the methods, materials, and locations of splicing and the methods of connecting
 and identifying wire and cable conform to Item 625, 725, and the plans. Furnish grounding systems according to
 625.16.
 Power service is furnished under Item 625.
 631.03
 Materials and Equipment. Furnish materials and equipment that are new, of first quality, of current
 design, and free from defects.
 Use electrical parts, wire, switches, and other elements of the installations that are of ample capacity to carry the
 required current without excessive heating or drop of potential.
 Ensure that each item of equipment bears a nameplate, indelible marking, or brand that identifies the type, model,
 catalog number, and manufacturer.
 Furnish materials conforming to the following:
 Ground rod ....................................................................................... 625.16
 Sealing, conduit ............................................................................... 625.12
 Cable and wire, 600-volt.................................................................. 725.02
 Conduit, rigid ................................................................................... 725.04
 Ballast .............................................................................................. 725.11
 Power service ................................................................................... 725.19
 Disconnect Switch .......................................................................... 725.19
 Switch Enclosure ............................................................................. 725.19
 Changeable message sign, electric type........................................... 731.03
 Internally illuminated fixed message sign ....................................... 731.05
 Sign flasher assembly ...................................................................... 731.06
 School speed limit sign assembly .................................................... 731.07
 Conduit, flexible .............................................................................. 731.08
 
 Timer with enclosure ....................................................................... 731.10
 631.04
 Sign Service. Sign service consists of all cable and other equipment to provide a complete electrical
 service from either an underground or overhead source to the disconnect switch.
 Route sign service cable from a pull box to the switch enclosure for overhead supported signs by means of
 underground conduit, foundation conduit ell, and the interior of the structural member supporting the enclosure.
 Route sign service for overpass structure mounted signs through underground and structure attached conduit
 terminating at a switch enclosure. Attach the conduit by 0.02-inch (0.5 mm) thick by 3/4-inch (19 mm) wide
 passivated stainless steel straps spaced at intervals of not more than 5 feet (1.5 m).
 Route sign service cable from a distribution system direct drop to the switch enclosure by means of a conduit
 riser with weatherhead. Form a drip loop into the cable. Use either a cast aluminum or galvanized ferrous metal
 weatherhead of a threaded design. Attach the conduit by straps as described in the previous paragraph.
 For sign service, use single conductor stranded copper. When the connection is to highway lighting distribution
 and circuit cable, use the same cable for sign service. In other applications, use sign service cable rated at 600 volts
 minimum and not smaller than 4 AWG.
 631.05
 Signs Wired. Ensure that signs wired complete the electrical system from the disconnect switch to
 the luminaires.
 Furnish continuous wiring from the disconnect switch to a junction box mounted on the sign support or overpass
 structure. Install junction box in a manner that allows sign removal as a unit by the disconnection of the wires and
 the removal of sign attachment hardware. Install a junction box for each sign.
 Furnish continuous wiring from the junction box to the first luminaire and between additional luminaires.
 Use wire rated at 600 volts, single conductor and not smaller than 10 AWG.
 Route wire on overhead sign supports from the disconnect switch enclosure through structural member interiors.
 Support wire hanging within the interior of steel vertical members by looping over the J-hook provided. After
 wiring in the disconnect switch enclosure, seal the nipple in the enclosure back with self-fusing high-dielectric
 insulating compound.
 Assemble flexible or rigid conduit on the sign structure or lighting support arms with condulets, and attach them
 to the structure by clamps located within 6 inches (150 mm) of each conduit end and separated by not more than
 24 inches (0.6 m).
 631.06
 Disconnect Switch. Install lighted signs with a disconnect switch within a lockable, weatherproof
 enclosure. For the switch, use a two-pole (minimum), single-throw, fused safety disconnect type, rated at 600 volts,
 30 amperes with the fuse size as specified. Furnish a solid neutral bar.
 For the enclosure, use stainless steel NEMA 250, Type 4. Furnish space for a chase nipple in the enclosure back.
 Field drill a hole through the enclosure and install the nipple. Ensure that enclosures also have a screened 1/4-inch
 (6 mm) diameter weep hole located in the bottom surface.
 Furnish each enclosure with at least one padlock. Use padlocks with a bronze or brass lock body and a corrosion
 protected steel shackle. Key all padlocks for a project alike, and obtain the appropriate master key number from
 the maintaining agency.
 When specified, furnish and install bracket assemblies on existing overhead sign supports or on concrete
 structures. Use bracket assemblies made of steel, galvanized according to 711.02, or aluminum.
 631.07
 
 Luminaire. Include a lamp of the wattage specified.
 
 Locate ballasts integral with the luminaire. Furnish weatherproof ballast housings made from corrosion resistant
 materials.
 631.08
 Controls. When specified, furnish photoelectric controls when sign lighting is fed by uncontrolled
 circuits.
 
 When specified, furnish and install the timer with enclosure to provide automatic school speed limit sign
 operation.
 631.09
 Electrical Signs. Furnish changeable message signs that conform to the Contract Documents. The
 pay item will specify if the display capabilities are limited message or unlimited message. The Contractor may use
 line units of these types as inserts in a panel sign, singly or grouped to provide a multiline sign. Hardware and
 software shall be complete to operate and maintain the sign.
 Furnish internally illuminated signs consisting of the single or double face type. The sign support is furnished
 under another pay item. Furnish suspended signs that hang plumb, are properly oriented, and locked in place.
 Furnish sign flasher assemblies consisting of a pair of flashing beacons. The sign, support, and foundation are
 furnished under other pay items.
 Furnish school speed limit sign assemblies that conform to the Contract Documents. School speed limit sign
 assemblies consist of a reflectorized SCHOOL SPEED LIMIT 20 DURING RESTRICTED HOURS (S5-H1) sign
 fitted with a pair of flashing beacons arranged above and below.
 631.10
 Removal. Carefully remove sign lighting equipment (such as luminaires, disconnect switches, or
 ballasts) and electrical signs. Removed items become the property of the Contractor.
 631.11
 Inspection and Testing. Ensure that the sign lighting systems and electrical signs meet all
 requirements of the ground, cable insulation, and performance tests specified in 625.19. Correct lamps, ballasts,
 and transformers that failed during the performance test by replacing the faulty component; the entire test period
 will not require restarting.
 During the performance test, make final adjustments to sign lateral position and aiming angles of luminaires to
 eliminate excessive brightness and glare, and to obtain optimum sign face reflected brightness, uniformity of
 illumination, visibility, and legibility, to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
 631.12
 Method of Measurement. All of the following methods of measurement include all hardware
 necessary to securely mount the associated item including angles, plates, tubes and channels.
 The Department will measure Sign Service by the number of complete units for each support, and will include
 conduit, conduit riser, weatherhead, fittings, cables, trenching, and backfilling.
 The Department will measure Sign Wired and Sign Wired, Overpass Structure by the number of complete units
 of wiring for each individual sign, and will include junction boxes, rigid or flexible conduit, condulets, clamps,
 wires, and connectors.
 The Department will measure Disconnect Switch with Enclosure by the number of each, and will include field
 drilling and padlocks.
 The Department will measure Switch Enclosure Mounting Bracket Assembly by the number of each, and will
 include two brackets and field drilling.
 The Department will measure Ballast and Photoelectric Control by the number of each separate item.
 The Department will measure Luminaire by the number of each, and will include lamps and luminaire attachment
 hardware.
 The Department will measure Changeable Message Sign by the number of each, and will include cabinet,
 external enclosures, conduit, electrical, electronic and auxiliary components, and remote control units to provide a
 fully functional unit.
 The Department will measure Internally Illuminated Fixed Message Sign by the number of each, and will include
 lamps and ballasts.
 The Department will measure Sign Flasher Assembly by the number of each, and will include beacons, flasher
 control unit with enclosure, and lamps.
 The Department will measure School Speed Limit Sign Assembly by the number of each, and will include sign,
 beacons, flasher control unit with enclosure, and lamps.
 
 The Department will measure Timer with Enclosure by the number of each, and will include field drilling and
 padlocks.
 The Department will measure Removal of sign lighting equipment or electrical signs by the number of each like
 items removed.
 631.13
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for grounding systems under Item 625.
 
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 631
 631
 631
 631
 631
 631
 631
 631
 631
 631
 631
 631
 
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 631
 631
 
 Each
 Each
 
 Sign Service
 Sign Wired
 Sign Wired, Overpass Structure
 Disconnect Switch with Enclosure, Type ___
 Switch Enclosure Mounting Bracket Assembly
 Ballast, Type ___
 Photoelectric Control
 Luminaire, Type ___, with ___-watt Lamp
 Changeable Message Sign, (Limited, Unlimited) Message
 Internally Illuminated Fixed Message Sign, Type ___
 Sign Flasher Assembly
 School Speed Limit Sign Assembly, ___ inches  ___ inches
 (___ mm  ___ mm)
 Timer with Enclosure
 Removal of (Luminaire, Disconnect Switch, Ballast, etc.)
 
 ITEM 632 TRAFFIC SIGNAL EQUIPMENT
 632.01
 632.02
 632.03
 632.04
 632.05
 632.06
 632.07
 632.08
 632.09
 632.10
 632.11
 632.14
 632.15
 632.16
 632.17
 632.18
 632.19
 632.20
 632.21
 632.22
 632.23
 632.24
 632.25
 632.26
 632.27
 632.28
 632.29
 632.30
 
 Description
 Contractor Personnel Requirements
 Materials and Equipment
 Shop Drawings
 General
 Vehicular Signal Head, Conventional
 Vehicular Signal Head, Optically Programmed
 Pedestrian Signal Head
 Pedestrian Pushbutton
 Loop Detector Unit
 Detector Loop
 Foundations
 Signal Support
 Strain Pole
 Wood Pole
 Down Guy Assembly
 Pedestal
 Conduit Riser
 Cable Support Assembly
 Messenger Wire
 Cable and Wire
 Power Service
 Covering of Vehicular and Pedestrian Signal Heads
 Removal of Traffic Signal Installation
 Reuse of Traffic Signal Equipment
 Testing
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 632.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and installing traffic signal equipment, complete and
 ready for service. This work also includes necessary excavation and backfill, disposal of discarded materials,
 restoration of disturbed facilities, and surfaces to a condition equal to that existing before the Work started, and
 electrical testing as specified.
 Pull boxes, conduits, ground rods, and cable splicing kits required for traffic signal equipment installations are
 specified in Item 625.
 632.02
 Contractor Personnel Requirements. Conform to the requirements of Supplement 1063 for the
 installation or testing of traffic signal equipment.
 632.03
 Materials and Equipment. Furnish new materials and equipment of first quality, of current design,
 and free from defects.
 Use electrical parts, wire, switches, and other elements of the installations capable of carrying the required current
 without excessive heating or drop of potential.
 Ensure that major items or assemblies of equipment bear a nameplate, indelible marking, or brand that identifies
 the type, model, catalog number, and manufacturer.
 Furnish materials and equipment conforming to:
 Concrete, Class QC Misc or QC 1 ................................................ 499, 511
 Steel*:
 Poles, supports, arms, appurtenances
 and anchor bases ..................... 730.02, 730.03, 730.04, 730.05, 730.06,
 
 ............................................................................ 730.07, 732.11, 732.12
 Pedestals ....................................................................................... 732.15
 Backplates .................................................................................... 732.22
 Hardware ...................................................................................... 730.08
 Stainless steel hardware ............................................................... 730.10
 Other Items:
 Conduit, rigid ................................................. 725.04, 725.051, 725.052
 Ground rod ................................................................................... 725.16
 Pull boxes .............................................. 725.06, 725.07, 725.08, 725.12
 Identifying tags or bands .............................................................. 725.02
 Signal heads .......................................... 732.01, 732.02, 732.03, 732.05
 Lamps ........................................................................................... 732.04
 Pushbuttons .................................................................................. 732.06
 Detectors ......................................................................... 732.07, 732.08
 Wood poles .................................................................................. 732.13
 Down guys ................................................................................... 732.14
 Conduit risers ............................................................................... 732.16
 Cable supports .............................................................................. 732.17
 Messenger wire ............................................................................ 732.18
 Cable and wire.............................................................................. 732.19
 Power service ............................................................................... 732.20
 Disconnect Switch with enclosure ............................................... 732.21
 Backplates ....................................................................................... 732.22
 Tether Wire ................................................................................ 732.185
 * Acceptance of materials and products is based on certified test data, furnished in triplicate, or on
 test results of samples according 106.04, as required by the Laboratory.
 632.04
 
 Shop Drawings. Furnish shop drawings according to 625.06.
 
 632.05
 General. Ensure that major items of traffic signal control equipment used in combination are
 compatible, interchangeable and, whenever feasible, provided by the same manufacturer or supplier. Perform work
 in compliance with applicable local laws and codes, the National Electrical Code, the National Electrical Safety
 Code, the Standard for Electrical Safety in the Workplace and OSHA.
 Ensure that the traffic control equipment installed in controller cabinets are shop prewired according to a wiring
 diagram that conforms to plan and specification requirements of the specific project and intersection, and show all
 wire harness and field connections required, with abbreviations according to Table 632.05-1. Furnish a neat and
 legibly drawn wiring diagram, reproduced on durable paper, and place two copies in a plastic envelope fastened to
 the inside of the controller cabinet.
 Identify cable and wire by tags or bands at pull boxes and controller cabinets, with size, material, and method of
 marking that conform to 725.02, except ensure that the identification on the tags or bands conforms to the wiring
 diagram with abbreviations according to Table 632.05-1. The Contractor may identify field wiring using an
 indelible pen on a plastic tag instead of embossed letters. Tags shall be a minimum of 1-inch diameter if round and
 1-inch by ½-inch if rectangular. Letters shall be clearly legible.
 Use spade terminals for wiring connected at signal heads and the wiring connected at terminal blocks within
 controller cabinets. However, for incoming power wiring, use either spade terminals or bared conductor wire
 connected to terminal points utilizing screw or spring applied clamping surfaces compatible with both cooper and
 aluminum wire and providing a positive grip. Neatly lash and fasten completed wiring to interiors with clamps
 and/or ties.
 
 TABLE 632.05-1 TABLE AND WIRE IDENTIFICATION
 Cable
 Ground
 Power (2 wire)1 120 volt
 Power (3 wire) 1 120/240 volt
 Neutral wire
 Phase A
 Phase 1
 Phase 1 northbound left turn lanes
 Phase A, pedestrian signal
 Overlap, phase A + C
 Overlap, phase 1 + 6
 Detector lead-in, phase A
 Detector lead-in, phase 1
 Detector lead-in, phase 1 northbound left turn lanes
 Detector lead-in, phase A (call type)
 Detector lead-in, phase 1
 (call type) northbound thru lanes
 Detector harness[1]
 Interconnect
 Pre-emption, fire
 Pre-emption, railroad
 [1]Place the tag next to the MS plug at the detector amplifier.
 
 Tag
 GND
 AC +AC- or ACN
 AC + 1, AC + 2
 AC- or ACN
 A
 1
  1 NBLT
  A PD
 A+C
 1+6
 DET A
 DET 1
 DET 1 NBLT
 DET A CALL
 DET 1 CALL
 NB-THRU
 DET A
 IC
 PE FIRE
 PE RR
 
 When constructing the traffic control system, cooperate with the agency supplying the electric service. Supply
 120/240 volt, single-phase, three-wire (grounded neutral) power to the disconnect switch.
 After completion of the 10-day performance test in compliance with 632.28 and until acceptance, the Contractor
 is responsible for the care and maintenance of traffic control equipment installed or reused as part of the Contract.
 Upon acceptance of the project, transfer to the Department all manufacturers’ guarantees or warranties covering
 installed electrical or mechanical equipment. Furnish two copies of wiring diagrams, service manuals, and
 instructions on installation and maintenance for each different type, model, or system of equipment used on the
 project.
 632.06
 Vehicular Signal Head, Conventional. Furnish heads in arrangements such that from one to a
 maximum of five sections assembled with the specified lens size, color, and circular or arrow configuration form
 a specific signal face. Mount signal faces alone as a one-way head when backplates are used.
 Install signals in a plumb condition, using a balance adjuster only if approved by the engineer. Fit heads mounted
 on mast arms, except those intended to be rigidly mounted, with a universal hanger allowing the head to swing in
 both longitudinal and transverse directions. Use drop pipes/extenders of suitable length only when necessary to
 bring the bottom of the signal heads to a proper roadway clearance. Drop pipes/extenders shall be kept as short as
 necessary on backplated signals. Use of drop pipes/extenders greater than 1.5 feet in length must be approved by
 the Engineer. Use disconnect hangers for suspended heads only when specified.
 Orient each signal face to its traffic approach, and lock faces in place by the serrated or other type device
 incorporated in signal housing and support hardware. Before closing serrations, apply a bead of Room-Temperature
 Vulcanizing (RTV) silicone to all serrated surfaces and then tighten. RTV silicone shall be white to facilitate visual
 inspection. On heads with dual concentric serrated rings, completely fill the space between the rings with RTV
 silicone.
 Install LED lamps in each section.
 
 Furnish backplates unless specified otherwise.
 632.07
 Vehicular Signal Head, Optically Programmed. Furnish heads of this type consisting totally of
 optically programmed sections unless an intermix of optically programmed and conventional sections is specified.
 Install approved LED light sources or lamps in each optically programmed section.
 Program each signal section according to the plan requirements. Upon completion of the project, deliver all
 programming tools and devices to the maintaining agency.
 Furnish backplates unless specified otherwise.
 632.08
 Pedestrian Signal Head. Furnish heads with the type of light source and symbol height specified.
 Orient each signal head to its crosswalk, and lock heads in place by the serrated or other type device incorporated
 in signal housing and support hardware. Close openings unused for mounting purposes with weatherproof caps.
 632.09
 Pedestrian Pushbutton. Properly orient and install pushbuttons on poles or pedestals. Service
 pushbuttons mounted on steel poles by wiring inside the poles. Furnish 3/4-inch (19 mm) diameter holes through
 the back of the housing and the pole wall, install a rubber grommet, and route wiring through until no external
 wiring is visible. Plug any unused conduit attachment holes. Attach the housing by machine or self-tapping screws
 in the housing back wall. Service pushbutton mounted on wooden poles through conduit. Furnish flat sheet
 pedestrian pushbutton signs in accordance with 630.04.
 632.10
 Loop Detector Unit. Install and tune detector units to their loops with the sensitivity set for optimum
 operation and any interference or cross talk eliminated between other detector units in the cabinet. Perform a field
 check to ensure that no extraneous detections are occurring by observing each detector unit’s operation to determine
 that a signal occurs only when a vehicle enters its associated loop. If actuations are observed when there is no
 vehicle in the loop, eliminate the extraneous detections. For any project using State or Federal funds, all stop line
 detection zones shall reliably detect motorcycles and bicycles, and all dilemma zone detectors shall reliably detect
 motorcycles.
 632.11
 Detector Loop. Saw slots in the pavement for installation of vehicle detector loop wire in the
 configuration, dimensions, and combinations required. Cut an extension from the loop to the pavement edge to
 allow wire routing to an adjacent pull box.
 Furnish slots 1/16 to 1/8-inch (1.6 to 3 mm) wider than the outside diameter of the loop wire or tubing. Ensure
 that the slot depth provides a covering of not less than 3/4-inch (19 mm) above the uppermost detector wire tubing
 after the loop installation is completed. Before installing loop detector wire, brush and blow all slots clean of loose
 material and completely dry. Install loop detector wire according to 632.23. Conform to all applicable state and
 local nuisance dust regulations, and OAC 3745-17-08 while saw cutting.
 Fill the slots completely with a flexible embedding sealant, listed on the ODOT QPL. Do not disturb slots until
 sealant has cured. Cured sealant shall be level with or higher than the pavement surface.
 For loop detector wire installations in new asphalt, the Contractor may saw slots and embed sealant in a
 subsurface course with subsequent covering by the surface course, subject to the Engineer’s approval.
 632.14
 Foundations. Locate support foundations, and stake with the proper elevation. If underground or
 overhead obstacles are encountered during stakeout, or to correct slope and subsurface difficulties, change
 foundation location and orientation with the approval of the Engineer. Ensure that the approved location provides
 a safe clearance from overhead power lines for construction operations, in compliance with applicable Codes. The
 Contractor is responsible for the correct location, elevation, and orientation for all poles and pedestals installed on
 the foundations.
 Excavate for foundations using an earth auger to specified dimensions according to 503.04. Exercise caution
 when excavating in areas of underground installations to avoid their disturbance or damage. When a cave-in occurs,
 excavate using casing, sleeving, or other methods, with the Engineer’s approval. If subsurface obstructions are
 encountered, remove the obstructions, or replace the excavated material and relocate the foundation, with the
 Engineer’s approval. If bedrock is encountered, the Contractor may reduce that portion of the specified foundation
 depth within the bedrock up to 50 percent. Perform all necessary dewatering of the excavation.
 
 Perform foundation concrete work according to Item 511, except that the loading restrictions in 511.14 are
 modified by this subsection. Place the concrete against undisturbed soil or compacted embankment. Form the top
 of the foundations to a nominal depth of 6 inches (150 mm) below the groundline. Place the concrete foundation,
 including formed top, in one continuous concrete pour.
 For foundations for anchor base type supports, provide the required reinforcing rods, and have anchor bolts and
 conduit ells accurately held by a template.
 Remove forms and templates once the concrete has hardened sufficiently so as not to be susceptible to damage.
 After 14 days, erect and load supports on anchor base foundations. The Contractor may erect and load supports
 after 7 days if the tests of two beam specimens of concrete yield an average modulus of rupture of not less than
 650 pounds per square inch (4.5 MPa).
 632.15
 Signal Support. Furnish supports with mast arms with the required pole and arm length, anchor bolt
 circle diameter, and anchor bolt size.
 Ensure that the combination signal supports with light pole extension provide for the attachment of a luminaire
 bracket arm. Adjust anchor base type supports with an initial rake so that when loaded the support poles assume an
 essentially vertical position.
 For support designs not specifically shown on the plans, demonstrate, to the Director’s satisfaction, that supports
 are structurally equivalent to the specified design.
 Do not use concrete grouting in the space between the foundation surface and support base.
 Conform to the requirements of AASHTO LTS-6 (Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs,
 Luminaires, and Traffic Signals, 2013)Section C.5.17.5.2.
 Do not erect signal supports unless at least one signal, sign or damping device approved by the Engineer is
 installed within 24 hours.
 632.16
 Strain Pole. Furnish strain poles for the attachment of messenger wire with the required pole length.
 Use anchor base type strain poles. Adjust anchor base type poles with the initial rake so that when loaded the poles
 assume an essentially vertical position.
 Ensure that the combination strain poles with light pole extension provide for the attachment of a luminaire
 bracket arm.
 Conform to the requirements of 630.06 for threaded fasteners, anchor bolts, anchor bolt nuts, and anaerobic
 adhesive.
 632.17
 Wood Pole. Set wood poles in holes excavated by an earth auger to a minimum depth of 6 feet (1.8
 m). Use an auger with a diameter approximately 4 inches (100 mm) greater than the pole butt. Hold poles with
 initial rake, up to a maximum of 12 inches (0.3 m), while tamping backfill into place, so that under messenger wire
 tensioning conforming to 632.22, the poles assume an essentially vertical position. Furnish backfill material no
 greater than 1 inch (25 mm) in size, and thoroughly tamp material in lifts not exceeding 6 inches (150 mm), to the
 satisfaction of the Engineer. If concrete embedment is specified, brace the poles until the concrete has set.
 Liberally coat field holes bored for the attachment of messenger or guy wire with approved creosote base paint
 and fitted with 5/8-inch (16 mm) thimble-eye through-bolts and 3-inch (75 mm) washers. Securely attach and
 protect ground wire furnished as part of another work item with a wood or plastic molding for a minimum distance
 of 10 feet (3 m) above groundline.
 632.18
 Down Guy Assembly. Install and tension guy assemblies before erecting signals such that they will
 resist the major portion of the horizontal loading caused by loading of the messenger wire.
 632.19
 Pedestal. Furnish pedestals for the support of traffic control equipment with a cast or plate steel base,
 unless a transformer type base is specified.
 632.20
 Conduit Riser. Attach risers to poles to provide a wiring raceway and include a weatherhead, conduit,
 necessary fittings, and pole attached clamps. Attach risers to poles by clamps spaced at intervals not exceeding 5
 feet (1.5 m). Paint conduit risers mounted on painted poles to match the poles.
 
 632.21
 Cable Support Assembly. Use cable support assemblies to eliminate strain on cables, or groups of
 cables up to a maximum of four, entering the interior of poles through a weatherhead or mast arm. If required,
 include a length of messenger wire forming a sling with ends formed of lapped wire, thimbles, and clamps as part
 of the assembly.
 632.22
 Messenger Wire. Arrange messenger wire with accessories between two or more poles to provide
 support and attachment for traffic control equipment. Accessories used with messenger wire include bullrings,
 thimbles, preformed guy grip dead ends, and three bolt clamps. Furnish bullrings at messenger wire network
 corners. Use thimbles to attach messenger wire to the shackles of strain pole clamps and bullrings.
 Adjust the length of the messenger wire under the load of traffic control equipment so the sag at the lowest point
 is not greater than 5 percent or less than 3 percent of the span. Attach signal cable to messenger wire with lengths
 of preformed helical lashing rod that are of a proper internal diameter to tightly secure the cable to the messenger
 wire. Attach interconnect cable with preformed lashing rod or spinning wire.
 632.225 Tether Wire. Arrange tether wire with accessories to stabilize signal heads and prevent excessive
 swinging and twisting. Install shim washers on hanger pin adjacent to wire entry to prevent any twisting of the head
 on the hanger. Accessories included with tether wire shall be those shown in the appropriate Plan Insert Sheet or
 Standard Construction Drawing and include pole clamps, anchor shackles, S-hooks yielding element, thimbles,
 turnbuckles, guy grips, wire rope clips, backup ties, lock wire, safety tie wires, and signal head tether anchors and
 extenders.
 Adjust the tether span to be horizontal on simple spans. On all spans, install tether horizontally and tighten with
 turnbuckles. Bull Rings will be used at all internal corners of the tether span. Safety ties shall be installed at all
 yielding (S-hook) locations to prevent the span end from dropping into the roadway if the S-hook opens. No
 electrical or communication cables of any kind shall be attached to the tether wire. No signs or other devices shall
 be suspended from or attached to the tether wire. Turnbuckles shall be tightened by hand to achieve the tether wire
 tension shown in appropriate Plan Insert Sheet or Standard Construction Drawing. Measure tether tension with
 Loos & Co., Inc. Model PT-2 or approved equal. Record tension test results and present written copy to the
 Engineer.
 632.23
 Cable and Wire. Fashion cable at traffic signal equipment weatherhead entrance fittings into a drip
 loop that extends at least 6 inches (150 mm) below the entrance. Do not allow the cable to chafe on the equipment.
 Support cables installed in strain poles and signal supports with cable support assemblies according to 632.21.
 Do not use splices in any cable or wire, except at the following locations:
 A. At the junction of detector wire and lead-in cable.
 B. At the junction of power cable and the power supply source or service cable.
 C. On long lengths of interconnect or service cable.
 For splices allowed in aerial installations, accomplish splicing in weather tight splice enclosures. For splices
 allowed in underground installations, accomplish splicing in pull boxes or poles where the splice is encapsulated
 with poured waterproof epoxy insulation according to 725.15.
 Install signal cable between signal heads and controller cabinets. Signal cables shall not be stripped beyond a
 length necessary to attach individual conductors within the signal head . The jacket shall extend into the signal
 head enclosure. Install interconnect cable between controller cabinets of different intersections. Route signal and
 interconnect cable by aerial installation supported by messenger wire or within underground conduit. If specified,
 use aerial self-supporting integral messenger type interconnect cable with a figure “8” cross-section and include
 pole clamps and splice enclosures. Ground the supporting messenger wire of interconnect cable.
 Provide loop detector wire consisting of detector wire inserted into flexible plastic tubing. Use of factorymanufactured preformed loops is permitted. Ensure that the tubing encases the wire continuously from the splice
 at the lead-in cable, through the entire loop turns, and back to the splice. Install loop detector wire in sawn roadway
 slots forming loops according to 632.11. Furnish the required number of turns of wire installed for each loop, and
 push the wire carefully into the slots with a blunt tool to avoid damaging the tubing. Run the wire continuously
 
 around the loop perimeter and through a slot leading to the pavement edge and by underground conduit to a roadside
 pull box or pole with 5 feet (1.5 m) at each end for slack and splice. Uniformly twist wires and tubing installed in
 the conduit to the splice with lead-in cable at 3 to 5 turns per foot (10 to 16 turns per meter). Splice the loop ends
 to lead-in cable, which is connected to the controller cabinet. Join the wires by a mutually twisted in-line splice,
 rosin core soldered, and wrapped in vinyl or equivalent electrical tape, and encapsulate wires with an approved
 poured waterproof epoxy insulated splice according to 725.15. Extend and seal the tubing ends into the poured
 epoxy splice. Also, solder crimped terminals to the conductors and the shield for connections inside the cabinet.
 Install power cable from the power supply source to the controller cabinet. If multi-conductor power cable is
 specified, the Contractor may substitute multiple single conductors.
 Install service cable aerially from a remote power source to the vicinity of the controller cabinet with the support
 cable functioning as the electrical neutral. Furnish connections used with aluminum power or service cable of an
 approved type for aluminum to aluminum or aluminum to copper connections, and insulate connections with an
 approved vinyl mastic pad.
 632.24
 Power Service. Furnish and install all equipment necessary to provide complete electrical service to
 each signal installation as shown on the plans. Make all necessary arrangements with the local electrical power
 company for connections to establish electrical service. Charges made by the power company for establishing of
 the account, extension of company facilities, connection of customer equipment to the power company facilities
 and energy will be borne by the maintaining agency.
 Power service consists of equipment to provide a pole attached wiring raceway and disconnect switch for use
 with power cable routed from the service entrance to the controller cabinet. The power service installation includes
 a weatherhead, conduit and fittings, a disconnect switch with enclosure, meter base and attachment clamps. It also
 includes the intersection lighting disconnect and associated equipment when intersection lighting is present.
 Bend the conduit away from the pole at the top and bottom of the riser to allow the conduit to enter straight into
 the enclosure or meter base hub, and to provide space for the weatherhead when the riser is pulled tight against the
 pole. Furnish watertight conduit connections between the meter base and enclosure by using conduit hubs listed on
 the enclosure UL label.
 Furnish each enclosure with at least one padlock. Use padlocks with a bronze or brass lock body and a corrosion
 protected steel shackle. Obtain the appropriate master key number from the maintaining agency.
 Paint conduit risers mounted on painted poles to match the poles.
 632.25
 Covering of Vehicular and Pedestrian Signal Heads. Cover vehicular signal heads if erected at
 intersections where traffic is maintained before energizing the signals. Cover pedestrian signal heads when
 specified in the plans. Use a sturdy opaque covering material specifically made for use with traffic signals, and
 ensure that the color of the cover is different than the signal head, tan or beige, so that it is clear to drivers and
 pedestrians the heads are covered, not dark, Use a method of covering and cover attachment and materials as
 approved by the Engineer. Covers are to be free of text, pictures, or any type of advertising. . Maintain covers, and
 remove them when directed by the Engineer.
 Completely cover the entire signal head, including backplates with reflective borders in such a manner that the
 reflective borders are not visible.
 632.26
 Removal of Traffic Signal Installation. Remove signal heads, cable, messenger wire, strain poles,
 cabinet, controller, or other incidental items required by the Engineer. Remove support foundations to at least 1foot (0.3 m) below subgrade or finished groundline. Backfill, restore surfaces, and dispose of surplus material
 according to 105.16, 105.17 and 611.15. Store removed items on the project for salvage by the maintaining agency,
 or reuse removed items as part of a new installation on the project under another item of work. Dispose of all items
 not designated for salvage or reuse. As specified in 614.03, do not remove signals until a new signal system or a
 temporary traffic control method approved by the Engineer is in operation. Suitably protect stored equipment.
 632.27
 Reuse of Traffic Signal Equipment. Reinstall or re-erect specified traffic equipment, removed from
 existing signal installations within the project. Clean and restore reused equipment to an operating condition.
 Furnish all additional hardware and incidentals necessary to allow reuse of the equipment.
 
 632.28
 Testing.
 A. General. Furnish all personnel and equipment required to successfully perform the following tests, and furnish
 to the Engineer six certified copies of complete test records, test reporting forms supplied by the Engineer, or
 alternate certification approved by the Engineer.
 B. Ground Test. Measure each ground rod for earth resistance according to 625.19, except that measurements
 are not necessary immediately after installation.
 C. Short-Circuit Test. Before performing any cable insulation tests or performance test, perform a short-circuit
 test with a volt-ohmmeter or other approved instrument. Conduct short-circuit tests with electrical loads, power
 sources, equipment grounds, and earth grounds disconnected. Test signal cable routed to signal heads with
 connections made to lamp sockets without lamps installed. Measure each conductor against every other conductor
 and ground to ensure that no short-circuits, cross-circuits, or other improper connections exist. Ensure that
 continuity does not exist between any conductor and another conductor including ground.
 D. Circuit Continuity Test. Temporarily jumper each circuit branch at its termination and the temporarily looped
 circuit measured for continuity to ensure that no open circuits exist, that the circuit branch is according to plan, that
 no high resistance connections exist, and that each circuit is properly identified. Test the lead-in cable for loop
 detector wire before and after splicing the cable to the loop wire. As an alternative, perform the circuit continuity
 testing of signal head cable by applying 120 volts to each outgoing circuit and observing that only the proper lamps
 are lighted.
 E. Cable Insulation Test. Ensure that the insulation resistance measured to ground is not less than 10 megohms
 for each conductor of cable or wire terminating at the controller cabinet. Perform insulation testing with all
 conductors disconnected from their points on the terminal blocks. Measure insulation resistance for the wire of
 roadway loops after the embedding of the wire with sealant in slots. Include a list of the resistance readings for
 each conductor in the test results. After completing the cable insulation test, connect all cabinet wiring according
 to the wiring diagram. Demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Engineer that all circuits are continuous and operating
 correctly with freedom from shorts, crosses, and unintentional grounds.
 F. Functional Test. Before the 10-day performance test begins, make the following checks and demonstrate to
 the Engineer that the system is ready for the performance test. Ensure that the incoming AC voltage is a nominal
 120 volts. If the supplied voltage under load is less than 100 or more than 130 VAC, contact the power company
 to arrange correction. Ensure that the cabinet ventilating fan, fan thermostat, and convenience outlet with lamp is
 operational. Verify correct timing settings on the controller as shown on the plans. Check all cabinet switches
 including the power on/off switch and flash switch. Check all controller functions to verify correct operation. Check
 the detector units to determine which pavement loop is associated with which detector unit. Check the visual call
 strength indication of detector units to determine that each vehicle class (truck, car, motorcycle, and bicycle)
 entering sensor areas is detected on the associated detector unit and that no extraneous calls occur when the sensor
 area is vacant. Occasional extraneous calls may be permitted by the Engineer if necessary to assure detection of
 small vehicle targets (bicycles and motorcycles). Check the flash switch to verify transfer of signal operation to
 flash and return to stop-and-go. Check the conflict monitor to verify that it is not activated by normal signal
 operations or by the manipulation of cabinet switches. If the monitor is activated, determine the cause of the
 problem and make appropriate changes and adjustments before beginning the performance test. Test the conflict
 monitor by artificially causing a number of different conflicting indications, and verify that at each test the monitor
 causes the signals to begin flashing and places the controller in a “stop timing” mode. Obtain artificial causation
 either by touching a jumper wire between two conflicting load switch outputs or by other methods approved by the
 Engineer. Ensure that the signal flashes when the monitor is disconnected.
 G. Performance Test. At least 7 days before the performance test begins, notify the Engineer of the starting date.
 The Engineer will notify the maintaining agency. Before acceptance, operate the traffic control system continuously
 for 10 consecutive days without major malfunction or failure. Immediately replace or repair minor failures (such
 as lamps, a single detector unit, or an individual signal head, etc.) that do not cause restart of the test. Major
 malfunctions or failures (such as a master or local controller, interconnect equipment, etc.) will cause termination
 of the test and, after replacement or repair, the beginning of a new 10-day test. Monitor items that have been
 
 repaired or that are replacements for a 10-day period to provide assurance of their reliability. Record, for inclusion
 in the test result, the method and date of correction of each fault, and the beginning and end of the test.
 632.29
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Vehicular Signal Head and Pedestrian
 Signal Head by the number of complete units, and will include all support or mounting hardware, disconnect
 hangers, closure caps, dimmers, and lamps as required. Optically programmed heads shall include programming.
 For programming purposes, 8-inch (200 mm) programmed heads shall include one extender tool per project.
 The Department will measure Pedestrian Pushbutton by the number of individual units, and will include
 pedestrian pushbutton signs.
 The Department will measure Loop Detector Unit by the number of individual units, adjusted and tuned, and
 will include a wiring harness. If multi-channel detector units are used, the Department will consider each channel
 as an individual detector unit up to the number of units specified.
 The Department will measure tether wire by the number of feet (meters) in place, and will include all necessary
 accessories such as pole clamps, safety tie clamps, anchor shackles, S-hooks yielding element, thimbles,
 turnbuckles, guy grips, wire rope clips, lock wire, safety tie wire, lead sheet, and signal head tether anchors and
 extenders in accordance with the applicable Plan Insert Sheet or Standard Construction Drawing. The Department
 will measure from pole center to pole center, or pole center to bullring, or bullring to bullring. The Department will
 not measure any length of tether wire for attachment to poles or bullrings by bending, lapping or wrapping.
 The Department will measure Detector Loop by the number of complete detector loops installed in the
 pavement, and will include pavement cutting, loop detector wire with tubing in place, application of sealant,
 conduit, trenching, backfilling, and surface restoration from the edge of pavement to the pull box.
 The Department will measure Strain Pole Foundation, Signal Support Foundation, and Pedestal Foundation by
 the number of complete units, and will include excavation, dewatering, sleeving, casing, reinforcing steel, concrete,
 backfilling, disposal of surplus excavation, and installation only of anchor bolts and conduit ells.
 The Department will measure Signal Support, Combination Signal Support, Strain Pole, Combination Strain
 Pole, Wood Pole, and Pedestal by the number of complete units of each, and will include pole arms, weather-heads
 and blind half couplings, anchor bolts and conduit ells furnished for foundations. The Department will measure the
 Luminaire Bracket Arm for each bracket arm for Combination Signal Supports and Combination Strain Poles. For
 combination strain poles, the luminaire bracket arm will be a separate item. For combination signal supports, the
 luminaire bracket arm will be a separate item.
 The Department will measure Down Guy by the number of individual units, and will include messenger wire,
 pole clamp or thru-bolt, washer, clamps, guy grips, insulator, guy guard, and anchor.
 The Department will measure Conduit Riser by the number of complete units, and will include weatherhead,
 conduit, fittings, clamps, and hardware.
 The Department will measure Messenger Wire by the number of feet (meters) in place, and will include all
 necessary accessories such as, grips, thimbles, clamps, bullrings, and lashing rod. The Department will measure
 from pole center to pole center, or pole center to bullring, or bullring to bullring. The Department will not measure
 any length of messenger wire for attachment to poles, or bullrings by bending, lapping, or wrapping.
 The Department will measure Signal Cable, Interconnect Cable, Loop Detector Lead-In Cable, Power Cable, and
 Service Cable by the number of feet (meters) in place. Cable inside of poles shall include cable support assemblies.
 Aerial cable shall include pole attachment hardware, splices, splice enclosures, and ground connection. Lead-in
 cable shall include poured epoxy insulated splices. The Department will measure: (1) horizontally from center-tocenter of pull boxes, poles, cabinets, power sources, and signal heads with an additional allowance of 5 feet (1.5
 m) at each pull box and terminating points for slack and connections; and (2) vertically between pole or conduit
 outlets. If single-conductor power cable is substituted for multi-conductor cable, the Department will measure
 required length of multi-conductor cable.
 The Department will measure Power Service by the number of complete units, and will include weatherhead,
 conduit, fittings, clamps and other necessary hardware, installation of meter base, ground wire connection, and
 disconnect switch(es) with enclosure and padlock.
 
 The Department will measure Covering of Vehicular Signal Head and Covering of Pedestrian Signal Head by
 the number of individual signal heads covered, and will include materials and labor to erect, maintain, and remove
 the covering.
 The Department will measure Removal of Traffic Signal Installation by the number of installations removed,
 and will include storage when required.
 The Department will measure Removal of (Item) and (Storage or Reerection) by the number of specific traffic
 signal installation parts (such as a signal head, controller unit, or pole) removed, and will include storage when
 required.
 The Department will measure Reuse of (Item) by the number of traffic signal equipment items reused, and will
 include cleaning, restoring, and relamping.
 632.30
 
 Basis of Payment. The costs to arrange service by the supply agency are included under Power Cable.
 
 The costs of personnel, materials, equipment, electrical energy, and incidentals required to conduct performance
 tests are included under the contract unit price for the respective items tested.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 632
 
 Each
 
 632
 
 Each
 
 Vehicular Signal Head, (Yellow or Black), (Aluminum or Polycarbonate),
 ___ Section ___ inch (___ mm) Lens (with Backplate)
 Vehicular Signal Head, Optically Programmed, (Yellow or Black),
 (Aluminum or Polycarbonate), ___-Section, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Lens, (with Backplate)
 
 632
 
 Each
 
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 632
 
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 Pedestrian Signal Head, (Aluminum or Polycarbonate) (Countdown),
 Type ___
 Pedestrian Pushbutton
 Loop Detector Unit
 Detector Loop
 Strain Pole Foundation
 Signal Support Foundation
 Pedestal Foundation
 Signal Support, Type TC-___, Design ___
 Combination Signal Support, Type TC-___, Design ___
 Strain Pole, Type TC-___, Design ___
 Combination Strain Pole, Type TC-___, Design ___
 Wood Pole, Class ___,(Length)___ feet (___ m)
 Down Guy
 Pedestal, (Length) ___ feet (___ m)
 Pedestal, (Length) ___ feet(___m),Transformer Base
 Conduit Riser, ___ inch (___ mm) Dia.
 Messenger Wire, (No.) Strand ___ inch (___ mm) Dia., with Accessories
 Signal Cable, ___Conductor, ___ AWG
 Interconnect Cable, ___- Conductor, ___ AWG
 Interconnect Cable, Integral Messenger Wire Type, ___
 -Conductor, ___ AWG
 Loop Detector Lead-In Cable
 Power Cable, ___Conductor, ___ AWG
 Service Cable, ___- Conductor, ___ AWG
 Power Service
 Covering of Vehicular Signal Head
 Covering of Pedestrian Signal Head
 
 632
 632
 632
 632
 
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 
 Removal of Traffic Signal Installation
 Removal of (Item) and (Storage Or Reerection)
 Reuse of (Item)
 Tether Wire, with Accessories
 
 ITEM 633 TRAFFIC SIGNAL CONTROLLERS
 633.01
 633.02
 633.03
 633.04
 633.05
 633.06
 633.07
 633.08
 633.10
 633.11
 633.12
 633.13
 633.14
 633.15
 633.16
 633.18
 633.19
 633.20
 
 Description
 Contractor Personnel Requirements
 Materials and Equipment
 Shop Drawings
 General
 Testing and Prequalification
 Controllers
 Cabinets
 Foundations
 Controller Work Pad
 Flasher Controller
 Controller, Master, Traffic Responsive
 Centrally Controlled Arterial Traffic Signal System
 Communications
 Training
 Uninterruptible Power Supply
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 633.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and installing traffic signal control equipment,
 including controllers, cabinets, auxiliary equipment, and specified accessories, completely wired, at the locations
 shown on the plans and ready for service.
 633.02
 Contractor Personnel Requirements. Conform to the requirements of Supplement 1063 for the
 installation or testing of traffic signal equipment.
 633.03
 Materials and Equipment. . Furnish new materials and equipment of first quality, of current design,
 and free from defects. For warranted items, “new” items shall have a manufacturing date (determined by serial
 number) within one (1) year of the date of shipment to the project as determined by the required warranty decal.
 Use electrical parts, wire, switches, and other elements of the installation capable of carrying the required current
 without excessive heating or drop of potential.
 Ensure that each item of equipment bears a nameplate, indelible marking, or brand that identifies the type, model,
 catalog number, and manufacturer. Use equipment conforming to the types, models, and systems specified.
 Furnish material and equipment conforming to:
 Concrete
 (cabinet foundations and work pads) QC Misc or QC 1 .......... 499, 511
 Conduit .............................................................. 725.04, 725.051, 725.052
 Controller unit .................................................................................. 733.02
 Cabinet and auxiliary equipment ..................................................... 733.03
 Cabinet riser ..................................................................................... 733.04
 Flasher controller ............................................................................. 733.05
 Controller, master, traffic responsive .............................................. 733.06
 Remote monitoring station .............................................................. 733.07
 Uninterruptible Power Supply ......................................................... 733.09
 633.04
 Shop Drawings. Furnish shop drawings according to 625.06.
 633.05
 General. Ensure that major items of traffic signal control equipment used in combination are
 compatible, interchangeable, and, whenever feasible, provided by the same manufacturer or supplier.
 Ensure that controller cabinets are shop prewired according to 632.05.
 
 Before starting installation, furnish to the Engineer, two copies of each cabinet wiring diagram, service manuals,
 and installation and maintenance instructions for each installation, including all components and interconnections.
 Supply one additional copy of the cabinet wiring diagrams in a clear plastic pouch fastened to the inside of the
 controller door. Before beginning the 10-day performance test, replace or modify these documents as necessary to
 reflect current conditions. Upon completion of the work and before its acceptance, replace or modify the documents
 as necessary.
 Transfer manufacturers’ guarantees or warranties on all installed traffic signal control equipment to the
 maintaining agency upon completion and acceptance of the project.
 If required by the plans to install equipment furnished by others, store and care of the equipment upon receipt.
 633.06
 Testing and Prequalification. For all traffic control equipment, perform functional tests and a 10day performance test according to 632.28. Do not clear conflict monitor logs during the 10-day test. Ensure that
 logs note power-up to start the test and all events until the test is complete. Restart the test upon correcting a noted
 event. Notify the Engineer at least 3 days before beginning the 10-day performance test. The Engineer will notify
 the maintaining agency of the beginning of the test. Ensure that the following testing and prequalification
 requirements are met:
 A. For traffic control equipment required by this specification to meet NEMA Standards Publication TS-1 or TS2, conform to the following:
 1. Furnish a certified test report indicating compliance to all requirements of NEMA Standards Publication
 TS-1 or TS-2 as applicable.
 2. Furnish the name and location of the laboratory testing facility as well as the identification of the principal
 personnel who conducted the equipment testing and a summary of their qualifications.
 3. Ensure that the laboratory provides Department representatives access to those parts of the laboratory
 where the testing was done.
 4.
 
 Upon request, furnish a copy of the actual test data results for review and analysis.
 
 B. For traffic control equipment required by this specification to meet CalTrans specifications, use a product or
 manufacturer as stated in this specification that is listed on the CalTrans Qualified Products List or applicable
 ODOT Qualified Product List.
 C. For Type 170/2070 controllers, use conflict monitors listed on the Department’s prequalified list as specified
 in Supplement 1076.
 633.07
 Controllers. Install controller units, consisting of the timing unit, software, and signal timing, into
 the specified type of prewired cabinet.
 Program controller units as shown on the plans unless otherwise directed by the Engineer. If the plan timing data
 or the supplemental timing data supplied by the Engineer does not exactly fulfill the timing requirements of the
 installed equipment, notify, in writing, the Engineer of the problem and identify the discrepancies. The Engineer
 will consult with the maintaining agency and notify the Contractor within 2 weeks. After programming, briefly
 operate controllers, with the signals turned off by means of the signal shutdown switch, to ensure that operation is
 reasonable and conforms to the plans.
 If the plans show two or more intersection controllers operated in a progressive signal system, coordinate signals
 by relating the various controller cycle start times to a zero time base, or other cycle start time at an adjacent
 signalized intersection. Ensure that the controller unit software provides coordination capability to allow associated
 controllers to be operated within the progressive traffic system. Coordination equipment shall supervise the
 operation of its associated controller by causing the end of certain phases and the beginning of the following phases
 to occur at set points. Program coordination timing according to the coordination timing data shown on the plans
 or provided by the Engineer.
 633.08
 Cabinets. Mount cabinets by attaching to pedestal or pole or by installing on a concrete foundation.
 Arrange foundation mounted cabinets so that control equipment, terminal blocks, or shelves are no closer than 6
 
 inches (150 mm) to the top of the foundation. Attach pole or pedestal mounted controller cabinets at a height that
 allows convenient access to all controller components by service personnel.
 Make field connections for the conductors of signal cable, power cable, interconnect cable, and detector lead-in
 cable. Neatly arrange and route all field wiring to the appropriate terminal blocks. Identify field wiring according
 to 725.02 except mark with either indelible pen or embossed letters.
 Except for power wiring, fit field wiring entering the cabinet with spade terminals to ensure a good connection.
 For incoming power wiring, either use spade terminals or connect the bare conductor wire to terminal points
 utilizing screw or spring applied clamping surfaces compatible with either copper or aluminum wire and providing
 a positive grip. After completing field wiring, seal the conduit entering the cabinet in an approved manner with a
 removable sealing compound (no foam sealants), or a molded plastic or rubber device that is compatible with the
 cable jacket, the insulation, and the conduit material.
 For foundation mounted cabinets, seal the joint between the controller cabinet and the foundation with a quality,
 clear silicone caulk.
 When future phasing configurations are shown on the plans, furnish the cabinet and hardware to accommodate
 the future operation through only the future addition of load switches and detector units.
 Provide a riser with each ground mounted cabinet unless it is a NEMA Size 7 cabinet. Cabinet risers provide an
 extension of the cabinet between the ground mounted cabinet and the foundation. Bolt the riser to the foundation,
 and bolt the cabinet to the riser.
 Use a type (size and shape) of cabinet riser compatible with the type of controller cabinets specified for the
 project.
 Seal the joints between the controller cabinet and cabinet riser, and between the cabinet riser and foundation with
 a quality, clear silicone caulk.
 633.10
 Foundations. Construct foundations for controller cabinets according to 632.14, except that
 excavation by earth auger is not required and the foundation may be mass concrete that does not require reinforcing
 steel. Hold anchor bolts, conduit ells, and similar appurtenances in the proper position until the concrete has set.
 Pour foundations separately from controller work pad.
 633.11
 Controller Work Pad. Construct controller work pad according to 608.03, except that transverse
 joints are not required. Provide the top of the pad nominally 1 inch (25 mm) above ground line. If the controller
 cabinet has both front and back doors, the work pad shall encompass three sides of the cabinet foundation to include
 the non-hinged cabinet door side of the foundation. Pour controller work pad separately from foundations.
 633.12
 Flasher Controller. Furnish and install a flasher controller with cabinet and mounting hardware
 when indicated. The flasher controller is for the operation of flashing beacons.
 633.13
 Controller, Master, Traffic Responsive. The traffic responsive master controller supervises and
 controls the operation of an interconnected system of local controllers. Ensure that the master controller is able to
 communicate with a remote monitoring station. Locate this master controller in a local intersection controller
 cabinet unless otherwise shown on plans. If the local controller cabinet size is not sufficient to accommodate the
 master controller and its associated wiring, furnish the proper size cabinet for the local intersection controller to
 house the local controller, master controller, modem, and all auxiliary devices.
 633.14
 Centrally Controlled Arterial Traffic Signal System. Install this construction item on signal
 systems with a minimum of fifty (50) networked signalized intersections in jurisdictions who employ dedicated
 engineering and/or traffic signal operations staff. Install, test, and operate the station, consisting of computer
 equipment, communications equipment, and central control software, in one or more locations in the maintaining
 agency’s facilities as shown in the plans. The maintaining agency shall furnish communications at these stations.
 633.15
 Communications. Furnish a broadband cellular modem from the Department’s Traffic Authorized
 Product list. The Maintaining Agency will arrange for the cellular service and device activation.
 
 Furnish all necessary cabling to interface with the traffic signal controller. Furnish an antenna that provides RSSI
 (Received Signal Strength Indication) or no less than -95 dBm. Provide all necessary cabling and surge suppression
 to connect the antenna to the modem.
 633.16
 Training. Furnish training for the traffic signal control equipment installed as part of the Contract.
 Furnish all handouts, manuals, and product information. For the training, use the same models of equipment
 furnished for the project. The maintaining agency shall furnish the facilities in which the training will take place.
 Furnish all media and test equipment needed to present the training. Unless otherwise shown on the plans, the
 minimum training requirements are as follows:
 A. Sixteen hours on how to operate the system, analyze system performance, and revise critical operating
 parameters.
 B. Eight hours of field trouble-shooting and maintenance procedures.
 C. Eight hours of follow-up training after the maintaining agency has operated the system for a minimum period
 of 30 days.
 D. Four hours for preemption device training if emergency vehicle preemption is shown on the plans.
 633.18
 Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS). Furnish and install a Battery Backup UPS system to provide
 uninterruptible, reliable, emergency power to a traffic signal intersection in the event of a power failure or
 interruption. The transfer from utility power to battery power shall not interfere with the normal operations of the
 traffic controller, conflict monitor or any other peripheral devices within the traffic control system. The system
 shall be self-contained including all UPS hardware, the required number of batteries and its own separate ventilated
 enclosure. A ground rod shall be provided for free-standing UPS cabinets.
 Provide a riser with each cabinet. Cabinet risers provide an extension of the cabinet between the ground mounted
 cabinet and the foundation. Bolt the riser to the foundation, and bolt the cabinet to the riser.
 Use a type (size and shape) of cabinet riser compatible with the type of controller cabinets specified for the
 project.
 Seal the joints between the controller cabinet and cabinet riser, and between the cabinet riser and foundation with
 a quality, clear silicone caulk.
 633.19
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Controller Unit, Type ___, with Cabinet,
 Type ___ by the number of each complete unit, and will include controller unit with software, all required auxiliary
 equipment, loop detector units, and a prewired cabinet, with all items completely wired and tested. Ground mounted
 cabinets will include anchor bolts and conduit ells for installation in the foundation. Pole mounted cabinets will
 include pole mounting hardware.
 The Department will measure Controller Unit, Type ___ by the number of each controller timing unit with
 software, and will include any signal timing programming or installation. The Department will measure Controller
 Unit, Type ___, Furnish Only by the number of each controller timing unit with software, and will exclude any
 signal timing programming or installation.
 The Department will measure Cabinet, Type ___ by the number of each complete prewired cabinet installed, and
 will include all required auxiliary equipment and loop detector units (excluding controller unit), with all items
 completely wired and tested. Ground mounted cabinets will include anchor bolts and conduit ells for installation
 in the foundation. Pole mounted cabinets will include pole mounting hardware. The Department will measure
 Cabinet, Type ___, Furnish Only by the number of each complete prewired cabinet, and will include pole mounting
 hardware, riser and anchor bolts, but will exclude installation, controller unit, and detector units.
 The Department will measure Cabinet Foundation and Controller Work Pad by the number of each complete
 unit, in place, complete and accepted, and will include excavation, concrete, backfilling, and disposal of surplus
 excavation. Cabinet foundation will include preformed joint filler between the foundation and adjacent paved areas.
 One complete Controller Work Pad unit may encompass several sides of a controller cabinet installation.
 The Department will measure Flasher Controller by the number of each complete flasher assembly with cabinet
 installed and tested.
 
 The Department will measure Controller, Master, Traffic Responsive by the number of each unit, and will include
 installation, signal system software, programming, and any increase in cabinet size to house the master controller
 in the local intersection cabinet. The Department will measure Controller, Master, Traffic Responsive, Furnish
 Only by the number of each unit, and will include software, but exclude any programming or installation.
 The Department will measure Centrally Controlled Arterial Traffic Signal System by the number of each location
 shown on the plans, and will include all equipment, testing, and software.
 The Department will measure Communication service by the number of each location shown on the plans for
 furnishing Communication service to an intersection controller, and will include the modem, conduit, trenching,
 and wiring.
 The Department will measure Training on a lump sum basis, and will include providing the instruction materials,
 instructor travel expenses, and test or media equipment for presenting the training material.
 The Department will measure Uninterruptible Power Supply by the number of each and will include all
 equipment, testing and certifications.
 633.20
 
 Basis of Payment.
 
 The costs to obtain and maintain telephone service of cellular by the supply agency are included under
 Communications.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 633
 633
 633
 633
 633
 633
 633
 633
 633
 633
 633
 633
 633
 633
 
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Lump Sum
 Each
 
 Controller Unit, Type ___, with Cabinet, Type ___
 Controller Unit, Type ___
 Controller Unit, Type ___, Furnish Only
 Cabinet, Type ___
 Cabinet, Type ___, Furnish Only
 Cabinet Foundation
 Controller Work Pad
 Flasher Controller
 Controller, Master, Traffic Responsive
 Controller, Master, Traffic Responsive, Furnish Only
 Centrally Controlled Arterial Traffic Signal System
 Communications
 Training
 Uninterruptible Power Supply
 
 ITEM 638 WATER MAINS AND SERVICE BRANCHES
 638.01
 638.02
 638.03
 638.04
 638.05
 638.06
 638.07
 638.08
 638.09
 638.10
 638.11
 638.12
 638.13
 638.14
 638.15
 638.16
 638.17
 638.18
 638.19
 638.20
 
 Description
 Materials
 Notification
 Excavation
 Pipe Bedding
 Pipe Laying
 Pipe Joints
 Backfilling
 Hydrostatic Tests
 Disinfection of Completed Water Work
 Steel Pipe Encasement
 Polyethylene Encasement
 Valves and Equipment
 Fire Hydrant
 Fire Hydrant Adjusted
 Service Branches
 Meter and Chamber Removed and Reset
 Valve Box and Service Box Adjusted to Grade
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 638.01 Description. This work consists of constructing water mains and service branches, including fire
 hydrants, water meters, corporation stops, service boxes, service stops, valves, fittings, and valve boxes, and
 includes:
 A. Excavation for items and preparation of the foundations, necessary for placing water mains and service
 branches, including fire hydrants, water meters, corporation stops, service boxes, service stops, valves, fittings, and
 valve boxes.
 B. Furnishing and placing bedding and backfill.
 C. Constructing and subsequently removing all necessary cofferdams, bracing, cribs and sheeting.
 D. Pumping and dewatering.
 E. Providing all joints as shown in the contract documents.
 F. Furnishing and installing all necessary bends and branches.
 G. Furnishing and installing all necessary tracer tape.
 H. Joining to existing and proposed appurtenances as required in the project plans.
 I.
 
 Performing all necessary test (leakage test, disinfections, hydrostatic).
 
 J.
 
 Restoration of disturbed underground facilities.
 
 K. Constructing all required blocking and wedging and/or thrust blocking.
 L. Furnishing and installing all necessary restraining of joints and fittings.
 M. Cutting and plugging as required existing water mains to be abandoned.
 Use removed or excavated materials in the Work when the material conforms to the specifications; if not, then
 recycle or dispose of the material according to 105.16 and 105.17.
 Provide a written Installation Plan per 611.04 B. for all new installations. The Installation Plan may be eliminated
 when utility owner installation details are included in the contract documents. The Performance Inspection 611.12
 and Conduit Evaluation 611.13 are not required.
 638.02 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Pipe, joints, and fittings.
 Ductile iron pipe, joints, and fittings ............................................... 748.01
 Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe, joints, and fittings ......................... 748.02
 Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe, joints, and fittings ......................... 748.02
 Glass-fiber-reinforced polymer mortar pipe and fittings ................. 748.04
 Copper service branches and fittings ............................................... 748.05
 Steel pipe encasement ...................................................................... 748.06
 Polyethylene encasement ................................................................. 748.07
 Valves and equipment.
 Gate valve and valve box ................................................................. 748.08
 Inserting valve and valve box .......................................................... 748.09
 Cutting-in sleeve, valve and valve box ............................................ 748.10
 Tapping sleeve, valve and valve box ............................................... 748.11
 Tapping saddle and corporation stop ............................................... 748.12
 Service stop and service box............................................................ 748.13
 Meter, setting, stop and chamber ..................................................... 748.14
 Fire hydrant ...................................................................................... 748.15
 Miscellaneous.
 Granular Material............................................................................. 605.02
 Disinfectant .................................................................................... AWWA
 Pipe bedding ............................................................................... 611.02 H
 Concrete, Class QC-Misc ........................................................499 and 511
 Soil and granular embankment ........................................................ 203.02
 Structural Backfill ............................................................................ 703.11
 Mortar ................................................................................................... 602
 The Engineer will allow Structural Backfill Type 3, conforming to 703.11, to be used as bedding below the pipe
 only when pumping operations do not control severe ground water problems. Place at least 12 inches (300 mm) of
 Structural Backfill Type 1 on top of the Structural Backfill Type 3 to prevent piping.
 The metric equivalent pipe size may vary with material type for the same English size pipe.
 638.03 Notification. Notify the Engineer and maintaining agency of the following:
 A. The dates scheduled for testing and for disinfections of mains and branches.
 B. Any clearances less than 1 foot (0.3 m) between new mains and existing pipes, sewers, and structures.
 638.04 Excavation. Excavate according to Item 611 with the following additions:
 A. Excavate the trench a suitable distance in advance of pipe laying to ensure proper clearance between the
 waterline and any utility crossing or underground structure. Suitably brace and support utilities and structures.
 B. Excavate the trench walls vertically up to the top of the pipe. Ensure that the clearance on either side of a pipe
 is a minimum of 6 inches (150 mm) and a maximum of 12 inches (300 mm). In paved areas, neatly line cut the
 pavement at the surface a distance of at least 12 inches (300 mm) beyond the trench side and remove paving
 material.
 C. Furnish cover over pipes of 5 feet (1.5 m) unless otherwise shown in the contract documents.
 D. Pile excavated material in a manner that will not endanger the work or obstruct sidewalks and driveways. Keep
 gutters clear or make other satisfactory provisions for drainage. Do not obstruct natural water-courses.
 E. Furnish holes for pipe bells at each joint, but make them no longer than necessary for joint assembly and
 assurance that the pipe barrel will be flat on the trench bottom.
 
 F. Furnish, place, and maintain such sheeting and bracing as may be required. Immediately backfill and compact
 voids appearing outside of sheeting. Notify the maintaining agency of sheeting and bracing left in place. Do not
 remove sheeting and bracing until sufficient backfill has been placed to provide ample support to the sides of the
 excavation. When sheeting is left in place, cut it off at least 2 feet (0.6 m) below the proposed finished surface or
 subgrade in paved areas. The Department will pay for sheeting and bracing it orders to be left in place as a separate
 item of the work.
 638.05
 Pipe Bedding. Where specified, provide 4 inches (100 mm) thick Structural Backfill for bedding
 according to Item 611.
 638.06
 
 Pipe Laying.
 
 A. Inspection. Inspect water mains and auxiliary equipment upon delivery in the field to ensure proper working
 order before installation.
 B. Trench Dewatering. Where water is encountered in the trench, remove it during pipe-laying operations and
 maintain the trench water free until the ends of the pipe are sealed and provisions are made to prevent floating of
 the pipe. Do not allow trench water or other deleterious materials to enter the pipe at any time.
 C. Existing Systems. Do not operate any valve or other control on the existing system. The maintaining agency
 will operate all valves, hydrants, air valves, and service stops.
 D. Pipe Handling. Handle pipe in a manner that will prevent damage to the pipe, pipe lining, or coating. Load,
 unload, and place pipe and fittings using hoists and slings in a manner that will avoid shock or damage. Do not
 drop, skid, or roll pipe or fittings against other pipe.
 E. Pipe Cutting. Whenever it becomes necessary to cut a length of pipe, make the pipe ends square with the
 longitudinal axis of the pipe and otherwise smooth so that good connections can be made. Cut pipe using cutters
 recommended by the manufacturer. Do not cut ductile iron pipe with an oxyacetylene torch. File or grind field-cut
 pipe lengths to obtain a chamfer on the outside of the pipe, according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 Remove rough or sharp edges from the cut end.
 F. Pipe Laying. Ensure that pipe and fittings are clean when laid. Take precautions to prevent floating. Place the
 pipe on the trench bottom or bedding. After the pipe has been aligned and jointed, and thrust blocking has been
 placed, secure the pipe in place with approved backfill material. At times when pipe laying is not in progress, close
 the open ends of the pipe with a watertight plug.
 G. Pipe Laying on Curves. If the pipe is shown curved in the contract documents, construct the curves by special
 fittings or by deflecting the joints according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Do not make joint deflections
 at valves.
 When rubber-gasketed pipe is laid on a curve, joint the pipe in a straight alignment and then deflect it to the
 curved alignment. Make trenches wider on curves for this purpose.
 H. Pipe Laying Where Earth Grading is Necessary. Where a pipe is to be placed within an embankment or the
 top of the pipe is above the existing ground, construct the embankment to at least 6 inches (150 mm) above the top
 of the pipe before trenching for the pipe. Excavate the trench to the minimum width necessary for the proper placing
 and backfilling of the pipe.
 I. Tracer Tape. Install tracer tape over copper and non-metallic water lines, including service lines. Place the
 tracer tape approximately 1 foot (0.3 m) above the top of the line and extend the tape for the line’s full length. Use
 tracer tape that is a detectable type and is marked “WATER.”
 J. Blocking and Wedging. Lay fire hydrants, valves, and fittings on hardwood blocks and hold them in position
 by hardwood wedges. Bed blocks firmly in the bottom of the trench with uniform bearing and with the long
 dimension of the block perpendicular to the pipe barrel. Ensure that the blocks are level across the trench and that
 the proper number of blocks are placed one upon the other to bring the fittings to the required grade for jointing.
 K. Thrust Blocking. Furnish plugs, caps, tees, hydrants, and elbows or bends having a deflection of 11 1/4
 degrees or greater with concrete thrust blocking, unless suitably restrained joints are provided. Construct the thrust
 blocking by placing concrete Class QC - Misc between firm original undisturbed earth and the fitting to be
 
 anchored. Place and shape the thrust blocking in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer with the thrust force
 contained by the blocking. Place the hardwood blocks between the plugs, caps, and hydrants, and the thrust
 blocking. Place the thrust blocking so that it allows for pipe and joint accessibility or repair.
 L. Restrained Joints and Fittings. Where conditions at an elbow, tee, or bulkhead are not conducive to the use
 of thrust blocking, restrain push-on or mechanical joints and fittings by bent or straight tie-rods, straps, clamps, or
 other devices, with required hardware. Protect the devices against corrosion by the application of an asphalt coating.
 Restrain mechanical joints by a wedge action type joint restraint with twist-off nuts. If polyethylene encasement is
 specified, ensure that the encasement covers the entire assembly. The Contractor may use restraining devices
 instead of thrust blocking when approved by the Engineer.
 638.07 Pipe Joints. Furnish ductile iron pipe and cast iron or ductile iron fittings with push-on joints, mechanical
 joints, boltless-restrained joints, or ball-and-socket joints. Furnish joints with all accessories and install them
 according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. During any construction where the outside temperature is below
 40 F (4 C), keep rubber gaskets and lubricants in a heated area to at least 40 F (4 C) until used. Maintain gaskets
 in a flexible condition until placed in the bell or on the spigot of the pipe.
 638.08 Backfilling. Complete backfill from the pipe grade to the finished grade, or to the subgrade surface in
 paved areas. Furnish and compact backfill material for water mains and appurtenances per 611.06 as described in
 the Installation Plan or installation details.
 If hydrostatic testing is performed before the backfilling operation is completed, complete the portion of the
 backfill from pipe grade to the centerline of the pipe, fittings, or appurtenances and place sufficient backfill material
 over the pipe barrel between joints to prevent movement.
 Place sand cushions at least 12 inches (0.3 m) thick between the pipe and existing pipelines or other conduits
 when encountered during construction and as directed by the Engineer.
 638.09 Hydrostatic Tests. Apply a hydrostatic test to the whole system or to all individual valved-off sections
 of the mains where work has been performed. Perform the hydrostatic tests according to of AWWA, except make
 the test pressure greater than 150 pounds per square inch (1000 kPa). Ensure that the quantity of water lost from
 the main does not exceed the number of gallons (liters) per hour as determined by in AWWA or by the following
 formula:
 L
 
 ND P
 7400
 
 
 ND P 
 L 
 
 
 130000 
 
 
 where:
 L = allowable leakage, in gallons (L) per hour
 N = number of joints in the length of pipe tested.
 D = nominal diameter of the pipe, in inches (mm)
 P = average test pressure during the leakage test, in pounds per square inch (kPa)
 638.10 Disinfection of Completed Water Work. After passing the hydrostatic testing, disinfect the completed
 water work according to AWWA.
 Make all necessary taps and furnish all equipment and labor required for the disinfections. Obtain the Engineer’s
 approval of the time and the section of line to be disinfected.
 638.11 Steel Pipe Encasement. Furnish and install a steel casing of the diameter and wall thickness shown in
 the plans.
 Make any necessary excavation to install the steel casing. Obtain the Engineer’s approval for the method of any
 boring or jacking operation. If placing the steel casing in an open cut trench, place it according to 638.05 and
 638.08.
 Join the casing pipe together with a full-circumference weld conforming to 513.21.
 
 Ensure that the inside diameter of the casing allows the water main to be removed without disturbing the casing
 or roadbed. Ensure that the inside diameter of the casing is at least 2 inches (50 mm) greater than the largest outside
 diameter of the water main joints or couplings for carrier pipe that is less than 6 inches (150 mm). Ensure that the
 inside diameter is at least 4 inches (100 mm) greater than the largest outside diameter for carrier pipe 6 inches (150
 mm) in diameter and over.
 Install the main in the casing on hardwood blocking or stainless steel chocks designed to remain fixed in position.
 The Contractor may install polyvinyl chloride water main using casing insulators. Close both ends of the casing
 with mortared 4-inch (100 mm) bricks or a concrete bulkhead.
 638.12 Polyethylene Encasement. Lay ductile iron pipe with a polyethylene encasement as shown in the
 contract documents. Install pipe and polyethylene encasement according to ANSI/AWWA. Any increased girth of
 wrapping over valves, tees, and any other irregular shaped items are included in this item without any additional
 payment.
 638.13 Valves and Equipment. Upon delivery at the work site, open valves to prevent the collection of water
 in the valve. Clean the interiors of valves of all foreign matter, and inspect them in both the open and closed position
 before installation.
 Set valves plumb and joint them to the pipe according to 638.07 and the ANSI/AWWA standards for the joint
 type used.
 Install valve boxes on all buried valves. Center the valve box and set it in a vertical position directly over the
 valve nut in such a manner that the box does not transmit shock or stress to the valve. Set the base of the valve box
 first, and support it with a minimum backfill, hardwood blocks, or a Styrofoam collar at least 2 inches (50 mm) in
 thickness. Do not allow the base to rest directly on the valve or main. Use valve boxes that are two or three piece
 boxes with covers. When necessary, furnish extension sections. Carefully tamp backfill around the valve box to a
 distance of 3 feet (1 m) on all sides or to the undisturbed face of the trench if closer. Set the valve box cover flush
 with the ground line or finished paved surface.
 Installation methods for valves and equipment include the following.
 A. Gate Valve and Valve Box. Install gate valves directly in new mains or by means of a cutting-in sleeve in
 existing mains where maintenance of a continuous supply of water is not mandatory. Where it is mandatory not to
 interrupt the water supply, the Contractor may provide a branch to an existing main with a gate valve installed by
 means of a tapping sleeve.
 B. Inserting Valve and Valve Box. Install inserting valves in existing water mains where it is mandatory not to
 interrupt the water supply.
 Assemble the sleeve around the existing main through which water is flowing under pressure. Bolt the
 equipment to the sleeve, drill a hole through the existing main walls, and insert the valve, according to the
 manufacturer’s recommendations.
 C. Cutting-In Sleeve, Valve, and Valve Box. Use cutting-in sleeves to install a gate valve in an existing main,
 without breaking pipe joints, where it is permissible to interrupt the flow for a short period of time. Install the valve
 by cutting an exact length of pipe from the existing main according to the manufacturer’s recommendation.
 Assemble the cutting-in sleeve, its glands and gaskets, and the cutting-in valve over the cut ends of the existing
 pipe according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 D. Tapping Sleeve, Valve, and Valve Box. Where it is mandatory not to interrupt the water supply in an existing
 main and the branch is 4-inch (100 mm) or larger provide tapping sleeves.
 Bolt the tapping sleeve around the existing main, assemble the tapping valve, and drill a hole through the main
 wall, according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 E. Tapping Saddle and Corporation Stop. Use corporation stops to provide individual service connections to
 mains. Ensure that the stops permit a shut-off of the service flow. Either assemble the stops directly to mains by
 means of a tap tool providing a tapped hole, or use a tapping saddle. Fasten the saddle around the main and drill a
 hole into the main by an attached drilling machine, then remove the machine and screw the stop into the saddle.
 
 Do not use corporation stops larger than 2 inches (51 mm) in size and locate them approximately 60 degrees from
 the top of the main.
 F. Service Stop and Service Box. Install service stops in service lines to allow the shutting-off of individual
 services. Locate the stop beyond the pavement and provide it with a service box centered vertically over the stop
 operating nut such that the box provides maximum protection for the stop.
 When 2-inch (51 mm) service stops are used, provide service boxes with an enlarged base. When necessary,
 provide extension sections for the service box to bring the box cover to finished grade.
 G. Meter, Setting, Stop, and Chamber. This pay item is for meters that are to be installed in frost-proof
 chambers. Set the chamber on hardwood blocks. The maintaining agency shall furnish meters unless otherwise
 indicated by the plans. Do not transmit shock or stress to the meter body.
 638.14 Fire Hydrant. The item includes excavation and furnishing and installing a new fire hydrant complete
 with proper jointing, blocking, and backfilling as outlined below and all other incidental work necessary to
 complete this item of work. The Department will pay for all hydrant branches, gate valves, and valve boxes required
 to perform the work separately.
 A. Excavation and Drainage Pits. Excavate according to 638.04. Excavate a drainage pit 2 feet (0.6 m) in
 diameter and 3 feet (1 m) deep below the hydrant and fill it with granular material.
 B. Setting Fire Hydrants. Provide a 3-foot (1 m) minimum radius unobstructed area around all hydrants. Set the
 sidewalk flange 2 inches (50 mm) above finished grade. Set hydrants on hardwood blocks according to 638.06.K.
 Provide thrust blocking according to 638.06.L.
 Cover any hydrant not in service with a burlap or sturdy opaque plastic bag.
 C. Fire Hydrant Connections. Construct hydrant branches using a section of ductile iron pipe from the main to
 the hydrant, and include a gate valve and valve box set vertically and placed in the line as indicated. Locate the
 valve a minimum of 3 feet (1 m) from the hydrant streamer connection.
 D. Gate Valve and Valve Box. Provide gate valve and valve boxes for hydrant branches conforming to 638.13.
 638.15 Fire Hydrant Adjusted. This item includes installing fire hydrants as described below complete with
 proper jointing, blocking, backfilling as outlined and all other incidental work necessary to complete this item of
 work. The Department will pay for all hydrant branches, gate valves, and valve boxes required to perform the work
 separately.
 A. Fire Hydrant Extended or Adjusted to Grade. Where existing hydrants are to be adjusted to conform to
 new street alignment and grade, relocate the hydrant without disturbing the location of the hydrant lateral tee at the
 main.
 Before excavating, close valves on hydrant branches to be cut. Where the distance of the center of the existing
 hydrant to the center of the gate valve on the hydrant branch is less than 4 feet (1.2 m), extend the trench to the
 hydrant branch valve to permit removal of the pipe. Adequately support the hydrant before being disconnected.
 Extend the hydrant branch with new pipe of the same size as the existing pipe. Thoroughly clean the removed
 hydrant of dirt, reset it, and connect it to the extended branch. Provide drainage pits and thrust blocking according
 to 638.14.A, and 638.06.L.
 After hydrants have been reset, open branch and hydrant valves until water flow expels all air and dirt.
 B. Fire Hydrant Removed and Reset. Where existing hydrants are indicated for removal, provide adequate
 support for the hydrant before disconnecting it and resetting it in the new location. Cap the existing branch line,
 and install adequate thrust blocking to brace the cap according to 638.06.L, unless the line is to be abandoned.
 Construct a new main tee, a new pipe branch, a new gate valve with valve box, with thrust blocking, and a drainage
 pit for the reset hydrant items. Adjust the valve box to the finished surface at the new location by raising or lowering
 the top portion and furnishing an extension section if needed.
 C. Fire Hydrant and Gate Valve Removed and Reset. Conform to 638.15.B, except remove and reinstall the
 gate valve and valve box. Furnish a new tee and new pipe branch using the existing valve and box.
 
 D. Fire Hydrant Removed and Disposed Of. Remove and dispose of fire hydrants designated for removal. Cap
 the existing line and place thrust blocking according to 638.06.L, unless the line is to be abandoned.
 638.16 Service Branches. Furnish and install service branches, either pipe or tubing and fittings, as necessary,
 or as shown in the contract documents including the removal of the existing service branches or service boxes, as
 required according to the following situations. Tapping saddles, corporation stops, service stops, and service boxes,
 if required, are separate from this item:
 A. Where a service branch is disturbed for lowering, raising, or relocation between the water main at the
 corporation stop and the service stop, replace it with new materials within these limits unless the connections can
 be made outside the limits of the proposed pavement, paved shoulder, or curb.
 B. Where a service branch is disturbed for lowering, raising, extending, or shortening on the property side of the
 service stop, replace it with new materials from the existing service stop to the proposed service stop. However, if
 the existing service branch encountered is found to be lead or galvanized pipe, replace it from the corporation stop
 to the service stop with new material.
 638.17 Meter and Chamber Removed and Reset. Remove and reset existing water meters and chambers as
 specified in 638.13.G. Remove existing chambers. Disconnect existing meters, and replace them with suitable
 connections if necessary. Reconnect the meters at new locations.
 638.18 Valve Box and Service Box Adjusted to Grade. Raise or lower existing valve boxes and service boxes
 to grade or the reuse of existing service boxes.
 The Contractor may reuse existing service boxes if they are in good condition, as determined by the Engineer
 then payment is per service box adjusted to grade.
 Excavate around the valve box or service box to permit the raising or lowering of the valve box or service box.
 The Contractor may adjust any screw-type boxes without the use of extensions provided that ample thread remains
 on the box to provide adequate rigidity to the box. Provide extension sections for boxes that are not of the screwtype and boxes not having ample thread for rigidity to adjust the top to grade. The Engineer will allow inserts or
 adapters. Adequately secure new sections of box stem to the existing stems. Backfill the hole after the box has been
 adjusted to grade.
 638.19 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Water Main, Ductile Iron Pipe and Water Main,
 Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe and Fittings by the number of feet (meters) of each constructed.
 The Department will measure Copper Service Branch, Polyethylene Service Branch, and Polybutylene Service
 Branch by the number of feet (meters) of each constructed.
 The Department will measure Polyethylene Encasement by the number of feet (meters) of covered pipe.
 The Department will measure Steel Pipe Encasement by the number of feet (meters) constructed, including the
 open cut or boring or jacking operation, encasement pipe, bedding and backfill, blocking to support the internal
 main, and end bulkheads.
 The Department will measure Gate Valve and Valve Box; Inserting Valve and Valve Box; Cutting-In Sleeve,
 Valve and Valve Box; Tapping Sleeve, Valve and Valve Box; and Meter, Setting, Stop and Chamber separately as
 a complete item by the number of each.
 The Department will measure Fire Hydrant, Fire Hydrant Extended and Adjusted to Grade, Fire Hydrant
 Adjusted to Grade, Fire Hydrant Removed and Reset, Fire Hydrant and Gate Valve Removed and Reset, and Fire
 Hydrant Removed and Disposed Of separately by the number of each.
 The Department will measure Valve Box Adjusted to Grade and Service Box Adjusted to Grade separately by
 the number of each, including any extension sections of valve or service boxes required.
 The Department will measure Meter and Chamber Removed and Reset by the number of each.
 The Department will measure Sheeting and Bracing Ordered Left In Place in thousands of board feet, MBF
 (cubic meters).
 638.20 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract unit prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 638
 
 Foot (Meter)
 
 638
 
 Foot (Meter)
 
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 638
 
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 MBF (Cubic Meter)
 
 ___ inch (___ mm) Water Main, Ductile Iron Pipe, ANSI Class___,
 (push-on, mechanical, boltless- restrained, ball-and-socket)
 Joints and Fittings
 ___ inch (___ mm) Water Main, Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe and Fittings,
 ASTM SAR ___ or AWWA Class ___
 ___ inch (___ mm) Copper Service Branch
 ___ inch (___ mm) Polyethylene Service Branch
 ___ inch (___ mm) Polybutylene Service Branch
 Polyethylene Encasement
 ___ inch (___ mm) Steel Pipe Encasement, (open cut, bored or jacked)
 ___ inch (___ mm) Gate Valve and Valve Box
 ___ inch (mm) Inserting Valve and Valve Box
 ___ inch (mm) Cutting-In Sleeve, Valve and Valve Box
 ___ inch  __ inch (_ mm  _ mm) Tapping Sleeve, Valve and Valve Box
 Meter, Setting, Stop and Chamber
 ___ inch (___ mm) Fire Hydrant
 Fire Hydrant Extended and Adjusted to Grade
 Fire Hydrant Adjusted to Grade
 Fire Hydrant Removed and Reset
 Fire Hydrant and Gate Valve Removed and Reset
 Fire Hydrant Removed and Disposed Of
 Valve Box Adjusted to Grade
 Service Box Adjusted to Grade
 Meter and Chamber Removed and Reset
 Sheeting and Bracing Ordered Left In Place
 
 640 PAVEMENT MARKING
 ITEM 641 PAVEMENT MARKING—GENERAL
 641.01
 641.02
 641.03
 641.04
 641.05
 641.06
 641.07
 641.08
 641.09
 641.10
 641.11
 641.12
 641.13
 
 Description
 Materials
 General
 Equipment
 Pavement Preparation
 Layout and Premarking
 Line Placement Tolerance
 Marking Types
 Two-Way Radio Communications
 Removal of Pavement Markings
 Deduction for Deficiency
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 641.01
 Description. This specification gives general requirements for various kinds of retroreflective
 pavement markings. Deviations from these general requirements are covered in the specific requirements for each
 marking type.
 Place all pavement markings according to the OMUTCD.
 641.02
 Materials. Use marking materials that are a formulation, identified by a manufacturer’s code number,
 prequalified by the Laboratory and that have the same composition as the prequalified marking material.
 Any materials delivered without a TE-24 when applicable and applied without laboratory preapproval shall be
 removed. Laboratory tested materials not meeting specifications shall be removed from the project site.
 Furnish a material safety data sheet (SDS) for each material, including resin, catalyst, primer, adhesive, activator,
 glass beads, and cleaning solvent, to be used on the project to the Engineer before material delivery. Inform workers
 of the location of all SDS and allow workers an opportunity to review them.
 Furnish the Engineer, prior to application, the paint manufacturer's printed application equipment requirements
 and application instructions.
 641.03
 General. Apply lines as solid, broken, or dotted lines, either singly or in combination, as shown on
 the plans. Apply broken lines in a 40-foot (12.0 m) cycle consisting of a 10-foot (3.0 m) dash and a 30-foot (9.0 m)
 gap between broken lines, unless otherwise shown on the plans. Use an accurate striping mechanism that is capable
 of being easily adjusted to retrace existing broken markings or to apply new materials at the correct spacing. Begin
 broken lines that are to be applied over plainly visible existing broken lines within 6 inches (150 mm) of the
 beginning of the existing broken line, unless otherwise directed by the Engineer. Apply dotted lines in an 8-foot
 (2.4 m) cycle consisting of a 2-foot (0.6 m) dot and a 6-foot (1.8 m) gap between dots for line extensions and in a
 12-foot (3.6 m) cycle consisting of a 3-foot (0.9 m) line segment and a 9-foot (2.7 m) gap for lane drop/add
 markings.
 Fill gaps that were not marked as a result of template use for spray-applied auxiliary markings with marking
 material after the template is removed. If applying extruded thermoplastic, the Contractor may leave small gaps in
 arrows or letters resulting from template use unfilled.
 Ensure that pavement markings are free of uneven edges, overspray, or other readily visible defects that detract
 from the appearance or function of the pavement markings.
 Ensure that lines are sharp, well defined, and uniformly retroreflective. Apply the lines to the width specified
 ±1/4 inch (6 mm). Fuzzy lines, excessive overspray, or non-uniform application are unacceptable. The Engineer
 will inspect lines at night to verify proper retroreflectivity. Correct pavement markings that are improperly applied,
 
 located, or reflectorized. Reapply lines applied with insufficient material quantities according to 641.11, 644.04 or
 648.05. Remove improperly located lines according to 641.10, and apply new lines in the correct locations.
 Reapply any lines applied with non-specification materials.
 Obtain the Engineer’s approval for methods and equipment used for pavement preparation, marking, and marking
 removal. Keep glass beads dry during storage and before use.
 Furnish to the Engineer at least 3 days in advance of installation current copies of the manufacturer’s instructions
 and recommendations for application of any marking material, including primer, activator, catalyst, and adhesive,
 shown on the plans. Schedule and perform other construction work, such as shoulder paving, seeding, and mulching
 in a manner to avoid damage to applied pavement markings.
 Do not apply pavement marking materials to the reflector of a plowable raised pavement marker. Interrupt the
 application of the pavement marking line at each raised pavement marker where marking material would otherwise
 be applied to the marker’s prismatic reflector. Provide a maximum gap in the marked line of 18 inches (0.5 m) at
 each marker. Remove pavement marking material applied to a prismatic reflector surface, or replace the reflector
 that same workday. If material must be removed from the reflector, restore the reflector’s brightness to its prior
 condition.
 641.04
 Equipment. Equip long line pavement marking equipment for traffic paint, polyester, epoxy and
 work zone marking Item 642 with a computerized Data Logging System (DLS), including a cab mounted display
 which shows the actual material application rate and film thickness. For center line, lane line and edge line
 markings, when the length of marking exceeds 0.5 miles (0.8 km) of continuous line equivalent, document the
 following with the DLS:
 Measure and record application vehicle speed to nearest 0.1 MPH (0.16 km/h),
 Measure and record weight and/or volume amount of material used by color,
 Measure and record weight of glass beads,
 Measure and record pavement surface temperature,
 Measure and record air temperature,
 Measure and record dew point,
 Measure and record humidity,
 Calculate and record average material application rate and film thickness over the section painted.
 Record as a separate DLS report line entry the above information for each route section painted, when the length
 of center line, lane line and edge line marking exceeds 0.5 miles (0.8 km) of continuous line equivalent. A route
 section is defined as one direction of a contiguous section of highway (without breaks) with the same route number
 designation. DLS documentation is not required for center line, lane line and edge line markings of 0.5 miles (0.8
 km) or less, and for channelizing lines of any length.
 If the DLS equipment fails, finish that day’s work only and resume when the DLS equipment is working.
 The Department will provide a standard DLS short form and long form, which prescribes the correct DLS report
 format and content prior to beginning of work.
 On the first working day following application of markings requiring documentation with the DLS or upon
 demand, furnish the Engineer a copy of the DLS report in ODOT DLS short report format. The DLS report can be
 provided in one of the following methods, which should be agreed upon at the preconstruction meeting:
 Hand delivery of paper report,
 Fax delivery of paper report,
 E-mail of Excel spreadsheet file,
 Disk or flash drive transfer of Excel spreadsheet file.
 
 Within two weeks of the date of application of markings requiring documentation with the DLS, furnish the
 Engineer the Excel spreadsheet file of the DLS report in ODOT DLS long report format by e-mail at the e-mail
 address provided at the preconstruction meeting.
 At the end of the project, furnish the Engineer all Excel spreadsheet files in ODOT DLS long report format.
 Each DLS shall have an annual calibration of all mechanical and electrical components and its software function
 and output confirmed by the DLS manufacturer or their designated representative. Evidence of the annual
 calibration shall be carried by a signed and dated stamp or seal affixed to the inside of the driver’s door of each
 striper.
 641.05
 Pavement Preparation. Clean all visible loose or foreign material from the surface to be marked.
 Equip the pavement marking equipment with an air jet to remove all debris from the pavement in advance of the
 applicator gun. Operate the air jet when marking material is being applied, and synchronize it with marking material
 application. Power-broom clean all surfaces where gore markings or edge lines are to be applied. If required by the
 Engineer, also power-broom clean other surfaces. Do not apply marking to portland cement concrete until the
 concrete in the areas to be marked is clean of membrane curing material and is dry.
 641.06
 Layout and Premarking. Lay out the locations of all lines, words, and other symbols to ensure their
 proper placement. Do not start marking operations until the Engineer or the Engineer’s representative has approved
 the layout and premarking lines If applying longitudinal or transverse lines, use existing lines, construction joints,
 or premarking to guide this marking equipment.
 On projects where resurfacing or other operations will result in obliteration of the existing pavement markings,
 establish reference points to ensure proper placement of restored markings. If existing markings are to be retraced,
 verify any adjustment in the location with the Engineer.
 Establish “T” marking of no-passing zones according to the plans or a no-passing zone log provided by the
 Engineer.
 Locate premarking from survey data or reference points, and offset it so as to parallel the theoretical edge of the
 marking lines at a maximum distance of 1 inch (25 mm). Use templates for the layout of arrows, words, and other
 symbols. Place premarking for longitudinal lines at 40-foot (12 m) intervals, and do not exceed 2 inches (50 mm)
 in width or 12 inches (300 mm) in length. Locate premarking for auxiliary markings from the plans or schematic
 forms provided by the Engineer.
 641.07
 Line Placement Tolerance. Ensure that pavement marking lines are straight or smoothly curved,
 true to the alignment of the pavement, and do not deviate laterally from the proper location at a rate of more than
 2 inches in 100 feet (50 mm in 30 m). The Engineer will not allow any deviation greater than 3 inches (75 mm).
 Remove improperly located lines according to 641.10 and apply new lines in the correct locations.
 641.08
 Marking Types. Apply marking materials at the rate or thickness specified in 642.04, 643.04, 644.04,
 645.03, 646.05, 647.04, or 648.05 and, except for parking lot stall markings, ensure that they are uniformly
 retroreflective. Ensure that portions of parking stalls that are adjacent to street traffic are retroreflective. Pavement
 markings consist of the following types:
 A. Edge Lines. Place edge lines as continuous stripes using the width specified. Locate the center of the stripe 6
 inches (150 mm) from the edge of the pavement. Ensure that the right edge line is applied to the left of the right
 edge of pavement. Ensure that the left edge line is applied to the right of the left edge of pavement.
 B. Lane Lines. Place lane lines using the width specified, as white stripes between contiguous lanes of pavement
 carrying traffic in the same direction. Place them as broken lines unless specified solid. Offset lane lines to the left
 of the longitudinal joint, if present, or the theoretical line lying between contiguous lanes, if a joint is not present.
 Ensure that the nearer edge of the stripe is 2 inches (50 mm) to the left of the joint or line. Do not place lane lines
 through intersections.
 C. Center Lines. Place center lines as single or double yellow stripes between contiguous lanes of pavement
 carrying traffic in opposite directions. Center line marking includes two-way left-turn lane striping and the outline
 of left-turn islands. Make each stripe 4 inches (100 mm) wide, solid or broken as specified.
 
 D. Channelizing Lines. Place channelizing lines as continuous white stripes, using the width specified.
 E. Stop and Crosswalk Lines. Place stop lines as solid 24-inch (600 mm) wide white stripes. Place crosswalk
 lines as solid 12-inch (300 mm) wide white stripes.
 F. Transverse/Diagonal Lines. Place transverse/diagonal lines as solid 24-inch (600 mm) wide stripes, of the
 color specified, and at an angle to the direction of travel.
 G. Curb and Island Marking. Prepare exposed surfaces and curbs and paved islands according to 641.05. In
 addition, remove and dispose of all visible loose or foreign material, including vegetation, on and immediately
 contiguous to surfaces to be marked.
 H. Symbol Markings. Place all railroad, school, bicycle and handicap symbol markings using white markings.
 A railroad marking includes the 16-inch (400 mm) crossbuck, two 72-inch (1.8 m) “R”s, two 24-inch (600 mm)
 transverse lines, and a stop line. A school marking includes the word “SCHOOL” and two 16-inch (400 mm)
 transverse lines. A shared lane marking includes the bicycle symbol and two sharrows.
 I. Parking Lot Stall Marking. Place parking lot stall marking lines as continuous 4-inch (100 mm) wide white
 stripes.
 J.
 
 Lane Arrows. Place lane arrows using white markings.
 
 K. Words on Pavement. Place words on pavement using white markings.
 L. Dotted Lines. Place dotted lines using the width and color specified.
 M. Yield Lines. Place yield lines as solid white 24-inch (600 mm) isosceles triangles pointing toward approaching
 traffic.
 The term long lines, when used in sections 642 through 648 includes edge lines, lane lines, center lines, and
 channelizing lines over 200 feet (60 m) long. The term auxiliary markings, when used in Items 642 through 648
 includes channelizing lines 200 feet (60 m) or shorter, stop lines, yield lines, crosswalk lines, transverse lines,
 diagonal lines, curb markings, island markings, symbol markings, parking lot stall markings, lane arrows, and
 dotted lines.
 641.09
 Two-Way Radio Communications. If two-way radio equipment is required, furnish and maintain
 radio equipment necessary for the voice communication between the striper and the inspector’s vehicle at all times
 during the pavement marking operation. Use equipment capable of transmitting and receiving normal voice
 communications to at least 4 miles (6 km).
 641.10
 Removal of Pavement Markings. If specified as a pay item, remove pavement markings as described
 in 614.11.G. Take care during marking removal not to scar, discolor, or otherwise damage the pavement surface.
 Do not overpaint or use other methods of covering markings instead of removal.
 641.11
 Deduction for Deficiency. For traffic paint, polyester and epoxy, the Engineer will compute each
 day the amount of marking material (including all components) and glass beads applied for each route section on
 the DLS report for determining unsatisfactory sections. The Department will reduce the contract price for each
 route section in direct proportion to the percent of deficiency of marking material or glass beads as specified in
 642.04, 643.04 and 646.05, up to 20 percent for each material deficiency. The Department will only use the greater
 deficiency of marking material or glass beads to compute the deduction.
 If the deficiency of marking material or glass beads is 20 percent or more, the Department will consider the work
 unsatisfactory. In addition, the Engineer will consider as unsatisfactory materials applied outside the temperature
 or application requirements in Items 642, 643 and 646 without written approval of the Engineer. Replace pavement
 markings and glass beads in all sections determined to be unsatisfactory by retracing over the unsatisfactory
 markings at the full thickness specified in Items 642, 643 and 646.
 641.12
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure pavement markings complete in place in
 the units designated. The Department will measure line quantities as the length of completed marking, including
 the gaps, intersections, and other sections of pavement not normally marked. The Department will measure the
 
 removal of pavement markings using the same method of measurement as completed markings in the units
 designated.
 641.13
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities of work performed under Items
 642, 643, 644, 645, 646, 647 and 648.
 The Department will not pay for costs associated with correcting improperly located lines, replacing reflectors
 coated with pavement marking material, or replacing unsatisfactory pavement markings.
 The Department will not pay for lines placed using non-specification materials.
 The Department will not pay for non-specification lines determined through field measurement.
 The Department will pay for Two-Way Radio Equipment at the lump sum bid price.
 
 ITEM 642 TRAFFIC PAINT
 642.01
 642.02
 642.03
 642.04
 642.05
 
 Description
 Materials
 Equipment
 Application
 Basis of Payment
 
 642.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and applying fast dry water-based traffic paint or fast
 dry water-based traffic paint for cold weather applications according to Item 641, 740.01, 740.02, 740.09, and the
 additional requirements specified below.
 642.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Traffic Paint ..................................................................................... 740.02
 Glass Beads, Type A........................................................................ 740.09
 The Engineer may obtain random samples from the application equipment. Furnish the manufacturer’s
 identification information for the sampled liquid materials. The Department will test the quality assurance sample
 for conformance to the manufacturer’s production ranges. Samples not meeting the manufacturer’s production
 ranges will require the Contactor to re-apply, at his expense, any markings using that sample. All other untested
 batches will become not approved and will either require testing or re-application.
 Do not apply paints that have exceeded the manufacturer’s shelf life. Do not use glass beads that are wet.
 642.03
 Equipment. Use equipment capable of applying the traffic paint as recommended by the
 manufacturer and applying glass beads at the time of line placement. Furnish a calibrated measuring device
 acceptable to the Engineer to measure the traffic paint in the striper tanks.
 Equip all striping equipment for center line, lane line and edge line markings with a computerized Data Logging
 System (DLS) conforming to 641.04 when the length of marking exceeds 0.5 miles (0.8 km) of continuous line
 equivalent.
 Furnish written documentation to the Engineer for the equipment’s operational capabilities from the equipment
 manufacturer.
 642.04
 Application. Apply pavement markings only when the surface is clean and dry in accordance with
 the paint manufacturer’s written application instructions.
 If application is required when air and pavement temperatures are between 35 °F (2 °C) and 50 °F (10 °C) obtain
 approval from the Engineer and apply only pre-qualified Type 1A cold weather traffic paint materials. Apply traffic
 paint according to the manufacturer’s recommendations and protect line from tracking.
 Keep the paint thoroughly mixed during application.
 Apply 20 mil (0.51 mm) thick traffic paint Type 1 at the following rates:
 20 Mil Thickness
 
 Solid Line
 Broken Line
 Dotted Line
 Areas, Symbols, Words
 
 Line Width (inch)
 4
 6
 8
 12
 24
 Gallon per Mile of Line
 22
 33
 44
 66
 132
 5.5
 8.25
 11
 16.5
 33
 5.5
 8.25
 11
 16.5
 33
 1.25 gallon per 100 square feet
 
 0.51 mm Thickness
 
 Solid Line
 Broken Line
 Dotted Line
 Areas, Symbols, Words
 
 Line Width (mm)
 100
 150
 200
 300 600
 Liter per Kilometer of Line
 50
 75
 100
 150 300
 12.5
 19
 25
 38
 75
 12.5
 19
 25
 38
 75
 0.51 L/m²
 
 Apply 15 mil (0.38 mm) thick traffic paint Type 1A at the following rates:
 15 Mil Thickness
 
 Solid Line
 Broken Line
 Dotted Line
 Areas, Symbols, Words
 0.38 mm Thickness
 
 Solid Line
 Broken Line
 Dotted Line
 Areas, Symbols, Words
 
 Line Width (inch)
 4
 6
 8
 12
 24
 Gallon per Mile of Line
 16
 24
 32
 48
 96
 4
 6
 8
 12
 24
 4
 6
 8
 12
 24
 0.94 gallon per 100 square feet
 Line Width (mm)
 100 150
 200
 300
 600
 Liter per Kilometer of Line
 37
 56
 74
 111
 222
 9.3
 14
 18.6
 28
 56
 9.3
 14
 18.6
 28
 56
 0.38 L/m²
 
 Do not dilute the paint. However, the Contractor may add spent traffic paint solvents, generated during
 performance of this work, to virgin traffic paint. If adding spent solvents, add them in a maximum ratio of 1:50 of
 spent solvents to virgin paint. Ensure that the maximum concentration of spent solvents in the striping equipment
 tanks is maximum 2 percent. Add spent solvents during the loading of the striping equipment.
 Apply glass beads to the wet paint so that the beads are embedded and retained in the paint and provide uniform
 retroreflectivity in the paint surface. Apply glass beads at a minimum rate of 15 pounds per 100 square feet (7.3 kg
 per 10 m2) for Type 1 traffic paint. Apply glass beads at a minimum rate of 8.0 pounds per 100 square feet (3.9 kg
 per 10 m2) for Type 1A traffic paint.
 Ensure temperature of the paint at the discharge point is within the range recommended by paint manufacturer.
 Replace unsatisfactory markings according to 641.11.
 Furnish the Engineer daily, biweekly and final DLS reports according to 641.04.
 Perform traffic control operations for all 642 pavement markings according to 614.12 and MT-99.20M, but
 provide for center line, edge line, lane line and channelizing line traffic control equipment according to MT-99.20M
 equipment requirements for center line, longer than 2 minute dry.
 Payment for this work shall be included in the 642 price per mile for Center Line, Edge Line and Lane Line and
 the 642 price per foot for channelizing Line.
 642.05
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices, or prices
 adjusted according to 641.11, measured according to 641.12, with the provisions specified in 641.13, and as
 follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 642
 642
 642
 642
 
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Foot (Meter)
 
 Edge Line, ___ inch (___ mm), Type ___
 Lane Line, ___ inch (___ mm), Type ___
 Center Line, Type ___
 Channelizing Line, ___ inch (___ mm), Type ___
 
 642
 642
 642
 642
 642
 642
 642
 642
 642
 642
 642
 642
 642
 642
 642
 642
 642
 
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot or Square Foot
 (Meter or Square
 Meter), or Each
 Lump Sum
 
 Stop Line, Type ___
 Yield Line, Type___
 Crosswalk Line, Type ___
 Transverse/Diagonal Line, Type ___
 Curb Marking, Type ___
 Island Marking, Type ___
 Handicap Symbol Marking, Type ___
 Railroad Symbol Marking, Type ___
 School Symbol Marking, ___ inch (___ mm), Type ___
 Bicycle Lane Symbol Marking, Type___
 Shared Lane Marking, Type____
 Parking Lot Stall Marking, Type ___
 Lane Arrow, Type ___
 Word on Pavement, ___ inch(___ mm), Type ___
 Dotted Line, ___ inch (___mm), Type ___
 Removal of Pavement Marking
 Two-Way Radio Equipment
 
 ITEM 643 POLYESTER PAVEMENT MARKING
 643.01
 643.02
 643.03
 643.04
 643.05
 
 Description
 Materials
 Equipment
 Application
 Basis of Payment
 
 643.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and applying polyester pavement markings according
 to Item 641, 740.01, 740.03, 740.09, and the additional requirements specified below.
 643.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Polyester Pavement Marking ........................................................... 740.03
 Glass Beads, Type B ........................................................................ 740.09
 The Engineer may obtain random samples from the application equipment. Furnish the manufacturer’s
 identification information for the sampled liquid materials. The Department will test the quality assurance sample
 for conformance to the manufacturer’s production ranges. Samples not meeting the manufacturer’s production
 ranges will require the Contractor to re-apply, at his expense, any markings using that sample. All other untested
 batches will become not approved materials and will either require testing or re-application.
 Do not apply material that have exceeded the manufacturer’s shelf life. Do not use glass beads that are wet.
 643.03
 Equipment. Use application equipment capable of mixing the polyester components in proportions
 recommended by the manufacturer and applying glass beads at the time of marking placement. Use equipment
 (striper) capable of applying polyester long-lines at the thickness specified for solid and broken lines while moving
 on the highway at a speed of not less than 7 miles per hour (11 km/h). Furnish a calibrated measuring device
 acceptable to the Engineer to measure the polyester resin in the striper tanks.
 Equip all striping equipment for center line, lane line and edge line markings with a computerized Data Logging
 System (DLS) conforming to 641.04 when the length of marking exceeds 0.5 miles (0.8 km) of continuous line
 equivalent. The DLS shall measure the polyester resin material component and glass beads only. Catalyst will be
 calculated as 2 percent of the resin used.
 Furnish written documentation to the Engineer for the equipment’s operational capabilities from the equipment
 manufacturer.
 643.04
 Application. Apply polyester only when the pavement surface is clean and dry and the pavement and
 air temperature are above 50 F (10 C).
 If project safety requirements require marking application below 50°F (10°C), obtain approval from the Engineer
 and apply cold weather traffic paint, Type 1A, according to Item 642 instead of the polyester.
 After sampling of resin is completed, transfer the entire contents of each material container to the striper tanks.
 Ensure that the polyester is thoroughly mixed at all times during application. Apply polyester (catalyst plus resin)
 uniformly to the pavement at the following rates:
 15 Mil Thickness
 
 Solid Line
 Broken Line
 Dotted Line
 Areas, Symbols, Words
 
 Line Width (inch)
 4
 6
 8
 12
 24
 Gallon per Mile of Line
 16
 24
 32
 48
 96
 4
 6
 8
 12
 24
 4
 6
 8
 12
 24
 0.94 gallon per 100 square feet
 
 0.38 mm Thickness
 
 Solid Line
 Broken Line
 Dotted Line
 Areas, Symbols, Words
 
 Line Width (mm)
 100
 150
 200
 300
 600
 Liter per Kilometer of Line
 37
 56
 74
 111
 222
 9.3
 14
 18.6
 28
 56
 9.3
 14
 18.6
 28
 56
 0.38 L/m²
 
 Do not dilute the material.
 Apply glass beads to the uncured polyester in sufficient quantity so that the beads completely fill the polyester
 film from the film-pavement interface to the top surface of the film to the extent that there are loose beads on the
 surface of the uncured line. Apply glass beads at a minimum rate of 16.5 pounds per 100 square feet (8 kg per 10
 m2) of polyester applied in a manner that provides uniformly retroreflective lines.
 If the applied polyester becomes tacky and causes marking discoloration and darkening, cease marking
 application until the Engineer agrees that the problem is corrected.
 If any marking is in a tracking condition 45 minutes after application, cease marking application until the
 Engineer agrees that the problem is corrected.
 Do not apply polyester pavement markings to new asphalt concrete until at least 2 weeks after the pavement is
 placed. Assure curing compound is removed from portland cement concrete pavements.
 Replace unsatisfactory markings according to 641.11.
 Furnish the Engineer daily, biweekly and final DLS reports according to 641.04.
 643.05
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices, or prices
 adjusted according to 641.11, measured according to 641.12, with the provisions specified in 641.13, and as
 follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 643
 
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Square Foot
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot or Square Foot
 (Meter or Square
 Meter), or Each
 Lump Sum
 
 Edge Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Lane Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Center Line
 Channelizing Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Stop Line
 Yield Line
 Crosswalk Line
 Transverse/Diagonal Line
 Curb Marking
 Island Marking (Square Meter)
 Handicap Symbol Marking
 Railroad Symbol Marking
 School Symbol Marking, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Bicycle Lane Symbol Marking
 Shared Lane Marking
 Parking Lot Stall Marking
 Lane Arrow
 Word on Pavement, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Dotted Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Removal of Pavement Marking
 
 643
 
 Two-Way Radio Equipment
 
 ITEM 644 THERMOPLASTIC PAVEMENT MARKING
 644.01
 644.02
 644.03
 644.04
 644.05
 644.06
 
 Description
 Materials
 Equipment
 Application
 Layout and Premarking
 Basis of Payment
 
 644.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and applying screed extruded thermoplastic pavement
 markings according to Item 641, 740.01, 740.04, 740.09, and the additional requirements specified below.
 644.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Thermoplastic pavement marking ................................................... 740.04
 Glass beads, Type C ........................................................................ 740.09
 The Engineer may obtain random samples from the application equipment. Furnish the manufacturer’s
 identification information for the sampled liquid materials. The Department will test the quality assurance sample
 for conformance to the manufacturer’s production ranges. Samples not meeting the manufacturer’s production
 ranges will require the Contractor to re-apply, at his expense, any markings using that sample. All other untested
 batches will become not approved materials and will either require testing or re-application.
 Do not apply material that has exceeded the manufacturer’s shelf life. Do not use glass beads that are wet.
 644.03
 Equipment. Equip all thermoplastic pavement marking trucks for center line, lane line and edge line
 markings with a computerized Data Logging System (DLS), including a cab mounted display which shows the
 actual bead application rate. A DLS is not required for markings applied with hand carts. For center line, lane line
 and edge line markings applied with truck-mounted equipment, when the length of marking exceeds 0.5 miles (0.8
 km) of continuous line equivalent, document the following with the DLS:
 Measure and record application vehicle speed to the nearest 0.1 MPH (0.16 km/h).
 Measure and record pavement surface temperature.
 Measure and record air temperature.
 Measure and record thermoplastic temperature in the kettle and at the point of application.
 Record as a separate DLS report line entry the above information for each route section painted, when the length
 of marking exceeds 0.5 miles (0.8 km) of continuous line equivalent. A route section is defined as one direction of
 a contiguous section of highway (without breaks) with the same route number designation.
 If the DLS equipment fails, finish that day’s work only and resume when the DLS equipment is working.
 The Department will provide a standard DLS spreadsheet, which prescribes the correct DLS report format and
 content prior to beginning of work.
 Each DLS shall have an annual calibration of all mechanical and electrical components and its software function
 and output confirmed by the DLS manufacturer or their designated representative. Evidence of the annual
 calibration shall be carried by a signed and dated stamp or seal affixed to the inside of the driver’s door of each
 striper.
 Use application equipment that includes a kettle for melting the thermoplastic and maintaining it at the proper
 temperature. Equip the kettle with a thermostat to control the temperature of the melted thermoplastic and to prevent
 overheating. Use equipment that continuously mixes and agitates the molten thermoplastic. Ensure that the parts
 of the equipment that convey the thermoplastic from the kettle to the application point maintains it at the required
 temperature.
 Attach an automatic bead dispenser to the equipment so that the beads are immediately and uniformly dispensed
 over the marking surface. Equip the bead dispenser with an automatic cut-off control synchronized with the cutoff of the thermoplastic material.
 
 Ensure that the applicator portion of the equipment has a shoe that rides on the pavement and extrudes the
 thermoplastic. Ensure that the application equipment applies lines with a square end and can apply broken lines.
 Furnish application equipment for applying extruded markings that consists of dies of varying widths to produce
 different widths of lines. Do not use pans, aprons, or similar devices that the die overruns.
 Use equipment that ensures uniformity in the thickness and width of lines. Use equipment that forms lines 12
 inches (300 mm) wide or less by one application pass, and lines wider than 12 inches (300 mm) by no more than
 two passes. Do not allow individual passes to overlap or to be separated by a gap greater than 1/4 inch (6 mm).
 644.04
 Application. If applying thermoplastic to pavements that are less than six months old, ensure that
 both the pavement surface and the ambient air temperature at the time of application are not less than 50 F (10 C)
 and rising. However, if applying thermoplastic to pavements that are older than six months, ensure that both the
 pavement surface and the ambient air temperature at the time of application are not less than 70 °F (21 °C) and
 rising. Ensure that the temperature of thermoplastic at the point of application is at least 400 F (204 C) and not
 more than 440 F (227 C).
 Apply thermoplastic at a thickness of 125 mils (3.2 mm). Thermoplastic for small quantities or auxiliary
 markings up to 100 feet (30 m) in length can be exchanged as equal in function and price with 125 mil (3.2 mm)
 thick heat-fused preformed thermoplastic (Item 647).
 Apply thermoplastic at the following rates:
 125 Mil Thickness
 
 Solid Line
 Broken Line
 Dotted Line
 Areas, Symbols, Words
 3.2 mm Thickness
 
 Solid Line
 Broken Line
 Dotted Line
 Areas, Symbols, Words
 
 Line Width (inch)
 4
 6
 8
 12
 24
 Pounds per Mile of Line
 2340 3510 4680 7020 14040
 585 878 1170 1755 3510
 585 878 1170 1755 3510
 133 pounds per 100 square feet
 Line Width (mm)
 100 150 200 300 600
 Kilograms per Kilometer of Line
 650 975 1300 1950 3900
 165 245 325 490 975
 165 245 325 490 975
 6.5 kg/m²
 
 Mechanically apply glass beads to the wet thermoplastic surface so that the beads are embedded and retained
 and provide uniform retroreflectivity in the surface. Do not place beads by hand, except to symbols and words, and
 to complete the ends of lines. Apply beads at a minimum rate of 12 pounds per 100 square feet (6 kg per 10 m²) of
 thermoplastic surface area. The Contractor may leave small gaps unfilled in symbols and letters resulting from
 template use.
 If required, furnish primer, and apply it according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Use primer except
 on new asphalt pavement.
 For each route section on the DLS report, the Engineer will compute the amount of thermoplastic marking
 material and glass beads applied. The Department will reduce the contract price in direct proportion to the percent
 of deficiency of thermoplastic marking material or glass beads as specified in 644.04, up to 20 percent for each
 material deficiency. The Department will only use the greater deficiency of marking material or glass beads to
 compute the deduction.
 If the deficiency of thermoplastic marking material or glass beads is 20 percent or more, the Department will
 consider the work unsatisfactory. In addition, the Engineer will consider as unsatisfactory materials applied outside
 the temperature or application requirements in 644.04 without written approval of the Engineer. Replace
 thermoplastic markings and glass beads in all sections determined to be unsatisfactory by entirely removing the
 
 unsatisfactory thermoplastic material by grinding as per 641.10 and then reapplying at the full thickness specified
 in 644.04. Do not apply a layer of sprayed thermoplastic to sections determined to be unsatisfactory to achieve the
 required thickness.
 Furnish the Engineer daily, biweekly and final DLS reports conforming to 644.03, and additional reports
 indicating material type and quantities in pounds (kilograms) of thermoplastic materials used, according to 641.04.
 644.05
 Layout and Premarking. In addition to the requirements specified in 641.06, only place auxiliary
 markings on new pavement. The Contractor may place initial thermoplastic markings over work zone traffic paint
 markings.
 644.06
 Basis of Payment. The Department will not pay for any thermoplastic lines that do not meet the
 required thickness. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices, or prices adjusted
 according to 644.04, measured according to 641.12, with the provisions specified in 641.13, and as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 644
 644
 644
 644
 644
 644
 644
 644
 644
 644
 644
 644
 644
 644
 644
 644
 644
 644
 
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot or Square Foot
 (Meter or Square
 Meter), or Each
 Lump Sum
 
 Edge Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Lane Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Center Line
 Channelizing Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Stop Line
 Yield Line
 Crosswalk Line
 Transverse/Diagonal Line
 Handicap Symbol Marking
 Railroad Symbol Marking, ___ inch (___ mm)
 School Symbol Marking, __ inch (___ mm)
 Bicycle Lane Marking Sym_bol
 Shared Lane Marking
 Parking Lot Stall Marking
 Lane Arrow
 Word on Pavement, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Dotted Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Removal of Pavement Marking
 
 644
 
 Two-Way Radio Equipment
 
 ITEM 645 PREFORMED PAVEMENT MARKING
 645.01
 645.02
 645.03
 645.04
 645.05
 
 Description
 Materials
 Application
 Layout and Premarking
 Basis of Payment
 
 645.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and applying preformed pavement marking material
 according to Item 641, 740.01, 740.05, 740.06, and the additional requirements specified below.
 645.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to the following:
 
 Type A (permanent markings), Type A1, A2, or A3....................... 740.05
 Type B (work zone markings), Type II (non-removable) ............... 740.06
 Type C (work zone markings), Type I (removable) ........................ 740.06
 Do not apply materials that has exceeded the manufacturer’s shelf life.
 645.03
 Application. Only apply on clean dry pavement surfaces. If there is oil, salt or dust; power wash the
 pavement and allow the pavement to dry.
 Furnish the Engineer with the manufacturer’s application instructions. Record the surface temperature and date
 of application. Furnish documentation to the Engineer. Apply preformed markings to the pavement by means of a
 precoated adhesive on the back, or by an adhesive or activator furnished with the markings and used according to
 the manufacturer’s recommendations. Form lines 12 inches (300 mm) wide or less by one piece; form lines wider
 than 12 inches (300 mm) by no more than two pieces. Do not overlap individual pieces. Do not allow a gap greater
 than 1/4 inch (6 mm) between pieces.
 Do not use preformed markings that are subject to premature adhesion or contamination before placement.
 Apply preformed markings according to the appropriate type of application as follows:
 A. Type A Marking Application. Apply the preformed markings while the pavement surface temperature is at
 the manufacturer’s application recommendations. Before any application, test and record the pavement surface
 temperature, air temperature and dew point. Retest and record every 4 hours of operation. Demonstrate to the
 Engineer the testing devices are accurate and operational. Initially position the marking under light pressure, or use
 a hand operated light roller or mechanical applicator. Once correctly located, hold the marking in position without
 delay by rolling.
 If Type A preformed markings are specified to be inlaid on newly placed asphalt concrete, press the markings
 into the warm surface using a mechanical roller. Proper application of inlaid markings requires that the asphalt
 concrete pavement surface have a temperature below the maximum temperature recommended for the preformed
 material or its adhesive backing.
 B. Type B and Type C Marking Application. Apply the preformed markings according to the manufacturer’s
 recommendations.
 645.04
 Layout and Premarking. In addition to the requirements specified in 641.06, place preformed
 auxiliary markings only on new pavement.
 645.05
 Basis of Payment. The Department will not pay for under thickness lines or non-specification
 materials. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices, or prices adjusted according to
 641.11, measured according to 641.12, with the provisions specified in 641.13, and as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 645
 645
 645
 645
 645
 
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 
 Edge Line, ___ inch (___ mm), Type ___
 Lane Line, ___ inch (___ mm), Type ___
 Center Line, Type ___
 Channelizing Line, ___ inch (___ mm), Type ___
 Stop Line, Type ___
 
 645
 645
 645
 645
 645
 645
 645
 645
 645
 645
 645
 645
 645
 645
 
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot, Square Foot
 (Meter, Square
 Meter), or Each
 Lump Sum
 
 Yield Line, Type____
 Crosswalk Line, Type ___
 Transverse/Diagonal Line, Type ___
 Handicap Symbol Marking, Type ___
 Railroad Symbol Marking, Type ___
 School Symbol Marking, ___ inch (___ mm), Type ___
 Bicycle Lane Symbol Marking, Type___
 Shared Lane Marking
 Parking Lot Stall Marking, Type ___
 Lane Arrow, Type ___
 Word on Pavement, ___ inch (___ mm), Type ___
 Dotted Line, ___ inch (___ mm), Type ___
 Removal of Pavement Marking
 Two-Way Radio Equipment
 
 ITEM 646 EPOXY PAVEMENT MARKING
 646.01
 646.02
 646.03
 646.04
 646.05
 646.07
 
 Description
 Materials
 Equipment
 Cleaning and Surface Preparation
 Application
 Basis of Payment
 
 646.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and applying epoxy pavement markings according to
 Item 641, 740.01, 740.07, 740.09, and the additional requirements specified below.
 Store and handle epoxy material according to all the applicable EPA and local environmental regulations and the
 manufacturer’s recommendations.
 646.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Epoxy pavement markings .............................................................. 740.07
 Glass beads, Type D ........................................................................ 740.09
 The Engineer may obtain random samples from the application equipment.
 Furnish the manufacturer’s identification information for the sampled liquid materials. The Department will test
 the quality assurance sample for conformance to the manufacturer’s production ranges. Samples not meeting the
 manufacturer’s production ranges will require the Contractor to re-apply, at his expense, any markings using that
 sample. All other untested batches will become not approved materials and will either require testing or reapplication.
 Do not apply material that has exceeded the manufacturer’s shelf life. Do not use glass beads that are wet.
 646.03
 
 Equipment.
 
 A. General. Equip all striping equipment for center line, lane line and edge line markings with a computerized
 Data Logging System (DLS) conforming to 641.04 when the length of marking exceeds 0.5 miles (0.8 km) of
 continuous line equivalent.
 Furnish written documentation to the Engineer for the equipment’s operational capabilities from the equipment
 manufacturer.
 Use equipment to apply epoxy pavement markings that has the following capabilities and features:
 1. Capable of mixing the epoxy components in proportions recommended by the manufacturer and applying
 glass beads simultaneously with line placement.
 2.
 
 Capable of applying epoxy at the specified thickness, width, and pattern.
 
 3.
 
 Individual material reservoirs, or space, for the storage of Part A and Part B of the epoxy.
 
 4. Heating equipment of sufficient capacity to maintain the epoxy components at the manufacturer’s
 recommended temperature, and to produce the required amount of heat at the mixing head and gun tip and maintain
 those temperatures with the tolerances recommended by the epoxy manufacturer for the spray application.
 5.
 
 Adequate individual tanks for the storage and dispensing of Size I and Size II glass beads.
 
 6.
 
 Individual dispensers for the simultaneous application of Size I and Size II glass beads at specified rates.
 
 7. Individual metering devices on the proportioning pumps (one indicator per pump) and stroke counters to
 monitor gallon (liter) usage. Ensure that these devices are clearly visible.
 8. All the necessary spray equipment mixers, compressors, and other appurtenances to allow for the
 placement of reflectorized pavement marking systems in a simultaneous sequence of operations.
 9. A minimum 24-inch (600 mm) long static mixer unit or an equivalent system that produces properly mixed
 material.
 
 10. A completely enclosed flush and purge system to clean the lines and the guns without expelling any of the
 solution into the environment.
 B. Long Line Equipment. Furnish a striper to apply long line epoxy markings that is:
 1.
 
 Truck-mounted and self-contained.
 
 2.
 
 Designed to spray the epoxy and glass beads in continuous and skip line.
 
 3.
 
 Maneuverable to the extent that straight lines can be followed and normal curves can be made in a true
 
 arc.
 C. Auxiliary Marking Equipment. Furnish application equipment for auxiliary markings by either of the
 following two methods:
 1.
 
 Equip the striper with accessories for applying auxiliary markings.
 
 2.
 
 Use a portable applicator approved by the Engineer.
 
 D. Documentation Requirements Furnish the Engineer documentation from the manufacturer that the equipment
 meets all requirements of 646.03. Demonstrate the equipment has the capability to obtain the manufacturer’s
 required temperature for the mixed components and the required temperature at the lines and gun.
 646.04
 
 Cleaning and Surface Preparation.
 
 A. General. Before applying epoxy, clean and prepare the pavement surface in the following sequence:
 1. Remove all debris, oil, and any other contaminants that may hinder the adhesion of the epoxy to the
 pavement.
 2.
 
 Use a power-broom to clean the pavement.
 
 3. Remove residue and debris with blasts of compressed air.
 4. Follow any additional manufacturer’s recommendations for surface preparation.
 Perform operations in such a manner that the finished pavement surface is not damaged or unnecessarily
 scarred or left in a pattern that will mislead or misdirect the motorist and that minimizes airborne dust. Avoid
 damage to transverse and longitudinal joint sealers.
 B. Asphalt Concrete Pavements. In addition to the requirements of 646.04.A, the following apply.
 Wait 48 hours after the placement of polymer modified asphalt-concrete pavement before preparing it for
 epoxy pavement markings.
 For any other type of modified asphalt or for open graded friction course asphalts, contact the manufacturer
 for surface preparation recommendations. Furnish the Engineer copies of the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 Lightly abrade any new asphalt concrete pavement containing SBS, SBR latex or SMA latex polymer
 modifiers without scarring the area between the broken lines to the manufacturer’s recommendations to remove
 polymer surface film to assure proper bonding. In no case shall the removal of the polymer surface film be less
 than that required for the epoxy to properly bond and adhere.
 C. Portland Cement Concrete Pavements. On new portland cement concrete pavements, do not begin cleaning
 operations until a minimum of 30 days after the placement of concrete, unless otherwise directed by the Engineer.
 In addition to the requirements of 646.04.A, the following apply.
 Remove all curing compound and laitance on the concrete surface and in any textured pavement valleys.
 Round the profiles of the peaks of textured pavement and remove sharp edges and irregularities.
 Acceptable removal methods are:
 1. Sand blasting with containment.
 2. Lightly abrading the surface without scarring the surrounding surface. This must be demonstrated before
 the application and approved by the Engineer.
 3. Blast track cleaning.
 
 4. High-pressure water blasting (greater than 5000 psi [34 450 kPa]) with or without abrasives and with
 sufficient time to allow the pavement to dry before applying epoxy markings.
 5. Other methods approved by the Engineer.
 Contain and dispose of all the removal debris.
 D. Removal of Existing Markings. When placing epoxy markings in the same place as existing pavement
 markings, remove at least 95 percent of the existing pavement markings. Use a removal method that results in little
 or no color and texture changes in the surrounding pavement.
 E. Preparation Area.
 1. Lines. Prepare an area that is the width of the new pavement marking, or existing line, plus 1-inch (25
 mm) on each side and the length of broken lines plus 12 inches (300 mm) on each end.
 2. Arrows, Letters, and Symbols. When cleaning for letters and symbols, prepare an area that is sufficiently
 large to accommodate the new marking, or to remove the existing marking.
 646.05
 Application. Apply epoxy only when the surface is clean and dry and when the pavement and air
 temperature are above 50 ºF (10 ºC). Transfer the entire contents of each material container to the striper tanks.
 Keep the epoxy thoroughly mixed at all times during application. Before any application, test and record the
 pavement surface temperature, air temperature. Retest and record every 4 hours of operation. Demonstrate to the
 Engineer the testing devices including DLS are accurate and operational.
 Apply epoxy uniformly to the surface to be marked at a rate specified below. To achieve the rate, ensure that the
 thickness of the applied epoxy is 20 mils (0.51 mm).
 20 Mil Thickness
 
 Solid Line
 Broken Line
 Dotted Line
 Areas, Symbols, Words
 0.51 mm Thickness
 
 Solid Line
 Broken Line
 Dotted Line
 Areas, Symbols, Words
 
 Line Width (inch)
 4
 6
 8
 12
 24
 Gallon per Mile of Line
 22 33 44 66
 132
 5.5 8.25 11 16.5
 33
 5.5 8.25 11 16.5
 33
 1.25 gallon per 100 square feet
 Line Width (mm)
 100
 150 200 300 600
 Liter per Kilometer of Line
 50
 75 100 150 300
 12.5
 19 25 38 75
 12.5
 19 25 38 75
 0.51 L/m²
 
 Do not dilute the epoxy.
 Apply enough glass beads to the uncured epoxy so that the beads completely fill the epoxy film from the filmpavement interface to the top surface of the film to the extent that there are loose beads on the surface of the uncured
 line. Apply glass beads at a minimum rate of 31 pounds per 100 square feet (15 kg per 10 m2) of epoxy to achieve
 uniform retroreflectivity. Drop glass beads onto the epoxy in a double-drop system with the large gradation (Size
 I) first and the regular gradation (Size II) second in the same pass of the equipment. Apply the beads in equal
 amounts by weight.
 Cease operations when any of the following conditions are observed:
 A. The marking does not consistently dry to a no-track condition.
 B. The marking has cyclical soft spots.
 Resume marking operations when the Inspector is satisfied the problem is corrected.
 Replace unsatisfactory markings according to 641.11.
 
 Furnish the Engineer daily, biweekly and final DLS reports according to 641.04.
 646.07
 Basis of Payment. The cost of cleaning and surface preparation according to 646.04 is included in
 the unit bid cost for the various pavement markings.
 The Department will make payment for accepted quantities at the contract prices, or prices adjusted according
 to 641.11, measured according to 641.12, with the provisions specified in 641.13, and as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 646
 646
 646
 646
 646
 646
 646
 646
 646
 646
 
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Foot
 Each, Foot, (Meter)
 Square Foot
 (Square Meter)
 Lump Sum
 
 Edge Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Lane Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Center Line
 Channelizing Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Stop Line
 Yield Line
 Crosswalk Line
 Transverse/Diagonal Line
 Curb Marking
 Island Marking
 
 646
 646
 646
 646
 646
 646
 646
 646
 646
 646
 646
 
 Handicap Symbol Marking
 Railroad Symbol Marking
 School Symbol Marking, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Bicycle Lane Symbol Marking
 Shared Lane Marking
 Parking Lot Stall Marking
 Lane Arrow
 Word on Pavement, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Dotted Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Removal of Pavement Marking
 Two-Way Radio Equipment
 
 ITEM 647 HEAT-FUSED PREFORMED THERMOPLASTIC PAVEMENT MARKING
 647.01
 647.02
 647.03
 647.04
 647.05
 
 Description
 Materials
 Equipment
 Application
 Basis of Payment
 
 647.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and applying heat-fused preformed thermoplastic for
 use as auxiliary pavement markings according to Item 641, 740.01, 740.08 and the additional requirements
 specified below.
 647.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Heat fused preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material ... 740.08
 647.03
 Equipment. Use manufacturer recommended equipment to apply the heat-fused preformed
 thermoplastic pavement marking material according to the appropriate type, as follows:
 A. Type A90 or Type A125 Material.
 1.
 
 Propane torch to heat the pavement and material according to 647.04.B.
 
 2. Infrared thermometer to assure that both the pavement and the material are properly heated and do not
 exceed the manufacturer’s specified application temperature.
 B. Type B90 or Type B125 Material.
 1. Propane torch for ensuring no moisture is present on the pavement and heating the material according to
 647.04.C.
 2.
 
 A thermometer is not required.
 
 647.04
 
 Application.
 
 A. General. Apply the heat-fused preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material to clean, dry pavement
 surfaces according to the appropriate type unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer's recommendation. Apply
 primer sealer on portland cement concrete pavements for proper adhesion only if the manufacturer requires its use.
 Form lines 12 inches (300 mm) wide or less by one piece; form lines wider than 12 inches (300 mm) by no
 more than two pieces. Do not overlap individual pieces. Do not allow a gap greater than 1/4-inch (6 mm) between
 pieces.
 B. Type A90 and Type A125 Material Application on Asphalt Concrete and Portland Cement Concrete
 Pavements. Uniformly pre-heat the pavement to 300 F (149 C) with a propane torch. Place the material on the
 warm surface as soon as practical, then uniformly post-heat to 400 F (204 C). Begin the post-heating process of
 material application as quickly as possible. The Contractor may have to extend post-heating on concrete having a
 high moisture content. Allow the material to cool naturally and solidify before exposing it to traffic.
 Type A90 and A125 materials shall contain intermix beads throughout. Drop-on glass beads are not required
 unless using a non-surface beaded marking (i.e., for turn or combination arrows).
 C. Type B90 and Type B125 Material Application on Asphalt Concrete and Portland Cement Concrete
 Pavements. Heat the pavement only to ensure no moisture is present. Place the material on the dry surface and
 then uniformly heat the material until it bubbles and changes color to off-white. Material must be able to be applied
 with no preheating of the pavement to a specified temperature and without the use of a thermometer. Allow the
 material to cool naturally and solidify before exposing it to traffic.
 Type B90 and B125 material shall contain intermix glass beads throughout. Drop-on glass beads are not
 required unless using a non-surface beaded marking (i.e., for turn or combination arrows).
 
 647.05
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices, or prices
 adjusted according to 641.11, measured according to 641.12, with the provisions specified in 641.13, and as
 follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 647
 647
 647
 647
 647
 647
 647
 647
 647
 647
 647
 647
 647
 647
 647
 
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Foot (Meter)
 Each, Foot,
 Square Foot
 (Meter,
 Square Meter)
 
 Channelizing Line, ___ inch (___ mm), Type ___
 Stop Line, Type ___
 Yield Line, Type____
 Crosswalk Line, Type ___
 Transverse/Diagonal Line, Type ____
 Handicap Symbol Marking, Type ___
 Railroad Symbol Marking, Type ___
 School Symbol Marking, ___ inch (___ mm), Type ___
 Bicycle Lane Symbol Marking, Type____
 Shared Lane Marking
 Parking Lot Stall Marking, Type ___
 Lane Arrow, Type ___
 Word on a Pavement, ___ inch (___ mm), Type ___
 Dotted Line, ___ inch (___ mm), Type ___
 Removal of Pavement Marking
 
 ITEM 648 SPRAY THERMOPLASTIC PAVEMENT MARKING
 648.01 Description
 648.02 Materials
 648.03 Equipment
 648.04 Surface Preparation
 648.05 Application
 648.06 Basis of Payment
 648.01 Description. This work consists of furnishing and applying spray thermoplastic pavement markings
 according to Item 641, 740.01, 740.09, 740.10, and the additional requirements specified below.
 648.02 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 Spray Thermoplastic Pavement Marking ....................................... 740.10
 Glass beads, Type C ....................................................................... 740.09
 The Engineer may obtain random samples from the application equipment. Furnish the manufacturer’s
 identification information for the sampled materials. The Department will test the quality assurance sample for
 conformance to the manufacturer’s production ranges. Samples not meeting the manufacturer’s production ranges
 will require the Contractor to re-apply, at his expense, any markings using that sample. All other untested batches
 will become not approved materials and will either require testing or re-application.
 Do not apply material that has exceeded the manufacturer’s shelf life. Do not use glass beads that are wet.
 648.03 Equipment. Equip all spray thermoplastic pavement marking trucks for center line, lane line and edge
 line markings with a computerized Data Logging System (DLS), including a cab mounted display which shows the
 actual bead application rate. For center line, lane line and edge line markings applied with truck-mounted
 equipment, when the length of marking exceeds 0.5 miles (0.8 km) of continuous line equivalent, document the
 following with the DLS:
 Measure and record application vehicle speed to the nearest 0.1 mph (0.16 km/h).
 Measure and record pavement surface temperature.
 Measure and record air temperature.
 Measure and record spray thermoplastic temperature in the kettle and at the point of application.
 Record as a separate DLS report line entry the above information for each route section painted, when the length
 of marking exceeds 0.5 miles (0.8 km) of continuous line equivalent. A route section is defined as one direction of
 a contiguous section of highway (without breaks) with the same route number designation.
 If the DLS equipment fails finish that day’s work only and resume when the DLS equipment is working.
 The Department will provide a standard DLS spreadsheet, which prescribes the correct DLS report format and
 content prior to beginning of work.
 Each DLS shall have an annual calibration of all mechanical and electrical components and its software function
 and output confirmed by the DLS manufacturer or their designated representative. Evidence of the annual
 calibration is shown by carrying a signed and dated stamp or seal affixed to the inside of the driver’s door of each
 striper.
 Use application equipment that includes a kettle for melting the spray thermoplastic and maintaining it at the
 proper temperature. Equip the kettle with a thermostat to control the temperature of the melted spray thermoplastic
 and to prevent overheating. Use equipment that continuously mixes and agitates the molten spray thermoplastic.
 Ensure that the parts of the equipment that convey the spray thermoplastic from the kettle to the application point
 maintain it at the required temperature.
 
 Attach an automatic bead dispenser to the equipment so that the beads are immediately and uniformly dispensed
 over the marking surface. Equip the bead dispenser with an automatic cut-off control synchronized with the cutoff of the spray thermoplastic material.
 Ensure that the application equipment applies lines with a square end and can apply broken lines. Furnish
 application equipment for applying spray thermoplastic markings that produces different widths of lines.
 Use equipment that ensures uniformity in the thickness and width of lines. Use equipment that forms lines 8
 inches (200 mm) wide or less by one application pass.
 648.04 Surface Preparation. Before applying spray thermoplastic the pavement surfaces must be clean, dust
 free, and completely dry. Test for moisture using the following test procedures, if needed as directed by the
 Engineer:
 MOISTURE TEST
 Tape a 12 inch (300 mm) square sheet of thin plastic to the road surface, sealing all edges.
 After 15 minutes examine the side of the sheet facing the road surface.
 If more than a sparse amount of moisture is present, do not apply spray thermoplastic.
 Apply spray thermoplastic to new pavement, over existing thermoplastic, or over one application of paint. Do
 not apply spray thermoplastic over epoxy, polyester, or preformed markings. Remove poorly adhering, flaking and
 loose markings and curing compounds. Use an air blast, or manual or mechanical broom to prepare surfaces. When
 more effort is needed to obtain a surface free from adhering, flaking and loose markings and curing compounds,
 use water blasting or mechanical removal.
 648.05 Application. If applying spray thermoplastic to pavements that are less than six months old, ensure that
 both the pavement surface and the ambient air temperature at the time of application are not less than 50 °F (10 °C)
 and rising. However, if applying spray thermoplastic to pavements that are older than six months, ensure that both
 the pavement surface and the ambient air temperature at the time of application are not less than 70 °F (21 °C) and
 rising. Ensure that the temperature of spray thermoplastic at the point of application is at least 375 °F (191 °C) and
 not more than 425 °F (218 °C).
 Apply spray thermoplastic at a thickness of 45 mil (1.15 mm) at the following rates:
 45 Mil Thickness
 4
 Solid Line
 Broken or Dotted Line
 
 762-886
 191-222
 
 1.15 mm Thickness
 100
 Solid Line
 Broken or Dotted Line
 
 209-242
 52-61
 
 Line width (inch)
 6
 8
 Pounds per Mile of Line
 1143-1329
 1524-1772
 286-332
 381-443
 
 12
 2286-2658
 572-666
 
 Line Width (mm)
 150
 200
 300
 Kilogram per Kilometer of Line
 313-364
 417-485
 626-728
 79-92
 104-121
 158-184
 
 Mechanically apply glass beads to the wet spray thermoplastic surface so that the beads are embedded and
 retained and provide uniform retroreflectivity in the surface. Apply beads at a minimum rate of 10 pounds per 100
 square feet (4.9 kg per 10 m²) of spray thermoplastic surface area.
 Use primer when required by the manufacturer. Apply primer according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 For each route section on the DLS report, the Engineer will compute the amount of spray thermoplastic marking
 material and glass beads applied. The Department will reduce the contract price in direct proportion to the percent
 of deficiency of spray thermoplastic marking material or glass beads as specified in 648.05, up to 20 percent for
 
 each material deficiency. The Department will only use the greater deficiency of marking material or glass beads
 to compute the deduction.
 If the deficiency of spray thermoplastic marking material or glass beads is 20 percent or more, the Department
 will consider the work unsatisfactory. In addition, the Engineer will consider as unsatisfactory materials applied
 outside the temperature or application requirements in 648.05 without written approval of the Engineer. Replace
 or reapply spray thermoplastic markings and glass beads in all sections determined to be unsatisfactory as
 determined by the Engineer.
 Furnish the Engineer daily, biweekly and final DLS reports conforming to 648.03, and additional reports
 indicating material type and quantities in pounds (kilograms) of spray thermoplastic materials used, as per 641.04.
 648.06 Basis of Payment. The Department will not pay for any spray thermoplastic lines that do not meet the
 required thickness. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices, or prices adjusted
 according to 648.05, measured according to 641.12, with the provisions specified in 641.13, and as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 648
 648
 648
 648
 648
 648
 
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Mile (Kilometer)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot (Meter)
 Foot or Square Foot
 (Meter or Square Meter),
 or Each
 Lump Sum
 
 648
 
 Description
 Edge Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Lane Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Center Line
 Channelizing Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Dotted Line, ___ inch (___ mm)
 Removal of Pavement Marking
 Two-Way Radio Equipment
 
 650 ROADSIDES
 ITEM 651 TOPSOIL STOCKPILED
 651.01
 651.02
 651.03
 651.04
 
 Description
 Construction Requirements
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 651.01
 Description. This work consists of stripping topsoil from areas shown on the plans or from within
 the Right-of-Way limits, transporting, and stockpiling topsoil at locations shown on the plans or at locations
 selected by the Contractor with project approval.
 651.02
 Construction Requirements. Remove all heavy grass, weeds, or other vegetation over the areas
 before stripping. Keep the topsoil separate from other excavated materials. Remove topsoil before beginning the
 regular excavation or embankment work in the area. Strip the topsoil to the depth shown on the plans or as directed
 by the Engineer.
 651.03
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Topsoil Stockpiled by the number of cubic
 yards (cubic meters) completed and accepted, measured from the removal areas.
 651.04
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will not pay for any removal of topsoil beyond the directed depth.
 
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 651
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Topsoil Stockpiled
 
 ITEM 652 PLACING STOCKPILED TOPSOIL
 652.01
 652.02
 652.03
 652.04
 652.01
 surface.
 
 Description
 Construction Requirements
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 Description. This work consists of hauling and spreading topsoil from stockpiles and preparing the
 
 652.02
 Construction Requirements. Prepare the surface according to 653.03. Place and spread the topsoil
 according to 653.03.
 652.03
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Placing Stockpiled Topsoil by the number
 of cubic yards (cubic meters) completed and accepted in place.
 652.04
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 652
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Placing Stockpiled Topsoil
 
 ITEM 653 TOPSOIL FURNISHED AND PLACED
 653.01
 653.02
 653.03
 653.04
 653.05
 
 Description
 Materials
 Construction Requirements
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 653.01 Description. This work consists of furnishing and spreading topsoil and preparing the subgrade.
 653.02
 Materials. Furnish topsoil consisting of loose, friable, loamy material without admixture of subsoil
 or refuse. For topsoil to be considered loamy, ensure that the fraction passing the No. 10 (2.00 mm) sieve does not
 contain more than 40 percent clay. Furnish topsoil consisting of not less than 4 percent and not more than 20 percent
 organic matter as determined by loss on ignition of samples oven dried to constant weight at 212 F (100 C). Test
 topsoil according to AASHTO T 267. Furnish topsoil that is free of grass, brush, and, roots.
 653.03
 Construction Requirements. Before placing any topsoil, prepare all areas to be covered with topsoil
 according to 659.10. Place the topsoil according to 659.11. When seeding is specified, open the topsoil up to receive
 the seed.
 653.04
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure compacted Topsoil Furnished and Placed
 by the number of cubic yards (cubic meters) accepted in place.
 653.05
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 653
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Topsoil Furnished and Placed
 
 ITEM 654 RENOVATING EXISTING SOIL
 654.01
 654.02
 654.03
 654.04
 654.05
 
 Description
 Materials
 Construction Requirements
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 654.01
 Description. This work consists of preparing a suitable seedbed by grading and renovating existing
 soil, and furnishing and placing commercial fertilizer, if specified.
 Use removed or excavated materials in the Work when the material conforms to the specifications; if not, then
 recycle or dispose of the material according to 105.16 and 105.17.
 654.02
 
 Materials. Use commercial fertilizer conforming to 659.04.
 
 654.03
 
 Construction Requirements. Prepare the surface area for seed according to 659.10.
 
 If the Contract Documents require commercial fertilizer, place it according to 659.04.
 654.04
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Renovating Existing Soil by the number of
 M square feet (square meters) completed and accepted.
 The Department will measure Commercial Fertilizer by the number of tons (kilograms) completed and accepted.
 654.05
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 654
 
 M Square Feet
 (Square Meter)
 Ton (Kilogram)
 
 Renovating Existing Soil
 
 654
 
 Commercial Fertilizer
 
 ITEM 656 ROADSIDE CLEANUP
 656.01
 656.02
 656.03
 656.04
 656.05
 656.06
 656.07
 
 Description
 Intensity of Cleanup
 Cleaning
 Pruning
 Disposal of Refuse
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 656.01
 Description. This work consists of cleaning up outside the excavated and filled areas and disposing
 of undesirable plants and other vegetative growth, prunings, rubbish, stumps, conspicuous stones, all down timber,
 dead brush, logs and timbers; felling and destroying of all snags and such dangerous trees; and pruning trees, native
 shrubs and similar vegetation but does not include work to be performed under Item 201.
 656.02
 Intensity of Cleanup. Control the intensity of cleanup to effect a natural transition in cleanup
 treatment from the edge of the pavement outward to the limits of the Right-of-Way to avoid sharp demarcation
 between the artificial and the natural.
 656.03
 Cleaning. After removal of large objects, clean the designated areas with grubbing rakes or widespaced tooth rakes. Do not disturb or injure desirable grass, vines, or wild flowers.
 656.04
 Pruning. Prune trees 6 inches (150 mm) or less in diameter and native shrubs and similar vegetation
 according to Item 666. Consider the diameter of existing trees to be the diameter measured at 54 inches (1.4 m)
 above the ground.
 656.05
 Disposal of Refuse. Use removed materials in the Work when the material conforms to the
 specifications; if not, then recycle or dispose of the material according to 105.16 and 105.17.
 656.06
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Roadside Cleanup by the number of
 M square feet (square meters) cleaned up and accepted.
 The Department will determine the boundaries of the area to be cleaned up and the number of units.
 656.07
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 656
 
 M Square Feet
 (Square Meter)
 
 Roadside Cleanup
 
 ITEM 657 RIPRAP FOR TREE PROTECTION
 657.01
 657.02
 657.03
 657.04
 657.05
 657.06
 657.07
 657.08
 657.09
 
 Description
 Materials
 Tree Wells in Fill
 Walls in Cut
 Hand-Laid Stone Riprap
 Earthwork
 Pipe Drains
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 657.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and placing riprap for protecting selected trees or
 shrubs by tree wells and retaining walls.
 657.02
 Materials. Furnish stone consisting of sandstone, limestone, or other natural rock with a maximum
 30 percent single slab loss and a maximum 20 percent cumulative loss after testing to ASTM D 5240. Use an 8inch slab test sample. The Department may waive testing when the stone source has a known durability history.
 Furnish embankment according to Item 203. Unless otherwise specified, use 4-inch (100 mm) pipe conforming to
 611 Type E conduits.
 657.03
 Tree Wells in Fill. Where a fill around a tree or shrub not marked for removal will be 12 inches (0.3
 m) or more in depth over the feeding root area or ground surface lying within the periphery of the tree, construct a
 dry hand-laid stone riprap tree well. Construct a wall, of the same height as the fill, circling the tree or shrub and 3
 1/2 feet (1 m) from the tree trunk or as specified. Construct the wall so that the top of the wall follows the contour
 on the finished grade in a neat line.
 Construct tree wells before placing the fill over the root area. However, the Contractor may bring up the fill with
 the wall after required aggregate for root aeration is in place according to Item 658.
 657.04
 Walls in Cut. Where the top of the slope in cut is within 6 feet (2 m) of the trunk of a tree not marked
 for removal, construct a dry hand-laid stone riprap wall. Toe the bottom of the wall into the ground 2 inches (50
 mm) unless otherwise shown on the plans, and make the top of the wall even with the original ground line at the
 base of the tree. Extend the length of the wall far enough from the tree to amply cover the roots, or according to
 the shape and size as shown on the plans. Flare the ends of the wall back, and taper or fade them out into the
 finished grade of the slope in a neat line.
 657.05
 Hand-Laid Stone Riprap. Construct the earth bed on which riprap is to be placed to a slope of 1 foot
 (300 mm) vertical to 2 inches (50 mm) horizontal. Dress the earth bed to a true plane. Where riprap is to rest against
 a fill, tamp the embankment against the back of the stone.
 Construct riprap for walls or wells according to the arrangements and dimensions shown on the plans. Lay each
 course with the long dimensions of each stone perpendicular to the slope or batter.
 Use individual stones that are roughly rectangular in cross-section and are a minimum of 3 inches (75 mm) in
 the vertical depth with a horizontal dimension of not less than 15 inches (0.4 m). Place the individual stones by
 hand, one upon the other so that they break joints with the stone in the course below. Where it is necessary to use
 more than one stone to provide the specified thickness or depth of the wall, thereby resulting in joints parallel to
 the face of the wall, place such stones to break joints with the adjacent stones.
 Fill the space between the larger stones with spalls rammed into place. Ensure that the surface of the finished
 riprap does not vary more than 3 inches (75 mm) from that shown on the plans, and that it presents an even, tight
 surface, pleasing in appearance.
 657.06
 
 Earthwork. Perform excavation and embankment, as necessary, according to Item 203.
 
 657.07
 Pipe Drains. Drain tree wells with pipe starting on the original ground surface and lay to drain beyond
 the toe of the fill. Install pipe for drains according to Item 611.
 
 657.08
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Riprap for Tree Protection by the number
 of square yards (square meters) in place, completed and accepted. The Department will measure parallel to the face
 of the wells or walls.
 657.09
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for embankment and excavation under Item 203 and the
 pipe for drains under Item 611.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price for as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 657
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Riprap for Tree Protection
 
 ITEM 658 TREE ROOT AERATION
 658.01
 658.02
 658.03
 658.04
 658.05
 658.06
 658.07
 658.08
 
 Description
 Materials
 Preparation
 Aeration for Trees Not Welled
 Aeration with Tree Wells
 Earth Embankment
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 658.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing and placing the necessary aggregate and tile for the
 protection and aeration of the roots of trees and shrubs.
 Use removed or excavated materials in the Work when the material conforms to the specifications; if not, then
 recycle or dispose of the material according to 105.16 and 105.17.
 658.02
 Materials. Furnish aggregate for tree root aeration and protection consisting of No. 4 or 467 limestone
 or gravel with a maximum sodium soundness loss of 15 percent.
 Furnish 4-inch (100 mm) pipe conforming to 611 Type E conduit. Furnish embankment conforming to Item 203.
 658.03 Preparation. The feeding root area to be protected and aerated is the ground surface area lying within
 the periphery of the tree or shrub not marked for removal. Prepare these areas by excavating all vegetation, wood,
 brush, and debris.
 658.04
 Aeration for Trees Not Welled. Where the earth fill is less than 12 inches (300 mm) and more than
 4 inches (100 mm) over the feeding root area, loosely spread an aggregate aeration course of one-half the height of
 fill, but not less than 3 inches (75 mm), over this area. At the tree trunk, increase the thickness to the height of the
 fill and extend it outward from the tree trunk in collar form for a distance of 15 inches (0.4 m). Place a 2-inch
 (50 mm) layer of straw or hay over the aggregate.
 658.05
 Aeration with Tree Wells. Place an aeration course of aggregate while constructing the tree wells
 and before any other filling. Do not place any aggregate inside the tree well (between the wall and the tree trunk).
 Place the aggregate over the entire feeding root area outside of the tree wells to a total depth of 6 inches (150 mm)
 for each 12 inches (300 mm) of earth fill, or proportion thereof, but place a minimum depth of 6 inches (150 mm)
 regardless of depth of overlying fill. Place a 2-inch (50 mm) layer of straw or hay over the aeration layer.
 658.06
 
 Earth Embankment. Perform excavation and embankment, as necessary, according to Item 203.
 
 658.07
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Tree Root Aeration by the number of cubic
 yards (cubic meters), measured in the carrier or truck according to 109, of the aggregate furnished, placed,
 completed, and accepted.
 658.08
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for embankment and excavation under Item 203 and the
 pipe under Item 611.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract price as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 658
 
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 
 Tree Root Aeration
 
 ITEM 659 SEEDING AND MULCHING
 659.01
 659.02
 659.03
 659.04
 659.05
 659.06
 659.07
 659.08
 659.09
 659.10
 659.11
 659.12
 659.13
 659.14
 659.15
 659.16
 659.17
 659.18
 659.19
 659.20
 659.21
 659.22
 659.23
 659.24
 659.25
 
 Description
 Testing of Soil or Topsoil
 Lime
 Commercial Fertilizer
 Topsoil
 Compost
 Seeds
 Legumes
 Native Grasses and Wildflowers
 Site Preparation
 Placing Topsoil
 Seeding Methods
 Mulching Operation
 Straw Mulch
 Wood Fiber Mulch
 Compost Mulch
 Watering
 Maintenance
 Mowing
 Repair Seeding and Mulching
 Inter-Seeding
 Fertilization: 2nd Application
 Performances
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 659.01
 Description. This work consists of placing topsoil, preparing the seed bed, and placing and
 incorporating seed, agricultural lime, commercial fertilizer, and placing mulching material used to achieve NPDES
 final stabilization.
 Perform this work in areas shown on the plans for seeding and mulching.
 Perform seeding and mulching after completing all work in the area and within 7 days of obtaining final grade.
 If it is anticipated that future work may disturb an area, place temporary NPDES compliant Best Management
 Practices as needed until final stabilization measures under this item can be installed. If the Contractor disturbs a
 final area, then the Contractor shall restore this area. With the Engineer’s approval, the Contractor may apply
 permanent seed between October 30 and March 1 on projects started and completed within the same calendar year.
 Use all excavation material in the work. Alternatively legally use, recycle, or dispose of all excavated materials
 according to 105.16 and 105.17.
 659.02
 Testing of Soil or Topsoil. When a Soil Analysis Test of the soil or topsoil is required in the plans,
 use the following sampling frequency to determine the lime required:
 A. When an area is near final grade, perform Standard Soil Analysis Test to measure the soil acidity or alkalinity
 (pH) if no topsoil is to be placed. This testing will determine the soil requirements for lime. If the soil requirements
 are different than the standard lime mixture ratio application rates then the standard application rate shall be
 adjusted up or down such that the soil requirements are met. If liquid lime is used then use the following application
 table to achieve a pH of 6.5 or greater. Calculate the difference between the soil pH and 6.5 pH.
 
 Example:
 (15L/ha)
 
 pH Difference
 0.25
 0.50
 0.75
 1.0
 Application rate in gals/ac (L/ha)
 2.5 (4) 5 (8)
 10 (15)
 20 (30)
 Soil Analysis Test pH=5.75 required pH=6.5 difference= 0.75 required application rate is 10 gals/ac
 
 Only use liquid lime on the QPL list. Provide the Engineer with the Liquid Lime manufacturers written
 application rate. The Engineer will only accept printed application rates.
 There will be no change in the mixture ratio. The sampling frequency is one sample every 10 acres (4.0 ha)
 per project side or one sample per project side whichever is greater. A sample consist of 15 soil cores in a random
 pattern spaced at a minimum of 500 feet (153 m) apart. Sample any change in soil. Soil changes can be seen as
 color and/or texture changes.
 B. If placing topsoil, perform the Standard Soil Analysis Test from topsoil stockpiles to measure the topsoil
 acidity or alkalinity (pH). This testing will determine the soil requirements for lime. If the topsoil requirements are
 different than the standard lime mixture ratio application rates then the standard application rate shall be adjusted
 up or down such that the topsoil requirements are met.
 If liquid lime is used then use the following application table to achieve a pH of 6.5 or greater. Calculate the
 difference between the soil pH and 6.5 pH.
 pH Difference
 0.25
 0.50
 0.75
 1.0
 Application rate in gals/ac (L/ha)
 2.5 (4)
 5 (8)
 10 (15)
 20 (30)
 Example: Soil Analysis Test pH=5.75 required pH=6.5 difference= 0.75 required application rate is 10 gals/ac
 (15L/ha)
 Only use liquid lime on the QPL list. Provide the Engineer with the Liquid Lime manufacturers written
 application rate. The Engineer will only accept printed application rates.
 There will be no change in the mixture ratio. The sampling frequency is one sample every 10,000 cubic yards
 (7600 m3) of a topsoil stockpile, or at least two samples per stock pile whichever is greater. Test each stockpile. A
 sample consisting of 15 soil cores in a random pattern spaced evenly throughout the stockpile.
 Mix the 15 cores from each sample and then remove 1 pint (0.5 L) for testing.
 The Ohio County Extension offices can provide the Contractor with a soil sample kit and testing laboratory
 locations.
 The Department will review the sample test results and approve application rates for the standard mixture
 ratios provided by the Contractor.
 If a Soil Analysis Test of the soil is not required by the plans, use the standard application rates for lime and
 commercial fertilizer.
 659.03 Lime. Obtain granular or liquid lime from a agricultural lime dealer or manufacturer whose brands are
 grades registered or licensed by the State of Ohio, Department of Agriculture. The granular or liquid lime standard
 grade is Ag-ground 90+. Ag-ground 90+ is defined as agricultural ground limestone, having a total neutralizing
 power (TNP) of 90 percent or more, at least 40 percent passing a No. 100 (150 m) sieve and 95 percent passing a
 No. 8 (2.36 mm) sieve. Test granular or liquid lime according to Supplement 1007. Apply the granular or liquid
 lime standard grade Ag-ground 90+ at the standard application rate of 92 pounds per 1000 square feet (2 tons per
 acre) [0.45 kg/m2 (9 metric tons/ha)].
 The Contractor may provide other lime grade materials. The lime grade materials provided will meet Table 7-10
 “Equivalent Amounts of Liming Materials” found in Bulletin 472, Ohio Agronomy Guide, published by the
 Cooperative Extension Service, The Ohio State University. Based on the type of lime grade material provided,
 determine the increase or decrease in the standard application rate from Table 7-10 “Equivalent Amounts of Liming
 Materials” found in Bulletin 472, “Ohio Agronomy Guide”, published by the Cooperative Extension Service, The
 Ohio State University.
 If using liquid lime apply liquid lime at a rate of 5 gals/acre (8 L/ha) unless otherwise required per the soil or
 topsoil Soil Analysis Test. Provide the Engineer with the Liquid Lime manufacturers written application rate. The
 Engineer will only accept printed application rates. Only use Liquid lime on the QPL list.
 If testing of the soil or topsoil was performed, the lime required will be such that a growing environment of
 slightly acidic (pH 6.5) can be reached. The application rate of the standard grade lime Ag-ground 90+ will be
 
 adjusted up or down to achieve this condition and reported to the Department for approval. No lime is required for
 the soil or topsoil if the test shows a slightly acidic condition.
 659.04
 Commercial Fertilizer. Obtain commercial fertilizer from a dealer or manufacturer whose brands
 are grades registered or licensed by the State of Ohio, Department of Agriculture.
 Commercial fertilizer may be dry or liquid. Apply standard commercial fertilizer 10-20-10 evenly over the
 surface at a standard dry application rate of 20 pounds per 1000 square feet (0.1 kg/m2). Furnish liquid application
 rates for approval by the Department.
 The Contractor may provide other commercial fertilizer mixture ratios, however, ensure that the ratio meets or
 exceeds the standard commercial fertilizer ratio of 10-20-10 by providing an application rate specific for that ratio.
 The Department will approve this application rate that is specific to that ratio provided by the Contractor.
 For areas of inter-seeding apply commercial fertilizer 12-12-12 over the affected area at the above rate.
 For commercial fertilizer second application the method, mixture, and rate is broadcast 12-12-12 evenly over the
 surface without incorporation into the soil at a rate of 10 pounds per 1000 square feet (0.05 kg/m2).
 659.05
 Topsoil. If placing topsoil as specified in the plan, then stockpile off project site topsoil for testing
 and/or stockpile stripped topsoil from the project for testing. Perform the Soil Analysis Test from these stockpiles
 to determine the percent of organic matter present. The topsoil shall contain between 4 percent and 20 percent
 organic matter as determined by loss on ignition of samples oven dried to constant weight at 212 F (100 C) and
 consist of fertile, loose, friable, and loamy material that contains humus material. For topsoil to be considered
 loamy, ensure that the fraction passing the No. 10 (200) sieve does not contain more than 40 percent clay. Test
 topsoil according to AASHTO T 267.
 The Department will review the sample test results and approve the stockpiles for use. Stockpiles outside the
 above limits will not be used.
 Stripped topsoil from the R/W limits will be from the upper most layers of the excavation areas. Remove all
 heavy grass, weeds, and other vegetation before stripping topsoil from the excavation areas.
 A mixture of 1 part compost and 2 parts topsoil will be treated as topsoil.
 659.06
 Compost. Acceptable compost shall include Ohio EPA rated Class IV compost, EQS biosolids
 compost, or a Department approved equal. Furnish compost with a nitrogen content of 1.4 percent or above. Obtain
 compost from an Ohio EPA approved facility. Before delivering compost, provide the Engineer with the facility
 name and location.
 659.07
 Seeds. Furnish grass seed from a grass seed dealer or grower whose brands are grades registered or
 licensed by the State of Ohio, Department of Agriculture or from the approved list of grass seed dealers or growers
 on file with Department. Furnish the kind and type of grass seed required that meets current specifications on file
 with the Department as to percentage purity, percentage weed seed, and percentage germination.
 Turf grass germination rates specifications are shown below in Table 659.07-1 to provide an understanding of
 the specifications on file with the Department along with information to understand what is required.
 TABLE 659.07-1 GERMINATION RATES
 Species
 Kentucky Bluegrass
 Fine Fescue
 Perennial Ryegrass
 Annual Ryegrass
 Tall Fescue
 Creeping Red Fescue
 
 Minimum Percent
 80
 85
 85
 85
 85
 85
 
 High Quality Percent
 85
 90
 90
 90
 90
 90
 
 If high quality is not shown on the plans, then the minimum germination rate is required.
 
 Mark the test date on seed bags. Furnish seeds as separate species and cultivars, packaged together or bagged
 separately, and labeled, tagged, or marked according to ORC 907.03. Sow seeds within 15 months of the testing
 date. The Department reserves the right to test, reject, or approve all seed after delivery.
 659.08
 Legumes. Inoculate or treat all leguminous seeds (crown vetch) with the proper amount of pure
 nitrogen-fixing bacteria and mix with sufficient water to thoroughly wet the seed. The bacteria selected will be for
 maximum vitality and shall not be more than one-year old. All culture records will be provided with the leguminous
 seeds.
 If sown hydraulically, use 4 times the inoculant rate specified by the inoculant manufacturer. If pre-inoculated
 seed is used then use 3 times the inoculant rate specified by the inoculant manufacturer. Immediately before
 seeding, add inoculant and sticking agent directly into the slurry, and thoroughly mix the slurry. Sow seed as soon
 as possible after inoculation. If left standing for more than 24 hours, reinoculate seed before sowing. Mix all seed
 on the project. Sixty days before seeding, provide a written description for the Class 3C mixture showing the
 percentage by weight (mass) of each kind of seed for the Engineer’s approval.
 Include the following with the description:
 A. Name and location of the seed supplier.
 B. Origin and date of harvest of each kind of seed.
 C. A statement of the purity and germination of each seed.
 D. Testing date for each seed.
 E. How and when seeds were mixed.
 659.09
 Native Grasses and Wildflowers. Table 659.09-1 lists the seed quantities by weight per area. Use
 Classes 4, 5, and 6 in the amounts of pure live seed (PLS) for each species listed. If seed tests show that the seed
 has an actual pure live seed (PLS) yield less than the intended yield, adjust the specified quantity to provide the
 intended PLS yields.
 For Class 4, 5, and 6 mixtures, provide seed specifically grown for the Ohio climate.
 Use cool season turf Classes 1, 2, 3A, and 3B as listed in Table 659.09-1 composed of no less than two and no
 more than four cultivars of the same species. Sixty days before seeding, provide a written description for the Class
 1, 2, and 3A mixtures showing the percentage by weight (mass) of each kind of seed for the Engineer’s approval.
 Mix all seed on the project. Sixty days before seeding, provide a written description for the Classes 1, 2, 3A, 3B,
 4, 5, and 6 mixtures showing the percentage by weight (mass) of each kind of seed for the Engineer’s approval.
 Include the following with the description:
 A. Name and location of the seed supplier.
 B. Origin and date of harvest of each kind of seed.
 C. A statement of the purity and germination of each seed.
 D. Testing date for each seed.
 E. How and when seeds were mixed.
 TABLE 659.09-1 GRASS AND WILDFLOWER SEED MIXES
 Weight per Area
 lb
 kg
 1000 ft2 1000 m2
 
 Mix Type
 Class Seeds
 1
 Lawn Mixture
 Use for areas in front of residences, commercial properties, etc. between curb and
 sidewalk with slopes 3:1 or flatter.
 Kentucky Bluegrass (Poa pratensis)
 3
 14.64
 Creeping Red Fescue (Festuca rubra)
 3
 14.64
 Annual Ryegrass (Lolium multiflorum)
 2
 9.76
 
 Weight per Area
 lb
 kg
 1000 ft2 1000 m2
 2
 9.76
 
 Mix Type
 Class Seeds
 Perennial Ryegrass, turf type (Lolium perenne)
 2
 Roadside Mixture
 Kentucky Bluegrass (Poa pratensis)
 1.5
 7.32
 Kentucky 31 Fescue
 2
 9.76
 (Festuca arundinacea var. KY 31)
 Perennial Ryegrass (Lolium perenne)
 1.5
 7.32
 3A
 Slope Mixtures
 Use for slopes flatter than or equal to 3:1.
 Use Class 2, 3B, 3C, or 4B mixtures
 3B
 Low Growing Slope Mixture
 Use for slopes steeper than 3:1 when low growing species are required
 Hard Fescue (Festuca longifolia)
 1.3
 6.35
 Creeping Red Fescue (Festuca rubra)
 0.8
 3.9
 Annual Ryegrass (Lolium multiflorum)
 0.23
 1.12
 3C
 Crown Vetch Mixture
 Use for slopes steeper than 3:1 and shale or rock slopes.
 Crown Vetch (Coronilla varia)
 0.9
 4.39
 Perennial Ryegrass (Lolium perenne)
 1.8
 8.79
 Annual Ryegrass (Lolium multiflorum)
 0.3
 1.46
 4A
 Native Grass Mixture
 Use for slopes flatter than 2:1 and seeding for wildlife habitat mitigation.
 Big Bluestem (Andropogon gerardii)
 0.07
 0.34
 Indiangrass (Sorghastrum nutans)
 0.09
 0.44
 Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum)
 0.02
 0.09
 Annual Ryegrass (Lolium multiflorum)
 spring
 0.11
 0.54
 fall
 0.34
 1.66
 4B Low Growing Native Grass Mixture
 Use for slopes flatter than 2:1 and seeding for wildlife habitat mitigation when low
 growing species are required.
 Little Bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium)
 0.18
 0.88
 Sideoats Grama (Bouteloua curtipendula)
 0.04
 0.19
 Prairie Dropseed (Sporobolus heterolepis)
 0.04
 0.19
 Annual Ryegrass (Lolium multiflorum)
 spring
 0.11
 0.54
 fall
 0.34
 1.66
 5A
 Annual and Perennial Wildflower Mixture
 Use for slopes flatter than 2:1 and seeding for wildlife habitat mitigation.
 Annual Mixture
 0.07
 0.34
 Do not exceed 25% by weight of any one of the following species:
 Corn Poppy (Papaver rhoeas)
 Cosmos (Cosmos bipinnatus)
 Yellow Cosmos (Cosmos sulphureus)
 Cornflower (Centaurea cyanus)
 Rocket Larkspur (Delphinium ajacis)
 Indian Blanket (Gaillardia pulchella)
 Perennial Wildflower Mixture
 0.28
 1.37
 Do not exceed 50% by weight PLS of any one of the following
 species:
 
 Mix Type
 Class Seeds
 Black-eyed Susan (Rudbekia hirta)
 Purple Coneflower (Echinacea purpurea)
 Lance-leaved Coreopsis (Coreopsis lanceolata)
 5B Native Wildflower and Grass Mixture
 Use for slopes flatter than 2:1 and seeding for wildlife habitat
 mitigation.
 Native Wildflower Mixture
 Do not exceed 10% by weight PLS of any one of the following
 species:
 Butterfly-weed (Asclepias tuberosa)
 New England Aster (Aster novae-angliae)
 Partridge Pea (Cassia fasciculata)
 Purple Coneflower (Echinacea purpurea)
 Rattlesnake Master (Eryngium yuccifolium)
 Ox-eye Sunflower (Heliopsis helianthoides)
 Wild Bergamot (Monarda fistulosa)
 Greyhead Coneflower (Ratibida pinnata)
 Orange Coneflower (Rudbekia fulgida)
 Prairie Dock (Silphium terebinthinaceum)
 Whorled Rosinweed (Silphium trifoliatum)
 Stiff Goldenrod (Solidago rigida)
 Grass Mixture
 Big Bluestem (Andropogon gerardii)
 Little Bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium)
 Indiangrass (Sorghastrum nutans)
 Annual Ryegrass (Lolium multiflorum)
 6 Wildlife Mixture
 Use for slopes flatter than 2:1 and seeding for wildlife habitat
 mitigation.
 Big Bluestem (Andropogon gerardii)
 Little Bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium)
 Indiangrass (Sorghastrum nutans)
 Ox-eye Sunflower (Heliopsis helianthoides)
 Prairie Dock (Silphium terebinthinaceum)
 Purple Coneflower (Echinacea purpurea)
 Whorled Rosinweed (Silphium trifoliatum)
 Downy Sunflower (Helianthus mollis)
 New England Aster (Aster novae-angliae)
 Annual Ryegrass (Lolium multiflorum) spring
 fall
 7 Temporary Erosion Control Mixture
 Annual Ryegrass (Lolium multiflorum)
 
 Weight per Area
 lb
 kg
 1000 ft2 1000 m2
 
 0.34
 
 1.66
 
 0.046
 0.069
 0.023
 0.92
 
 0.22
 0.34
 0.11
 4.49
 
 0.13
 0.18
 0.13
 0.18
 0.18
 0.18
 0.11
 0.07
 0.07
 0.11
 0.34
 
 0.63
 0.88
 0.63
 0.88
 0.88
 0.88
 0.54
 0.34
 0.34
 0.54
 1.66
 
 2.02
 
 9.86
 
 659.10
 Site Preparation. Before placing topsoil or seed remove rock or other foreign material of 3 inches
 (75 mm) or greater in any dimension, from all areas except as listed below.
 
 A. Remove stones 1-inch (25 mm) or greater in any dimension from all seed areas from in front of residences,
 commercial properties, etc.; between curb and sidewalks; or as shown on the plans.
 B. Remove nothing in shale cuts, but allow the shale to deteriorate to a soil type surface before seeding or placing
 topsoil.
 Finish the area in such a manner that seeding, place sod, planting, or, placing topsoil can proceed without
 additional soil preparation.
 Apply commercial fertilizer, lime, or other soil amendments including compost to the soil or topsoil surface in
 separate operations. Incorporate the commercial fertilizer, granular lime, or other soil amendments, including
 compost either separately or together, into the soil or topsoil to a depth of 2 to 4 inches (50 to 100 mm). Do not
 mix Liquid lime into the soil or topsoil. Only apply liquid lime to the top of the soil or topsoil. Furnish a smooth
 surface for the seed or topsoil by tracking with a dozer or by other methods. If the site is inaccessible to a dozer
 and other methods do not provide results equivalent to hand raking, hand rake these areas. Ensure that the surface
 is uniform, free of gullies, rivulets, crusting, and caking. Finely grade the surface for seed or topsoil for slopes 4:1
 or flatter, and grade all other slopes. Rake or open the surface with a dozer cleats or otherwise loosen the surface
 of these areas to a depth of 1 inch (25 mm) immediately before covering with topsoil. Remove raked up material
 from the area.
 659.11
 Placing Topsoil. If shown on the plans, place topsoil in loose lifts that construct a 4-inch (100 mm)
 compacted depth. The surface of the topsoil shall be such that the final grade as shown on the cross-sections is met.
 Use the following methods or combination of any of the methods to produce the required space to place the topsoil.
 A. The 203 Items can be cut or placed to the final grade, which will match the plan quantities for Items 203, and
 then remove a 4-inch (100 mm) thickness for the topsoil.
 B. The 203 Items can be cut or placed to a 4-inch (100 mm) height below the final grade. There will be no change
 from the plan quantities in the 203 Items for this method.
 Track the area with a dozer to compact and provide good contact between the topsoil and the surface.
 The Contractor may place topsoil by using pneumatic, or hydraulic methods. If using pneumatic or hydraulic
 methods to place the topsoil, the Contractor may place the top 1-inch (25 mm) with a mix of seed, commercial
 fertilizer, lime, and other soils amendments. This mixture will be 1 part compost and 2 parts topsoil. Do not apply
 mulch to this surface. The compost is the mulch.
 659.12
 Seeding Methods. Apply seed to prepared areas. If the prepared areas to be seeded become
 compacted before seeding, loosen the surface using disks, rakes, or other methods.
 Thoroughly mix all seed, and evenly sow the seed over the prepared areas at the required rates. Do not sow seed
 during high winds. For slopes subject to windy conditions, seed using hydraulic methods only. Operate equipment
 in a manner to ensure complete coverage of the entire area to be seeded.
 If broadcast seeding, seed Classes 1, 2, 3A, and 3B between August 15 to October 30. If necessary to seed Classes
 1, 2, 3A, or 3B before August 15, but after March 1 increase the seeding rates by 5 percent.
 Between March 1 and October 30, the Contractor may use hydro seeding, which applies the mulch, seed, water,
 and commercial fertilizer in the same operation, for Classes 1, 2, 3A, 3B, 3C, and 7.
 Between October 30 and March 1, apply temporary seed according to Supplemental Specification 832. With the
 Engineer’s approval, the Contractor may apply permanent seed between October 30 and March 1 on projects started
 and completed within the same calendar year.
 Seed before or concurrently with all required erosion control items.
 Do not apply crown vetch seed from September 1 to October 31.
 Wildflower Classes 5 and 6 seed from September 1to October 30, unless the Engineer allows seeding from March
 1 to May 31.
 Seed Class 4 wildflowers from March 1 to May 31.
 
 Seed native grasses and wildflowers in Classes 4, 5, and 6 with a rangeland type, slit seeder or native seed grass
 drill. Seed native grasses with no less than two passes in different directions and by equally splitting the seed
 application rate to each pass. Use broadcast seeding, along with cultipacking or rolling, only with the Engineer’s
 approval.
 If broadcast seeding, perform the following, immediately after sowing, to provide good seed-soil contact:
 A. For flat surfaces, lightly rake the area then roll.
 B. For slopes, track the area with a dozer.
 659.13
 Mulching Operation. Mulch materials consist of straw, compost, or wood fiber for 3:1 or flatter
 slopes. The Contractor may specify which mulch to use, if it is not shown on the plans. Use mulch that is reasonably
 free of weed seed, foreign materials, or other materials that would prohibit seed germination. Do not mulch during
 high winds. For slopes subject to windy conditions mulch using hydraulic methods only. Within 24 hours after
 seeding an area, evenly place mulch. Immediately replace mulch that becomes displaced.
 659.14
 Straw Mulch. Straw mulch consists of straw. Evenly place straw mulch over all seeded areas at the
 following rates:
 Seeding Period
 From March 15 to October 30
 From October 31 to March 14
 
 Rate
 2 tons per acre (0.5 metric ton/1000 m2)
 3 tons per acre (0.7 metric ton/1000 m2)
 
 Keep straw mulching materials in place by applying an asphalt emulsion at a minimum rate of 60 gallons per ton
 (250 L/metric ton) of straw mulch or by applying tackifiers according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 Apply an additional application at a rate of 30 gallons per ton (125 L/metric ton) of straw mulch to shoulder areas,
 starting at the berm edge and extending out for a distance of 10 feet (3 m). Use an emulsion that is nontoxic to
 plants and prepared in a manner that will not change during transportation or storage.
 659.15
 Wood Fiber Mulch. Wood fiber mulch consists of pure wood fibers manufactured expressly from
 clean wood chips. Ensure that the chips do not contain lead paint, varnish, printing ink, and petroleum based
 compounds. Do not use wood fiber mulch manufactured from recycled materials of unknown origin such as
 sawdust, paper, cardboard, or residue from chlorine-bleached pulp and paper mills.
 Ensure that the wood fiber mulch maintains uniform suspension in water under agitation and blends with grass
 seed, commercial fertilizer, and other additives to form a homogeneous slurry. Use manufacturer-approved
 tackifiers.
 Using standard hydraulic mulching equipment, evenly apply the slurry over the soil surface in a one-step
 operation. Apply slurry from March 1 to October 30 at the following rates:
 Surface
 Slopes 3:1 or flatter
 
 Rate
 46 pounds per 1000 square feet (225 kg/1000 m2)
 
 659.16
 Compost Mulch. The Contractor may provide compost applied to a minimum depth of 1/4-inch (6
 mm) over the prepared seed areas. The Contractor may also mix the grass seed with the compost and using
 pneumatic equipment, place this mixture to a minimum depth of 1/4-inch (6 mm) over the prepared seed areas. If
 using compost no tackifiers or asphalt emulsion are required.
 659.17
 Watering. Thoroughly water all permanent seeded areas (Classes 1 to 6) after the seed has
 germinated. Apply a total rate of 300 gallons per 1000 square feet (12.2 m3/1000 m2) in at least 2 applications
 spread over 7 days. Apply the water using a hydro-seeder or a water tank under pressure with a nozzle that produces
 a spray that will not dislodge the mulch material.
 Perform a secondary water application between 7 and 10 days after the primary applications. If 1/2-inch (13 mm)
 or greater of rainfall has occurred within the first 7-day period, the Contractor may delay or omit the secondary
 application, depending on weather conditions.
 
 659.18
 Maintenance. Maintain all seeded and mulched areas until final inspection. Repair damaged areas to
 the original condition and grade.
 659.19
 Mowing. The Engineer may require mowing before permanent seeding and during the growing
 season following permanent seeding. The Engineer will notify the Contractor of when to begin each mowing. Use
 suitable mowing equipment of the rotary, flail, disk, or sickle type. Use handheld equipment where inacessible by
 larger equipment. Do not bunch or windrow mowed vegetation. Mow to a final cutting height of no less than 6
 inches (150 mm). If necessary to achieve the cutting height, make more than one pass with the mower.
 659.20
 Repair Seeding and Mulching. Repair all damage or erosion of the seeded and mulched areas before
 the completion of the project.
 Rework or reshape slopes, and bring in additional material, as necessary, using whatever equipment is necessary
 to restore slopes to grade. Seed and mulch repaired areas according to this specification. As an alternative, the
 Contractor may apply compost to repair areas as specified in Item 659.
 659.21
 Inter-Seeding. Inter-seeding is seeding existing thin and spotty growing turf using a slit or drill type
 seeder. Perform inter-seeding only from March 15 to May 15 and from September 1 to October 15. If necessary to
 achieve good seed-soil contact, mow before seeding according to Item 659.
 For seeding steep slopes or inaccessible areas, the Contractor may use broadcast or hydraulic seeding methods.
 Broadcast commercial fertilizer over affected areas as specified in Item 659. Water affected areas at the rate
 specified in 659 to aid in seed-soil contact.
 659.22
 Fertilization: 2nd Application. Once all repair seeding and mulching, and inter-seeding is complete
 and no earlier than 3 months after seeding, perform a Soil Analysis Test if shown on the plans to determine the
 need for a second application of commercial fertilizer. Do not apply the second application of commercial fertilizer
 unless the grass has germinated. Broadcast commercial fertilizer of 12-12-12 evenly over the surface without
 incorporation at a rate of 10 pounds per 1000 square feet (0.05 kg/m2).
 659.23
 Performance. The Department will inspect all seeded areas no earlier than 6 months and no later
 than 12 months after final seeding. For any area identified without a uniform density of at least 70 percent grass
 cover, repair seeding and mulching as specified in 659 or perform inter-seeding as specified in 659, and fertilize as
 specified in this subsection.
 Also repair seeding and mulching or perform inter-seeding, and fertilize seeded areas damaged by traffic or
 erosion, due to no fault or negligence of the Contractor.
 659.24
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Soil Analysis Test by the number of tests
 submitted to the Engineer.
 The Department will measure the compacted topsoil by the number of cubic yards (cubic meters).
 The Department will measure Commercial Fertilizer by the number of tons (kilograms) of each quantity of
 furnished, spread, and incorporated into the soil or topsoil. This measure will be converted to the standard
 application rate for the standard mixture ratio.
 The Department will measure lime or liquid lime by the number of acres (ha) furnished, spread, and incorporated
 into the soil or topsoil. The measure will be converted to the standard application rate for the standard mixture ratio.
 The Department will measure Seeding and Mulching by the number of square yards (square meters).
 The Department will measure Repair Seeding and Mulching by the number of square yards (square meters) of
 damaged or eroded areas reshaped, seeded, and mulched. If compost is substituted for mulch to repair areas, the
 Department will include such work under Repair Seeding and Mulching.
 The Department will measure Water by the number of M gallons or 1000 gallon units (cubic meters) applied.
 The Department will measure water in tanks, tank wagons, or trucks of predetermined capacity, or by means of
 meters of a type satisfactory to the Engineer and furnished and installed by the Contractor at expense to the
 Department, or determined by weight conversion.
 The Department will measure Inter-Seeding by the number of square yards (square meters) of the seeded area.
 
 The Department will measure mowing by the number of M square feet (square meters) satisfactorily mowed.
 If seeded areas are damaged by traffic or erosion, due to no fault or negligence of the Contractor, the Department
 will measure for such work and mobilization by Supplemental Agreement.
 The Department will not measure for repairs to seeding and mulching if damage or erosion of the areas occurs
 as a result of fault or negligence of the Contractor.
 659.25
 
 Basis of Payment.
 
 The Department will pay the plan quantity for compacted topsoil. The Department will not adjust topsoil
 quantities when the volume between two consecutive cross-sections differs by less than 5 percent from the plan
 quantity, unless the difference between the actual quantity and plan quantity is greater than 1000 cubic yards (1000
 m³). For quantity differences greater than 5 percent or greater than 1000 cubic yards (1000 m³), submit supporting
 documentation to the Engineer.
 The Department will pay the plan quantity for Seeding and Mulching. The Department will not adjust Seeding
 and Mulching quantities when the area between two consecutive cross-sections differs by less than 5 percent from
 the plan quantity, unless the difference between the actual quantity and plan quantity is greater than 20,000 square
 yards (20,000 m²) for all Seeding and Mulching pay items, combined. For quantity differences greater than 5
 percent or greater than 20,000 square yards (20,000 m²), submit supporting documentation to the Engineer.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows (M=1000):
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 659
 659
 
 Each
 Cubic Yard
 (Cubic Meter)
 Ton (Kilogram)
 Acres (ha)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 M Gallons
 (Cubic Meters)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 M Square Feet
 (Square Meter)
 
 Soil Analysis Test
 Topsoil
 
 659
 659
 659
 659
 659
 659
 659
 659
 659
 
 Commercial Fertilizer
 Lime
 Seeding and Mulching
 Seeding and Mulching for Wildlife
 Seeding and Mulching Class ___
 Repair Seeding and Mulching
 Water
 Inter-Seeding
 Mowing
 
 ITEM 660 SODDING
 660.01
 660.02
 660.03
 660.04
 660.05
 660.06
 660.07
 660.08
 660.09
 660.10
 660.11
 
 Description
 Materials
 Lifting Sod
 Preparation of Areas to be Sodded
 Placing Sod on Slopes 3 to 1 or Flatter
 Placing Sod on Slopes Steeper Than 3 to 1 But Flatter Than 2 to 1
 Placing Sod in Ditches
 Placing Reinforced Sod On Slopes 2 to 1 or Steeper
 Watering
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 660.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing, hauling, excavating for and preparing the bed, and
 placing sod.
 660.02
 Materials. Furnish sod consisting of well-rooted Kentucky Blue Grass (Poa pratensis) or Canadian
 Blue Grass (Poa compressa) containing a growth of not more than 30 percent of other grasses and clovers, and free
 from all noxious weeds such as wild mustard, thistles, quack grass, and Johnson grass, and reasonably free from
 dandelions and crab grass.
 Ensure that all sod is certified by the sod supplier that it complies with this item. Ensure that the sod was recently
 mowed to a height of not more than 3 inches (75 mm). Furnish a certificate with each shipment, and furnish the
 following additional information from the sod supplier:
 A. The name of the producer.
 B. The amount of sod shipped in square yards (square meters).
 C. The location of sod field.
 D. The location of job site.
 E. The date sod was cut.
 F. The thickness the sod was cut.
 Furnish wood stakes that are at least 1/2  3/4  12 inches (13  19  300 mm).
 Furnish T-pins that are 18-inch (450 mm) in length and ¼ inch (6 mm) in diameter and have a 3-inch (75 mm)
 tee.
 Furnish round pins that are 18-inch (450 mm) in length and ¼ inch (6 mm) in diameter and have a 1.5-inch (38
 mm) washer.
 Furnish galvanized poultry netting 50 inches (1200 mm) wide with 2-inch (50 mm) mesh and No. 20 gage
 minimum wire.
 Furnish fertilizer and lime according to Item 659.
 Furnish sod materials according to the Department’s Qualified Product List (QPL).
 660.03
 Lifting Sod. Furnish sod strips that are not less than 3 feet (0.9 m) and not over 6 feet (1.8 m) in
 length with a uniform width of not over 24 inches (0.6 m). Furnish sod strips that lay flat on skids. The Contractor
 may elect to deliver sod rolls of up to 25 feet (7.6 m) in length. Furnish sod rolls that are pre-rolled on skids.
 Furnish sod cut to a depth equal to the growth of the fibrous roots but in no case less than 1 inch (25 mm).
 Deliver sod to the job within 24 hours after being cut, and install it within 48 hours after being cut.
 During wet weather, allow the sod to dry sufficiently to prevent tearing during handling and placing. During dry
 weather, water the sod before lifting to ensure its vitality and to prevent the dropping off of the soil in handling.
 
 660.04
 Preparation of Areas to be Sodded. Before placing the sod, excavate the sod bed to a depth that
 when the sod is in place the top of the sod is flush with the surrounding grade and conforms to the typical crosssection. If specified, place the topsoil according to Item 659. If specified under Item 659, apply commercial
 fertilizer and agricultural liming material. Incorporate these materials in the areas to be sodded at the rate specified
 in 659.03 and 659.04 to a depth of not less than 1 inch (25 mm). Incorporate these materials within 48 hours prior
 to placing the sod. Immediately before placing the sod, rake the area or otherwise bring it to an even surface
 forming a proper sod bed. If the area is dry, thoroughly water the sod bed.
 660.05
 Placing Sod On Slopes 3 to 1 or Flatter. Do not place any sod when the temperature is below 32
 F (0 C). Do not place any frozen sod, and do not place any sod upon frozen soil. When placing sod between
 June 1 and October 15, cover it immediately with straw mulch 1 inch (25 mm) thick, loose measurement.
 Lift sod from trucks or storage piles, and place it by hand with close joints and no overlapping. Plug all gaps
 between sections of sod and openings at angles with sod. After laying, thoroughly water the sod, and tamp the sod
 with approved sod tampers sufficiently to bring the sod into close contact with the sod-bed and to ensure tight joints
 between the sections or strips. Upon placing the sod, ensure that the surface of the sodded areas coincides with the
 finished grade.
 660.06
 Placing Sod on Slopes Steeper Than 3 to 1 But Flatter Than 2 to 1. Place sod on slopes steeper
 than 3 to 1 but flatter than 2 to 1 according to 660.05, with the following modifications.
 Lay sod with the long edges of the strip parallel to the contour starting at the bottom of the slope. Neatly match
 successive strips, and stagger all joints by at least 12 inches (300mm).
 For sod placed 6 feet (1.8 m) or greater in height (measured along the slope), stake each strip or roll securely
 along all sides with stakes not more than 2 feet (0.6 m) apart with the flat side against the slope or with pins not
 more than 2 feet (0.6 m) apart. Drive the wooden stakes so that the last 1 inch (25 mm) remains above the top of
 the sod. Drive pins 1 inch (25 mm) below the top of the grass.
 After laying, thoroughly water the sod, and tamp the sod with approved tampers sufficiently to bring the sod into
 close contact with the sod-bed and to ensure tight joints between the sections or strips.
 660.07
 
 Placing Sod in Ditches. Place sod in ditches according to 660.05, with the following modifications.
 
 Place sod in ditches with joints staggered at least 12 inches (300 mm). Stake each strip or roll securely along all
 sides with wooden stakes not more than 2 feet (0.6 m) apart with the flat side against the slope. Drive the wooden
 stakes so that the last 1 inch (25 mm) remains above the top of the sod.
 660.08
 Placing Reinforced Sod On Slopes 2 to 1 or Steeper. Place reinforced sod on slopes 2 to 1 or steeper
 or as specified in the plans according to 660.05, with the following modifications. Before placing the sod, place the
 galvanized poultry netting or equivalent. Stake the galvanized poultry netting or equivalent securely to the
 subgrade by using pins or wood stakes. Place the pins or wooden stakes at 4 foot (1.2m) intervals. Fasten the netting
 to the wooden stakes with staples. Where the sod width is from 8 to 10 feet (2.4 to 3 m) wide, the Engineer will
 allow two strands of netting for a total width of 8 feet (2.4 m). For sod, stake each strip or roll securely along all
 sides with wooden stakes not more than 2 feet (0.6 m) apart with the flat side against the slope or with pins not
 more than 2 feet (0.6 m) apart. Drive the wooden stakes so that the last 1 inch (25 mm) remains above the top of
 the sod. Drive pins 1 inch (25mm) below the top of the grass.
 660.09
 Watering. Keep all sodded areas thoroughly moist for 30 days after sodding. Repair any areas
 damaged following installation. Ensure that sod is in place for at least 30 days before final acceptance.
 660.10
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Sodding Unstaked, Sodding Staked, and
 Sodding Reinforced by the actual number of square yards (square meters) of area sodded, completed and accepted.
 660.11
 659.
 
 Basis of Payment. If required, the Department will pay for topsoil liming and fertilizing under Item
 
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 660
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Sodding Unstaked
 
 660
 660
 
 Sodding Staked
 Sodding Reinforced
 
 ITEM 661 PLANTING TREES, SHRUBS, PERENNIALS AND VINES
 661.01
 661.02
 661.03
 661.04
 661.05
 661.06
 661.07
 661.08
 661.09
 661.10
 661.11
 661.12
 661.13
 661.14
 661.15
 661.16
 661.17
 661.18
 
 Description
 Plant Materials
 Location and Source of Supply
 Transportation, Storage and Handling
 Labeling
 Acceptance
 Scheduling
 Layout of Plant Materials
 Backfill Mix
 Planting
 Mulch
 Wrapping
 Bracing
 Period of Establishment
 Final Acceptance
 Removal of Stakes and Wrapping
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 661.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing, planting and maintaining trees, shrubs, perennials,
 and vines, described in the plans. Additionally, provide landscape watering according to Item 662.
 661.02
 Plant Materials. Plant materials include all trees, shrubs, perennial and vines, and plants required as
 part of the Work. Provide plant materials that are healthy specimens, typical of their species or variety, and that
 exhibit a normal habit of growth as set forth in the most current edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock
 (ANSI Z60).
 661.03
 Location and Source of Supply. Supply the Engineer with complete and detailed information
 concerning the source of supply for each item of required plant material within 15 days after receiving the notice
 of award of the Contract.
 Ensure that all plant materials have been grown in the same hardiness zone or 1 zone colder than the project.
 661.04
 Transportation, Storage, and Handling. Transport all plants from nursery sources to the project
 site with the entire load completely covered for protection from drying winds. Thoroughly water all plants that
 cannot be immediately planted so as to keep the roots in a continually moist and protected condition. The Engineer
 may reject plants that are not adequately protected during transportation and storage. Immediately remove all
 rejected plant materials from the project site. Handle all plant materials by the root ball or container.
 661.05
 Labeling. Attach legible labels to all specimens, or boxes, bundles, and other containers, indicating
 detailed information including, but not limited to, the botanical genus and the species name, the common name,
 the size or age of each species or variety and the quantity contained in the individual bundles or boxes. Remove
 all labels no more than two weeks prior to the completion of the establishment period. Notify the Engineer prior
 to removing the plant material labels.
 661.06
 Acceptance. Prior to acceptance by the Engineer, notify the Engineer when plant materials are
 delivered to the project site. Ensure that the plant species delivered are as described in the plans and are healthy,
 vigorous, and free from harmful plant diseases, and insect pests. Species substitutions must have written approval
 from the project engineer prior to delivery to the project.
 Do not install any plant materials until the Engineer provides the Contractor with notification that the plant
 materials have been accepted.
 661.07
 Scheduling. Install all plant materials after March 15 and before June 1 or after September 15 and
 before November 30. Do not install plant materials in frozen or saturated soil conditions. Ensure a sufficient water
 supply is available to satisfy the requirements of the plant materials and Item 662.
 
 661.08
 Layout of Plant Materials. Before installation, use suitable staking to lay out the locations of all
 planting holes and beds. Provide the Engineer with a scaled drawing that indicates the location, species, and size
 of plant materials required in the plan. Obtain the Engineer’s approval of these locations before installation.
 661.09
 
 Backfill Mix. For all plantings, use backfill mix consisting of the following:
 
 A. One part soil.
 B. One part sphagnum peat moss, shredded pine bark, or EPA rated Class IV compost.
 C. One part sand.
 Do not use backfill mix that is frozen or muddy.
 661.10
 
 Planting.
 
 A. Planting Holes: Dig planting holes that have sloping side walls and are ‘bowl shaped’. Slope the side walls
 to approximately 45 degrees. Dig the planting hole so that the diameter at the top is at least two times the diameter
 of the root ball. Dig the planting hole to the same depth as the root ball structure.
 Dig planting holes for vines and perennials to a minimum depth and diameter of 6 inches (150 mm). Make
 planting holes for rooted cuttings and tree seedlings large enough to accommodate the root system.
 B. Planting Beds: One month before cultivation, treat all planting beds that are to be developed in areas of
 existing turf with pre-emergent and post-emergent type herbicides. Use a State-licensed pesticide applicator to
 apply the herbicide according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
 Before planting, top dress all planting beds with a minimum of 2 inches (50 mm) of backfill mix, then cultivate
 it to a depth of 6 inches (150 mm) using a plow, disc, or roto-tiller.
 C. Planting Trees & Shrubs: Set each plant in the center of the planting hole, plumb, and straight at a level such
 that the top of the root structure (i.e., trunk flare or root collar) is 1 inch (25 mm) above the surrounding soil. Set
 the root ball on compacted or unexcavated soil to prevent settlement. Prior to backfilling the hole, remove all
 twine, bags, and roping. For trees shipped with wire baskets supporting the root structure, remove the top twothird of the wire basket from root balls. Remove all rot-proof burlap. Remove or fold down the top one-third of
 standard (biodegradable) burlap. Take care not to separate the soil of the root ball from the plant’s root system.
 Cut or remove circling roots before planting.
 Backfill the planting hole with the backfill mix. Fill the hole gradually and settle the backfill with water to the
 top of the root structure. Do not place backfill mix in direct contact with the trunks or stems. Add backfill mix
 around the root structure up to the plant’s root collar is at the soil surface.
 Do not plant groundcovers, vines, or perennials closer than 12 inches (300 mm) to tree trunks and shrub stems
 or within 6 inches (150 mm) of the edge of planting beds.
 D. Planting Seedlings, Groundcovers, Vines or Perennials: For seedlings, groundcovers, vines, or perennials
 that are not in a planting bed, , remove all grass and weeds by scalping an area that has a minimum diameter of 12
 inches (300 mm). Plant seedlings or perennials in the center of the scalped area using a spade or planting bar.
 661.11
 Landscape Mulch. Provide Landscape Mulch that consists of shredded bark and shredded wood.
 The length of any individual component cannot exceed 2 inches (50 mm). Ensure that at least 75 percent of the
 mulch can pass a 1-inch (25 mm) screen. Landscape Mulch may contain up to 50 percent shredded wood. Wood
 chips are not acceptable. Provide mulch that is free of soil, rocks, and weeds, and that has been aged at least one
 year before installation.
 Smooth and shape the backfill mix to form a shallow basin slightly larger than the planting hole. Mulch these
 areas with a 4-inch (100 mm) layer of Landscape Mulch uniform in texture and size. Do not place mulch in direct
 contact with the trunks of any trees. Rake and smooth all planting beds upon completion of the work.
 661.12
 Wrapping. Wrap all single deciduous tree trunks of 1-inch (25 mm) caliper and larger. Before
 wrapping, inspect for insect infestation and take corrective measures. Wrap trees within 48 hours after planting,
 using a double-layered, bituminous-cemented, waterproof, crinkled paper. Start at the ground and wrap the trunk
 
 neatly and snugly to the height of the first branches, then attach securely. With each turn of the wrapping, overlap
 the previous turn by half the width of the paper.
 661.13
 Bracing. Use only flexible, biodegradable ties when bracing trees. Use bracing only in areas where
 mower damage, vandalism, or windy conditions are a concern or as directed by the Engineer. Install loose fitting
 ties that will not girdle the trunk. Ensure that the tie will allow trunk movement and growth. Install all bracing as
 shown on the standard construction drawing.
 661.14
 Period of Establishment. Before final inspection, install all plants and care for them for a period of
 establishment. The period of establishment begins immediately upon completion of the planting operations and
 continues until October 1. The minimum period of establishment is one complete growing season, beginning June
 1 and ending the following October 1.
 During the period of establishment, follow standard horticultural practices to ensure the vigor and growth of the
 transplanted material including watering (according to Item 662), re-mulching, re-staking, and cultivating as
 necessary. Prune branches of deciduous plants to preserve the natural characteristics of the species according to
 ANSI Pruning Standards (ANSI A300). Remove broken, damaged, and dead branches. Do not trim the central
 leader of trees.
 Completely remove weeds and grasses from the planted and mulched areas by weeding and mowing (around
 trees, shrubs, and bed edges) at least two times during the growing season. Weed and mow the first time on or
 about June 15 and again approximately 8 weeks later.
 661.15
 Final Acceptance. On or about October 1 at the end of the establishment period, the Engineer, in
 coordination with the Department’s Office of Environmental Services, will inspect the plantings and supply the
 Contractor with a list of plant materials that do not comply with the contract requirements. Install all replacement
 plantings in accordance with the contract requirements. Replacement plants are subject to a new establishment
 period. Care for, water and maintain the replacement plant materials throughout the new establishment period at
 no additional cost to the State.
 661.16
 Removal of Stakes and Wrapping. After receiving notification from the Department of the date of
 the final inspection, remove all stakes and wrapping material from all plants not more than 14 days before the final
 inspection, with the exception of the replacement plantings that have not been in place for a full growing season.
 661.17
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure the number of healthy plant materials that
 exhibit typical growth habit for the species and variety.
 The Department will measure each species and size, completed and accepted in place.
 The cost associated with wrapping, bracing, mulching and staking is included in the unit price bid for Item 661
 Planting Trees, Shrubs, Perennials and Vines.
 If the Contract does not include an estimated quantity for Item 662 Landscape Watering, the Department will not
 pay for landscape watering separately. In this case, include the cost of landscape watering in the unit price bid for
 Item 661 Planting Trees, Shrubs, Perennials and Vines.
 661.18
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay 40 percent of the bid price for plant materials delivered
 and accepted at the project site. The Department will pay 40 percent of the bid price when the plant materials have
 been installed. The Department will pay the remaining 20 percent of the bid price at the end of the establishment
 period following final acceptance.
 If for each pay item, less than or equal to 5% of the installed plants require replacement at the time of Project
 Completion, the Engineer may waive the establishment period for the replacement plantings, provided that the
 replacement plantings are installed in accordance with this specification and in the presence of the Engineer or
 Inspector.
 If for each pay item, more than 5% of the installed plants require replacement at the time of Project Completion,
 the Contractor is required to install the replacement plantings in accordance with this specification. The
 Department will pay the remaining percentage of the bid price at the time of Project Completion. The replacement
 plantings are subject to the one year establishment period regardless of the Project Completion date. After the
 
 replacement plantings complete the one year establishment period, the Department will inspect the replacement
 plantings and notify the Contractor of the Departments’ findings. As final remedy under the contract, the
 Contractor is required to install replacement plants for all plantings that did not survive the establishment period at
 no additional cost to the State.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 661
 661
 661
 661
 661
 661
 661
 
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 Tree Seedling, (Size), (Species)
 Perennials, (Size), (Species)
 Groundcover and Vines, (Size), (Species)
 Deciduous Shrub, (Size), (Species)
 Evergreen Shrub, (Size), (Species)
 Deciduous Tree, (Size), (Species)
 Evergreen Tree, (Size), (Species)
 
 ITEM 662 LANDSCAPE WATERING
 662.01
 662.02
 662.03
 662.04
 
 Description
 Watering
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 662.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing, delivering, applying, measuring, and scheduling a
 sufficient amount of water necessary to keep each plant included in Item 661 in a healthy growing condition
 throughout the period of establishment and the Contract.
 662.02
 Watering. Furnish the water used in watering landscape plants. Thoroughly water all plant material
 at the time of planting regardless of soil moisture content. Continue to water throughout the period of
 establishment.
 Saturate the root zone and mulched area of each plant without causing run-off according to Table 662.03-1.
 During fall planting, continue to water until the ground is frozen and recommence watering after the spring thaw.
 Furnish a rain gauge approved by the Engineer.
 662.03
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Landscape Watering by the number of
 gallons (liters) delivered to plants from approved metered tanks or individually measured containers as follows:
 TABLE 662.03-1 WATERING TABLE
 Plant Description
 Shrubs:
 12 to 36 inches (300 to 900 mm), height
 36 inches to 5 feet (900 mm to 1.5 m), height
 Trees:
 5 to 8 feet (1.5 to 2.5 m), height
 2 to 3 inches (50 to 75 mm), caliper
 3 to 4 inches (75 to 100 mm), caliper
 Greater than 4 inches (100 mm), caliper
 662.04
 follows:
 
 Gallons (L)
 4 (15)
 7 (25)
 15 (55)
 25 (95)
 30 (115)
 35 (115)
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for the accepted quantities at the contract price as
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 662
 
 Gallon (Liter)
 
 Landscape Watering
 
 ITEM 666 PRUNING EXISTING TREES
 666.01
 666.02
 666.03
 666.04
 666.05
 666.06
 666.07
 666.08
 
 Description
 Wound Dressing
 Pruning
 Painting
 Removal of Foreign Materials from Trees
 Removal of Rubbish
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 666.01
 
 Description. This work consists of pruning trees.
 
 666.02
 
 Wound Dressing. Use approved material specifically manufactured for tree wound dressing.
 
 666.03
 Pruning. Prune all trees to make them shapely, typical of the species, using standard drawings on
 the plans as a guide. Use approved pruning tools and methods.
 Remove all dead wood and dead branches 1 inch (25 mm) or more in diameter. Remove all branches interfering
 with or hindering the healthy growth of the tree with a good clean cut made flush with the parent trunk. Remove
 all diseased branches. For branches that may be partly dead, yet have a good healthy lateral branch between the
 dead part and the base, cut off the branch with a good clean slanting cut close to and beyond the healthy lateral
 branch.
 Remove low hanging, unsound, or unsightly branches on trees or shrubs designated to remain. Remove all
 branches or growth interfering with the free traffic movement on the highway. Trim branches of trees extending
 over the roadbed to provide a clear height of 20 feet (6 m) above the roadbed surface.
 Cut off all stubs or improper cuts resulting from former pruning or limbs that have been broken flush with the
 trunk or limb of the tree in order to ensure proper healing.
 666.04
 Painting. Paint all cuts or wounds measuring 1 inch (25 mm) or more in diameter and all exposed
 wood and scars resulting from previous work or damage with approved tree wound dressing.
 666.05
 Removal of Foreign Materials from Trees. Remove all nails, spikes, bolts, wire, or other foreign
 materials driven into or fastened to the trunk or branches of the tree, or, if directed by the Engineer, cut them flush
 with the bark of cambium layer to ensure complete healing over.
 666.06
 
 Removal of Rubbish. Legally use, burn, or dispose of all material according to 105.16 and 105.17.
 
 666.07
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Pruning Existing Trees by the number of
 each size, completed and accepted.
 666.08
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 666
 666
 666
 666
 666
 
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 Pruning Existing Trees, 3 to 8-inch (80 to 200 mm) Diameter
 Pruning Existing Trees, 8 to 16-inch (200 to 400 mm) Diameter
 Pruning Existing Trees, 16 to 24-inch (400 to 600 mm) Diameter
 Pruning Existing Trees, 24 to 36-inch (600 to 900 mm) Diameter
 Pruning Existing Trees, 36 inches (900 mm) and Over
 
 ITEM 670 EROSION PROTECTION
 670.01
 670.02
 670.03
 670.04
 670.05
 670.06
 
 Description
 Materials
 Construction
 Maintenance
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 670.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing, placing, and maintaining slope, ditch, and vegetated
 swale erosion protection as shown on the plans.
 670.02
 
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 
 Sodding ............................................................................................ 660.02
 Erosion Control Mats ....................................................................... 712.11
 For slope erosion protection, the Contractor may use any of the above materials. For ditch erosion protection,
 use only Item 660 Sodding or Item 671 Erosion Control Mat Type B, C, E, or G or as specified in the plans. For
 vegetated swale erosion protection, use only Item 671 Erosion Control Mat Type B or as specified in the plans.
 670.03
 671.
 
 Construction. Install sodding according to Item 660. Install erosion control mats according to Item
 
 670.04
 Maintenance. Maintain sodded areas as specified in Item 660. Maintain erosion control mats as
 specified in Item 671.
 670.05
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Slope Erosion Protection, Ditch Erosion
 Protection, and Vegetated Swale Erosion Protection by the number of square yards (square meters) completed and
 accepted. The Department will determine the area based on the surface area covered by the slope, ditch, or swale
 erosion protection.
 670.06
 
 Basis of Payment. The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 670
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Slope Erosion Protection
 
 670
 670
 670
 
 Ditch Erosion Protection
 Slope Erosion Protection Mat Type __
 Ditch Erosion Protection Mat Type __
 
 ITEM 671 EROSION CONTROL MATS
 671.01
 671.02
 671.03
 671.04
 671.05
 671.06
 
 Description
 Materials
 Construction
 Maintenance
 Method of Measurement
 Basis of Payment
 
 671.01
 Description. This work consists of furnishing, placing, and maintaining Types A through I erosion
 control mats. This work also consists of furnishing, placing, and maintaining seeding and mulching when the
 seeding and mulching is to be held in place with erosion control mats.
 671.02
 Materials. Furnish materials conforming to:
 Seed and Mulch .................................................................................... 659
 Lime and Fertilizer ............................................................................... 659
 Erosion Control Mats ....................................................................... 712.11
 If the mat type is not specifically itemized, furnish any mat type listed in 712.11.
 Furnish staples consisting of 12-inch (0.3 m) No. 11 gage steel wire bent into narrow U-shape with the ends of
 the staples approximately 1 inch (25 mm) apart producing a 6 inch staple or furnish pins conforming 18 inch (450
 mm) long, 1/4 inch (4.5 mm) in diameter, with attached 1 1/2 inch (38 mm) washer. Drive staples until the staple
 is flush with the ground surface. Drive pins until the attached washer is flush with the ground surface.
 For clay, shale, and other heavy soils, furnish 3-inch (75 mm) steel staples, No. 9 gage or thicker with points
 approximately 1 inch (25 mm) apart, as required by the Engineer.
 671.03
 Construction. Before placing any type of temporary erosion control mats, prepare the surface, apply
 the fertilizer and lime if specified, and seed as specified in Item 659 or as shown on the plans. Place the temporary
 erosion control mat in the locations shown on the plans.
 A. Types A, B, C, E, F, and I. Construct erosion control mat Types A, B, C, E, F, and I as follows:
 1. Within 48 hours after seeding and before placing the mat, evenly place mulch over the specified area at
 the following rates:
 a.
 
 For straw mulch, use 30 percent of the rate specified in 659.14.
 
 b.
 
 For wood fiber mulch, use 30 percent of the rate specified in 659.15.
 
 c.
 
 For compost, use the same rate as specified in 659.16.
 
 d.
 
 Asphalt emulsion tack or tackifier is not required.
 
 2. Immediately after mulching, lay the mat strips flat, loose, parallel to the flow of water, and with the mat
 contacting the ground at all points. For mats placed in ditches, start the construction at the downstream end.
 3. Where more than one strip is required to cover the area, overlap the strips at least 4 inches (100 mm).
 Overlap the ends at least 6 inches (150 mm) with the upgrade strip on top.
 4. Place upgrade slots at the upgrade end of each strip of mat by placing a tight fold of the mat at least 6
 inches (150 mm) vertically into the soil. Firmly tamp the soil against the end and staple the mat. If directed by the
 Engineer, bury other edges exposed to more than normal flow in a similar manner.
 5. Place end slots between the ends of strips by placing a tight fold of the mat at least 6 inches (150 mm)
 vertically into the soil. Firmly tamp the soil and staple the mat.
 6. Place check slots by placing a tight fold of the mat at least 6 inches (150 mm) vertically into the soil.
 Firmly tamp the soil and staple the mat. Space check slots so that one check slot or an end slot occurs within each
 50 feet (15 m) of slope for slopes 3 to 1 or steeper.
 7.
 
 Bury the edges of the mat where the mat abuts catch basins and other structures.
 
 8. Secure the mat in place with staples driven vertically into the soil. Do not stretch or draw the mat taut
 during the stapling operation. Install three rows of staples for each strip of mat, with one row along each edge and
 one row alternately spaced in the middle. Space staples not more than 3 feet (1 m) apart in each row. Staple all
 upgrade slots, end slots and check slots across the width, with staples spaced not more than 6 inches (150 mm)
 apart.
 9. After completing the mat installation, seed over top of the mat in areas that the Engineer identifies as
 disturbed. Use a seed mixture conforming to Item 659 at the rate of 1 pound per 1000 square feet (5 g/m2) or with
 a mixture or rate shown on the plans.
 B. Type G. Construct erosion control mat Type G according to 671.03.A, with the following exceptions.
 1.
 
 Do not use mulch under the mat.
 
 2.
 
 Overlap edges and ends by 1 1/2 inches (40 mm).
 
 3. Do not bury the upgrade end or top edge of each strip unless required by the Engineer due to special
 conditions in the field.
 4. The Contractor may elect not to provide check slots. However upgrade slots and end slots will be
 furnished.
 5.
 
 Place the mat in contact with the soil.
 
 671.04
 Maintenance. Maintain the specified areas until all work in the Contract has been completed and the
 Engineer issues the final acceptance. Restore damaged areas to the condition and grade existing just before placing
 the mat. Relime, refertilize, and reseed restored areas according to Item 659. Replace all damaged mats.
 671.05
 Method of Measurement. The Department will measure Erosion Control Mat, Type ___ by the
 number of square yards (square meters) completed and accepted. The Department will determine the area based
 on the surface area covered by the erosion control mat.
 671.06
 Basis of Payment. The Department will not pay for maintenance as detailed in 671.04 that is required
 due to the Contractor’s negligence, carelessness, or failure to install erosion controls.
 If erosion control items in the Contract are properly placed according to the Contract Documents, the Department
 will pay for maintenance detailed in 671.04 or according to 109.05.
 The Department will pay for liming and fertilizing of areas covered by the mats under Item 659. The Department
 will not pay for the seeding and mulching performed under or over the mats.
 The Department will pay for accepted quantities at the contract prices as follows:
 Item
 
 Unit
 
 Description
 
 671
 
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Square Meter)
 
 Erosion Control Mat, Type ___
 
 671
 
 Erosion Control Mat
 
 700 MATERIAL DETAILS
 700.00 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR SAMPLING MATERIALS
 Spec No.
 
 Material
 
 203
 
 Embankment
 
 258.02
 
 Load Transfer
 Retrofit
 
 304
 
 Aggregate Base
 
 305
 
 PC Concrete
 Pavement Base
 
 407
 
 409
 
 451, 452
 
 Material only Inspection or Sampling
 Requirements
 Assure 203.02 Q and R materials conform
 to the individual material requirements.
 Sample materials when requested by the
 Engineer.
 Follow Supplement 1015 for acceptance.
 Soil Embankment: 50 lb (23 kg)
 Granular Embankment: 50 lb (23 kg)
 Silicone Sealant– Obtain letter of
 certification stating that the material meets
 the requirements of Item 258. Material to
 be shipped from manufacturer not more
 than 9 months prior to use.
 Patching material - Verify brand name of
 material is on QPL at the time of use.
 Perform compaction conforming to
 Supplement 1015 and 304.05
 Products will be supplied by a Supplement
 1069 Pre-Qualified Producer/Supplier.
 Document in SM.
 
 Make two 6"x6"x4' beams for every 7500
 yd² (6500 m²) or fraction thereof daily.
 Field test beams for required load for the
 specification.
 Report results in SM.
 Tack Coat
 If obtaining a sample, draw at least 1 gallon
 from the sampling valve or tap and discard
 prior to obtaining a 1 quart sample.
 Tag and ship sample to the District lab for
 OMM Asphalt section testing.
 Document in SM.
 Sawing and Sealing Inspect material for condition.
 Asphalt Concrete Document in SM.
 Pavement Joints Follow joint seal material sections for
 sampling and acceptance requirements.
 
 PC Concrete
 Pavement
 
 Additional Instructions
 
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 submit a 1 quart sample to
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 submit two 60 lb bag samples
 to OMMfor testing.
 Core samples taken every 2000
 sq. yds by Contractor.
 Conform to Supplement 1064.
 
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 submit a 1 quart sample to
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Make 6"x6"x4' beams for every 7500 yd²
 Core samples taken every 2000
 (6500 m²) or fraction thereof daily. Make yd by Contractor. Conform to
 two beams if testing before 7 days. Field
 Supplement 1064.
 test beams for required load for the
 specification.
 Report results in SM.
 
 451.09.B
 499
 
 Dowel Bond
 Breaking Material
 Various Concrete
 Items
 
 499.02
 
 Water
 
 503.08
 
 Excavation for
 StructuresBackfill Material
 
 507.09
 
 Bearing Piles
 Steel Pile Points
 
 509.08
 
 511
 
 515
 
 515.15
 
 Check new light form oil by labels on new
 cans. No sampling required
 A sample for concrete strength testing
 Within 24 to 48 hours after
 consists of a set of three 4 × 8 inch
 sampling, ship cylinders to
 cylinders when the maximum nominal
 District Testing with required
 aggregate is 1 inch or less. For concrete
 documentation. Submit sample
 with maximum nominal aggregate sizes
 to OMM.
 greater than 1 inch, a sample consists of a
 set of two 6 × 12 inch cylinders.
 Potable water is satisfactory.
 Notify District Testing if water
 If question about water quality, obtain 1
 appears to contain sewage, oil,
 gallon sample.
 acid, or other matter.
 Document in SM.
 Sample only when requested by the
 Engineer per Item 203.
 Soil Embankment: 50 lb (23 kg)
 Granular Embankment: 50 lb (23 kg)
 Only use points from suppliers on the
 Approved List on the OMM website.
 Document bearing piles in SM.
 
 Notify District Testing if
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use. Notify the
 Contractor with noncompliance issues.
 Reinforcing Steel - Assure plastic supports conform to 709.15. Maximum spacing of supports in
 Plastic support
 slabs, beams and girders to be 4
 chairs
 feet or less to prevent
 substantial deflection.
 Concrete for
 NON QC/QA SPECIFICATIONS
 Within 24 to 48 hours after
 Structures
 Make one set of cylinders for spans over 20 sampling, ship cylinders to
 ft each day, each 200 yd³.
 District Testing with required
 For spans 20 ft span and under, make one
 documentation.
 set of cylinders each 50 yd³ or less.
 Document in SM.
 Field or Standard Cure according to
 ACI/ODOT specifications.
 QC/QA SPECIFICATIONS
 Within 24 to 48 hours after
 Follow requirements of 455 for quality
 sampling, ship quality
 assurance sampling and testing.
 assurance cylinders to District
 Document in SM.
 Testing with required
 documentation.
 Prestressed
 Assure products are supplied by a source on If rejecting material because
 Concrete Bridge
 the Certified List for Supplement 1079
 material non-performs or looks
 Members
 maintained by OMM.
 defective during use, notify
 Receive with TE-24.
 District Testing and OMM.
 Check dimension and condition
 Document in SM.
 Prestressed
 Verify company and brand name of material For precast beams delivered on
 Concrete Bridge
 is on QPL at the time of use. Document in TE-24, verification performed
 Members SM.
 by OMM.
 Corrosion
 Inhibitors
 
 526
 
 609.02
 
 610
 
 613
 
 632.11
 
 653.02
 
 657.02
 
 658.02
 
 Approach Slabs
 
 Make one set of cylinders for each day, each Within 24 to 48 hours after
 200 yd³. Document in SM.
 sampling, ship cylinders to
 Field or Standard Cure according to
 District Testing with required
 ACI/ODOT specifications.
 documentation.
 QC/QA SPECIFICATIONS
 Follow requirements of 455 for quality
 assurance sampling and testing. Document
 in SM.
 Curbing, Concrete Contact District Testing and OMM to assure
 Medians, and
 stone curb conforms to requirements of
 Traffic Islands 609.02.
 Stone Curbs
 Cellular Retaining 610.04.A Cellular Products will be supplied Notify District Testing if
 Walls
 by a source on the Certified Lists for
 rejecting material.
 Supplement 1073 maintained by OMM.
 If material non-performs or
 Receive with TE-24. Check dimension,
 looks defective during use
 condition and compliance with approved
 notify District Testing and
 drawings.
 OMM.
 610.04.B Cellular Products accept by
 certified test data documentation at the
 Project. Document in SM.
 Low Strength
 Supplier to perform trial batches of 1 cy to Notify District Testing if
 Mortar Backfill
 ensure flowable consistency and yield.
 rejecting material.
 Refer to Item 613.05 for alternate mix
 If material non-performs or
 design.
 looks defective during use
 Submit Alternate mix designs for approval
 notify District Testing and
 30 days prior to placement. When using
 OMM.
 foundry sand, obtain written permission
 from EPA ten days before use.
 Verify manufacturer is on QPL.
 Notify District Testing if
 Loop Detector
 Inspect for condition, appearance and
 rejecting material.
 Sealant
 package markings.
 If material non-performs or
 Document in SM.
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Topsoil
 Obtain one (1) pint sample of material from
 each source and/or stockpile of visually
 different material from same source.
 Use friction top, air tight metal container
 supplied by the Department.
 Submit to Office of Geotechnical
 Engineering Operations.
 Samples will include a TE-31 form or SM
 print screen.
 RipRap for Tree
 Confirm with OMM that the aggregate
 Protection
 source has an acceptable performance
 history. Sources with poor performance
 require test data conforming to ASTM
 D5240.
 Tree Root Aeration Assure source is on the Certified List for
 - Aggregate
 Supplement 1069 maintained by OMM.
 
 659.03
 
 659.04
 
 659.07
 659.08
 659.09
 S1022
 659.14
 659.15
 659.16
 660.02
 
 661
 
 Assure aggregate meets soundness
 requirements. For sources with no
 soundness history, obtain a 100 lb (45 kg)
 sample.
 Liming Materials Only accept materials from suppliers
 licensed in Ohio. See OMM website for
 list of Ohio Department of Agriculture
 licensed suppliers.
 Document in SM.
 Commercial
 Only accept materials from suppliers
 Fertilizer
 licensed in Ohio. See OMM website for
 list of Ohio Department of Agriculture
 licensed suppliers.
 Inspect material for certified analysis and
 condition.
 Non-standard application rate requires
 approval prior to use.
 Document in SM.
 Verify manufacturer is on Certified Supplier
 Seeds
 List maintained by OMM.
 Legumes
 Receive with TE-24 and description bill of
 Native Grasses and lading.
 Wildflowers
 Document in SM.
 Mulch
 Material should be reasonably free from
 foreign matter that would inhibit seed
 germination.
 Sodding Materials Verify company and brand name of material
 is on QPL at the time of use.
 Certification required for each shipment.
 Document in SM.
 Planting Trees
 Verify company and brand name of material
 Shrubs, Perennials is on QPL at the time of use.
 and Vines
 Inspect material for condition.
 Plant material should be sealed until used.
 Document in SM.
 
 STANDARD MATERIALS SPECIFICATIONS
 701.01
 701.02
 701.04
 701.05
 701.07
 701.09
 701.10
 
 Cement, Hydraulic
 ASTM Types I, IA,
 II, III
 Masonry
 Type IS(<25)
 Micro-Silica
 
 Verify manufacturer on Concrete Plant
 Batch Ticket is on Certified List for
 Supplement 1028 maintained by OMM.
 Verify material against bill of lading
 description.
 Document in SM.
 Verify manufacturer on Concrete Plant
 Batch Ticket is on Certified List for
 Supplement 1045 maintained by OMM.
 Verify material against bill of lading
 description.
 Document in SM.
 
 Licensing is required. Notify
 District Testing if rejecting
 material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing &
 OMM.
 
 Verify District approval of seed
 mixture.
 
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 
 Final acceptance should take
 place after period of
 establishment.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 
 701.11
 
 701.13
 
 702.01
 
 702.02
 702.03
 702.04
 702.07
 702.13
 
 702.05
 702.06
 
 702.16
 
 702.17
 
 Ground Granulated Verify manufacturer on Concrete Plant
 Blast Furnace
 Batch Ticket is on Certified List for
 Slag (GGBFS)
 Supplement 1034 maintained by OMM.
 Verify material against bill of lading
 description.
 Document in SM.
 Fly Ash
 Verify manufacturer on Concrete Plant
 Batch Ticket is on Certified List for
 Supplement 1026 maintained by OMM.
 Verify material against bill of lading
 description.
 Document in SM
 If high LOI fly ash verify manufacturer on
 Concrete Plant Batch Ticket is on List for
 Supplement 1115.
 Asphalt Binder
 Certified asphalt PG binder: As directed by
 OMM.
 Plant: Minimum of one sample per project
 per season, except for inconsequential
 quantities.
 Non-Certified PG binder:Sample and
 Approve by OMM before use.
 Cut Back Asphalt Certified material:
 Cut Back Asphalt At the refinery or source as directed by
 Emulsions
 OMM. Project and/ or Plant: One sample
 Emulsified
 per each 25,000 gallons. None for less
 Asphalts
 than 300 gallons.
 Asphalt Emulsion Non-certified material: Non-Certified PG
 MWS
 binder:Sample and Approve by OMM
 SBR Asphalt
 before use.
 Emulsion
 702.13 – Provide Certified Test Data per
 specification requirements.
 Asphalt Primer
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Waterproofing
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Asphalt
 Document in SM.
 Waterproofing
 
 Certified binder: Plant: Submit
 sample to OMM.
 Non-certified binder: Submit to
 OMM. Do not allow asphalt
 production until material is
 approved.
 Certified material: Submit to
 OMM.
 
 Non-certified binder: Submit to
 OMM. Do not allow asphalt
 production until material is
 approved.
 
 If rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use, notify
 District Testing and OMM
 Asphalt section.
 Polymer
 Type A: Certified Material. At the refinery Type A: Certified material:
 Emulsified Binder or source as directed by OMM. Project
 Submit to OMM.
 and/ or Plant Sample per 422.10.
 Non-certified binder: Submit to
 Non-Certified PG binder:Sample and
 OMM. Do not allow asphalt
 Approve by OMMbefore use.
 production until material is
 Type B: Certified test data
 approved.
 Crack Sealant
 Material is pre-tested and approved.
 Notify District Testing if
 Will
 be
 shipped
 with
 TE-24.
 rejecting material.
 Type 1
 Document in SM.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM Asphalt section.
 Type II
 Provide fibers listed on the QPL. Provide Notify District Testing if
 PG64-22 conforming to 702.01.
 rejecting material.
 
 Type III
 Type IV
 
 Provide fibers listed on the QPL. Provide
 PG64-22 conforming to 702.01.
 Provide materials listed on the QPL.
 
 703.02
 703.04
 703.05
 703.08
 
 Coarse Aggregate
 
 Coarse Aggregate will have current
 certification for use, and be supplied by a
 Supplement 1069 Pre-Qualified
 Producer/Supplier. Verify material
 certification, and Pre-Qualified status by
 checking SM or by using the CMRS portal
 and generating a report for that source or
 district.
 Document in SM.
 
 703.02
 703.03
 703.04
 703.05
 703.06
 703.10
 
 Fine Aggregate
 
 Fine Aggregate will have current
 certification for use, and be supplied by a
 Supplement 1069 Pre-Qualified
 Producer/Supplier. Verify material
 certification, and Pre-Qualified status by
 checking SM or by using the CMRS portal
 and generating a report for that source or
 district.
 Document in SM.
 
 703.02
 703.04
 703.05
 
 Dense Graded
 Aggregate
 
 Dense Graded Aggregate will have current
 certification for use, and be supplied by a
 Supplement 1069 Pre-Qualified
 Producer/Supplier. Verify material
 certification, and Pre-Qualified status by
 checking SM or by using the CMRS portal
 and generating a report for that source or
 district.
 Document in SM.
 
 703.07
 
 Materials Mineral
 filler
 
 703.11
 Type 1
 Type 2
 Type 3
 
 Limestone Dust will be supplied by a
 Supplement 1069 Pre-Qualified
 Producer/Supplier. Verify Pre-Qualified
 status by checking SM or by using the
 CMRS portal and generating a report for
 that source or district.
 For Portland cement assure source is on
 Certified list for Supplement 1028.
 For inert mineral filler sample for gradation.
 Submit to District Testing.
 Structural Backfill All 703.11 (Type 1, 2, & 3) shall be
 for 611 Bedding
 provided by a Supplement 1069 Preand Backfill
 Qualified Producer/Supplier. Verify
 material certification, and Pre-Qualified
 
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM Asphalt section.
 60 to 75 lb. QA samples are
 taken by District Testing at
 each Pre-Qualified source a
 minimum of three (3) times per
 year.
 Sample at the project on an as
 needed basis to address
 material problems or risks
 associated with quality or
 gradation.
 30 to 40 lb. QA samples are
 taken by District Testing at
 each Pre-Qualified source a
 minimum of three (3) times per
 year.
 Sample at the project on an as
 needed basis to address
 material problems or risks
 associated with quality or
 gradation.
 
 90 to 100 lb. QA samples are
 taken by District Testing at
 each Pre-Qualified source a
 minimum of three (3) times per
 year.
 Sample at the project on an as
 needed basis to address
 material problems or risks
 associated with quality or
 gradation.
 
 40-100lb (depending on coarse,
 fine, or dense grade) QA
 samples are taken by District
 Testing at each Pre-Qualified
 
 status by checking SM or by using the
 CMRS portal and generating a report for
 that source or district. Document in SM.
 
 703.13
 
 703.14
 
 703.16
 
 703.17
 
 source a minimum of one (1)
 time per year.
 Sample at the project on an as
 needed basis to address
 material problems or risks
 associated with quality or
 gradation.
 Coarse Aggregate All materials shall be provided by a
 240-300 lb QA (Freeze
 for Items 451 and Supplement 1069 Pre-Qualified
 Thaw/Quality) samples are
 452
 Producer/Supplier. Verify material
 taken by District Testing once
 certification, and Pre-Qualified status by
 (1) every 2 to 4 years
 checking SM or by using the CMRS portal depending on certification and
 and generating a report for that source or
 submitted to OMM for testing
 district. Document in SM.
 (this is additional to standard
 coarse aggregate testing).
 Sample at the project on an as
 needed basis to address
 material problems or risks
 associated with quality or
 gradation.
 Steel Slag
 All materials shall be provided by a
 Steel Slag less than 10 yrs old
 Aggregate for
 Supplement 1069 Pre-Qualified Producer
 requires X-Ray Fluorescence
 Non-Pavement
 Supplier.
 for total percent MgO, and XUse
 Stockpile and sample each 2500 tons (2300 Ray Diffraction for total
 metric tons). Notify the District laboratory percent periclase.
 for inspection of sources and to obtain
 Sample at the project on an as
 split samples. Test for expansion.
 needed basis to address
 Document in SM.
 material problems or risks
 associated with quality or
 gradation.
 Suitable Materials All materials shall be provided by a
 Sample at the project on an as
 for Embankment Supplement 1069 Pre-Qualified
 needed basis to address
 Construction
 Producer/Supplier. Multiple aggregate
 material problems or risks
 types available. Follow the requirements
 associated with quality or
 of the individual material specification.
 gradation.
 Verify material certification, and PreQualified status by checking SM or by
 using the CMRS portal and generating a
 report for that source or district.
 Document in SM.
 Dense Graded
 All materials shall be provided by a
 90 to 100 lb. QA sample taken
 Aggregate for
 Supplement 1069 Pre-Qualified
 by District Testing at each
 Item 304
 Producer/Supplier. Verify the material
 source a minimum of (1) time
 certification, and Pre-Qualified status by
 per year.
 checking SM or by using the CMRS portal Sample at the project on an as
 and generating a report for that source or
 needed basis to address
 district.
 material problems or risks
 associated with quality or
 gradation.
 
 703.18
 
 Aggregate for
 Items 410, 411,
 and 617
 
 703.19.A
 
 Crushed Aggregate All materials shall be provided by a
 Slope Protection
 Supplement 1069 Pre-Qualified
 and Filter
 Producer/Supplier. Verify the material
 Aggregate for
 certification, and Pre-Qualified status by
 Dump Rock Fill
 checking SM or by using the CMRS portal
 and generating a report for that source or
 district.
 Dumped Rock Fill All materials shall be provided by a
 and Rock Channel Supplement 1069 Pre-Qualified
 Protection
 Producer/Supplier. Verify the material
 certification, and Pre-Qualified status by
 checking SM or by using the CMRS portal
 and generating a report for that source or
 district.
 Block
 Verify type of material is on QPL at the
 Brick
 time of use.
 Concrete Masonry Inspect for condition and defects.
 Shale
 Document in SM.
 
 703.19.B
 
 704.01
 704.02
 704.03
 
 705.01
 
 705.03
 
 705.04
 
 705.05
 
 All materials shall be provided by a
 Supplement 1069 Pre-Qualified
 Producer/Supplier. Verify the material
 certification, and Pre-Qualified status by
 checking SM or by using the CMRS portal
 and generating a report for that source or
 district.
 
 90 to 100 lb. QA sample taken
 by District Testing at each
 source a minimum of (1) time
 per year.
 Sample at the project on an as
 needed basis to address
 material problems or risks
 associated with quality or
 gradation.
 Sample and/or photograph with a
 scale for sizing on an as needed
 basis to address material
 problems or risks associated
 with quality or gradation.
 Sample and/or photograph with a
 scale for sizing on an as needed
 basis to address material
 problems or risks associated
 with quality or gradation.
 
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 When material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 reject material and sample 12
 pieces representative of defect
 to OMM for QA follow-up.
 Glass Fiber
 Certified test data from an accredited testing Notify District Testing upon
 Reinforced
 facility will accompany each shipment.
 receipt of shipment.
 Polymer (GFRP) Document in SM.
 Dowel and
 Deformed Bars
 Joint Filler
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Preformed
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition, appearance and
 If material non-performs or
 dimension.
 looks defective during use send
 Document in SM.
 one (1) 1.5'x2.5' sample
 representative of defect to
 OMM for QA follow-up.
 Joint and Crack
 Material is pre-tested and approved.
 Notify District Testing if
 Sealer
 Will be shipped with TE-24.
 rejecting material.
 Hot Applied
 Document in SM.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM Asphalt section for
 sampling requirements.
 Burlap Cloth
 Inspect for condition, appearance and
 Notify District Testing if
 Materials
 dimension.
 rejecting material.
 
 Documenting in SM is not required.
 Sample only if there is a question that
 material meets specification.
 705.06
 
 Sheet Curing
 Materials
 
 Inspect for condition, appearance and
 dimension.
 Documenting in SM is not required.
 Sample only if there is a question that
 material meets specification.
 
 705.07
 
 Concrete Curing
 Compounds
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition and appearance.
 Document in SM.
 
 705.10
 
 Air Entraining
 Admixtures
 
 Verify type and brand name of material
 listed on Concrete Plant Batch Ticket is on
 QPL at the time of use.
 Document in SM.
 
 705.11
 
 Preformed
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Elastomeric Joint on QPL at the time of use.
 Sealer
 Inspect for condition, appearance,
 dimension and manufacturer trademark.
 Document in SM.
 Chemical
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Admixtures for
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Concrete
 Document in SM.
 
 705.12
 
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use send
 one (1) quart sample
 representative of defect to
 OMM Cement and Concrete
 section for QA follow-up.
 
 Storage: Admixtures should be
 stored at concrete producer in
 such a manner to permit easy
 access for proper identification
 in weather resistant units.
 Provide minimum QA sample of
 one (1) annually per concrete
 plant, each material, each
 company. Minimum sample
 size one (1) quart.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use.
 Storage: Admixtures should be
 stored at concrete producer in
 such a manner to permit easy
 access for proper identification
 in weather resistant units.
 Provide minimum QA sample of
 one (1) annually per concrete
 plant, each material, each
 company. Minimum sample
 size one (1) quart.
 
 705.13
 
 Neoprene Sheeting Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at time of use. Inspect for
 condition and appearance. Document in
 SM.
 
 705.15
 
 High Molecular
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Weight
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Methacrylate
 Document in SM.
 (HMWM)
 Non Shrink, Non Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Metallic Materials on QPL at the time of use. Ensure mixing rejecting material.
 is performed in accordance with
 If material non-performs or
 manufacturer’s recommendations on the
 looks defective during use
 container.
 notify District Testing and
 Document in SM.
 OMM for sampling
 requirements.
 Quick Setting
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Concrete Mortar
 on QPL at the time of use. Ensure mixing rejecting material.
 is performed in accordance with
 If material non-performs or
 manufacturer’s recommendations on the
 looks defective during use
 container.
 notify District Testing and
 Document in SM.
 OMM for sampling
 requirements.
 Non-shrink Mortar Verify manufacturer is on the Approved List Sample will be tested at 3, 7 and
 maintained by OMM. Ensure mixing is
 28 days.
 performed in accordance with
 Do not open structure to traffic
 manufacturer’s recommendations on the
 until a compressive strength of
 container. Make three (3) or more 3"x6"
 5000 psi (34.5 MPa) is
 cylinders from keyway mix.
 achieved.
 Ship to OMM Concrete Section.
 Document in SM.
 Epoxy-urethane
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Sealers
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Ensure mixing is performed in accordance If material non-performs or
 with manufacturer’s recommendations on looks defective during use
 the container.
 obtain 1 qt (1 L) samples in a
 Document in SM.
 sealed container and send to
 OMM.
 Non Epoxy Sealers Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Ensure mixing is performed in accordance If material non-performs or
 with manufacturer’s recommendations on looks defective during use
 the container.
 obtain 1 qt (1 L) samples in a
 Document in SM.
 sealed container and send to
 OMM.
 
 705.20
 
 705.21
 
 705.22
 
 705.23 A
 
 705.23 B
 
 705.24
 
 Soluble Reactive
 Silicate
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 
 705.25
 
 705.26
 
 706.01
 
 706.02
 
 706.03
 
 706.04
 
 706.05
 
 Ensure mixing is performed in accordance
 with manufacturer’s recommendations on
 the container.
 Document in SM.
 Gravity Fed Resin Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Ensure mixing is performed in accordance If material non-performs or
 with manufacturer’s recommendations on looks defective during use
 the container.
 obtain 1 qt (1 L) samples in a
 Document in SM.
 sealed container and send to
 OMM.
 Epoxy injection
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Resin
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Make sure that ports are properly installed
 and ensure mixing is performed in
 accordance with manufacturer’s
 recommendations
 Document in SM.
 Non-Reinforced
 Assure products are supplied by a source on If rejecting material because
 Concrete Pipe
 the Certified List for Supplement 1074
 material non-performs or looks
 maintained by OMM.
 defective during use, notify
 Receive with TE-24.
 District Testing and OMM
 Check dimension, markings, roughness or
 Cement and Concrete section.
 excessive cracks.
 Document in SM.
 Reinforced
 Assure products are supplied by a source on If rejecting material because
 Concrete Circular the Certified List for Supplement 1074
 material non-performs or looks
 Pipe
 maintained by OMM.
 defective during use, notify
 Receive with TE-24.
 District Testing and OMM
 Check dimension, markings, roughness or
 Cement and Concrete section.
 excessive cracks.
 Document in SM.
 Reinforced
 Assure products are supplied by a source on If rejecting material because
 Concrete Pipe,
 the Certified List for Supplement 1074
 material non-performs or looks
 Epoxy Coated
 maintained by OMM.
 defective during use, notify
 Receive with TE-24.
 District Testing and OMM
 Check dimension, markings, roughness or
 Cement and Concrete section.
 excessive cracks.
 Document in SM.
 Reinforced
 Assure products are supplied by a source on If rejecting material because
 Concrete
 the Certified List for Supplement 1074
 material non-performs or looks
 Elliptical Culvert, maintained by OMM.
 defective during use, notify
 Storm Drain and
 Received with TE-24.
 District Testing and OMM
 Sewer Pipe
 Check dimension, markings, roughness or
 Cement and Concrete section.
 excessive cracks.
 Document in SM.
 Precast Reinforced Assure products are supplied by a source on If rejecting material because
 Concrete Box
 the Certified List for Supplement 1073
 material non-performs or looks
 Sections
 maintained by OMM.
 defective during use, notify
 Receive with TE-24.
 District Testing and OMM
 Cement and Concrete section.
 
 706.051
 
 706.052
 
 706.053
 
 706.06
 
 706.07
 
 706.08
 
 706.09
 
 706.10
 
 Check dimension, markings, roughness or
 excessive cracks.
 Document in SM.
 Precast Reinforced Assure products are supplied by a source on
 Concrete
 the Certified List for Supplement 1073
 Three-Sided Flat
 maintained by OMM.
 Topped Culverts Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension, markings, roughness or
 excessive cracks.
 Document in SM.
 Precast Reinforced Assure products are supplied by a source on
 Concrete Arch
 the Certified List for Supplement 1073
 Sections
 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension, markings, roughness or
 excessive cracks.
 Document in SM.
 Precast Reinforced Assure products are supplied by a source on
 Concrete Round
 the Certified List for Supplement 1073
 Sections
 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension, markings, roughness or
 excessive cracks.
 Document in SM.
 Perforated
 Assure products are supplied by a source on
 Concrete Pipe
 the Certified List for Supplement 1074
 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension, markings, roughness or
 excessive cracks.
 Document in SM.
 Concrete Drain Tile Assure products are supplied by a source on
 the Certified List for Supplement 1074
 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension, markings, roughness or
 excessive cracks.
 Document in SM.
 Vitrified Clay Pipe Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition, appearance and
 dimension.
 Document in SM.
 Clay Drain Tile
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition, appearance and
 dimension.
 Document in SM.
 Asphalt pipe joint Verify type and brand name of material is
 filler
 on QPL at the time of use.
 
 If rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use, notify
 District Testing and OMM
 Cement and Concrete section.
 
 If rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use, notify
 District Testing and OMM
 Cement and Concrete section.
 
 If rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use, notify
 District Testing and OMM
 Cement and Concrete section.
 
 If rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use, notify
 District Testing and OMM
 Cement and Concrete section.
 
 If rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use, notify
 District Testing and OMM
 Cement and Concrete section.
 
 If rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use, notify
 District Testing and OMM
 Cement and Concrete section.
 If rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use, notify
 District Testing and OMM
 Cement and Concrete section.
 If rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use, notify
 
 706.11
 
 706.12
 
 706.13
 
 706.14
 
 706.15
 
 707.01
 
 707.02
 
 707.03
 
 Inspect for condition, appearance and
 dimension.
 Document in SM.
 Resilient and
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Flexible Gasket
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Joints
 Inspect for condition, appearance and
 dimension.
 Document in SM.
 Resilient and
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Flexible Joints
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition, appearance and
 dimension.
 Document in SM.
 Precast Reinforced Assure products are supplied by a source on
 Concrete Manhole the Certified List for Supplement 1073
 Riser Sections,
 maintained by OMM,
 Catch Basins and Receive with TE-24.
 Inlet Tops, and
 Check dimension, markings, roughness or
 Temporary
 excessive cracks.
 Barriers
 Document in SM.
 Flexible Plastic
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Gaskets
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition, appearance and
 dimension.
 Document in SM.
 Precast Reinforced Assure products are supplied by a source on
 Concrete Outlets the Certified List for Supplement 1073
 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension, markings, roughness or
 excessive cracks.
 Document in SM.
 
 Metallic Coated
 Corrugated Steel
 Conduits and
 Underdrains
 [1/2 inch and 1/4
 depth
 corrugations]
 Metallic Coated
 Corrugated Steel
 Conduits
 [1 inch depth
 corrugation]
 
 District Testing and OMM
 Asphalt section.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Cement and Concrete
 section, if rejecting material
 because material non-performs
 or looks defective during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Cement and Concrete
 section, if rejecting material
 because material non-performs
 or looks defective during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Cement and Concrete
 section, if rejecting material
 because material non-performs
 or looks defective during use.
 
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Cement and Concrete
 section, if rejecting material
 because material non-performs
 or looks defective during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Cement and Concrete
 section, if rejecting material
 because material non-performs
 or looks defective during use.
 
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Certified List for Supplement 1019
 OMM Structural Welding and
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonCheck dimensions and markings.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use.
 
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Certified List for Supplement 1019
 OMM Structural Welding and
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonCheck dimensions and markings.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use.
 Structural Plate
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Corrugated Steel Certified List for Supplement 1019
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Structures
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material non-
 
 707.04
 
 707.05
 705.07
 
 707.10
 
 707.11
 
 707.12
 
 707.13
 707.14
 
 707.15
 
 707.18
 
 Check dimensions and markings.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use.
 Precoated,
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Galvanized Steel Certified List for Supplement 1019
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Culverts
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonCheck dimensions and cracks.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use.
 Bituminous Coated Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Corrugated Steel Certified List for Supplement 1019
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Pipe and Arches
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 with Paved Invert Receive with TE-24.
 material because material non[1/2 inch depth
 Check dimensions and markings.
 performs or looks defective
 corrugations]
 Document in SM.
 during use.
 [1 inch depth
 corrugations]
 Steel Tubing
 Generally a fabricated component received Notify District Testing and
 Square and
 with TE-24.
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Rectangular
 Check dimensions and markings.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Document in SM.
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Mortar Lined
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Corrugated Steel Certified List for Supplement 1019
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Pipe
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 [any corrugation
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nondepth]
 Check dimensions and markings.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use.
 Corrugated Steel Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Spiral Rib
 Certified List for Supplement 1019
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Conduits
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonCheck dimensions and markings.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use
 Bituminous Lined Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Corrugated Steel Certified List for Supplement 1019
 OMMStructural Welding and
 Pipe
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 [1/2 depth
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material noncorrugations]
 Check dimensions and markings.
 performs or looks defective
 [1 depth
 Document in SM.
 during use.
 corrugations]
 Corrugated Steel Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Box Culverts
 Certified List for Supplement 1019
 OMM Structural Welding and
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonCheck dimensions and markings.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use.
 Polymer Precoated, Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Galvanized Steel Certified List for Supplement 1019
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Conduits with
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 precoated
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material non-
 
 707.19
 
 707.20
 
 707.21
 
 707.22
 
 707.23
 
 707.24
 
 707.25
 
 707.31
 707.32
 707.33
 
 galvanized
 smooth steel
 interior liner
 Aluminum Coated
 Steel Conduits
 with precoated
 galvanized
 smooth steel
 interior liner
 Galvanized Coated
 Steel Conduits
 with precoated
 galvanized
 smooth steel
 interior liner
 Corrugated
 Aluminum Alloy
 Conduits and
 Underdrains
 [1/4, 7/16 & ½ inch
 depth
 corrugations]
 Corrugated
 Aluminum Alloy
 Conduits
 
 Check dimension and markings.
 Document in SM.
 
 performs or looks defective
 during use.
 
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Certified List for Supplement 1019
 OMM Structural Welding and
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonCheck dimension and markings.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use.
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Certified List for Supplement 1019
 OMM Structural Welding and
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonCheck dimension and markings.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use.
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Certified List for Supplement 1019
 OMM Structural Welding and
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonCheck dimension and markings.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use.
 
 Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Certified List for Supplement 1019
 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension and markings.
 Document in SM.
 Aluminum Alloy Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Structural Plate
 Certified List for Supplement 1019
 Conduits
 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimensions and markings.
 Document in SM.
 Corrugated
 Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Aluminum Spiral Certified List for Supplement 1019
 Rib Conduits
 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimensions and markings.
 Document in SM.
 Corrugated
 Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Aluminum Box
 Certified List for Supplement 1019
 Culverts
 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimensions and markings.
 Document in SM.
 Polyethylene
 Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Corrugated Pipe
 Certified List for Supplement 1066
 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension and markings.
 
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Asphalt section, if
 rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use.
 
 707.34
 707.35
 
 707.41
 
 707.42
 
 707.43
 
 707.45
 
 707.46
 
 707.47
 
 707.48
 
 707.51
 
 Document in SM.
 Polyethylene Pipe- Signed Letter of Certification from Supplier Notify District Testing and
 Outside Diameter
 OMM Asphalt section, if
 Polyethylene
 rejecting material because
 Profile Wall Pipe
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use.
 Smooth-Wall
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing and
 Polyvinyl
 on QPL at the time of use.
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Chloride
 Document in SM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Underdrain Pipe
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Polyvinyl Chloride Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing and
 Corrugated
 on QPL at the time of use.
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Smooth Interior Document in SM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Pipe
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Polyvinyl Chloride Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing and
 Profile Wall Pipe on QPL at the time of use.
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Document in SM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Polyvinyl Chloride Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing and
 Solid Wall Pipe
 on QPL at the time of use.
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Document in SM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Polyvinyl Chloride Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing and
 Drain Waste and
 on QPL at the time of use.
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Vent Pipe
 Document in SM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 ABS and Polyvinyl Furnish certified test data conforming to
 Notify District Testing if
 Chloride
 101.03 to the Engineer.
 rejecting material.
 Composite Pipe Document in SM. Accept based on
 inspection of material for type, condition,
 dimension, receipt and verification of
 manufacturer’s certified test data.
 Polyvinyl Chloride Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing and
 Large-Diameter
 on QPL at the time of use.
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Solid Wall Pipe Document in SM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 ABS Drain Waste Furnish certified test data conforming to
 Notify District Testing if
 and Vent Pipe
 101.03 to the Engineer.
 rejecting material.
 
 707.52
 
 707.62
 
 707.65
 
 707.69
 
 707.70
 
 707.80
 
 708.01
 
 Document in SM. Accept based on
 inspection of material for type, condition,
 dimension, receipt and verification of
 manufacturer’s certified test data.
 ABS Sewer Pipe
 Furnish certified test data conforming to
 Notify District Testing if
 101.03 to the Engineer.
 rejecting material.
 Document in SM. Accept based on
 inspection of material for type, condition,
 dimension, receipt and verification of
 manufacturer’s certified test data.
 Polypropylene
 Furnish a letter of certification documenting Notify District Testing if
 Corrugated Single the material meets specification
 rejecting material.
 Wall Pipe
 requirements. Document in SM. Accept
 based on inspection of material for type,
 condition, dimension, receipt and
 verification of manufacturer’s certified test
 data.
 Polypropylene
 Furnish a letter of certification documenting Notify District Testing if
 Corrugated
 the material meets specification
 rejecting material.
 Double Wall Pipe requirements.
 Document in SM. Accept based on
 inspection of material for type, condition,
 dimension, receipt and verification of
 manufacturer’s certified test data.
 Polypropylene
 Furnish a letter of certification documenting Notify District Testing if
 Corrugated Tripe the material meets specification
 rejecting material.
 Wall Pipe
 requirements.
 Document in SM. Accept based on
 inspection of material for type, condition,
 dimension, receipt and verification of
 manufacturer’s certified test data.
 Welded and
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing and
 Seamless Steel
 on QPL at the time of use.
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Pipe
 Document in SM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Reinforced
 Accept based on inspection of material for Notify District Testing and
 Thermosetting
 type, condition, dimension, receipt and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Resin Pipe
 verification of manufacturer’s certified test Metals section, if rejecting
 data.
 material because material nonDocument in SM.
 performs or looks defective
 during use.
 Inorganic Zinc
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Silicate Primer
 Certified List for Supplement 1084
 OMM Chemical section, if
 Paint
 maintained by OMM.
 rejecting material because
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 material non-performs or looks
 on QPL at the time of use.
 defective during use. Obtain a
 Inspect material container for markings,
 1 qt (1 L) sample representative
 expiration date and condition.
 of the defects.
 Document in SM.
 
 708.02
 708.02.B
 708.02.C
 708.02.D
 709.01
 
 709.03
 
 709.05
 
 709.08
 
 709.09
 
 OZEU Structural Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Steel Pant
 Certified List for Supplement 1084
 OMM Chemical section, if
 Organic Zinc Prime maintained by OMM.
 rejecting material because
 Coat
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 material non-performs or looks
 Epoxy Intermediate on QPL at the time of use.
 defective during use. Obtain a
 Coat
 Inspect material container for markings,
 1 qt (1 L) sample representative
 Urethane Finish
 expiration date and condition.
 of the defects.
 Coat
 Document in SM.
 Deformed and
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Plain Billet Steel Certified List for Supplement 1068
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Bars for Concrete maintained by OMM
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Reinforcement
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonCheck dimension, markings and condition.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use. Obtain three (3)
 30" (.8 m) long samples of each
 rebar size, with markings, and
 submit for QA testing by
 OMM.
 Rail Steel
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Deformed and
 Certified List for Supplement 1068
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Plain Bars for
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Concrete
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonReinforcement
 Check dimension, markings and condition.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use. Obtain three (3)
 30" (.8 m) long samples of each
 rebar size, with markings, and
 submit for QA testing by
 OMM.
 Axle Steel
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Deformed and
 Certified List for Supplement 1068
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Plain Bars for
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Concrete
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonReinforcement
 Check dimension, markings and condition.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use. Obtain three (3)
 30" (.8 m) long samples of each
 rebar size, with markings, and
 submit for QA testing by
 OMM.
 Cold-Drawn Steel Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Wire for Concrete Certified List for Supplement 1068
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Reinforcement
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonCheck dimension, markings and condition.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use. Obtain three (3)
 30" (.8 m) long samples of each
 diameter and submit for QA
 testing by OMM.
 Fabricated Steel
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Bar or Rod Mats
 Certified List for Supplement 1068
 OMM Structural Welding and
 for Concrete
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Reinforcement
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material non-
 
 Check dimension, markings and condition.
 Document in SM
 
 709.10
 
 Welded Steel Wire Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Fabric for
 Certified List for Supplement 1068
 Concrete
 maintained by OMM.
 Reinforcement
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension, markings and condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 709.11
 
 Deformed Steel
 Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Wire for Concrete Certified List for Supplement 1068
 Reinforcement
 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension, markings and condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 709.12
 
 Welded Deformed Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Steel Wire Fabric Certified List for Supplement 1068
 for Concrete
 maintained by OMM.
 Reinforcement
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension, markings and condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 709.13
 
 Coated Dowel Bars Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Certified List for Supplement 1068
 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension, markings and condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 709.14
 
 Epoxy-Coated
 Steel Wire and
 Welded Wire
 Fabric for
 Reinforcement
 
 709.15
 
 Plastic Supports for Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Reinforcing Steel Approved List maintained by OMM.
 Inspect for dimension and condition.
 
 Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Certified List for Supplement 1068
 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension, markings and condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 performs or looks defective
 during use. Obtain 3 ft x 3 ft (1
 m x 1 m) of the mat and submit
 for QA testing by OMM.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use. Obtain 3 ft x 3 ft (1
 m x 1 m) of the mat and submit
 for QA testing by OMM.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use. Obtain 3 ft x 3 ft (1
 m x 1 m) of the mat and submit
 for QA testing by OMM.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use. Obtain 3 ft x 3 ft (1
 m x 1 m) of the mat and submit
 for QA testing by the
 Laboratory.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use. Obtain 3 dowel
 bars and submit for QA testing
 by the Laboratory.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use. Obtain 3 ft x 3 ft (1
 m x 1 m) of the mat and submit
 for QA testing by the
 Laboratory.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material that nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 
 709.16
 
 710.01.A
 710.01 B
 
 710.02
 
 710.03
 
 Galvanizing Steel Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Option for Bridge Certified List for Supplement 1068
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Spirals
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonCheck dimension, markings and condition.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use. Obtain three (3)
 30" (.8 m) long samples of each
 rebar size, with markings, and
 submit for QA testing by the
 Laboratory.
 Barbed Wire
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Certified List for Supplement 1067
 OMM Structural Welding and
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonCheck dimension, markings and condition.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use. Obtain a 5 ft (1.5
 m) length of barbed wire and
 submit for QA testing by the
 Laboratory.
 Woven Steel Wire Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Fence, Type 47
 Certified List for Supplement 1067
 OMM Structural Welding and
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonCheck dimension, markings and condition.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use. Obtain 4 ft (1.2 m)
 width of fencing and submit for
 QA testing by the Laboratory.
 Chain-Link Fence Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 [including Fittings Certified List for Supplement 1067
 OMM Structural Welding and
 and Accessories] maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonCheck dimension, markings and condition.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use. Obtain samples as
 directed by the Laboratory.
 
 710.06
 
 Deep Beam Rail
 
 710.09
 
 Wire Rope Rail
 
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Certified List for Supplement 1042
 OMM Structural Welding and
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Receive with TE-24.
 material because material nonCheck dimension, markings and condition.
 performs or looks defective
 Document in SM.
 during use. Obtain three (3) 1
 ft (0.3 m) lengths of guardrail
 from the same section and
 submit for QA testing by the
 Laboratory.
 Inspect for dimension, condition,
 Approval required prior to use.
 appearance and markings on tag or reel.
 Notify District Testing and
 Submit one (1) six (6) ft. sample to OMM.
 OMM.
 Document in SM.
 
 710.11
 
 710.12
 
 710.14
 
 710.15
 
 710.16
 
 711.01
 
 711.02
 
 711.03
 
 711.04
 
 Fence Posts and
 Braces
 [Lumber]
 [Steel]
 
 Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Certified List for Supplement 1067 and
 Supplement 1072 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension, markings and condition.
 Document in SM.
 Square-Sawed and Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Round Guardrail Certified List for Supplement 1042
 Posts
 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension, markings and condition.
 Document in SM.
 Pressure Treated
 Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Guardrail and
 Certified List for Supplement 1042 and
 Fence Posts,
 Supplement 1067 maintained by OMM.
 Braces, and
 Receive with TE-24.
 Blocks
 Check dimension, markings and condition.
 Document in SM.
 Steel Guardrail
 Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Posts
 Certified List for Supplement 1042
 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension, markings and condition.
 Document in SM.
 Guard Posts
 Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Certified List for Supplement 1042 and
 Supplement 1067 maintained by OMM.
 Receive with TE-24.
 Check dimension, markings and condition.
 Document in SM.
 Structural Steel
 Material supplied by a Fabricator source on
 the Certified List for Items 513, 516, 517
 & 518 maintained by OMM.
 Structural Steel Members are received with
 TE-24.
 Galvanized Steel Any material supplied with galvanizing will
 conform to this specification. Randomly
 inspect galvanizing for appearance and
 thickness of coating.
 Steel for Sheet
 Certified Mill Test Data required for new
 Piling
 material.
 Verify tensile and chemical properties meet
 requirements.
 Inspect all material for dimension and
 condition.
 Used material is not acceptable for
 permanent installations.
 Document field inspection.
 Cold Rolled Steel Contact OMM Structural Steel section for
 acceptance process.
 Document in SM.
 
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 etals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 If questions concerning
 structural steel materials,
 contact OMM Structural Steel
 Section and notify District
 Testing.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Steel Section
 section if rejecting material.
 
 711.07
 
 711.08
 
 711.09
 
 711.10
 
 711.12
 711.13
 711.14
 
 711.15
 711.16
 711.17
 711.18
 711.19
 711.20
 
 711.21
 
 711.22
 
 Steel Castings
 
 Contact OMM Structural Steel section for
 acceptance process.
 Document in SM.
 Verify manufacturer is on Approved List
 maintained by OMM.
 Inspect for dimension, condition and
 markings.
 
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Steel Section
 section if rejecting material.
 Arc-welding
 If material is not on Approved
 Electrode &
 List, certification and test data
 Fluxes
 from supplier will be submitted
 to OMM. Do not use until
 approval has been received.
 High Strength Bolts Receive with TE-24.
 If field test does not meet
 Nuts and Washers Inspect material for dimension, condition
 requirements of Supplement
 and markings.
 1080, retest bolt, nut and
 Reject defective material.
 washer combination after
 Perform field testing of assembly
 application of a lubricant.
 combination per Supplement 1080.
 Notify District Testing if
 Document field inspection & testing in SM. rejecting material.
 Machine Bolts
 General specification for many common
 Notify District Testing if
 bolts
 rejecting material.
 Verify material is component of certified
 supplier shipment like Supplement 1042
 for Guardrail Suppliers or Supplement
 1067 for Fence Suppliers.
 Inspect for condition and coating.
 Reject defective material.
 Gray Iron Castings Verify manufacturer is on Approved List
 Notify District Testing if
 Ductile Iron
 maintained by OMM.
 rejecting material.
 Castings
 Receive with TE-24.
 Gray Iron &
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 Ductile Iron
 Document in SM.
 Castings
 Sheet Copper
 Material supplied by a Fabricator source on If questions concerning
 Phosphor Bronze
 the Certified List for Items 513, 516, 517 structural steel materials,
 Plate
 & 518 maintained by OMM.
 contact OMM Structural Steel
 Cast Bronze
 Structural Steel Members are received with section and notify District
 Leaded Bronze
 TE-24.
 Testing.
 Sheet Lead
 Document in SM.
 Aluminum for
 Material supplied by a Fabricator source on If questions concerning
 Railings
 the Certified List for Items 513, 516, 517 structural steel materials,
 & 518 maintained by OMM.
 contact OMM Structural Steel
 Structural Steel Members are received with Section and notify District
 TE-24.
 Testing.
 Document in SM.
 Preformed Bearing Verify type and brand name of material is If material non-performs or
 Pads
 on QPL at the time of use.
 looks defective during use
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 notify District Testing and
 Verify dimension conform to plan
 OMM.
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 Buried Liner
 Verify type and brand name of material is If material non-performs or
 Waterproofing
 on QPL at the time of use.
 looks defective during use
 Membrane
 Inspect for condition and defects.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 
 711.23
 
 Elastomeric
 Bearings
 
 711.24
 
 Waterproofing
 fabric
 
 711.25
 
 Type 2 Membrane
 Waterproofing
 
 711.26
 
 Structural Timber,
 Lumber and
 Piling
 
 711.27
 
 Prestressing Steel
 
 711.28
 
 Cellular Polyvinyl
 Chloride Sponge
 
 711.29
 
 Type 3 Membrane
 Waterproofing
 
 Verify dimension conform to plan
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 Only accept elastomeric bearings shipped Field acceptable for durometer.
 by TE-24.and provided by certified
 Reading average range: +/- 7
 suppliers conforming to Supplement 1081. points of design plan number.
 Notify district testing. to Inspect material
 to check location and number of internal
 shims utilizing an ice pick or similar tool.
 Five (5) Durometer Gage readings should be
 taken and averaged to determine
 compliance with design plans.
 Document in SM.
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 Verify dimension conform to plan
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 If material non-performs or
 Verify dimensions conform to plan
 looks defective during use send
 requirements.
 one (1) 4 ft2 sample
 Document in SM.
 representative of defect to
 OMM for QA follow-up.
 Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing and
 Certified List for Supplement 1072
 OMM Structural Welding and
 maintained by OMM.
 Metals section, if rejecting
 Received with TE-24 and supplier bill of
 material because material nonlading.
 performs or looks defective
 Check dimensions, quantity and condition.
 during use.
 Document in SM.
 Material supplied by a Fabricator source on If questions concerning
 the Certified List for Items 515 maintained prestressing strand, contact
 by OMM.
 OMM structural Welding and
 Prestressed Concrete Members are received Metals section
 with TE-24.
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 If material non-performs or
 Verify dimensions conform to plan
 looks defective during use send
 requirements.
 one (1) 1.5'x2.5' sample
 Document in SM.
 representative of defect to
 OMM for QA follow-up.
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Membrane primer is 705.04 material
 If material non-performs or
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 looks defective during use send
 Verify dimensions conform to plan
 requirements.
 
 Document in SM.
 
 711.30
 
 711.31
 
 Aluminum for
 Steps
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 Verify dimensions conform to plan
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 Reinforced
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Propylene Plastic on QPL at the time of use.
 Manhole Steps
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 Verify dimensions conform to plan
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 
 712.01
 
 Expansion Shield
 Anchors
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 Verify dimensions conform to plan
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 
 712.02
 
 Calcium Chloride
 
 712.03
 
 Sodium Chloride
 
 712.04 A
 
 Lime [masonry]
 
 712.04 B
 
 Lime [Quick] for
 Stabilization
 
 712.04 C
 
 Lime Kiln Dust
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 Verify dimensions conform to plan
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 Inspect material for condition.
 Submit one (1) pint sample per each
 Purchase Order to OMM.
 Document in SM.
 Sample & inspect material for condition
 within 24 hrs of receipt.
 One (1) five (5) lb sample.
 Document in SM.
 Assure provided material is from suppliers
 certified under Supplement 1087 and
 listed on the QPL .
 Inspection for condition and defects
 Document in SM. If questions on material
 quality sample one (1) ten (10) lb sample
 of Quicklime. Send to Geotechnical
 Engineering.
 Assure provided material is from suppliers
 certified under Supplement 1087 and
 documentation for Supplement 1087 is
 complete. Document in SM.
 
 one (1) 4 square ft sample
 representative of defect to
 OMM for QA follow-up.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use. Obtain three(3)
 samples representative of
 defect to OMM for QA followup.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 contact OMM.
 If additional samples required
 for material quantities
 exceeding 3000 tons, notify
 District Testing.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 Samples may be taken in
 triplicate, if required. Contact
 Geotechnical Engineering.
 
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 
 712.06
 
 712.09
 
 712.10
 
 712.11
 
 712.12
 
 712.13
 
 712.14
 
 720.01
 
 720.03
 
 If questions on material quality, sample one
 (1) ten (10) lb sample of Lime Kiln Dust.
 Send to Geotechnical Engineering.
 Preservative
 Component material of pressure treated
 Treatment for
 lumber. No approval required. Approval
 Structural Timber is for the wood including the preservative
 treatment.
 Geotextile Fabrics Verify type and brand name of material is
 on Approved List at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 Verify dimensions conform to plan
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 Prefabricated Edge Inspect material for condition and
 Underdrain
 dimension.
 Manufacturer’s certified test data required
 for acceptance.
 Document in SM.
 Temporary Erosion Inspect material for condition and
 Control Mats
 dimension.
 Material
 Manufacturer’s certified test data required
 [Types A through
 for acceptance.
 I]
 Field Acceptance item.
 Tied Concrete
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Block Mat
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 Verify dimensions conform to plan
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 Articulating
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Concrete Block
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Revetment
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 System
 Verify dimensions conform to plan
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 Detectable
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Warning Device
 on Approved List at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 Verify dimensions conform to plan
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 Rectangular
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Reflectors
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition, color requirements
 and defect.
 Verify dimensions conform to plan
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 Flexible Delineator Verify type and brand name of material is
 Posts
 on QPL at the time of use.
 
 Samples may be taken in
 triplicate, if required. Contact
 Geotechnical Engineering.
 If questions on pressure treated
 lumber check the specific
 material item and follow those
 instructions.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 submit one (1) 4' x 4' sample
 representative of defect to
 OMM .
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Concrete section, if
 rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Concrete section, if
 rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Chemical section, if
 rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use.
 
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Chemical section, if
 
 721.01
 
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 Verify dimensions conform to plan
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 Raised Pavement Verify type and brand name of material is
 Marker Castings
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 Verify type conforms to pre-qualification
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 
 721.02
 
 Prismatic
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Retroreflector and on QPL at the time of use.
 Adhesive
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 Verify type conforms to pre-qualification
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 
 721.03
 
 Casting Adhesive
 
 725.02
 
 Wire and Cables
 
 725.03
 
 Unit Type DuctCable Systems
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition, markings and
 conformance to plan requirements.
 Document in SM.
 
 725.04
 
 Rigid Ferrous
 Metal Electrical
 Conduit and
 Fittings
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition of coating and
 conformance to plan requirements.
 Document in SM.
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 Verify dimension conform to plan
 requirements.
 Document in SM.
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition, markings and
 conformance to plan requirements.
 Document in SM.
 
 rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use. Obtain one (1)
 4x2x0.48 in. sample
 representative of defect to
 OMM for QA follow-up.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use. Obtain one (1)
 sample representative of
 defective RPM casting to
 OMM for QA follow-up.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Chemical section, if
 rejecting material because
 material non-performs or looks
 defective during use.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use send
 a sample representative of non
 -compliance or defect to OMM
 for QA follow-up.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use send
 a 10 ft. sample representative
 of non -compliance or defect to
 OMM for QA follow-up.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use send
 a sample representative of non
 -compliance or defect to OMM
 for QA follow-up.
 
 725.051
 
 725.052
 
 725.06
 
 725.07
 
 725.08
 
 725.10
 
 725.11 B
 
 725.11 E
 
 Polyvinyl Chloride Verify type and brand name of material is
 Conduit and
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Fittings
 Inspect for condition, markings and
 conformance to plan requirements.
 Document in SM.
 
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use send
 a sample representative of non
 -compliance or defect to OMM
 for QA follow-up.
 Polyethylene
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Conduit and
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Fittings
 Inspect for condition, markings and
 If material non-performs or
 conformance to plan requirements.
 looks defective during use send
 Document in SM.
 a sample representative of non
 -compliance or defect to OMM
 for QA follow-up.
 Polymer Concrete Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Pull Boxes
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition, dimension, markings If material non-performs or
 and conformance to plan requirements.
 looks defective during use send
 Document in SM.
 a sample representative of non
 -compliance or defect to OMM
 for QA follow-up.
 Plastic Pull Box
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition, dimension, markings If material non-performs or
 and conformance to plan requirements.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Portland Concrete Products will be supplied by a source on the Notify District Testing if
 Pull Boxes
 Certified List for Supplement 1073
 rejecting material.
 maintained by OMM.
 If material non-performs or
 Receive with TE-24.
 looks defective during use
 Check dimension, markings, roughness or
 notify District Testing and
 excessive cracks.
 OMM.
 Item 604 Installation documented on CA-P3 Inspection Form.
 Document in SM.
 Junction Boxes
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition, dimension, markings If material non-performs or
 and conformance to plan requirements.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Lamps for
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Luminaires
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition, markings and
 If material non-performs or
 conformance to plan requirements.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Conventional
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Luminaires for
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 High Intensity
 
 725.11 F
 
 725.11 G
 
 725.12
 
 725.15.B
 
 725.15.C
 
 725.15.D
 
 725.15.E
 
 725.16
 
 Discharge Lamps Inspect for condition, dimension, markings
 (including Optical and conformance to plan requirements.
 system, lamp,
 Document in SM.
 ballast and
 housing)
 Wall Mounted
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Underpass
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Luminaires
 Inspect for condition, dimension, markings
 (including Optical and conformance to plan requirements.
 system, lamp,
 Document in SM.
 ballast and
 housing)
 High Mast/Low
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Mast Luminaire
 on QPL at the time of use.
 (including Optical Inspect for condition, dimension, markings
 system, lamp,
 and conformance to plan requirements.
 ballast and
 Document in SM.
 housing)
 Polyethylene,
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Fiberglas
 on QPL at the time of use.
 reinforced, Pull Inspect for condition, dimension, markings
 Box with Polymer and conformance to plan requirements.
 concrete cover
 Document in SM.
 and support ring
 Fused Pull-Apart
 Connection
 
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition, dimension, markings If material non-performs or
 and conformance to plan requirements.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Unfused Pull-Apart Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Connection
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition, dimension, markings If material non-performs or
 and conformance to plan requirements.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Fused Bolted
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Connection
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition, dimension, markings If material non-performs or
 and conformance to plan requirements.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Unfused Permanent Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Connection
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition, dimension, markings If material non-performs or
 and conformance to plan requirements.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Ground Rods
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 
 725.19.H
 
 725.20
 
 725.21.A
 
 Inspect for condition, dimension, markings
 and conformance to plan requirements.
 Document in SM.
 Power Service
 Products will be supplied by a source on the
 Components
 Certified List for Supplement 1072
 Wood Pole
 maintained by OMM.
 Received with TE-24 and supplier bill of
 lading.
 Check dimension, quantity and condition.
 Document in SM.
 Multiple Cell
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 Polyvinyl
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Chloride Conduit Inspect for condition, dimension, markings
 and Fittings
 and conformance to plan requirements.
 Document in SM.
 
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 contact OMM.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM, Structural Welding and
 Metals section, if rejecting
 material because material nonperforms or looks defective
 during use.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 
 Luminaire Supports Verify pole provided by Certified
 Light Poles
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1091.
 Inspect material for condition and
 conformance to plan requirements.
 Accept with TE-24.
 Document in SM.
 725.21.B Luminaire Supports Inspect material for condition and
 Light Towers
 conformance to plan requirements.
 Verify pole provided by Certified
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1091.
 Accept with TE-24.
 Document in SM.
 725.21.B.9 Luminaire Support OPTION 1
 Anchor Bolts
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for condition, and conformance to
 plan requirements.
 OPTION 2
 Verify pole provided by Certified
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1091.
 Accept with TE-24.
 Document in SM.
 726.01
 Barrier Reflectors Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing and
 on QPL at the time of use.
 OMM Chemical section, if
 Inspect for condition and defect.
 rejecting material because
 Verify dimension conform to plan
 material non-performs or looks
 requirements.
 defective during use.
 Document in SM.
 730.01
 Steel Tube and
 This item typically is a component of a sign Notify District Testing if
 Pipe
 support. Inspect total component for
 rejecting material.
 condition and conformance to shop
 drawings.
 Document in SM.
 730.015
 U-Channel Posts Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 
 Inspect for conformance to dimension and
 condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing and
 OMM Structural Steel section
 if rejecting material.
 
 730.016
 
 Square Posts
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for conformance to dimension and
 condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 730.017
 
 Wooden Box
 Beams
 
 Contact OMM Structural Steel section for
 acceptance process.
 Document in SM.
 
 730.02
 
 Steel Anchor Bolts OPTION 1
 Notify District Testing if
 and Nuts
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 rejecting material.
 on QPL at the time of use.
 If material non-performs or
 Inspect for condition, and conformance to
 looks defective during use
 plan requirements.
 notify District Testing and
 OPTION 2
 OMM.
 Verify pole provided by Certified
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1093.
 Accept with TE-24.
 Document in SM.
 Steel Poles and
 Component material provided by Certified Notify District Testing if
 Arms
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1093.
 rejecting material.
 Verify manufacturer is on Supplement 1093. If material non-performs or
 Accept with TE-24.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Base and Arm
 Component material provided by Certified Notify District Testing if
 Plates
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1093.
 rejecting material.
 Verify manufacturer is on Supplement 1093. If material non-performs or
 Accept with TE-24.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Handhole Covers Component material provided by Certified Notify District Testing if
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1093.
 rejecting material.
 Verify manufacturer is on Supplement 1093. If material non-performs or
 Accept with TE-24.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Pole Caps
 Component material provided by Certified Notify District Testing if
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1093.
 rejecting material.
 Verify manufacturer is on Supplement 1093. If material non-performs or
 Accept with TE-24.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Arm Caps
 Component material provided by Certified Notify District Testing if
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1093.
 rejecting material.
 Verify manufacturer is on Supplement 1093.
 
 730.03
 
 730.04
 
 730.05
 
 730.06
 
 730.07
 
 Accept with TE-24.
 Document in SM.
 
 730.08
 
 Steel Hardware
 
 730.09
 
 Stainless Steel
 
 730.10
 
 Stainless Steel
 Hardware
 
 730.11
 
 Aluminum Sheet
 and Plate
 
 730.12
 
 Aluminum
 Extrusions
 
 730.13
 
 Aluminum Tube
 and Pipe
 
 730.14
 
 Aluminum
 Castings
 
 Component material provided by Certified
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1092 or
 Supplement 1093.
 Verify manufacturer is on Supplement
 1092or Supplement 1093.
 Accept with TE-24.
 Document in SM.
 Component material provided by Certified
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1092 or
 Supplement 1093.
 Verify manufacturer is on Supplement
 1092or Supplement 1093.
 Accept with TE-24.
 Document in SM.
 Component material provided by Certified
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1092 or
 Supplement 1093.
 Verify manufacturer is on Supplement
 1092or Supplement 1093.
 Accept with TE-24.
 Document in SM.
 Component material provided by Certified
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1092 or
 Supplement 1093.
 Verify manufacturer is on Supplement
 1092or Supplement 1093.
 Accept with TE-24.
 Document in SM.
 Component material provided by Certified
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1092 or
 Supplement 1093.
 Verify manufacturer is on Supplement
 1092or Supplement 1093.
 Accept with TE-24.
 Document in SM.
 Component material provided by Certified
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1092 or
 Supplement 1093.
 Verify manufacturer is on Supplement
 1092or Supplement 1093.
 Accept with TE-24.
 Document in SM.
 Component material provided by Certified
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1092 or
 Supplement 1093.
 Verify manufacturer is on Supplement
 1092or Supplement 1093.
 
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 
 730.15
 
 Aluminum
 Forgings
 
 730.16
 
 Aluminum
 Welding Rods
 
 730.17
 
 Aluminum
 Hardware
 
 730.18
 
 Reflective Sheeting
 Type F
 
 730.19
 
 Reflective Sheeting
 Type G
 
 730.191
 
 Reflective Sheeting
 Type G
 reboundable
 
 730.192
 
 Reflective Sheeting
 Type H
 
 730.193
 
 Reflective Sheeting
 Type J
 
 730.20
 
 Nonreflective
 Sheeting
 
 Accept with TE-24.
 notify District Testing and
 Document in SM.
 OMM.
 Component material provided by Certified Notify District Testing if
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1092 or
 rejecting material.
 Supplement 1093.
 If material non-performs or
 Verify manufacturer is on Supplement
 looks defective during use
 1092or Supplement 1093.
 notify District Testing and
 Accept with TE-24.
 OMM.
 Document in SM.
 Normally only applies to shop fabrication. Notify District Testing if
 If performing field aluminum welding
 rejecting material.
 contact District Testing and OMMfor
 recommendations.
 Component material provided by Certified Notify District Testing if
 Manufacturer under Supplement 1092.
 rejecting material.
 Verify manufacturer is on Supplement 1092. If material non-performs or
 Accept with TE-24.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Use if certification provided.
 Notify District Testing if
 Document in SM.
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 
 730.22
 730.23
 
 731.03.C
 
 731.05
 
 731.06
 
 731.07
 
 731.08
 
 731.10
 
 732.01
 
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Silk Screen Inks
 No field acceptance requirements.- part of
 730.19, 191, 192 or 193 items.
 Transparent
 No field acceptance requirements.- part of
 Electronic
 730.19, 191, 192 or 193 items. No field
 Cuttable Films
 requirements.
 Changeable
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Message Sign,
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Electrical Type Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Internally
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Illuminated Fixed on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Message Sign
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Sign Flasher
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Assembly
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 School Speed Limit Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Sign Assembly
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Flexible Conduit Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Timer with
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Enclosure
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Vehicular Signal Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Heads,
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Conventional
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 
 732.02
 
 732.03
 
 732.04.C
 
 732.05
 
 732.06
 
 732.07.A
 
 732.07.B
 
 732.08
 
 732.11
 
 Vehicular Signal Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Heads, Optically on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Programmed, 12- Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 inch (300 mm)
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Lens
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Vehicular Signal Provide Manufacturer’s Certification verify Notify District Testing if
 Heads, Optically material meets specification requirements rejecting material.
 Programmed, 8- Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 inch (200 mm)
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Lens
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Vehicular and
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 pedestrian light
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Emitting Diode Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 Lamps (LED)
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Pedestrian Signal Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Heads
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 [Type A1]
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 [Type A2]
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 [Type D2]
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Pedestrian
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Pushbuttons
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Loop Detector
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Units Nema TS 1 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Loop Detector
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Units Nema TS 2 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Loop Detector
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Units, Delay and on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Extension Type Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Signal Supports
 Check provided by Certified Manufacturer Notify District Testing if
 under Supplement 1094.
 rejecting material.
 Accept with TE-24.
 
 Document in SM.
 
 732.12
 
 Strain Poles
 
 Check provided by Certified Manufacturer
 under Supplement 1094.
 Accept with TE-24.
 Document in SM.
 
 732.13
 
 Wood Poles
 
 Check provided by Certified Manufacturer
 under Supplement 1094.
 Accept with TE-24.
 Document in SM.
 
 732.14
 
 Down Guy
 Assemblies
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and
 condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 732.15
 
 Pedestals and Bases Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and
 condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 732.16
 
 Conduit Risers
 
 See 725.04 requirements.
 
 732.17
 
 Cable Support
 Assemblies
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and
 condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 732.18
 
 Messenger and
 Tether Wire
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and
 condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 732.19
 
 Cable and Wire
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and
 condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 
 732.20
 
 Power Service
 
 732.21
 
 Disconnect Switch Verify type and brand name of material is
 with Enclosure
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and
 condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 733.02.A
 
 Controller Unit
 Type TS2/A1
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and
 condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 733.02.B
 
 Controller Unit
 Type TS2/A2
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and
 condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 733.02.C
 
 Controller Unit
 Type 170E
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and
 condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 733.02.D
 
 Controller Unit
 Type 2070L and
 LC
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is
 on QPL at the time of use.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and
 condition.
 Document in SM.
 
 733.03.A
 
 Cabinet Type TS 1 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Cabinet Type TS 2 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 
 733.03.B
 
 See 725.04 requirements
 
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Notify District Testing if
 rejecting material.
 If material non-performs or
 looks defective during use
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 
 Document in SM.
 
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Field inspect for 1/4 aluminum thickness
 Notify District Testing if
 and accept.
 rejecting material.
 
 733.03.C
 
 Cabinet Type 332
 
 733.03.D
 
 Cabinet Type 334
 
 733.03.E
 
 Cabinet Type 336
 
 733.04.A
 
 Cabinet Riser for
 TS 1 – TS 2
 cabinet
 Cabinet Riser for Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Types 332, 334 or on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 336
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Flasher Controller Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Controller, Master, Assure the same manufacturer as the
 Notify District Testing if
 Traffic
 supplied controller unit 733.02.
 rejecting material.
 Responsive
 Remote Monitoring Compatible with the supplied 733.02 and
 Notify District Testing if
 Station
 733.06 unit.
 rejecting material.
 
 733.04.B
 
 733.05
 
 733.06
 
 733.07
 
 733.09
 
 Uninterruptible
 Power Supply
 (UPS)
 
 733.09.C
 
 Battery System
 
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for conformance to dimensions and If material non-performs or
 condition.
 looks defective during use
 
 Document in SM.
 740.02
 
 740.03
 
 740.04
 
 740.05
 
 740.06
 
 740.07
 
 740.08
 
 740.09.A
 
 740.09.B
 
 Traffic Paint
 
 Verify material is on Approved List
 maintained by OMM.
 Accepted with TE-24.
 Inspect container for appropriate markings.
 Inspect material for uniform consistency.
 Document in SM.
 Polyester Pavement Verify material is on Approved List
 Marking
 maintained by OMM.
 Accepted with TE-24.
 Inspect container for appropriate markings.
 Inspect material for uniform consistency.
 Document in SM.
 Thermoplastic
 Verify material is on Approved List
 Pavement
 maintained by OMM.
 Marking
 Accepted with TE-24.
 Inspect container for appropriate markings.
 Inspect material for uniform consistency.
 Document in SM.
 Preformed
 Verify material is on Approved List
 Pavement
 maintained by OMM.
 Marking
 Accepted with TE-24.
 Inspect container for appropriate markings.
 Inspect material for uniform consistency.
 Document in SM.
 Work Zone
 Materials accepted by Engineer.
 Pavement
 Inspect material for uniform consistency.
 Marking
 Document in SM.
 [Type 1
 Removable]
 [Type 2 NonRemovable]
 Epoxy Pavement Verify material is on Approved List
 Marking Material maintained by OMM.
 Accepted with TE-24.
 Inspect container for appropriate markings.
 Inspect material for uniform consistency.
 Document in SM.
 Heat-Fused
 Verify material is on Approved List
 Preformed Plastic maintained by OMM.
 Pavement
 Accepted with TE-24.
 Marking Material Inspect container for appropriate markings.
 Inspect material for uniform consistency.
 Document in SM.
 Glass Beads – for Accepted with TE-24.
 740.02
 Inspect container for appropriate markings.
 Inspect material for uniform consistency.
 Document in SM.
 Glass Beads – for Accepted with TE-24.
 740.03
 Inspect container for appropriate markings.
 
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 If rejecting for performance
 provide 1 qt (1 L) sample and
 notify District Testing.
 
 If rejecting for performance
 provide 1 qt (1 L) sample and
 notify District Testing.
 
 If rejecting for performance
 provide 1 qt (1 L) sample and
 notify District Testing.
 
 If rejecting for performance
 provide 1 qt (1 L) sample and
 notify District Testing.
 
 If rejecting for performance
 provide 1 qt (1 L) sample and
 notify District.
 
 If rejecting for performance
 provide 1 qt (1 L) sample and
 notify District Testing.
 
 If rejecting for performance
 provide 1 qt (1 L) sample and
 notify District Testing.
 
 740.09.C
 
 740.09.D
 
 740.10
 
 748.01
 
 748.02
 
 748.03
 
 748.05
 
 748.06
 
 748.07
 
 748.08
 
 Inspect material for uniform consistency.
 Document in SM.
 Glass Beads – for Accepted with TE-24.
 740.04
 Inspect container for appropriate markings.
 Inspect material for uniform consistency.
 Document in SM.
 Glass Beads – for Verify material is on Approved List
 740.07
 maintained by OMM.
 Accepted with TE-24.
 Inspect container for appropriate markings.
 Inspect material for uniform consistency.
 Document in SM.
 Spray
 Verify material is on Approved List
 If rejecting for performance
 Thermoplastic
 maintained by OMM.
 provide 1 qt (1 L) sample and
 Pavement
 Accepted with TE-24.
 notify District Testing.
 Marking
 Inspect container for appropriate markings.
 Inspect material for uniform consistency.
 Document in SM.
 Ductile Iron Pipe, Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Joints, and
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Fittings
 Inspect for condition, dimension, suitability If material non-performs or
 for intended use.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Polyvinyl Chloride Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 (PVC) Pipe,
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Joints, and
 Inspect for condition, dimension, suitability If material non-performs or
 Fittings
 for intended use.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Polyethylene (PE) Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Service Branches on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 and Fittings
 Inspect for condition, dimension, suitability If material non-performs or
 for intended use.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Copper Service
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Branches and
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Fittings
 Inspect for condition, dimension, suitability If material non-performs or
 for intended use.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Steel Pipe
 Basis of acceptance is manufacturers
 Notify District Testing if
 Encasement
 certification containing documentation of rejecting material
 domestic origin from manufacturer.
 Polyethylene
 Verify manufacturer certification conforms Notify District Testing if
 Encasement
 to ANSI/AWWA C105/A21.5
 rejecting material.
 Inspect condition, dimension, suitability for
 intended use.
 Gate Valve and
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Valve Box
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 
 748.09
 
 748.10
 
 748.11
 
 748.12
 
 748.13
 
 748.14
 
 748.15
 
 Inspect for condition, dimension, suitability If material non-performs or
 for intended use.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Inserting Valve and Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Valve Box
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition, dimension, suitability If material non-performs or
 for intended use.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Cutting-in Sleeve, Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Valve, and Valve on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Box
 Inspect for condition, dimension, suitability If material non-performs or
 for intended use.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Tapping Sleeve,
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Valve, and Valve on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Box
 Inspect for condition, dimension, suitability If material non-performs or
 for intended use.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Tapping Saddle and Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Corporation Stop on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition, dimension, suitability If material non-performs or
 for intended use.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Service Stop and Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 Service Box
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition, dimension, suitability If material non-performs or
 for intended use.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM.
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 Meter, Setting,
 Inspect for condition, dimension, suitability
 Stop, and
 for intended use.
 Chamber
 Acceptance based on manufacturer’s
 statement of conformity.
 Fire Hydrant
 Verify type and brand name of material is Notify District Testing if
 on QPL at the time of use.
 rejecting material.
 Inspect for condition, dimension, suitability If material non-performs or
 for intended use.
 looks defective during use
 Document in SM
 notify District Testing and
 OMM.
 
 701 CEMENTITIOUS MATERIALS AND CARBONATE MICRO-FINES
 701.00 Acceptance. Provide cements meeting 701.01, 701.02, 701.04, 701.05, 701.07 and 701.09 and certified
 according to Supplement 1028; fly ash meeting 701.13 and certified according to Supplement 1026; ground,
 granulated blast furnace slag meeting 701.11 and certified according to Supplement 1034; and micro silica meeting
 701.10 and certified according to Supplement 1045; carbonate micro-fines meeting 701.14 and certified according
 to Supplement 1016, without prior sampling, testing and approval by the Department. Lists for certified cement,
 fly ash, GGBFS and micro silica sources are maintained by the Laboratory.
 701.01 Air-Entraining Portland Cement. Provide air-entraining portland cement according to ASTM C 150,
 Type IA. The Gillmore time of set and the air permeability (fineness) tests will govern.
 701.02 Portland Cement. Provide portland cement according to ASTM C 150, Type II. The Gillmore time of
 set and the air permeability (fineness) tests will govern.
 701.04 Portland Cement. Provide portland cement according to ASTM C 150, Type I. The Gillmore time of
 set and the air permeability (fineness) tests will govern.
 701.05 High Early Strength Portland Cement. Provide high early strength portland cement according to
 ASTM C 150, Type III. The Gillmore time of set test shall govern.
 701.07 Masonry Cement. Provide masonry cement according to ASTM C 91.
 701.09 Slag Modified Portland Cement. Provide slag modified portland cement according to ASTM C 595,
 Type IS (< 25).
 701.10 Micro-Silica. Provide micro-silica according to ASTM C 1240. Do not use micro-silica admixtures in
 dissolvable bags.
 701.11 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag (GGBFS). Provide ground granulated blast furnace (GGBFS)
 according to ASTM C 989, Grade 100 minimum.
 701.13 Fly Ash for Use in Portland Cement Concrete. Provide fly ash according to ASTM C 618, Class C
 or F, except ensure a maximum loss on ignition (LOI) of 3 percent.
 Fly ash from sources certified according to Supplement 1026 and with an LOI greater than 3 percent may be
 approved for use by the Department if the fly ash is treated with a chemical conforming to Supplement 1115.
 701.14 Carbonate Micro-Fines for use in Portland Cement Concrete. Provide carbonate micro-fines (CMF)
 according to ASTM C1797, except modify Type C according to the properties shown in Table 701.14-1 below:
 TABLE 701.14-1 CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS
 Parameter
 MgCO3, %
 Sum of CaCO3 + Mg CO3, % by mass
 Methylene blue value (mg/g)
 Particle size distribution,
 850 µm (No. 20) sieve
 300 µm (No. 50) sieve
 150 µm (No. 100) sieve
 75 µm (No. 200) sieve
 45 µm (No. 325) sieve
 
 Type C
 ≥43
 ≥ 98
 ≤3
 minimum % passing
 100
 80-100
 10-90
 5-70
 
 702 ASPHALT MATERIAL
 Acceptance. Asphalt binders 702.01 and liquid asphalts 702.02, 702.03, and 702.04 may be acceptable for
 shipment to and immediate use in construction projects. Acceptance is according to Supplement 1032. Material
 will meet specification requirements and no tolerances are given for material falling out of specification
 requirements.
 702.00 Application Temperatures. Apply asphalt materials, according to the temperature ranges specified in
 Table 702.00-1.
 TABLE 702.00-1
 Type and Grade
 of Material
 MC-30
 MC-70
 MC-250
 MC-800
 MC-3000
 All Emulsions
 Asphalt Primer for Waterproofing
 Asphalt for Waterproofing
 CBAE 350, CBAE 350 SP
 CBAE 800, CBAE 800 SP
 Primer 20
 Primer 100
 Asphalt Binders
 Asphalt Binders Polymer modified with
 SB, SBR, SBS, or Elvaloy
 
 Application Temperature Range F (C)
 Spray
 Mix
 50 to 120 (10 to 49)
 --75 to 150 (24 to 66)
 --100 to 225 (38 to 107)
 100 to 225 (38 to 107)
 150 to 250 (66 to 121)
 150 to 225 (66 to 107)
 225 to 275 (107 to 135)
 200 to 250 (93 to 121)
 50 to 160 (10 to 71)
 50 to 140 (10 to 60)
 50 to 80 (10 to 27)
 --300 to 350 (149 to 177)
 --100 to 150 (38 to 66)
 100 to 150 (38 to 66)
 125 to 175 (52 to 79)
 125 to 175 (52 to 79)
 60 to 120 (16 to 49)
 --75 to 125 (24 to 52)
 --350 (177) Max.
 325 (163) Max.
 375 (190) Max
 
 350 (177) Max.
 
 702.01 Asphalt Binders.
 General. According to AASHTO M 320-10 Table 1 except as follows.
 Ensure PG 70-22M, PG 76-22M, PG 88-22M, and PG 64-28 meet the requirements of Table 702.01-1.
 An independent laboratory will not be owned or operated, in whole or part, by the binder supplier, Contractor,
 or affiliates of either.
 Materials and Manufacture. Replace the requirements of AASHTO M 320-10 Table 1 Section 5 “Materials and
 Manufacture” Section with the following:
 5.1
 Supply PG Binder from the refining of crude petroleum, or combination of asphalt binders from the
 refining of crude petroleum, or asphalt binders and suitable liquid from the refining of crude petroleum, and
 possible organic modifiers for performance enhancement. Material from the crude refining stream is considered
 neat. Liquid from crude refining may be used for adjustments, but do not used liquid from crude refining for the
 purpose of substitution of crude refined asphalt binder in a PG Binder. In the event of a failure investigation where
 asphalt binders exhibit unusual properties a supplier may be requested by OMM to supply information about the
 makeup of a PG Binder. Failure to cooperate will mean removal from Supplement 1032 certification.
 5.2 A modifier may be any approved material of suitable manufacture that is proven compatible with asphalt
 binder (does not separate appreciably in routine storage), and that is dissolved or reacted in asphalt binder to
 improve its performance. Performance enhancement is defined as a decrease in the temperature susceptibility of
 the asphalt binder while maintaining or improving desirable properties in a neat asphalt binder such as coat ability,
 
 adhesiveness and cohesiveness. Unless otherwise noted limit modifiers to no more than 6.0 percent by PG Binder
 weight.
 5.3
 The use of previously used materials in a PG Binder must be approved by OMM. Since no standard test
 procedures exist for reprocessed materials (and original tests were not developed with the use of such materials in
 mind), appropriate test methods may be chosen by OMM for review. OMM approval does not relieve the binder
 supplier from full responsibility for content and use of any previously used material in a PG Binder nor guarantee
 suitable performance enhancement as defined above. The detected presence in a PG Binder sample of any
 unapproved previously used material will mean immediate removal from Supplement 1032 certification. Limit
 approved previously used materials to 5.0 percent by PG Binder weight maximum and provide a written
 certification to OMM stating the exact percent used, the source, and any brand or trade names. Approved previously
 used materials are only allowed to be used to produce PG 58-28 and PG 64-28 and suppliers must get recertified
 per Supplement 1032 for these PG grades.
 5.4
 Ensure the PG Binder is homogeneous, free from water and deleterious materials, and does not foam
 when heated to 350 ºF (175 ºC). Prove the asphalt binder (before modification or after modification if liquid
 modifier used) is fully compatible with a negative result by means of the Spot Test per AASHTO T 102 using
 standard naphtha solvent. If standard naphtha shows a positive result, a retest using reagent grade 35 percent
 Xylene/ 65 percent Heptane (volume) may be used.
 5.5 Ensure the PG Binder is at least 99.0 percent soluble as determined by AASHTO T44 or ASTM D7553.
 Ensure any insoluble component is free of fibers or discrete particles more than 75 µm.
 5.6
 Ensure flash point is 500 ºF (260 ºC) minimum. Ensure mass change on RTFO of the final PG Binder
 grade is 0.75 percent maximum.
 5.7
 
 Ensure that PG 64-22 has a Penetration (AASHTO T49) of no more than 77.
 
 5.8
 
 Direct Tension testing is not required, unless otherwise required in this specification.
 
 Requirements for PG Modified Binder. Furnish PG Modified Binder according to the requirements of Table
 702.01-1 by modifying a non-oxidized, non-air blown, neat asphalt binder by using a styrene butadiene latex rubber
 compound (SBR polymer), a styrene butadiene styrene polymer block copolymer (SB, SBS polymer), an ethylene/
 nbutyl acrylate/ glycidyl methacrylate copolymer (Elvaloy) as specified or Ground Tire Rubber (GTR) according
 to Supplemental Specification 887. For SB, SBS products the polymer supplier will certify to the refiner and
 Contractor that the polymer used meets a minimum 68 percent by weight butadiene content. Perform SB, SBS,
 Elvaloy or GTR modification prior to shipment to the asphalt concrete mixing plant (pre-blend). Perform SBR
 modification at the asphalt concrete mixing plant (post-blend) or prior to shipment to the asphalt concrete mixing
 plant (pre-blend) where allowed by specification.
 Polyphosphoric acid (PPA) is allowed in PG binders as follows. PPA is a polymer of orthophosphoric acid.
 When using PPA ensure all the applicable requirements of the required PG binder in Table 702.01-1 are met.
 Ensure PPA does not contain water. To retain Supplement 1032 certification, suppliers of PPA modified asphalt
 will provide a written certification to OMM that the amount of PPA used is less than 1.0% by weight of neat binder.
 Suppliers of PPA can have their Supplement 1032 certification removed for not following the above PPA
 requirements.
 For each project, the PG Modified Binder supplier will give the Contractor a handling guide specifying
 temperature, circulation, shelf life, and other requirements for assuring the PG Modified Binder will perform as
 desired. Give this handling guide to the Monitoring Team and place a copy in the plant control room and plant
 laboratory.
 If PG Modified Binder is retained at the asphalt concrete mixing plant for more than two weeks before use or
 beyond the supplier recommended shelf life, whichever is less, a top and bottom sample test (material property
 difference between samples taken from the top and bottom of the storage tank) will be performed by OMM on
 samples retrieved by the Contractor at the Laboratory’s direction. Do not use material on hand until approved.
 
 TABLE 702.01-1
 MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PG MODIFIED BINDER
 Test / Requirement
 
 SBR Polymer
 70-22M 64-28
 Final PG Binder Grade (a, b)
 (b)
 Actual Pass
 Report
 Temperatures
 RTFO Mass Change,
 0.75
 percent max
 Phase Angle, max
 78
 Elastic Recovery, min
 Toughness, in. lb
 125
 105
 Tenacity, in lb.
 70
 80
 Elongation, in. min
 20
 20
 Ductility, in. min
 28
 28
 Separation, F max
 10
 Homogeneity
 
 Pre Blended Binder
 Note
 64-28
 70-22M 76-22M 88-22M c
 (a)
 (a,k)
 (a,k)
 (a,l,m)
 i
 d
 78
 65
 
 None Visible
 
 74
 75
 
 90
 
 d
 e, d
 f, d
 f, d
 f, d
 j, d
 g, d
 h, d
 
 a. Pre-blended Binder. Use a base neat asphalt binder that is a -22 grade for 70-22M and 76-22M. Use a base neat
 asphalt binder that is a -28 grade for 64-28. 64-28 can be neat, PPA modified or modified with SB, SBS or
 Elvaloy. 64-28 PPA only modified does not have to meet the phase angle or elastic recovery requirements.
 Ensure SB, SBS or Elvaloy modified 64-28 meets all requirements listed.
 b. Post-blended Binder made from neat Supplement 1032 certified or preapproved standard PG Binder grade and
 SBR solids amount equal to or above 3.5 percent by weight of total binder to achieve the PG Binder grade.
 Ensure all listed properties are met.
 c. Without Direct Tension, graded with actual pass temperatures
 d. PG Modified Binder
 e. AASHTO T301, 10cm @ 77 ºF (25 ºC), hold 5 min. before cutting, on RTFO material for SB, SBS, and Elvaloy.
 Note elongation after one hour to the nearest 0.01 cm and report elastic recovery to nearest 0.1%.
 f. ASTM D 5801, 50cm/min @ 77 ºF (25 ºC)
 g. Condition samples according to ASTM D 7173, Conduct softening point difference of top and bottom of tube
 per AASHTO T53. Compatibility of polymer and neat binder is sole responsibility of supplier. Formulate PG
 Modified Binder to retain dispersion for 3 days minimum.
 h. Heat a minimum 400 gram sample at 350 ºF (177 ºC) for 2.5-3 hours. Pour entire sample over a hot No. 50 (300
 µm) sieve at 340 ºF (171 ºC). Look for retained polymer lumps.
 i. Actual high and low temperature achieved by PG Modified Binder beyond required grade, but will not grade
 out to the next standard PG Binder grade for low temperature.
 j. AASHTO T51, @ 39 ºF (4 ºC), 1 cm/min
 k. SB, SBS, Elvaloy or Supplemental Specification 887 GTR
 l. SB, SBS, Elvaloy
 m. The requirements of 3.0 Pa*s maximum for the rotational viscosity for 88-22M may be waived at the discretion
 of the Department if the supplier warrants that the asphalt binder can be adequately pumped, mixed, and
 compacted at or below the temperature requirements in Table 702.00-1. Do not exceed 10.0 Pa*s rotational
 viscosity using the #27 spindle at time of shipment.
 702.02 Cut-Back Asphalt. Provide medium curing cut-back asphalt according to AASHTO M 82. Instead of
 viscosity on the residue, the penetration in note 2 (AASHTO M 82) will govern.
 702.03 Cut-Back Asphalt Emulsions. Prepare emulsions by compounding a suitable volatile solvent and water
 with 702.01 asphalt to produce emulsions according to Table 702.03-1.
 
 TABLE 702.03-1
 CBAE-350
 Kinematic Viscosity at 60 C,
 Centistokes
 Water Content[1], %
 Volatile Solvent[1], %
 Asphalt Content[1], %
 Adhesion Test[1]
 Wet Stone Coating Test[1]
 Stripping Test[1]
 
 CBAE- 350
 CBAE-800
 Special
 CBAE-800 Special Primer 20 Primer 100
 
 350-700
 4-12
 12-25
 67+
 [2]
 
 350-700
 800-1600
 4-12
 4-12
 12-25
 10-20
 67+
 72+
 [2]
 [2]
 [2]
 [2]
 Tests on Residue From Distillation
 Penetration at 25 C
 80-150
 80-150
 80-150
 Ductility at 25 C, in. cm
 100+
 100+
 100+
 Total Binder (Sol. in CSx), %
 99+
 99+
 99+
 
 800-1600
 4-12
 10-20
 72[2]
 [2]
 [2]
 
 20-40
 3-8
 
 100-200
 3-8
 
 45+
 
 60-
 
 [2]
 
 [2]
 
 80-150
 100+
 99+
 
 100-200
 100+
 99+
 
 100-200
 100+
 99+
 
 [1] Perform tests according to Supplement 1014.
 [2] Meets
 
 702.04 Emulsified Asphalts. Provide emulsified asphalts according to AASHTO M 140 or AASHTO M 208
 except specification limits will be producible for at least 30 days from sample date. Use Saybolt Furol for viscosity.
 702.05 Asphalt Primer for Waterproofing. Provide asphalt primer for waterproofing according to ASTM D
 41 Type 2.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 702.06 Asphalt for Waterproofing. Provide asphalt for waterproofing according to ASTM D 312, Type III.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 702.07 Asphalt Emulsion MWS. Prepare asphalt emulsion MWS from a base material according to 702.01,
 except vary the penetration to meet the float test and penetration specified below. Ensure that the emulsion coats
 the aggregate readily, thoroughly, and uniformly. Ensure that the specified characteristics do not change during
 transportation, normal storage and that the emulsion is according to the following when tested according to
 AASHTO T 59 within 30 days after sample date:
 
 Saybolt furol viscosity at 77 °F (25 °C), seconds
 Asphalt residue, percent
 Settlement, 7 days, percent
 Sieve test
 Coating test
 Oil distillate, percent
 Withstand freezing to
 Particle charge
 Penetration, 77 °F (25 °C) [6]
 Float test at 140 °F (60 °C), seconds [6]
 % Solubility [6]
 Ash content, percent [6]
 
 50+ [1]
 68+
 50.1[2]
 
 7-10 ºF (-23 °C) [3]
 Negative
 [4]
 
 1200+ [5]
 97.5+
 2.0-
 
 [1] Pumpable.
 [2] Use aggregates to test the emulsion that are from sources standardized by OMM . Use aggregates consisting of 100 percent passing a
 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) sieve and 0 percent passing a 1/4 inch (6.3 mm) sieve. Wash the standard reference aggregates with distilled water
 until free of dust, and dry them.
 Weigh 3.280 ounces (93 grams) of the dry graded reference aggregate into a suitable container. Weigh 0.247 ounces (7 grams) of the
 emulsion onto the aggregate in the container, and vigorously mix the contents for 5 minutes. After mixing, thoroughly coat the stone.
 Completely immerse the mixture in tap water, and immediately pour off the tap water. Ensure that the aggregate surface area is at least
 90 percent coated.
 [3] When shipped after October 1 and before April 15, except if the emulsion is stored and mixed at temperatures of emulsion, aggregate,
 and atmosphere above 40 °F (5 °C).
 [4] Select the penetration within the following ranges of the designation specified:
 [5] AASHTO T 50, except immediately pour residue from distillation into the float collar at 500 °F (260 °C); or if the residue has been
 allowed to cool, heat it again to 500 °F (260 °C) and pour it into the float collar.
 [6] Test on residue from distillation per AASHTO T44 or ASTM D7553
 
 Designation
 MWS 300
 MWS 150
 MWS 90
 MWS 60
 
 Penetration at 77 °F (25 °C)
 300+
 150 to 300
 90 to 150
 60 to 90
 
 702.08 Cold Liquid-Applied Elastomeric Waterproofing Membrane. Provide Cold Liquid-Applied
 Elastomeric Waterproofing Membrane as follows:
 Hardness Type 00, min.
 Low temperature crack bridging
 Adhesion-in-peel after water
 imeersion
 Extensibility after heat aging,
 min. in [mm]
 Hydrostatic Resistance min. psi
 
 50
 ASTM D-2240 as modified in Section 6.5 of ASTM C-836
 no cracking ASTM C-1305 as modified in Section 6.7 of ASTM C-836
 ASTM C-794 as modified in Section 6.9 of ASTM C-836
 1[4.4]
 min. Lbf [N] (no optional test allowed)
 ¼[6.4]
 
 ASTM C-1522
 
 25[0.16]
 
 ASTM C-1306
 
 Provide Certified Test Data to the Engineer for each shipment of material.
 702.12 Non-Tracking Asphalt Emulsion. Provide certified non-tracking asphalt emulsion material per
 Supplement 1128 and Supplement 1032. Emulsion will comply with all specification requirements for at least 30
 days after sample date.
 702.13 SBR Asphalt Emulsion. Provide material consisting of asphalt emulsion SS-1, SS-1h, CSS-1 or CSS1h per 702.04 and Supplement 1032, blended with SBR emulsion per 702.14, to produce a residual mixture of
 asphalt binder and SBR solids having a composition of 97.0  0.3 percent asphalt binder and 3.0  0.3 percent SBR
 solids by weight.
 
 Furnish a certification to the Engineer and signed by the Contractor containing the following:
 A. The weight of SBR emulsion blended with the asphalt emulsion.
 B. The weight of asphalt emulsion blended with the SBR emulsion.
 C. The SBR emulsion manufacturer certification per 702.14.
 D. The percent of asphalt binder in the asphalt emulsion (residue by distillation).
 E. The percent of SBR solids in the SBR emulsion.
 F. The percent of SBR solids in the mixture of asphalt binder residue and SBR solids.
 G. Name of Certified asphalt emulsion producer and asphalt emulsion.
 Determine the weight of the SBR emulsion to be added to a designated weight of asphalt emulsion to provide
 the percent of SBR solids in the mixture of asphalt residue and SBR solids using the following formula:
 X 
 
 0.0309(B)(W)
 (A)
 
 where:
 X = pounds (kilograms) of SBR emulsion
 A = percent SBR solids in the SBR emulsion
 B = percent of asphalt residue of the asphalt emulsion
 W = pounds (kilograms) of the asphalt emulsion
 For field blending, ensure the asphalt emulsion and SBR emulsion are thoroughly mixed as follows before
 application: Add to the distributor the asphalt emulsion and the required amount of the SBR emulsion of the
 appropriate SBR emulsion type (i.e. cationic or anionic). Heat and circulate the distributor contents for at least 30
 minutes to ensure complete blending. Re-circulate the distributor contents for 10 minutes just prior to application.
 If the distributor has set for 12 hours without circulation, repeat the heating and circulating of the distributor
 contents for 30 minutes prior to application.
 Draw samples of the mixed SBR and asphalt emulsion after mixing the materials as indicated above. Emulsion
 will comply with all specification requirements for at least 30 days after sample date.
 702.14 SBR Emulsion. Ensure the SBR emulsion is a cold polymerized Styrene Butadiene synthetic rubber
 (SBR) in latex form specifically compounded for use in asphalt binders and asphalt emulsions. Ensure the
 manufacturer of the SBR emulsion furnishes a written certification of the total SBR solids content of the SBR
 emulsion and actual test results showing compliance with both of the following requirements:
 A. SBR emulsion:
 Type of SBR Emulsion:
 Anionic
 Cationic
 SBR solids Styrene Butadiene Ratio
 27 ±5 : 73 ±5
 27 ±5 : 73 ±5
 Total SBR solids, % by weight
 60-72
 60-72
 SBR solids Residual Styrene, % by weight
 0.1 max
 3.5 0.1 max
 Ash, % of total SBR solids by weight
 3.5 max
 3.5 max
 pH
 9-11
 4-6
 Viscosity, Brookfield Units, Model RVF, spindle No 2 @20
 2000 max
 2000 max
 RPM@ 77° F (25 ºC)
 B. Combination of 3.0 – 4.0 % SBR solids with 96.0 – 97.0 % PG 64-22 meeting 702.01 by weight:
 Toughness inch-pounds (N×m), Minimum
 Tenacity, inch-pounds (N×m), Minimum
 
 133 (15)
 80 (9)
 
 702.16
 
 Polymer Emulsified Binder. Material will meet specification requirements of the table below.
 TABLE 702.16 POLYMER EMULSIFIED BINDER
 
 Emulsion (AASHTO T 59)
 Saybolt Furol Viscosity (g)
 Storage stability, 24 hrs., % difference, max (a)
 Demulsibility, 35 ml of 0.8% Dioctyl Sodium Sulf., min
 Demulsibility, 35 ml of 0.02N, CaCl2, %, min
 Sieve test, (distilled water), %, max
 Distillation to 177 ºC, residue % solids (d)
 Oil distillate, %, max
 Distillation Residue
 Penetration, 100g, 5 sec @77 ºF( 25ºC) AASHTO T 49
 Softening point, º C, min AASHTO T 53
 Solubility, %, min AASHTO T44 or ASTM D7553
 Elastic Recovery, 50 ºF (10º C), %, min AASHTO T 301, (e),(f)
 
 Type A (b)
 120-550
 (50 ºC)
 1
 50
 0.1
 66
 2
 70-125
 57
 97.5
 60
 
 Type B (c,g)
 20-100
 (25 ºC)
 1
 60
 60
 0.05
 63
 2
 90-150
 97.5
 58
 
 Notes:
 (a) After standing undisturbed for 24 hours, the surface will show no white, milky colored substance, but will be a
 smooth homogeneous color throughout.
 (b) CRS-2P, test within 20 days of project sampling. Limits for both certified source and project samples.
 (c) CRS-1P and HFRS-1P, test within 20 days of project sampling. Limits for both certified source and project
 samples.
 (d) See Supplement 1013.
 (e) Straight molds. Hold at test temperature for 90 minutes. Place in ductilometer and elongate 20 cm at 5 cm/min.
 Hold for 5 minutes and cut. After 1 hour retract the broken ends to touch and note elongation in cm (X) to the
 nearest 0.01cm. Percent Recovery = ((20-X)/20) x 100. Report elastic recovery to nearest 0.1%.
 (f) SBR, SBS, & SB
 (g) Minimum of 70 SFS for project acceptance
 702.17 Crack Sealant
 A. Type I Crack Sealant. Conform to 705.04
 B. Type II Crack Sealant. Provide a mixture of PG 64-22 certified binder (Supplement 1032) and polyester
 fibers (recycled fibers not permitted) according to the following requirements:
 Denier; ASTM D 1577* .............................................................. 3.0 to 6.0
 Length ................................................... 0.25 ± 0.02 inch (6.35 ± 0.51mm)
 Crimps; ASTM D 3937 ......................................................................None
 Tensile str, min. ASTM D2256* ..............................70,000 psi (483 Mpa)
 Specific gravity ........................................................................ 1.32 to 1.40
 Minimum melting temperature .......................................... 475 ºF (256 ºC)
 Ignition temperature................................................. 1000 ºF (538 ºC) min.
 *This data must be obtained prior to cutting the fibers.
 The fiber and fiber manufacturer must be on the Department’s QPL.
 Combine materials so the fibers are a minimum of 5.0 percent by total weight of the asphalt binder. Ensure
 combined materials are according to the following properties:
 
 Strength (at break) at 72 ºF (22 ºC)
 at 0 ºF (-18 ºC)
 Elongation (at break) at 72 ºF (22 ºC)
 at 0 ºF (-18 ºC)
 
 350 psi (2.4 MPa) min.
 500 psi (3.5 MPa) min.
 50 percent min.
 20 percent min.
 
 The option for using premixed and prepackaged Type II crack sealant is permitted provided (1) the fibers and
 the fiber binder are according to the requirements as shown and, (2) the fiber binder is according to the
 manufacturer’s specifications. Furnish certified test data from the fiber binder manufacturer annually to OMM ,
 and when requested by OMM . Furnish a letter of certification with each shipment stating that the material complies
 with specification requirements.
 C. Type III Crack Sealant. Provide a mixture of PG 64-22 certified binder (Supplement 1032) and
 polypropylene fibers (recycled fibers not permitted) according to the following requirements:
 Denier; ASTM D 1577* .................................................................... 15 ±3
 Length, ................................................... 0.39 ± 0.08 inch (9.91 ± 2.0 mm)
 Crimps; ASTM D 3937 ......................................................................None
 Tensile strength, min, ASTM D 2256* ................... 40,000 psi (276 MPa)
 Specific gravity ......................................................................... 0.91 ± 0.04
 Minimum melting point ..................................................... 320 ºF (160 ºC)
 * This data must be obtained prior to cutting the fibers.
 The fiber and fiber manufacturer must be on the Department’s QPL.
 Combine materials so the fibers are a minimum of 7.0 percent by total weight of the asphalt binder. Ensure
 combined materials are according to the following properties:
 Strength (at break) at 72 ºF (22 ºC)
 at 0 ºF (-18 ºC)
 Elongation (at break) at 72 ºF (22 ºC)
 at 0 ºF (-18 ºC)
 
 350 psi (2.4 MPa) min.
 500 psi (3.5 MPa) min.
 50 percent min.
 20 percent min.
 
 D. Type IV Crack Sealant. Provide a prepackaged, preapproved mixture of modified binder according to the
 following properties and minimum 2.0 percent polyester fibers (recycled fibers not permitted) according to the
 following properties.
 Modified binder:
 Cone penetration, 77 ºF (25 ºC) ......................................................... 50-90
 Flow, 140 ºF (60 ºC) .................................................................1.0 cm max
 Resilience, 77 ºF (25 ºC) ....................................................... 25-60 percent
 Ductility, 77 ºF (25 ºC) .............................................................. 40 cm min
 Bond, 0 ºF (-18 ºC), 100 percent ext. Pass .................................... 5 cycles
 Impact, 0 ºF (-18 ºC) ............................................................................ Pass
 Compression recovery .................................................................. 0.40 min
 Recommended pour temperature ....................................... 380 ºF (193 ºC)
 Safe heating temperature ................................................... 410 ºF (210 ºC)
 Fiber must meet requirements for Type II polyester fiber. Fiber and fiber manufacturer must be on the
 Department’s QPL.
 Safe heating temperature ................................................... 400 ºF (204 ºC)
 Softening point..................................................................... 190 ºF (88 ºC)
 Viscosity, 400 ºF (225 0C) ...................................................... 3000 cp min
 Cone penetration, 77 ºF (25 ºC) ......................................................... 25-45
 Workability - Capable of being melted and applied through a pressure feed, indirect heated and agitated melter
 
 Flexibility* ........................................................................................... Pass
 * 1 inch (25mm) sample at -20 ºF (-30 ºC), 90 degree bend, 10 sec
 Crack sealant and crack sealant manufacturer must be on the Department’s QPL.
 
 703 AGGREGATE
 703.01
 
 General.
 
 The following abbreviations apply:
 CCS
 ACBFS
 GS
 RAP
 RPCC
 OH
 EAF
 BOF
 PCS
 
 Crushed Carbonate Stone.
 Air Cooled Blast Furnace Slag
 Granulated Slag
 Recycled Asphalt Pavement
 Recycled Portland Cement Concrete
 Open Hearth Slag
 Electric Arc Furnace Slag
 Basic Oxygen Furnace Slag
 Petroleum Contaminated Soil
 
 Pre-qualified Aggregate Supplier Program (Supplement 1069). Provide aggregate materials to the Ohio
 Department of Transportation from pre-qualified suppliers.
 A. Soundness. When the major portion of the unsound material in a coarse aggregate acquires a mud-like
 condition when tested for soundness, ensure that the maximum loss for all uses is 5 percent.
 B. Stockpiles. Use stockpiling and loading methods that permit ready identification of the aggregates and to
 minimize segregation. Clean the sites for stockpiles before storing materials. Do not remove aggregates from
 stockpiles within 1 foot (0.3 m) of the ground until final cleanup of the work. Do not use material that has become
 mixed with foreign matter, wood or other size or grades of aggregates.
 Handle aggregates in such a manner that the moisture content is reasonably uniform for each day’s run.
 C. Size. Provide aggregate according to the size specified in the material specification, the construction item, or
 as shown in AASHTO M 43.
 D. Method of Test. Provide aggregate tested by the following methods:
 Amount finer than No. 200 (75 m) sieve........................................ S1004
 Clay lumps ........................................................................................ S1017
 Coal and lignite .................................................................AASHTO T 113
 Crushed pieces .................................................................... ASTM D 5821
 Deleterious materials ........................................................................ S1029
 Effect of organic impurities on
 strength of mortar ............................................................... AASHTO T 71
 Liquid limit ......................................................................... AASHTO T 89
 Percent of wear, Los Angeles
 abrasion test ..........................................AASHTO T 96 or ASTM C 535
 Plasticity index.................................................................... AASHTO T 90
 Sieve analysis........................................................................ S1004, S1005
 Sieve analysis of mineral filler ........................................... AASHTO T 37
 Sodium sulfate soundness test, 5 cycle .............................AASHTO T 104
 Specific Gravity and percent absorption
 for fine and coarse aggregate ........................................................ S1031
 Unit weight ......................................................................... AASHTO T 19
 Lightweight chert in aggregates........................................AASHTO T 113
 Sand equivalent .................................................................AASHTO T 176
 Uncompacted void content ...............................................AASHTO T 304
 Flat and elongated ............................................................... ASTM D 4791
 Rapid freezing and thawing ............................. ASTM C 666, Procedure B
 Insoluble residue of carbonate aggregates .......................... ASTM D 3042
 Compaction testing of Unbound Materials ....................................... S1015
 
 In place gradation sampling .............................................................. S1090
 Sulfur leachate test ............................................................................ S1027
 Soundness of aggregate by freezing and thawing.............AASHTO T 103
 Micro-Deval ......................................................................AASHTO T 327
 Silicon Dioxide ......................................................................ASTM C 146
 Sodium sulfate soundness test, Rock slabs ......................... ASTM D 5240
 E. Steel Slag Aggregate. Provide open-hearth (OH), basic oxygen furnace (BOF), and electric arc furnace (EAF)
 steel slag aggregate (known as steel slag) according to the following requirements when 703.04 aggregate for
 asphalt concrete base or 703.05 aggregate for asphalt intermediate course is specified. Do not use OH, BOF, or
 EAF slag as the fine or coarse aggregate (virgin or recycled) for asphalt surface courses.
 Supply all steel slag from sources according to Supplement 1071. Furnish steel slag to a size meeting the
 specified grading requirements. Provide steel slag aggregate meeting the specified coarse or fine aggregate quality
 requirements. Ensure that measurements of soft pieces includes soft lime, lime oxide, or magnesia agglomerations
 or any foreign materials prone to rapid disintegration under construction processing and weathering conditions.
 Ensure that additional testing beyond those listed are performed or required any time poor quality steel slag is
 suspected due to visual inspection, testing, or field performance problems.
 Provide a letter of certification to the Engineer from the steel slag processor for every shipment of steel slag
 to the Contractor. In addition the steel slag processor must provide the Engineer with the following:
 Quality control records (created in accordance with Supplement 1071).
 Documentation of the steel slag production, processing, and stockpile retrieval
 Failure to follow the processor QC plan or continued problems with performance recognized by the Laboratory
 attributable to steel slag is cause for limiting steel slag use from that processor.
 F. Restrictions. When an aggregate source is specially designated with a “SR or SRH” according to Guidelines
 for Maintaining Adequate Pavement Friction in Surface Pavements, the aggregate source will be restricted for use
 in surface pavement according to the methods in the guidelines. The document, Guidelines for Maintaining
 Adequate Pavement Friction in Surface Pavements, is available on the OMM website under “Material Information
 by Category, Aggregate”, or the Office of Pavement Engineering’s website.
 
 No. 4 to 0
 
 [2]
 
 3 1/2 to 1 1/2
 2 1/2 to 1 1/2
 3 1/2 to 3/4
 2 to 1
 2 to No. 4
 1 1/2 to 3/4
 1 1/2 to No. 4
 1 to 1/2
 1 to 3/8
 1 to No. 4
 3/4 to 3/8
 3/4 to No. 4
 3/4 to No. 8
 1/2 to No. 4
 1/2 to No. 8
 3/8 to No. 8
 3/8 to No. 16
 No. 4 to 16
 
 2 in.
 
 4.75 to 0
 
 [2]
 
 50 mm
 100 mm 90 mm 75 mm 63 mm
 25 to 60
 90 to 100
 100
 90 to 37.5
 100 90 to 100 35 to 70
 63 to 37.5
 100 90 to 100
 63 to 19
 90 to 100
 100
 50 to 25
 95 to 100
 100
 50 to 4.75
 100
 37.5 to 19
 100
 37.5 to 4.75
 25 to 12.5
 25 to 9.5
 25 to 4.75
 19 to 9.5
 19 to 4.75
 19 to 2.36
 12.5 to 4.75
 12.5 to 2.36
 9.5 to 2.36
 9.5 to 1.18
 4.75 to 1.18
 
 4 in. 3 1/2 in. 3 in. 2 1/2 in.
 
 0 to 10
 10 to 40
 25 to 60
 90 to 100 20 to 55
 90 to 100
 90 to 100
 90 to 100
 100
 90 to 100
 100
 100
 100
 
 0 to 15
 35 to 70
 20 to 55
 40 to 85
 
 0 to 5
 0 to 5
 10 to 30
 
 0 to 15
 20 to 55
 30 to 65
 40 to 70
 40 to 75
 85 to 100
 90 to 100
 100
 100
 
 0 to 5
 10 to 30
 0 to 5
 0 to 15
 
 0 to 5
 0 to 5
 0 to 10
 0 to 5
 0 to 5
 0 to 10
 0 to 10
 5 to 25
 0 to 5
 0 to 15
 0 to 10
 5 to 25
 10 to 30 0 to 10
 20 to 55 5 to 30
 85 to 100 10 to 40
 85 to 100
 
 0 to 5
 
 0 to 5
 
 0 to 5
 0 to 5
 0 to 10
 0 to 10
 
 0 to 5
 
 0 to 5
 0 to 5
 
 9.5 mm
 
 19 mm
 0 to 5
 0 to 5
 0 to 10
 
 37.5 mm
 0 to 15
 0 to 15
 25 to 60
 35 to 70
 
 0 to 15
 35 to 70
 90 to 100 20 to 55
 95 to 100
 90 to 100
 100
 90 to 100
 100
 95 to 100
 100
 100
 100
 100
 
 No. 4
 
 4.75 mm 2.36 mm 1.18 mm 300 m
 
 3/8 in.
 
 1/2 in.
 12.5 mm
 
 3/4 in.
 
 1 in.
 25 mm
 
 1 1/2 in.
 
 10 to 30
 
 150 m
 
 No. 8 No. 16 No. 50 No. 100
 
 Amounts finer than each laboratory sieve (square openings), percent by weight
 
 Numbered sieves are those of the United States Standard Sieve Series.
 [1]
 Screenings.
 [2]
 Where standard size of coarse aggregate designated by two or three digit numbers are specified, obtain the specified gradation by combining the appropriate
 single digit standard size aggregates by a suitable proportioning device which has a separate compartment for each coarse aggregate combined. Perform the
 blending as directed by the Laboratory.
 
 1
 2
 24
 3
 357
 4
 467
 5
 56
 57
 6
 67
 68
 7
 78
 8
 89
 9
 10
 
 Size
 No.
 
 Nominal size [1]
 square openings
 mm
 inch
 
 Table 703.01 (AASHTO M43) Standard Sizes of Processed Aggregate
 
 703.02 Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete.
 A. Fine Aggregate.
 1.
 
 Provide fine aggregate consisting of natural sand or sand manufactured from stone.
 
 2.
 
 Sieve analysis.
 Sieve Size
 3/8 inch (9.5 mm)
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 No. 8 (2.36 mm)
 No. 16 (1.18 mm)
 No. 30 (600 m)
 No. 50 (300 m)
 No. 100 (150 m)
 No. 200 (75 m)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 95 to 100
 70 to 100
 38 to 80
 18 to 60
 5 to 30
 0 to 10
 0 to 5
 
 Should the fineness modulus of a job control sample of sand from any source vary by more than 0.20
 percent from that of the representative sample from that source, the sand may be rejected.
 3.
 
 Physical properties.
 Maximum
 Loss, sodium sulfate soundness test
 Item 305
 Items 255, 256, 451, 452, 511, 515, 519, 526, 602,
 611, 604, 608, 609, 610, 622, and 625
 Aggregations of soil, silt, etc. by weight
 
 12 %
 10 %
 0.5 %
 
 When tested for the effect of organic impurities on strength of mortar, ensure that the compressive strength
 at 3 and 7 days of mortar made with untreated sand is not less than 95 percent of the compressive strength of mortar
 made with treated sand.
 Provide fine aggregate for Items 255, 256, 451, 452, 526, and 511 deck slabs with at least 25 percent
 siliceous particles as determined by the acid insoluble residue test [ASTM D3042]. Ensure material has been tested
 and results are on file at the Laboratory. For sources not tested and on file at the laboratory, submit certified test
 data from an AMRL accredited independent laboratory verifying the minimum 25 percent.
 B. Coarse Aggregate.
 1.
 
 Provide coarse aggregate consisting of washed gravel, CCS, or crushed ACBFS.
 
 2.
 
 Physical properties.
 Percent of wear, Los Angeles test, maximum
 (CCS or washed gravel)
 Unit weight, compacted, minimum (slag)
 Loss, sodium sulfate soundness test, maximum:
 Item 305
 Items 255, 256, 451, 452, 511, 519, 526, 602, 611, 604,
 609, 610, 622, and 625
 Item 515
 Deleterious substances shall not exceed the following:
 
 40 %
 70 lb/ft3 (1120 kg/m3)
 15 %
 12 %
 10 %
 
 Material Type
 Soft pieces
 Coal and lignite
 Clay lumps
 Pieces having a length greater than 5 times
 the average thickness
 Shale and shaly material
 Limonitic concretions
 Alkali
 Metallic particles
 Chert, that disintegrates in 5 cycles of the
 soundness test
 
 Percent by Weight
 Super-Structure All Other Concrete
 2.0
 3.0
 0.25
 1.0
 0.25
 0.25
 15
 15
 0.5
 0.5
 0.5
 0.5
 0.5
 
 1.0
 1.0
 1.0
 1.0
 1.0
 
 Additional requirement for ACBFS aggregate:
 Total Sulfur as S, maximum (ASTM C114)
 
 2.0%
 
 3. Amount passing the No. 200 (75 m) sieve. Ensure that the percent by weight of material passing the No.
 200 (75 m) sieve in the aggregate portion of the concrete mix does not exceed the following:
 Material Type
 CCS and crushed ACBFS
 Washed gravel
 703.03
 
 Percent by Weight
 Super-Structure All Other Concrete
 3.4
 3.8
 2.0
 2.2
 
 Fine Aggregate for Mortar or Grout.
 
 A. Provide fine aggregate consisting of natural sand or sand manufactured from stone or ACBFS.
 B. Sieve Analysis.
 Sieve Size
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 No. 8 (2.36 mm)
 No. 50 (300 m)
 No. 100 (150 m)
 No. 200 (75 m)
 
 Natural Sand
 Manufactured Sand
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 100
 95 to 100
 95 to 100
 10 to 40
 20 to 40
 0 to 15
 10 to 25
 0 to 5
 0 to 10
 
 C. Physical properties.
 Loss, sodium sulfate soundness test
 Aggregations of soil, silt, etc. by weight
 
 Maximum
 10 %
 0.5 %
 
 When tested for the effect of organic impurities on strength of mortar, ensure that the compressive strength of
 mortar made with untreated sand is not less than 95 percent of the compressive strength of mortar made with treated
 sand.
 703.04
 
 Aggregate for Asphalt Concrete Base (301 and 302).
 
 A. Provide coarse aggregate for asphalt concrete base used in combination with rigid pavement consisting of
 CCS, gravel, or crushed ACBFS.
 
 Provide coarse aggregate for asphalt concrete base used in flexible pavements consisting of CCS, gravel (see note
 [1] in table below), or crushed ACBFS. Provide fine aggregate for asphalt concrete base consisting of natural sand
 or sand manufactured from stone, gravel, or ACBFS. Crushed Steel Slag (OH, EAF or BOF) conforming to
 703.01.E and 401.03 may be used for coarse and fine aggregate in asphalt concrete base used in flexible pavements.
 B. Physical properties.
 Percent of wear, Los Angeles test, maximum (CCS or washed gravel)
 50 %
 3
 Unit weight, compacted, minimum (slag)
 65 lb/ft (1040 kg/m3)
 Loss, sodium sulfate soundness test, maximum
 15 %
 Percent by weight of fractured pieces (one or more faces), minimum
 40 %
 Micro-Deval Abrasion Loss test, maximum (for coarse aggregate gravel only)
 22 % [1]
 [1]If the MD value is greater than the specification limit conform to Supplement 1010.
 Deleterious substances shall not exceed the following:
 Material Type
 Soft pieces
 Coal and lignite
 Clay lumps
 Pieces having a length greater than 5 times the average thickness
 Shale and shaly material
 Chert that disintegrates in 5 cycles of the soundness test
 
 Percent by Weight
 3.0
 1.0
 0.25
 15
 2.5
 2.5
 
 703.05
 Aggregate for Asphalt Concrete (Intermediate and Surface Courses), Prime Coat (408), Chip
 Seal (422), and Microsurfacing (421).
 A. Fine Aggregate.
 1. Provide fine aggregate consisting of natural sand or sand manufactured from stone, gravel, ACBFS or, for
 intermediate courses only, steel slag (OH, EAF or BOF) conforming to 703.01.E and 401.03.
 2.
 
 Sieve analysis.
 Standard 703.05 Gradation
 Sieve Size
 3/8 inch (9.5 mm)
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 No. 8 (2.36 mm)
 No. 16 (1.18 mm)
 No. 30 (600 m)
 No. 50 (300 m)
 No. 100 (150 m)
 No. 200 (75 m)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 90 to 100
 65 to 100
 40 to 85
 20 to 60
 7 to 40
 0 to 20
 0 to 10
 Screenings
 
 Sieve Size
 3/8 inch (9.5 mm)
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 No. 100 (150 m)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 85 to 100
 10 to 30
 
 3.
 
 Physical properties.
 Loss, sodium sulfate soundness test
 Aggregations of soil, silt, etc., by weight
 
 Maximum
 15 %
 0.5 %
 
 B. Coarse Aggregate.
 1. Provide coarse aggregate consisting of CCS, crushed ACBFS, washed gravel, or for intermediate courses
 only, steel slag (OH, EAF or BOF) conforming to 703.01.E and 401.03.
 2.
 
 Physical properties.
 Percent of wear, Los Angeles test, maximum (CCS or washed gravel)
 40 %
 Unit weight, compacted, minimum (slag):
 Asphalt Concrete, 408 and 422
 70 lb/ft3 (1120 kg/m3)
 Loss, sodium sulfate soundness test, maximum:
 Asphalt Concrete and 422
 12 %
 421
 15 %
 Percent by weight of fractured pieces (one or more faces), minimum
 40 %
 Micro-Deval Abrasion Loss test, maximum (for gravel only)
 20 % [1]
 [1]If the MD value is greater than the specification limit conform to Supplement 1010.
 Deleterious substances shall not exceed the following:
 Material Type
 Soft pieces
 Coal and lignite
 Clay lumps
 Amount finer than No. 200 (75 m) sieve
 Pieces having a length greater than 5 times the average thickness
 Shale and shaly material
 Limonitic concretions
 Alkali
 Chert that disintegrates in 5 cycles of the soundness test
 
 Percent by Weight
 3.0
 1.0
 0.25
 3.0
 15
 2.5
 2.5
 2.5
 2.5
 
 C. General Requirements for Fine Aggregate. For fine aggregate calculate each individual sieve fraction
 soundness loss and ensure that the fractional size does not exceed 13.0 percent for all surface courses, intermediate
 courses and any asphalt concrete course directly below an open graded friction course.
 703.06
 
 Sand Cover (407 and 408 ).
 
 A. Furnish sand cover consisting of natural sand or sand manufactured from stone or ACBFS.
 B. Sieve analysis.
 Sieve Size
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 No. 50 (300 m)
 No. 200 (75 m)
 703.07
 
 Total Percent Passing
 90 to 100
 7 to 40
 0 to 10
 
 Mineral Filler.
 
 A. Furnish mineral filler consisting of limestone dust, portland cement, or other inert mineral matter. Ensure the
 mineral filler is thoroughly dry and free from lumps.
 
 B. Sieve analysis.
 Sieve Size
 No. 30 (600 m)
 No. 50 (300 m)
 No. 200 (75 m)
 703.08
 
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 95 to 100
 65 to 100
 
 Granulated Slag.
 
 A. Furnish Granulated Slag (GS) consisting of glassy, granular materials formed when molten blast furnace slag
 or electric-furnace slag is rapidly chilled, as by immersion in water. The Department may reject material containing
 mill waste, cinders, large pieces of ungranulated slag, or other matter foreign to the production of slag in the normal
 operation of the blast furnace or electric furnace.
 Furnish material of such nature that it will compact to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
 B. Sieve analysis.
 Sieve Size
 2 inch (50 mm)
 1 inch (25 mm)
 No. 100 (150 m)
 703.10
 
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 85 to 100
 0 to 15
 
 Screenings.
 
 A. Furnish screenings for No. 10 size gravel, stone, or ACBFS. Where crushed material is specified, ensure that
 it is crushed from material larger than the 1/2-inch (12.5 mm) sieve.
 B. Physical properties.
 Loss, sodium sulfate soundness test
 
 Maximum
 15 %
 
 703.11
 Structural Backfill for 611 Bedding and Backfill. Furnish structural backfill for 611 bedding and
 backfill consisting of CCS, gravel, natural sand, sand manufactured from stone, foundry sand, ACBFS, or RPCC.
 Furnish ACBF Slag according to Supplement 1027.
 The use of RPCC is permitted without wear testing or sodium soundness testing requirements if the Contractor
 provides information proving the material met this specification at the time of its original incorporation. The use
 of RPCC is not permitted in conjunction with aluminum pipe or aluminum coated steel pipe. Ensure that the RPCC
 use does not contain more than two percent steel.
 Reclaimed asphalt concrete is not allowed for any bedding or backfill materials.
 Use foundry sand if the material meets these requirements and meets the requirements of the Ohio EPA, Division
 of Surface Water, Policy 400.007 “Beneficial use of Non-Toxic Bottom Ash, Fly Ash and Spent Foundry Sand and
 Other Exempt Waste,” and all other regulations. Ten days before using foundry sand on the project, submit written
 permission from the Ohio EPA to the Engineer. Instead of written permission from the Ohio EPA, the Contractor
 may elect to have an independent consultant pre-qualified by ODOT in remedial design environmental site
 assessment review the proposed usage. The consultant will provide all documentation utilized to ensure that the
 proposed usage is according to all Ohio EPA regulations. Ensure that the consultant coordinates all EPA required
 meetings, documentation, and testing requirements. Ensure that the consultant certifies this to the Department.
 A. Structural Backfill Type 1 and 3.
 1. Furnish Type 1 structural backfill that meets the gradations of Items 304, 411, or 617, except 0 to 20
 percent may pass the No. 200 sieve. Furnish Type 3 structural backfill that meets the gradations of Size No. 57 or
 67 from Table 703.01-1.
 2.
 
 Physical properties.
 
 Percent of wear, Los Angeles test, maximum (CCS or washed gravel)
 Loss, sodium sulfate soundness test, maximum
 Percent by weight of fractured pieces (one or more faces), minimum (Type 3 only)
 
 50 %
 15 %
 90 %
 
 Deleterious substances shall not exceed the following:
 Material Type
 Percent by weight
 Shale and shaly material
 5.0
 Chert, that disintegrates in 5 cycles of the soundness test
 5.0
 Ensure that the portion of the material passing through the No. 40 (425 m) sieve has a maximum liquid limit
 of 25 and a maximum plasticity index of 6.
 Crush gravel for Type 3 from material retained on the 1/2 inch (12.5 mm) sieve.
 B. Structural Backfill Type 2.
 1. Furnish Type 2 structural backfill that meets the gradations of 703.05.A, 703.02.A, or one of the well
 graded gradations below:
 Sieve Size
 2 1/2 inch
 1 inch
 3/4 inch
 3/8 inch
 No. 4
 No. 8
 No. 40
 No. 50
 No. 200
 2.
 
 (63 mm)
 (25.0 mm)
 (19.0 mm)
 (9.5 mm)
 (4.75 mm)
 (2.36 mm)
 (425 µm)
 (300 µm)
 (75 µm)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 –
 –
 100
 80 to 100
 60 to 100
 45 to 95
 –
 7 to 55
 0 to 15
 
 100
 70 to 100
 –
 –
 25 to 100
 –
 10 to 50
 –
 0 to 15
 
 Physical properties:
 Percent of wear, Los Angeles test, maximum (CCS or gravel)
 Loss, sodium sulfate soundness test, maximum
 
 50 %
 15 %
 
 Ensure that the portion of the material passing through the No. 40 (425 mm) sieve has a maximum liquid
 limit of 25 and a maximum plastic index of 6.
 703.13
 Coarse Aggregate for Items 305, 451 and 452. In addition to the requirements of 703.02, the
 following aggregate requirements apply.
 When the total combined quantity of the listed items is greater than 10,000 square yards (8000 m2), provide size
 No. 57 or 67 from Table 703.01-1. If the total combined quantity of the listed items is less than 10,000 square
 yards (8000 m2), then provide one of the following sizes from Table 703.01-1: No. 7, 78, 8, 57, or 67.
 If gravel or limestone No. 57 or 67 size is selected in either of the above cases, then ensure that the coarse
 aggregate incorporated into the concrete is tested according to ODOT Supplement 1024.
 Ensure that the validity of results of freeze thaw-resistance testing is as outlined below:
 
 Average Total Percent Expansion[1]
 Status of Source Approval
 0.000 to 0.010
 Valid for four years from date approved[2]
 0.011 to 0.020
 Valid for two years from date approved[2]
 0.021 to 0.030[4]
 Not Approved, one retest allowed[3]
 > 0.030[4]
 Not Approved, no retesting allowed[3]
 [1] As measured at 350 cycles.
 [2] If a notable change in the properties of the aggregate originating from the affected source is
 determined from quality control testing, a retest of freeze-thaw resistance may be requested before
 the original expiration date. The Laboratory will make the determination to retest.
 [3] Except as noted, the Department will not retest the material unless the producer of the material
 sends a written request to the Department with substantiation that significant changes in operation
 have been made (e.g., new processing equipment, material from a new ledge, etc.).
 [4] If the average total percent expansion is greater than 0.020, but the durability is greater than or
 equal to 100, the Department may accept the source for two years.
 The Laboratory will maintain a list of approved sources.
 703.14
 Non Pavement Open-Hearth, Electric Arc Furnace, and Basic Oxygen Furnace Steel Slag
 Aggregate Use. Provide steel slag according to the following requirements.
 Non-confined Applications. When using OH, EAF, and BOF slag in applications where the steel slag will not
 be confined, ensure that the slag meets the requirements in 703.14.A (deleterious substances and crushing), and in
 703.14.B (aging and stockpiling requirements). Recycled steel slag from Department or non-Department projects
 may be used in applications where the recycled steel slag will not be confined.
 Confined Applications. When using OH, EAF, and BOF slag in applications where the steel slag will be
 confined, ensure the steel slag meets all requirements of 703.14. The use of recycled steel slag from Department or
 non-Department projects is not allowed in confined applications.
 A. Deleterious Substances (soft pieces). Deleterious substances include soft lime, lime oxide,or magnesia
 agglomerations or any foreign materials prone to rapid disintegration under construction processing and weathering
 conditions.
 Furnish steel slag with less than 3 percent deleterious substances (soft pieces) by weight. The Department will
 use Supplement 1029 (hand crushing of soft pieces) to determine the soft pieces.
 Crushing of steel slag is not allowed.
 B. Aging and Stockpiling Requirements. Stockpile and age all steel slag as follows:
 1. Grade and stockpile the material into maximum size piles of 25,000 ton (23,000 metric tons). Before and
 during the stockpiling operation, add water to these materials to provide a uniform moisture content not less than
 their absorbed moisture. Ensure that the stockpile is maintained in a moist condition during the required stockpiling
 period.
 2. Ensure that the producer mixes the stockpile when the outside surface of the pile has crusted over. The
 Department will inspect the stockpile every 2 months to ensure no crusting occurs. Do not mix frozen stockpile
 material. Suspend the aging period when the stockpile is frozen for more than one month.
 3. Ensure that this aging period is at least 6 months in duration and starts over if any new material is added to
 the pile during the aging period.
 C. Identification of Steel Slag. Clear, definitive, and undisputable identification of the proposed material being
 steel slag is required.
 The producer will show the Department evidence that the material supplied is steel slag. This information will
 consist of, but is not limited to, the following:
 1.
 
 Steel producer.
 
 2.
 
 Production dates.
 
 3.
 
 Production rates.
 
 4.
 
 Stockpiling dates.
 
 5.
 
 Type of steel furnace(s).
 
 6.
 
 All known Department and non-Department projects where the material was previously used.
 
 This identification of steel slag and the source may be supplemented by other information approved by the
 Department or by using 10 years of good performance data. Ensure that the producer submits to the Department
 projects where the steel slag has been used without expansion or tufa problems. The Department will review the
 above projects as part of the identification approval process.
 D. Tufa Performance Verification of Steel Slag. Tufa is a precipitate form of calcium carbonate that can clog
 up the underdrain systems. Some steel slag sources clog up underdrain systems and some do not. Tufa performance
 verification is based on field performance and Department’s inspection of the underdrain systems.
 Tufa performance verification is required.
 Ensure that the producer submits past projects that are at least 10 years old that used the proposed steel slag
 source to the Department. The Department may consider projects that are less than 10 years old for tufa
 performance verification if it can be determined by the Department that the age of the steel slag incorporated in the
 project was 10 years old or greater. Ensure the producer supplies the Department with construction plans with the
 underdrains and underdrain outlets marked on the plans, or other suitable method, approved by the Department,
 showing the underdrain system. Ensure the producer marks the underdrain outlets in the field for inspection. The
 Department will inspect the underdrain systems for tufa deposits. If tufa deposits are found in the outlets or in the
 underdrain system, the Department will reject the steel slag source.
 E. Expansion Testing of Steel Slag. After the aging and stockpiling requirements are met, expansion testing is
 required for steel slag.
 Perform expansion testing according to Pennsylvania Department of Transportation PTM No. 130, the ODOT
 equivalent to this test or expansion testing acceptable to the Department.
 Ensure that the producer hires an independent AASHTO accredited and Department approved laboratory to
 perform at least half of the expansion testing. At the producer’s option, up to half of the required expansion testing
 may be performed by the producer’s laboratory. The Laboratory will observe the expansion testing and approve
 each independent and producer laboratory.
 Perform expansion testing for every 2500 tons (2300 metric tons) or fraction thereof of the material stockpiled
 in accordance with 703.14.B. For steel slag less than 10 years old, retain a split portion of the expansion sample.
 Reduce the split sample to 5 lbs (2500 g) and test for total percent MgO by X-Ray florescence and total percent
 periclase (hard burned MgO) by X-Ray diffraction.
 The maximum allowable total expansion for each test is less than 0.50 percent. If any one test fails in the
 stockpile, the Department will reject the entire stockpile.
 When sampling for expansion, ensure that the producer notifies the Department at least 48 hours before the
 sampling. The Department will verify that the sample came from the correct stockpile and take independent split
 samples, if required.
 Submit the expansion test data and a suitably presented summary of the expansion test data to the Department
 for approval. Submit X-Ray florescence and X-Ray diffraction data to the Department. The Department reserves
 the right to perform independent testing to verify the laboratory results at any time.
 The Department expansion test data takes precedence over the producer or independent laboratory expansion
 testing results in the event of a conflict. The Department will make the final determination on all conflicting data.
 
 If the material fails the expansion testing, then stockpile the material for a minimum of two additional months
 from the date of last sampling and retest for expansion. Only materials that pass the expansion test are approved
 for use.
 703.16
 Suitable Materials for Embankment Construction. Natural soil, natural granular material,
 granular material types, slag material, brick, shale, rock, random material, RAP, RPCC, or PCS as further defined
 below are suitable for use in embankment construction. The Engineer will submit samples of soils not identified
 from the plan subsurface investigation, from borrow sources or materials appearing questionable in the field.
 Furnish ACBFS according to Supplement 1027.
 Furnish RPCC with the reinforcing steel cut to a maximum length of 1 inch (25 mm) outside the pieces.
 Ensure that pieces of RAP do not exceed 4 inches (100 mm) in the largest dimension.
 Furnish steel slag according to 703.14.
 When using steel slag, RPCC, or RAP, completely blend it with at least 30 percent natural soil or natural granular
 material.
 When using coal, completely blend it with natural soil or natural granular materials. Make at least 90 percent of
 the blend natural soil or natural granular materials.
 A. Natural Soils. Furnish natural soils as defined in 203.02.I and classified as Department Group Classifications
 A-4-a, A-4-b, A-6-a, A-6-b, and A-7-6 as further defined below: Furnish soils with a maximum dry density of at
 least 90 pounds per cubic foot (1450 kg/m3).
 Do not use soils having a liquid limit in excess of 65 or soils identified as Department Group Classifications
 A-5, or A-7-5 in the work.
 B. Granular Embankment Materials. Furnish natural granular materials as defined in 203.02.H and classified
 as Department Group Classifications A-1-a, A-1-b, A-3, A-3-a, A-2-4, A-2-6, or A-2-7.
 Do not use granular material classified as A-2-5.
 C. Granular Material Types. Furnish CCS, gravel, ACBFS, durable sandstone, durable siltstone, GS, or
 blended natural soil or natural granular materials blended with OH, BOF, EAF, or RPCC as detailed above. Furnish
 durable sandstone and siltstone with a slake durability index greater than 90 percent according to ASTM D 4644.
 Except for GS, furnish the following gradations for the granular material types, by weight:
 1. Granular Material, Type A. Furnish material having less than 25 percent by weight of the grains or
 particles passing the No. 200 (75 µm) sieve.
 2. Granular Material Type B. For Item 204, furnish the gradation of Items 304, 411, or 617 . For Item 203,
 furnish the gradation of Items 304, 411, or 617 except 0 to 20 percent will be allowed to pass the No. 200 (75 μm)
 sieve.
 3.
 
 Granular Material Type C. Furnish well graded material that meets the following gradation:
 Sieve Size
 3 inch (75 mm)
 2 inch (50 mm)
 1/2 inch (12.5 mm)
 No. 200 (75 m)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 70 to 90
 30 to 60
 0 to 13
 
 4. Granular Material Type D. Furnish the gradation of 100 percent passing the 8 inch (200 mm) sieve, less
 than 60 percent passing the 3 inch (76 mm) sieve, less than 40 percent passing the 3/4 inch (19 mm) sieve, and 0
 to 20 percent passing the No. 200 (75 µm) sieve.
 5. Granular Material Type E. Furnish any of the coarse aggregates from No. l through 67 inclusive on Table
 703.01-1.
 
 6.
 
 Granular Material Type F. Furnish material according to the following:
 a.
 b.
 c.
 d.
 
 Well graded material.
 A gradation with a top size from 8 inches (200 mm) to 3 inches (76 mm) and a bottom size of No.
 200 (75 µm) sieve.
 An evenly graded material between the top and bottom size.
 Compactable, stable, and serves the intended use.
 
 D. Shale. Furnish shale as defined in 203.02 and as further defined below. Ensure that the shale is tested for
 durability to determine whether the shale is durable or nondurable shale. Test the shale according to the following
 procedure:
 1. Obtain a piece of shale that is typical and representative of the rest of the shale. The size of the piece
 should be about 6 inches (150 mm). If a 6-inch (150 mm) sample is not available, then the shale is nondurable.
 2. Place the piece of shale in a bucket of water. Examine the deterioration or slaking of the shale after 48
 hours. If the shale has deteriorated, then the shale is nondurable.
 3. If the shale has not deteriorated after being in water for 48 hours, then break down the shale over a 3/4
 inch (19.0 mm) sieve by hand pressure. If 75 percent or less of the shale is retained on the 3/4 inch (19.0 mm),
 then the shale is nondurable.
 4. If more than 75 percent of the shale is retained on the 3/4 inch (19.0 mm) sieve or, then perform a field
 test for durability. The field test for durability consists of compacting the shale with six passes of a steel drum
 roller which has a minimum compaction force of 500 pounds per lineal inch (57 kN/mm) of roller drum width.
 Provide documentation to the Engineer to verify the roller meets the compaction force requirement.
 a.
 b.
 703.17
 steel slag.
 
 If more than 40 percent of the shale breaks down, by visual inspection, then the shale is nondurable.
 If less than 40 percent of the shale breaks down, by visual inspection, then the shale is durable.
 Aggregate Materials for 304. Furnish aggregate that is CCS, crushed gravel, crushed ACBFS, or
 
 Furnish steel slag according to 703.14
 Furnish ACBFS according to Supplement 1027.
 Determine aggregate acceptance before incorporation into the work based on samples taken from stockpiles.
 A. Gradations. Furnish CCS, crushed gravel, crushed ACBFS, and steel slag that meets the following gradation:
 Sieve Size
 Total Percent Passing
 2 inch (50 mm)
 100
 1 inch (25.0 mm)
 70 to 100
 3/4 inch (19.0 mm)
 50 to 90
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 30 to 60
 9 to 33
 No. 30 (600 m)
 0 to 15 [1]
 No. 200 (75 m)
 [1]Furnish steel slag that has 0 to 10 percent passing through the No.
 200 (75m) sieve
 Furnish gravel used under Item 304 that is crushed from material retained on the 1/2 inch (12.5 mm) sieve.
 B. Physical Properties. Furnish CCS, crushed gravel, ACBFS, and steel slag that meets the physical property
 requirements:
 
 Percent of wear, Los Angeles test, maximum (CCS or crushed gravel)
 Loss, sodium sulfate soundness test, maximum
 Percent by weight of fractured pieces (one or more faces), minimum
 [1]Does not apply to steel slag
 
 50 %
 15 %
 90 % [1]
 
 Ensure deleterious substances in CCS, crushed gravel, and ACBFS do not exceed the following:
 Material Type
 Shale and shaly material
 Chert, that disintegrates in 5 cycles of the soundness test
 
 Percent by weight
 5.0
 5.0
 
 Ensure that the portion of the material passing through the No. 40 (425 μm) sieve has a maximum liquid limit
 of 25 and a maximum plasticity index of 6.
 703.18
 Materials for Items 410, 411, and 617. Furnish CCS, gravel, ACBFS, GS, OH slag, BOF slag, EAF
 slag, RPCC, or RAP for materials.
 If RPCC and RAP are used, provide the following information:
 1.
 2.
 
 Specification item that the material was originally constructed under.
 The applicable material requirements of the original construction item.
 
 If the original construction requirements meet or exceed the requirements of this specification, then the shale,
 sodium soundness and Los Angeles abrasion test for RAP and RPCC may be waived. The plastic index and clay
 requirements are not required for RAP. Use RPCC that is free of steel.
 Furnish OH, BOF, and EAF slag according to 703.14
 Use ACBFS according to Supplement 1027.
 Furnish GS according to 703.08.
 A. Gradations. Furnish for Items 617, 410, and 411 RAP materials according to the following gradation:
 Sieve Size
 1 1/2 inch (37.5 mm)
 3/4 inch (19.0 mm)
 3/8 inch (9.5 mm)
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 No. 30 (600 m)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 80 to 100
 60 to 90
 30 to 90
 3 to 20
 
 Except for GS and RAP, use the following gradations for Items 410, 411, and 617.
 Furnish materials for Item 410 according to one of the following gradations:
 Sieve Size
 1 1/2 inch (37.5 mm)
 1 inch (25.0 mm)
 3/4 inch (19.0 mm)
 3/8 inch (9.5 mm)
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 Do not use RAP for Type C material.
 
 Type A
 Type B
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 100
 90 to 100
 75 to 100
 60 to 100
 60 to 100
 40 to 60
 35 to 75
 15 to 30
 30 to 60
 
 Type C
 Size
 No. 4 or 57
 from
 Table
 703.01-1
 
 Furnish materials for Item 411 according to the following gradation:
 Sieve Size
 1 1/2 inch (37.5 mm)
 1 inch (25.0 mm)
 3/4 inch (19.0 mm)
 3/8 inch (9.5 mm)
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 No. 30 (600 m)
 No. 200 (75 m)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 75 to 100
 60 to 100
 35 to 75
 30 to 60
 7 to 30
 3 to 15
 
 Furnish materials for Item 617 according to the following gradation:
 Sieve Size
 1 inch (25.0 mm)
 3/4 inch (19.0 mm)
 3/8 inch (9.5 mm)
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 No. 30 (600 m)
 No. 200 (75 m)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 60 to 100
 35 to 75
 30 to 60
 9 to 33
 0 to 15
 
 B. Physical properties.
 
 Percent of wear, Los Angeles test, maximum
 Loss, sodium sulfate soundness test, maximum
 Percent by weight of fractured pieces (one or more faces), minimum
 Gravel used, portion retained on a No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve (one or more
 faces) minimum crushed
 Maximum plasticity index of material passing No. 40 (425 m) sieve
 
 Item
 410
 50 %
 –
 –
 –
 –
 
 Item Item
 411 617
 –
 –
 15 % –
 – 90 %
 40 % –
 6
 
 –
 
 Deleterious substances shall not exceed the following:
 Percent by weight
 Material Type
 Item 410 Item 411
 Item 617
 [1]
 Shale and shaly material
 –
 5%
 12 %
 Clay
 10 %
 –
 –
 [1]Where the major portion of the material in a coarse aggregate, from a source on record at
 the Laboratory, has shown the characteristics of acquiring a mud-like condition when tested
 for soundness, test it for soundness and ensure that the maximum loss is 5 percent.
 703.19
 
 Rock and Aggregate Materials for Item 601.
 
 A. Crushed Aggregate Slope Protection and Filter Aggregate for Dump Rock Fill. Furnish crushed gravel,
 limestone, sandstone, RPCC, ACBFS, OH slag, BOF slag, or EAF slag for crushed aggregate slope protection and
 filter aggregate for dump rock fill.
 Use ACBFS slag according to Supplement 1027.
 Use OH, BOF, and EAF slag according to 703.14.
 
 Furnish Size No. 1 or 2 from Table 703.01-1, or according to the following gradation for crushed aggregate
 slope protection:
 Sieve Size
 4 inch (100 mm)
 3 1/2 inch (90 mm)
 2 1/2 inch (63 mm)
 1 1/2 inch (37.5 mm)
 3/4 inch (19.0 mm)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 90 to 100
 25 to 90
 0 to 25
 0 to 10
 
 For a filter for rock channel protection, use Size No. 3 or 4 from Table 703.01-1.
 Physical properties.
 Percent of wear, Los Angeles Test, maximum (except for ACBFS)
 Loss, sodium sulfate soundness test, maximum (except for RPCC)
 Percent by weight of fractured pieces minimum (CCS or gravel)
 Loss for RPCC, AASHTO T 103 Soundness of Aggregates by Freezing and Thawing
 [1]Use Method C using 25 cycles.
 
 50 %
 15 %
 90 %
 20 % [1]
 
 B. Dumped Rock Fill and Rock Channel Protection. Furnish gravel, broken recycled portland cement concrete
 (RPCC), broken sandstone, broken siltstone, and broken limestone for dumped rock fill and rock channel
 protection. Furnish sandstone, siltstone, and limestone that is free of laminations, seams, and fractures, or injury
 due to blasting.
 Except for RPCC, test for soundness according to ASTM D 5240. Use materials having a maximum 30 percent
 single slab loss and a maximum 20 percent cumulative loss. Slab heights and lengths will be a minimum of 8
 inches. For RPCC, test for soundness according to AASHTO T 103 as stated in 703.18.A.
 The Department may waive testing when the stone source has a known durability history.
 Do not use thin, slab-like pieces, or any pieces having a dimension larger than 36 inches (1 m). Do not use
 RPCC with reinforcing steel protruding more than 1 inch (25 mm) beyond the outside surface of the concrete
 pieces.
 Furnish dumped rock fill and rock channel protection materials consisting of the four material types defined
 below:
 1. Type A material has at least 85 percent of the total material by weight larger than an 18-inch (0.5 m) but
 less than a 30-inch (0.8 m) square opening and at least 50 percent of the total material by weight larger than a 24inch (0.6 m) square opening. Furnish material smaller than an 18-inch (0.5 m) square opening that consists
 predominantly of rock spalls and rock fines, and that is free of soil.
 2. Type B material has at least 85 percent of the total material by weight larger than a 12-inch (0.3 m) but
 less than a 24-inch (0.6 m) square opening and at least 50 percent of the total material by weight larger than an 18inch (0.5 m) square opening. Furnish material smaller than a 12-inch (0.3 m) square opening that consists
 predominantly of rock spalls and rock fines, and that is free of soil.
 3. Type C material has at least 85 percent of the total material by weight larger than a 6-inch (150 mm) but
 less than an 18-inch (0.5 m) square opening and at least 50 percent of the total material by weight larger than a 12inch (0.3 m) square opening. Furnish material smaller than a 6-inch (150 mm) square opening that consists
 predominantly of rock spalls and rock fines, and that is free of soil.
 4. Type D material has at least 85 percent of the total material by weight larger than a 3-inch (75 mm) but
 less than a 12-inch (0.3 m) square opening and at least 50 percent of the total material by weight larger than a 6inch (150 mm) square opening. Furnish material smaller than a 3-inch (75 mm) square opening that consists
 predominantly of rock spalls and rock fines, and that is free of soil.
 
 703.20
 
 Aggregate for Water Quality Structures.
 
 A. Fine Aggregate.
 1. Furnish fine aggregate consisting of washed natural sand, washed sand manufactured from stone or gravel,
 or washed lightweight sand prepared by expanding products such as clay, diatomite, shale, or slate.
 2.
 
 Sieve analysis.
 Sieve Size
 3/8 inch
 (9.5 mm)
 No. 4
 (4.75 mm)
 No. 8
 (2.36 mm)
 No. 16
 (1.18 mm)
 No. 30
 (600 µm)
 No. 50
 (300 µm)
 No. 100
 (150 µm)
 No. 200
 (75 µm)
 
 Total Percent Passing
 100
 95 to 100
 65 to 100
 40 to 80
 20 to 60
 5 to 30
 0 to 10
 0 to 1
 
 B. Coarse Aggregate.
 1. Furnish coarse aggregate consisting of washed gravel, washed CCS, or washed lightweight aggregate
 prepared by expanding products such as clay, diatomite, shale, or slate.
 2. Gradation. Furnish any of the coarse aggregates from Size No.1 through No.10 inclusive on Table 703.011. Ensure that the percent by weight of material passing the No. 200 (75 µm) sieve in the course aggregate does
 not exceed 1 percent.
 3.
 
 Physical properties.
 Percent of wear, Los Angeles test, maximum
 
 40 %
 
 704 MASONRY UNITS
 704.01 Clay or Shale Brick. Furnish clay or shale brick conforming to ASTM C 32, with the following
 modifications:
 4.1 Furnish bricks of such size and shape as to allow their incorporation in the structure in conformance with
 the specified dimensions of the structure.
 6.1 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 704.02 Concrete Brick. Furnish concrete brick according to ASTM C 55, with the following modifications:
 4.1.1 and 4.1.2 Use cement conforming to 701 Portland Cement.
 4.2 Use aggregate that conforms to the quality requirements of 703.02.
 8.1 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 8.2 Sample and test the brick according to ASTM C 140. Furnish bricks of such size and shape as to allow
 their incorporation in the structure in conformance with the specified dimensions of the structure. Furnish bricks
 that have a rectangular cross-section with square corners. Ensure that the ends, edges, and one face are plain
 surfaces.
 704.03 Concrete Masonry Blocks. Furnish concrete masonry blocks conforming to ASTM C 139, with the
 following modification:
 4.1.1 and 4.1.2 Use cement conforming to 701 Portland Cement.
 7.1 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 7.2 Furnish blocks of such size and shape as to allow their incorporation in the structure in conformance with
 the specified dimensions of the structure.
 
 705 CONCRETE INCIDENTALS
 705.01
 Glass Fiber Reinforced Polymer (GFRP) Dowel and Deformed Bars. Furnish round and straight
 fiber reinforced polymer (GFRP) dowel bars. Furnish deformed GRFP bars meeting the material requirements of
 ACI 440.6. Ensure resin used to manufacture the GFRP bars consists of an epoxy vinyl ester resin. Ensure the
 glass fiber used is ECR glass which meets ASTM D578. Ensure that the minimum glass fiber content is 70 percent
 by weight. Furnish dowels and deformed bars of a type meeting the dimensional requirements of the standard
 construction drawings Provide certified test data according to 101.03 with each shipment.
 705.03
 Preformed Fillers. Furnish preformed fillers according to AASHTO M 153 or AASHTO M 213,
 with the following modification:
 5.7 For materials manufactured as described in 4.1.1 and 4.1.2, ensure that the producer certifies to the
 Engineer that the asphalt content is at least 35 percent by weight of the filler.
 Or furnish semi-rigid closed-cell polypropylene foam preformed fillers according to the following:
 1.
 
 Water Absorption
 
 < 1.0%
 
 ASTM D 545 or AASHTO T 42
 
 2.
 
 Compression Recovery
 
 > 80%
 
 ASTM D 545 or AASHTO T 42
 
 3.
 
 Extrusion
 
 < 0.1 inch
 
 ASTM D 545 or AASHTO T 42
 
 4.
 
 Density
 
 > 3.5 lb/cu.ft.
 
 ASTM D 545 or AASHTO T 42
 
 5.
 
 Heat Resistance
 
 392 F +/- 5F
 
 ASTM D 5249
 
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 705.04
 Hot Applied Joint Sealer, Furnish hot applied joint sealer conforming to ASTM D 6690, Type II.
 Use this material as the primer for Type 3 membrane.
 705.05
 
 Burlap Cloth. Furnish burlap cloth according to AASHTO M 182, Class 2.
 
 705.06
 Sheet Materials for Concrete Curing. Furnish sheet materials conforming to ASTM C171 for
 moisture loss and reflectance only.
 705.07
 Liquid Membrane-Forming Compounds for Curing Concrete. Furnish liquid membrane-forming
 compounds conforming to ASTM C 309, with the following modification:
 5.3 In addition - liquid membrane-forming compounds will have a minimum solids content of 25% .
 6.1 Water Retention - Liquid membrane-forming compound, when tested in accordance with 10.1, shall have
 a water loss of not more than: 0.15 kg/m2 @ 24 hours and 0.40 kg/m2 @ 72 hours.
 7.1 Reflectance - Type 2 curing compound will have a minimum daylight reflectance of 65%.
 10.4 In addition - Mix Type 2 curing compound until uniform in color and consistency, and then pour into a
 glass graduated cylinder (Kimax 150 ml) to the 150 ml mark. The Type 2 curing compound should have a rate of
 settling such that its uniformly white portion as visible to the eye is not less than 145 ml at 2 hours and not less
 than 125 ml at 24 hours after filling the Kimax cylinder . The test should be performed at 73.0 ± 3.5 oF (23 ± 2
 o
 C). During this test the glass cylinder should be stoppered and left undisturbed.
 11.1 In addition, Equip the containers for Type 2 white pigmented liquid membrane forming compounds with
 mechanical agitators. Assign each container in any batch or lot, a number as the container is being filled.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 705.10
 Air-Entraining Admixtures. Provide air-entraining admixtures conforming to AASHTO M 154.
 Conform to Supplement 1001 for approval.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 705.11
 
 Preformed Elastomeric Compression Joint Seal for Concrete.
 
 A. General. Provide preformed elastomeric compression joint seal conforming to ASTM D 2628, with the
 following modifications:
 
 5.1 Ensure that the size and design is as shown on the plans.
 7.2 The Engineer will perform inspection at the project site.
 7.3 If sampled, provide a minimum of 3 feet (1.0 m), with all manufacturers’ markings,
 12.1 In addition, ensure that markings are every 1 foot (305 mm). Use lubricants recommended by the seal
 manufacturer to install preformed compression seals.
 B. Qualification. Obtain Department approval of each design, shape, width, depth, web, and shell thickness
 before use. Submit drawings of the seals showing all dimensions and dimension tolerances and weight per foot
 (meter) with the request for approval.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 705.12
 Chemical Admixture for Concrete. Provide chemical admixtures conforming to ASTM C 494.
 Ensure that the minimum relative durability factor is 90.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 705.13 Neoprene Sheeting. Provide material conforming to the following:
 Test Description
 Thickness (inch)
 
 Specification
 ASTM D751
 
 Breaking Strength, Grab (lb)
 
 ASTM D751
 
 Adhesive Strip, 1” wide × 2” long (lb)
 Burst Strength (psi)
 
 ASTM D751
 ASTM D751
 
 Heat Aging, 70 hr., 212 ºF, 180 º bend without cracking
 
 ASTM D2136
 
 Low temperature brittleness, 1 hr., -40 º F, bend around ¼” mandrel
 
 ASTM D2136
 
 Requirement
 0.094±0.01
 700 × 700
 (long. × trans.)
 9
 1400
 No cracking of
 coating
 No cracking of
 coating
 
 Furnish material according to the Department’s QPL.
 705.15
 High Molecular Weight Methacrylate (HMWM) Resin. Provide low viscosity, non-fuming high
 molecular weight methacrylate (HMWM) resin conforming to the following:
 Viscosity
 
 Less than 25 cps (Brookfield viscometer, Model RVT with UL adaptor or
 Model LVF, # spindle and UL adaptor C @ 77 °F (25 °C) (ASTM D 2849)
 Density
 Greater than 8.4 lb/gal Ca 77 °F (25 °C) (ASTM D 2849)
 Flash Point Greater than 200 °F (93 ºC) (PenskyMartens CC) (ASTM D 93)
 Vapor Pressure Less than 1.0 mm Hg C @ 77 °F (25 °C) (ASTM D 323)
 TG (DSC)
 Greater than 135 °F (58 °C) (ASTM D3418)
 Shelf Life
 Must be 1 year minimum at manufacturers recommended environmental
 considerations
 Gel Time
 Greater than 40 min, 100 g mass (ASTM D 2471) (thin film)
 Percent Solids Greater than 90% by weight
 Bond Strength Greater than 1500 psi (10.5 MPa) (ASTM C 882)
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 705.20
 Non Shrink, Non Metallic Materials. Provide anchoring materials for installing anchor bolts,
 dowels and similar material in concrete which are non-shrink, 100% solids, two part (resin and hardener), fast
 setting, and moisture insensitive.
 A. Provide certified test data according to 101.03 showing compliance with the following requirements. Include
 manufacturer’s installation and application requirements.
 
 Test Description
 
 Specification
 
 Requirements
 
 Bond Strength (dry)
 
 ASTM C 882
 
 2 day, Min. 1800 psi
 
 Bond Strength after
 subjected to 300 cycles
 freeze/thaw testing
 Heat Deflection
 Linear Coefficient of
 Shrinkage
 
 ASTM C 882 specimens subjected
 to ASTM C666 Method B testing
 and the tested conforming to
 ASTM C 882
 ASTM D648
 
 7 day, Min. 130 ºF
 
 ASTM C531
 
 % Max. 0.005
 
 Min. 1600 psi
 
 Notes
 Average of three
 samples [1]
 Average of three
 samples [1]
 
 Average of three
 See procedure below
 cylinders in dry
 condition
 Average of three
 Pullout Strength Test
 24 hours, Min. Load
 See procedure below
 cylinders in wet
 (wet)
 22,500 lbs
 condition
 [1]A total of six samples will be made under ASTM C 882. Three of the ASTM C 882 samples will be tested
 under ASTM C666 Method B and those samples tested.
 Pullout Strength Test
 (dry)
 
 24 hours, Min. Load
 22,500 lbs
 
 Pullout Strength Test Procedure. Perform pullout strength tests under dry and wet conditions as follows:
 1.
 
 Dry Condition (epoxy steel)
 
 Cast three concrete test blocks or cylinders, a minimum of 6 inches (150 mm) in width or diameter by
 12 inch (300 mm) in depth. Use concrete with a compressive strength of 4000+/- 500 psi at 28-days Center a 6
 3/4 inch (170 mm) deep hole, drilled the diameter required by the manufacturer’s requirements for installing a No.
 6 (20M) rebar, in the block or cylinder by drilling or forming. Dry the hole surfaces and clean the holes following
 manufacturer instructions. Fill the hole with adhesive materials according to manufacturer recommendations.
 Insert a No. 6 (20M) deformed reinforcing bar 30 inches (760 mm) long, cleaned and degreased, into the hole.
 Hold and center the bar perpendicular to the concrete surface in the grout-filled hole during the curing period.
 2.
 
 Wet Condition (epoxy steel)
 
 Cast three concrete test blocks or cylinders, a minimum of 6 inches (150 mm) in width or diameter by
 12 inch (300 mm) in depth. Use concrete with a compressive strength of 4000+/- 500 psi at 28-days. Center a 63/4 inch (170 mm) deep hole, drilled the diameter required by the manufacturer’s requirements for installing a No.
 6 (20M) rebar, in the blocks or cylinders by drilling or forming. Wet the hole’s surfaces prior to applying the
 anchoring material by filling the hole with water and letting stand for five minutes. Turn the samples over for two
 minutes to allow the excess water to drain from the hole, Turn all samples over to the upright positions and
 immediately fill hole with adhesive materials according to manufacturer recommendations. Insert a No. 6 (20M)
 deformed reinforcing bar 30 inches (760 mm) long, cleaned and degreased into the hole. Hold and center the bar
 perpendicular to the concrete surface in the adhesive-filled hole during the curing period.
 Cure the specimen at 77  5 F (25  3 C) for 24 hours.
 For the pullout strength test, apply an axial load to the bar at a rate of 1/2 inch (13 mm) per minute until the bar
 pulls out of the specimen, or the concrete block or cylinder cracks or spalls. Record the failure mode and applied
 load.
 B. Epoxy materials will also conform to ASTM C881, Type IV, Grade 3, Class A, B or C.
 Supply the anchoring material in non-reactive containers and with their SDS. Label containers with the name of
 the product, the manufacturer, the shelf life expiration date, the batch number, quantity, and provide application
 instructions.
 Maintain storage areas between 40 and 100 F (5 and 38 C).
 Only use materials on the Department’s QPL.
 
 705.21
 Quick Setting Concrete Mortar. Provide prepackaged mortar material that requires the addition of
 water only.
 Only use materials meeting the following criteria:
 A. Capable of being extended 50 percent by dry mortar weight with aggregate meeting the following
 requirements:
 1.
 
 Gradation requirements of Table 703.01-1 for No. 8, 89, 9, or a combination thereof.
 
 2.
 
 AASHTO M 43, Maximum Passing No. 200 (75 m) sieve - Not to exceed 0.2 percent.
 
 3.
 
 AASHTO T 84 and T 85, Absorption - Not more than 2 percent.
 
 4.
 
 AASHTO T 104, Soundness Loss - Not more than 2 percent.
 
 a.
 
 Ensure that the material meets the following requirements:
 Test
 Compressive Strength ASTM C 109[2]
 psi (MPa)
 
 Compressive Strength ASTM C 39[1],[2]
 psi (MPa)
 
 Initial Set Time (min) ASTM C 266[2]
 Bond Strength, ASTM C 882[1]
 psi (MPa)
 
 @ 1 Hour
 @ 3 Hour
 @ 24 Hours
 @ 7 Days
 @ 1 Hour
 @ 3 Hour
 @ 24 Hours
 @ 7 Days
 
 @ 24 Hours
 @ 7 Days
 
 Type 1
 
 Type 2
 
 100 (0.7)
 250 (1.7)
 2000 (14)
 ---
 
 2000 (14)
 --5000 (34)
 7000 (48)
 
 100 (0.7)
 (2000) (14)
 150 (1.0)
 --1000 (10)
 3500 (24)
 --6000 (41)
 5 Minutes
 10 Minutes
 1000 (7)
 1500 (11)
 
 1000 (7)
 1500 (11)
 
 Flexural Strength ASTM C 78[1]
 psi (MPa)
 
 @ 4 Hour
 --200 (1.4)
 @ 3 Day
 650 (4.5)
 500 (3.4)
 [1]
 Freeze and Thaw ASTM C 666 (use either Procedure B or A)
 Procedure B (350 Cycles) Durability Factor
 80%
 80%
 Procedure A (300 Cycles) Durability Factor
 79%
 79%
 [1]Extend test specimens 50 percent by dry mortar weight with aggregate.
 [2]Test the mortar as received with the addition of water. Ensure that the amount of water is
 designated on the packing container by the manufacturer.
 B. Prequalify the material by placing and having the material evaluated conforming to Supplement 1070 for 3
 years. At the end of the 3 year rating the material will meet the following criteria:
 1.
 
 Percentage debonding/delamination ≤ 5%
 
 2.
 
 Percentage spalling ≤ 5%
 
 3. Mid panel average crack width ≤ 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) and total length of mid panel cracks ≤ 20 feet (6.1
 m) total length
 4. Edge Cracking/debonding average crack width ≤ 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) and total length of cracks ≤ 12 feet
 (3.6 m)
 
 Furnish the Laboratory with a certified copy of test results from a recognized laboratory showing compliance
 with the requirements of this specification for item.
 C. Furnish the laboratory written documentation of the method of surface preparation and any primers, adhesives,
 or activators used in the field test. Those will become requirements of the material system for subsequent approval
 or use. A recognized laboratory is one that is regularly inspected by the Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory
 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
 Provide quick setting concrete mortar packaged in strong moisture resistant paper bags or other suitable
 containers capable of withstanding shipping, normal handling, and storage without breakage. The package will
 protect the material from deterioration when stored in a dry condition for a period of 1 year. Each package or
 container must display information regarding the minimum nominal yield and instructions for mixing. Calculate
 volumetric yield determinations using the manufacturers’ recommended water content.
 Furnish materials listed on the Department’s QPL.
 705.22
 Nonshrink Mortar. Provide nonshrink mortar conforming to ASTM C 1107, with the following
 modification:
 9.1 In addition, ensure that the fluidity of the grout at the maximum water content is at least equal to a flowable
 mixture as defined in ASTM C 827, Section 8.2.2 and that the minimum flow is 125 @ 5 drops of the flow table
 in 3 seconds.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s Approved List.
 705.23
 
 Concrete Sealers
 
 A. Provide an Epoxy-Urethane sealer incorporating a two component cross linked urethane and conforming to
 the following requirements:
 1. Absorption - ASTM C642 (non-air entrained concrete). Proportion and mix concrete according to ASTM
 C672. Sealed concrete, under total immersion, will not exceed 1.0% after 48 hours or 2.0% after 50 days
 2. Scaling Resistance - ASTM C672 A rating of “No scaling” after 100 cycles on the sealed concrete (nonair entrained concrete) as compared to “Severe Scaling” on untreated concrete.
 3.
 
 NCHRP 244, Series 11 - Cube Test
 3.1 Weight gain - not to exceed 25% of untreated cube
 3.2 Absorbed chloride - not to exceed 25% of untreated cube
 
 4.
 
 NCHRP 244, Series IV - Southern Exposure
 4.1 Absorbed chloride - not to exceed 10% of untreated concrete
 
 5.
 
 Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) maximum, ASTM D 3960, 3.33 lbs./gal(0.399 g/ml), as applied
 
 Record and report the application rate (square footage/gallon) of sealer during the tests.
 Provide test data from an approved independent testing facility. The sealer manufacturer funds the testing
 costs.
 Furnish the test data, a one quart (one liter) sample, and the SDS to the Office of Materials Management
 (OMM). OMM will determine material acceptance.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 B. Provide an Non-Epoxy sealer conforming to the following requirements:
 1. Absorption - ASTM C642 (non-air entrained concrete). Proportion and mix concrete according to ASTM
 C672. Sealed concrete, under total immersion, will not exceed 1.0% after 48 hours or 2.0% after 50 days.
 2. Scaling Resistance - ASTM C672 A rating of “No scaling” after 100 cycles on the sealed concrete (nonair entrained concrete) as compared to “Severe Scaling” on untreated concrete.
 3.
 
 NCHRP 244, Series 11 - Cube Test
 
 3.1 Weight gain - not to exceed 25% of untreated cube
 3.2 Absorbed chloride - not to exceed 25% of untreated cube
 4.
 
 NCHRP 244, Series IV - Southern Exposure
 4.1 Absorbed chloride - not to exceed 10% of untreated concrete
 
 5.
 
 Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) maximum, ASTM D 3960, 3.33 lbs./gal(0.399 g/ml), as applied
 
 Record and report the application rate (square footage/gallon) of sealer during the tests.
 Provide test data from an approved independent testing facility. The sealer manufacturer funds the testing
 costs.
 Furnish the test data, a one quart (one liter) sample, and the SDS to the OMM. OMM will determine material
 acceptance.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 705.24
 Soluble Reactive Silicate. Provide a soluble reactive silicate (SRS) that is a blend of Na/K/FlxSiOx
 (sodium, potassium, fluoro or other silicate), surfactants, polymers, and stabilizers capable of thoroughly saturating
 and sealing concrete. The treatment system will meet the following performance requirements:
 A. Scaling Resistance - Treated concrete, abraded by sufficient wire brushing to break any film remaining on the
 surface after drying, will pass ASTM C 672, Scaling Resistance test with a rating of 2- “Slight to Moderate Scaling”
 after 50 cycles (non-air entrained concrete) as compared to a rating of 5-"Severe Scaling” on untreated concrete.
 B. Absorption - The absorption of treated concrete under total immersion will not exceed 1.0 percent after 48
 hours or 2.0 percent after 50 days (ASTM C 642, non-air entrained concrete). Concrete should be proportioned and
 mixed in accordance with ASTM C 672.
 C. Skid resistance - The skid resistance of treated concrete pavement will not be reduced by more than 10 percent
 as compared to the same untreated pavement. ASTM E 274 using ASTM E 501 ribbed tire at 40 mph (64 kph),
 five test average.
 D. AASHTO T 259 as modified. The standard T 259 Resistance of Concrete to Chloride Ion Penetration will be
 modified as follows:
 In addition to section 3.1, intentionally break the specimens so they have a full depth crack through the middle
 of the slab.
 Install section 3.2 dams around the perimeter of the re-assembled, cracked, concrete specimens. Caulk around
 the perimeter of the dam to assure that only the crack and the concrete will allow water to pass through or be
 absorbed. After assembly, measure the crack width at three locations and report the crack width.
 Perform the ponding of 3.4 until the 3% solution comes through the specimen’s crack. Record and report the
 time required for the solution to appear through the specimen’s crack. Remove the solution from the specimens
 and re-dry according to 3.3 (AASHTO T 259).
 After drying apply the SRS to the specimen’s top surface at the manufacturer’s recommended rate of
 application. Record and report the rate of application. Air dry the SRS coated dammed sample specimens for 7
 days. After 7 days, re perform the ponding with 3% chloride solution until solution comes through the specimen’s
 crack or 14 days. Record the time the until the ponded solution comes through the crack.
 Acceptable SRS materials will have a value of 2 or more when the ponding time before SRS application is
 divided into the ponding time after SRS application.
 Sections 3.5, 3,6, 4.1,4.2 and 5.1 (of AASHTO T 259) will not apply.
 Have tests performed by an approved independent testing facility acceptable to the Department.
 Submit test data, a one quart (one liter) sample, a technical data sheet and the SDS to the OMM for approval.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 
 705.25
 Gravity-Fed Resin. Provide non shrink, non metallic resin conforming to ASTM C 881, Type 1,
 Grade 1, Class B or C and the following:
 The maximum viscosity at the lowest allowable temperature will be 250 cps. The manufacturer will provide test
 data to verify the viscosity at the lowest temperature for the class for which it is to be approved.
 A minimum average sand retention of 95.0% for three samples tested according to the Sand Penetration Test
 Method described below.
 Show no signs of cracking, debonding or insufficient curing during the sand penetration test
 A. Sand Penetration Test Method. This test will be conducted with the following equipment and materials:
 1. 4 oz (118 ml) wax coated paper cup. Maximum top diameter 2 5/16" (59 mm); bottom diameter 1 11/16"
 (43 mm); height 2 3/8" (960 mm).
 2.
 
 20 - 30 grade sand (ASTM C 778)
 
 3.
 
 1 Pint non-absorbent container
 
 4.
 
 8 oz (240 ml) plastic cup
 
 5.
 
 Stirring stick or spatula
 
 6.
 
 Scale accurate to 0.1 g
 
 7.
 
 Disposable gloves
 
 8.
 
 Stop watch
 
 9.
 
 Thermometer
 
 10. Paint brush
 B. Perform the test as follows
 1.
 
 Assure the material and the room is at 73 F (23 C)
 
 2.
 
 Determine and record the tare weight of the paper cup (1).
 
 3.
 
 Introduce 100.0 grams of 20 - 30 graded sand (2) into the paper cup.
 
 4.
 
 Record the weight of the cup and the sand.
 
 5. Consolidate the sand in the cup by lifting the cup approximately ½ inch (13 mm) and dropping 25 to 30
 times. Then lightly tap the sides of the cup 25 to 30 times with the fingers. The sample may also be placed on a
 vibrating table for 10 to 15 seconds.
 6.
 
 Measure enough material into the 8 oz plastic cups (4) to make at least a 200 g sample.
 
 7. Combine the components into the non-absorbent container (3) and mix according to the manufacturer’s
 recommendations using a spatula or stirring stick (5).
 8.
 
 Pour 40.0g of material over the sand and record the weight of the resin, cup and sand.
 
 9. Allow the resin, sand and cup to set undisturbed for 24 hours at 73 F (23 C). Re-weigh the resin, cup
 and sand.
 10. Remove as much of the paper cup from around the hardened resin and sand matrix as possible. Lightly
 brush any loose sand from the matrix. Weigh the hardened matrix.
 11. Calculate the percent of sand retained, F, as follows:
 F = [E / (D - A)] × 100
 Where,
 A = Tare weight of paper cup (g)
 B = Weight of cup and sand (g)
 C = Weight of fresh mixture of resin, cup and sand (g)
 D = Weight of cured mixture of resin, cup and sand (g)
 
 E = Weight of resin sand matrix as measured in step 10 (g)
 12. Report the average of three specimens mixed separately.
 13. Also calculate and report the percent loss due to curing G as follows:
 G = [(D - C) / (C - B)] × 100
 14. Examine the sand / resin matrix for signs of insufficient curing and bond, or excessive shrinkage.
 Material Approval. The manufacturer will provide certified test data verifying compliance with the above
 requirements; technical data sheet; current SDS for the material; 1 gallon sample; and a letter certifying that the
 product formulation will not be altered without notification to the Department and OMM.
 OMM will determine materials acceptance and include in the Department’s QPL.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 705.26
 Epoxy injection Resin. Provide epoxy injection resin capable of application, positive adherence and
 strength development when applied to moist or wet surfaces at temperatures of 33 F (1 C) and above.
 Use products that contain 100% solids material and no non-reactive diluents, solvents or other fillers. Provide
 materials that meet the following requirements:
 A. The injection material will meet the requirements of ASTM C 881 Type IV, Grade 1 and Class B or C and
 have a maximum viscosity of 600 cps at the lowest ambient material and substrate temperature to be used.
 B. The paste materials will meet the requirements of ASTM C 881 Type I, Grade 3 and Class B or C.
 Material Approval. The manufacturer of the materials is responsible for prequalifying the material and
 submitting the following to the OMM:
 An Independent certified test data indicating that the materials, when mixed according to the
 manufacturer’s recommendations, meet the requirements listed above.
 Manufacturer’s technical data sheet for the paste and injection materials.
 SDS for paste and injection materials.
 1 Gallon Sample or 2 kits of the injection materials
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 
 STEPS REMOVED
 
 706 CONCRETE AND CLAY PIPE
 706.01
 Non-Reinforced Concrete Pipe. Provide non-reinforced concrete pipe conforming to ASTM C 14
 (ASTM C 14M), with the following modifications:
 5.3 Does not apply.
 6.2 Provide cementitious materials conforming to 701, except 701.07.
 6.3 Provide aggregate conforming to the quality requirements of 703.02.
 10.2 Ensure that the manufacture furnishes the number of pipe shown in the “Minimum Requirements for
 Sampling Materials” table, section 700.
 10.3 In addition, perform external load crushing strength tests with hard rubber blocks on wood strips with
 plaster of paris bedding fillets.
 13 Perform inspection at the project site. Obtain random samples from materials delivered to the project site
 or at other locations designated by the Laboratory. Ensure that the manufacturers of these materials are certified
 by the Office of Materials Management according to Supplement 1074.
 15 Ensure that the markings also include “P” to denote non-reinforced pipe.
 Testing Equipment. Ensure that every manufacturer furnishing concrete pipe under these Specifications
 furnishes all facilities and personnel needed to perform the tests.
 706.02
 Reinforced Concrete Circular Pipe. Provide reinforced concrete circular pipe conforming to
 ASTM C 655 (ASTM C 655M), with the following modifications:
 Ensure that the minimum D-Load of the reinforced concrete pipe is as follows:
 Size
 12 in
 15 in
 18 in
 21 in
 24 in
 27 in or larger
 
 (300 mm)
 (375 mm)
 (450 mm)
 (525 mm)
 (600 mm)
 (675 mm or larger)
 
 Minimum D-Load
 2000 lb
 (100 kg)
 2000 lb
 (100 kg)
 1250 lb
 (62.5 kg)
 1250 lb
 (62.5 kg)
 1250 lb
 (62.5 kg)
 1000 lb
 (50 kg)
 
 1. In addition, ensure that this pipe is circular reinforced concrete pipe with circular or elliptical
 reinforcement, with and without quadrant and “S” strip reinforcement.
 4.1 The acceptability of the pipe design is determined according to Section 10. All designs in ASTM C 76
 (ASTM C 76M), Tables 2 through 5, inclusive, are accepted designs with the 0.01-inch (0.3 mm) crack D-loads as
 follows:
 
 ASTM C 76 (ASTM C 76M) Table No.
 2 (Class II)
 3 (Class III)
 4 (Class IV)
 5 (Class V)
 
 D-Load
 0.01-inch
 Crack
 1000 lb
 1350 lb
 2000 lb
 3000 lb
 
 (0.3 mm)
 Crack
 (50 kg)
 (65 kg)
 (100 kg)
 (140 kg)
 
 All designs in Tables 706.02-1 through 706.02-4 are accepted designs with noted 0.01-inch (0.3 mm) crack
 and ultimate D-loads. For intermediate D-loads, in Tables 2 through 5 of ASTM C 76 (ASTM C 76M), steel areas
 for a given wall thickness may be interpolated between Tables 2 and 3, 3 and 4, and 4 and 5 for a size and D-load
 as accepted designs. Where different concrete strengths are listed in the tables, use the higher concrete. In addition,
 steel areas, interpolated as above between Table 706.02-1 and Table 706.02-2, 36-inch (900 mm) through 108-inch
 
 (2700 mm) using the higher concrete strength, and interpolation of the circumferential steel between Table 706.023 and Table 706.02-4 using the wall thickness and stirrup designs in Table 706.02-4, are accepted designs. Pipe
 manufactured according to an accepted pipe design will be accepted, at the option of the Laboratory, according to
 the basis of acceptance described in Section 4.1.1 or 4.1.2.
 Provide reinforced concrete pipe with S-stirrups according to Figure 706.02-1 (Figure 706.02-1M) and the
 following requirements:
 1. Provide steel conforming to 709.08, 709.10, 709.11, or 709.12. Ensure that the wall thickness, amount of
 circular reinforcement, S-stirrup system, and concrete strength comply with Tables 706.02-2, 706.02-3, and 706.024. Ensure that the spacing center-to-center of adjacent inner rings of circumferential reinforcement in a cage does
 not exceed 4 inches (102 mm) for pipe up to and including pipe having a 4 inches (102 mm) wall thickness or
 exceed wall thicknesses for larger pipe and in no case exceed 6 inches (152 mm).
 2. Ensure that each line of S-stirrups have a continuous “S” shape extending longitudinally from end to end
 of the pipe. Ensure that they extend from the inner cage toward the outer surface of the pipe for a distance not less
 than the minimum amplitude. Ensure that S-stirrups pass around and are in contact with each inside circumferential
 member of the inner cage. Ensure that each line of S-stirrups lie essentially in a plane passing through the
 longitudinal axis of the pipe.
 3. Where more than one length of stirrup material is used per line, make a lap round one circumferential
 member of the inner cage. Ensure that the ends of “S” shaped stirrups at splices include an outer bend. Do not use
 more than three lengths of “S” material in a line and ensure that the minimum length of a section of S-stirrups is
 30 inches (0.76 m).
 
 Figure 706.02-1 Illustrative Example of S-Stirrup Support System for 0.01-inch Crack D-load 3000, 102-inch
 diameter Pipe Minimum Area Per Support 0.053 square inch, 11 Lines Spaced @ 5 1/8 inches. For other classes
 and sizes, see Tables 706.02-2, 3, and 4.
 
 Figure 706.02-1M Illustrative Example of S-Stirrup Support System for 0.3 mm Crack D-Load 140.0, 2550 mm
 diameter Pipe Minimum Area per Support 34 mm 2, 11 Lines Spaced @ 128 mm. For other classes and sizes,
 see Tables 706.02-2M, 3M, and 4M.
 TABLE 706.02-1
 0.01-inch Crack D-Load 1000
 Ultimate Strength D-Load 1500
 Circular Reinforcement
 in Circular Pipe
 Internal Wall
 (in²/ft of pipe)
 Dia. of
 ThickPipe
 ness
 Inner
 Outer
 (inch)
 (inch)
 Cage
 Cage
 Reinforcing Steel
 709.11 or 709.12 Only
 Concrete Strength, 4000 psi
 36
 4
 0.09
 0.07
 42
 4 1/2
 0.11
 0.08
 48
 5
 0.13
 0.09
 54
 5 1/2
 0.16
 0.12
 60
 6
 0.19
 0.14
 66
 6 1/2
 0.21
 0.16
 72
 7
 0.23
 0.17
 78
 7 1/2
 0.25
 0.19
 84
 8
 0.29
 0.21
 90
 8
 0.33
 0.24
 96
 8 1/2
 0.37
 0.26
 Reinforcing Steel
 709.11 or 709.12 Only
 Concrete Strength, 5000 psi
 102
 8 1/2
 0.41
 0.28
 108
 9
 0.47
 0.30
 All Permitted Reinforcing Steel, Concrete
 Strength, 5000 psi
 114
 9 1/2
 0.56
 0.42
 120
 10
 0.61
 0.46
 126
 10 1/2
 0.65
 0.49
 132
 11
 0.70
 0.52
 144
 12
 0.80
 0.60
 
 TABLE 706.02-1M
 0.3 mm Crack D-Load 50.0
 Ultimate Strength D-Load 75.0
 Circular Reinforcement
 in Circular Pipe
 Internal Wall
 (cm²/m of pipe)
 Dia. of
 ThickPipe
 ness
 Inner
 Outer
 (mm)
 (mm)
 Cage
 Cage
 Reinforcing Steel
 709.11 or 709.12 Only
 Concrete Strength, 27.6 MPa
 900
 100
 1.9
 1.5
 1050
 113
 2.3
 1.7
 1200
 125
 2.8
 1.9
 1350
 138
 3.4
 2.5
 1500
 150
 4.0
 3.0
 1650
 163
 4.4
 3.4
 1800
 175
 4.9
 3.6
 1950
 188
 5.3
 4.0
 2100
 200
 6.1
 4.4
 2250
 200
 7.0
 5.1
 2400
 213
 7.8
 5.5
 Reinforcing Steel
 709.11 or 709.12 Only
 Concrete Strength, 34.5 MPa
 2550
 213
 8.7
 5.9
 2700
 225
 9.9
 6.4
 All Permitted Reinforcing Steel, Concrete
 Strength, 34.5 MPa
 2850
 238
 11.9
 8.9
 3000
 250
 12.9
 9.7
 3150
 263
 13.8
 10.4
 3300
 275
 14.8
 11.0
 3600
 300
 16.9
 12.7
 
 4.1.1
 In addition, test the pipe designs covered by Tables 706.02-1, 706.02-2, 706.02-3, and 706.02-4 and
 ASTM C 76 (ASTM C 76M), Tables 2 through 5, and interpolated designs by the three-edge bearing method.
 When the test load on the pipe reaches 115 percent of the required 0.01-inch (0.3 mm) crack D-load without
 developing a 0.01-inch (0.3 mm) or larger crack, accept the test specimen for strength. If any test specimen fails
 to pass this test, but attained the 0.01-inch (0.3 mm) crack, continue the test until the ultimate D-load is reached.
 4.1.2
 In addition, accept pipe 54 inches (1350 mm) and larger in diameter covered by Tables 706.02-1,
 706.02-2, 706.02-3, and 706.02-4, and ASTM C 76 (ASTM C 76M), Tables 2 through 5, and interpolated designs
 according to Section 12 and the following requirements:
 1. When pipe from a plant has been approved by the Laboratory for a specified design and pipe from
 the same plant has wall and steel area not less than the approved pipe.
 2. When it has been established that two or more plants have complied with the above requirements for
 the class and size under consideration, and the plant under consideration has established compliance with the above
 requirements for an adjacent size, and the wall and steel area are not less than the pipe tested at the two plants.
 6.1.2.1 Provide cement according to 701.
 6.1.2.2 Provide fly ash according to 701.13
 6.1.3
 
 Provide aggregates conforming to the quality requirements of 703.02.
 
 6.1.5
 
 Provide steel according to 709.08, 709.10, 709.11, or 709.12.
 
 6.2.4
 Ensure that no more than two holes are cast, drilled, or otherwise neatly made in the shell of each
 piece of pipe for the purpose of handling or laying. Taper the holes unless drilled, and before backfilling, fill the
 tapered holes with portland cement mortar, precast concrete plugs secured with portland cement mortar, or a device
 on the Department’s Approved List specifically designed for filling the hole. Fill drilled holes with portland cement
 mortar.
 7.1 and 7.3 In addition, perform strength tests using methods described in ASTM C 497 (ASTM C 497M).
 10.1 In addition, ensure that pipe designs covered by Tables 706.02-1, 706.02-2, 706.02-3, and 706.02-4 and
 ASTM C 76 (ASTM C 76M) Tables 2 through 5 have the number of samples selected as shown in the “Minimum
 Requirements for Sampling Materials” table for each size, class, and production lot (pipe of the same size and class
 made from the same materials and by the same process and approximately the same production date) for test.
 
 TABLE 706.02-2
 
 Minimum Amplitude of Stirrups [2]
 
 Circumferential Spacing on Inner Cage
 
 Longitudinal Spacing
 
 Number of Lines [1]
 
 Minimum Area per Support Element
 
 0.01-inch Crack D-Load 1350
 Ultimate Strength D-Load 2000
 Circular Reinforcement
 Internal
 Wall
 in Circular Pipe
 S-Stirrups
 Dia. of
 Thick(in²/ft of pipe)
 Pipe
 ness
 (inch)
 (inch) Inner Cage
 Outer Cage
 Reinforcing Steel 709.11 or 709.12 Only
 Concrete Strength, 4000 psi
 36
 4
 0.12
 0.09
 42
 4 1/2
 0.15
 0.11
 48
 5
 0.17
 0.12
 54
 5 1/2
 0.21
 0.16
 60
 6
 0.26
 0.20
 66
 6 1/2
 0.30
 0.21
 72
 7
 0.35
 0.24
 78
 7 1/2
 0.40
 0.27
 84
 8
 0.47
 0.30
 Reinforcing Steel 709.11 or 709.12 Only
 Concrete Strength, 5000 psi
 90
 8
 0.64
 0.35
 96
 8 1/2
 0.80
 0.40
 102
 8 1/2
 0.96
 0.44
 108
 9
 1.07
 0.47
 (in²)
 (inch) (inch) (inch)
 All Permitted Reinforcing Steel, Concrete Strength, 5000 psi
 114
 9 1/2
 0.69
 0.52
 0.041 5
 2
 6 1/8 6 5/8
 120
 10
 0.74
 0.55
 0.041 5
 2
 6 1/2 7 1/8
 126
 10 1/2
 0.79
 0.60
 0.041 5
 2
 6 7/8 7 5/8
 132
 11
 0.85
 0.64
 0.041 5
 2
 7 1/4 8 1/8
 144
 12
 0.97
 0.73
 0.041 5
 2
 8
 9 1/8
 [1]Number of lines in the table indicates the number of longitudinal lines required in each top and bottom portion
 of the pipe. The area of each support element in a pipe is two times the cross-sectional area of the S-stirrups
 wire used. There shall be an equal number of these lines of S-stirrups on either side of the mid-point of both the
 top and bottom of the pipe. See Figure 706.02-1.
 [2]The amplitude is the overall width of the line of stirrups.
 
 TABLE 706.02-2M
 
 Minimum Amplitude of Stirrups [2]
 
 Circumferential Spacing on Inner Cage
 
 Longitudinal Spacing
 
 Number of Lines [1]
 
 Minimum Area per Support Element
 
 0.3 mm Crack D-Load 65.0
 Ultimate Strength D-Load 100.0
 Circular Reinforcement
 Internal
 Wall
 in Circular Pipe
 S-Stirrups
 Dia. of
 Thick(cm²/m of pipe)
 Pipe
 ness
 (mm)
 (mm) Inner Cage
 Outer Cage
 Reinforcing Steel 709.11 or 709.12 Only
 Concrete Strength, 27.6 MPa
 900
 100
 2.5
 1.9
 1050
 113
 3.2
 2.3
 1200
 125
 3.6
 2.5
 1350
 138
 4.4
 3.4
 1500
 150
 5.5
 4.2
 1650
 163
 6.4
 4.4
 1800
 175
 7.4
 5.1
 1950
 188
 8.5
 5.7
 2100
 200
 9.9
 6.4
 Reinforcing Steel 709.11 or 709.12 Only
 Concrete Strength, 34.5 MPa
 2250
 200
 13.5
 7.4
 2400
 213
 16.9
 8.5
 2550
 213
 20.3
 9.3
 2700
 225
 22.6
 9.9
 (mm²)
 (mm) (mm)
 (mm)
 All Permitted Reinforcing Steel, Concrete Strength, 34.5 MPa
 2850
 238
 14.6
 11.0
 26
 5
 50
 156
 168
 3000
 250
 15.7
 11.6
 26
 5
 50
 165
 181
 3150
 263
 16.7
 12.7
 26
 5
 50
 175
 194
 3300
 275
 18.0
 13.5
 26
 5
 50
 184
 206
 3600
 300
 20.5
 15.5
 26
 5
 50
 203
 232
 [1]Number of lines in the table indicates the number of longitudinal lines required in each top and bottom portion
 of the pipe. The area of each support element in a pipe is two times the cross-sectional area of the S-stirrups
 wire used. There shall be an equal number of these lines of S-stirrups on either side of the mid-point of both the
 top and bottom of the pipe. See Figure 706.02-1M.
 [2]The amplitude is the overall width of the line of stirrups.
 
 TABLE 706.02-3
 
 Min. Amplitude of
 Stirrups [2]
 
 Circular Reinforcement
 in Circular Pipe
 (in²/ft of pipe)
 Inner Cage Outer Cage (in²)
 (inch)
 Concrete Strength, 5000 psi
 7 1/2
 0.69
 0.52
 0.029
 11
 2
 8
 0.74
 0.56
 0.029
 11
 2
 8
 0.85
 0.63
 0.031
 11
 2
 8 1/2
 0.91
 0.69
 0.034
 11
 2
 8 1/2
 1.02
 0.77
 0.041
 12
 2
 9
 1.07
 0.80
 0.045
 11
 2
 9 1/2
 1.02
 0.77
 0.048
 11
 2
 10
 1.10
 0.82
 0.051
 11
 2
 10 1/2
 1.17
 0.88
 0.055
 11
 2
 11
 1.25
 0.94
 0.058
 11
 2
 12
 1.42
 1.07
 0.065
 11
 2
 [1] and [2] Refer to footnotes in Table 706.02-2
 
 Circum. Spacing
 on Inner Cage
 
 Longitudinal
 Spacing
 
 Number of Lines [1]
 
 Internal
 Wall
 Dia. of
 ThickPipe
 ness
 (inch)
 (inch)
 78
 84
 90
 96
 102
 108
 114
 120
 126
 132
 144
 
 Ultimate Strength D-Load 3000
 S-Stirrups
 Minimum Area per
 Support Element
 
 0.01-inch Crack D-Load 2000
 
 (inch)
 
 (inch)
 
 4 1/8
 4 5/8
 4 5/8
 5 1/8
 5 1/8
 5 5/8
 6 1/8
 6 1/2
 6 7/8
 7 1/4
 8
 
 4 5/8
 5 1/8
 5 1/8
 5 5/8
 5 5/8
 6 1/8
 6 5/8
 7 1/8
 7 5/8
 8 1/8
 9 1/8
 
 TABLE 706.02-3M
 
 1950
 2100
 2250
 2400
 2550
 2700
 2850
 3000
 3150
 3300
 3600
 
 188
 200
 200
 213
 213
 225
 238
 250
 263
 275
 300
 
 Circular Reinforcement
 in Circular Pipe
 (cm²/m of pipe)
 Inner Cage Outer Cage (mm²)
 (mm) (mm)
 Concrete Strength, 34.5 MPa
 14.6
 11.0
 19
 11
 50
 105
 15.7
 11.9
 19
 11
 50
 117
 18.0
 13.3
 20
 11
 50
 117
 19.3
 14.6
 22
 11
 50
 130
 21.6
 16.3
 26
 12
 50
 130
 22.6
 16.9
 29
 11
 50
 143
 21.6
 16.3
 31
 11
 50
 156
 22.3
 17.4
 33
 11
 50
 165
 24.8
 18.6
 35
 11
 50
 175
 26.5
 19.9
 37
 11
 50
 184
 30.1
 22.6
 42
 11
 50
 203
 [1] and [2] Refer to footnotes in Table 706.02-2M
 
 Min. Amplitude of
 Stirrups [2]
 
 Circum. Spacing
 on Inner Cage
 
 Longitudinal
 Spacing
 
 Wall
 Thickness
 (mm)
 
 Number of Lines [1]
 
 Internal
 Dia. of
 Pipe
 (mm)
 
 Ultimate Strength D-Load 150
 S-Stirrups
 Minimum Area per
 Support Element
 
 0.3 mm Crack D-Load 100
 
 (mm)
 117
 130
 130
 143
 143
 156
 168
 181
 194
 206
 232
 
 TABLE 706.02-4
 
 Minimum Amplitude
 of Stirrups [2]
 
 Circum. Spacing
 on Inner Cage
 
 Longitudinal Spacing
 
 Number of Lines [1]
 
 Minimum Area per Support
 Element
 
 0.01-inch Crack D-Load 3000
 Ultimate Strength D-Load 3750
 S-Stirrups
 Circular
 Reinforcement
 Internal
 Wall
 in Circular Pipe
 Dia. of
 Thick(in²/ft of pipe)
 Pipe
 ness
 (inch)
 (inch) Inner Cage Outer Cage
 Concrete Strength, 6000 psi
 6
 1 3/4
 0.07
 -8
 1 3/4
 0.07
 -10
 1 3/4
 0.07
 -54
 5 1/2
 0.86
 0.62
 60
 6
 0.95
 0.68
 (in²)
 (inch) (inch) (inch)
 Concrete Strength, 5000 psi
 54
 5 1/2
 0.64
 0.48
 0.029
 15
 2
 2 1/8 2 5/8
 60
 6
 0.70
 0.53
 0.029
 14
 2
 2 5/8 3 1/8
 66
 6 1/2
 0.79
 0.59
 0.029
 13
 2
 3 1/8 3 5/8
 72
 7
 0.87
 0.66
 0.029
 12
 2
 3 5/8 4 1/8
 78
 7 1/2
 0.92
 0.69
 0.031
 11
 2
 4 1/8 4 5/8
 84
 8
 0.99
 0.74
 0.034
 11
 2
 4 5/8 5 1/8
 90
 8
 1.13
 0.85
 0.041
 11
 2
 4 5/8 5 1/8
 96
 8 1/2
 1.20
 0.90
 0.045
 11
 2
 5 1/8 5 5/8
 102
 8 1/2
 1.34
 1.00
 0.053
 11
 2
 5 1/8 5 5/8
 108
 9
 1.51
 1.13
 0.063
 11
 2
 5 5/8 6 1/8
 114
 9 1/2
 1.51
 1.13
 0.064
 11
 2
 6 1/8 6 5/8
 120
 10
 1.62
 1.21
 0.068
 11
 2
 6 1/2 7 1/8
 126
 10 1/2
 1.73
 1.30
 0.072
 11
 2
 6 7/8 7 5/8
 132
 11
 1.84
 1.38
 0.076
 11
 2
 7 1/4 8 1/8
 144
 12
 2.09
 1.57
 0.085
 11
 2
 8
 9 1/8
 [1] and [2] Refer to footnotes in Table 706.02-2
 
 1350
 1500
 1650
 1800
 1950
 2100
 2250
 2400
 2550
 2700
 2850
 3000
 3150
 3200
 3600
 
 Circum. Spacing
 on Inner Cage
 
 Longitudinal Spacing
 
 Number of Lines [1]
 
 150
 200
 250
 1350
 1500
 
 Minimum Area per Support
 Element
 
 Internal
 Dia. of
 Pipe
 (mm)
 
 0.3 mm Crack D-Load 140.0
 Ultimate Strength D-Load 175.0
 S-Stirrups
 Circular
 Reinforcement
 Wall
 in Circular Pipe
 Thick(cm²/m of pipe)
 ness
 (mm) Inner Cage Outer Cage
 Concrete Strength, 41.4 MPa
 44
 1.5
 -44
 1.5
 -44
 1.5
 -138
 18.2
 13.1
 150
 20.1
 14.4
 (mm²)
 (mm) (mm)
 Concrete Strength, 34.5 MPa
 138
 13.5
 10.2
 19
 15
 50
 54
 150
 14.8
 11.2
 19
 14
 50
 37
 163
 16.7
 12.5
 19
 13
 50
 79
 175
 18.4
 14.0
 19
 12
 50
 92
 188
 19.5
 14.6
 20
 11
 50
 105
 200
 21.0
 15.7
 22
 11
 50
 117
 200
 23.9
 18.0
 26
 11
 50
 117
 213
 25.4
 19.1
 29
 11
 50
 130
 213
 28.4
 21.2
 34
 11
 50
 130
 225
 32.0
 23.9
 41
 11
 50
 143
 238
 32.0
 23.9
 41
 11
 50
 156
 250
 34.3
 25.6
 44
 11
 50
 165
 263
 36.6
 27.5
 46
 11
 50
 175
 275
 38.9
 29.2
 49
 11
 50
 184
 300
 44.2
 33.2
 55
 11
 50
 203
 [1] and [2] Refer to footnotes in Table 706.02-2M
 
 Minimum Amplitude
 of Stirrups [2]
 
 TABLE 706.02-4M
 
 (mm)
 67
 79
 92
 105
 117
 130
 130
 143
 143
 156
 168
 181
 194
 206
 232
 
 11.1 Perform compression tests on cores according to ASTM C 497 (ASTM C 497M).
 11.3 Does not apply.
 12 Perform inspection at the project site. Obtain random samples from material delivered to the project site
 or at other locations designated by the Laboratory.
 16 Furnish materials from suppliers certified according to Supplement 1074.
 17 In addition, after the capital letter “D,” designate the D-load, the design wall thickness in millimeters
 (inches expressed as a decimal). Ensure that pipe with S-stirrups have the symbol “S”. Ensure that pipe requiring
 axis orientation without lift holes (i.e., stirrup pipe, quadrant reinforced pipe, elliptically reinforced pipe) has the
 centerline of the crown of the pipe marked inside and outside with the symbol “TB”. Mark pipe with quadrant
 steel with the symbol “Q”. Mark pipe with elliptical reinforcement with the symbol “E”. Mark pipe with deformed
 wire reinforcement required in the design with the symbol “DF”.
 706.03
 Reinforced Concrete Pipe, Epoxy Coated. Provide Type A reinforced concrete epoxy coated pipe
 conforming to 706.02 and Type B conforming to 706.04, with the following modification:
 In the plant, prepare the interior barrel and joint surface areas of the concrete pipe to remove all forms of oil,
 laitance, and other deleterious materials and then line them with a high-build, polyamide-cured, two-component
 coal tar epoxy coating, Military Specification DOD-P-23236A (SH). Spray the lining compound to obtain a
 continuous and relatively uniform and smooth lining with a minimum dry film thickness of 0.03 inch (760 µm).
 Ensure that all coated pipe are free of surface irregularities such as air bubbles, delamination, lumping, sagging,
 blistering, pinholing, or porosity, in the coating film.
 
 706.04
 Reinforced Concrete Elliptical Culvert, Storm Drain, and Sewer Pipe. Provide reinforced
 concrete elliptical culvert, storm drain, and sewer pipe conforming to ASTM C 507 (ASTM C 507M), with the
 following modifications:
 4.1 Delete Class HE-A. Table 706.04-1 includes additional design requirements.
 5.1 All materials, processes of manufacture, and finished pipe are subject to inspection and approval by the
 Department. When directed by the Laboratory, the manufacturer will cut holes in sections of the finished pipe for
 inspection.
 6.2.1
 
 Provide cement according to 701, except 701.07.
 
 6.2.2
 
 Provide fly ash according to 701.
 
 6.3 Provide aggregates conforming to the quality requirements of 703.02.
 6.5 Provide steel according 709.08, 709.10, 709.11, or 709.12.
 7.2 In addition, manufacture horizontal elliptical pipe HE-II and HE-III using the design requirements of
 Table 706.04-1.
 8.1 In addition, ensure that pipe made in accordance with 706.04-1 has three lines of reinforcement of elliptical
 shape. Place the outer and inner lines of reinforcement so that the nominal protective covering of the concrete over
 the reinforcement in the barrel of the pipe is 1 inch (25 mm) subject to the variations permitted in Section 12.5.
 Ensure that the third or middle line is in contact with and fastened securely to the inner line at the vertical axis of
 the pipe both top and bottom and to the outer line at the horizontal axis on both sides. Ensure that the length of the
 middle line is the average of the length of the inner and outer line. Ensure that the middle line is of an elliptical
 shape and runs smoothly between the specified points of contact with the inner and outer lines.
 10 Ensure that no more than two holes are cast, drilled, or otherwise neatly made in the shell of each piece
 of pipe for the purpose of handling or laying. Taper the holes unless drilled, and before backfilling, fill the tapered
 holes with portland cement mortar, precast concrete plugs secured with portland cement mortar, or a device on the
 Department’s Approved List specifically designed for filling the hole. Fill drilled holes with portland cement
 mortar.
 11.2 Select the specified number of pipe, as noted in the “Minimum Requirements for Sampling Materials”
 table, for the purpose of test at the plant and at random from the lot to be shipped or at the project site from the pipe
 delivered and that are pipe that would not otherwise be rejected under these Specifications. Test pipe according to
 Section 5.1.1 except the Laboratory may accept pipe 54 inches (1350 mm) and larger in diameter according to
 Section 5.1.2 and the following requirements:
 1. When pipe from a plant has been approved by the Laboratory for a specified design, pipe from the
 same plant with wall and steel area not less than the approved pipe may be approved by means of tests on cores
 verifying absorption, strength, wall, and steel area.
 2. When it has been established that two or more plants have complied with the above requirements for
 the class and size under consideration and the plant under consideration has established compliance with the above
 requirements for an adjacent size, and the wall and steel area are not less than the pipe tested at the two plants.
 11.3.1 Ensure that the load to produce a 0.01-inch (0.3 mm) crack and the ultimate load as determined by
 ASTM C 497 (ASTM C 497M) three-edge bearing method, is not less than shown in Tables 1, 2, and 706.04-1.
 The ultimate strength test may be waived when the test load on the pipe reaches 115 percent of the required 0.01inch (0.3 mm) crack D-load without developing a 0.01-inch (0.3 mm) or larger crack.
 11.4
 Perform compression tests for satisfying the minimum specified concrete strength requirement from
 cores drilled from the wall of the pipe. Ensure that the diameter of the core is such that the capped height to
 diameter or L/D ratio lies between one and two. Ensure that the cores are secured, prepared for testing, and tested
 by methods prescribed in the appropriate sections of ASTM C 497 (ASTM C 497M). Ensure that the compressive
 strength of each core tested is equal to or greater than the design strength of the concrete. If a core does not meet
 the required strength, test another core from the same pipe. If this core does not meet the required strength, the
 Department may reject the pipe. Make additional tests on other pipe to determine the acceptability of the lot. When
 
 the cores cut from a section of pipe successfully meet the strength test requirement, ensure that the core holes are
 plugged and sealed by the manufacturer in a manner such that the pipe section will meet all of the test requirements
 of these Specifications.
 11.9
 Does not apply.
 11.10
 
 Does not apply.
 
 14 Perform inspection at the project site. Obtain random samples from material delivered to the project site
 or at other locations designated by the laboratory.
 Ensure manufacturers of these materials are certified according to Supplement 1074.
 16 In addition, place the plant location on each pipe, and for pipe manufactured to design requirements of
 706.04-1 place the letter “A” after the pipe class. Ensure that the markings are legible and indented in the pipe
 section or painted on with waterproof paint.
 TABLE 706.04-1 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR
 HORIZONTAL ELLIPTICAL PIPE
 Minimum Reinforcement (in²/ft)
 HE-II
 HE-III
 D-Loads
 Rise (inch) Minimum Wall
 0.01 = 1000
 0.01 = 1350
 Equiv. Round
 Thickness
 
 Size (inch)
 Span (inch)
 (inch)
 Utl. = 1500
 Utl. = 2000
 78
 63 × 98
 8
 3 lines totaling 0.87 3 lines totaling 1.23
 84
 68 × 106
 8 1/2
 3 lines totaling 0.97 3 lines totaling 1.33
 90
 72 × 113
 9
 3 lines totaling 1.03 3 lines totaling 1.43
 96
 77 × 121
 9 1/2
 3 lines totaling 1.13 3 lines totaling 1.54
 102
 82 × 128
 9 3/4
 3 lines totaling 1.23 3 lines totaling 1.70
 108
 87 × 136
 10
 3 lines totaling 1.43 3 lines totaling 1.85
 The test load in lb/ft equals D-load × nominal inside span in feet. Concrete strength=5000 psi.
 TABLE 706.04-1M DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR
 HORIZONTAL ELLIPTICAL PIPE
 Minimum Reinforcement (cm²/m)
 HE-II
 HE-III
 Rise (mm)
 D-Loads
 Minimum Wall
 0.03 = 50.0
 0.03 = 65.0
 Equiv. Round
 
 Thickness
 Size (mm)
 Span (mm)
 (mm)
 Utl. = 75.0
 Utl. = 100.0
 1950
 200
 3 lines totaling 18.4 3 lines totaling 26.0
 1585  2495
 2100
 213
 3 lines totaling 20.5 3 lines totaling 28.2
 1705  2690
 2250
 225
 3 lines totaling 21.8 3 lines totaling 30.3
 1830  2880
 2400
 238
 3 lines totaling 23.9 3 lines totaling 32.6
 1950  3070
 2550
 244
 3 lines totaling 26.0 3 lines totaling 36.0
 2075  3265
 2700
 250
 3 lines totaling 30.3 3 lines totaling 39.2
 2195  3455
 The test load in kN/m equals D-load × nominal inside span in mm. Concrete strength=34.5 MPa.
 706.05
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box Sections. Provide precast reinforced concrete box section
 conforming to ASTM C 1577, with the following modifications:
 Ensure that manufacturers of precast concrete members are certified by the Laboratory according to Supplement
 1073.
 6.2.1
 
 Provide cement according to 701, except 701.07.
 
 6.2.2
 
 Provide fly ash according to 701.
 
 6.2.4.9 Provide Carbonate Micro-Fines according to 701.14 and Table 499.03-2.
 6.3 Provide aggregates conforming to the quality requirements of 703.02.
 6.5 Provide reinforcement according to 709.10 or 709.12. Provide longitudinal distribution reinforcement
 according to 709.01, 709.10 or 709.12.
 7.1 For the following box sizes, span by rise, refer to ASTM C1577: 8x4, 5, 6, 7; 10x5, 6, 7, 8, 9; and 12x4,
 6, 8, 10 feet. For the following box sizes, span by rise, refer to Supplemental Specification 940: 14x4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
 10; 16x4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10; 18x4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10; and 20x4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 feet.
 9.1 Provide hardened concrete that contains a minimum of 4 percent entrained air for wet-cast sections with
 spans less than 14 feet (4200 mm) and for all sections with spans 14 feet (4200 mm) and greater.
 9.4 Lift holes are not permitted. Use handling devices that do not require a hole through the box.
 10.1 Verify concrete strength using cylinders. Do not ship items before the design strength of the concrete is
 reached.
 11.5 A minimum cover of 1/2 inch (13 mm) over both circumferential and longitudinal reinforcement is
 required at the mating surfaces of joints.
 15
 In addition, mark the identification of the plant on each box section. For box sections 14 feet (4200 mm)
 or greater, mark the reinforcing steel areas for the section on each box section. Place the manufacturers’ name and
 required product information on the inside of the box section within the top one-half of the culvert.
 706.051 Precast Reinforced Concrete Three-Sided Flat Topped Culverts. Provide precast concrete threesided flat topped culverts according to ASTM C 1504, with the following modifications:
 Provide flat deck culvert structures with a minimum clear span (measured normal to the structure at the bottom
 of the haunch) of 14 feet (4200 mm) and a minimum opening rise (measured from bottom of leg to bottom of deck
 at the centerline of the structure) of 4 feet (1200 mm); and a maximum clear span of 34 feet (10,200 mm) and
 maximum opening rising of 10 feet (3000 mm). Ensure that the minimum wall and deck thicknesses is 10 inches
 (250 mm) and 12 inches (300 mm) respectively, measured under the haunch normal to the structure and at the
 centerline of the span measured perpendicular to the structure.
 Ensure manufacturers of precast concrete members are certified according to Supplement 1073.
 5. Ensure the manufacturer submits design calculations, a structural load rating and shop drawings according
 to 611.04. Ensure the shop drawings include the following:
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
 7.
 8.
 9.
 
 Load rate the structure according to the requirements of section 900 of the Department’s Bridge
 Design Manual.
 All material specifications.
 All plan view.
 All elevation view.
 All headwall and wingwall attachment requirements.
 All dimensions.
 All maintenance of traffic phases.
 All section sizes.
 All design handling strength.
 
 The manufacturer may modify an approved shop drawing and resubmit for approval to the Department.
 Ensure that the shop drawings also include the following special information as required:
 1. For top mounted guardrail, show the guardrail plate and bolt locations in the plan view. Ensure that
 holes are a minimum of 6 inches (150 mm) from a joint.
 2.
 6.2.1
 
 For side mounted guardrail, show additional reinforcing details according to the plan details.
 Provide cement according to 701, except 701.07.
 
 6.2.2
 
 Provide fly ash according to 701.13.
 
 6.2.4.9 Provide Carbonate Micro-Fines according to 701.14 and Table 499.03-2.
 6.3 Provide aggregates conforming to the quality requirements of 703.02.
 6.4 Use chemical admixtures according to 705.12. Use a corrosion inhibitor unless epoxy coated reinforcing
 steel is used. An Approved List of corrosion inhibiting admixtures is on file at the Laboratory. Manufacturers
 should recognize that the corrosion inhibitors and admixtures may have an effect on strength, entrained air content,
 workability, etc. of their concrete mixes. The manufacturers choice of one of these corrosion inhibitors does not
 alleviate meeting all design requirements of this structure.
 6.4.1
 Provide air-entraining admixture according to 705.10.
 6.5 Provide epoxy coated reinforcement according to 709.00, Grade 60 (Grade 420), or 709.14. In lieu of
 epoxy coated reinforcement, an approved corrosion inhibiting admixture may be added to the concrete at the
 approved dosage; and provide reinforcement according to 709.01, 709.03 or 709.05; Grade 60 (Grade 420) or
 709.08, 709.10, 709.11 or 709.12. Provide epoxy or galvanized coated connections when connecting a precast
 structural unit into a cast-in-place structural component or between segments of adjacent precast structural units
 either manufactured as separate units or across construction joints when manufactured as one unit. Provide epoxy
 coated reinforcement according to 709.00 or 709.14, when these connections are designed using reinforcing steel.
 Provide galvanized coatings according to 711.02, when these connections are designed using connection plates,
 hardware or concrete inserts.
 7.1 Design according to AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications, Section 12.14. Include a future
 wearing surface loading of 60 psf.
 7.2 Ensure that the concrete cover dimension over reinforcement is a minimum of 2 inches (50 mm) in the
 slab and in the exterior of the leg. Ensure that the interior of the leg reinforcement cover tapers from 1 inch (25
 mm) at the bottom of the leg to 2 inches (50 mm) at the bottom of the haunch.
 Ensure that the ends of longitudinal reinforcement have a minimum cover of 1/2 inch (13 mm), and spacers
 used to position the reinforcement are plastic or epoxy coated steel regardless of whether a corrosion inhibiting
 admixture is used.
 8 Ensure that the top slab is produced with a keyway joint. The keyway provides a void volume equivalent
 to that of 12 inches (300 mm) prestressed beam as per Standard Construction Drawing PSBD-2-07. Ensure that
 the joint in the leg sections is designed to produce a shear key or inter-locking joint. Ensure that non-adjoining
 outside legs are flat. Sandblast the joint surfaces to the satisfaction of the Department, or a 2000 pounds per square
 inch (14 MPa) water blast no more than 14 days prior to shipping. Ensure that the culvert is designed such that the
 sections when laid together will make a continuous line with a smooth interior free of appreciable irregularities, all
 compatible with the permissible variations of Section 11.
 9 Application of membrane waterproofing at any location other than the final location shown on the plans
 is prohibited.
 9.1 Ensure that the aggregate, cement, and water are manufactured in conformance with 499.06 and 499.07.
 Ensure that the temperature requirements of 511.08 and 511.15 are met.
 Ensure that the proportion of cementitious and carbonate micro-fines material is not less than 564 pounds
 per cubic yard (335 kg/m3) of concrete.
 If used, add the corrosion inhibitor as an aqueous solution. Consider the water in the solution as mixing
 water for the purpose of determining the w/c ratio of concrete.
 9.2 Cure the three-sided sections in the forms for the length of time required to obtain the specified minimum
 design handling strength as defined in the shop drawings. Test a cylinder to check each section’s design handling
 strength. Repeat this test as often as needed. Only one cylinder passing will ensure that the design handling
 strength has been met. If the shop drawing shows no design handling strengths, then the minimum handling
 strength is assumed to be 100 percent of the design strength. Ensure that the curing then continues either in or out
 of the forms until the specified minimum design strength is met.
 
 9.2.1
 Steam curing is an accelerated cure by low pressure steam or radiant heat within a suitable insulated
 enclosure to contain the live steam or heat. The initial application of the steam or heat is from two to four hours
 after the final placement of concrete to allow the initial set to take place. If retarders are used, increase the waiting
 period to 4 to 6 hours. As an alternative, determine the actual time of initial set according to ASTM C 403. Do
 not start curing until the actual time to initial set has elapsed.
 During the waiting period, ensure that the temperature within the curing enclosure is not less than 50 F
 (10 C).
 During the initial application of live steam or radiant heat, ensure that the ambient temperature within the
 curing enclosure increases at an average rate not exceeding 40 F (22 C) per hour until the curing temperature is
 reached.
 Ensure that the maximum curing temperature does not exceed 150 F (65 C). Hold the design
 temperature until the concrete has reached the desired design strength. Do not direct the application of live steam
 on the concrete forms so as to cause localized high temperatures.
 9.2.2
 
 Provide water curing according to 511.15 and 511.17, Method A.
 
 9.2.3
 
 Provide membrane curing according to 511.16, Method B.
 
 9.3 Ensure that all forms are in place until the design handling strength is met.
 9.4 Holes for handling or setting are not permitted. Do not move members before the design handling strength
 of the concrete is reached, or shipped before the design strength of the concrete is reached. Ensure that the
 manufacturers have equipment necessary to handle and transport the pieces without damaging them.
 10 Ensure that the hardened concrete contains a minimum of 4 percent entrained air.
 10.2.1 Keep the cylinders and matching culvert section together to guarantee the cylinders are matched with
 the corresponding culvert section; or, upon agreement by the Department, keep the cylinders at a location that will
 provide the same environment as the culvert sections.
 10.2.2 For each section of the culvert, produce and mark at least four cylinders so that they are identifiable
 with the matching culvert section.
 10.2.3 Conform to Supplement 1073 for acceptance.
 10.2.3.1 Ensure that cylinder strengths conform to Supplement 1073.
 10.4 Plug the core holes by using a concrete that is the same as that used in the section and cured in according
 to Section 9.2, or by a non-shrink grout that exceeds the concrete design strength.
 11 The design in the plan reflects the external top slab elevation of the structure. If the structure supplied has
 a deck thicker than the plan design, eliminate the difference between the design top slab elevation and the supplied
 top slab elevation by a reducing the leg length. The Department may approve alternate methods to eliminate the
 difference between the design top slab elevation and the supplied top slab elevation. The Department will not
 approve a change in the top slab elevation from that shown on the plans.
 The clear span shown is the minimum for the structure. The manufacturer may provide a clear span greater
 than that shown. Base the exact footer locations for both the elevation and offset on the manufacturer’s shop
 drawings. Ensure that these footer locations are such that the centerline of the leg at the bottom of the haunch
 matches the centerline of the footer.
 All changes to the project resulting from the manufacturer’s dimensional changes in the structure are at
 no charge to the Department.
 Ensure that the sections are free of fractures spalls and chips. Ensure that all surfaces have a smooth and
 regular finish being defined as a 1/4-inch variation within 4 feet (6 mm variation within 1.2 m).
 11.1 Ensure that the slab and walls are perpendicular with a diagonal difference of not more than 0.5 percent.
 Ensure that the length of each section is within 1/2 inch (13 mm) of the design length. Consider the length
 is the average of the length measured at each side and at the middle of the three-sided section.
 
 11.4 Ensure that the maximum variation in the position of the reinforcement is 3/8 inch (9 mm), except that the
 cover over the reinforcement for the external surface of the top slab is not less than 2 inches (50 mm). The above
 tolerances or cover requirements do not apply to mating surfaces at the joint.
 11.5 Resubmit any change in reinforcement from the shop drawings for approval.
 12 Make repairs according to the Department’s requirements. The Department will not make additional
 payments for culvert repairs. Repairs are acceptable if, in the opinion of the Department, the repairs are sound,
 properly finished, and cured.
 13 Perform inspection at the project site.
 Furnish precast concrete components from suppliers certified according to Supplement 1073.
 14 Form seams and slight surface irregularities that are expected from a wood panel forming system will not
 be cause for rejection. In addition, hairline cracks less than 0.01 inch (0.25 mm) are not cause for rejection.
 15.1 Ensure that the location of the product marking is on the interior of the three-sided section 1 foot (300
 mm) below the leg haunch.
 Add the product marking upon removal of the forms.
 The manufacturer may be required to repeat the product markings before the project is final.
 706.052 Precast Reinforced Concrete Arch Sections. Provide precast reinforced concrete arch sections
 according to ASTM C 1504, with the following modifications:
 This item shall consist of manufacturing precast reinforced concrete arch sections for culverts.
 Ensure that manufacturers of precast concrete members are certified according to Supplement 1073.
 5 Ensure the manufacturer submits design calculations, a structural load rating and shop drawings according
 to 611.04. Ensure the shop drawings include the following:
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
 7.
 8.
 9.
 
 Load rate the structure according to the requirements of section 900 of the Department’s Bridge
 Design Manual.
 All material specifications.
 All plan view.
 All elevation view.
 All headwall and wingwall attachment requirements.
 All dimensions.
 All maintenance of traffic phases.
 All section sizes.
 All design handling strength.
 
 The manufacturer may modify an approved shop drawing and resubmit for approval to the Department.
 Ensure that the shop drawings also include the following special information as required:
 1.
 2.
 
 For top mounted guardrail, the guardrail plate and bolt locations are shown in the plan view. Holes
 shall be a minimum of 6 inches (150 mm) from a joint.
 The corrosion inhibitor being used, if any, and dosage rate. Dosage rate will be approved by the
 Laboratory.
 
 6.2.1
 
 Provide cement according to 701, except 701.07.
 
 6.2.2
 
 Provide fly ash according to 701.13.
 
 6.2.4.9 Provide Carbonate Micro-Fines according to 701.14 and Table 499.03-2.
 6.3 Provide aggregates conforming to the quality requirements of 703.02.
 
 6.4 Use chemical admixtures according to 705.12. Use a corrosion inhibitor unless epoxy coated reinforcing
 steel is used. An Approved List of corrosion inhibiting admixtures is on file at the Laboratory. Manufacturers
 should recognize that the corrosion inhibitors and admixtures may have an effect on strength, entrained air content,
 workability, etc. of their concrete mixes. The manufacturers choice of one of these corrosion inhibitors does not
 alleviate meeting all design requirements of this structure.
 6.4.1 Provide air-entraining admixture according to 705.10.
 6.5 Provide epoxy coated reinforcement according to 709.00, Grade 60 (Grade 420), or 709.14. In lieu of
 epoxy coated reinforcement, an approved corrosion inhibiting admixture may be added to the concrete at the
 approved dosage; and provide reinforcement according to 709.01, 709.03 or 709.05; Grade 60 (Grade 420) or
 709.08, 709.10, 709.11 or 709.12. Provide epoxy or galvanized coated connections when connecting a precast
 structural unit into a cast-in-place structural component or between segments of adjacent precast structural units
 either manufactured as separate units or across construction joints when manufactured as one unit. Provide epoxy
 coated reinforcement according to 709.00 or 709.14, when these connections are designed using reinforcing steel.
 Provide galvanized coatings according to 711.02, when these connections are designed using connection plates,
 hardware or concrete inserts.
 7.1 Design according to AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications , Section 12.14. Include a future
 wearing surface loading of 60 psf.
 7.2 Ensure that the concrete cover dimension over the outside circumferential reinforcement is a minimum of
 2 inches (50 mm). Ensure that the concrete cover dimension over the inside circumferential reinforcement is a
 minimum of 1 1/2 inches (38 mm). The clear distance of the end circumferential wires shall not be less than 1 inch
 (25 mm) nor more than 2 inches (50 mm) from the ends of the sections. Reinforcement shall be assembled utilizing
 single or multiple layers of welded wire fabric (three-layer maximum), or utilizing a single layer of deformed billetsteel bars. The welded wire fabric shall be composed of circumferential and longitudinal wires and shall contain
 sufficient longitudinal wires extending through the section to maintain the shape and position of reinforcement.
 Longitudinal distribution reinforcement may be welded wire fabric or deformed billet-steel bars. The ends of the
 longitudinal distribution reinforcement shall be not more than 3 inches (75 mm) from the ends of the sections.
 The outside and inside circumferential reinforcing steel for the corners of the culvert shall be bent to such
 an angle that it is approximately equal to the configuration of the culverts outside corner.
 7.3 Tension splices in the circumferential reinforcement shall not be made. For splices other than tension
 splices, the overlap shall be a minimum of 12 inches (300 mm) for welded wire fabric or deformed billet steel bars.
 The spacing center-to-center of the circumferential wires in a wire fabric sheet shall be not less than 2 inches (50
 mm) or more than 4 inches (100 mm). For the wire fabric, the spacing center-to-center of the longitudinal wire
 shall not be more than 8 inches (200 mm). The spacing center-to-center of the longitudinal distribution steel for
 either line of reinforcing in the top slab shall be not more than 16 inches (410 mm).
 8.1 Ensure the sections are produced with butt ends. The ends of the sections shall be such that when the
 sections are laid together they will make a continuous line of sections with a smooth interior free of appreciable
 irregularities, all compatible with the permissible variations in these Specifications. Provide a chamfer on the
 outside surface at the sections joint to form a void for a 7/8  1 3/8-inch (24  34 mm) flexible plastic gasket
 706.14.
 9 Application of membrane waterproofing on the arch section at any location other than the final location
 shown on the plans is prohibited.
 9.1 Ensure that the aggregate, cement, and water are manufactured according to 499.06 and 499.07.
 Ensure that the temperature requirements of 511.08 and 511.15 are met.
 Ensure that the proportion of cementitious and carbonate micro-fines material is not less than 564 pounds
 per cubic yard (335 kg/m3) of concrete.
 If used, add the corrosion inhibitor as an aqueous solution. Consider the water in the solution as mixing
 water for the purpose of determining the water-cement ratio of concrete.
 
 9.2 Cure the arch sections in the forms for the length of time required to obtain the specified minimum design
 handling strength as defined in the shop drawings. Test a cylinder to check each section’s design handling strength.
 Repeat this test as often as needed. Only one cylinder passing will ensure that the design handling strength has
 been met. If the shop drawing shows no design handling strengths, then the minimum handling strength is assumed
 to be 100 percent of the design strength. Ensure that the curing then continues either in or out of the forms until
 the specified minimum design strength is met.
 9.2.1
 Steam curing is an accelerated cure by low pressure steam or radiant heat within a suitable insulated
 enclosure to contain the live steam or heat. The initial application of the steam or heat is from 2 to 4 hours after
 the final placement of concrete to allow the initial set to take place. If retarders are used, increase the waiting
 period to 4 to 6 hours. As an alternative, determine the actual time of initial set according to ASTM C 403. Do
 not start curing until the actual time to initial set has elapsed.
 (10 C).
 
 During the waiting period, ensure that the temperature within the curing enclosure is not less than 50 F
 
 During the initial application of live steam or radiant heat, ensure that the ambient temperature within the
 curing enclosure increases at an average rate not exceeding 40 F (22 C) per hour until the curing temperature is
 reached.
 Ensure that the maximum curing temperature does not exceed 150 F (65 C). Hold the design
 temperature until the concrete has reached the desired design strength. Do not direct the application of live steam
 on the concrete forms so as to cause localized high temperatures.
 9.2.2
 
 Provide water curing according to 511.15 and 511.17, Method A.
 
 9.3 Ensure that all forms are in place until the design handling strength is met.
 Holes for handling or setting are not permitted. Do not move members before the design handling strength
 of the concrete is reached, or shipped before the design strength of the concrete is reached. Ensure that the
 manufacturers have equipment necessary to handle and transport the pieces without damaging them.
 10 Ensure that the hardened concrete contains a minimum of 4 percent entrained air.
 10.2.1 Keep the cylinders and matching culvert section together to guarantee the cylinders are matched with
 the corresponding culvert section; or, upon agreement by the Department, keep the cylinders at a location that will
 provide the same environment as the culvert sections.
 10.2.2 For each section of the culvert, produce and mark at least four cylinders so that they are identifiable
 with the matching culvert section.
 10.2.3 Conform to Supplement 1073 for acceptance.
 10.2.3.1 Ensure that cylinder strengths conform to Supplement 1073.
 10.4 Plug the core holes by using a concrete that is the same as that used in the section and cured according to
 Section 9.2, or by a non-shrink grout that exceeds the concrete design strength.
 11.0 The under-run in length of a section shall not be more than 1/2 inch (13 mm).
 All changes to the project resulting from the manufacturer’s dimensional changes in the structure are at
 no charge to the Department.
 Ensure that the sections are free of fractures spalls and chips. Ensure that all surfaces have a smooth and
 regular finish being defined as a 1/4 inch variation within 4 feet (6 mm variation within 1.2 m).
 11.1 The internal dimensions shall vary not more than 1 percent from the design dimensions or more than 38
 mm (1 1/2 inches), whichever is less. The haunch dimensions shall vary not more than 19 mm (3/4 inch) from the
 design dimension.
 11.4 Ensure that the maximum variation in the position of the reinforcement is 3/8 inch (9 mm), except that the
 cover over the reinforcement for the external surface of the top slab is not less than 2 inches (50 mm). The above
 tolerances or cover requirements do not apply to mating surfaces at the joint.
 
 11.5 Resubmit any change in reinforcement from the shop drawings for approval.
 12.0 Make repairs according to the Department’s requirements. The Department will not make additional
 payments for culvert repairs. Repairs are acceptable if, in the opinion of the Department, the repairs are sound,
 properly finished, and cured.
 13.0 Perform inspection at the project site.
 Furnish precast concrete components from suppliers certified according to Supplement 1073.
 14.0 Form seams and slight surface irregularities that are expected from a wood panel forming system will not
 be cause for rejection. In addition, hairline cracks less than 0.01 inch (0.25 mm) will not be cause for rejection.
 15.1 Ensure that the location of the product marking is on the interior of the arch section 1 foot (300 mm) below
 the leg haunch.
 Add the product marking upon removal of the forms.
 The manufacturer may be required to repeat the product markings before the project is final.
 706.053
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Round Sections. Provide precast reinforced concrete elliptical and
 circular arch sections according to ASTM C 1504, with the following modifications:
 This item shall consist of manufacturing precast reinforced concrete elliptical and circular arch sections for
 culverts.
 Ensure that manufacturers of precast concrete members are certified according to Supplement 1073.
 5. Ensure the manufacturer submits design calculations, a structural load rating and shop drawings according
 to 611.04. Ensure the shop drawings include the following:
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
 7.
 8.
 9.
 
 Load rate the structure according to the requirements of section 900 of the Department’s Bridge
 Design Manual.
 All material specifications.
 Plan view.
 Elevation views.
 Headwall and wingwall attachment requirements.
 Dimensions.
 All maintenance of traffic phases.
 Section sizes.
 Design handling strength.
 
 The manufacturer may modify an approved shop drawing and resubmit for approval to the Department.
 Ensure that the shop drawings also include the following special information as required:
 1.
 2.
 
 For top mounted guardrail, the guardrail plate and bolt locations are shown in the plan view. Holes
 shall be a minimum of 6 inches (150 mm) from a joint.
 The corrosion inhibitor being used, if any, and dosage rate. Dosage rate will be approved by the
 Laboratory.
 
 6.2.1
 
 In addition, provide cement according to 701, except 701.07.
 
 6.2.2
 
 Provide fly ash conforming to 701.13.
 
 6.2.4.9 Provide Carbonate Micro-Fines according to 701.14 and Table 499.03-2.
 6.3 Provide aggregates conforming to the quality requirements of 703.02.
 6.4 Use chemical admixtures conforming to 705.12. Use a corrosion inhibitor unless epoxy coated reinforcing
 steel is used. An Approved List of corrosion inhibiting admixtures is on file at the Laboratory. Manufacturers
 should recognize that the corrosion inhibitors and admixtures may have an effect on strength, entrained air content,
 
 workability, etc. of their concrete mixes. The manufacturer’s choice of one of these corrosion inhibitors does not
 alleviate meeting all design requirements of this structure.
 6.4.1
 
 Provide air-entraining admixture conforming to 705.10.
 
 6.5 Provide epoxy coated reinforcement according to 709.00, Grade 60 (Grade 420), or 709.14. In lieu of
 epoxy coated reinforcement, an approved corrosion inhibiting admixture may be added to the concrete at the
 approved dosage; and provide reinforcement according to 709.01, 709.03 or 709.05; Grade 60 (Grade 420) or
 709.08, 709.10, 709.11 or 709.12. Provide epoxy or galvanized coated connections when connecting a precast
 structural unit into a cast-in-place structural component or between segments of adjacent precast structural units
 either manufactured as separate units or across construction joints when manufactured as one unit. Provide epoxy
 coated reinforcement according to 709.00 or 709.14, when these connections are designed using reinforcing steel.
 Provide galvanized coatings according to 711.02, when these connections are designed using connection plates,
 hardware or concrete inserts.
 7.1 Modify the first sentence as follows: Design according to AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications ,
 Section 12.14. Include a future wearing surface loading of 60 psf.
 7.2 Ensure that the concrete cover dimension over the outside circumferential reinforcement is a minimum of
 2 inches (50 mm). Ensure that the concrete cover dimension over the inside circumferential reinforcement is a
 minimum of 1 1/2 inches (38 mm). The clear distance of the end circumferential wires shall not be less than 1 inch
 (25 mm) nor more than 2 inches (50 mm) from the ends of the sections. Reinforcement shall be assembled utilizing
 single or multiple layers of welded wire fabric (three-layer maximum), or utilizing a single layer of deformed billetsteel bars. The welded wire fabric shall be composed of circumferential and longitudinal wires and shall contain
 sufficient longitudinal wires extending through the section to maintain the shape and position of reinforcement.
 Longitudinal distribution reinforcement may be welded wire fabric or deformed billet-steel bars. The ends of the
 longitudinal distribution reinforcement shall be not more than 3 inches (75 mm) from the ends of the sections.
 Form the outside and inside circumferential reinforcing steel for the arch such that it is approximately
 equal to the configuration of the arch shape.
 7.3 In addition, tension splices in the circumferential reinforcement shall not be made. For splices other than
 tension splices, the overlap shall be a minimum of 12 inches (300 mm) for welded wire fabric or deformed billet
 steel bars. The spacing center-to-center of the circumferential wires in a wire fabric sheet shall be not less than 2
 inches (50 mm) or more than 4 inches (100 mm). For the wire fabric, the spacing center-to-center of the longitudinal
 wire shall not be more than 8 inches (200 mm). The spacing center-to-center of the longitudinal distribution steel
 for either line of reinforcing in the top slab shall be not more than 16 inches (410 mm).
 8.1 Ensure the sections are produced with butt ends. The ends of the sections shall be such that when the
 sections are laid together they will make a continuous line of sections with a smooth interior free of appreciable
 irregularities, all compatible with the permissible variations in these Specifications and section 11 of ASTM C
 1504. Provide a 3/4 × 3/4 inch (19 × 19 mm) minimum chamfer on the inside and outside surface at the sections
 joint.
 Ensure that the design of the arch in its final constructed location is structurally continuous throughout the arch
 unit providing for flexural, compressive and shear force transfers. For arches that gain structural continuity by a
 cast in place closure at the project site, provide concrete with the same compressive strength as the precast arch. In
 addition, the cast in place closure shall provide continuity in the transverse direction (90 degrees to the span) along
 the lay length of the arches.
 9.1 Ensure that the aggregate, cement, and water are manufactured according to 499.06 and 499.07.
 Ensure that the temperature requirements of 511.08 and 511.15 are met.
 Ensure that the proportion of cementitious and carbonate micro-fines material is not less than 564 pounds
 per cubic yard (335 kg/m³) of concrete.
 If used, add the corrosion inhibitor as an aqueous solution. Consider the water in the solution as mixing
 water for the purpose of determining the water-cement ratio of concrete.
 
 9.2 Cure the arch sections in the forms for the length of time required to obtain the specified minimum design
 handling strength as defined in the shop drawings. Test a cylinder to check each section’s design handling strength.
 Repeat this test as often as needed. Only one cylinder passing will ensure that the design handling strength has been
 met. If the shop drawing shows no design handling strengths, then the minimum handling strength is assumed to
 be 100 percent of the design strength. Ensure that the curing then continues either in or out of the forms until the
 specified minimum design strength is met.
 9.2.1
 Steam curing is an accelerated cure by low pressure steam or radiant heat within a suitable insulated
 enclosure to contain the live steam or heat. The initial application of the steam or heat is from 2 to 4 hours after the
 final placement of concrete to allow the initial set to take place. If retarders are used, increase the waiting period to
 4 to 6 hours. As an alternative, determine the actual time of initial set according to ASTM C 403. Do not start
 curing until the actual time to initial set has elapsed.
 During the waiting period, ensure that the temperature within the curing enclosure is not less than 50 °F
 (10 °C).
 During the initial application of live steam or radiant heat, ensure that the ambient temperature within the
 curing enclosure increases at an average rate not exceeding 40 °F (22 °C) per hour until the curing temperature is
 reached.
 Ensure that the maximum curing temperature does not exceed 150 °F (65 °C). Hold the design temperature
 until the concrete has reached the desired design strength. Do not direct the application of live steam on the concrete
 forms so as to cause localized high temperatures.
 9.2.2
 
 Provide water curing according to 511.15 and 511.17, Method A.
 
 9.3 Ensure that all forms are in place until the design handling strength is met.
 Holes for handling or setting are not permitted. Do not move members before the design handling strength
 of the concrete is reached, or shipped before the design strength of the concrete is reached. Ensure that the
 manufacturers have equipment necessary to handle and transport the pieces without damaging them.
 10 Ensure that the hardened concrete contains a minimum of 4 percent entrained air.
 10.1 Cores drilled from the section are not permitted.
 10.2.1 Keep the cylinders and matching arch section together to guarantee the cylinders are matched with
 the corresponding culvert section; or, upon agreement by the Department, keep the cylinders at a location that will
 provide the same environment as the arch sections.
 10.2.2 For each section of the arch structure, produce and mark at least four cylinders so that they are
 identifiable with the matching arch section.
 10.2.3
 
 Conform to Supplement 1073 for acceptance.
 
 10.2.3.1 Ensure that cylinder strengths conform to Supplement 1073.
 11.0 The under-run in length of a section shall not be more than 1/2 inch (13 mm).
 All changes to the project resulting from the manufacturer’s dimensional changes in the structure are at
 no charge to the Department.
 Ensure that the sections are free of fractures spalls and chips. Ensure that all surfaces have a smooth and
 regular finish being defined as a 1/4 inch variation within 4 feet (6 mm variation within 1.2 m).
 11.1 The internal dimensions shall vary not more than 1 percent from the design dimensions or more than 1 1/2
 inches (38 mm), whichever is less. The haunch dimensions shall vary not more than 3/4 inch (19 mm) from the
 design dimension.
 11.4 Ensure that the maximum variation in the position of the reinforcement is 3/8 inch (9 mm), except that the
 cover over the reinforcement for the external surface of the top is not less than 2 inches (50 mm). The above
 tolerances or cover requirements do not apply to mating surfaces at the joint.
 11.5 Resubmit any change in reinforcement from the shop drawings for approval.
 
 11.6 All interior and exterior arch surfaces shall have a smooth steel form finish.
 12.0 Make repairs according to the Department’s requirements. The Department will not make additional
 payments for arch repairs. Repairs are acceptable if, in the opinion of the Department, the repairs are sound,
 properly finished, and cured.
 13.0 The Department may perform inspection at the plant conforming to Supplement 1073 but final inspection
 and acceptance will be at the project site.
 Furnish precast concrete components from suppliers certified according to Supplement 1073.
 14.0 Form seams and slight surface irregularities that are expected from a steel panel forming system will not
 be cause for rejection. In addition, hairline cracks less than 0.01 inch (0.25 mm) will not be cause for rejection.
 15.1 Ensure that the location of the product marking is on the interior of the arch section 4 feet (1.2 m) above
 the base of the arch. Measure the 4 feet (1.2 m) from the base of the arch along the circumference of the interior
 surface.
 Add the product marking upon removal of the forms.
 The manufacturer may be required to repeat the product markings before the project is final.
 706.06
 Perforated Concrete Pipe. Provide perforated concrete pipe according to ASTM C 444 (ASTM C
 444M), and 706.01 or 706.02.
 Ensure manufacturers providing materials are certified according to Supplement 1074.
 706.07
 Concrete Drain Tile. Provide extra-quality concrete drain tile according to ASTM C 412 (ASTM C
 412M), with the following modifications:
 Ensure manufacturers providing materials are certified according to Supplement 1074.
 4.0 This specification covers extra-quality concrete drain tile only.
 5.1(3) Does not apply.
 6.2.1
 
 Provide cement according to 701, except 701.07.
 
 6.2.2
 
 Provide fly ash according to 701.13
 
 6.3 Provide aggregate conforming to the quality requirements of 703.02.
 8.1 Perform inspection at the project site. Obtain random samples from material delivered to the project site
 or at other locations designated by the Laboratory. Ensure manufacturers providing materials are certified
 according to Supplement 1074.
 Testing. Ensure that the manufacturer furnishes all facilities and personnel to carry out the tests.
 706.08
 Vitrified Clay Pipe. Provide vitrified clay pipe according to ASTM C 700, with the following
 modifications:
 14.0 Perform all tests except hydrostatic according to ASTM C 301.
 15.0 Perform inspection at the project site. Obtain random samples from material delivered to the project site
 or at other locations designated by the Laboratory.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 706.09
 Clay Drain Tile. Provide extra-quality clay drain tile according to ASTM C 4, with the following
 modifications:
 6.1 Perform inspection at the project site. Obtain random samples from material delivered to the project site
 or at other locations designated by the Laboratory.
 11, 12, and 13 Ensure that the manufacturer furnishes all facilities and personnel to carry out the tests.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 
 706.10
 Bituminous Pipe Joint Filler. Provide cold applied, mineral filled, joint sealing compound for joints
 of bell and spigot, or tongue and groove sewer; or drain pipe conforming to the following:
 A. Composition. Provide a steam-refined petroleum asphalt or a refined coal tar, dissolved in a suitable solvent,
 and containing an appropriate stiffener.
 B. General Requirement. Provide a bituminous plastic cement that has a smooth, uniform mixture, not
 thickened or livered, and that shows a separation easily overcome by stirring. Ensure that the material is of such
 consistency and properties that it is readily applied with a trowel, a putty knife, or with a caulking gun without
 pulling or drawing. Provide a material that when applied to metal, concrete, or vitrified clay surfaces, exhibits
 good adhesive and cohesive properties and has only slight shrinkage after curing. Provide a material that is not
 damaged by exposure to below freezing temperatures.
 C. Detail Requirements. Provide materials conforming to the following requirements:
 1.
 
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 
 When applied in a layer 1/16 to 1/8-inch (1.6 to 3.2 mm) thick on a tinned metal
 panel and cured at room temperature for 24 hours, the bituminous plastic
 cement shall set to a tough, plastic coating, free from blisters.
 Minimum Maximum
 Grease Cone Penetration (unworked, 150 grams, 25
 175
 250
 C, 5 sec, ASTM D 217, mm/10
 Weight, kg/L
 1.17
 -75
 -Non-volatile, 10 g, 105 to 110 C, 24 hrs, %
 Ash, by ignition, %
 25
 45
 
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 706.11
 Resilient and Flexible Gasket Joints. Provide resilient and flexible gasket joints for concrete pipe
 according to ASTM C 443 (ASTM C 443M).
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 706.12
 Resilient and Flexible Joints. Provide resilient and flexible joints for vitrified clay pipe according
 to ASTM C 425.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 706.13
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Manhole Riser Sections, Flat Slab Tops, Catch Basins and Inlet
 Tops, and Portable Barriers. Provide precast reinforced concrete manhole riser sections, flat slab tops, catch
 basins and inlet tops, and portable barriers according to ASTM C 478 (ASTM C 478M), with the following
 modifications:
 1.1 Provide precast catch basin tops where permitted by the plans.
 4.1.2.1 Provide cement according to 701, except 701.07.
 4.1.2.2 Provide fly ash according to 701.13.
 4.1.4 Provide aggregate conforming to the quality requirements of 703.02.
 4.1.6 Provide steel according to 709.01, 709.08, 709.10, or 709.12. Provide epoxy coated steel according to
 709.00 for the manhole flat slab tops, catch basin tops and inlet tops only.
 7.0 Ensure that no more than two holes are cast, drilled, or otherwise neatly made in the shell of each piece of
 each riser section for the purpose of handling or laying. Taper the holes unless drilled, and before backfilling fill
 the tapered holes with portland cement mortar, precast concrete plugs secured with portland cement mortar, or a
 device on the Department’s Approved List specifically designed for filling the hole. Fill drilled holes with portland
 cement mortar.
 8.2.2
 
 Absorption test does not apply
 
 10.0 Perform inspection at the project site.
 
 11.0 In addition, mark the plant location on each manhole top or barrier section.
 Ensure manufacturers providing materials are certified according to Supplement 1073
 Ensure structures that have a span of 10 feet or greater and are located under the traveled way, including the
 treated shoulder width, are designed in accordance with the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications. Have
 competent individuals prepare and check the shop drawings. Provide a cover sheet containing the preparer(s) and
 checker(s): First Name, Last Name, Initials and Content Responsibility. Preparer(s) and checker(s) shall initial each
 sheet for their content responsibility. The preparer(s) and checker(s) shall not be the same individual. Have an Ohio
 Registered Engineer review, approve, sign, seal and date the shop drawing cover sheet or submittal letter according
 to ORC 4733 and OAC 4733-35. Provide a load rating report in accordance with the ODOT Bridge Design Manual.
 706.14
 Preformed Flexible Joint Sealant. Provide preformed flexible joint sealant for concrete conduit
 according to ASTM C 990.
 Furnish materials according to the Department's QPL.
 706.15
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Outlets. Provide precast reinforced concrete outlets composed of
 cement conforming to 701, except 701.07. Provide aggregate conforming to the quality requirements of 703.02.
 Provide epoxy coated steel reinforcement conforming to 709.00. Do not provide holes for handling or laying.
 Ensure that the outlet hole are the same size as the outlet pipe. Perform inspection at the project site.
 Ensure manufacturers providing materials are certified according to Supplement 1073.
 
 707 STEEL, ALUMINUM, AND PLASTIC PIPE
 707.00
 Acceptance. Corrugated metal pipe conforming to 707.01, 707.02, 707.03, 707.04, 707.05, 707.07,
 707.11, 707.12, 707.13, 707.14, 707.15, 707.21, 707.22, 707.23, 707.24, and 707.25 may be accepted for shipment
 to and immediate use in construction projects when provided from suppliers certified according to Supplement
 1019.
 707.01
 Metallic Coated Corrugated Steel Conduits and Underdrains. Provide conduits and underdrains
 having a corrugation depth of 1/2 or 1/4 inch (13 or 6.5 mm) and according to AASHTO M 36/M 36M, with the
 following modifications:
 7.7.1
 Helical corrugated pipe, 12-inch (300 mm) diameter and larger, shall have at least two annular
 corrugations at each end of each pipe length.
 8.1.2
 
 Ensure that the minimum wall thickness (coated) of steel pipe and pipe-arches is as follows:
 Diameter
 (inch)
 6
 8
 10
 12
 15
 18
 21
 24
 27
 30
 33
 36
 42
 48
 54
 60
 66
 72
 78
 84
 
 Pipe
 Wall Thickness
 (inch)
 0.052
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.109
 0.109
 0.138
 0.138
 0.168
 0.168
 
 Size
 (inch)
 
 Pipe-Arch
 Wall Thickness
 (inch)
 
 17  13
 21  15
 24  18
 28  20
 
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 
 35  24
 
 0.064
 
 42  29
 49  33
 57  38
 64  43
 71  47
 77  52
 83  57
 
 0.064
 0.079
 0.109
 0.109
 0.138
 0.168
 0.168
 
 Diameter
 (mm)
 150
 200
 250
 300
 375
 450
 525
 600
 675
 750
 825
 900
 1050
 1200
 1350
 1500
 1650
 1800
 1950
 2100
 
 Pipe
 Wall Thickness
 (mm)
 1.32
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 2.77
 2.77
 3.51
 3.51
 4.27
 4.27
 
 Size
 (mm)
 
 Pipe-Arch
 Wall Thickness
 (mm)
 
 430  340
 530  380
 610  460
 710  510
 
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 
 885  610
 
 1.63
 
 1060  740
 1240  840
 1440  970
 1620  1100
 1800  1200
 1950  1320
 2100  1450
 
 1.63
 2.01
 2.77
 2.77
 3.51
 3.51
 4.27
 
 Ensure that the minus tolerance conforms to AASHTO M 218, M 274, or M 289.
 TABLE 707.01-1 PIPE REQUIREMENTS
 Nominal Inside
 Diameter
 (inch)
 (mm)
 27
 675
 33
 825
 
 Corrugation Depth
 Nominal
 (inch)
 (mm)
 1/2
 13
 1/2
 13
 
 Minimum
 Width of Lap
 (inch)
 (mm)
 2
 50
 2
 50
 
 8.3.2.1 Ensure that the minimum number of longitudinal rows of perforations is four.
 9.1 Coupling bands shall have annular corrugations.
 9.2 Ensure that coupling bands are not more than two nominal sheet thicknesses thinner than the thickness of
 the pipe to be connected. For pipes 48-inch (1200 mm) diameter and smaller, ensure that the coupling band is not
 thinner than the 0.052-inch (1.32 mm) nominal sheet thickness. For pipes 54-inch (1350 mm) diameter through
 84-inch (2100 mm) diameter, ensure that the coupling band is not thinner than the 0.064-inch (1.63 mm) nominal
 sheet thickness. For pipe diameters over 36 inches (900 mm), provide coupling bands that have at least one annular
 corrugation that indexes into the inboard corrugation of each pipe section joined.
 707.02
 Metallic Coated Corrugated Steel Conduits [1-inch (25 mm) Corrugations]. Provide conduits
 according to AASHTO M 36/M 36M, with the following modifications:
 7.7.1
 
 Helical corrugated pipe shall have at least two annual corrugations at each end of each pipe length.
 
 8.1.2
 
 Ensure that the minimum wall thickness (coated) of steel pipe and pipe-arches is as follows:
 Diameter
 (inch)
 36
 42
 48
 54
 60
 66
 72
 78
 84
 90
 96
 102
 108
 114
 120
 
 Pipe
 Wall Thickness
 (inch)
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.079
 0.079
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 
 Pipe
 Diameter
 Wall Thickness
 (mm)
 (mm)
 900
 1.63
 1050
 1.63
 1200
 1.63
 1350
 2.01
 1500
 2.01
 1650
 2.01
 1800
 2.77
 1950
 2.77
 2100
 2.77
 2250
 2.77
 2400
 2.77
 2550
 2.77
 2700
 2.77
 2850
 2.77
 3000
 2.77
 
 Size
 (inch)
 40  31
 46  36
 53  41
 60  46
 66  51
 73  55
 81  59
 87  63
 95  67
 103  71
 112  75
 117  79
 128  83
 137  87
 142  91
 
 Pipe-Arch
 Wall Thickness
 (inch)
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.138
 0.138
 0.168
 
 Pipe-Arch
 Size
 Wall Thickness
 (mm)
 (mm)
 2.77
 1010  790
 2.77
 1160  920
 2.77
 1340  1050
 2.77
 1520  1170
 2.77
 1670  1300
 2.77
 1850  1400
 2.77
 2050  1500
 2.77
 2200  1620
 2.77
 2400  1720
 2.77
 2600  1820
 2.77
 2840  1920
 2.77
 2970  2020
 3.51
 3240  2120
 3.51
 3470  2220
 4.27
 3600  2320
 
 Ensure that the minus tolerance conforms to AASHTO M 218, M 274, or M 289.
 9.1 Provide coupling bands with a minimum wall thickness (coated) of 0.064 inch (1.63 mm) and that have
 at least one annular corrugation that indexes into the inboard corrugations of each pipe section joined.
 707.03
 Structural Plate Corrugated Steel Structures. Provide structural plate pipe, pipe arch, and arch
 structures according to AASHTO M 167 (AASHTO M 167M), with the following modification:
 5.4 Assembly bolts may be galvanized by an electrolytic process.
 707.04
 Precoated, Galvanized Steel Culverts. Provide conduits and coupling bands according to AASHTO
 M 245/M 245M, as modified by 707.01 and 707.02. Ensure that the precoated, galvanized steel sheets conform to
 
 AASHTO M 246/M 246M, Type B. Ensure that the polymeric coating is 10 mils (250 µm) on the interior and 10
 mils (250 µm) on the exterior.
 707.05
 Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe and Pipe Arches with Paved Invert [1/2-inch (13 mm)
 Corrugations]. Provide conduits and coupling bands according to 707.01 and to AASHTO M 190. Provide either
 Type B half bituminous coated pipe, or pipe arches with paved invert or Type C fully coated pipe, or pipe arches
 with paved invert.
 707.07
 Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe and Pipe Arches with Paved Invert [1-inch (25 mm)
 Corrugations]. Provide conduits and coupling bands according to 707.02 and to AASHTO M 190. Provide either
 Type B half bituminous coated pipe, or pipe arches with paved invert or Type C fully coated pipe, or pipe arches
 with paved invert.
 707.10
 Square and Rectangular Steel Tubing. Provide square and rectangular steel tubing according to
 ASTM A 501 or ASTM A 500, Grade B, with the following modifications:
 Galvanize the tubing according to 711.02.
 Test the tubular steel from all heat numbers supplied for toughness according to ASTM E 436, except as modified
 herein. Take and test tubing test samples before delivery of the railing. Ensure that the taking of the test samples
 is witnessed and the testing is performed by an independent test laboratory. Submit certified test data for review
 and approval as specified in 501.06.
 Perform testing on test specimens obtained from galvanized tubing with the same heat number as that being used.
 Conduct the testing at a temperature of 0 F (-18 C) on 2  9-inch (50  225 mm) specimens supported to provide
 a 7-inch (180 mm) clear span. Do not remove the galvanizing from the specimens. Cut three 2  9-inch (50  225
 mm) test specimens from each of the unwelded sides for a total of nine specimens. If all three unwelded sides are
 not large enough to remove 2  9-inch (50  225 mm) specimens, then remove nine specimens from any unwelded
 side.
 Disregard the three specimens from the side with the lowest average shear area when calculating the final average
 shear area. If specimens were not removed from three unwelded sides, then disregard the three specimens with the
 lowest average shear area. Calculate the final average shear area using the six remaining specimens. If the average
 shear area falls below 50 percent, reject material from the heat represented by these tests. However, if the average
 shear area is 30 percent or greater, the Department will allow one retest at a sampling frequently three times that
 of the first test, and with no samples excluded in calculating the average. Reject materials not having a 50 percent
 average shear area upon retest.
 Before galvanizing, the manufacturer of the tubing shall identify the product with the steel heat number (or with
 some number that is traceable to the heat number) and with the manufacturer’s unique identification code to
 facilitate acceptance or rejection of the material. Ensure that the identification method is such that identification is
 on only one face of the section, and is repeated at intervals no greater than 4 feet (1.2 m), and does not extend into
 the curved surface of the tubing at the corners.
 707.12
 Corrugated Steel Spiral Rib Conduits. Provide conduits that have a center-to-center rib spacing of
 7 1/2 inches (190 mm). Provide conduits and fittings according to AASHTO M 36, Type IR, with the following
 modifications:
 6.1 Fabricate pipe from aluminum coated sheet according to AASHTO M 274.
 7.2.2
 
 The ribs shall conform to AASHTO M 196, Section 7.2.2.
 
 7.7.1
 Reroll the ends of the individual pipe sections to form at least two annular corrugations on each end.
 Paint the rerolled end with zinc rich paint.
 
 8.1.2
 
 Ensure that the minimum wall thickness (coated) of steel pipe is as follows:
 Pipe
 Diameter
 (inch)
 18
 21
 24
 30
 36
 42
 48
 54
 60
 66
 72
 78
 84
 90
 
 Wall Thickness
 (inch)
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.064
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.138
 0.138
 
 Diameter
 (mm)
 450
 525
 600
 750
 900
 1050
 1200
 1350
 1500
 1650
 1800
 1950
 2100
 2250
 
 Wall Thickness
 (mm)
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 2.77
 2.77
 2.77
 2.77
 2.77
 3.51
 3.51
 
 9.1 Coupling bands shall have annular corrugations.
 9.2 Coupling bands shall conform to 707.01.
 9.3 A bell and spigot joint according to ASTM A760 (A760M) may be used with the following modifications:
 9.3.1
 in diameter.
 
 These joints may be used for conduits ranging in size from 18 (450mm) to 48 (1200mm) inches
 
 9.3.2
 Ensure the bell and spigot has a soil tight joint by use of a shop applied gasket on the bell end
 and a field applied gasket on the spigot end.
 9.3.3
 Provide a minimum of 0.064 (1.63mm) inch nominal sheet thickness or not more than two (2)
 nominal sheet thickness thinner than the thickness of the pipe to be joined.
 14.1 Ensure that the certification and sampling conforms to 707.01.
 707.13
 Bituminous Lined Corrugated Steel Pipe [1/2-inch (13 mm) Corrugations].
 according to 707.01 and AASHTO M 190, Type D.
 
 Provide pipe
 
 707.14
 Bituminous Lined Corrugated Steel Pipe [1-inch (25 mm) Corrugations]. Provide pipe according
 to 707.02 and AASHTO M 190, Type D.
 707.15
 
 Corrugated Steel Box Culverts. Provide corrugated steel box culverts according to ASTM A 964.
 
 Ensure that all manufacturers are pre-approved. Ensure that manufacturers not pre-approved submit a structural
 design criteria and analysis method to the Department before the project letting for approval. The Department
 maintains a list of all pre-approved manufacturers.
 Ensure that the manufacturer submits shop drawings and design calculations for review and written approval
 before manufacture. Submit a minimum of seven copies of the drawings. Allow a minimum of four weeks for
 approval. Ensure that the shop drawings include the following:
 A. All structural design and loading information.
 B. All material specifications.
 C. All plan view.
 D. All elevation view.
 E. All headwall and wingwall attachment requirements.
 
 F.
 
 All dimensions.
 
 G. All maintenance of traffic phases.
 H. All plate size and dimensions.
 The manufacturer may modify an approved shop drawing and resubmit for approval to the Department.
 707.17
 Spiral Rib Steel Pipe Arch. Provide conduits according to AASHTO M36, Type IIA, with the
 following modifications:
 6.1 Fabricate pipe from aluminum coated sheet according to AASHTO M 274.
 7.2.2
 
 The ribs shall conform to AASHTO M 196, Section 7.2.2.
 
 9.1 Coupling bands shall have annular corrugations.
 9.2 Coupling bands shall conform to 707.01.
 14.1 Ensure that the certification and sampling conforms to 707.01.
 Ensure that the minimum wall thickness of Spiral Rib steel pipe arches is as follows:
 Pipe-Arch
 Size
 (inch)
 20 × 16
 23 × 19
 27 × 21
 33 × 26
 40 × 31
 46 × 36
 53 × 41
 60 × 46
 66 × 51
 73 × 55
 81 × 59
 
 Wall Thickness
 (inch)
 0.079
 0.079
 0.079
 0.079
 0.079
 0.079
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.109
 0.138
 
 Size
 (mm)
 500 × 410
 580 × 490
 680 × 540
 830 × 670
 1010 × 790
 1160 × 920
 1340 × 1050
 1520 × 1170
 1670 × 1300
 1850 × 1400
 2050 × 1500
 
 Wall Thickness
 (mm)
 2.01
 2.01
 2.01
 2.01
 2.01
 2.01
 2.77
 2.77
 2.77
 2.77
 3.51
 
 707.18
 Polymer Precoated, Galvanized Steel Conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior
 liner. Provide Type IA pipe which has a corrugated exterior with a smooth interior liner. Provide corrugated
 exterior conduits and smooth liners according to 707.04 with the following modifications to AASHTO M 245:
 7.5.1 Provide Polymer Precoated, Galvanized Steel Conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior
 liner pipe with plain cut helical ends. Match mark ends. Install conduit so that match marks align and are in
 accordance with the layout drawings supplied by the manufacturer.
 Provide external flat sheet coupling bands with a minimum wall thickness (coated) of .064 inch and that are a
 minimum of 12” wide. Ensure coupling bands are polymer precoated, galvanized steel.
 9.3 Ensure a soil tight joint by the use of a flat gasket conforming to ASTM D1056 2B1 that is a minimum of
 12” wide and centered over the joint.
 707.19
 Aluminum Coated Steel Conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner. Provide
 Type IA pipe which has a corrugated exterior with a smooth interior liner. Ensure that the interior liner conforms
 to 707.04. Ensure that the corrugated exterior conduit material conforms to AASHTO M274. Provide corrugated
 exterior conduits per 707.01 or 707.02 with the following modifications to AASHTO M36:
 7.7.1 Provide Aluminum Coated Steel Conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner pipe
 with plain cut helical ends. Match mark ends. Install conduit so that match marks align and are in accordance with
 the layout drawings supplied by the manufacturer.
 
 9.2 Provide external flat sheet coupling bands with a minimum wall thickness (coated) of .064 inch and that
 are a minimum of 12” wide. Ensure coupling bands are aluminum coated steel.
 9.5 Ensure a soil tight joint by the use of a flat gasket conforming to ASTM D1056 2B1 that is a minimum of
 12” wide and centered over the joint.
 707.20
 Galvanized Coated Steel Conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner.
 Provide Type IA pipe which has a corrugated exterior with a smooth interior liner. Ensure that the interior liner
 conforms to 707.04. Ensure that the corrugated exterior conduit material conforms to AASHTO M 218. Provide
 corrugated exterior conduits per 707.01 and 707.02 with the following modifications to AASHTO M36:
 7.7.1 Provide Galvanized Coated Steel Conduits with precoated galvanized smooth steel interior liner pipe
 with plain cut helical ends. Match mark ends. Install conduit so that match marks align and are in accordance with
 the layout drawings supplied by the manufacturer.
 9.2 Provide external flat sheet coupling bands with a minimum wall thickness (coated) of .064 inch and that
 are a minimum of 12” wide. Ensure coupling bands are galvanized coated steel.
 9.5 Ensure a soil tight joint by the use of a flat gasket conforming to ASTM D1056 2B1 that is a minimum of
 12” wide and centered over the joint.
 707.21
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Conduits and Underdrains. Provide conduits and underdrains
 having a 1/4, 7/16, or 1/2-inch (6.5, 11, or 13 mm) corrugation depth and according to AASHTO M 196/M 196M,
 with the following modifications:
 8.1 and 8.2 Provide helically corrugated pipe 12 inches (300 mm) in diameter and larger that have at least two
 circumferential corrugations at each end of each pipe length.
 8.1.2
 
 Ensure that the minimum wall thickness of aluminum pipe and pipe arches is as follows:
 Pipe
 Diameter
 (inch)
 6
 8
 10
 12
 15
 18
 21
 24
 27
 30
 36
 42
 48
 54
 60
 66
 72
 
 Wall Thickness
 (inch)
 0.048
 0.060
 0.060
 0.060
 0.060
 0.060
 0.060
 0.060
 0.075
 0.075
 0.075
 0.105
 0.105
 0.105
 0.135
 0.164
 0.164
 
 Pipe-Arch
 Size
 Wall Thickness
 (inch)
 (inch)
 
 17  13
 21  15
 24  18
 28  20
 
 0.060
 0.060
 0.060
 0.075
 
 35  24
 42  29
 49  33
 57  38
 64  43
 71  47
 
 0.075
 0.105
 0.105
 0.135
 0.135
 0.164
 
 Pipe
 Diameter
 Wall Thickness
 (mm)
 (mm)
 150
 1.22
 200
 1.52
 250
 1.52
 300
 1.52
 375
 1.52
 450
 1.52
 525
 1.52
 600
 1.52
 675
 1.91
 750
 1.91
 900
 1.91
 1050
 2.67
 1200
 2.67
 1350
 2.67
 1500
 3.43
 1650
 4.17
 1800
 4.17
 
 Pipe-Arch
 Size
 Wall Thickness
 (mm)
 (mm)
 
 430  330
 530  380
 610  460
 710  510
 
 1.52
 1.52
 1.52
 1.91
 
 885  610
 1060  740
 1240  840
 1440  970
 1620  1100
 1800  1200
 
 1.91
 2.67
 2.67
 3.43
 3.43
 4.17
 
 Ensure that the minus tolerance conforms to AASHTO M 197/M 197M.
 9.2 Provide coupling bands with a minimum wall thickness (coated) of 0.060 inch (1.52 mm). For pipe
 diameters 12 inches (300 mm) and larger, provide coupling bands that have at least one circumferential corrugation
 that indexes into the inboard corrugations of each pipe section joined.
 707.22
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Conduits. Provide conduits having a 1-inch (25 mm) corrugation
 depth and according to AASHTO M 196/M 196M, with the following modifications:
 8.1 and 8.2 Provide helically corrugated pipe that have at least two circumferential corrugations at each end
 of each pipe length.
 8.1.2
 
 Ensure that the minimum wall thickness of aluminum pipe is as follows:
 Pipe
 Diameter
 (inch)
 36
 42
 48
 54
 60
 66
 72
 78
 84
 90
 96
 102
 108
 114
 120
 
 Wall Thickness
 (inch)
 0.060
 0.060
 0.060
 0.075
 0.105
 0.105
 0.105
 0.105
 0.105
 0.105
 0.105
 0.135
 0.135
 0.164
 0.164
 
 Diameter
 (mm)
 900
 1050
 1200
 1350
 1500
 1650
 1800
 1950
 2100
 2250
 2400
 2550
 2700
 2850
 3000
 
 Wall Thickness
 (mm)
 1.63
 1.63
 1.63
 1.91
 2.67
 2.67
 2.67
 2.67
 2.67
 2.67
 2.67
 3.43
 3.43
 4.17
 4.17
 
 Ensure that the minus tolerance conforms to AASHTO M 197/M 197M.
 9.2 Provide coupling bands that are not lighter than 0.060-inch (1.52 mm) nominal sheet thickness and that
 have at least one circumferential corrugation that indexes into the inboard corrugations of each pipe section joined.
 707.23
 Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate Conduits. Provide aluminum alloy plates and fasteners for
 structural plate conduits according to AASHTO M 219/M 219M.
 707.24
 Corrugated Aluminum Spiral Rib Conduits. Provide conduits that have a center-to-center rib
 spacing of 7 1/2 inches (190 mm). Provide conduits and fittings according to AASHTO M 196, Type IR, with the
 following modifications:
 7.5.1
 
 Reroll the ends of the individual pipe sections to form at least two annular corrugations on each end.
 
 8.1.2
 
 Ensure that the minimum wall thickness of aluminum pipe is as follows:
 Pipe
 Diameter
 (inch)
 18
 21
 24
 30
 36
 42
 48
 54
 60
 66
 
 Wall Thickness
 (inch)
 0.060
 0.060
 0.060
 0.060
 0.075
 0.105
 0.105
 0.105
 0.135
 0.135
 
 Diameter
 (mm)
 450
 525
 600
 750
 900
 1050
 1200
 1350
 1500
 1650
 
 Wall Thickness
 (mm)
 1.52
 1.52
 1.52
 1.52
 1.91
 2.67
 2.67
 2.67
 3.43
 3.43
 
 9.1 Coupling bands shall have annular corrugations.
 9.2 Coupling bands shall conform to 707.21.
 14.1 Ensure that the certification and sampling conforms to 707.21.
 707.25
 Corrugated Aluminum Box Culverts. Provide corrugated aluminum box culverts according to
 ASTM B 864/B 864M.
 Ensure that all manufacturers are pre-approved. Ensure that manufacturers not pre-approved submit a structural
 design criteria and analysis method to the Department before the project letting for approval. The Department
 maintains a list of all pre-approved manufacturers.
 Ensure that the manufacturer submits shop drawings and design calculations for review and written approval
 before manufacture. Submit a minimum of seven copies of the drawings. Allow a minimum of four weeks for
 approval. Ensure that the shop drawings include the following:
 A. All structural design and loading information.
 B. All material specifications.
 C. All plan view.
 D. All elevation view.
 E. All headwall and wingwall attachment requirements.
 F.
 
 All dimensions.
 
 G. All maintenance of traffic phases.
 H. All plate size and dimensions.
 The manufacturer may modify an approved shop drawing and resubmit for approval to the Department.
 
 707.31
 Corrugated Polyethylene Drainage Tubing. Provide corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing
 according to AASHTO M 252 Type C, and CP. If Type S or SP is specified, provide corrugated polyethylene
 smooth lined pipe conforming to 707.33.
 Only provide materials from manufacturers certified according to Supplement 1066.
 707.32
 Corrugated Polyethylene Drainage Pipe. Provide conduits, coupling bands, and fittings according
 to AASHTO M 294, Type C.
 Only provide materials from manufacturers certified according to Supplement 1066.
 707.33
 
 Corrugated Polyethylene Smooth Lined Pipe.
 
 Provide smooth lined corrugated polyethylene pipe, closed profile polyethylene pipe, couplings, and fittings
 conforming to AASHTO M 294, with the following modifications:
 Provide Type S or Type D. If perforated is specified, provide Type SP.
 1.1.1
 
 Nominal sizes of 4 to 60 inches (100 mm to 1500 mm) are included.
 
 7.2.1
 
 In addition, nominal diameters of 4, 6, 8, and 10 inches (100, 150, 200, and 250 mm) are included.
 
 7.2.2
 For the additional nominal diameters listed for 7.2.1 the inner liner of Type S and SP pipe, and both
 inner and outer walls of Type D pipe shall have the following minimum thicknesses:
 Diameter
 (inch) (mm)
 4
 100
 6
 150
 8
 200
 10
 250
 
 Inner Wall Thickness
 (inch)
 (mm)
 0.020
 0.50
 0.020
 0.50
 0.025
 0.60
 0.025
 0.60
 
 7.4 For the additional nominal diameters listed for 7.2.1 the pipe shall have a minimum pipe stiffness at 5
 percent deflection as follows:
 Diameter
 (inch) (mm)
 4
 100
 6
 150
 8
 200
 10
 250
 
 Pipe Stiffness
 (P/I/I)
 (N/m/mm)
 50
 340
 50
 340
 50
 340
 50
 340
 
 7.8.5
 In addition, couplings for corrugated pipe shall be bell and spigot or bell-bell couplings, or clamp-on
 bands, for all sizes up to and including 36 inch (900 mm) diameter.
 Couplings for Type D pipe shall be a bell-bell or bell and spigot coupling. The coupling may be welded
 on one end of each length of pipe by means of a full circumferential weld. Stitch welds are not permitted.
 Couplings for pipe diameters 42 inches (1050 mm) and larger shall be bell-bell or bell and spigot.
 11.1.3 In addition, pipe with diameters 4 through 10 inches (100 through 200 mm) inclusive may be marked
 “AASHTO M252”.
 12.1 Only provide materials from manufacturers certified according to Supplement 1066.
 707.34 Polyethylene Plastic Pipe Based on Outside Diameter (OD). Provide polyethylene plastic pipe based
 on OD, coupling and fittings conforming to ASTM F714 with the following modifications:
 1.1 Provide pipes with outside diameters from 10 to 63 inches.
 
 Table 7 Minimum Wall Thickness
 Outside Diameter (inches)
 Dimension Ratio
 Minimum Wall thickness (inches)
 63
 
 32.5
 
 1.938
 
 4.1 Polyethylene Compound. Ensure the resin compound for the pipe and fittings meets the requirements of
 ASTM D 3350 with a cell classification of PE345464C and a Plastic Pipe Institute designation of PE 3408.
 Compounds that have higher cell classifications in one or more properties are acceptable if the specified property
 value is exceeded.
 8.1 Provide a letter of certification to cover each shipment of material verifying that it meets specification
 requirements.
 No electro-fusion or internal joints permitted.
 707.35
 Polyethylene Profile Wall Pipe. Provide polyethylene profile wall pipe, coupling and fittings
 conforming to ASTM F 894 with the following modifications:
 1.1 Provide pipes with inside diameters from 12 to 132 inches. No electro-fusion joints permitted.
 4.3 No electro-fusion joints permitted.
 6.5 Delete.
 10.1 Provide a letter of certification to cover each shipment of material verifying that it meets specification
 requirements.
 707.41
 Smooth-Wall Polyvinyl Chloride Underdrain Pipe.
 Provide smooth wall perforated and
 non-perforated PVC plastic pipe and fittings according to ASTM F 758, Type PS 46 minimum, with the following
 modifications:
 7.2.4
 
 Perforated pipe shall have a minimum of four rows of perforations.
 
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 707.42
 Polyvinyl Chloride Corrugated Smooth Interior Pipe. Provide PVC corrugated smooth interior
 pipe, joints and fittings according to ASTM F 949, with the following modifications:
 5.2.4
 
 Perforated pipe may be specified.
 
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 707.43
 Polyvinyl Chloride Profile Wall Pipe. Provide PVC open profile wall pipe and fittings with integral
 bell joints according to ASTM F 794, with the following modifications:
 7.2.4
 used.
 
 Only molded or fabricated fittings conforming to the requirements of Specification F 794 may be
 
 7.5 Ensure a pipe stiffness of 46 or greater.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 707.45
 Polyvinyl Chloride Solid Wall Pipe. Provide PVC solid wall pipe and fittings with nominal size of
 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 and 15-inch (100, 150, 200, 250, 300 and 375 mm) diameter according to ASTM D 3034, SDR 35,
 with the following modifications:
 10.1 The retest provisions do not apply.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 707.46
 Polyvinyl Chloride Drain Waste and Vent Pipe. Provide PVC drain, waste, and vent pipe and
 fittings according to ASTM D 2665, with the following modifications.
 8.1 The retest provisions do not apply.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 
 707.47
 ABS and Polyvinyl Chloride Composite Pipe. Provide ABS and PVC composite pipe and fittings
 according to ASTM D 2680, with the following modifications.
 11.1 The retest provisions do not apply.
 13.1 Furnish certified test data as defined in 101.03 to the Engineer.
 707.48
 Polyvinyl Chloride Large-Diameter Solid Wall Pipe. Provide PVC solid wall pipe and fittings
 according to ASTM F 679, with the following modifications:
 8.1 The retest provisions do not apply.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 707.51
 ABS Drain Waste and Vent Pipe. Provide ABS schedule 40 plastic drain, waste and vent pipe and
 fittings according to ASTM D 2661, with the following modifications:
 6.4.1
 
 Perform inspection at the project site.
 
 9.18.1 The retest provisions do not apply.
 10.1 Furnish certified test data as defined in 101.03 to the Engineer.
 707.62
 Polypropylene Corrugated Single Wall Pipe. Provide polypropylene corrugated single wall pipe
 for drainage pipe from 6 to 30-inch diameters according to ASTM F 2736, with the following modification.
 9.1 Provide a letter of certification to cover each shipment of material verifying that it meets specification
 requirements.
 707.65
 Polypropylene Corrugated Double Wall Pipe. Provide poly propylene corrugated double wall pipe
 for non-pressure sanitary sewer and storm sewer pipe from 6 to 30-inch diameters according to ASTM F 2736 and
 storm sewer pipe from 36 to 60-inch diameters according to ASTM F 2881 with the following modification.
 9.1 Provide a letter of certification to cover each shipment of material verifying that it meets specification
 requirements.
 707.69
 Polypropylene Triple Wall Pipe. Provide polypropylene triple wall pipe and fittings for nonpressure sanitary sewer and storm sewer pipe from 30 to 60-inch diameters according to ASTM F 2764, with the
 following modification.
 10.1 Provide a letter of certification to cover each shipment of material verifying that it meets specification
 requirements.
 707.70
 Welded and Seamless Steel Pipe. Provide welded and seamless steel pipe according to ASTM A
 53 or ASTM A 139/A 139M, Grade B, with the following modifications:
 20.1 Perform inspection at the project site. Obtain random samples from material delivered to the project site
 or at other locations designated by the Laboratory.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 707.75 Glass-Fiber-Reinforced Polymer Mortar Pipe. Provide Glass-fiber-reinforced polymer mortar pipe
 and fittings for non-pressure applications according to ASTM D 3262 and for pressure applications according to
 ASTM D 3754 with the following modifications:
 4.1 Provide a minimum pipe stiffness of 18 psi.
 7.2 Furnish certified test data as defined in 101.03 to the Engineer.
 707.80 Reinforced Thermosetting Resin Pipe. Provide reinforced thermosetting resin pipe and fittings
 according to ASTM D 2996.The short-term rupture strength hoop tensile stress shall be a minimum 30,000 psi (207
 MPa).
 Test pipe according to a) ASTM G 154 for 2,500 hrs of accelerated weathering following cycle 2 as defined in
 Appendix X2, or b) ASTM G 155 for a minimum of 1,250 hours of accelerated weathering following a minimum
 of cycle 1 as defined in Appendix X3.
 
 After testing, the surface of the pipe will show no fiber exposure, crazing, or checking, and may have only a
 slight chalking. After testing, the color change of the glass resin sample shall show a Delta E, using L*a*b color
 space, of less than 3.5.
 Use adhesive recommended by the manufacturer for joining pipe and fittings.
 Pigmented resin will be used throughout the pipe wall thickness.
 Furnish certified test data as defined in 101.03 to the Engineer showing compliance with these specifications.
 
 708 PAINT
 708.01
 Inorganic Zinc Silicate Primer Paint. Provide inorganic zinc silicate primer paint conforming to
 AASHTO M 300, Type I, and the following modification:
 5.1 A green colorant approximately No. 34159 of FS 595C.
 Follow the submittal requirements of Supplement 1084 to obtain approval of materials conforming to this
 specification.
 Submit new certified test results if the formulation or manufacturing process has been changed, or as requested
 by the Department.
 Furnish materials certified according to Supplement 1084 and listed on the Department’s QPL.
 708.02
 OZEU Structural Steel Paint. This specification covers the formulation and testing of a three-coat
 structural steel paint system consisting of an organic zinc prime coat, an epoxy intermediate coat, and a urethane
 finish coat (OZEU). Material requirements for the respective coats are as follows:
 A. General. For each lot of all coatings, furnish a coated card (Drawdown card) that shows the color, gloss, and
 general appearance of the material covered by the lot. Use a minimum card size of 3-inches by 5-inches. The color
 must match the color card furnished for the Contract or order within visual limits determined by the Engineer. In
 case of disagreement, provide test data according to ASTM D 2244 showing a color difference of no greater than
 2.0, ΔE* (CIE 1976 L*a*b*).
 B. Organic Zinc Prime Coat. Provide an organic zinc prime coat consisting of a zinc dust filled, two or threecomponent epoxy polyamide, and selected additives as required. The coating shall also meet the following:
 1.
 
 Physical Requirements.
 Total solids, % by weight of paint,
 Pigment, % by weight of total solids,
 Total zinc dust, % by weight of pigment
 Total zinc, % by weight of total solids
 (by calculation)
 Total solids, % by volume,
 Color Greenish gray
 
 2.
 
 3.
 
 ASTM D 2369
 ASTM D 2371
 ASTM D 521
 ASTM D 521
 
 70 percent minimum
 83 percent minimum
 93 percent minimum
 77 percent minimum
 
 ASTM D 2697
 45 percent minimum
 approximating FSvisual comparison
 595C-34159
 Pot life. Follow the paint manufacturers recommendations for applying the coating within the
 pot life specified with no evidence of gellation. The coating will be in a free-flowing
 condition and easily sprayed.
 Qualitative Requirements.
 a.
 
 Mixing. Section 6.1, SSPC-Paint 20 using only a high shear (Jiffy) mixer.
 
 b.
 
 Storage Life. Section 6.3, SSPC-Paint 20.
 
 c.
 
 Mudcracking. Section 7.1, SSPC-Paint 20.
 
 Material Quality Assurance. Analysis for each component.
 
 Material Quality Assurance will conform to the requirements of Supplement 1084.
 C. Epoxy Intermediate Coat. Provide a two-part epoxy intermediate coat composed of a base component and
 curing agent suitable for application over the zinc rich primer.
 The base component shall contain an epoxy resin together with color pigments, mineral fillers, gellant, leveling
 agent, and volatile solvents. The curing agent component will contain a liquid polyamide resin and volatile solvent.
 The coating shall also meet the following:
 1.
 
 Physical Requirements.
 a.
 
 Color. White, meeting or exceeding, FS-595C-37875 according to ASTM E 1347.
 
 b.
 
 Components. Two, mixed before application.
 
 c.
 
 Volume solids, ASTM D 2697. 50 percent minimum.
 
 d. Pot life. Follow the paint manufacturers recommendations for applying the coating within the pot
 life specified with no evidence of gellation. The coating will be in a free-flowing condition and easily sprayed.
 e.
 
 Curing time.
 (1) Set-to-touch, ASTM D 1640. 4 hours, maximum at 77 F (25 C).
 (2) Dry-to-recoat, ASTM D 1640. 24 hours, maximum at 77 F (25 C).
 
 2.
 1084.
 
 f.
 
 Fineness of grind, ASTM D 1210. Hegman 3 minimum.
 
 g.
 
 Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC), maximum, ASTM D 3960. 2.83 lb/gal(340 g/L), as applied.
 
 Material Quality Assurance. Material Quality Assurance will conform to the requirements of Supplement
 
 D. Urethane Finish Coat. Provide a two-component urethane finish coat composed of a polyester and/or acrylic
 aliphatic urethane and suitable for use as a finish coat over the white epoxy polyamide intermediate coat. The
 coating shall also meet the following:
 1.
 
 Physical Requirements.
 
 a. Finish, Specular gloss, ASTM D 523. Use Fed. Std. 595C-16440 Gray: 70 % minimum after 3000
 hours weathering resistance. Color change less than 2.0 ΔE*, (C.I.E 1976 L*a*b*) ASTM D2244.
 b.
 
 Volume solids, ASTM D 2697. 42 percent minimum.
 
 c. Curing time, at 77 F (25 C) and 50% RH. Set-to-touch, ASTM D 1640: 30 minutes, minimum; 4
 hours, maximum.
 d. Pot life. Follow the paint manufacturers recommendations for applying the coating within the pot
 life specified with no evidence of gellation. The coating will be in a free-flowing condition and easily sprayed.
 e.
 
 Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC), maximum, ASTM D 3960. 2.83 lb/gal(340 g/L), as applied.
 
 f.
 
 Colors.
 (1) Specified.[2]
 Brown
 Green
 Blue
 [2]
 
 FS-595C, 10324
 FS-595C, 14277
 FS-595C, 15526
 Contractor’s choice unless specified on plans
 
 (2) Elective. As specified on the plans.
 g.
 
 Gloss requirements, ASTM D 523.
 Full gloss
 Semi-gloss
 Lusterless (Matte)
 
 2.
 1084.
 
 minimum 80% unless specified on the plans
 30 to 45%
 maximum 6%
 
 Material Quality Assurance. Material Quality Assurance will conform to the requirements of Supplement
 
 Performance Requirements. Test the coating system, which consists of the organic zinc prime coat, the epoxy
 intermediate coat, and the urethane topcoat, prior to use.
 Prepare three panels for each of the specified tests according to ASTM D 609, except provide a minimum
 thickness of 1/8 inch (3 mm) and use ASTM A 36/A 36M hot rolled steel. Blast clean (using coal slag abrasive)
 the surface to equal, as nearly as is practical, the standard Sa 2 1/2 of ASTM D 2200 (Steel Structures Painting
 
 Council SSPC-SP10 meets this requirement). Ensure that the surface has a nominal height of profile of 1 to 3.5
 mils (25 to 88 m) verified by using appropriate replica tape. Coat and cure the panels according to the
 manufacturer’s printed instructions. Provide a dry film coating thickness for the system to be tested as follows:
 Organic Zinc:
 Epoxy:
 Urethane:
 
 3.0 to 5.0 mils (75 to 125 m)
 5.0 to 7.0 mils (125 to 175 m)
 2.0 to 4.0 mils (50 to 100 m)
 
 The coating system shall pass each of the following tests:
 A. Fresh Water Resistance Test (ASTM D 870). Scribe the panels according to ASTM D 1654 to the depth of
 the base metal in the form of an “X” having at least 2-inch (50 mm) legs, and immerse panels in fresh tap water at
 75  5 F (25  3 C). After 30 days of immersion, examine the panels to verify that they show no rusting and that
 the coating shows no blistering, softening, or discoloration. Rate blistering according to ASTM D 714.
 B. Salt Water Resistance Test (ASTM D 870). Scribe the panels as specified in “A” above, and immersed
 panels in a water solution of 5 percent sodium chloride at 75  5 F (25  3 C). After 7, 14, and 30 days of
 immersion, examine the panels to verify that they show no rusting and that the coating shows no blistering or
 softening. Rate blistering according to ASTM D 714. Replace the sodium chloride solution with a fresh solution
 after examination at 7 and 14 days.
 C. Weathering Resistance Test. Test the panels according ASTM D 4587, Method D, using Ultra Violet A 340
 bulbs. Place the panels on test at the beginning of a wet cycle. After 3000 hours of continuous exposure, examine
 the panels to verify that they show no rusting and that the coating shows no blistering or loss of adhesion. Perform
 the 60 degree specular gloss measurements on the sprayed panels utilized for this test. Average the three initial
 measurements (one per panel) together. Also, average the three final measurements together.
 D. Salt Fog Resistance Test. Scribe the panels as specified in “A” above, and test them according to ASTM B
 117. After 3000 hours of continuous exposure, examine the coating to verify that it shows no loss of bond and that
 it shows no rusting or blistering beyond 1/16 inch (2 mm) from the center of the scribe mark. Rate blistering
 according to ASTM D 714.
 E. Adhesion Test, ASTM D 4541 Type IV. Test the panels according to the following:
 1.
 
 Lightly sand the coating surface and aluminum dolly, and apply a quick set adhesive.
 
 2.
 
 Allow adhesive to cure overnight.
 
 3.
 
 Scribe the coating and adhesive around the dolly before testing.
 
 4. Make a minimum of 4 trials to failure, and report the 4 trials. Ensure that each trial is greater than 400
 pounds per square inch (2.8 MPa). Reject trial if fracture at the primer-blast interface occurs.
 F. Pencil Hardness Test, ASTM D 3363. Determine the hardness of an individual coat or the coating system by
 performing a Pencil Hardness Test according to ASTM D 3363. Meet or exceed scale of hardness HB for the
 coating.
 Prequalification. Before approval, submit copies of the manufacturer’s certified test data showing that the
 coating system complies with the performance requirements of this specification to the Laboratory Ensure that the
 certified test data also states the following physical properties for each coating: Density, pounds per gallon (g/mL);
 Solids, percent by weight; Solids, percent by volume; Viscosity; Drying time; and VOC content, pounds per gallon
 (g/mL).
 Use an independent testing laboratory, approved by the Laboratory, to develop the test data. Include with the
 test data the brand name of the paint, name of manufacturer, number of lots tested, and date of manufacture.
 Submit new certified test results if the formulation or manufacturing process has been changed, or as requested
 by the Department.
 Sampling. The Laboratory will establish acceptance variances.
 Furnish materials certified according to Supplement 1084 and listed on the Department’s QPL.
 
 709 REINFORCING STEEL
 709.00
 Epoxy Coated Reinforcing Steel. Provide epoxy coated reinforcing steel according to ASTM A
 775/A 775M, with the following modifications:
 5.1 Ensure that steel reinforcing bars to be coated conform to 709.01, 709.03, or 709.05, and are free of oil,
 grease, or paint.
 5.2 Ensure that the coating material meets the requirements listed in Annex A1 and is a color that facilitates
 inspection of the installed bar. The color is subject to approval of the Director.
 5.3 Sample required.
 8.3.1 Evaluate the adhesion of the coating by bending production coated bars around a mandrel of specified
 size according to the bending tables in ASTM A 615 (ASTM A 615M) or ASTM A 996 (ASTM A 996M) as
 applicable. Perform the bend test for adhesion of the coating at a uniform rate, and ensure that it takes up to 90
 seconds to complete. Place the two longitudinal deformations in a plane perpendicular to the mandrel radius, and
 ensure that the test specimens are at thermal equilibrium between 68 and 86 F (20 and 30 C).
 12.1 Perform tests, inspection, and sampling at a site specified by the Director. Sampling for testing requires
 three 30-inch (1 m) samples for each bar size, for each coating lot, and for each heat of steel reinforcing bars.
 14.1 Report of test results required.
 Where reinforcing bar cages for prestressed concrete beams are fabricated by tack welding, patch the areas
 damaged by the tack welding according to ASTM A 775, Section 11, permissible Amount of Damaged Coating
 and Repair of Damaged Coating.
 709.01
 Deformed and Plain Billet Steel Bars for Concrete Reinforcement. Provide deformed and plain
 billet steel bars for concrete reinforcement according to ASTM A 615 (ASTM A 615M), with the following
 modification:
 13.1 Where positive identification of a heat can be made, perform one tension test and one bend test from
 each bar designation number of each heat in the Lot. Where identification of the heat is not practical, perform one
 tension test and one bend test for each bar designation number in each lot of 10 tons (10 metric tons) or fraction
 thereof.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1068.
 709.03
 Rail Steel Deformed and Plain Bars for Concrete Reinforcement. Provide rail steel deformed and
 plain bars for concrete reinforcement according to ASTM A 996/A 996M.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1068.
 709.05
 Axle Steel Deformed and Plain Bars for Concrete Reinforcement. Provide axle steel deformed
 and plain bars for concrete reinforcement according to ASTM A 996/A 996M.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1068.
 709.07
 Electric- Resistance-Welded Carbon and Alloy Steel Mechanical Tubing. Provide grade 60
 carbon steel round tubing with a minimum 60 ksi (414 MPa) yield strength according to ASTM A 513/A 513M,
 with the following modifications:
 14.1 Galvanize both the interior and exterior of the tubing with a minimum thickness of 0.30 oz/ft² (91.5 g/m2)
 zinc. If welded tubing is used, re-metallize the outside weld with zinc.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1068.
 709.08
 Cold-Drawn Steel Wire for Concrete Reinforcement. Provide cold drawn steel wire for concrete
 reinforcement according to ASTM A 82 or ASTM A 1064, with the following modification:
 7.2 Completely cover galvanized wire with a coating of pure zinc of uniform thickness, so applied that it will
 adhere firmly to the surface of the wire. Ensure that the minimum weight of zinc coating is 0.8 ounces per square
 foot (244 g/m2) of surface as determined by ASTM A 90.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1068.
 
 709.09
 Fabricated Steel Bar or Rod Mats for Concrete Reinforcement. Provide fabricated steel bar or
 rod mats for concrete reinforcement according to ASTM A 184/A 184M, with the following modifications:
 4 Use deformed bars.
 4.1 Provide longitudinal bars conforming to Grade 60 of 709.01, 709.03, or 709.05.
 4.2 Provide longitudinal bars according to 709.01, Grade 60. Provide transverse bars according to 709.01.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1068.
 709.10
 Welded Steel Wire Fabric For Concrete Reinforcement.
 concrete reinforcement according to ASTM A 185 or ASTM A 1064.
 
 Provide welded steel wire fabric for
 
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1068.
 709.11
 Deformed Steel Wire for Concrete Reinforcement.
 reinforcement according to ASTM A 496 or ASTM A 1064.
 
 Provide deformed steel wire for concrete
 
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1068.
 709.12
 Welded Deformed Steel Wire Fabric for Concrete Reinforcement. Provide welded deformed
 steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement according to ASTM A 497 or ASTM A 1064.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1068.
 709.13
 Coated Dowel Bars. Provide coated dowel bars according to AASHTO M 254, with the following
 modifications:
 4.1 The core material will consist of steel according to 709.01, 709.03, or 709.05.
 Coat all surfaces of dowel bars. Suitably re-coat ends of dowel bars that have been cut to length after coating or
 have not had the uncoated ends coated during manufacturing or fabrication. Prepare surface and patch uncoated
 bar ends with material equivalent to the original epoxy coating.
 If the Contractor elects to use basket supports for positioning of the above dowel bars as specified in 451.08.B
 or as shown on the plans, provide a fusion-bonded epoxy coated basket dowel bar assembly. Repair uncoated areas
 with surface preparation and patching material equivalent to the original epoxy coating.
 Suitably repair coating on the dowel bars or baskets damaged during installation.
 Do not expose coated dowels to weather or sunlight for a period exceeding 180 days.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1068.
 709.14
 Epoxy-Coated Steel Wire and Welded Wire Fabric for Reinforcement. Provide epoxy coated
 steel wire and welded wire fabric for reinforcement according to ASTM A 884, with the following modifications:
 5.1 Ensure that plain or deformed steel wire or welded wire fabric to be coated conform to 709.08, 709.10,
 709.11, or 709.12, and is free of oil, grease, or paint.
 8.1 Ensure that the coating thickness conforms to Type A. Provide dry film thickness of 5 to 12 mils (0.13 to
 0.31 mm).
 8.4 Test coated steel wire or welded wire fabric at the manufacturer’s plant before shipment or at other sites
 as designated by the Laboratory.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1068.
 709.15
 
 Plastic Supports for Reinforcing Steel. Conform to Supplement 1125.
 
 709.16
 Galvanized Reinforcing Steel Option for Bridge Structure Spirals. As an option to 709.00
 provide galvanized reinforcing steel for the spiral bars only in round column and drilled shaft reinforcing steel
 cages. Galvanized steel will conform to ASTM A767, Class 1. The galvanized coated reinforcing steel will meet
 all other requirements of 509.
 The galvanized coating will be applied after the reinforcing has been fabricated. If the galvanized surface
 becomes damaged during handling in the field, repairs will conform to ASTM A780.
 
 Where a sample is requested, provide a replacement splice conforming to the lap length requirements for epoxy
 coated reinforcing.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1068.
 
 710 FENCE AND GUARDRAIL
 710.01
 Barbed Wire. Furnish barbed wire according to ASTM A 121, Type Z, Class 3 Galvanizing, or
 ASTM A 585, Type I, with the following modifications:
 A. ASTM A 121, Type Z, Class 3.
 6.3.1 Ensure that the weight of coating for various gages of wire composing the strands and barbs are not less
 than 0.80 ounces per square foot (244 g/m2) of surface.
 7.1 Furnish No. 12 1/2, 13 1/2 or 15 1/2 steel wire gage barbed wire. Ensure that the barbs are four point
 round steel wire spaced 5 inches (130 mm) center-to-center.
 9.1 Select one sample, according to Section 9.2, from each 50 spools or fraction thereof.
 11.1 Perform inspection at the project site.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1067.
 B. ASTM A 585, Type I.
 12.3 Does not apply.
 14.1 Perform inspection at the project site.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1067.
 710.02
 Woven Steel Wire Fence, Type 47. Furnish woven steel wire fence according to ASTM A 116,
 Type Z, Class 3 galvanizing, with the following modifications:
 7.1 Ensure that the fence fabric is design number 1047-6.9.
 11.1 Perform inspection at the project site.
 In addition, ensure that all hardware and attachments are galvanized according to 711.02.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1067.
 710.03
 Chain-Link Fence. Furnish chain-link fence according to AASHTO M 181, with the following
 modifications:
 3.1 Furnish posts, gate frames, and post braces, made of Type I or Type III material. Furnish Type I material
 conforming to the requirements of Table 710.03-1. Furnish Type III material conforming to the requirements of
 Table 710.03-2.
 Fasten the fabric to the posts using either aluminum alloy or galvanized steel bands or wires. Furnish wires
 that have a 0.148-inch (3.7 mm) minimum diameter and a zinc coating or steel fasteners that are not less than 0.8
 ounces per square foot (244 g/m2).
 Furnish stretcher bars that have a 3/4  3/16-inch (19  5 mm) cross-section or an equivalent cross-section
 with a length equal to full height of fabric.
 Furnish steel truss rods that have a steel 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) diameter or equivalent cross-section and that have
 suitable adjustment.
 
 TABLE 710.03-1 STEEL POSTS, GATE FRAMES, AND POST BRACES,
 Usage –
 nominal
 fence height
 6 ft or less
 Line posts
 
 End, corner pull posts
 
 Section
 Thickness
 Grade 1 Pipe
 Grade 2 Pipe
 C-Section
 H-Section
 Grade 1 Pipe
 Grade 2 Pipe
 
 Outside
 Diameter or
 Dimensions
 (in)
 2.375
 2.375
 2.250  1.700
 2.250  1.700
 2.875
 2.875
 
 Weight
 Nominal
 lb/ft
 3.65
 3.12
 2.78
 3.26
 5.79
 4.64
 
 Gate Posts, for nominal width of gate (single or one leaf of Double):
 Grade 1 Pipe
 2.875
 5.79
 Up to 6 ft incl.
 Grade 2 Pipe
 2.875
 4.64
 Over 6 to 13 ft incl.
 Grade 1 Pipe
 4.000
 9.11
 Grade 2 Pipe
 4.000
 6.56
 Over 13 to 18 feet incl. Grade 1 Pipe
 6.625
 18.97
 Over 18 feet
 Round
 8.625
 28.58
 Grade 1 Pipe
 1.900
 2.72
 Gate frames
 Grade 2 Pipe
 1.900
 2.28
 Grade 1 Pipe
 1.660
 2.27
 1.660
 1.84
 Tension Wire,[1] post Grade 2 Pipe
 braces
 Roll-form
 1.35
 1.6250  1.250
 Round tubing
 1.660
 1.38
 [1] When tension wire is specified, it will be of 0.177 in diameter.
 
 Minimum
 Yield
 Tolerance Strength
 (+/- %)
 (psi)
 10
 30,000
 10
 50,000
 10
 50,000
 10
 50,000
 10
 30,000
 10
 50,000
 10
 10
 10
 10
 10
 10
 10
 10
 10
 10
 10
 10
 
 30,000
 50,000
 30,000
 50,000
 30,000
 30,000
 30,000
 50,000
 30,000
 50,000
 50,000
 50,000
 
 TABLE 710.03-1M STEEL POSTS, GATE FRAMES, AND POST BRACES,
 Usage – nominal fence
 height 1.8 m or less
 Line posts
 
 End, corner pull posts
 
 Section
 Thickness
 Grade 1 Pipe
 Grade 2 Pipe
 C-Section
 H-Section
 Grade 1 Pipe
 Grade 2 Pipe
 
 Outside Diameter Weight Minimum Yield
 or Dimensions Nominal Tolerance Strength
 (mm)
 (kg/m) (+/- %) (MPa)
 60
 5.4
 10
 209
 60
 4.6
 10
 345
 4.1
 10
 345
 57  43
 4.9
 10
 345
 57  43
 73
 8.6
 10
 209
 73.00
 6.9
 10
 345
 
 Gate Posts, for nominal width of gate (single or one leaf of Double):
 Grade 1 Pipe
 73.00
 8.6
 Up to 1.8 m incl
 Grade 2 Pipe
 73.00
 6.9
 Grade 1 Pipe
 102.00
 13.6
 Over 1.8 to 4 m incl.
 Grade 2 Pipe
 102.00
 9.8
 Over 4 to 5.5 m incl.
 Over 5.5 m
 Gate frames
 Tension Wires,[1]
 post braces
 
 Grade 1 Pipe
 Round
 Grade 1 Pipe
 Grade 2 Pipe
 Grade 1 Pipe
 Grade 2 Pipe
 Roll-form
 Round tubing
 
 168.00
 219
 48
 48
 42
 42
 41  32
 42
 
 28.2
 42.5
 4.0
 3.4
 3.4
 2.7
 2.0
 2.1
 
 10
 10
 10
 10
 
 209
 345
 209
 345
 
 10
 10
 10
 10
 10
 10
 10
 10
 
 209
 209
 209
 345
 209
 345
 345
 345
 
 [1] When tension wire is specified, it will be of 4.5 mm diameter.
 
 Furnish ornamental cap post tops made of steel, malleable iron or cast iron. Furnish them with a hole suitable
 for through passage of the top rail. Ensure that they fit snugly to the post, have a means of attaching securely to
 the post, and exclude moisture from tubular posts. Furnish swing type gates complete with latches, stops, keepers,
 hinges, locks, and fabric. Cover them with fabric matching the fence. Furnish hinges of adequate strength to
 support the gate and that do not twist or turn under action of the gate. Locate plunger bar type latches at the full
 gate height in a manner that will engage the gate stop. Forked latches may be used for single gates less than 10
 feet (3 m) wide. Furnish lockable latches. Furnish stops that consist of a flush plate with anchor placed in concrete
 to engage the plunger bar of the latch. Other approved types of stops may be used for single gates less than 10 feet
 (3 m) wide. Keepers are substantial devices for securing and supporting the free end of the gate in open position.
 Furnish top rail couplings consisting of the outside sleeve type at least 6 inches (150 mm) long. Ensure that a
 minimum of 20 percent of the coupling has an internal heavy spring to take up expansion and contraction.
 Furnish gate frames that are assembled by welding, using properly designed, formed sheet, or sandcast fittings.
 Cover the gates with fabric matching the fence.
 Furnish offset type hinges. Furnish galvanized latches, stops, and keepers made of malleable iron, except for
 plunger bars that may be galvanized tubular or bar steel according to Section 6.2.
 Furnish flat stretcher bars in 3/4  1/4-inch (19  6 mm) sections.
 Furnish self-centering outside rail couplings that are 6 inches (150 mm) long.
 Furnish tie wire that has a 0.148-inch (3.7 mm) minimum diameter and that meets an aluminum alloy.
 Furnish wrought or cast turnbuckles.
 Furnish truss and brace rods with an 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) outside diameter or equivalent cross-section.
 
 Furnish beveled brace bands in 1  1/8-inch (25  3 mm) section.
 Furnish bolts with an anodic coating at least 2 mil (5 µm) in thickness, chromate sealed.
 11.1. Ensure that the size of the fabric conforms to 0.148-inch (3.7 mm) nominal diameter of coated wire, 2inch (50 mm) mesh.
 14.1 Table 8. Type I Zinc-Coated Steel Chain Link Fabric will have Class D weight of coating.
 15.5 Ensure that the vinyl covering is of a uniform medium green color.
 19.1 Perform inspection at the project site.
 32.2 Does not apply.
 32.3.3.2. Increase the minimum weight of interior coating to an average of 0.9 ounces per square foot (275
 g/m2) and not less than 0.8 ounces per square foot (244 g/m2) on an individual specimen.
 TABLE 710.03-2
 DIAMETERS OR PLAIN END, SCHEDULE 40 ALUMINUM ALLOY PIPE
 THE WEIGHTS AND DIMENSIONS ARE AS SPECIFIED IN ANSI H 35.2.
 Material
 Brace rails
 Gate frames and rail couplings
 Line posts
 End and corner posts
 Gate posts single or one leaf of double:
 Gate opening
 (ft)
 (m)
 To 6
 To 1.8
 Over 6 to 12
 Over 1.8 to 3.7
 Over12 to 18
 Over 3.7 to 5.5
 Over 18 to 32
 Over 5.5 to 9.8
 
 Nominal Pipe Size
 (in)
 (mm)
 1 1/4
 32
 1 1/2
 40
 2
 50
 2 1/2
 65
 
 (in)
 2 1/2
 3 1/2
 6
 8
 
 (mm)
 65
 90
 150
 200
 
 A 8'-8" line post may be substituted in lieu of the line post shown on standard drawings Chain Link Fence 1.1,
 7-28-00 and Walk Gates F-3.2, 7-28-00. This will be accomplished by reducing the 4'-0" depth as necessary to
 accommodate the shorter posts. All other dimensions shown in the standard drawings shall remain unchanged
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1067.
 710.06
 Deep Beam Rail. Furnish deep beam rail according to AASHTO M 180, Type II, Class A, with the
 following modifications:
 5.1 Perform inspection at the project site.
 5.2.1 When a field check of coating thickness shows insufficient coating thickness or shows insufficient
 coating weight, sample and test the guardrail.
 9.1.2 The minimum check limits for both triple and single-spot tests apply.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1042.
 710.09
 Wire Rope Rail. Furnish wire rope rail according to AASHTO M 30, Class A, Type I rope, with the
 following modification:
 9 Perform inspection at the project site.
 Obtain random samples from material delivered to the project site or at other locations designated by the
 Laboratory.
 
 710.11
 Fence Posts and Braces. Furnish round wood posts conforming to 710.12 and 710.14. Furnish
 dimension timber, posts, and lumber for braces and stream crossings that are sound, straight, free from unsound or
 loose knots, splits and shakes, and that are treated according to 712.06.
 Furnish steel line posts according to ASTM A 702, with the following modifications:
 5.5.2 Furnish fasteners or clamps that have a 0.120-inch (3 mm) diameter and that are galvanized according
 to ASTM A 116, Type Z, Class 3.
 5.5.1 Supply each post with a sufficient number of fasteners or clamps.
 6.2 Ensure that the post lengths are as designated.
 7.1 Furnish galvanized line posts and anchors according to 711.02.
 7.2 Delete.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1067.
 710.12
 Square-Sawed and Round Guardrail Posts. Furnish pressure treated square-sawed and round
 guardrail posts according to 710.14 and 712.06. Cut posts from growing timbers that are free from unsound or
 loose knots and rot and from injurious or excessive shake, and season checks that exceed 1/4 inch (6 mm) in width.
 Ensure that the sweep does not exceed 1 inch (25 mm) for the length of the post. Peel round posts their entire
 length, removing all outer and inner bark and leather fiber by shaving the surface. Trim knots even with the post,
 and saw both ends of the post square.
 Furnish round posts for the follow species only:
 Douglas Fir: Knot diameter for posts of Douglas Fir shall not exceed 51 mm (2 in.). Ring density for the species
 shall be at least 6 rings-per-inch as measured over a 76 mm (3 in.) distance. The diameter of the Douglas Fir posts
 shall be 184 mm (7¼ in.) at the ground line with a upper limit of 203 mm (8 in.).
 Southern Pine: Knot diameter for posts of Southern Pine shall not exceed 64 mm (2½ in.). Ring density for the
 species shall be at least 4 rings-per-inch as measured over a 76 mm (3 in.) distance. The diameter of the Southern
 Pine posts shall be 190 mm (7½ in.) at the ground line with a upper limit of 210 mm (8¼ in).
 Ponderosa Pine: Knot diameter for posts of Ponderosa Pine shall not exceed 102 mm (4 in.). Ring density for the
 species shall be at least 6 rings-per-inch as measured over a 76 mm (3 in.) distance. The diameter of the Ponderosa
 Pine posts shall be 203 mm (8 in.) at the ground line with an upper limit of 222 mm (8¾ in.).
 Furnish square sawed posts that are free from injurious cross grain and sapwood.
 Species
 Maximum Slope of Grain
 Nominal Width of Face
 Green
 Shakes, Checks,
 and Splits
 Seasoned
 Maximum Wane
 Middle 1/3 of Length
 Narrow
 End (1)
 Face
 Sum in Middle ½ of Length (2)
 Maximum
 Edge Knot in Middle 1/3 of
 Allowable
 Length
 Knots
 Wide
 Edge Knot at End (1)
 Face
 Centerline
 Sum in Middle Half of Length
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1072.
 
 White Pine
 1 in 15
 6" [152]
 8" [203]
 1" [25]
 1 3/8" [35]
 1 1/2" [38]
 2" [51]
 1" [25]
 1 3/8" [35]
 1 3/8" [35]
 1 5/8" [41]
 2 3/4" [70]
 3 1/4" [83]
 11" [279]
 13" [330]
 1 3/8" [35]
 
 1 5/8" [41]
 
 2 3/4" [70]
 1 3/8" [35]
 5 1/2" [140]
 
 3 1/4" [83]
 1 7/8" [48]
 7 1/2" [190]
 
 710.14
 Pressure Treated Guardrail and Fence Posts, Braces, and Blocks. Furnish pressure treated
 guardrail and fence posts, braces, and blocks according to AASHTO M 168 and 710.11, 710.12, and 712.06.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplements 1042 and 1072.
 710.15
 Steel Guardrail Posts. Furnish steel guardrail posts in the sections and lengths as specified. Ensure
 that they are made of copper bearing steel when so specified. Furnish steel according to ASTM A 36/A 36M.
 Furnish galvanized posts according to 711.02.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1042.
 710.16
 Guard Posts. Furnish pressure treated wood posts according to 710.14 Furnish posts that are either
 5  6-inch (125  150 mm) sawed square or 5 1/2-inch + 1/2-inch (138 mm) diameter round when measured 30
 inches (0.75 m) from the top. Furnish posts that are 5 feet, 3 inches (1.6 m) in length and are embedded such that
 30 inches (0.75 m) remains exposed. Ensure that the center-to-center spacing is spaced at 6 feet (1.8 m) intervals,
 unless otherwise shown on the plans.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1042.
 
 711 STRUCTURAL STEEL AND STRUCTURE INCIDENTALS
 711.01
 Structural Steel. Furnish structural steel conforming to ASTM A 709, Grade 36 (A36), 50 (A572),
 50W (A588), or 70W.
 Ensure that materials designated to meet notch toughness requirements have a minimum longitudinal Charpy VNotch (CVN) energy absorption value as listed below. Sample and test according to ASTM A 673/A 673M. Use
 the (H) frequency of heat testing and provide the test data as required by 501.06.
 ASTM Designation
 
 Thickness and Connection Method
 Up to 4 in (102 mm) mechanically fastened
 or welded
 
 Value Min CVN
 15 ft-lb @ 40 F
 A709 Gr. 36 (A36, A36M)
 (20 J @ 4 C)
 A709 Gr. 50 (A 572/A 572M),
 15 ft-lb @ 40 F [1]
 Up to 4 in (102 mm) mechanically fastened
 A709 Gr. 50W (A 588/A 588M)
 (20 J @ 4 C)
 A709 Gr. 50 (A 572/A 572M),
 20 ft-lb @ 40 F [1]
 Over 2 to 4 in (51 to 102 mm) welded
 A709 Gr. 50W (A 588/A 588M)
 (20 J @ 4 C)
 A709 Gr. 50 (A 572/A 72M),
 15 ft-lb @ 40 F [1]
 Up to 2 in (51 mm) welded
 A709 Gr. 50W (A 588/A 588M)
 (20 J @ 4 C)
 A709 Gr. 70W
 Up to 4 in (100 mm) mechanically fastened 25 ft-lb @ -10 °F [2,3]
 or welded
 (34 J @ -23 °C)
 [1]If the yield point of the material exceeds 65 ksi (448 MPa), the temperature of the CVN value for acceptability
 should be reduced by 15 F (8.3 C) for each increment, or part of increment, of 10 ksi (69 MPa) above 65 ksi
 (448 MPa).
 [2]If the yield point of the material exceeds 85 ksi (585 MPa), the temperature of the CVN value for acceptability
 should be reduced by 15 F (8.3 C) for each increment, or part of increment, of 10 ksi (69 MPa) above 85 ksi
 (585 MPa).
 [3] The CVN-impact testing shall be at “P” frequency in accordance with ASTM A 673.
 711.02
 Galvanized Steel. Furnish galvanize steel according to ASTM A 123 after cutting, bending, and
 welding. At the discretion of the Engineer, replace, re-galvanize, or repair damaged galvanized material. If a repair
 is authorized, perform work according to ASTM A 780 except the Department will not allow aerosol spray
 applications of paints containing zinc dust.
 Furnish bolts, nuts, washers, and similar threaded fasteners that are galvanized according to ASTM A 153 or
 ASTM F F2329. These items may be mechanically zinc coated according to ASTM B 695, Class 50. Except for
 ASTM A 325 (ASTM A 325M) bolts, electrogalvanizing may also be used if the coated item meets the thickness
 coating requirements of ASTM A 153 or ASTM F F2329.
 711.03
 Steel for Piling. Furnish steel for H-piling conforming to ASTM A 572 Grade 50 / A 572M Grade
 345. Furnish steel for sheet piling according to ASTM A 328/A 328M. Furnish steel for cast-in-place reinforced
 concrete piles conforming to ASTM A 252, Grade 2 or 3.
 711.04
 Cold Rolled Steel. Furnish cold rolled steel according to ASTM A 108, Grades 1016 through 1030
 for pins, rollers, trunnions, and other similar parts.
 711.07
 Steel Castings. Furnish steel castings according to ASTM A 27/A 27M, Grade 65-35 or Grade 7036, or AASHTO M 103, or ASTM A 148, Grade 90-60, with the following modification:
 Ensure that steel castings are free from pouring faults, sponginess, cracks, blow holes, and other defects in
 positions affecting their strength and value for the service intended. No sharp, unfilleted angles or corners are
 allowed.
 711.08
 Arc-Welding Electrodes and Fluxes. The following applies to all steel, except for exposed bare
 ASTM A 242/A 242M and ASTM A 709 Grade 50W (A 588/A 588M) steels. For exposed bare ASTM A 242/A
 242M and ASTM A709 Grade 50W (A 588/A 588M) applications, see Table 711.08-1.
 A. Manual shielded metal-arc welding.
 
 B.
 
 1.
 
 AWS A5.1 Low Hydrogen Only
 
 2.
 
 AWS A5.5 Low Hydrogen Only
 
 Submerged Arc Welding
 1.
 
 AWS 5.175
 
 2.
 
 AWS 5.235
 
 C. Gas metal-arc welding, AWS A 5.185
 D. Flux cored arc welding, AWS A5.205
 TABLE 711.08-1
 Filler metal requirements for exposed bare applications of
 ASTM A 242/A 242M and ASTM A709 Grade 50W (A 588/A 588M) steel.
 Welding Process
 Shielded metal arc
 AWS A5.5
 E8015, 8016, or 8018 electrodes that
 deposit weld metal meeting C1,
 C1L, C2, C2L, C3, or W analysis
 
 [5]
 
 Gas metal arc or
 Flux cored arc [2],[4], [5]
 AWS A5.28 and AWS 5.29
 All electrode-flux combinations that
 deposit weld metal with a Ni1,
 Ni2, Ni3, Ni4, or W analysis
 
 Submerged arc
 AWS A5.23
 All electrode-flux
 combinations that
 deposit weld metal with
 a Ni1, Ni2, Ni3, Ni4, or
 W analysis [2],[3]
 [2]Deposited weld metal will have a minimum impact strength of CVN 20 ft-lb (27 J) at 0 F (-18 C) (only applied
 to bridges).
 [3]The use of the same type filler metal having next higher mechanical properties as listed in AWS specification is
 permitted.
 [4]Deposited weld metal will have a chemical composition the same as that for any one of the weld metals in this
 table for the shielded metal arc welding process.
 [5]In conformance with those classifications allowed under AWS D1.5 Bridge Welding Code, Tables 4.1 and 4.2.
 The Laboratory will issue a list of approved electrodes and combinations of shielding. The Laboratory will
 include electrodes in the list when certified test data submitted by the manufacturer is found in compliance with
 the specified requirements. The certification will cover either process qualification or quality control tests. To
 qualify, such tests must be made within one year before the period covered. For each submission of certified test
 data, include the manufacturer’s statement that it will advise the Laboratory immediately of any change in materials
 or processing used in the manufacture of the electrodes made within one year from the date of the tests.
 When electrodes to be used are not included in the Laboratory’s list of approved electrodes and combinations of
 shielding, submit certified test data as described above for each lot showing compliance with the specified
 requirements.
 711.09
 High-Strength Steel Bolts, Nuts, and Washers. Furnish high-strength steel bolts, nuts, and washers
 according to ASTM A 325 (ASTM A 325M), with the following modification:
 11 If necessary for approval, obtain samples from material delivered to the project site or at other locations
 designated by the Laboratory.
 Furnish bolts for steel use in bare unpainted applications according to ASTM A 325 (A 325M), Type 3.
 When galvanized bolts, nuts, and washers are specified, mechanical galvanizing is permitted.
 Use galvanized bolts to fasten steel that has received an inorganic zinc prime coat according to 514.
 Furnish high-strength steel bolts, nuts, and washers that also meet the requirements of Supplement 1080.
 Provide samples to the Laboratory for acceptance.
 711.10
 
 Machine Bolts. Furnish machine bolts according to ASTM A 307, with the following modification:
 
 If necessary for approval, obtain samples from material delivered to the project site or at other locations
 designated by the Laboratory.
 Mechanical galvanizing is permitted.
 711.12
 Gray Iron Castings. Furnish gray iron casting according to ASTM A 48, Class 30B, with the
 following modifications:
 12 Two or more test bars will accompany each lot of castings or; one pair of test bars may represent castings
 shipped to two or more projects provided the lot number or date cast are cast or anchored in both the bars and
 castings. The identifying data or castings shall not interfere with the use of the casting.
 9 In addition, ensure that castings are free from pouring faults, sponginess, cracks, blow holes, and other
 defects in positions affecting their strength and value for the service intended. Ensure that the castings are
 generously filleted at angles and the arrises are sharp and perfect.
 17 Ship test bars with the lot or make test bars representing the lot available to the Laboratory at the place of
 manufacture or warehouse.
 711.13
 Ductile Iron Castings. Furnish ductile iron castings according to ASTM A 536, with the following
 modifications:
 8.1 In addition, ensure that castings are free from pouring faults, sponginess, cracks, blowholes, and other
 defects in positions affecting their strength. Ensure that the castings are generously filleted at angles and arrises
 are sharp and perfect.
 10.1 Send a keel block or Y-block specimen made according to ASTM A 536 with the shipment for each heat
 number, ladle number, and date of casting.
 14.1 Submit a certification stating that the test bars shipped with the castings were prepared according to the
 specified requirements.
 711.14
 Gray Iron and Ductile Iron Castings. Furnish gray iron and ductile iron castings according to
 AASHTO M 306, Class 35B, with the following modifications:
 Test bars are required as outlined in 711.12 and 711.13. In addition, submit certified test data for monthly
 proof load testing to the Laboratory with each inspection of castings from that month.
 Design Approval. Submit designs for cast frames, grates and covers for manholes, catch basins and inlets that
 vary from the standard construction drawings to the Department for approval. Manufacturers will seek approval
 for such non-standard designs well in advance of a projects sale date.
 711.15
 
 Sheet Copper. Furnish sheet copper according to ASTM B 370.
 
 711.16
 
 Phosphor Bronze Plate. Furnish phosphor bronze plate according to ASTM B 100.
 
 711.17
 Cast Bronze. Furnish cast bronze according to ASTM B 22, Copper Alloy No. C91100, with the
 following modification:
 Finish cast plates to plane surfaces and finish one plate of a pair at right angles to the other plate of the pair.
 711.18
 Leaded Bronze. Furnish leaded bronze according to ASTM B 584, Copper Alloy No. C93700, with
 the following modification:
 Finish cast plates to plane surfaces and finish one plate of a pair at right angles to the other plate of the pair.
 711.19
 
 Sheet Lead. Furnish sheet lead according to ASTM B 29.
 
 711.20
 Aluminum for Railings. Furnish aluminum other than permanent mold castings that conform to the
 following requirements:
 
 Portion of Railing
 Sand castings
 Shims
 
 ASTM Designation
 B 26/B 26M
 B 209 (B 209M)
 
 Washers
 
 B 209 (B 209M)
 
 Sheet and plate
 Drawn seamless tubes
 Bars, rods, wire
 
 B 209 (B 209M)
 B 210
 B 211 (B 211M)
 
 Bolts, set screws
 
 B 211 (B 211M)
 
 Nuts
 
 B 211 (B 211M)
 
 Extruded bars, rods, shapes
 
 B 211 (B 211M)
 
 Extruded tubes
 
 B 221 (B 221M)
 
 Pipe
 Rivets
 [1]Will have an anodic coating.
 
 B 241 (B 241M)
 B 316 (B 316M)
 
 Alloy
 356.0
 1100
 Clad 2024
 6061
 6061
 6061 or 6063
 6061
 2024 [1]
 6061
 6061
 6262
 6061 or 6063
 6351
 6061 or 6063
 6351
 6061 or 6063
 6061
 
 Condition or
 Temper (B296)
 T6
 0
 T4
 T6
 T6
 T6
 T6
 T4
 T6
 T6
 T9
 T6
 T5
 T6
 T5
 T6
 T6
 
 For permanent mold castings for bridge railing posts, provide aluminum according to AASHTO M 193.
 711.21
 Preformed Bearing Pads. Composition. Furnish preformed bearing pads consisting of a fabric and
 rubber body. Ensure that the pad is made with new, unvulcanized, natural and/or synthetic rubber, and unused
 cotton and/or synthetic fabric fibers in proper proportion to maintain strength and stability.
 Physical Properties. The required surface hardness, expressed in standard rubber hardness figures, is 80  10
 Shore Durometer. The minimum ultimate break down limit of pads under compressive loading is 10,000 pounds
 per square inch (69 MPa). Furnish pads to specified dimensions and accurately locate and cleanly cut all bolt holes.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 711.22
 Buried Liner Waterproofing Membrane. Furnish buried liner waterproofing membrane according
 to ASTM D 7176-06, with the following modification:
 Only 4.1.2 through 4.1.6 is approved.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 711.23
 Elastomeric Bearings. Furnish bearing pads and elastomeric bearings conforming to AASHTO
 Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges, Division II, Construction, Chapter 18, Section 18.4.5.1 Grade 3
 requirements. Fabricate elastomeric bearing pads according to Sections 18.5.6.1 and 18.5.6.2. Test pads and
 bearings according to 18.7.1, 18.7.2.1, 18.7.2.3, 18.7.2.5, 18.7.2.6, 18.7.3, 18.7.4.5, and 18.10.3. Include testing
 in the price bid for the bearings. Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1081.
 Furnish bearing pads and laminated bearings consisting of neoprene cast in molds under pressure and heat. A
 plain elastomeric bearing pad and steel load distribution plate combination is classified as a laminated elastomeric
 bearing. Obtain test specimens according to ASTM D 3182 or ASTM D 3183. Where test specimens are cut from
 the finished product, a 20 percent variation from the original physical properties is allowed. The use of compounds
 of nominal hardness between the values shown in Table 711.23-1 is permitted and the test requirements
 interpolated.
 
 TABLE 711.23-1
 Physical Properties
 Hardness, Durometer A, ASTM D 2240.
 Tensile Strength, min psi (MPa), ASTM D 412
 Elongation at break, min %
 Accelerated Tests to Determine Long-Term Aging
 Characteristics, Over-Aged 70 hrs at 212 F (100
 C), ASTM D 573:
 Hardness, points change, max
 Tensile strength, % change, max
 Elongation at break, % change, max
 Ozone 1 ppm in air by volume 20% strain, 104 F
 (40 C) ASTM D 1149, 100 hrs
 (Samples to be solvent wiped before test to
 remove any traces of surface impurities)
 Compression set 22 hrs/212 F (100 C) ASTM D
 395, Method B, % max
 Adhesion, bond made during vulcanization ASTM
 D 429 Method B, lb/in (kN/m)
 
 Grade
 50
 60
 50  5
 60  5
 2500 (17) 2500 (17)
 400
 350
 
 70
 70  5
 2500 (17)
 300
 
 15
 -15
 -40
 
 15
 -15
 -40
 
 15
 -15
 -40
 
 No
 cracks
 
 No
 cracks
 
 No
 cracks
 
 35
 
 35
 
 35
 
 40 (7.0)
 
 40 (7.0)
 
 40 (7.0)
 
 Furnish bearing pads that are individually molded, cut from previously molded strips or slabs, or extruded and
 cut to length. Mold laminated bearings together into an integral unit with all edges of internal steel laminates
 covered by a 1/8-inch (3 mm) minimum thickness of elastomer. Fill indentations or grooves on the exterior surface
 of the bearings caused by external laminate restraining devices to a 1/8 inch (3 mm) minimum cover by a
 revulcanized patch; or by a silicon caulk conforming to Federal Specifications TT-S-001543A; or by an approved
 equal. Ensure that the bearing manufacturer patches the bearings.
 Ensure that the external connection or distribution plates of laminated bearings are the same material as the
 attached structural steel and are similarly cleaned and coated. Furnish internal plates according to ASTM A 709
 grade 36 or A1011/A1011M, SS Grade 36 or Grade 40. Minimum thickness for the internal plates is 0.074 inch
 (1.88 mm). Debur all plates.
 The bearing manufacturer will furnish certified test data for the elastomer, base plate, steel laminates, and proof
 load.
 The bearing manufacturer will produce one sample bearing for each bridge structure in the project plans. Ensure
 that the sample bearing for each bridge structure is of the same design and materials as the bearings furnished for
 that bridge structure. The bearing manufacturer will ship the completed sample bearings to an independent testing
 laboratory for destructive testing for the following physical properties:
 Hardness, Durometer A
 Tensile Strength
 Elongation at Break
 Adhesion bond made during vulcanization
 
 ASTM D2240
 ASTM D412
 ASTM D412
 ASTM D429, Method B
 
 Ensure that the bearing manufacturer submits to the project the certified test data for the sample bearings from
 the independent testing laboratory with the bearing manufacturer’s certified test data for the elastomer, base plate,
 steel laminates, and proof load.
 711.24
 
 Waterproofing Fabric. Furnish waterproofing fabric according to ASTM D 173.
 
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 
 711.25
 
 Type 2 Membrane Waterproofing.
 Physical Properties
 
 Thickness ASTM D 1777
 Width
 Pliability [180 bend over 1/4 inch (6 mm) mandrel @ -25 F (-32 C)]
 ASTM D 146
 Elongation ASTM D 412 (Die C)
 Puncture Resistance-Membrane ASTM E 154
 Permeance (Grains/ft2/hr/in Hg)
 ASTM E 96, Method B
 Water Absorption (% by Weight) ASTM D 570
 Adhesion to concrete ASTM D 903
 
 60 mils (1500 m) min.
 36 inches (914 mm) min.
 No Effect
 300% min
 40 lb (18 kg) min.
 0.1 max.
 0.2 max.
 5.0 min.
 
 Submit certified test data and letter of certification to the Engineer.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 711.26
 Structural Timber, Lumber and Piling. Furnish structural timber, lumber and piling according to
 712.06, and AASHTO M 168, with the following modification:
 Air-dry or kiln-dry timber and lumber to a moisture content not to exceed 19 percent by weight. Size and
 grade will conform to American Lumber Standards.
 Use only structural timber, lumber, and piling meeting the certification requirements of Supplement 1072.
 711.27
 Prestressing Steel Strands. Furnish prestressing steel strands according to ASTM A 416, with the
 following modification:
 11 Sample and inspect as directed by the Laboratory.
 711.28
 Cellular Polyvinyl Chloride Sponge. Furnish cellular PVC sponge according to AASHTO M 153,
 Type I, and with a minimum density of 20 pounds per cubic foot (320 kg/m3).
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 711.29
 Type 3 Membrane Waterproofing. Furnish Type 3 membrane waterproofing conforming to
 the following requirements.
 
 Physical Properties
 Thickness
 0.135 inches (3.43 mm) min.
 Width
 36 inches (914 mm) min.
 Weight
 0.8 lb/ft2 (3.875 kg/mm2) min.
 Tensile strength (machine direction) ASTM D 882
 275 lb/in (48.1 N/mm)
 Modified [1]
 200 psi (13.8 MPa)
 Tensile strength ASTM D 882 (90
 150 lb/in (26.2 N/mm)
 machine direction)
 1000 psi (6.9 MPa)
 Modified [1]
 Elongation at break ASTM D 882, Modified [1]
 100%
 Brittleness ASTM D 517
 Pass
 Softening point (mastic) ASTM D 36
 200 F (93 C) min.
 [1]
 Peel adhesion ASTM D 413
 2.0 lb/in (0.35 N/mm)
 Cold flex ASTM D 146
 No cracking
 2  5 inch (50  125 mm) specimen-180 bend over 2 inch (50 mm)
 mandrel
 Heat stability
 2  5 inch (50  125 mm) specimen vertically suspended in a
 No dripping or delamination
 mechanical convection oven 2 hr @ 190 F (88 C)
 [1]12 inches (300 mm)/minute test speed and 1 inch (25 mm) initial distance between the grips.
 Submit certified test data and letter of certification to the Engineer.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 711.30
 Aluminum for Steps. Furnish aluminum for steps according to ASTM B 221 (ASTM B 221M),
 Alloys 6061-T6 or 6005-T5.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 711.31
 Reinforced Propylene Plastic Manhole Steps. Furnish reinforced propylene plastic manhole steps
 conforming to the details shown on the plans.
 Furnish steel rod according to 709.01, Grade 60 that is continuous through the entire length of legs and tread.
 The steel may be coated according to ASTM A 934/A 934M. Ensure that the manufacturer furnishes written
 certification. Furnish propylene plastic according to ASTM D 4101, Table B 33430. Ensure that the manufacturer
 furnishes certified test data for the propylene plastic used in each lot of steps.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 
 712 MISCELLANEOUS
 712.01
 Expansion Shield Anchors. Furnish anchors conforming to the dimension requirements of the
 project plans and the following:
 A. Type A. Federal Specification A-A-1923A, and A-A-55614.
 B. Type B. Federal Specification A-A-1924A.
 The supplier or producer of the anchors will provide a certification showing certified test results of the proof load
 required in the Federal Specifications.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 712.02
 
 Calcium Chloride. Furnish calcium chloride according to ASTM D 98.
 
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 712.03
 Sodium Chloride. Furnish sodium chloride according to ASTM D 632, Type I, Grade 1, with the
 following modification:
 4 Total Chlorides (NaCl, CaCl2, and MgCl2 as NaCl based on dry weight) not less than 97 percent.
 712.04
 
 Lime and Lime Kiln Dust.
 
 A. Furnish hydrated lime for masonry purposes according to ASTM C 207, Type S.
 B. Furnish quick lime for soil stabilization that is certified according to Supplement 1087 and listed on the
 Department’s QPLand according to ASTM C 977, with the following modification:
 4.2.1 Particle size of Quick Lime – Quick lime shall all pass the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve.
 C. Furnish lime kiln dust that is certified according to Supplemental 1087. Furnish lime kiln dust that meets the
 following requirements. Perform chemical analysis of the lime kiln dust according to ASTM C 25.
 Combined total calcium oxide and magnesium oxide
 Available calcium hydroxide (rapid sugar test, ASTM C25),
 plus total MgO content calculated to be equivalent Ca(OH)2
 Loss on ignition (carbon dioxide plus moisture, combined and free on as-received
 basis)
 Free water (as-received basis)
 Sulfur as SO3
 
 50 % minimum
 30 % minimum
 40 % maximum
 4 % maximum
 10 % maximum
 
 Sieve analysis.
 Sieve Size
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 No. 30 (600 µm)
 No. 100 (150 µm)
 
 Minimum Percent Passing
 95
 90
 75
 
 Submit test results for the above requirements for every 100 tons (90 metric tons) of lime kiln dust supplied to
 the Department. If multiple tests were performed, include the average and standard deviation with the results.
 712.06
 
 Preservative Treatment for Structural Timber, Lumber, Piling, Posts, Braces, and Blocks.
 
 A. General. Furnish structural timber, lumber, and pilings according to 711.26, and posts, braces, and blocks
 according to 710.14, except that moisture may be removed from the untreated lumber at the time of preservative
 treatment. Ensure that structural timber, lumber, piling, posts, and braces conform to the current AWPA standards
 or AASHTO M-133, and this subsection.
 B. Materials. Furnish timber preservatives according to AASHTO M 133 and current AWPA standards.
 C. Preparation for Treatment. Sort the material into one kind or designated group of kinds of wood and into
 pieces of approximately equal size and moisture and sapwood content. Separate material to ensure contact of
 treating medium with all surfaces.
 
 D. Framing.
 treatment.
 
 Conduct all adzing, boring, chamfering, framing, graining, mortising, and surfacing before
 
 E. Incising. Incise lumber 3 inches (75 mm) or more thick on all four sides. Incise lumber less than 3 inches (75
 mm) thick on the wide faces only, except as shown on the plans.
 Incise Douglas fir with a minimum dimension of 2 inches (50 mm) using a suitable power-driven machine
 before treatment. Do not incise Douglas fir rails and rail posts.
 Use the spacing and shape of the cutting teeth and the method of incising necessary to produce a uniform
 penetration. The minimum required depths of the incisions are as follows:
 Size[1]
 Minimum depth of incision, inch (mm)
 3/8
 (9)
 2  12
 (50300)
 7/16
 (11)
 3  12
 (75300)
 1/2
 (13)
 4  12
 (100300)
 9/16
 (14)
 8  10
 (200250)
 5/8
 (16)
 10  12
 (250300)
 3/4
 (19)
 12  12
 (300300)
 [1]Intermediate size in proportion.
 F. Amount of Preservative. The required net retention in any charge is no less than 90 percent of the quantity
 of preservative specified, but the average retention by the material treated under any contract or order and the
 average retention of any five consecutive charges are required to be at least 100 percent of the quantity specified.
 Ensure that the minimum amounts of preservative retained conform to AASHTO M 133 and the requirements set
 forth in the referenced AWPA Standard. Treat all species of structural timber, lumber, piling, posts, and blocks
 according to the current AWPA standards.
 G. Acceptance. Accept only structural timber, lumber, piling, posts, braces, and blocks according to Supplement
 1072.
 
 H. Sawn Wood Sign Posts. A sawn wood post must adhere to AASHTO M 168: Wood Products standards, and
 be the allowable grade and species for the sizes shown in the following table:
 Nominal post sizea
 
 Allowable grade and species
 No. 1 structural light framing Douglas fir, free of heart center
 
 4 by 4 inches
 
 No. 1 structural light framing Hem-Fir, free of heart center
 No. 1 structural light framing Southern Yellow pine
 No. 2 structural joists and planks Douglas fir, free of heart center
 
 4 by 6 inches
 
 No. 1 structural joists and planks Hem-Fir, free of heart center
 No. 1 structural joists and planks Southern Yellow pine
 No. 1 posts and timbers, also known as No. 1 structural Douglas fir, free of heart center
 
 Greater than 4 by 6 inches Select structural Hem-Fir, free of heart center
 No. 1 timbers Southern Yellow pine
 a
 
 Sizes shown are nominal dressed sizes
 The sweep must not exceed .08 foot in 10 feet.
 Sawn wood sign posts must be graded per the following:
 Southern Pine Inspection Bureau (SPIB) Standard Grading Rules
 Western Wood Products Association (WWPA) Standard Grading Rules
 West Coast Lumber Inspection Bureau (WCLIB) Standard Grading Rules
 Posts must be treated per current AASHTO M 133: Preservatives and Pressure Treatment Processes for
 Timber standards.
 Douglas fir and Hem-Fir posts must be incised prior to treatment.
 Inspection shall be in accordance with AWPA M2.
 Quality control shall be in accordance with AWPA M3.
 Care of the posts shall be in accordance with AWPA M4.
 712.09
 Geotextile Fabrics. Furnish fabric composed of strong rot-proof polymeric fibers formed into a
 woven or non-woven fabric. Products must be tested by the National Transportation Product Evaluation Program
 (NTPEP). The Department will determine acceptance of Type A, B, C and D fabric according to data obtained in
 the most current NTPEP report – Laboratory Results of Evaluations on Geotextiles and Geosynthetics. The NTPEP
 testing results must meet or exceed the requirements listed in Table 712.09-1. For all tests except Ultraviolet
 Exposure, the products Minimum Average Roll Values (MARV), as published in the NTPEP report, must also
 meet or exceed the requirements listed in the table. If no MARV value is published in the NTPEP report, the
 manufacturer must submit to the Department certified test data showing the MARV values for the product will
 meet or exceed the requirements listed in Table 712.09-1.
 For Type E material, supply fabric conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M288, Section 10, Table 8. The
 Department will accept Type E material based on certified test data.
 All minimum strengths shown are in the weakest principal direction.
 Ensure that the fabric is free of any treatment that might significantly alter its physical properties.
 During shipment and storage, wrap the fabric in a heavy-duty protective covering to protect it from UV
 deterioration, direct sunlight, dirt, dust, and other debris.
 Furnish Type A, B, C, and D material according to the Department’s Approved List and Supplement 1123.
 
 TABLE 712.09-1
 Property
 Type A: Underdrains and Slope Drains
 Minimum tensile strength
 Minimum puncture strength [1]
 
 [1]
 
 [2]
 
 Test Method
 
 Required Value
 
 ASTM D 4632
 80 lb
 355 N
 ASTM D 6241
 140 lb
 625 N
 or ASTM D 4833
 25 lb
 110 N
 Minimum tear strength
 ASTM D 4533
 25 lb
 110 N
 Apparent opening size
 ASTM D 4751
 Soil Type-1: Soils with 50% or less passing No. 200 (75 m) sieve AOS  0.6 mm
 Soil Type-2: Soils with 50 to 85% passing No. 200 (75 m) sieve
 AOS  0.3 mm
 Minimum permittivity
 ASTM D 4491
 0.5 sec-1
 Type B: Filter Blankets for Rock Channel Protection
 Minimum tensile strength
 ASTM D 4632
 200 lb
 890 N
 Minimum elongation
 ASTM D 4632
 15%
 [1]
 Minimum puncture strength
 ASTM D 6241
 440 lb
 1955 N
 or ASTM D 4833
 80 lb
 355 N
 Minimum tear strength
 ASTM D 4533
 50 lb
 220 N
 Apparent opening size
 ASTM D 4751
 AOS  0.6 mm
 Minimum permittivity
 ASTM D 4491
 0.2 sec-1
 Type C: Sediment Fences
 Minimum tensile strength
 ASTM D 4632
 120 lb
 535 N
 Maximum elongation
 ASTM D 4632
 50%
 [1]
 Minimum puncture strength
 ASTM D 6241
 275 lb
 1225 N
 or ASTM D 4833
 50 lb
 220 N
 Minimum tear strength
 ASTM D 4533
 40 lb
 180 N
 Apparent opening size
 ASTM D 4751
 AOS  0.84 mm
 Minimum permittivity
 ASTM D 4491
 0.01 sec-1
 Ultraviolet exposure strength retention [2] ASTM D 4355
 70%
 Type D: Subgrade-Base Separation or Stabilization
 Minimum tensile strength
 ASTM D 4632
 180 lb
 800 N
 Maximum elongation
 ASTM D 4632
 50%
 [1]
 Minimum puncture strength
 ASTM D 6241
 385 lb
 1715 N
 or ASTM D 4833
 70 lb
 310 N
 Minimum tear strength
 ASTM D 4533
 70 lb
 310 N
 Apparent opening size
 ASTM D 4751
 Same as Type A
 Permittivity
 ASTM D 4491
 0.05 sec-1
 ASTM D6241 is now the standard puncture resistance test required by AASHTO and NTPEP. NTPEP will
 continue to publish product data, tested under ASTM D4833, until the product is retested under ASTM D6241.
 Provide certified test data to the Department. Include strength retention data at 0, 150, 300, and 500 hours
 
 712.10
 Prefabricated Edge Underdrain. Furnish prefabricated edge underdrain consisting of a polymeric
 core with a minimum thickness of 1 inch (25 mm) wrapped in fabric according to 712.09, Type A. Ensure that the
 underdrain is flexible, rectangular in shape, and of hollow construction. Use core material that is resistant to
 petroleum-based chemicals, naturally occurring soil chemicals, and road de-icing agents. The core material will
 have sufficient flexibility to withstand bending and handling during installation without damage. The core will
 provide a minimum of 100 square inches (0.064 m2) unobstructed (one side only) drainage area per 1 foot (0.3 m)
 of width. Side walls of the core will have at least 5 percent open area to permit unobstructed flow through the filter
 and wall to the core. The required minimum compressive strength of the prefabricated edge drain is 6000 pounds
 per square foot (290 kPa) with a maximum 20 percent compression in a parallel plate compression test (ASTM D
 695). The minimum (single side) core flow capacity is 10 gallons per minute per foot of width for a 0.1 gradient
 at 10 pounds per square inch bladder load according to ASTM D 4716. Furnish the manufacturer’s certified test
 results as specified 101.03.
 712.11
 Temporary Erosion Control Mats Materials. Unless specifically itemized, furnish any of the type
 mats listed below. Provide certified test data for each shipment of material.
 A. Type A Temporary Erosion Control Mat. Conform to the following:
 1. A machine-produced mat consisting of 100 percent agricultural straw covered on the top with a
 polypropylene netting having an approximate 1/4  1/4 inch to 1/2  1/2 inch (6  6 mm to 13  13 mm) mesh, and
 sewn together with biodegradable or photodegradable thread.
 2.
 
 A consistent thickness with the straw evenly distributed over the entire area of the mat.
 
 3.
 
 A minimum mat width of 6.5 feet (2 m).
 
 4.
 
 An average mat weight of 0.5 pound per square yard (270 g/m2)  10 percent.
 
 5.
 
 A netting weight of approximately 1 pound per 1000 square feet (5 kg/1000 m2).
 
 B. Type B Temporary Erosion Control Mat. Conform to the following:
 1. A machine-produced mat consisting of 100 percent agricultural straw covered on the top with a
 photodegradable polypropylene netting having an approximate 1/2  1/2 inch to 5/8  5/8 inch (13  13 mm to 16
  16 mm) mesh and on the bottom with a photodegradable polypropylene netting having an approximate 1/4  1/4
 inch to 1/2  1/2 inch (6  6 mm to 13  13 mm) mesh, sewn together with biodegradable or photodegradable
 thread.
 2.
 
 A consistent thickness with the straw evenly distributed over the entire area of the mat.
 
 3.
 
 A minimum mat width of 6.5 feet (2 m).
 
 4.
 
 An average mat weight of 0.5 pound per square yard (270 g/m2) 10 percent.
 
 5. A top netting weight of approximately 3 pounds per 1000 square feet (15 kg/1000 m2) and a bottom netting
 weight of approximately 1 pound per 1000 square feet (5 kg/1000 m2).
 C. Type C Temporary Erosion Control Mat. Conform to the following:
 1. A machine-produced mat consisting of 70 percent agricultural straw and 30 percent coconut fiber covered
 on the top with a photodegradable polypropylene netting having an approximate 5/8  5/8 inch (16  16 mm) mesh
 and on the bottom with a photodegradable polypropylene netting having an approximate 1/4  1/4 inch (6  6 mm)
 mesh, sewn together with cotton thread.
 2.
 
 A consistent thickness with the straw and coconut fiber evenly distributed over the entire area of the mat.
 
 3.
 
 A minimum mat width of 6.5 feet (2 m).
 
 4.
 
 An average mat weight of 0.5 pound per square yard (270 g/m2)  10 percent.
 
 5. A top netting weight of approximately 3 pounds per 1000 square feet (15 kg/1000 m2) and a bottom netting
 weight of approximately 1 pound per 1000 square feet (5 kg/1000 m2).
 E. Type E Temporary Erosion Control Mat. Conform to the following:
 
 1. A machine-produced mat consisting of 100 percent coconut fiber covered on the top and bottom with an
 ultraviolet stabilized polypropylene netting having an approximate 5/8  5/8 inch (16  16 mm) mesh, and sewn
 together with polyester thread.
 2.
 
 A consistent thickness with the coconut fiber evenly distributed over the entire area of the mat.
 
 3.
 
 A minimum mat width of 6.5 feet (2 m).
 
 4.
 
 An average mat weight of 0.5 pound per square yard (270 g/m2)  10 percent.
 
 5. An ultraviolet stabilized polypropylene netting with a weight of approximately 3 pounds per 1000 square
 feet (15 kg/1000 m2).
 F. Type F Temporary Erosion Control Mat. Conform to the following:
 1.
 
 A uniform open plain weave of undyed and unbleached single jute yarn.
 
 2.
 
 Loosely twisted yarn not varying in thickness by more than one-half its normal diameter.
 
 3.
 
 Furnish mats in rolled strips with:
 a.
 
 A minimum length of 50 yards (46 m).
 
 b.
 
 A width of 48 inches  1 inch (1.2 m  25 mm).
 
 c.
 
 Warp ends width 81  3.
 
 d.
 
 Weft ends per yard (meter) 41  3 (49  3).
 
 e.
 
 An average weight of 1.22 pounds per linear yard (0.6 kg/m)  10 percent.
 
 G. Type G Temporary Erosion Control Mat. Conform to the following:
 1. A machine-produced mat consisting of wood excelsior, 80 percent of which is at least 8 inches (200 mm)
 in length.
 2.
 
 Excelsior cut from wood that is properly cured to achieve adequately curled and barbed fibers.
 
 3.
 
 A consistent thickness with the fiber evenly distributed over the entire area of the mat.
 
 4. For use in ditches or channels, cover the top and bottom of the excelsior with lightweight netting entwined
 with the excelsior for maximum strength and ease of handling, or cover the top only with heavyweight netting
 machine sewn on maximum 2 to 4-inch (51 to 102 mm) centers along the longitudinal axis of the material. For all
 other applications, cover the top with lightweight netting entwined with the excelsior for maximum strength and
 ease of handling.
 5. Regardless of application, lightweight netting consists of either netting having a maximum 3  1 inch (75
  25 mm) weave, twisted craft [check spelling] paper yarn having a high web strength or biodegradable plastic.
 
 I.
 
 6.
 
 Mat widths of 24, 36, 48, or 78 inches (0.6, 0.9, 1.2, or 2 m) or greater, 1 inch (25 mm).
 
 7.
 
 Mat rolls of more than 90 feet (27.5 m) in length.
 
 8.
 
 A mat weight of not less than 0.72 pound per square yard (390 g/m2) constant weight, air dry.
 
 Type I Temporary Erosion Control Mat. Conform to the following:
 1.
 
 Extruded polymeric plastic net having a mesh opening of approximately 3/4  3/4 inch (20  20 mm).
 
 2. A netting with an average weight of 3 pounds per 1000 square feet (15 kg/1000 m2)  10 percent and a
 minimum tensile strength of 15 pounds over a 3-inch width (67 N over a 77 mm width) in the weakest principal
 direction.
 712.12
 Tied Concrete Block Mat. Furnish materials tested to ASTM D6460. The Department will
 determine acceptance of Type 1, 2, and 3 based on independent third party test data. The acceptable stability
 threshold shear values are:
 
 Type 1:
 Type 2:
 Type 3:
 
 3 lbf/ft²
 5 lbf/ft²
 7 lbf/ft²
 
 (140 Pa)
 (240 Pa)
 (340 Pa)
 
 Furnish products according to the Departments QPL.
 712.13
 Articulating Concrete Block Revetment System. Furnish materials according to ASTM D 6684
 and tested according to ASTM D 7277. The Department will determine acceptance of Type 1, 2, 3 based on
 independent third party test data. The acceptable stability threshold shear values are:
 Type 1:
 Type 2:
 Type 3:
 
 17 lbf/ft²
 20 lbf/ft²
 23 lbf/ft²
 
 (810 Pa)
 (960 Pa)
 (1100 Pa)
 
 Furnish products according to the Department’s QPL.
 712.14
 Detectable Warning Devices Furnish materials conforming to the following requirements:
 Products must be compliant with AASHTO M 333.
 Products will be designed to be physically embedded into concrete and be of a color that visually contrasts with
 the concrete. Do not use black as a color.
 Products may be manufactured from materials of cast iron, stainless steel, polymer concrete, reinforced polymer
 composite, or granite. Products may be designed as either one time installation products or replaceable products.
 Surface applied, stamped concrete, concrete, and brick products will not be permitted.
 Detectable Warning Devices will be provided with a minimum 5 year written warranty with at least the following:
 A. The installed device will remain AASHTO M 333. compliant for the term of the warranty period.
 B. During the warranty period at least 85% of the truncated domes on installed device will remain entirely intact.
 C. The installed device will remain securely affixed to and flush with the concrete substrate.
 D. Any surface coating applied to the installed product will remain in place and color fast.
 E. At no cost to the Department, the manufacturer will replace the product, including all installation costs, if
 during the 5 year warranty period the product fails to comply with the above warranty requirements. Any new
 device installed under the warranty will meet the requirements of this specification
 As part of the Department Acceptance process for inclusion on the Approved List submit the proposed warranty
 to the Department along with material samples, dimensional drawings, and written installation procedures.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s Approved List.
 Begin warranty period upon Contract acceptance.
 At the preconstruction meeting provide the Engineer with the written warranty signed by the executive officer
 of the manufacturing company.
 
 720 DELINEATOR MATERIALS
 720.01
 Reflectors. For bridge parapet bracket or bridge rail bracket, furnish rectangular reflectors that are a
 minimum size of 3 × 6 inches (75 × 150 mm) and that consist of reflective sheeting according to 730.192 or 730.193
 adhered to an aluminum plate. Furnish white, yellow, or red reflectors as specified. Furnish aluminum plate for
 reflectors according to ASTM B 209 (B 209M), 6061-T6 with a minimum thickness of 0.060 inch (1.5 mm).
 For ground mounted delineators, furnish rectangular reflective sheeting according to 730.192 or 730.193 that is
 a minimum size of 3 × 6 inches (75 × 150 mm) adhered to a flexible post. Furnish white, yellow or red reflectors
 as specified.
 For surface mounted delineators, furnish a 3-inch (75 mm) wide band of reflective sheeting according to 730.192
 or 730.193 adhered completely around a flexible post. Furnish white or yellow reflectors as specified.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 720.03
 
 Flexible Posts. Conform to Supplement 1020.
 
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 
 721 RAISED PAVEMENT MARKER MATERIALS
 721.01 Raised Pavement Marker Castings. Ensure that the casting is nodular iron according to ASTM A
 536, hardened to 51-55 RC, snow plowable in the two opposing longitudinal directions and designed to
 accommodate a replacement prismatic retroreflector.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 721.02 Prismatic Retroreflector and Adhesive. Furnish reflectors that contain one or two prismatic reflective
 faces to reflect incident light from a single or opposite directions. Furnish reflectors with nominal dimensions of
 4  2  0.48 inch (100  50  12 mm). Ensure that the reflector fits securely in the recessed area and does not
 protrude above the profile of the casting.
 Furnish manufacturer recommended retroreflector adhesive to bond the prismatic retroreflectors to casting.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 721.03 Casting Adhesive. Casting adhesives will follow a two-step acceptance procedure.
 Step 1 will be materials testing and a flow test.
 A. Furnish adhesive material conforming to AASHTO M 237, Type IV, except that the viscosity is 200 to 900
 poise at 77 + 2 °F (25 + 1 °C), the unit weight is 11.3 to 11.9 pounds per gallon (1.35 to 1.43 kg/L), and the air
 requirement is waived.
 B. For materials conforming to the above requirements provide samples of the adhesives to the Department for
 flow testing.
 The flow test procedure is:
 1. In a standard 2 × 4 block of pine wood (3.5 in wide × 1.5 in deep × 22 in long) cut a channel in the block
 that is 3/4 in wide by 1/2 in deep with a dado blade. The channel will run longitudinally 22 inches long in the center
 of the 3.5 inch wide face of the wood block. Use tape to block off the ends of the channel.
 2. Condition epoxy (Part A and Part B) and the wood block for a minimum of 4 hours at 120 °F.
 3. Mix Part A and Part B epoxy separately for 15 seconds.
 4. Mix Part A epoxy with Part B epoxy, at the manufacturer’s required ratio, for 1.5 minutes. The total amount
 of sample mixed will equal 40 mL.
 5. Temporarily dam off 6.5 inches of the channel at one end of the wood block.
 6. Keeping the wood block flat, pour mixed product into the blocked off end of the channel for 30 seconds.
 The product should fill this blocked off volume. Remove the temporary dam.
 7. Immediately place wood block with the epoxy filled channel on a 15 percent grade incline, with epoxy
 placed at the top of the slope.
 8. Record distance the epoxy flows down the incline.
 9. The average distance of three tests will be less than 20 inches.
 Step 2 will include a Department controlled field application and performance test.
 The epoxy adhesive will be field evaluated on an ODOT roadway project in north eastern Ohio. The roadway
 will be new asphalt pavement. The roadway will be a minimum of 2 miles long and carry a minimum of 30,000
 ADT. It will be the responsibility of the epoxy manufacturer to work with an ODOT approved RPM installer to
 find routes in Ohio that meet these requirements and have them installed, at no cost to the Department, as a part of
 an existing ODOT contract. The casting adhesive will be evaluated after one year of service. Removal of any
 casting from the roadway after one year will be considered failure of the epoxy adhesive. If no castings are removed
 from the roadway and the product meets the requirements listed above, the epoxy adhesive will be approved and
 added to the QPL. The adhesive will continue to be monitored and will remain approved as long as the product
 continues to perform to the satisfaction of the Department
 
 Approved materials will be incorporated on the Department’s QPL. Only furnish materials listed on the
 Department’s QPL.
 
 725 HIGHWAY LIGHTING MATERIALS
 725.01
 General. Furnish luminaires, conduits, wire, switch gear and other electrical hardware that are listed
 with Underwriters Laboratories.
 Ensure that each item of manufactured electrical apparatus as a unit has a durable nameplate identifying the
 manufacturer and manufacturer’s product identification.
 Only provide samples when required by the Laboratory.
 725.02
 Wire and Cable. Ensure that each nonshielded wire or cable rated 0-2kV is single conductor,
 stranded copper with cross-linked thermosetting polyethylene insulation, nonjacketed, meets the requirements of
 ICEA S-95-658/NEMA WC70 and is of UL Type RHH-RHW-USE except for conductors 10 AWG and smaller
 for which those with insulation meeting the requirements of UL Type XHHW may also be used.
 Ensure that each non-shielded wire or cable rated 2400 volts is single conductor, stranded copper with
 chemically cross-linked polyethylene insulation, nonjacketed, meets the requirements of ICEA S-96-659/NEMA
 WC71 and of UL Type MV-90 dry.
 Ensure that each cable’s identification device defining its use is either a tag tied onto the cable or a band applied
 around the cable. Ensure that cable tags are of copper, brass or plastic (except for tags within switch and device
 cabinets which shall be nonconducting) 1/32 inch (0.8 mm) minimum in thickness permanently fastened to the
 cables by means of cable tying straps. Ensure that cable identifying bands are approximately 1/32 inch (0.8 mm)
 thick wrap completely around the cable and closed securely. Ensure that each tag or band is marked using 1/4 inch
 (6 mm) minimum height embossed or engraved letters.
 Ensure that conductors shall be marked “CKT” followed by the circuit designation shown on the plans and that
 grounding conductors are marked “GND” and that neutral conductors are marked “NEU” and that hot conductors
 are marked “Line“ followed by “1” or “2” for single phase power or “Phase“ followed by “A“ or “B“ or “C“ for
 three phase power.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 725.03
 Unit Type Duct-Cable Systems Ensure that factory made cable-in-duct has conductors as specified,
 that the duct is high density polyethylene Type III, Class C, Category 5, Grade 34 conforming to NEMA TC-7 and
 that the duct has the manufacturer’s name and the year of manufacture included in the marking.
 Conductors and neutrals will conform to 725.02.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 725.04
 Rigid Galvanized Steel Conduit and Fittings Ensure that rigid galvanized steel conduit complies
 with the requirements of ANSI C 80.1 and UL 6 Type I and that each length of conduit bears the UL label. Furnish
 fittings that comply with the requirements of ANSI/NEMA FB 1 AND ANSI/UL 514B.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 725.051 Polyvinyl Chloride Conduits and Fittings. Furnish polyvinyl chloride conduit EPC-40-PVC
 conforming with NEMA Standard TC 2 for normal above ground or below ground installation, either concrete
 encased or direct burial. Use fittings conforming to NEMA Standard TC-2 references.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 725.052 Polyethylene Conduits and Fittings. Furnish polyethylene conduit EPEC-40-HDPE conforming to
 NEMA Standard TC 7 for below ground only installation, whether concrete encased or direct burial. Use fittings
 conforming to ASTM D3350.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 725.06
 Polymer Concrete Pull Boxes Ensure that the polymer concrete pull box and cover is of aggregate
 bound with a polymer resin. Ensure that the body of the box is of one piece construction. Ensure that all surfaces
 of the box and cover are smooth and that the cover has a molded slip resistant surface. Ensure that the cover is slip
 resistant and is labeled in clearly legible block letters 1 to 2 inches (25 to 50 mm) in height integral to the cover
 
 with the word “TRAFFIC”, “LIGHTING”, “ELECTRIC” or “COMM“ to designate the circuit(s) contained.
 Ensure that the cover closely fits the opening and is secured by stainless steel bolts (hex head unless penta head is
 specified in the plans) and hardware and that the threaded holes into which the cover bolts fasten are of open bottom
 design. Ensure that the box and cover meet the structural requirements of ANSI/SCTE 77-2002 “Specification for
 Underground Enclosure Integrity” Tier 15, including lateral loading requirements. The load rating of the box shall
 be permanently denoted on the top surface of the cover. The temperature range of the cover shall be at least -30°C
 to +80°C.
 The pull box cover shall be polymer concrete.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 725.07
 Plastic Pull Boxes Ensure that the plastic pull box and cover is of high density ultraviolet stabilized
 molded polymer or structural foam. The box depth may be obtained through the use of extensions or stacking.
 Ensure that the cover is slip resistant and is labeled in clearly legible block letters 1 to 2 inches (25 to 50 mm) in
 height integral to the cover with the word “TRAFFIC”, “LIGHTING”, “ELECTRIC” or “COMM“ to designate the
 circuit(s) contained. Ensure that the cover closely fits the opening and is secured by stainless steel bolts (hex head
 unless penta head is specified in the plans) and hardware and that the threaded holes into which the cover bolts
 fasten are of open bottom design. Ensure that the box and cover meet the structural requirements of ANSI/SCTE
 77-2002 “Speicifcation for Underground Enclosure Integrity” Tier 15, including lateral loading requirements. The
 load rating of the box shall be permanently denoted on the top surface of the cover. The temperature range of the
 cover shall be at least -30°C to +80°C.
 The pull box cover shall be polymer concrete.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 725.08
 
 Portland Concrete Pull Boxes.
 
 A. Pull Box. Ensure that the Portland concrete pull box is constructed of reinforced portland cement concrete.
 When the box is precast, provide pull boxes from suppliers certified to Supplement 1073. Ensure that the pull box
 cover is constructed according to 725.08.B and as shown on the plans.
 B. Pull Box Covers. Furnish metal pull box covers that conform to the following requirements:
 1. Furnish 1/2-inch (13 mm) thick steel plate for the steel cover conforming to 711.01 with a 1/2-inch (13
 mm) minimum flange around the edge and galvanized to conform to 711.02. Display on the steel cover or on an
 attached brass or stainless steel plate (tag) clearly legible block letters 1 to 2 inches (25 to 50 mm) in height with
 the word “TRAFFIC”, “LIGHTING”, “ELECTRIC” or “COMM” to designate the circuit(s) contained. Ensure
 that the word designating the use is in raised letters that are either integral to the steel cover or integral to a brass
 or stainless steel plate 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) in thickness securely mechanically attached to the steel cover at the four
 corners of the tag and at intervals 2 to 3 inches (50 to 75 mm) along the perimeter between corners.
 2. Furnish gray iron or ductile iron with a minimum thickness of 3/8 inch (9 mm) conforming to 711.14.
 Certification is required. Ensure that the word “TRAFFIC,” “LIGHTING”, “ELECTRIC,” or “COMM” is cast in
 the top surface of the cover forming letters 1 to 2 inches (25 to 50 mm) in height.
 725.10
 Junction Boxes. Ensure that the junction boxes are iron castings hot-dip galvanized in accordance
 with 711.02. Ensure that the junction boxes meet the requirements of NEMA ICS-6-Type 3. When a drilled and
 tapped conduit entry is stipulated, ensure that the junction box has adequate wall thickness and that a boss has been
 cast into the box if necessary.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 725.11
 
 Luminaires
 
 A. Optical System. Furnish a luminaire set to the photometric distribution stipulated in the plan and that the
 distribution along with the settings required to produce it are clearly indicated on a durable label affixed to the
 interior of the housing in a position readily apparent and easily read by a worker lamping the luminaire.
 
 Furnish a luminaire with a borosilicate glass refractor free of striations and imperfections and embossed to
 clearly indicate the street side when the refractor may be installed in more than one position. Ensure the refractor
 is held firmly in the housing, but is easily removed without the use of special tools.
 Furnish a luminaire with an aluminum reflector with a specular polished reflective surface free from scratches.
 Ensure the reflector is held firmly in the housing, but is easily removed without the use of special tools.
 Furnish a luminaire with a socket for mogul base lamps where there is a choice of size for the application at
 hand.
 Furnish a lamp socket with a large center contact spring providing a firm contact with the lamp base and lamp
 grips to prevent the lamp from loosening. Ensure that the shell is shrouded in porcelain and that the wiring terminals
 and contacts are identified.
 Ensure that socket position adjustments have positive indexing such as holes, lugs or notches and are not slots
 with infinite settings.
 Ensure that socket adaptors are not necessary and not used.
 B. Lamps. Furnish a luminaire that has been provided with a lamp of the type and wattage specified and that each
 lamp has a clear glass envelope, a date recording feature and does not have any ballasting or starting components.
 Furnish high pressure sodium lamps that are first line, high quality lamps having heat resistant clear glass
 envelopes with a quartz arc tube interior with horizontal initial lumens and approximate hours of life not be less
 than the values shown in Table 725.11-1.
 TABLE 725.11-1
 ANSI WATTS
 S62
 70
 S54
 100
 S55
 150
 S66
 200
 S50
 250
 S67
 310
 S51
 400
 S52
 1,000
 
 Horizontal Lumens Initial
 5,800
 9,500
 16,000
 22,000
 27,500
 37,000
 50,000
 130,000
 
 Economic Life Hours
 14,000
 14,000
 16,000
 16,000
 16,000
 16,000
 16,000
 16,000
 
 Furnish high pressure sodium lamps that produce a minimum of 80 percent of the initial lumen output at the
 end of economic life.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 C. Ballast. Ensure that the ballast is of an integral design contained within the luminaire housing.
 If the ballast is to be wired line to line or phase to phase, ensure that the ballast has an isolated primary winding.
 Furnish a ballast (in conjunction with the starter in the case of high pressure sodium lamps) capable of starting
 and operating the lamp at ambient temperatures as low as -20 °F (-30 °C).
 At circuit voltage of nominal plus or minus 10 percent or the ballast manufacturer’s stated range if greater,
 ensure that the ballast can start (in conjunction with the starter in the case of high pressure sodium lamps) and
 operate the lamp within the lamp’s ANSI operating parameters for the full design life of the lamp.
 Furnish a ballast capable of operation with the lamp in an open or short circuit condition for six months without
 significant loss of ballast life.
 Furnish a starter of encapsulated solid state design capable of withstanding the temperatures encountered in
 the ballast compartment of the luminaire.
 Ensure that the starter provides a timed pulsing with sufficient follow through current to completely ionize and
 start all lamps that meet published ANSI standards.
 
 Ensure that the starter has push-on type electrical terminations and is field replaceable with no adjustment
 necessary for proper operation.
 Ensure that there is a barrier type terminal block for connection of the incoming electrical circuit.
 D. Housing. Furnish a housing of cast aluminum.
 Ensure that the housing has a flat area on the top side on which a level may be placed and read by a worker
 leveling a mounted luminaire on an erected support.
 Ensure that the door(s) providing access to the optical and electrical components have hinges and latches of
 corrosion resistant materials that remain securely closed during operation.
 Ensure that the silicone rubber, ethylene propylene terpolymer, dacron felt or other durable gaskets and seals
 supplied by the manufacturer either as part of the basic luminaire or as options are in good condition and properly
 installed at the socket entry, between the refractor and reflector and any other location where such gaskets or shields
 are part of the luminaire and options.
 Ensure that the exterior finish of the luminaire is a light gray color unless otherwise specified.
 Furnish a glare shield of aluminum or opaque plastic material when specified. Furnish a shield supplied by the
 manufacturer of the luminaire.
 E. Conventional Luminaries. Ensure that the luminaire housing doors may be opened, closed, removed or
 installed without the use of tools.
 Ensure that the clamp for the slip-fit mounting accommodates both 1 1/4 inch (32 mm) and 2 inch (50 mm)
 nominal pipe mounting bracket. Ensure that a stop is provided as part of the housing to prevent over insertion of
 the bracket into the housing. Ensure that the clamp engages at least 4 1/2 inches (115 mm) longitudinally along
 the arm of the bracket arm between the extremes of a minimum of two clamping points. Ensure that the mounting
 clamp provides for leveling of the luminaire to the specified transverse and longitudinal position with respect to
 the roadway.
 Ensure that the luminaire is equipped with a device indicating the direction and amount of tilt over a range of
 zero to five degrees in any direction with indications at level, three degree tilt and five degree tilt all accurate to
 one half degree. Ensure that the indicating device is clearly readable in daylight from a distance of 50 feet (15 m)
 and in no way alters or reduces the amount of light from the luminaire. Ensure that the indicating device is
 constructed of a transparent container having one horizontal surface which is curvilinear in any vertical cross
 section for supporting an indicator and a damping fluid. Ensure that the damping fluid is a liquid which shall be
 suitable for operation at -40 °F (-40 °C) and that the transparent container is fabricated from clear
 ultraviolet-inhibited acrylic or similar material.
 Ensure that the glare shield will cut off the upward component of light and that it does not reduce the total
 output of the luminaire more than 3 percent.
 Ensure that the luminaire has a label or decal indicating the type of source and wattage rating. Ensure that,
 with the luminaire installed in its normal operating position, the label or decal is clearly legible in daylight at a
 distance of 50 feet (15 m). Ensure that the labeling is in accordance with the provisions of NEMA Publication
 OD-150 or EEI Publication TDJ-150.
 Ensure that the complete conventional luminaire assembly including the lamp and all options including, when
 required, the glare shield does not weigh more than 75 pounds (34 kg).
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 F. Wall Mounted Underpass Luminaires. Ensure that the assembly is weatherproof and sealed against dust.
 Ensure that a wire entry for the incoming power is provided on both of the vertical side surfaces of the housing,
 that each entry is drilled and tapped for 3/4-inch (19 mm) conduit and that the unused entry is properly closed with
 the screw type plug supplied by the manufacturer.
 Ensure that the luminaire housing doors may be opened, closed, removed or installed without the use of special
 tools.
 
 Ensure that the housing can be mounted onto a vertical flat surface by means of cap screws or bolts through
 the wall side of the housing.
 For mounting on concrete, use adhesive-grip anchors designed to be set into a drilled hole half-filled with
 material meeting 705.20, with a minimum hole depth of 1-3/4 inches.
 Ensure that the luminaire has the option for protecting the glass refractor with a guard or shield that is integral
 to the luminaire and does not have to be removed to gain access to the lamp or ballast.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 G. High Mast / Low Mast Luminaires. Ensure that luminaires with a symmetric distribution shall have an initial
 intensity of no more than 100 candela per 1000 lamp lumens at nadir and no more than 325 candela per 1000 lamp
 lumens at angles between 55 and 65 degrees above nadir.
 Ensure that luminaires with an asymmetric distribution or a long and narrow distribution shall have an initial
 intensity of no more than 175 candela per 1000 lamp lumens at nadir and no more than 425 candela per 1000 lamp
 lumens at angles from 66 through 73 degrees above nadir.
 Ensure that the output efficiency of the luminaire shall be not less than 65 percent of the bare lamp lumens.
 The luminaire shall emit at least 25 percent but no more than 35 percent of the bare lamp lumens at vertical angles
 of at least 60 degrees above nadir but no more than 90 degrees above nadir.
 Ensure that no portion of the arc tube of the lamp shall be viewable at angles of 70 degrees or more above
 nadir.
 Ensure that the photometric distribution is produced by an optical assembly consisting of a reflector alone or
 in combination with a refractor which redirects the output of a lamp mounted in a socket therein and that the
 reflector and refractor (if used) are each of a one piece design.
 Ensure that the optical assembly is field rotatable to align the light distribution horizontally independent of the
 orientation of the arm supporting the luminaire.
 Ensure that a luminaire for use with a 1000 watt lamp has an auxiliary lamp support that engages the outer end
 of the lamp envelope.
 Ensure that the luminaire is of substantial design adequate to operate at mounting heights up to and including
 150 feet (45 m) and wind velocities up to and including 90 mph (145 km/h).
 Ensure that the luminaire mounts by means of a slip fit onto a horizontal 2-inch (50 mm) pipe and that the
 luminaire’s integral mounting provides adjustment for leveling but remains secure and does not twist about the
 mounting pipe of the bracket when subjected to the vibration and wind loads of the installation.
 Ensure that the maximum weight of the complete luminaire does not exceed 75 pounds (34 kg) and the
 maximum projected area does not exceed 3.5 square feet (0.3 m2).
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 725.12
 Polyethylene, Fiberglass Reinforced, Pull Box with Polymer Concrete Cover and Support Ring
 Ensure that the pull box body is of fiberglass reinforced high density ultraviolet stabilized molded polyethylene
 with a polymer concrete cover support ring and polymer concrete cover. Ensure that the body of the box is of one
 piece construction. Ensure that the body of the box has a wall thickness of at least 1/4 inch (6 mm). Ensure that
 the cover support ring is permanently integrated into the box. Ensure that the cover is slip resistant and has in
 clearly legible block letters 1 to 2 inches (25 to 50 mm) in height integral to the cover the word “TRAFFIC”,
 “LIGHTING”, “ELECTRIC” or “COMM” to designate the circuit(s) contained. Ensure that the cover closely fits
 the opening and is secured by stainless steel bolts and hardware and that the threaded holes into which the cover
 bolts fasten are of open bottom design. Ensure that the box and cover meet the structural requirements of Society
 of Cable Telecommunications Engineers Tier 5.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 
 725.15
 Circuit Cable Connections and Terminations. Ensure that each connector or terminator is of the
 same voltage rating as the wire being connected or terminated except that 600 volt connectors may be used with
 5000 volt (secondary service) cable used in 600 volt service for the highway lighting circuits.
 Ensure that each connector or terminator is a compression style which fully encloses the conductor(s) and is of
 high strength copper alloy not a metal other than copper which has been plated. Ensure that each connector used
 for a “butt” splice is a sleeve type with a “stop” in the center.
 A. Termination of Oversize Wire. Ensure that each cable terminal of each device can properly accommodate
 the size of the wire being terminated. If a terminal of adequate size cannot be furnished, ensure that a short length
 of smaller wire is connected to the oversize conductor through the use of a proper butt style crimp connector or a
 terminal block, that no strands have been cut back in the oversize conductor to make the connection and that the
 smaller wire is rated to carry the full ampacity of the circuit protection device.
 B. Fused Pull-Apart Connection. Ensure that each fused pull-apart cable connector kit is a molded synthetic
 rubber housing consisting of a female line side with two ports and a male load side with one port containing a
 socket type fuse holder wherein the fuse also acts as the pin for the load connection which is designed to break the
 circuit when the two halves of the connector body are separated. Ensure that the assembled kit is rated for direct
 burial and exposure to sunlight. Ensure that the metal parts of connector are of copper with a conductivity of 90
 percent, have individual compression connections for each wire on the line side, have a crimp connection for the
 wire on the load side and have annular spring on the socket for each end of the fuse. Ensure that the fuse holder is
 for a standard midget 13/32 × 1 -1/2-inch (10 × 38 mm) fuse. Ensure that the fuse is rated 600 VAC, 100,000 AIC
 and does not have a glass body. Ensure that each cable port is sized for the wire or cable entering the entering the
 port and that there is a closure for the second line port if it is not to be used.
 C. Unfused Pull-Apart Connection. Ensure that each unfused pull-apart cable connector kit is a molded
 synthetic rubber housing consisting of a female line side with two ports and a male load side with one port
 containing a line side socket and load side pin making a connection which is designed to break the circuit when the
 two halves of the connector body are separated. Ensure that the assembled kit is rated for direct burial and exposure
 to sunlight. Ensure that the metal parts of connector are of copper with a conductivity of 90 percent, have an
 individual compression connection for each wire on the line side, have a crimp connection for the wire on the load
 side, and have an annular spring on the socket for the pin. Ensure that each cable port is sized for the wire or cable
 entering the port and that there is a closure for the second line port if it is not to be used.
 D. Unfused Bolted Connection. Ensure that each unfused re-enterable cable connector kit is a rigid molded
 plastic sleeve closed on each end by a molded synthetic rubber female end housing having one or two ports as
 needed containing space in which the connection is made by crimping a lug onto each wire and then bolting all of
 the lugs together. Ensure that the assembled kit is rated for direct burial and exposure to sunlight. Ensure that the
 metal parts of connector are of copper with a conductivity of 90 percent and that each connecting bolt has a selflocking nut. Ensure that each wire enters through a port sized for the wire and that there is a closure for the port if
 it is not to be used.
 E. Unfused Permanent Connection. Ensure that each cable splicing kit is a rigid transparent molded body
 having as many as two ports on each which allows the completed splice to be completely encapsulated by filling
 the mold with a resin compound. Ensure that the actual conductor connections are made using one time use
 compression connectors and that each wire or cable enters the mold through its own port.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 725.16 Ground Rods. Ensure that each ground rod is one piece, at least ¾ inch in diameter and 10 feet in length
 with a driving point on the lower end. If other than circular cross section, assure the periphery of the rod is 4.7
 inches or more. Ensure that the rod is of solid construction and is 100% stainless steel and UL listed. 1 inch by 10
 feet galvanized rods may be installed through 12/31/2018. After that date, only ground rods meeting the material
 specifications above will be accepted.
 Ensure that the rod bears a label denoting that it is UL listed.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 
 725.19 Power Service Components. Furnish the materials and equipment comprising a service pole, including
 service equipment, that meets the following requirements.
 A. Service Entrance Conduit. Ensure that the service entrance or riser conduit is rigid galvanized steel with a
 rain tight galvanized steel service entrance head (weatherhead) threaded to fit the conduit containing a composition
 insert for three conductors.
 B. Service Disconnect. Ensure that the service disconnect is a properly rated fused switch of the ampacity
 specified and solid neutral. Ensure that the service fuses are cartridge fuses on the load side of the switch. Solid
 metal tie bars, when used to tie two or more circuit poles together on a fused disconnect and/or circuit breaker,
 shall be constrcted of 1/8-inch (min.) electrical-grade copper, not aluminum.
 C. Lighting Contactor. Ensure that the lighting contactor is of the open type electromagnetically held.
 Ensure that control of the contactor is through a photocell connected through a “HAND-OFF-AUTOMATIC”
 selector switch accessible only with the contactor enclosure open. Ensure that the control circuit is a separate
 circuit with its own protection.
 D. Lighting Circuit Protection. Ensure that separate protection is provided on the load side of the lighting
 contactor for each lighting circuit and that such protection will open all line or phase conductors of the respective
 circuit should a fault occur on any one line or phase conductors.
 E. Photoelectric Cell. Ensure that the photoelectric control is a twist-lock plug-in, utility grade, solid state,
 cadmium sulfide type of the proper voltage, rated for 1000 watts maximum load, with integral surge protection, a
 fail-safe mode in which the lighting circuits will remain energized, and a hermetically sealed case. Ensure that the
 nominal “turn on” level is 1 footcandle (10 lux) vertical and that the nominal “turn-off” level is 6 footcandles (65
 lux) vertical with tolerances of 20 percent for the specified values. Ensure that the photocell has a time delayed
 response that will not respond to flashes of light from lightning, headlights of passing vehicles or emergency vehicle
 strobes and beacons. Ensure that the photoelectric control mounting bracket has a EEI-NEMA locking-type
 receptacle.
 F. Switchgear Enclosure. Ensure that components are mounted on a removable back panel of 14 gage or heavier
 enameled steel rather than directly on the back wall of the enclosure and that the back panel mountings do not
 penetrate the walls of the enclosure. Provide a welded grounding stud on the enclosure interior.
 Ensure that a neutral terminal bar of adequate ampere rating and with holes in number and of size to terminate
 each conductor separately is provided in each enclosure where neutral conductors are to be terminated. Ensure that
 an equipment grounding conductor terminal bar of adequate ampere rating and with holes in number and of size to
 terminate each conductor separately is provided in each enclosure where grounding conductors are to be terminated.
 When there is no code or utility company prohibition, a combination neutral and equipment grounding conductor
 bar may be furnished. Attach the grounding electrode conductor to the grounding stud. Provide a bonding jumper
 from the equipment grounding bar to the grounding stud.
 Ensure that an enclosure containing a disconnect switch with an external operating handle allows that handle
 to be padlocked in either the “OFF” or the “ON” position.
 Ensure that the enclosure containing the service disconnect switch has an interlock to prevent the door from
 being opened when the switch is in the “ON” position.
 Ensure that the enclosure provides for padlocking the door.
 Ensure that each switchgear enclosure is a NEMA ICS-1-110.15 Type 4 fabricated from No. 16 gage or heavier
 AISI Type 302 or 303 annealed stainless steel with fully welded seams and a brushed finish.
 All fasteners used in assembly of the enclosures shall conform to ASTM A 320/A 320M (AISI-300 series).
 G. Wiring Schematic, Wiring Diagram, Placards. Furnish both a schematic diagram and a wiring diagram of
 the entire power service from the power company service transformer secondary connection through the lighting
 branch circuit connections in triplicate with two copies delivered to the project and the third copy placed in the
 service disconnect enclosure. The Engineer will ensure that one of the two copies delivered to the project is filed
 with the project records and the other is delivered to the maintaining agency.
 
 Ensure that each placard to be attached to an apparatus enclosure is of multiple layers of plastic thermally
 bonded together to provide a plate of at least 1/8 inch (3 mm) in thickness with engraved plain block letters at least
 1/2 inch (12 mm) in height. Ensure that placards designating the function of the apparatus contained in an enclosure
 or other such information are of white letters on a black placard. Ensure that placards warning of high voltage
 possibly present in an enclosure or other such warning are of white letters on a red placard.
 H. Customer Service Pole. Furnish a wood pole that complies with Supplement 1072. Ensure that the pole and
 any cross arms or pole key is Southern Pine or Western Red Cedar, full length, pressure treated in compliance with
 specifications of the American Wood Protection Association or AASHTO M-133. Ensure that the pole is 35 feet
 (10.5 m) minimum in length and Class 4 or heavier and conforming to ANSI 05.1 Specifications and Dimensions
 for wood poles. Ensure that the pole is reasonably straight without pronounced sweep or short crooks.
 Ensure that all pole hardware, including racks, braces, straps, guy anchors, guy wire, clamps, bolts, nuts,
 washers, screws, nails, etc. is hot dip galvanized in accordance with 711.02.
 Ensure that the grounding conductor is fastened to the pole with copper clad, rolled point staples of adequate
 size.
 Ensure that the grounding conductor molding is either wood or plastic, in sections not less than 8 feet (2.4 m)
 long, of sufficient width and groove depth to completely enclose the grounding conductor.
 Ensure that each pole anchor is of malleable iron or galvanized steel, 6 inch (150 mm) minimum diameter,
 two-way or four-way expanding type. Ensure that each anchor rod is 5/8 inch (16 mm) minimum diameter, 8 feet
 (2.4 m) minimum length galvanized steel with thimble eye. Ensure that each guy wire is 3/8 inch (10 mm) minimum
 diameter, conforming to ASTM A 475, galvanized steel.
 I. Circuit Breakers. Ensure that circuit breaker assemblies for lighting control circuits are 100% rated for
 continuous (over 3 hours) operation by the manufacturer and labeled so, with a pre-defined minimum enclosure
 size, and housed in an enclosure sufficient to achieve the 100% rating.
 725.20
 Multiple Cell Polyvinyl Chloride Conduit and Fittings. Ensure that the multiple cell conduit
 consists of inner ducts conforming to NEMA TC-8 type DB in an outer conduit conforming to NEMA TC-2 (type
 EPC-40 or EPC-80 as specified except that size shall be the true inside diameter) in a factory preassembled unit.
 Ensure that fittings are factory made couplings that couple inner ducts and the outer conduit simultaneously,
 maintain the continuity and indexing of the inner ducts and are of a push fit design mechanically locked in place.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 725.21
 Luminaire Supports. Ensure that the complete luminaire support from the luminaire(s) down
 through the connection to the foundation or other structure to which the luminaire support is attached conforms to
 the requirements of AASHTO’s Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaires
 and Traffic Signals. Ensure that the combined stress ratio above the first field joint is greater than the combined
 stress ratio at the base of the pole.
 The design wind speed for all areas of the State shall be 90 mph (145 km/h).
 The Department may require various tests including destructive tests at either the factory or on site prior to
 acceptance of a support in which case the Department’s representative will supervise the Contractor and/or
 manufacturer as the appropriate entity performs the tests on supports selected at random by the Department from
 the lot produced for the project. Ensure that any support damaged by the testing is replaced at no additional cost
 to the Department.
 Ensure that the support identification labels are adhesive labels with silver white reflective characters on a
 reflective green background meeting the requirements of 730.18.
 Furnish certified luminaire supports according to Supplement 1091.
 A. Light Poles. Ensure that the deflection of the pole from vertical when placed under the load of the bracket
 arm, and a weight of 55 pounds (25 kg) in place of each luminaire does not exceed an angle of 1 degree 40 minutes
 when tested in accordance with Supplement 1025 and that certified copies of the results obtained from the
 deflection tests are furnished the Laboratory.
 
 A pole and arm constructed from either aluminum or steel but not a combination of the two may be furnished.
 Ensure that each bracket arm is made from straight or tapered stock round or ovaliptic in cross section not less
 in size than 2 inch (50 mm) nominal pipe.
 Ensure that the luminaire end of each bracket arm has an outside diameter equal to 2 inch (50 mm) pipe, is
 straight for a distance of eight inches (203 mm), with the longitudinal axis canted not less than 1 degree and not
 more than 4 degrees above horizontal.
 Ensure that the bracket has an internal raceway with a minimum internal diameter of 1 3/32 inches (28 mm)
 free of projections and obstructions, which, when assembled to the shaft, will permit installation of luminaire supply
 conductors without insulation damage and which will not require bending the conductors to a radius less than 3
 inches (75 mm).
 Ensure that the pole does not have more than two sections, that the shorter section of a sectional is at the top
 and that the shorter section of a sectional pole is not less than 10 feet (3 m) in length. Ensure that the pole sections
 are joined by telescoping the bottom of the upper section over the top of the lower section for a minimum length
 of 1 1/2 times the external diameter of the bottom of the upper section, driving the joint tight, and securing by
 through bolting with a stainless steel hex head bolt of a minimum diameter of 5/8 inch (16 mm).
 Ensure that a pole section does not have more than one longitudinal, automatically electrically welded seam
 and no transverse seams. Ensure that the longitudinal welded seam is neat and uniform in appearance, that the
 weld is not less than the thickness of the base material and that the bead height does not exceed 1/16 inch (2 mm).
 Ensure that the wall thickness is uniform throughout, except at the weld bead. Ensure that the cross section of the
 pole is circular, or multi-sided with no less than eight sides and that the difference between the major and minor
 diameters of poles of circular cross section or the difference between the maximum and minimum distances across
 corners for poles of multi-sided cross section, measured at any point along the longitudinal axis, does not exceed
 3/16 inch (5 mm).
 Ensure that steel poles are tapered tubes with a true continuous taper not less than 0.06 inches per foot (1.5
 mm per 300 mm) and not more than 0.16 inches per foot (4.0 mm per 300 mm).
 Ensure that aluminum poles, either spun or cold rolled, are a true continuous taper except for the top and
 bottom sections which may be straight, that no more than 40 percent of the total shaft length is straight, and that
 the average rate of shaft taper including straight portions of the shaft is not less than 0.06 inches per foot (1.5 mm
 per 300 mm) and not more than 0.16 inches per foot (4.0 mm per 300 mm).
 Ensure that the full design strength of the pole shaft section in bending can be transmitted through the base
 plate into the transformer base or the anchor bolts without permanent bending of the base plate or failure of the
 pole shaft to base plate connection.
 Ensure that there is a “J” hook inside the pole just below the top on which to hang the pole and bracket cable
 support assembly.
 Ensure that nonstructural castings for aluminum poles, including the pole cap are of ASTM B 26/B 26M or B
 108, Alloy S 5 A, Condition F.
 Ensure that steel poles and bracket arms are hot dipped galvanized after fabrication in accordance with the
 requirements of 711.02.
 Furnish aluminum poles and bracket arms in natural aluminum with a satin brushed surface.
 Ensure that each light pole is identified by a raised or engraved marking applied to the edge of the base plate
 which identifies the manufacturer and the year that the pole was manufactured and that such marking remains
 legible after the pole has been galvanized.
 Ensure that bolts, nuts, washers and other fasteners used to assemble the light pole are of galvanized steel
 conforming to 711.02, stainless steel conforming to ASTM A 320/A 320M (AISI-300 series) or silicon bronze
 conforming to ASTM B 98 / B 98M.
 
 Ensure that each non-frangible steel transformer base is capable of transmitting the design dead, live, ice and
 wind loads of the light pole to be mounted on it to the foundation without failure or permanent deformation, has a
 flush door permanently attached by means of a top-mounted continuous stainless steel hinge, and is made from
 steel conforming to ASTM A36/A 36M hot dip galvanized after fabrication.
 Ensure that each frangible aluminum transformer base is capable of transmitting the design dead, live, ice and
 wind loads of the light pole to be mounted on it to the foundation without failure or permanent deformation, has a
 flush aluminum door, bolted, or (if specified) permanently attached by means of a top-mounted continuous stainless
 steel hinge, and bears easily found and read durable labeling as to which AASHTO frangibility criteria the base
 meets. Ensure that the base has been tested and accepted by the FHWA as complying with the 1985 AASHTO
 frangibility requirements.
 Ensure that the bolts and nuts used to fasten the base plate of the pole to the transformer base are heavy hex
 conforming to ASTM A 307 and galvanized in accordance with 711.02. When either the top or the bottom of an
 aluminum transformer bases is to be fastened against non-galvanized steel, ensure that both the steel and the
 aluminum mating surfaces have been coated with a heavy film of zinc rich paint.
 Ensure that the anchor bolts are ASTM F1554 steel with 55,000 psi (380 Mpa) minimum yield strength, are
 galvanized in accordance with 711.02 and that the nuts are capable of developing the full strength of the anchor
 bolt and are galvanized in accordance with 711.02.
 B. Light Towers. Ensure that the structural design of the light tower is based on a load of six luminaires or the
 actual number of luminaires to be installed whichever is greater. Ensure that the structural design of the light tower
 is based on each luminaire weighing 75 pounds (34 kg) and having an effective projected area of 3.5 square feet
 (0.3 m2) or the actual weight and effective projected area of each luminaire whichever is greater. Ensure that the
 structural design of the light tower is based on the head frame assembly with lowering device weighing 340 pounds
 (154 kg) and having a projected area of 5.3 square feet (0.5 m2) or the actual weight and effective projected area of
 the head frame and lowering device whichever is greater.
 Ensure that the luminaire lowering device (consisting of the luminaire ring, the head frame, the winch, the
 power cables and all miscellaneous mechanical and electrical equipment mounted in or on the pole) and the pole
 are compatible with each other.
 1. Luminaire Ring. Ensure that the luminaire ring assembly is fabricated from steel which conforms to
 ASTM A 36/A 36M and that the ring is fitted with a separate 2 inch (50 mm) nominal steel pipe mounting arm
 directly attached to the ring for each luminaire.
 Ensure that the luminaire ring is supported by three wire ropes equally spaced around the ring. Ensure
 that the three wire ropes are of the same material and construction. Ensure that the wire rope for this purposed is
 3/16 inch (5 mm) minimum diameter and either galvanized steel hoisting cable or aircraft grade stainless steel
 control cable composed of 7 strands of 19 wires each. Ensure that each wire rope support cable is connected to the
 ring by a corrosion resistant device that will allow the connection to develop the full breaking strength of the wire
 rope while permitting ready adjustment of the length of the wire rope to level the ring. Ensure that the ring is
 equipped with a minimum of three spring loaded roller tipped centering arms equally spaced around the ring that
 are in continuous contact with the pole shaft and that the guide arm rollers are of a nonabrasive, water resistant
 material.
 Ensure that the luminaire ring is equipped with three positive latching devices equally spaced around the
 ring that latch to the head frame supporting the ring in the raised position allowing tension to be removed from the
 lifting cables. Ensure that all moving parts of each latching device are part of the ring portion of the latch assembly
 and that each latch assembly incorporates a reflectorized flag that is clearly discernible from the ground when the
 ring is latched to the head frame. Ensure that the latching sequence shall not exert a horizontal force sufficient to
 cause an excess of 4 g’s acceleration upon the luminaires.
 Ensure that the luminaire ring is equipped with a NEMA 4 corrosion resistant junction box for the
 connections between the main power cord bringing power to the ring and the separate power cords for each
 luminaire. Conform to Article 409 of the NEC for construction of the junction box. Ensure that each power cord
 
 has copper conductors of adequate size and insulation, that each power cord is of suitable construction, and that
 each power cord enters the junction box through a weather tight cord connector. Ensure that there is a cord support
 capable of withstanding a load of 1 1/2 times the weight of the main power cord without damage to the cord
 transmitting the weight of the main power cord directly to the ring. Ensure that there is a weather tight power inlet
 on the luminaire ring which allows the main power cord in the base of the tower to connect to the ring when the
 ring is in the lowered position. Ensure that the junction box is equipped with a 600 volt class terminal block for
 the connections between the main power cord, the luminaire power cords and the power inlet cord. Ensure that
 each luminaire ring is identified by a raised or engraved marking applied in a prominent location which identifies
 the manufacturer and the year that the ring was manufactured and that such marking remains legible after the ring
 has been galvanized
 2. Head Frame Assembly. Ensure that the head frame is fabricated from steel which conforms to the
 requirements of ASTM A 36/A 36M. Ensure that the head frame assembly is equipped with pulleys for the wire
 ropes hoisting cables and rollers for the main power cord to the luminaire ring. Ensure that each hoisting cable
 sheave has a tread diameter of at least 20 times the cable diameter for galvanized cable and 25 times the cable
 diameter for stainless steel cable, that the groove for the hoisting cable has a semi-circular in cross section with a
 radius of one-half the cable diameter plus 1/64 inch (0.4 mm), that the sheave has an oil-impregnated bronze
 bushing and that the shaft on which the sheave turns is of stainless steel. Ensure that the rollers for power cord run
 on AISI 304 stainless steel shafts between cold-rolled steel plates. Ensure that bending radius of the power cord is
 not less than 7 inches (180 mm). Ensure that keeper bars have been provided over the power cord and ring support
 cables to keep them in their respective tracks. Ensure that a guide is provided to separate the individual cables as
 they pass between the head frame and the top of the pole. Ensure that the head frame mechanism is protected from
 the weather by a domed cover of either copper free spun aluminum or fiberglass. Ensure that each head frame is
 identified by a raised or engraved marking applied in a prominent location which identifies the manufacturer and
 the year that the head frame was manufactured and that such marking remains legible after the head frame has been
 galvanized.
 3. Transition Plate. Ensure that there is a transition plate between the ring support cables and the main
 hoisting cable. Ensure that the luminaire ring support cables are secured to the transition plate by shop applied,
 swage-type fittings designed to develop a connection strength equal to the breaking strength of the cable and
 prevent abrasion of the cable by the transition plate. Ensure that there is a cord support capable of withstanding a
 load of the weight of the main power cord plus a wind load on the cord equal that of a 30 mph (48 km/h) wind
 perpendicular to the full length of the cord without damage to the cord connecting the main power cord to the
 transition plate.
 4. Hoisting Winch. Ensure that the winch is of cast iron and steel construction with an integral enclosed
 lubricant bathed worm and gear drive having a reduction great enough to be self-locking. Ensure that the winch
 has a pulling capacity at least five times greater than that required to lift the load. Ensure that the winch drum
 diameter is not less than 4 inches (100 mm), that the drum flange diameter is at least 3 inches (75 mm) greater than
 the diameter of the drum. Ensure that there is a cable guide or follower to prevent cable buildup at the ends of the
 winch drum. Ensure that the support plate for the winch bears a durable tag which identifies the manufacturer,
 manufacturer’s model and year of manufacture for the lowering device.
 5. Winch Drive Unit (Portable Power Unit). Ensure that the winch drive unit is powered by a heavy duty
 reversing drill motor, minimum 560 W (3/4 horsepower) rating, 120 volt. Ensure that there is a mechanical slip
 clutch torque limiter incorporated into the output shaft and that there is a placard on the portable winch drive unit
 giving the settings and instructions for care of the torque limiter. Ensure that there is a separately packaged dry
 type isolated winding transformer included to permit operation of the drill motor from the lighting circuit by
 plugging into the luminaire power cord outlet in the base of the tower. Ensure that the cord outlet and plug for
 connecting the motor to the transformer are NEMA L5-15 devices. Ensure that he hoisting rate is between 15 and
 25 feet per minute (4 and 8 m/min). Ensure that the hand control switch incorporates 20 feet (6 m) of cable to
 allow operation of the lowering device from a position away from the pole and not beneath the ring and luminaires.
 Ensure that each winch drive unit frame is identified by a raised or engraved marking applied in a prominent
 
 location which identifies the manufacturer and the year that the portable power winch drive unit was manufactured
 and that such marking remains legible after final finish has been applied to the frame.
 6. Connection of Tower to Lighting Circuit. Ensure that there is a separate terminal block for each
 conductor of the supply circuit in the base of the tower, and that there are enough spaces on the blocks to allow the
 incoming circuit to split into three outgoing directions in addition to the feed to the tower itself. Ensure that the
 terminal block has set screw style terminations, sized for 4 AWG - 1/0 AWG for the incoming and outgoing lighting
 circuit and 12 AWG - 10 AWG for the tower wiring. Ensure that there is a circuit breaker in a NEMA 3R,4, or 4X
 enclosure located electrically after the terminal blocks for the lighting circuit and before the power cord leading up
 the tower to the luminaires. Ensure that the breaker enclosure is internally mounted and that the breaker is readily
 accessible through the tower hand hole. Ensure that the circuit breaker is a bolt on design, sized at 15 amperes with
 a minimum interrupting capacity of 14,000 amperes for 480 volt circuits or sized at 20 amperes with a minimum
 interrupting capacity of 10,000 amperes for 240 volt circuits and is of a single handle rather than a tied handle
 design with one pole for each line or phase conductor. Ensure that each breaker pole has one or more mechanical
 lugs, one per wire. Ensure that complete lug shields are installed on the breaker. Ensure that cord connector, plug
 and inlet on the ring for electrical power to the luminaires are NEMA L8-20 devices for 480 volt systems or are
 NEMA L6-30 devices for 240 volt systems.
 7. Operating Manual. Furnish a complete manual including instructions on installation, operation and
 maintenance for each type of the following: lowering device, winch assembly and portable power winch drive unit.
 8. Shaft. Ensure that shaft of the tower is of not more than four round or multi-sided tapered steel sections
 for towers up to and including 100 feet (30 m), five sections for towers over 100 feet (30 m) up to and including
 120 feet (37 m), and six sections for towers over 120 feet (37 m). Ensure that the shaft is of steel having a minimum
 yield strength of 55,000 psi (379 MPa). Ensure that the shaft sections are joined by telescoping the bottom of the
 upper section over the top of the lower section for a minimum length of 1 1/2 times the external diameter of the
 bottom of the upper section or two feet (0.6 m) whichever is greater and driving the joint tight. Ensure that the
 sections have been pre-fitted and match-marked at the factory. Ensure that the inside surface of the shaft is relatively
 smooth and that there are no more than two longitudinal welds which shall be made by automatic electric arc
 welding. Ensure that the longitudinal seam welds have complete penetration, are of uniform density, are no thinner
 than the shaft material and not more than 20 percent thicker than the shaft material. Ensure that the base plate is
 fabricated from steel which conforms to the requirements of ASTM A 36/A 36M and that the shaft is joined to the
 base plate using the American Welding Society prequalified joint TC-U4a-S or TC-U4c-GF. Ensure that the hand
 hole in the shaft is properly reinforced to avoid stress risers and that the reinforcements are welded to the shaft
 using a joint and techniques designed to insure total penetration plus an outside fillet equal to the thickness of the
 shaft material. Ensure that all welds in the shaft satisfy AWS D 1.1 Structural Welding Code Article 9.25.3 for
 tensile stress when tested either by the ultrasonic method or by an approved alternate method, and that certified
 results are furnished to the Laboratory. Ensure that the door is fabricated from the same type steel as the shaft, is
 attached with a continuous stainless steel hinge having non-removable stainless steel hinge pins, fits the opening
 closely, and is securely held shut. Ensure that there are provisions for padlocking the handhole door closed and
 that each tower has been furnished with a vandal resistant padlock having a bronze or brass lock body and a
 corrosion-protected steel shackle keyed to the key number specified by the maintaining agency. Ensure that there
 are two holes, tapped 1/2-13, 180 degrees apart provided at the base of the tower for the grounding conductors.
 Ensure that the shaft shall be hot dipped galvanized after fabrication in accordance with the requirements of 711.02.
 Ensure that each shaft is identified by a raised or engraved marking applied to the edge of the base plate which
 identifies the manufacturer and the year that the shaft was manufactured and that such marking remains legible
 after the pole has been galvanized.
 9. Anchor Bolts and Nuts. Ensure that each anchor bolt is steel conforming to ASTM F1554, Grade 55, and
 galvanized in accordance with 711.02. Ensure that the nuts used with each anchor bolt are capable of developing
 the full strength of the anchor bolt.
 725.22
 Plastic Caution Tape. Furnish tape that is an inert material, approximately 6 inches (150 mm) wide
 composed of polyethylene plastic, highly resistant to alkalis, acids or other chemical components likely to be
 encountered in soils. Furnish tape that is bright red with identifying printing “ELECTRIC” in black letters on one
 
 side only. Furnish tape in continuous rolls with the identifying lettering repeated continuously the full length of
 the tape.
 
 726 BARRIER REFLECTOR MATERIALS
 726.01
 Barrier Reflectors. Furnish concrete barrier, retaining wall and bridge parapet reflector body
 housings that are made of acrylic or polycarbonate plastic, or corrosion resistant metal of the following Type:
 Type 1, Barrier Reflector. Ensure that the minimum reflective surface area of the reflector is 7 square inches
 (4400 mm²).
 Furnish white reflectors that reflect the following minimum candela of light at the indicated observation angles
 for each 1 foot-candle (10.76 lx) of incident light at the indicated entrance angles. Furnish amber reflectors that
 reflect at least 60 percent of these values.
 MINIMUM SPECIFIC INTENSITY, CD/10.76 LX
 Entrance angle
 -4°
 15°
 
 Observation Angle
 0.2°
 2.0°
 62
 0.25
 52
 0.18
 
 The entrance angle is measured in the horizontal plane between the direction of incident light and normal to the
 face of the reflector. The observation angle is measured in the vertical plane between the observer’s line of sight
 and the direction of light incident to the reflector face.
 Type 2, Barrier Reflector. Furnish corrosion resistant metal guardrail blockout reflectors that are a minimum
 size of 4.5 × 10 × 0.125 inches (112.5 × 250 × 3.1 mm) with 1/4" (6 mm) predrilled mounting holes. One or both
 sides shall be covered with a minimum 4.5 × 5 inches (112.5 × 125 mm) of Type G, H or J reflective sheeting.
 Type 3, Barrier Reflector. Furnish acrylic or polycarbonate plastic guardrail blockout reflector housings with
 1/4" (6 mm) predrilled mounting holes. Products shall be structurally reinforced to withstand the force of thrown
 plowed snow. New products will be tested by the Department for a minimum of one winter season before approval.
 One or both sides shall be covered with a minimum 4.5 × 5 inches (112.5 × 125 mm) of Type G, H or J reflective
 sheeting.
 Type 4, Barrier Reflector. Furnish spring loaded guardrail blockout reflector (reflector plate, holding arm and
 holding plate) made of plastic with UV protection.
 The reflector plate shall have a minimum size of 5.33 x 6.33 x 0.150 inches. One or both sides of the reflector
 plate shall be covered with a minimum 5.0 x 6.0 inches of Type G, H or J reflective sheeting.
 The total height of the Spring Loaded Guardrail Blockout Reflector shall be 26.00 inches, which includes the
 reflector plate, holding arm and holding plate.
 The holding plate shall have 2 predrilled holes for 5/11x 1 1/14 inch long leg screw.
 The spring shall be made of 0.135 phos-music wire conform to ASTM-A228-07 standard specification
 requirements.
 Type 5, Barrier Reflector. Furnish L-type guardrail blockout reflector 6.50”x11.38” (reflective and mounting
 plate) made of durable, flexible high density polyethylene (HDPE) plastic with UV protection.
 The reflective plate shall have a minimum size of 6.50”x4.25” inches. One or both side of the reflective plate
 shall be covered with a minimum of 26.0 square inches Type G, H or J reflective sheeting.
 The mounting plate shall have two (2) 1/2" (12.7 mm) predrilled mounting holes.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 
 730 TRAFFIC SIGN AND SUPPORT MATERIAL
 730.01 Steel Tube and Pipe. Furnish steel tube and pipe according to ASTM A 53 Grade B, ASTM A 500
 Grade B, or ASTM A 501, except provide tubing for truss and end frame diagonals according to 711.01.
 730.015 U-Channel Posts. Furnish U-channel posts fabricated from steel into a characteristic cross-section that
 may be used alone or paired to form a heavier post by being bolted together back to back. Furnish posts with a
 uniform cross section for their full length. Cut posts square to a length tolerance 1 inch (25 mm) and ensure that
 posts do not have ragged or sharp edges, or cracks or other imperfections affecting strength or durability. The back
 of the posts may be flat or contain raised longitudinal ribs.
 Furnish posts meeting the deflection criteria of Supplement 1075. Furnish posts manufactured from rail or billet
 steel according to ASTM A 499, Grade 60.
 Furnish posts with a nominal weight before punching or galvanizing as follows:
 Post Size Number
 1
 2
 3
 
 Weight lb/ft (kg/m)
 1.12 (1.7)
 2.00 (3)
 3.00 (4.5)
 
 Tolerances %
 -3.5, +10.0
 -3.5, +10.0
 -3.5, +10.0
 
 Furnish posts with 3/8-inch (10 mm) diameter holes accurately punched on the centerline spaced at 1-inch (25
 mm) centers beginning not more than 1 1/8 inches (30 mm) from the top of the post through the entire length, to
 allow bolting the posts back to back, without redrilling, using 5/16-inch (8 mm) diameter bolts. Furnish posts that
 have been galvanized after punching according to 711.02.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 730.016 Square Posts. Furnish square posts fabricated from steel according to ASTM A 1011 with a minimum
 yield strength of 60,000 pounds per square inch (415 MPa), with 7/16-inch (11 mm) diameter die-cut knockouts or
 open holes spaced on 1-inch (25 mm) on the centerline of all four sides, in true alignment and opposite each other.
 Furnish posts with the dimensional requirements conforming to the Department’s standard drawings. Furnish posts
 that have been finished with one of the following methods:
 A. Both inside and outside of the post are hot-dip galvanized according to ASTM A 653 G-235.
 B. The outside of the post has a zinc coating of 0.80 ounce per square foot (244 g/m 2) followed by chromate
 conversion coating and a cross-linked polyurethane acrylic coating. The inside of the post has a zinc organic
 coating.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 730.017 Wooden Box Beams. Furnish wooden box beams fabricated from 1/10 or 1/8 inch (2.54 or 3.18 mm)
 thick laminated veneers with the grain oriented parallel to the length of the finished beam and the veneers glued
 together in a continuous process with lap or scarf joints connecting successive veneers in each layer staggered
 throughout the thickness of the beam. A 45 degree miter shall be used for the corner joints. The adhesive used
 shall be a phenol-formaldehyde which conforms to ASTM D 2559. The beams shall be pressure treated with a
 preservative meeting AWPA Standard U1, Commodity Specification F: Composite Materials.
 730.02 Steel Anchor Bolts and Nuts. Furnish anchor bolts made of steel conforming to ASTM F 1554 Grade
 105, galvanized according to 711.02 at least 2 inches (50 mm) beyond the threads, with the end either bent or with
 a drilled and tapped steel plate. Furnish leveling nuts and anchor nuts capable of developing the full strength of
 the anchor bolt.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 730.03 Steel Poles and Arms. Furnish poles and arms made of steel with a minimum yield strength of 52,000
 pounds per square inch (359 MPa) and galvanized according to 711.02.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1093.
 
 730.04 Base and Arm Plates. Furnish support or pole anchor bases and arm attachment plates fabricated from
 steel plate according to ASTM A 36 (A 36M) or ASTM A 572 (A 572M), Grade 42. Weld plates to supports,
 poles, or arms both inside and outside with fillet or full penetration welds equal to the wall thickness, or by AWS
 prequalified welding joints TC U4a-S or TC U4c-GF. The Contractor may use a cast steel base of equivalent
 strength.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1093.
 730.05 Handhole Covers. Furnish handhole covers for poles and overhead sign supports made of 0.109-inch
 (2.7 mm) galvanized steel or 0.125-inch (3 mm) nominal aluminum alloy.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1093.
 730.06 Pole Caps. Furnish pole caps made of aluminum, galvanized ferrous metal, or zinc die casting.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1093.
 730.07 Arm Caps. Furnish arm caps made of steel that cover at least 50 percent of the end area.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1093.
 730.08 Steel Hardware. Furnish bolts 5/8-inch (16 mm) diameter or larger according to ASTM A 325
 (A 325M). Furnish bolts and screws less than 5/8-inch (16 mm) diameter according to SAE J429, Grade 5. Furnish
 nuts of all size, except anchor nuts and leveling nuts, according to SAE J995, Grade 2. Furnish flat washers
 according to ANSI B18.22.1. Furnish lock washers according to ASME B18.21.1. Furnish U-bolts according to
 ASTM A 307. Furnish all hardware that is hot-dipped galvanized according to ASTM A 153 or mechanically
 galvanized according to ASTM B 695, Class 50.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1092 or Supplement 1093.
 730.09 Stainless Steel. Furnish any AISI 300 or 400 series stainless steel.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1093.
 730.10 Stainless Steel Hardware. Furnish stainless steel hardware according to ASTM A 320/A 320M (AISI
 300 series). Furnish bolts, screws, nuts, washers, handhole cover chains, and U-bolts that are passivated
 commercial grade.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1092 or Supplement 1093.
 730.11 Aluminum Sheet and Plate. Furnish sheets for extrusheet panels according to ASTM B 209 (B 209M),
 3003-H18, or 5052-H38. Furnish sheets for flat sheet and overlay signs, and sign post reflectors, according to
 ASTM B 209 (B 209M), 3004-H38, 5052-H38, or 6061-T6. Furnish plates for sign support structures according
 to ASTM B 209 (B 209M), 6061-T6.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1092 or Supplement 1093.
 730.12 Aluminum Extrusions. Furnish extruded panels and extrusions for extrusheet panels according to
 ASTM B 221 (B 221M), 6063-T6. For sign support structures, provide rolled or cold finished bar, rod, and wire
 according to ASTM B 211 (B 211M), 6061-T6; provide extruded bars, rods, shapes, and tubes according to ASTM
 B 221 (B 221M), 6061-T6.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1092 or Supplement 1093.
 730.13 Aluminum Tube and Pipe. Furnish seamless pipe and seamless extruded tube according to ASTM B
 241/B 241M, 6061-T6. Furnish extruded structural pipe and tube according to ASTM B 429, 6061-T6.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1092 or Supplement 1093.
 730.14 Aluminum Castings. Furnish sand castings according to ASTM B 26/B 26M, 356-T6 or T7. Furnish
 self-aligning aluminum extrusheet sign mounting clips with manufacturer identification mark conspicuously
 incorporated in relief on the top surface of the casting, and in accordance with Supplemental Specification 992.
 Furnish permanent mold castings according to ASTM B 108, 356-T6 or T7.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1092 or Supplement 1093.
 730.15 Aluminum Forgings. Furnish forgings according to ASTM B 247 (B 247M), 6061-T6.
 
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1092 or Supplement 1093.
 730.16 Aluminum Welding Rods. Furnish welding rods according to AWS ER-4043.
 730.17 Aluminum Hardware. Furnish hardware according to:
 ASTM Designation
 Bolts and screws
 
 B 211 (B 211M)
 
 Studs-welded
 
 B 211 (B 211M)
 
 Nuts-hex
 
 B 211 (B 211M)
 
 Nuts-lock
 
 B 211 (B 211M)
 
 Washers-flat
 
 B 209 (B 209M)
 
 Lock washers
 
 B 211 (B 211M)
 
 Rivets-solid
 
 B 316/B 316M
 
 Rivets-blind
 
 B 316/B 316M
 
 Alloy Condition/Temper
 2024
 T4
 6061
 T6
 1100
 H16
 6061
 T6
 6262
 T9
 2017
 T4
 Clad
 T4
 2024
 T6
 6061
 7075
 T6
 6053
 T6
 6061
 T6
 2017
 F
 2117
 F
 5052
 F
 
 In addition, provide break-mandrel aluminum blind rivets with a stainless steel or aluminum mandrel.
 Furnish certified material according to Supplement 1092.
 730.18 Reflective Sheeting Type F. Furnish sheeting according to ASTM D 4956, Type I, including
 supplemental requirement S1.
 730.19 Reflective Sheeting Type G. Furnish Type G reflective sheeting of microprismatic construction
 according to Supplement 1049, and according to ASTM D 4956 IV, including supplemental requirement S1. Do
 not furnish material of glass bead construction.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 730.191 Reflective Sheeting Reboundable. Furnish reboundable reflective sheeting according to Supplement
 1049, and according to ASTM D 4956, Type III, IV, VIII, IX or XI, including supplemental requirements S1 and
 S2, with watermarks or other identification marks inconspicuously incorporated into the face of the sheeting on a
 repeating pattern if necessary to distinguish the sheeting from other similarly appearing sheetings.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 730.192 Reflective Sheeting Type H. Furnish Type H reflective sheeting according to Supplement 1049, and
 according to ASTM D 4956, Type VIII including supplemental requirement S1.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 730.193 Reflective Sheeting Type J. Furnish Type J reflective sheeting according to Supplement 1049, and
 according to ASTM D 4956, Type IX or XI, including supplemental requirements S1.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 730.20 Nonreflective Acrylic Opaque Sheeting. Furnish non-reflective acrylic opaque sheeting according to
 ASTM D 4956, except provide sheeting that does not incorporate any optical elements.
 730.22 Silk Screen Inks. Furnish opaque and transparent process color inks used in the silk screen process that
 the manufacturer of the reflective sheeting accepts and warrants according to Supplement 1049. Use inks that
 provide a tough, durable film of uniform thickness and appearance on the sign surface. Furnish transparent process
 color inks used in the reverse screen process according to the Daytime Color Specification Limits table in ASTM
 D 4956.
 
 730.23 Transparent Acrylic Electronic Cuttable Films. Furnish transparent acrylic electronic cuttable films
 the manufacturer of the reflective sheeting warrants according to Supplement 1049. Use films that provide a
 uniform appearance on the sign surface. Furnish films according to the Daytime Color Specification Limits table
 in ASTM D 4956.
 
 731 SIGN LIGHTING AND ELECTRICAL SIGNS MATERIAL
 731.03 Changeable Message Sign, Electrical Type.
 A. General. Electrical changeable message signs consist of units or groups of units containing arrangements of
 pixels that use electrical circuitry to display different messages.
 Place signs in weatherproof cabinets. Integrate control logic units, load switches, monitor feedback circuits,
 power supply, etc., within the sign cabinet or mount within a separate weatherproof enclosure as required.
 B. Message Type. Furnish electrical changeable message signs of the limited message or unlimited message
 type.
 Limited message signs contain pixels in an arrangement so that by the energizing of selected pixels two or
 more messages may be displayed.
 Unlimited message signs contain pixels arranged in full matrix or alphanumeric type modules positioned sideby-side to provide line units of the specified length. Ensure that the line units are capable of displaying messages
 containing letters and numerals, limited only by the number of characters that can be accommodated. Ensure that
 the line units are capable of continually displaying alternating messages.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 C. Display Type. Furnish electrical changeable message signs consisting of lamp, light emitting diode, fiber
 optic, light reflecting, or hybrid types.
 Lamp type changeable message signs consist of individual incandescent bulbs.
 Light emitting diode changeable message signs consist of groups of individual light emitting diodes that, acting
 together, form individual character pixels.
 Fiber optic changeable message signs consist of fiber optic bundles that transmit light from a remote source to
 form individual pixels.
 Light reflecting changeable message signs consist of individual light reflecting panels.
 Hybrid changeable message signs consist of individual light reflecting panels, each augmented by a light
 emitting pixel of the specified type. Ensure that the light emitting pixels are displayed when the corresponding
 reflecting panel is in the exposed position, and concealed or de-energized when the corresponding reflecting panel
 is in the unexposed position.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 731.05 Internally Illuminated Fixed Message Sign. Furnish internally illuminated fixed message signs of the
 required legend and that consist of an opaque housing with a face of translucent plastic. If specified, provide double
 faced signs. Illuminate signs using interior lamps located so the sign face is uniformly lighted.
 Furnish signs either with the legend on the exterior surface to maintain legibility when unlighted due to power
 failure, or with the legend on the interior surface so as to be invisible when the sign is unlighted. Apply the legend
 using black silk screening or by direct applied characters to white sign faces, unless otherwise specified. Design
 the sign faces for quick removal for maintenance, and provide faces with a safety chain or like device. If specified,
 shield the sign faces with sunscreens, louvering, or visors.
 Furnish housings made of corrosion-resistant material that is cast, extruded, or formed. Furnish mounting hubs
 that are similar to traffic signal design. Furnish weatherproof signs that have drainage weepholes.
 Furnish the sign with the appropriate hardware for mounting by span wire, mast arm, pedestal top, or pole type
 bracket arms. Include fluorescent type lamps with ballast or LED light source.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 731.06 Sign Flasher Assembly. Furnish beacons consisting of single traffic signal sections with 8 or 12-inch
 (200 or 300 mm) yellow lenses. Ensure that the flasher control unit flashes the beacons at a rate for each beacon
 of between 50 to 60 times per minute with the light period from one-half to two-thirds of the total cycle. Furnish
 
 flasher control units that have all solid state components and that meet NEMA TS-1, part 6. House control units
 within a weatherproof corrosion-resistant enclosure with a lockable door. Include the LED lamps.
 Ensure that the manufacturer of LED beacons is listed on the Department’s TAP for LED signal lamps.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 731.07 School Speed Limit Sign Assembly. Furnish yellow beacons that are 8 inches (200 mm) or 12 inches
 (300 mm). Ensure that the flashers flash the beacons alternately at a rate for each beacon of 50 to 60 times per
 minute with the light period from one-half to two-thirds of the total cycle. Furnish flashers that have all solid state
 components and that meet NEMA TS-1, part 6. Ensure that the backing members with hardware are compatible
 with the method of support.
 Ensure that the manufacturer of LED beacons is listed on the Department’s TAP for LED signal lamps.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 731.08 Flexible Conduit. Furnish galvanized steel flextube conduit with a waterproof PVC jacket according to
 UL 360 for wiring of lighted signs.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 731.10 Timer with Enclosure. Furnish a timer that allows automatic sign operation for a minimum of 8 times
 per day and for selected days of the week. Furnish a solid state timer with a back-up battery to maintain timekeeping
 and program memory for at least 48 hours. Furnish a battery with a design life of 10 years under field conditions
 when power failures over the 10-year period would accumulate to 100 days. If installed outdoors, house the timer
 within a lockable, weatherproof, corrosion-resistant enclosure. Furnish each enclosure with at least one padlock
 complying with 631.06.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s TAP.
 
 732 TRAFFIC SIGNAL MATERIAL
 732.01 Vehicular Signal Heads, Conventional. Ensure that vehicular traffic signal heads conform to the ITE
 “Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads” standard. In conformance with the above standard, provide signal heads
 that are of cast nonferrous corrosion resistant metal.
 Traffic signals consist of specified assemblies of optical sections containing 12-inch (300 mm) diameter lens
 opening, a housing, a door frame with stainless steel hinge pins and latching device, visor, wiring, and includes
 LED lamp in accordance with 732.04. Retention hardware for LED lamps, if sharing threaded hole with visor
 hardware, shall consist of minimum 1/2-inch (13 mm) long, set screw with retaining tab and captive wingnut or
 hex nut. All hardware shall be stainless steel and set screw shall be inserted into signal section door using visible,
 semi-permanent threadlocking compound. All hardware used to join optical sections together shall be stainless
 steel.
 Furnish signal heads with required mounting hardware. Furnish signal face orientation to traffic by serrated rings
 or other devices on housing sections and mounting hardware. Permit adjustment in increments not greater than 5
 degrees of rotation and not affected by wind gusts when locked. Furnish galvanized steel or aluminum spacers and
 drop pipes 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) nominal pipe size (1.90 inch (48 mm) actual diameter). Ensure that disconnect
 hangers have at least twelve terminals unless a greater number is required Tethered heads shall use ¾-inch
 unpainted cast aluminum span wire clamps and cable entrance adapters with integral tri-studs (no tri-stud inserts),
 stainless steel hardware, and a single steel-reinforced mounting hole. Free-swinging heads shall use cast iron span
 wire clamps and cable entrance adapters with tri-studs. Tri-studs shall be secured to the head using stainless steel
 nylon-insert or distorted thread locknuts. A neoprene gasket placed under the clamp washer in the top signal section
 shall effectively seal the entrance adapter on the signal to make a waterproof connection and shall have a minimum
 thickness of 3/32 inch. The inside surface of the visors shall have a finish of flat black. All other exterior surfaces
 of the signal head and hardware shall have a finish of Federal Yellow or Gloss Black to closely agree with Federal
 Standard 595, Color 13655 or Color 17038, as specified in the plans. The coating system used shall be durable,
 uniform, and weather resistant.
 For polycarbonate signal heads, obtain proper exterior colors by use of colored plastic rather than painting.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 732.02 Vehicular Signal Heads, Optically Programmed, 12-inch (300 mm) Lens. Ensure that the signal
 sections conform to applicable portions of the ITE standard and 732.01. Furnish and mount optical sections with
 a 12-inch (300 mm) lens size alone or in combination with additional sections of optically programmed or
 conventional optics types to form signal faces and heads. Furnish an optically programmed signal section that
 includes an LED lamp.
 Balance adjusters, used only if specified, shall have a splined eyebolt design and splined external clamping body.
 All assembly hardware shall be stainless steel.
 Furnish a visor with each signal section.
 Cable entrance adapters shall be of the tri-stud type with stainless steel hardware. A neoprene gasket placed
 under the clamp washer in the top signal section shall effectively seal the entrance adapter on the signal to make a
 weatherproof connection and shall have a minimum thickness of 3/32 inch (2.5 mm).
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 732.04 Signal Lamps.
 A. Vehicular and Pedestrian Light Emitting Diode (LED) Lamps. Prequalify vehicular and pedestrian LED
 lamps according to Supplement 1097.
 Furnish LED signal lamp units that meet or exceed all the requirements of the current Institute of
 Transportation Engineers (ITE) publications. LED module shall be certified by the Intertek LED Traffic Signal
 Module Certification Program, and each unit shall have a decal indicating Intertek certification.
 
 All LED signal lamp units shall be the latest model currently in production and new. Equipment no longer
 being manufactured shall not be accepted, even if it meets the following specifications.
 LED signal lamp units shall conform to the following criteria:
 1.
 
 Physical and Mechanical Requirements
 
 a. The LED traffic signal lamp unit shall be designed as a retrofit replacement for existing incandescent
 signal lamps and shall not require any special tools for installation. The 12" (300 mm) retrofit replacement LED
 traffic signal lamp unit shall fit into existing traffic signal housings built to ITE Vehicular Traffic Signal Heads
 (VTCSH) standards without modifications.
 b. Installation of a retrofit replacement LED traffic signal lamp unit into an existing signal housing shall
 only require removal of the existing lens and incandescent lamp. The new unit shall fit securely in the housing door
 and connect to existing electrical wiring or terminal block by means of simple connectors. Removal of the reflector
 is optional.
 c.
 
 Each LED signal lamp unit shall be identified on the back side with the following:
 Manufacturer’s name and trademark
 Part number
 Serial number (must be unique for each unit)
 Voltage rating
 Power consumption (watts and volt-ampere)
 Vertical indexing indicator (i.e., “up arrow”, or the word “UP” or “TOP”) if specific orientation
 of the module is required.
 (7) Date of manufacture (minimum information required - month & year)
 (1)
 (2)
 (3)
 (4)
 (5)
 (6)
 
 Single units shall have identification markings as to the type and color of the module. Bi-Modals shall
 be marked with module type.
 Each LED signal lamp unit shall have a label placed on the unit certifying compliance to ITE
 standards for color and luminance.
 d. The LED traffic signal lamp unit shall be a single, self-contained device, not requiring on-site
 assembly for installation into an existing traffic signal housing.
 e. The assembly and manufacturing process for the LED traffic signal lamp unit assembly shall be such
 as to assure all internal LED and electronic components are adequately supported to withstand mechanical shock
 and vibration from high winds and other sources. The LED signal lamp shall survive 3 drops of 42 inches onto a
 smooth concrete surface without any loosening or breaking of internal components, or change in operation.
 f. The lens of the LED signal lamp unit shall be capable of withstanding ultraviolet light (direct sunlight)
 exposure for a minimum time period of five years without exhibiting evidence of deterioration.
 g. Ensure that lenses will withstand a 42-inch (1.0 meter) drop test, are a minimum of 1/8 inch (3 mm)
 thick, and are free of bubbles and imperfections. The lenses shall be smooth on the outside with no external facets
 to prevent dirt and debris build up.
 h. Each LED traffic signal lamp unit shall comprise a UV stabilized polymeric outer shell, multiple LED
 light sources, and a regulated power supply.
 i. If red or yellow lenses are tinted, they shall match the wavelength (chromaticity) of the LED. Do not
 furnish green tinted lenses.
 j. An optical assembly shall diffuse the light output and provide uniform illumination across the entire
 surface of the lens and eliminate the visibility of the individual LEDs to the observer. The optical assembly shall
 be used for all ball modules and shall be optional on arrow and pedestrian modules.
 k. The LED traffic signal lamp unit shall be designed for universal installation in both span wire and
 standard/stationary pole mount applications.
 
 l. The Arrow pattern produced by the Arrow LED traffic signal lamp units shall conform to the VTCSH
 standard for color, size and shape. The Arrow LED traffic signal lamp units shall not require a specific orientation
 or have a variance in light output, pattern or visibility for any mounting orientation.
 m. LED pedestrian signal lamp units shall be designed as a retrofit replacement, modular or screw in unit
 for the message bearing surface of a 12" (300 mm) pedestrian traffic signal, type A-2, housing.
 n. The LED pedestrian signal lamp unit shall fit into existing pedestrian signal housings without the
 need to modify the housing. Installation of the retrofit replacement LED pedestrian signal lamp unit into an existing
 12" (300 mm) pedestrian signal housing shall only require the removal of the existing message bearing surface,
 existing lamp components (i.e. lens, lamp module, gaskets, and reflector) and insertion of the retrofit replacement
 into the area once occupied by the removed assembly.
 o. The single pedestrian module shall be designed to display a full “HAND” icon and a full “Walking”
 Person icon that complies with standards for this (icon) symbol for the size specified.
 p. LED traffic signal lamp units shall be visible at 450 feet (137 meters) during sway conditions
 (extended view) until obscured by the visor.
 q. The module shall be designed to detect catastrophic loss of the LED load. Upon sensing the loss of
 the LED load, the module shall present a resistance of at least 250K Ohms across the input power leads within 300
 msec.
 2.
 
 Electrical Requirements
 
 a. Each unit shall incorporate a regulated power supply engineered to electrically protect the LEDs and
 maintain a safe and reliable operation. The power supply shall provide capacitor filtered DC regulated current to
 the LEDs according to the LED manufacturer’s specification.
 b. The LED traffic signal lamp unit shall operate on a 60 Hz AC line voltage ranging as specified by
 ITE specifications. The circuitry shall prevent flickering over this voltage range. Nominal rated voltage for all
 measurements shall be 120  3 volts RMS.
 c. All unit types shall be operationally compatible with the traffic signal equipment that each type is
 designed and intended to interface with.
 e. Two, captive, color coded, 600 V, 20 AWG minimum jacketed wires, 3 feet (0.9 m) long, conforming
 to the National Electric Code, rated for service at 221 F (105 C), are to be provided for an electrical connection.
 f.
 
 The LED signal shall operate with a minimum 0.90 power factor.
 
 g. Total harmonic distortion (current and/or voltage) induced into an AC power cabinet bus by any
 sample of 10 signal lamp units shall not exceed 20 percent. This value may be calculated using the root-meansquare combination of the measured harmonic distortion from one sample LED signal lamp unit.
 h. LED signal lamp units and associated on-board circuitry shall conform to the requirements in Federal
 Communications Commission (FCC) Title 47, Sub Part B, Section 15 regulations concerning the emission of
 electronic noise.
 i. The LED signal lamp units shall incorporate circuitry to ensure that they show no evidence of
 illumination for input voltages below 35 volts. LED signal lamp units shall be illuminated (unregulated
 illumination) for all input voltages higher than 45 volts AC but less than 80 volts AC. They shall have fully
 regulated illumination for applied voltages of 80 volts through 135 volts AC. Proof of the intended function of this
 circuitry shall be accomplished by connecting the lamps to a variable voltage source and slowly raising the applied
 voltage from zero volts up to 135 volts, and then slowly lowering the applied voltage from 135 volts to zero volts.
 j.
 (25 C).
 
 Proposed LED signal lamp units shall be less than or equal to the base wattage shown below at 77 F
 
 Retrofit
 12@ R 12” Red Ball
 12@ Y 12” Yellow Ball
 12@ G 12” Green Ball
 12@ Y 12” Yellow Arrow
 12@ G 12” Green Arrow
 3.
 
 Wattage
 12 or less
 22 or less
 15 or less
 10 or less
 l9 or less
 
 Environmental Requirements
 
 a. Green and red LED traffic signal lamp units shall be rated for use in the ambient operating temperature
 range of -40 F to +166 F (-40 C to +74 C). Yellow signal lamps shall be rated at a range of -13 F to +77 F (25 C to +25 C).
 b. The unit shall consist of a housing that is a sealed watertight enclosure that eliminates dirt
 contamination and allows for safe handling in all weather conditions.
 4. Documentation Requirements. Each LED traffic signal lamp unit shall be provided with the following
 documentation:
 a.
 
 Installation instructions.
 
 b. The manufacturer name, brand and model number of all LEDs used shall be provided, along with the
 LED manufacturer’s recommended drive current and degradation curves.
 5. Warranty. The LED signal lamp unit shall be repaired or replaced by the manufacturer if it exhibits a
 failure due to workmanship or material defects within the first 60 months of field operation.
 The LED signal lamp unit shall be repaired or replaced by the manufacturer if, when operating over the
 specified operating ambient temperature and voltage ranges, the unit does not meet or exceed all minimum
 luminous intensity requirements as defined in the specifications during the first 60 months of field operation.
 The measured chromaticity coordinates of LED signal lamp units shall conform to the requirements for
 chromaticity in the specifications over the temperature range provided in the Specifications for the duration of the
 warranty period.
 The manufacturer shall provide a written warranty against defects in materials, workmanship and
 luminous intensity for LED signal lamp units for a period of 60 months after installation of LED signal lamp units.
 Replacement LED signal lamp units shall be provided within 10 days after receipt of failed LED signal lamp units
 at no cost, except the cost of shipping the failed units.
 An LED pedestrian signal lamp unit shall be repaired or replaced by the manufacturer if the signal lamp
 unit does not attract the attention of, or is not readable to, a viewer (both day and night) at all distances from 10
 feet (3 meters) to the full width of the area to be crossed when operated over the specified operating ambient
 temperature and voltage ranges.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s TAP.
 732.05 Pedestrian Signal Heads. Furnish pedestrian signal heads that conform to the ITE specifications.
 Ensure that the signal heads alternately display the symbol of an upraised hand in Portland orange and the symbol
 of a walking person in white light. Do not furnish outline style symbols. Furnish material for housings that consist
 of cast or sheet, corrosion resistant, non-ferrous metal or polycarbonate plastic, as specified in the plans.
 Adequately reinforce the housings. Ensure that the lens frames are non-ferrous metal or polycarbonate material.
 Ensure that the lenses are glass or ultraviolet and impact-resistant plastic and display the legend with translucent
 symbols within an opaque black background.
 Seal the lens to the door frame by the use of a weatherproof seal. Furnish an elastomeric gasket between the
 door frame and housing to ensure a dust and weatherproof seal.
 Use a signal head design that provides adequate dissipation of heat.
 
 Furnish pedestrian signal heads with required mounting brackets. Furnish either pipe type brackets or, when
 compatible with the mounting position required by the plans, two-piece hinged type brackets that support the signal
 head close to the pole.
 Furnish 1 1/2-inch (38 mm) galvanized steel pipe brackets with necessary fittings and adapters, and that are oneway or two-way as required. Orient the signal face to crosswalks by selective meshing of serration rings or other
 devices provided on housings and mounting brackets. Make adjustment in increments not greater than 5 degrees
 of rotation and that is not affected by wind gusts when locked.
 Furnish two-piece hinged brackets of cast aluminum with stainless steel hinge pins, and when closed will be
 secured by a tamperproof bolt. Ensure that the mounting incorporates a terminal block for quick disconnect of
 field wiring. Ensure that the mounting design permits attachment to the pole by banding, bolting or by lag screws
 in the case of wood poles.
 Finish signal exterior surfaces black with enamel coating. Finish interior surfaces of visors flat black.
 For polycarbonate signals, proper exterior colors shall be obtained by use of colored plastic material rather than painting .
 
 Also for polycarbonate signals; pipes, spacers and fittings constructed of polycarbonate plastic may be used in
 lieu of galvanized steel or aluminum.
 Furnish pedestrian signal head types according to Table 732.05-1.
 TABLE 732.05-1
 Signal Head Type
 A1
 A2
 D2
 
 Symbol Height, Inches, (mm)
 6 (152)
 9 (229)
 9 (229)
 
 If specified, furnish the types listed below:
 A. Type A1. Furnish a signal head that utilizes the housings of two 8-inch (200 mm) lens type vehicular traffic
 sections connected together to form a vertical unit. Ensure that the sections have square lenses. Ensure that the
 upper lens displays the symbol of an upraised hand in portland orange and the lower lens will display the symbol
 of a walking person in white .
 B. Type A2. Furnish a signal head that utilizes the housings of two 12-inch (300 mm) lens type vehicular traffic
 sections connected together to form a vertical unit. Ensure that the sections have square lenses with the same
 symbol position as Type A1.
 C. Type D2. Furnish a single housing signal head with a lens in one piece or in two sections, one for each
 message. Color and mask the lens to display in portland orange the symbol of an upraised hand from the left
 compartment and the symbol of a walking person in white from the right compartment. Install a lamp in each
 compartment. The upraised hand and the walking person symbols may be integral in the same compartment.
 D. Countdown.
 1.
 
 Operation.
 
 a. Display driver shall be designed to allow individual LED failures without affecting other LEDs in the
 same display.
 b. The countdown timer shall be of the “smart” type, which continuously samples the timing intervals
 presented by the pedestrian signal load switch driver(s) in order to “learn” the programmed timing being used by
 the controller.
 c.
 
 During interval sampling time, the countdown timer numerical display shall be blank.
 
 d.
 
 Sampling time to determine interval settings shall take a maximum of two complete signal cycles.
 
 e. The unit shall be capable of displaying a countdown commencing at the onset of the pedestrian
 clearance interval and reaching zero at the end of the pedestrian clearance interval.
 
 f. Any interruption of the flashing pedestrian clearance display, e.g., preemption, timing plan change,
 during a countdown display shall immediately cause blanking of the countdown numerals. The countdown timer
 shall “re-learn” the pedestrian clearance interval upon return to normal service after preemption or immediately
 following a change in walk clearance time associated with a timing plan change.
 2. Type A2. The top section shall be identical to the 12 inch (300 mm) Type D2 pedestrian signal. The
 bottom section shall consist of a countdown display in a 12 inch (300 mm) housing.
 3. Type D2. The left side of the signal section shall consist of an integral hand/walking person display. The
 right side compartment shall contain the countdown display.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 732.06 Pedestrian Pushbuttons. Furnish pushbuttons of sturdy construction that consist of a base housing and
 a removable cover. Furnish components that provide a pushbutton with normally open contacts and that include
 all electrical and mechanical parts required for operation.
 Ensure that the design of the pushbutton and its associated contacts and housing are sturdy and resistant to
 mechanical shocks and abuse. Ensure that a concentrated force of 50 pounds (225 N) applied to the button or any
 exposed portion does not damage the unit or misadjusts the contacts. Furnish a housing with a curved back surface
 for mounting on poles of various diameters. Integrate the curved surface with the housing or supply an adapter
 with a flat back type housing. Attach the cover assembly to the housing by stainless steel machine screws, resulting
 in a weatherproof and shockproof assembly. Furnish a hole threaded for a 1/2-inch (13 mm) pipe in the housing
 for conduit attachment purposes. Furnish housing with manufacturer applied external surfaces of yellow Color
 13655, Federal Standard 595, unless specified otherwise in the Plans.
 Ensure that the maximum force required to operate the pushbutton is 5 pounds (22.5 N). Furnish a raised or
 flush pushbutton with a minimum of 2 inches at its smallest dimension.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 732.07 Loop Detector Units.
 A. NEMA TS-1. Ensure that the loop detector units comply with the requirements of NEMA TS-1, section 15,
 with the following modifications. Furnish shelf mounted loop detector units that are powered from 120 volts. Use
 solid state isolated output units for all controller applications where directly connected to a solid state digital
 controller unit. Ensure that the conductors in the cable harness for loop input pins are twisted three to five times
 per 1 foot (300 mm).
 Ensure that the electrical connections for four-channel shelf-mounted units either are the 19-pin MS connector,
 as required by the foregoing specification, or consist of four connectors of the type required for single-channel
 shelf-mounted detector units.
 If specified, design detector unit electrical connection plugs or wiring harness such that any multi-channel
 shelf-mounted detector unit may be readily replaced with single-channel detector units. Accomplish this by
 furnishing only units with the connector type required for single-channel shelf-mounted detector units, or by wiring
 the controller back panel to single-channel harnesses which are, in turn, plug-connected to an adapter harness which
 is mated to the multi-channel connector of the detector unit.
 Furnish loop detector unit with an LED or LCD display indication of call strength (∆L/L or equivalent). This
 display shall be a bar graph or numerical display with at least eight (8) discrete levels indicated.
 B. NEMA TS-2. Furnish loop detector units according to NEMA Standards TS-2.
 Furnish loop detector unit with an LED or LCD display indication of call strength (∆L/L or equivalent). This
 display shall be a bar graph or numerical display with at least eight (8) discrete levels indicated.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s TAP.
 732.08 Loop Detector Units, Delay and Extension Type. Ensure that the loop detector units of this type
 comply with the requirements of NEMA TS-1, section 15. Furnish shelf-mounted loop detector units that are
 powered from 120 volts. Use solid state isolated output units for all controller application where directly connected
 
 to a solid state digital controller unit. When specified, apply the provisions of 732.07 for possible replacement of
 multi-channel units with single channel units.
 Furnish loop detector unit with an LED or LCD display indication of call strength (∆L/L or equivalent). This
 display shall be a bar graph or numerical display with at least eight (8) discrete levels indicated.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s TAP.
 732.11 Signal Supports. Furnish signal poles and mast arms that are tapered tubes of a true continuous taper.
 Furnish tubes that are circular or regular polygons with six or more sides. Ensure that any measurements of circular
 tube diameter at a specific point along the longitudinal axis do not vary by more than 3/16-inch (5 mm). Ensure
 that the taper is between 0.54 and 1.3 percent. A rectangular, rounded-corner aluminum Pole Identification Tag
 with minimum dimensions of 1 x 3 x 0.040 inches shall be attached to the pole at a height of 6 inches above the
 base plate. The Pole Identification Tag shall be clearly and deeply stamped with the ODOT Standard Construction
 Drawing Number, Design Number, and the fabrication date of the pole (e.g., TC-81.21, DES. 12, 05-12) in
 characters with a minimum height of 3/8 in. Attach to the pole with four stainless steel 3/16 inch rivets.
 Fabricate mast arms of the true continuous taper type in two portions joined by overlapping of sections with the
 overlap being at least 1 1/2 diameters as determined by the largest diameter of the outer portion. Assemble the
 sections with a 5/8-inch (16 mm) minimum stainless steel or galvanized steel hex head through-bolt.
 Ensure that there is not more than one longitudinal, automatically electrically welded seam on circular poles.
 Ensure that the welded seams are neat and uniform in appearance and have a thickness not less than the base
 material and a bead height not exceeding 1/16-inch (2 mm). Ensure that the wall thickness at each pole or arm
 cross-section is of uniform thickness, except at weld beads. Do not place transverse seams or welds on true
 continuous taper type poles or arms. Weld according to 513.21.
 After fabrication, hot-dip galvanize poles and arms according to 711.02.
 Do not use guy rods or truss-type arms. Furnish poles and mast arms with attachment plates and gussets.
 Assemble using high-strength bolts with the connection developing the full moment-resisting capability of the arm.
 Do not allow the butt diameter of mast arms to exceed the nominal diameter of the pole at the point of attachment.
 Fit poles with a welded-on cast or plate steel base designed to mount on an anchor bolt foundation and ensure
 that each pole includes the furnishing of anchor bolts and conduit ells for installation in the foundation. Furnish at
 least one 2-inch (50 mm) diameter conduit ell for installation in each foundation. Furnish conduit ells made from
 steel complying with 725.04; however, if they connect to non-metallic conduit, ensure that they are of the same
 non-metallic material.
 Use steel anchor bolts conforming to ASTM F 1554, Grade 105 and galvanized according to 711.02. Ensure that
 ends have a steel plate as shown on the plans.
 Ensure that the poles include a handhole near the base oriented as required. Reinforce the handhole with a
 welded-on steel frame with a grounding lug and fit it with a cover plate fastened by stainless steel screws. Ensure
 that the poles also include a cable and wire support J-hook welded near the top and a removable pole cap. Design
 poles and arms so their interiors conceal wiring and their mast arms include grommeted wire outlets for the signal
 heads. Furnish hanger clamps with clevises on the mast arms for the signal heads as required. Ensure that arm
 caps are made of steel and cover at least 50 percent of the end area.
 Ensure that signal poles combining provisions for roadway lighting include an additional handhole located
 opposite the mast arm flange with the poles’ J-hook located above.
 Furnish pedestrian pushbutton access holes and blind half couplings for controllers and pedestrian signal heads
 as required. Plug any unused holes.
 Furnish certified materials according to Supplement 1094.
 732.12 Strain Poles. Furnish signal strain poles for the attachment of span wire that are steel tapered tubes
 according to the requirements of 732.11. Ensure that all poles include a removable pole cap, and messenger wire
 clamps with clevis and shackle unless otherwise specified. A rectangular, rounded-corner aluminum Pole
 Identification Tag with minimum dimensions of 1 x 3 x 0.040 inches shall be attached to the pole at a height of 6
 
 inches above the base plate. The Pole Identification Tag shall be clearly and deeply stamped with the ODOT
 Standard Construction Drawing Number, Design Number, and the fabrication date of the pole (e.g., TC-81.21,
 DES. 12, 05-12) in characters with a minimum height of 3/8 in. Attach to the pole with four stainless steel 3/16
 inch rivets.
 Furnish anchor bolt foundation type strain poles that include a welded-on cast or plate steel base, bolt covers, a
 handhole, and a J-hook, as required by 732.11, and that also include at least one 2-inch (50 mm) cable entrance
 with a weatherhead and a welded blind half-coupling. Ensure that the poles include the furnishing of anchor bolts
 and conduit ells for installation in the foundation. Furnish at least one 2-inch (50 mm) diameter conduit ell for
 installation in each foundation. Furnish steel conduit ells that comply with 725.04; however, if they connect to
 non-metallic conduit, ensure that they are of the same non-metallic material.
 Furnish certified materials according to Supplement 1094.
 732.13 Wood Poles. Furnish wood poles that conform to ANSI 05.1 “Specifications and Dimensions for Wood
 Poles”, that are made of Southern Pine or Western Red Cedar, and that are full-length pressure treated according
 to 725.19.
 732.14 Down Guy Assemblies. Furnish expanding or screw type anchors capable of withstanding a guy tension
 of 8000 pounds (35 kN) when installed in firm moist soil. Ensure that each anchor rod is 5/8-inch (16 mm)
 minimum diameter, 8 feet (2.4 m) minimum length galvanized steel with thimble eye.
 Ensure that all pole and attachment hardware is hot dip galvanized in accordance with 711.02.
 Furnish 3/8-inch (10 mm) minimum diameter guy wire that conforms to 732.18 and ensure that all accessories
 have a rated loading strength equal to or greater than the messenger wire minimum breaking strength.
 Furnish porcelain strain insulators of the wet process type.
 Furnish an 8 feet (2.4 m) minimum length guy guard made of impact and ultraviolet light resistant yellow plastic
 that is fastened to the guy wire.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 732.15 Pedestals. Fabricate pedestals for the support of traffic control equipment of 4-inch (100 mm) schedule
 40 steel or aluminum pipe. Fit the steel pipe with a welded-on base of plate or cast steel, or when specified thread
 the steel pipe into a gray cast iron transformer type base. Furnish galvanized steel pedestals according to 711.02.
 Thread aluminum pipe into an aluminum cast transformer type base. Design pedestals to mount on an anchor bolt
 foundation and include the furnishing of anchor bolts and conduit ells for installation in the foundation.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 732.16 Conduit Risers. Ensure that risers have conduit and fittings according to 725.04 and the weatherhead
 is made of aluminum or galvanized ferrous metal and threaded.
 732.17 Cable Support Assemblies. Ensure that the cable grip used with cable support assemblies is of the
 proper size and strength for the cables and is of the flexible “closed” or “split with rod” type, of stainless steel or
 tin coated bronze, and equipped with a single “U” eye bale. Ensure that the smallest cable grip permitted has a
 minimum rated breaking strength of 250 pounds (1.1 kN).
 Ensure that the slings for cable supports are made from copper clad or galvanized multi-strand steel wire with an
 overall diameter of not less than 1/8-inch (3 mm) and a breaking strength of at least 400 pounds (1.7 N). Use
 thimbles to form eyes at each end of the sling with grooves to match the wire. Adjust the sling to the proper length
 with the wire at each thimble lapped and secured with split bolt clamps.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 732.18 Messenger Wire
 A. Wire. Furnish seven strand ASTM A 475 Class B Utilities Grade or stronger messenger wire except 1/4-inch
 (6 mm) seven strand messenger wire must be High Strength Grade or stronger. Furnish 1/4-inch (6 mm) seven
 strand ASTM A 475 Class B High Strength Grade or stronger tether wire. Furnish all wire per ASTM A 475 with
 the following modifications:
 
 18.2 Tags are not required on lengths less than 1000 feet (300 m).
 B. Accessories. For messenger wire ensure all accessories have a rated loading strength equal to or greater than
 73 percent of the messenger wire minimum breaking strength. For breakaway tether installations, accessories
 within the turnbuckle-tensioned portion of the tether span shall have strength equal to or greater than 73 percent of
 the breaking strength of 1/4-inch, 7-strand ASTM A 475 High Strength Grade Wire rope, or 3460 pounds (15.4
 kN). Other portions of the tether assembly shall use accessories strength equal to or exceeding the wire rope used
 in that portion. S-hooks shall be made of mild low-carbon galvanized steel and of the wire size indicated on the
 plans; larger wire sizes and higher-strength steel S-hooks shall not be substituted. Safety tie wire shall be 304 or
 316 stainless steel, 1×19 stranded, 1/8-inch (3 mm) with stainless steel wire rope clips. If used, lead sheet to wrap
 tether wire in breakaway anchors shall be commercially pure lead of thickness 0.030 to 0.042 inches (0.75 to 1.0
 mm).
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 732.19 Cable and Wire. Furnish cable and wire meeting the requirements of Table 732.19-1 and rated at 600
 volts with conductors of copper unless otherwise specified. Ensure that the cable or wire jacket is indelibly marked
 at intervals of not more than 6 feet (2 m) with nomenclature stating the size, the type, the organization specifying
 the type, and the manufacturer’s name or trademark.
 
 TABLE 732.19-1 CABLE AND WIRE
 Cable or Wire
 Signal Cable
 
 Interconnect cable
 
 Interconnect cable,
 integral,
 messenger type
 
 Number of
 Conductors
 
 Wire Gage
 
 As specified
 
 As specified
 
 As specified
 
 As specified
 
 Twisted pairs as
 specified
 
 As specified
 
 As specified
 
 As specified
 
 Specification
 or type
 IMSA 19-1
 IMSA 20-1
 IMSA 19-1
 IMSA 20-1
 RUS PE-39
 IMSA 19-2
 IMSA 20-2
 IMSA 19-3
 IMSA 20-3
 IMSA 19-4
 IMSA 20-4
 IMSA 51-5
 
 Conductor Type
 Notes
 Copper,
 color coded, stranded
 Copper,
 color coded, stranded
 Copper,
 color coded, solid
 Copper,
 color coded, stranded
 Copper,
 [2]
 color coded, solid
 Copper, stranded
 Copper, twisted pair,
 stranded, shielded
 
 Twisted pairs as
 As specified
 specified
 Loop detector wire Single conductor 14 AWG
 Loop detector leadTwo conductor 14 AWG
 IMSA 50-2
 in cable
 UL: RHH/RHW/
 USE or HHW,
 cross linked
 polyethylene with
 Power cable
 Two conductor As specified
 Copper, stranded
 [3]
 an insulation
 thickness of 0.045
 inch (1.14 mm)
 (min.)
 Two conductor
 Aluminum,[1] twisted,
 Service cable
 As specified
 (duplex)
 stranded
 UL:
 RHH/RHW/USE
 Ground Wire
 Single conductor
 or XHHW, cross Copper, stranded
 [4]
 linked
 polyethylene
 Loop detector lead12 or 14
 IMSA 19-6
 in cable, direct
 As specified
 AWG, or
 Copper, stranded
 IMSA 20-6
 burial
 as specified
 Loop detector lead12 or 14
 IMSA 19-4
 in cable, Integral As specified
 AWG, or
 Copper, stranded
 IMSA 20-4
 messenger type
 as specified
 Notes
 [1]Copper conductors may be substituted
 [2]ANSI/ICEA Cable shall have: Solid insulations, Full count color coding, 8-mil shield, and 772 kHz attenuation
 compliance. All other specifications are manufacturer’s option unless specified.
 [3] Three-conductor cable may be specified. Permitted substitution: 2 (or 3) single conductor cable.
 [4]Minimum size is equal to the power or service cable, whichever is larger.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 732.20 Power Service. Furnish risers for power service that are 1 to 1 1/2-inch (25 to 38 mm) diameter conduit
 and fittings according to 725. Furnish weatherheads that are threaded and made of aluminum or galvanized ferrous
 metal. Include a disconnect switch with enclosure.
 
 732.21 Disconnect Switch with Enclosure. Ensure that the switch enclosure is a UL listed watertight lockable
 stainless steel NEMA Type 4 supplied with the conduit hubs listed on the enclosure UL label. Furnish an enclosure
 that contains as a minimum a single-throw, 2 pole, solid neutral, fused safety disconnect switch UL listed as suitable
 for a service disconnect with a minimum capacity of 30-amperes at 240 VAC. Ensure that the unit can be padlocked
 in both the “ON” and “OFF” positions.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 732.22 Backplates. Furnish louvered backplates constructed of wrought sheet aluminum, according to ASTM
 B 209 (B 209M), 6061-T6, .050 inch (1.3 mm) minimum thickness. Louvers shall be at least 8 percent of the total
 backplate area. Backplate base metal shall be anodized to maximize paint adhesion according to Mil-A-8625, Type
 II or Type I. Furnish backplates painted on both sides with at least two coats of flat black alkyd enamel paint or
 polyester powder coat (no epoxy) closely matching FED-STD-595b-37038. Furnish a backplate that extends 5
 inches (125 mm) beyond the outside of the signal assembly on all sides. The overall outside shape of the installed
 backplate shall be rectangular. The backplate shall allow no gaps between the backplate and the signal head or
 between signal sections. A 2-inch (50 mm) wide continuous outside border of fluorescent yellow reflective
 sheeting shall be applied to the front of the backplate. Border shall not be applied over the louvers. Reflective
 sheeting shall be Type H or J listed on the Department’s Qualified Products List. Prepare backplate surfaces in
 accordance with 630.04 prior to applying the reflective material. All assembly and mounting hardware shall be
 stainless steel conforming to 730.10. If used, machine nuts shall be thread-deforming or nylon locknuts. Rivets
 shall not be used for mounting the backplate to the signal head. A minimum of four mounting points shall be used
 on each signal section for attaching the backplate. Furnish all mounting hardware.
 
 733 TRAFFIC SIGNAL CONTROLLER MATERIAL
 733.01 References and Definitions.
 “NEMA TS-2,” “Type TS-2/A2,” and “Type TS-2/A1” refers to equipment manufactured in conformance with
 the National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA) Standards Publication No. TS-2.
 “NEMA TS-1” and “Type TS-1” refers to equipment manufactured in conformance with the National Electrical
 Manufacturers Association (NEMA) Standards Publication No. TS-1.
 “Type 332” and “Type 336” refers to equipment manufactured in conformance with the California Department
 of Transportation (CalTrans) specifications titled “Traffic Signal Control Equipment Specifications” and
 “Transportation Electrical Equipment Specifications“, including all addenda.
 “Type 2070” refers to equipment manufactured in conformance with the California Department of Transportation
 (CalTrans) specifications titled “Transportation Electrical Equipment Specifications”, including all addenda.
 “IP” refers to equipment conforming to the Internet Protocol Suite communication protocols defined by the
 Internet Engineering Taskforce RFC 1122.
 “TAP” refers to the Traffic Authorized Products list for products that have been authorized for use on Intelligent
 Transportation Systems (ITS) for the Ohio Department of Transportation.
 733.02 Controller Units.
 A. General Requirements. Ensure that each controller unit contains internal time based coordination and, if
 used in a hardwired coordination system, provide an internal communication device or transceiver for connection
 to interconnect cables including multi-conductor 120 volt cables, twisted pair low voltage cables or fiber optic
 cables as shown on the plans.
 If used in a closed loop system, ensure that the local intersection controller contains all of the software features
 necessary to operate with the system requirements given in 733.06 and 733.07.
 When the signal timing and phasing configuration shown on the plans requires a pre-timed operation, ensure
 that the controller unit meets all requirements of this section and can also be configured in a pre-timed, sequential
 phase, fixed interval mode.
 Furnish controller memories that are nonvolatile and do not require batteries or other sources of energy to
 retain data while power is removed from the controller.
 B. Software. Furnish a communication port for connection to a laptop computer for database upload/download.
 Furnish software for the personal computer to completely program all features of the controller unit. Unless
 otherwise shown on the plans, provide the controller unit with software that provides the following features even
 if not used by the signal phasing operation shown on the plans:
 1. NEMA 8 phase, dual ring capability with four pedestrian movements, 4 overlaps, and the ability to
 program an exclusive pedestrian movement. Ensure that the controller is capable of being programmed for
 sequential phasing operation. All controllers shall be capable of implementing Flashing Yellow Arrow operation
 by remapping pedestrian channel yellow drivers to operate the yellow arrows.
 2.
 
 Volume density functions
 
 3.
 
 Secondary coordination plans
 
 4.
 
 Time of day/day of week scheduler
 
 5.
 
 Time based coordination, minimum 3 dials, 3 offsets, 3 splits
 
 6. Internal preemption for railroad and emergency vehicles. Railroad preemption shall conform to ODOT
 specifications.
 7.
 
 Operator selectable single or dual entry in dual ring use
 
 8.
 
 Security access codes
 
 9.
 
 Detector features including delay timing, carryover (extension) timing and detector switching
 
 10. Simultaneous gap out feature
 11. If operated in a system, communication capabilities to interface with hardwired masters, dial up modems,
 and/or IP communication devices.
 12. Data upload and download capability to a personal computer. At least one IP port and one serial port shall
 be included.
 13. Storage of detector counts utilizing phase detectors for a minimum 24 hour period in 15 minute increments
 14. Detector failure monitoring and logging features for constant calls and absence of calls
 Furnish 60-month warranties or for the manufacturers’ standard warranty, whichever is greater for the
 following equipment:
 NEMA Controller Equipment
 a.
 
 TS-2 Controller Units
 
 b.
 
 Bus Interface Units
 
 c.
 
 Malfunction Management Units
 
 d.
 
 TS 1 Conflict Monitors
 
 CalTrans Controller Equipment
 a.
 
 Model 2010 Conflict Monitor Units
 
 b.
 
 2070L, 2070E, and 2070LX Controller Units including the following subassembly units:
 (1) 2070-1E, 2070-1B, 2070-1C CPU Board
 (2) 2070-2A Field I/O Module
 (3) 2070-3B Front Panel.
 (4) 2070-6A,B.
 
 Ensure that the warranty period begins on the date of shipment to the project. Ensure that each unit has a
 permanent label or stamp indicating the date of shipment. Label shall indicate the equipment vendor name and or
 logo.
 C. Type TS 2/A1. Furnish a controller unit that meets NEMA TS-2 specifications and is shelf or rack mounted.
 Ensure that controller settings are programmable through a keyboard on the front panel. Ensure that the front panel
 contains an 8-line by 40-character display. Ensure the controller is equipped with a datakey to support controller
 database upload/download. Securely attach the datakey to the top of the controller with fiber-reinforced tape at the
 time of delivery to the project.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s TAP.
 D. Type TS-2/A2. Furnish a controller unit that meets NEMA TS-2 specifications and is suitable for shelf
 mounting. Furnish a controller unit that includes all ports and input/output connectors for complete
 interchangeability between NEMA TS-1 and TS-2 cabinets. Ensure that controller settings are programmable
 through a keyboard on the front panel. Ensure that the front panel contains an eight-line by 40-character display.
 Ensure the controller is equipped with a datakey to support controller database upload/download. Securely attach
 the datakey to the top of the controller with fiber-reinforced tape at the time of delivery to the project.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s TAP.
 E. Type 2070L. Furnish controller units that meet the specifications for “Transportation Electrical Equipment
 Specifications”, California Department of Transportation, including all addenda. Furnish a controller unit that is
 listed on the ODOT TAP.
 The Type 2070L version controller unit consists of the following assembled modules:
 
 Unit Chassis
 Model 2070-1B
 Model 2070-2A
 Model 2070-3B
 Model 2070-4B
 
 CPU module, single board
 Field I/O module
 Front panel, Display B (8 lines of 40 char.)
 Power supply module, 3.5 amp. [Power supply Model 2070-4A (10 amp)
 may be supplied in lieu of Model 2070-4B]
 Model 2070-7A
 Async. Serial Communication Module
 Furnish a controller unit that is listed on the ODOT TAP.
 F. Type 2070E. Furnish controller units that meet the specifications for “Transportation Electrical Equipment
 Specifications”, California Department of Transportation, including all addenda.
 The Type 2070E version controller unit consists of the following assembled modules:
 Unit Chassis
 Model 2070-1E
 CPU module, single board
 Model 2070-2A
 Field I/O for 170 Cabinet
 Model 2070-3B
 Front Panel, Display B (8 lines of 40 characters)
 Model 2070-4A or 4B
 Power supply
 Model 2070-7A
 Async. Serial Communication Module
 Furnish a controller unit that is listed on the ODOT TAP.
 G. Type 2070LX. Furnish controller units that meet the specifications for “Transportation Electrical Equipment
 Specifications”, California Department of Transportation, including all addenda.
 The Type 2070LX version controller unit consists of the following assembled modules:
 Unit Chassis
 Model 2070-1C
 Model 2070-2A
 Model 2070-3B
 Model 2070-4A or 4B
 Model 2070-7A
 
 CPU module, single board
 Field I/O for 170 Cabinet
 Front Panel, Display B (8 lines of 40 characters)
 Power supply
 Async. Serial Communication Module
 
 Also, equip all versions of the Type 2070 controller unit with the following:
 1.
 
 The appropriate communication port, cables, and connectors for communicating with a laptop computer.
 
 2. Modems, ports, and cables for system communication, if the controller is to operate as part of an
 interconnected signal system or has a telephone drop shown on the plans.
 3. Furnish a serial communication cable to be used to establish periodic automatic time sync between the 2070
 controller software and the conflict monitor. The cable shall consist of six feet (2 m) of unshielded 4- conductor
 cable, minimum 24 gauge stranded conductors with protective jacket. End connectors shall be 9-pin Dsubminiature with backshell, male and female, with pin assignments shown in the table below.
 9-pin Male
 3
 5
 2
 1
 8
 
 9-pin Female
 3
 5
 2
 4
 4
 
 4. Data key.
 Furnish a controller unit that is listed on the ODOT TAP.
 733.03 Cabinet. Ensure that all cabinets comply with the requirements of this Section. Equip all NEMA
 specified cabinets as follows:
 
 Supply two through four phase controller operation with a minimum twelve position backpanel, configured
 for four pedestrian movements and four overlaps, with a twelve channel NEMA TS-1 conflict monitor or NEMA
 TS-2 malfunction management unit.
 Supply five through eight phase controller operation with a minimum 12 position backpanel, configured for
 four pedestrian movements and no overlaps, with a NEMA TS-2 malfunction management unit.
 For signal phasing configurations that require a larger capacity backpanel or conflict monitor, supply a 16
 position backpanel with a 16 channel NEMA TS-1 conflict monitor or NEMA TS-2 malfunction management unit.
 Furnish each cabinet main door with a sturdy, permanently lubricated lock that is covered with a weatherproof
 tab. Key the project locks to the master key used by the agency that will maintain the equipment. Supply two keys
 with each lock. Also, equip the small door-in-door with a lock that is keyed to the maintaining agency’s master
 key, covered with a weatherproof tab. The door handle shall swing out away from the door edge, not toward the
 center of the door.
 Any fasteners (rivets, bolts, etc.) that penetrate the cabinet exterior shall be tack-welded or brazed on the inside
 surface to prevent punch-thru if the fastener head is ground off from the outside. The preferred method of cabinet
 construction uses no such fasteners, but internal welds only.
 Furnish cabinet with drawings that show the following:
 1. Intersection map. The map shall include street names, all lanes, crosswalks and stop bars, all vehicle and
 pedestrian phases, all loops and detection zones, vehicular and pedestrian signal heads, and pedestrian pushbuttons.
 All of these features shall be labeled. Include a legend that shows the type of vehicular and pedestrian heads and
 north.
 2. Field wiring hook-up chart for all signal heads. The chart shall include signal head name, signal head display
 indication, and field terminal on back panel.
 3. Conflict Monitor/MMU channel assignments and functions, switch positions, and settings. Also show program
 card jumper locations diagrammatically (if applicable). If the Conflict Monitor/MMU is programmed via methods
 other than a program card detail this diagrammatically.
 4. Legend with all wire gauges and insulator colors used in the cabinet. Apply this legend to all wiring shown in
 the drawings. Also include components such as MOVs and diodes.
 5.
 
 Detector panel wiring. Detail all detector landings.
 
 6.
 
 All cable and wiring harness pin assignments.
 
 7.
 
 Detector rack layout. Label detector number and associated phase.
 
 8.
 
 SDLC cable assignments.
 
 9.
 
 Pedestrian pushbutton wiring.
 
 10. Load switch assignments.
 11. Flash programming buss and field terminals wiring.
 12. I/O board, load switch, and flash transfer relay wiring.
 13. Any video, radar, preemption, or other device wiring, interface, and cabling details.
 14. UPS as-built schematic (if applicable). Detail all connections to cabinet and controller.
 15. Netlist detailing all connectivity of the cabinet. It shall include all instances in the cabinet. Provide a
 description of all instances.
 A. Type TS-1.
 1. Cabinets. Furnish a cabinet size that provides ample space for housing the controller unit and all
 associated electrical devices furnished with it, together with any other auxiliary devices that are specified. Furnish
 a cabinet with sufficient shelf space to accommodate all existing, proposed, and designated future equipment.
 
 Ensure that the space provided accommodates the appropriate controller unit frame as designated in NEMA TS-1,
 Section 14.
 Construct the cabinets of cast aluminum or sheet aluminum, drawn or formed, with aluminum support and
 stiffening of members provided as necessary. Ensure that the exterior is smooth with no sharp edges. Weld all
 joints. Ensure that the cabinet is rigid and is designed to support all components. Ensure that the application of
 the following loads do not result in breakage, deformation, or loss of weatherproof qualities: a 100-pound (445 N)
 load applied to any 1-inch (25 mm) square surface of the cabinet or door (open or closed), in any direction; or a
 300-pound (1.3 kN) load applied vertically downward to any 4-inch (100 mm) square of the top surface or to the
 top edge of the closed and latched door.
 Provide cabinet exterior surfaces of bare aluminum. When the plans specify a cabinet color, prime and
 finish all cabinet exteriors with two coats of high-grade enamel paint of the specified color. Ensure that the cabinet
 interior surfaces are the same as the exterior, or may be painted flat white.
 Ensure that the cabinet contains at least one rain-tight louvered vent equipped with a replaceable filter.
 Install vents to allow for the release of excessive heat and any explosive gases that might enter the cabinet.
 Ensure that the cabinets are functional in design and have a door in the front providing access to
 substantially the full interior area. Attach a gasket of elastomeric material to the cabinet or door to form a
 weatherproof seal. Furnish door hinge pins of stainless steel or equivalent corrosion resistant material. Furnish a
 door stop to retain the door in at least a 90 degree open position.
 Include a small, hinged, and gasketed door-in-door (police door) on the outside of the main controller
 door. Ensure that the door-in-door does not allow entrance to the controller mechanism nor to exposed electrical
 terminals, but provides access to a small switch panel and compartment (police panel).
 Fit the cabinet with the necessary provisions for mounting, with a bottom conduit connection provided for
 pole-mounted cabinets. Furnish suitable hardware and equipment for each cabinet mounting method, including
 bolts for drilled and tapped holes on metal supports, pole attachment clamps, pedestal slipfitter, and anchor bolts
 and conduit ells for installation in concrete foundations. Furnish steel anchor bolts that are galvanized at least 1
 inch (25 mm) beyond the threads. Certified cabinet anchor bolts are not required.
 Directly place all equipment designed for shelf mounting on a shelf except for loop detector units
 (amplifiers) and similar devices designed for stacking on each other. Arrange components on shelves and devices
 on the door so that a 1-inch (25 mm) minimum space separates them when the door is shut. Ensure that plugs,
 wires, controls, or similar items do not compromise this space.
 Reserve a minimum 4-inch (100 mm) clear area on the bottom of the cabinet for the routing of cables. Do
 not locate panel mounted equipment in the bottom 6 inches (150 mm) of the cabinet. Do not locate shelves or
 components within 6 inches (150 mm) of the bottom of foundation mounted cabinets.
 Arrange all equipment for easy withdrawal and replacement, without the necessity of disturbing adjacent
 equipment. Permanently locate devices within the cabinet to allow free circulation of air and that do not restrict
 air flow from fan ducts or vents.
 Ensure that the auxiliary equipment operates within a weatherproof cabinet at ambient temperatures
 between -30 and 165 F (-34 and 74 C).
 When terminals and panel mounted devices with exposed electrical contact points are located next to
 shelf mounted equipment, provide spacers, shelf lips, or other means to assure that component units cannot be
 accidentally moved into contact with any exposed electrical terminal points.
 Ensure that load switches, relays, flashers, fuses, switches, terminal blocks, and other equipment mounted
 or plugged into the back or side panels are readily accessible. Ensure that switches, controls, and indicator lights
 are visible and easily operable without moving the components from their normal shelf positions.
 Furnish an aluminum shelf with integral storage compartment in the space immediately below the
 controller. Ensure the storage compartment has telescoping drawer guides for full extension. Ensure the
 compartment top has a non-slip plastic laminate attached.
 
 Furnish LED strip lighting for internal illumination.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s TAP.
 2. Accessory Equipment
 a. Ventilating Fan. Equip all cabinets with a forced air ventilating fan. Furnish a fan that provides a
 capacity of at least 100 cubic feet (2.8 m3) per minute. Furnish a fan that is thermostatically controlled and adjusted
 to start at cabinet temperatures above 120 F (49 C) and to stop when the temperature has dropped below 100 F
 (38 C).
 b. Load Switches. Furnish all cabinets with solid state, triple-signal load switches complying with
 NEMA TS-1, Section 5. Additionally, ensure that all load switches have both input and output indicators.
 c. Conflict Monitor. Furnish all cabinets with a separate solid-state conflict monitor device. Ensure
 that the cabinet wiring, in the event of monitor disconnection, transfers the signals to a flashing condition. Furnish
 conflict monitors that comply with NEMA TS-1, Section 6. Additionally, ensure that all conflict monitors are
 capable of causing the signals to flash as a result of the following events:
 (1) All red lamps associated with a load switch are burned out;
 (2) Within one second when red and green, or yellow and green color pairings are displayed on the
 same phase;
 (3) The absence of a minimum yellow interval.
 Ensure that the monitor indicates the exact load switch output channel upon which the failure event
 occurred. Furnish conflict monitors that are capable of storing a minimum of nine fault events (event logging
 feature). Furnish a monitor that utilizes a LCD display and has a RS-232 port for connection to a laptop computer.
 Furnish software and connector cables to diagnose the conflict monitor.
 d. Flashers. Furnish solid-state flashers that comply with NEMA TS-1, Section 8. When signals have
 a normal stop-and-go sequence that includes flashing, either ensure that the controller unit generates that flashing
 display or provide flashers. For this purpose, provide separate flashers from those provided for emergency backup. Furnish flashers that are designed with two circuits of at least 10 amperes each.
 Equip each controller cabinet with terminals that are wired so that, by an interchange of jumpers, the
 flashing operation is arranged to display either flashing yellow or flashing red on the vehicular signals.
 e. Relays. Ensure that the relays required for proper operation of the specified equipment are furnished
 and completely wired. Furnish relays that are enclosed, readily replaceable, and designed for one-million
 operations without failure or need for adjustment.
 f. Surge Protection Devices. Furnish surge protection on incoming power lines, interconnect lines,
 and detector leads.
 The primary surge protection device (SPD) shall be an EDCO SHA-1250 or approved equal. A plug-in
 base shall be used to hold the device. All wiring connections shall be made to the base, and appropriate cabinet
 clearances maintained, to allow the SPD module to be relaced by hand without the use of tools.
 Furnish loop detector lead-in cable protection that consists of devices installed in each detector circuit
 where the lead-in connects to the terminal block. House each device in a case that consists of two stages; a 3electrode gas tube arrestor and a semiconductor circuit. Ensure that the arrestor shunts to ground a common mode
 transient with a 1,000 ampere peak and an 8/20 microsecond wave-shape, ionizing at 400 volts within 100
 nanoseconds when subjected to a 1,000 volt per microsecond transient. Furnish a semiconductor circuit that clamps
 a differential transient to 30 volts within 40 nanoseconds of the appearance of the transient, and a common mode
 transient to 30 volts within 500 nanoseconds of the ionization of the gas tube arrestor. Ensure that the second stage
 is able to withstand a peak current of 13 amperes. Furnish a device that has impedance characteristics compatible
 with the detector unit so as not to cause false calls or increase the loop impedance above the sensitivity of the
 detector unit.
 
 Furnish pedestrian pushbutton inputs with the same protection as specified for the loop detector lead-in
 cables.
 Protect interconnect cable against transients by devices across each conductor of the cable and ground.
 The devices may be either 2 or 3-terminal devices. If 3-terminal devices are used, connect two conductors and
 ground to the same device. Furnish a protection device that consists of a gas tube arrestor with a maximum
 ionization voltage of 1000 volts on a 10,000 volt per microsecond transient or a maximum ionization voltage of
 950 volts on a 3000 volt per microsecond transient. Ensure that the maximum time from beginning of the transient
 to ionization is 1.1 microseconds on a 10,000 volt per microsecond transient. Ensure that the device is not ionized
 by normal voltage variations on a 120-volt AC line. Furnish a device that is able to withstand a 10,000 ampere
 peak with an 8/20 microsecond waveshape.
 g. Main Power Breaker. Furnish an incoming AC+ power line that is controlled by a main circuit
 breaker rated at 240 volts and an auxiliary breaker, with capacity and wiring as specified in NEMA TS-1, Section
 10.3.2.2 and Figure 10-4.
 If a power service disconnect switch is located before the controller cabinet, the neutral (AC-) and the
 grounding bar in the controller cabinet shall not be connected together as shown in NEMA TS-1, Figure 10-4.
 h. Radio Interference Filter. Furnish an incoming AC+ power line that contains a radio frequency
 interference (RFI) filter installed between the main circuit breaker and the solid state equipment. Also, provide
 RFI filtering for the load switches and flasher, unless the equipment furnished provides signal and flasher circuits
 switching at the zero voltage point of the power line sinusoid wave form.
 i. Convenience Outlet and Light. Wire a convenience outlet into the cabinet for use by electrical
 maintenance equipment. Ensure that the outlet contains at least one standard duplex three-wire NEMA 5-15
 receptacle of the ground-fault circuit-interrupting (GFCI) type. Wire a second non-GFCI convenience outlet, not
 fed thru the UPS system (if used). Furnish and mount a white LED lamp in the upper portion of the cabinet. Furnish
 a door switch to control the convenience light.
 j. Manual Control and Pushbutton. When required by the plans, provide intersection controller units
 with means for substituting manual operation of interval timing for automatic interval timing. Ensure that manual
 operation provides the same interval sequence as when the controller unit is operating automatically.
 Obtain manual interval timing by a momentary pushbutton contact switch mounted on a 5-foot (1.5 m)
 minimum flexible weatherproof extension cord. Store that switch and cord behind the small door-in-door.
 k. Switches. Furnish completely wired switches that are required for proper operation of specified
 equipment. Clearly and permanently label switches as to function and setting position, and ensure that they are
 accessible without the necessity of moving components.
 (1) Signal Shutdown Switch. Furnish a cabinet with a signal shutdown switch for turning off the
 power to the signals at the intersection. Ensure that this switch only affects the power to the signals, and allows
 the controller to continue in operation. Locate the switch in the panel behind the small door-in-door (police door).
 (2) Auto/Flash Switch. Furnish a cabinet with a flash control switch for activating the flashing of
 vehicular signals in a preselected emergency flash display. Ensure that the operation of the flash control switch
 causes a flashing display even under conditions of controller unit malfunction or of its removal from the cabinet.
 Ensure that the operation of the switch overrides any operation commands from a local or remote time switch.
 Locate the switch in the panel behind the small door-in-door (police door).
 Program the transfer to and from flashing operation, when called remotely or by a local time switch,
 to occur only at points in the cycle allowed by the OMUTCD.
 (3) Automatic/Manual Transfer Switch. Furnish a cabinet with an automatic/manual transfer
 switch. In the automatic position, ensure that the controller unit automatically sequences the signal head displays.
 In the manual position, ensure that the signal phase or interval sequencing occurs only upon manual activation of
 the manual control pushbutton. Locate the switch in the door-in-door (police door). Ensure that it is unnecessary,
 
 when switching from manual to automatic operation, or vice versa, to do so at any certain time or to make any time
 adjustments.
 (4) Run/Stop-Time Switch. Furnish a cabinet with a run/stop-time switch that activates the
 controller stop-time feature when in the “stop-time” position. Locate the run/stop-time switch on a switch panel in
 the cabinet.
 (5) Controller Shutdown Switch. Furnish a cabinet with a controller shutdown switch that cuts off
 power to the controller unit, conflict monitor, and detector units. Ensure that power is not cut off to those
 components required to maintain flashing operation. Locate the controller shutdown switch on a switch panel in
 the cabinet.
 (6) Coordinated/Free Switch. Furnish controllers operated in a coordinated system with a
 coordinated/free switch. Ensure that this switch allows the choice of operating the controller under the supervision
 of a coordination device or operating the controller independently of coordination control. Locate the
 coordinated/free switch on a switch panel in the cabinet.
 (7) Detector Test Switches. Furnish momentary contact switches that will enter a vehicular or
 pedestrian call for any actuated phase. Furnish a switch for each actuated phase vehicular and pedestrian detection
 input. Conveniently group and label the switches.
 l. Terminal Blocks. Furnish cabinets that include terminal blocks mounted on panels on the walls of
 the cabinet. Ensure that the blocks are not obstructed by shelf-mounted devices. Furnish sufficient terminal sets
 for each individual harness wire as well as for contacts of signal load switches, flasher transfer relays, flasher, and
 other components. Also, provide separate terminal sets for field wiring connections, including power, signal,
 interconnection, and detector lead-in cables. Group terminal sets to separate higher voltage (120 VAC) from lower
 voltage, and arrange them into logical groups. Protect terminal blocks from accidental contact during the
 installation and removal of shelf-mounted equipment. Locate the blocks no closer than 4 inches (100 mm) from
 the bottom of pole and pedestal mounted cabinets, and no closer than 6 inches (150 mm) from the bottom of
 foundation mounted cabinets.
 Ensure that the terminal points are UL listed as suitable to carry the rated loading. Ensure that the capacity
 and size of the terminals are as specified in NEMA TS-1, Section 10.2.5. Ensure that the terminal points for signal
 field wiring for each circuit accommodates at least four 12 AWG conductors with spade type terminals.
 Furnish terminal points for incoming power wiring that accepts either spade terminals or bare stranded
 wire and are suitable for either aluminum or copper conductors.
 Space terminal sets for easy wiring. Furnish at least six reserve terminal sets for controllers. Harnesses
 may terminate on the back of terminal blocks using through-panel terminals. Clearly mark terminal sets for ready
 identification including through-panel terminals that are identified on both sides. Ensure that the contact between
 adjacent terminal points are made by bus bar, or by wire jumpers having spade type terminals securely attached to
 each end.
 m. Terminal Buses. Furnish a cabinet with supply terminal buses fed from the line side of the incoming
 120 VAC power line, after the phase wire has passed through the main power switch. Ensure that the requirements
 for use of radio interference filters are according to Item 8 of this Section, with the buses supplying load switches
 and with flashers being filtered when required. Ensure that a signal bus relay controls power to the bus supplying
 power for the signal load switches. . The following overrides NEMA requirements for signal bus relays. A solidstate relay shall be used for the signal bus relay. The signal bus relay shall maintain output equal to or above the
 rating of the cabinet main overcurrent protection device over the NEMA TS-2 Environmental Operating Range of
 -50 to +185 degrees F (-45 to +85 degrees C).
 Furnish a common terminal bus for the connection of the neutral wire of the incoming 120 VAC
 power line. Ensure that the common bus has sufficient terminal points to accommodate all potential cabinet wiring
 as well as field wiring. Use a separate common terminal, insulated from the panel, for the interconnect common.
 Furnish bus terminal points that comply with Item 12 of this Section for conductor accommodation,
 attachment and identification.
 
 n. Grounding System/Bus Bars. Furnish a cabinet that includes a grounding system as specified in
 NEMA TS-1, Section 10.3.2.1 with an adequate number (minimum of three) of ground terminal points.
 o. Wiring. Neatly organize and route the harnesses and wiring bundles to individual terminals. Ensure
 that the harness provides a wire for each pin or contact of the device. Connect each wire to a marked terminal
 position. Use labeled spade type terminals or plug connections on all harness wiring. Group and lash or restrain
 wire bundles in such a manner that they will not interfere with the access to components, terminal blocks or buses,
 or the legibility of terminal identification. Ensure that the harnesses are of sufficient length to reach any point
 within the cabinet. Ensure that the cables and harness bundles are easily traced through the cabinet to their
 terminations. Route all wiring terminated on printed circuit boards (as commonly done for BIU backpanel
 connectors) at right angles to the pin array; no wires shall pass over the connector pins.
 Wire the cabinet so that controller pin connections associated with a given phase number matches the
 phase number assigned to the specified traffic movement as shown on the plans.
 Furnish all wiring with stranded conductors. Ensure that the wiring is adequate for the voltage and load
 that represents the ultimate load of the devices connected. Ensure that the ampacity rating of the wires are as
 specified in NEMA TS-1, Section 10.3.3.1. Ensure that the wiring is color coded as follows:
 (1) Solid white, AC common.
 (2) Solid green or green with yellow stripes, equipment ground.
 (3) Solid black, AC line side power (AC+).
 p. Loop Detector Units. Furnish loop detector units that comply with the requirements of NEMA TS1, Section 15, with the following modifications:
 (1) Furnish loop detector units that are shelf mounted and powered from 120 volts.
 (2) Ensure that the unit uses solid-state isolated output devices.
 (3) Furnish conductors in the cable harness for loop input pins that are twisted three to five times per
 foot (300 mm).
 (4) Furnish detector unit electrical connection plugs or wiring harness that are designed such that
 any multi-channel shelf mounted detector unit is readily replaced with single channel detector units. Furnish only
 units with the connector type required for single channel shelf mounted detector units, or by wiring the controller
 back panel to single channel wiring harnesses which are, in turn, plug connected to an adapter harness that is mated
 to the multi-channel connector of the detector unit.
 (5) When shown on the plans, supply delay and extension timing capability on the detector unit;
 otherwise, the controller unit software requirements of 733.02 will provide these features.
 (6) Ensure that the harness provides a wire for each pin or contact of the device.
 (7) Furnish loop detector unit with an LED or LCD display indication of call strength (∆L/L or
 equivalent). This display shall be a bar graph or numerical display with at least eight (8) discrete levels indicated.
 If vehicle detector types other than “loop” detectors are required by the plans, provide these detectors
 by separate bid item.
 Furnish TS-1 cabinets according to the Department’s TAP.
 B. Type TS-2.
 1. Furnish TS-2 cabinets that utilize a high speed data channel to connect the controller unit, malfunction
 management unit, rear panel (terminals and facilities), detectors and bus interface units and also comply with the
 general requirements of 733.03. Furnish a prewired cabinet with malfunction management unit, loop detector units,
 and all accessory equipment as specified in NEMA TS-2, except as follows:
 a.
 
 Section 5.3.4, use detector racks for both Type 1 (A1) and Type 2 (A2) controller units.
 
 b. Section 5.4.2.1, if a power service disconnect switch is located before the controller cabinet, the
 neutral (AC-) and the grounding bar in the controller cabinet shall be connected together.
 c.
 
 Section 5.4.2.7, provide an LED type light.
 
 d.
 
 Section 5.4.2.7.2, provide the LED lamp.
 
 e.
 
 Section 5.4.2.7.3, provide the door actuated light switch.
 
 f. Section 6.5.2.2.1, provide 2-channel detector units, without delay/extension features (Type A).
 Furnish momentary pushbuttons on the cabinet door or a detector rack panel for actuation of Detector BIU #9,
 channels 1-16, and the four opto-isolated pedestrian detector inputs on BIU #1 and BIU #2. Permanently label these
 pushbuttons as “VEH DET 1” through “VEH DET 16” and “PED DET 1” through “PED DET 8.”
 g.
 
 Section 7.2, construct cabinets of sheet aluminum.
 
 h. Section 7.3, unless otherwise specified in the plans, provide a Size 5 cabinet for pole mounted
 cabinets, Size 7 for ground mounted cabinets. Supply larger cabinets if required to house the equipment to meet
 the plan requirements; such as master controllers, preemption devices, 16 position backpanels or special detection
 units.
 Furnish all wire passages through and over metal edges with edge protection polymer trim.
 i. Section 7.5.7, ensure that the police panel contains switches for AUTO/FLASH, SIGNALS ON/OFF
 and AUTO/MANUAL in the police panel. Furnish a pushbutton with a 5-foot (1.5 m) cord, and panel connector,
 not hard wired, unless a strain-relieving panel feed-thru bushing is provided.
 j.
 
 Section 7.7.3, supply unpainted cabinets.
 
 k. The following overrides the NEMA requirements for signal bus relays. A solid-state relay shall be
 used for the signal bus relay. This relay shall maintain output equal to or exceeding the requirements of the cabinet
 main overcurrent protective device over the NEMA TS-2 Environmental Operating Range of -30 to +165 degrees
 Fahrenheit.
 2. Furnish loop detector and pedestrian inputs that have lightning/surge protection as specified in
 733.03.A.2.f.
 3. Include loop detector racks with the necessary number of two-channel loop detector units with the cabinet.
 When shown on the plans, supply delay and extension timing capability on the detector unit; otherwise, provide
 the controller unit software with these features. If vehicle detector types other than “loop” detectors are required
 by the plans, provide these detector units by separate bid item. If the special bid detector units use standard TS-2
 detector racks, furnish the racks as part of the pre-wired cabinet.
 Furnish loop detector unit with an LED or LCD display indication of call strength (∆L/L or equivalent).
 This display shall be a bar graph or numerical display with at least eight (8) discrete levels indicated.
 4.
 
 Furnish switches to control the controller unit and cabinet functions as specified in the plans.
 
 5.
 
 Furnish load switches that have both input and output indicators.
 
 6. The primary surge protection device (SPD) shall be an EDCO SHA-1250 or approved equal. A plug-in
 base shall be used to hold the device. All wiring connections shall be made to the base, and appropriate cabinet
 clearances maintained, to allow the SPD module to be replaced by hand without the use of tools. Cabinet power
 distribution shall conform to Figure 5-4, NEMA TS-2 2003 v02.06. In addition, locates a non GFCI NEMA 5-15
 utility outlet on the right side power panel. This outlet shall be powered independently of the UPS by direct
 connection to incoming utility power through a 15-amp circuit breaker labeled “UTILITY OUTLET.”
 7. Include serial and/or Ethernet cables, 4-feet minimum length, to interface with laptop computer. Include
 all interface software.
 8. Include datakey module. Provide a datakey with each controller, taped securely to the top of the controller
 chassis.
 9.
 
 Include an SDLC expansion board with three available ports, mounted on a cabinet side wall.
 
 10. Include an SDLC in-line surge suppressor, EDCO SRS-BIU-15 or equivalent, located at the controller
 SDLC port.
 11. Furnish an aluminum shelf with integral storage compartment in the space immediately below the
 controller. Ensure the storage compartment has telescoping drawer guides for full extension. Ensure the
 compartment top has a non-slip plastic laminate attached.
 Furnish TS-2 cabinet according to the Department’s TAP.
 C. Type 332.
 1. General. Furnish Model 332L cabinets that meet the specifications “Traffic Signal Control Equipment
 Specifications” and “Transportation Electrical Equipment Specifications”, California Department of
 Transportation. Ensure that the manufacturer of the cabinets is listed on the TAP at the time of delivery to the
 project.
 2.
 
 Cabinets.
 
 a. Ensure that the cabinets are constructed of aluminum and are supplied unpainted. An anodic coating
 is not required. Supply galvanized anchor bolts with nuts and washers with each cabinet. Furnish 3/4-inch (19
 mm) diameter by 16 inches (0.4 m) minimum length anchor bolts with an “L” bend on the unthreaded end.
 b.
 
 Fit the cabinets with a PDA-2 power distribution assembly.
 
 c. When shown on the plans, provide the cabinet with door hinges that are “right” or “left” mounted
 when facing the front of the cabinet.
 3.
 
 Terminals and Wiring.
 a.
 
 “Hardwire” output files. Do not use printed circuit wiring in the output file except for the red monitor
 
 board.
 b. Ensure that the vehicle and pedestrian detector field wiring inputs connect to side mounted terminal
 blocks. Install terminal blocks and associated wiring to the input file. Label the field wiring terminals of the side
 mounted terminal block by a permanent screening process to identify the input panel (I or J), the input file slot
 number (1 through 14) and the channel terminal (D, E, J, or K). An example is “I4-E”. Ensure that all terminals
 on these detector blocks are accessible without removing equipment from the EIA mounting rack.
 c. Install red monitor cabling in the cabinets. Install a program board to enable/disable red monitoring.
 Ship the cabinets with the red monitor jumpers set in the “enable” position.
 d.
 
 Do not connect the pedestrian yellow load switch outputs to the conflict monitor card-edge connector.
 
 e. Supply each cabinet with a cable at least 5 feet (1.5 m) long to connect a laptop computer with the
 controller. Ensure that the cable has a DB-9 connector on one end, and a connector on the other end to mate with
 the C2 on the back of the controller. The cable will allow a laptop computer to upload/download data to the
 controller.
 f. Supply each cabinet with a Category 5e cable with 8P8C (RJ45) plug on each end, minimum 5 feet
 in length. The cable will allow a laptop computer to upload/download data to the controller.
 g. On the output file, wire pin No. 11 of each switchpack connector to AC- so that the output indicators
 on dual indicator switchpacks will display properly.
 4.
 
 Accessories.
 
 a. Fully equip the cabinets with two channel loop detector sensors, flashers, flash transfer relays, power
 supply, AC and DC isolators, conflict monitor, switchpacks (with both input and output indicators), and a DC
 isolator in slot 14 for flash sense/stop time. Do not switch the input file channels from the standard layout in order
 to minimize the number of two-channel detector units utilized. If vehicle detector types other than “loop” detectors
 are required by the plans, provide these detectors under a separate bid item.
 Flash Transfer Relays shall use AC coils only; the use of a series rectifier in combination with a DC coil
 is prohibited.
 
 In addition to the requirements of “Transportation Electrical Equipment Specifications”, California
 Department of Transportation, furnish detector unit with an LED or LCD display indication of call strength (∆L/L
 or equivalent). This display shall be a bar graph or numerical display with at least eight (8) discrete levels indicated.
 Furnish loop detector sensors according to the Department’s QPL.
 b. Furnish a rack mounted detector test panel with test switches. Test switches shall call vehicle phases
 1-8, pedestrian phases 2,4,6,8 and EVPE channels A,B,C,D as defined in the published ODOT Plan Insert Sheet
 for default 332/336 cabinet input file assignments. Furnish switches with three position “on/off/momentary on”
 switches.
 c. Furnish a police panel in each cabinet that includes a removable pushbutton with 5 feet (1.5 m) cord
 and three switches labeled AUTO/FLASH, SIGNALS ON/OFF and AUTO/MANUAL. Wire the pushbutton cord
 to the controller harness wiring by a molex plug connection and not through an AC isolator. When placed in the
 manual position, apply “manual control enable” to the controller and apply “recall” to all phases. Ensure that
 activation of the push button “advances” the controller, except prohibit the manual advancement during the
 minimum green, yellow, and red timing intervals.
 d. Furnish an aluminum shelf with integral storage compartment in the rack below the controller. Ensure
 that the storage compartment has telescoping drawer guides for full extension. Ensure that the compartment top
 has a non-slip plastic laminate attached. Top of shelf shall be at least 30 inches and no more than 48 inches above
 the workpad surface. For cabinets with risers, this may require relocating the drawer to a position below Input File
 #2.
 e. Ensure that each cabinet has two white LED lights installed at the top of the cabinet, one near each
 door. Wire the lights to the door switches such that opening either door will turn on both lights.
 5. Surge Protection.
 a. Furnish surge protection on pedestrian and detector inputs. Furnish three terminal surge arrestors
 equivalent to EDCO models SRA-6LCA, SRA-6LCB, or SRA-6LC.
 b. Protect the cabinet’s incoming power lines with an EDCO SHA-1250 or approved equal surge
 protector in lieu of the CalTrans specified surge protection. A plug-in base shall be used to hold the device. All
 wiring connections shall be made to the base, and appropriate cabinet clearances maintained, to allow the SPD
 module to be relaced by hand without the use of tools.
 6.
 1076.
 
 Conflict Monitor. Ensure that the conflict monitor unit was tested and accepted according to Supplement
 
 a. Materials and Warranties. Furnish electrical parts, switches, and other elements of the installation
 that are of ample capacity to carry the required current without excessive heating or drop of potential.
 Use standard industrial quality components (integrated circuit chips, transistors, diodes, resistors,
 capacitors, etc.) wherever possible. Clearly identify these components with the original identification. Designate
 the other vital information such as voltage polarity, emitter or collector terminals, pin locations, etc., by an approved
 industrial procedure. Ensure that the major items or assemblies of equipment bear a nameplate, indelible marking,
 or brand that identifies it as to type, model, catalog number, and manufacturer.
 Transfer that manufacturers’ guarantees or warranties to the Department upon delivery and
 acceptance of the equipment. Ensure that all conflict monitors are warranted for a period of 60 months or for the
 manufacturer’s standard warranty period, whichever is greater, for parts and labor from date of shipment to the
 project or the ODOT Signal Shop. Ensure that each unit has a permanent label or stamp indicating the date of
 shipment and name of vendor supplying the unit and/or logo.
 b. General Requirements.
 (1) Minimum Standards. This specification establishes minimum standards for Conflict
 Monitoring Devices designed for use in Model 332 and 336 Traffic Signal Controller Cabinets supplied to the
 Department.
 
 (2) Indicator Lights. Furnish indicator lights that are water-clear (not colored or diffused lenses),
 ultra- bright light emitting diodes (LED), whose states are clearly readable in direct sunlight. Ensure that each
 conflict monitor channel provides separate red, yellow, and green LEDs.
 (a) Furnish a GREEN AC POWER indicator light.
 (b) Arrange indicator lights in a vertical pattern with FAULT status lights as the upper
 indications and the output channel lights as the lower indications [See 733.03.C.6.c.(1) and 733.03.C.6.c.(9)]. An
 acceptable alternative is to provide a single fault indication and a supplemental display that clearly indicates the
 fault type.
 (c) Ensure that a failure causes its respective indicator light to display.
 (3) Monitor Power. Ensure that the Monitor does not use the 24VDC power supply being sensed
 to run any of its internal circuitry. Ensure that the watchdog, stop time, external reset, and 24VDC monitor input
 circuits are optically isolated from the Monitor internal power supply and are conditioned to provide proper sense
 circuit operation throughout the operating range.
 (4) Power Fail. Consider a line voltage less than 85 V ac  2 V ac as a power failure. Ensure that
 a power failure does not result in resetting the Monitor. Ensure that once the Monitor is triggered by detection of
 a fault that it remains in that state until a Reset Command is issued. Reset is issued only by the Front Panel Control
 Switch or by the External Test Reset input.
 (5) Power Up. Furnish a Monitor that is compatible with the Model 2070 controller unit. When
 power is established, > 103  2 Vac, the monitor will power up in the FAULT RELAY RECOVERY mode:
 When power is established, initiate FAULT RELAY RECOVERY. For an interval of 6.0  0.5
 seconds, the following will take place:
 (a) The Output Relay contacts remain closed, and the Stop Time output remains active.
 (b) All fault monitoring functions remain suspended.
 (c) The AC POWER indicator light flashes at a 2 hertz rate.
 At the end of this time interval, the Monitor begins counting Watchdog transitions from the
 controller and prepares to resume normal fault monitoring.
 Ensure that the resumption of normal Fault monitoring occurs when either:
 (a) The Monitor has counted 5 transitions between the True and False state from the controller
 Watchdog; or
 (b) 10  0.5 seconds has elapsed from the time of LINE RECOVERY.
 If the controller Watchdog output does not become active, ensure that the Monitor goes into a
 Latched Fault condition.
 (6) Cabinet Signals Monitored. Furnish a Monitor designed to monitor Green, Yellow, and Red
 AC circuits at the field output terminals of traffic signal cabinets. Monitor shall be capable of monitoring Flashing
 Yellow Arrow channels. In addition, monitor the cabinet 24VDC supply, and the Model 2070 controller Watchdog
 Timer output. These signals are processed by the Monitor circuitry, and if a failure is determined to have occurred,
 ensure that a relay output contact closure (FAILED state) places the cabinet and intersection into flashing operation.
 (7) Failed State Output Circuits.
 (a) Use an electro-mechanical relay to provide the FAILED STATE output circuit. Ensure that
 the relay contacts are normally closed (FAILED STATE). In a NON-FAILED state (relay coil energized), ensure
 that the contacts are open. The function of this output circuit is to initiate flash operation within the cabinet and
 transfer field circuits from the switch pack outputs to the flash bus during a FAILED STATE.
 (b) Furnish relay contacts that are rated for a minimum of 3 amperes at 120 V ac and 100,000
 operations. Ensure that the contact opening/closing time is 30 ms or less. Furnish contacts that present a minimum
 impedance of 50,000 ohms in the open state.
 
 (c) Ensure that the Stop Time output is active whenever the output relay contacts are in the
 FAILED STATE (closed). Ensure that it is inactive whenever the output relay contacts are in the NON-FAILED
 (open) STATE.
 (8) Monitor Unit Reset. Furnish a front panel momentary SPST pushbutton switch labeled
 “RESET” to reset the Monitor to a Non-FAILED state and restores normal monitoring operation. Position the
 switch on the front panel so that the switch can be operated while gripping the front panel handle.
 Ensure that the External Test Reset input line resets the Monitor circuitry to a Non-FAILED state
 and restores normal monitoring operation. Optically isolate it from the internal circuitry. Ensure that a reset
 issuance by either source (Unit Reset) is triggered by only the leading edge of the input signal (this will prevent a
 constant reset due to either a switch failure or a constant external input). Ensure that a constant reset input is
 ignored within 5 seconds of issuance.
 (9) Input Impedance. Ensure that the input impedance for all monitored AC inputs are 200 kilohms
  100 kilohms.
 (10) Connectors. Furnish PCB 28/56P Type Monitor and Conflict Program Card Connectors. Ensure
 that all edge connectors use the “bifurcated bellow” type contact or equivalent.
 (11) Door Ajar Circuit. Connect pin 24 to pin 25 on the Monitor PCB at the edge connector and
 ensure that it is capable of carrying one ampere according to CalTrans specifications.
 (12) Handle. Ensure that the handle placement and design is such that no interference between the
 handle and a closed cabinet door exists.
 (13) Fuse Holder. Furnish low profile fuse holders on the front panel.
 c.
 
 Functional Requirements.
 
 (1) General. The Monitor monitors the cabinet for conflicts and unsafe operation. If an unsafe
 condition exists, the Monitor will enter into a FAILED state. This places the cabinet into flash operation and
 applies STOP TIME to the controller unit. Ensure that the Monitor is designed to monitor red circuits, yellow
 timing, multiple outputs, and lack of outputs on a switch selectable, per channel basis. Specific conditions for
 failure follow:
 (a) 24VDC FAIL. The cabinet +24 volts DC does not meet the specified thresholds.
 (b) CONFLICT. When the green or yellow input to one or more channels is ON and they are
 not programmed as permissive on the Conflict Program Card.
 (c) WATCHDOG TIMER (WDT) ERROR. When the 2070 controller unit watchdog output
 has ceased.
 (d) CONFLICT PROGRAM CARD AJAR. Illuminates, if the Conflict Program Card is
 removed or if it is not properly seated in the connector. When it is not inserted into the monitor, ensure that the
 warning indicator light is displayed.
 (e) MONITOR FAILURE. A fault is detected within the operation of the monitor itself.
 (f) MULTIPLE OUTPUTS. Simultaneous indications of Green, Yellow, or Red field outputs
 on a single channel.
 (g) RED FAIL. No active field outputs on a single channel (green/yellow/red).
 (h) YELLOW ERROR. The absence of a minimum yellow field output during a green to red
 sequence. Minimum yellow shall be 2.7 seconds  100 ms.
 (2) Operating Range. Furnish a Monitor Unit that is fully operational using an 85 to 135 V ac
 power source. Ensure that the Monitor suspends Fault monitoring below 85 V ac  2 V ac, closes the output relay,
 and de-energizes the AC POWER indicator light.
 
 (3) Watchdog Timing. Furnish WATCHDOG Timing Circuitry to monitor the controller unit
 WATCHDOG output. Ensure that the WDT Circuitry senses state changes and the time between the last change.
 Ensure that an absence of change for 1.50.1 seconds places the Monitor in a FAILED state.
 (4) Channels Monitored. Furnish a Monitor that senses and responds to conflicts and 24 VDC
 failures whenever the AC line voltage is within the 85 to 135 V ac operating range of the Monitor, except during
 FAULT RELAY OPERATION.
 (5) Yellow Inhibit. Furnish means to selectively inhibit the monitoring of a Yellow channel input.
 (6) Power Fail after Fault. In the event that the Monitor senses a fault, followed by a loss of
 operating voltage, ensure that the initial Failure Status is retained in memory and is redisplayed after restoration of
 power.
 (a) Once the Monitor is LATCHED in a fault condition for any reason, including the removal
 of the Conflict Program Card, ensure that it REMAINS LATCHED, even through a power fail/recovery, until a
 RESET is issued by the front panel reset switch, or by the external test reset line.
 (b) Display the status of the Green, Yellow, and Red inputs of all channels, at the time the fault
 was latched. Ensure that a power loss does not affect the retention of this data. An acceptable alternative is to save
 status of all channels in memory and only display the latched fault.
 (7) Insertion/Removal of Unit. Ensure that it is possible to insert and remove the Monitor while
 the cabinet is energized without placing the cabinet into Flash operation provided that: The cabinet door remains
 open and the reset switch is held depressed while the unit is being inserted or removed. Any momentary disruption
 of field signal indications is less than 500 ms.
 (8) Microprocessor Use. If a microprocessor is used in the Monitor design, ensure that its program
 is written so that:
 (a) Integrity tests are performed periodically on each memory cell of each memory device,
 relevant to each device type.
 (b) Hardware external to the microprocessor circuits is employed to constantly sense proper
 microprocessor operation.
 (c) The Monitor reverts to a FAILED state if a fault is detected with the microprocessor or
 during integrity tests.
 (9) Front Panel Indicators. Ensure that the Monitor has red/yellow/green indicators for channel
 inputs and indicators to provide status and failure detection information. Furnish a GREEN AC POWER indicator.
 Ensure that all indicators are clearly readable in direct sunlight. Arrange and label the indicators as shown below:
 (a) AC POWER. Illuminates when the incoming AC Line Voltage exceeds 103  2V ac, and
 FLASHES during FAULT RELAY OPERATION.
 (b) VDC FAIL. Illuminates when the Monitor has detected a 24VDC failure.
 (c) CONFLICT. Illuminates when a conflicting signal condition is detected.
 (d) WDT ERROR. Illuminates when a Watchdog error is detected. Do not provide a switch
 or similar device to disable WDT monitoring.
 (e) PC AJAR. Illuminates when the Conflict Program Card is removed or is not properly seated
 in its connector.
 (f) MON FAIL. Illuminates to indicate an internal Monitor failure.
 (g) RED FAIL. Illuminates when the Monitor detects that there is no active output on any of
 the field outputs that comprise a monitored channel. Ensure that the failed channels are displayed on the
 corresponding channel indicators. If for any reason red fail is not enabled, ensure that the red fail indicator light
 flashes at approximately 2hertz.
 
 (h) MULT IND. Illuminates when the Monitor detects simultaneous outputs on more than one
 of the field outputs that comprise a monitored channel (green/yellow/red). Ensure that the failed channels are
 displayed on the corresponding channel indicators.
 (i) YELLOW. Illuminates when the Monitor detects the absence of a minimum period of
 active yellow field output during a green to red sequence. Ensure that the failed channel is displayed on the
 corresponding channel indicator.
 (j) 1, 2, 3, 48. Furnish channel indicators that illuminate a FAILED state in conformance with
 733.03.C.6.c.(6).
 (10) Monitor Board Edge Connector. Furnish monitor board edge connectors that conform to
 CalTrans specifications.
 (11) Monitoring of Conflicting Voltages. Ensure that inputs to any channel that exceed the specified
 conflict threshold (see Section 6) are sensed as “ON” and illuminate their respective channel indicators. Ensure
 that the number of active channels in no way affects the conflict threshold.
 Ensure that the following voltage levels and times apply: A conflict has occurred and will cause
 a FAILED state only when voltages appear at the field output terminals.
 > 20  5.0 V rms for a duration > 350  150 ms.
 (12) Conflict Program Card.
 specifications.
 
 Furnish conflict program cards that comply with CalTrans
 
 d. Fault Relay Operation.
 (1) Line Drop Out. Furnish a Monitor that determines that a LINE DROP OUT has occurred when:
 The AC Line Voltage is:
 < 98  2 VAC for > 400  100 ms.
 Within this time frame, ensure that the Monitor suspends all fault monitoring functions, closes
 the output relay contacts, enables Stop Time output, and the AC POWER indicator on the front panel flashes at a
 rate of 2 hertz 20 percent to indicate LINE DROP OUT status. Ensure that the Monitor remains in the FAULT
 RELAY mode until a LINE RECOVERY has occurred.
 (2) Line Recovery. Ensure that the Monitor that determines that a LINE RECOVERY has occurred
 when:
 The AC Line Voltage is:
 > 103  2 VAC for > 400  100 ms.
 (3) Fault Relay Recovery. When LINE RECOVERY is established, initiate the FAULT RELAY
 RECOVERY. For an interval of 6.0  0.5 seconds, the following will take place:
 (a) The Output Relay contacts remain closed, and the Stop Time output remains active.
 (b) All fault monitoring functions remain suspended.
 (c) The AC POWER indicator light flashes at a rate of 2 hertz  20 percent.
 At the end of this time interval the Monitor begins counting Watchdog transitions from the
 controller and prepares to resume normal fault monitoring.
 (4) Resumption of Normal Monitoring. Ensure that the resumption of normal Fault Monitoring
 occurs when either:
 (a) the Monitor has counted five transitions between the True and False state from the controller
 Watchdog; or
 (b) 10  0.5 seconds has elapsed from the time of LINE RECOVERY.
 
 If the controller Watchdog output does not become active, the Monitor shall go into a Latched
 Fault condition.
 e.
 
 Red Monitoring Connector.
 
 (1) Connector. Mount a connector, 3M-3428-5302, with two 3518 polarizing keys, or equivalent,
 on the Monitor front panel. The pin assignments of the P20 connector and terminal assembly are defined in this
 specification.
 Ensure that it is possible to plug and unplug the Red Monitoring Connector P20 without placing
 the cabinet into Flash operation.
 P20 CONNECTOR PIN ASSIGNMENTS
 Pin
 1
 3
 5
 7
 9
 11
 13
 15
 17
 19
 
 Function
 CHANNEL 15 RED
 CHANNEL 14 RED
 CHANNEL 13 RED
 CHANNEL 12 RED
 CHANNEL 10 RED
 CHANNEL 9 RED
 CHANNEL 7 RED
 CHANNEL 5 RED
 CHANNEL 3 RED
 CHANNEL 1 RED
 
 Pin
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
 18
 20
 
 Function
 CHANNEL 16 RED
 UNDEFINED
 SPECIAL FUNCTION 2
 SPECIAL FUNCTION 1
 CHANNEL 11 RED
 CHANNEL 8 RED
 CHANNEL 6 RED
 CHANNEL 4 RED
 CHANNEL 2 RED
 RED ENABLE
 
 Ensure that keying is between pins 3/5, and 17/19. The odd numbered pins are on one side, and
 the even pins are on the other. Key the P20 connector and the CMU connector physically alike (to prevent the Red
 Monitoring cable from being inserted into the P20 180 degrees out of alignment).
 (2) Red Enable Input. Ensure that pin 20 of the Red Monitoring Connector provides the Red Enable
 input to the Monitor. When the Red Monitoring Connector is disconnected, or Red Enable is not present, ensure
 that the Monitor checks for conflicting combinations of Greens and Yellows, Watchdog Timer, 24VDC, Conflict
 Program Card Ajar, and Monitor Fail. When enabled, ensure that the extended Monitor functions become active
 including: Red Fail, Multiple Output, and Yellow Fail.
 (3) Special Function 1 and 2 Inputs.
 (a) PIN 8, Special Function 1: Furnish an AC input to the Monitor, which will DISABLE only
 the RED FAIL monitoring functions while it is active (e.g. during Railroad Preempt).
 (b) PIN 6, Special Function 2: Reserved for future use.
 Furnish a means to select either a PRESENCE of, or LACK of AC+ to enable these inputs.
 f.
 
 Electrical Requirements.
 (1) Operation Range. Furnish a Monitor that is fully operational from an 85 to 135 V ac power
 
 source.
 (2) Isolation. Isolate the Chassis Ground and AC - from one another.
 (3) Monitored AC Inputs. The following voltage and time thresholds apply to all monitored AC
 inputs.
 (a) Green and Yellow Inputs.
 Any inputs < 15.0 V rms are considered OFF.
 Any inputs > 25.0 V rms are considered ON.
 Both sinusoidal and half-wave inputs of the specified RMS values are to meet these
 thresholds.
 
 (b) Red, Red Enable, and Special Function Inputs.
 Any inputs < 50.0 V rms are considered OFF.
 Any inputs > 70.0 V rms are considered ON.
 Red inputs, both sinusoidal, and half-wave, of the specified RMS values, are to meet these
 thresholds.
 Red enable and special function inputs are to meet these thresholds for sinusoidal waveforms
 only.
 (c) Timing of Conflicting Inputs or Multiple Inputs.
 Inputs ON < 200 ms are NOT considered a FAULT.
 Inputs ON > 500 ms are considered a FAULT.
 (d) Timing of Red Fail.
 Lack of output < 1200 ms is NOT considered a FAULT.
 Lack of output > 1500 ms is considered a FAULT.
 (4) Monitored DC Inputs.
 (a) 24VDC Input.
 Input < 18.0 VDC is considered Low VDC input.
 Input > 22.0 VDC is NOT considered Low VDC input.
 (b) 24VDC Timing.
 Low VDC input < 200 ms is NOT considered a FAULT.
 Low VDC input > 500 ms is considered a FAULT.
 (c) Watchdog Monitor Input.
 Input < 4.0 VDC is considered a LOW STATE.
 Input > 12.0 VDC (or OPEN) is considered a HIGH STATE.
 (d) Watchdog Error Timing.
 Lack of valid input state changes for < 1400 ms is NOT a FAULT.
 Lack of valid input state changes for > 1600 ms is a FAULT.
 g.
 
 Communications and Software.
 
 (1) Install an RS232 port for laptop communications on the front panel of the Monitor. If specified
 in the plans, an IP port shall be used in place of RS232.
 (2) Furnish a Monitor with compatible communications software for installation on a laptop
 computer, capable of interfacing with the communication port on the front panel. Furnish the software on a 3 1/2inch (85 mm) floppy disk with each Monitor. Label each disk with revision number and date.
 (3) Unless specified otherwise in the plans, furnish a Monitor that is capable of being programmed
 and set-up for intersection operation without the use of a laptop computer and communication software.
 (4) Furnish a Monitor communications software that is capable of showing and/or programming the
 status of all programmable set-up parameters of the unit. Furnish a communications software that is capable of
 displaying the following data:
 (a) Fault type
 (b) Field status (must update status continuously)
 (c) AC line voltage (must update status continuously)
 (d) Status of Red Enable
 (e) Previous fault data
 
 (f) Program card matrix
 (g) Yellow disable jumpers (if applicable)
 (h) Switch settings per channel (as applicable)
 (i) Option switches
 (j) Current time
 (k) Temperature (must update status continuously)
 (l) Event logs
 (5) Furnish a Monitor that is capable of storing events into memory. Typical events are fault events,
 AC line events, reset events, etc. When a fault event is stored into memory, the Monitor will store the fault
 condition (type), channel status, date, time, temperature, and line voltage. Ensure that the log history stores a
 minimum of 100 total events.
 h. Diode Matrix, Programming Key, and Software. Furnish a Monitor that loads the diode matrix or
 Programming Key programming into a non-volatile memory device. When the diode matrix or Programming Key
 is loaded into memory, the memory will regularly compare with diode card or Programming Key and fault condition
 will occur if memory does not match the diode card matrix.
 D. Type 334L.
 1. General. Furnish Model 334L cabinets that meet the specifications “Traffic Signal Control
 Equipment Specifications” and “Transportation Electrical Equipment Specifications”, California Department of
 Transportation. Ensure that the manufacturer of the cabinets is listed on the CalTrans QPL at the time of the project
 award.
 2. Cabinets. Furnish cabinets that are constructed of aluminum and are supplied unpainted. An anodic
 coating is not required. Supply galvanized anchor bolts with nuts and washers with each cabinet. Furnish 3/4-inch
 (19 mm) diameter by 16 inches (0.4 m) minimum length anchor bolts with an “L” bend on the unthreaded end.
 3. Terminals and Wiring. Ensure that the vehicle detector field wiring inputs connect to side mounted
 terminal blocks. Install terminal blocks and associated wiring to the input file. Label the field wiring terminals of
 the side mounted terminal block by a permanent screening process to identify the input panel (I), the input file slot
 number (1 through 14) and the channel terminal (D, E, J, or K). An example is “I4-E”. Ensure that all terminals
 on these detector blocks are accessible without removing equipment from the EIA mounting rack.
 4.
 
 Accessories.
 
 a.
 Fully equip the cabinets with two channel loop detector sensors, transfer relay, power
 supply, conflict monitor and switchpacks. When ramp meter warning signs with flashers are used, include a
 NEMA or Caltrans type flasher wired for control from the controller.
 b.
 is provided.
 
 Furnish a police panel in each cabinet with the Caltrans required switches. No pushbutton with cord
 
 c.
 Furnish an aluminum shelf with integral storage compartment in the rack below the
 controller. Ensure that the storage compartment has telescoping drawer guides for full extension. Ensure that the
 compartment top has a non-slip plastic laminate attached.
 d.
 Ensure that each cabinet has two fluorescent lights installed at the top of the cabinet, one near each
 door. Wire the lights to the door switches such that opening either door will turn on both lights.
 5.
 
 Lightning/Surge Protection. Comply with the requirements of 733.03.C.5.
 
 6.
 
 Conflict Monitor. Furnish a Model 208 conflict monitor unit.
 
 E. Type 336L.
 
 1. General. Furnish Model 336L cabinets that meet the basic cabinet specifications “Traffic Signal Control
 Equipment Specifications”, California Department of Transportation, latest edition. Ensure that the manufacturer
 of these Model 336L cabinets is listed on the TAP.
 2.
 
 Cabinets.
 
 a. Furnish cabinets that are constructed of aluminum and are supplied unpainted. An anodic coating is
 not required.
 b. The CalTrans Model 336L cabinet specification is only modified so that the cabinet supplied is the
 “stretch” type that provides approximately 10 inches of (250 mm) additional cabinet height.
 c. Supply galvanized anchor bolts with nuts and washers with each base mounted cabinet. Furnish 3/4inch (19 mm) diameter by 16 inches (0.4 m) minimum length anchor bolts with an “L” bend on the unthreaded end.
 d. Furnish pole mounted cabinets with two pole mounting brackets attached and bottom plates installed.
 Ensure that both of the cabinet sidewalls are reinforced for pole brackets; however, also ensure that the cabinet is
 shipped with the brackets installed on the door hinge side of the cabinet. When a pole mounted cabinet is ordered,
 ensure that the door hinges are specified as “right” or “left” mounted as looking into the front of the cabinet. Ensure
 that the brackets are designed for banding to a pole.
 e.
 
 Fit cabinets with a PDA-2 power distribution assembly.
 
 3.
 
 Terminals and Wiring. Comply with the requirements of 733.03.C.3.
 
 4.
 
 Accessories. Comply with the requirements of 733.03.C.4.
 
 5.
 
 Lightning/Surge Protection. Comply with the requirements of 733.03.C.5.
 
 6.
 
 Conflict Monitor. Comply with the requirements of 733.03.C.6.
 
 Furnish 336L cabinet materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 733.04 Cabinet Risers. Furnish the type (size and shape) of cabinet riser that is compatible with the type of
 controller cabinets specified for the project.
 A. Cabinet Riser for NEMA Cabinet. Furnish an aluminum riser that will raise the NEMA cabinet
 approximately 12 inches (0.3 m) above the concrete foundation. Ensure that the bottom of the riser bolts to the
 standard cabinet foundation anchor bolts (not included with the riser) and the top of the riser bolts to the bottom of
 the cabinet. Furnish attachment hardware for connecting the riser to the cabinet.
 Construct the riser in a minimum of two pieces such that an existing cabinet can be raised off the foundation
 without disconnecting the field wiring and the riser can be inserted below the cabinet. Furnish hardware for rigidly
 connecting the riser sections together.
 Fabricate the riser from 0.125-inch (3 mm) sheet aluminum with flanges on the top and bottom to provide
 rigidity. Furnish mounting flanges as necessary to connect with the controller cabinet and foundation anchor bolts.
 Ensure that the outside surface of the riser has a smooth, uniform, natural finish unless controller cabinet painting
 is shown on the plans. If painting is required, prepare and paint the riser to match the cabinet.
 B. Cabinet Riser for Type 332, 334 or Type 336 Cabinet. Furnish an aluminum riser that will raise the Model
 332, 334 or 336 cabinet approximately 8 inches (0.2 m) above the concrete foundation. Ensure that the bottom of
 the riser bolts to the standard cabinet foundation anchor bolts (not included with the riser) and the top of the riser
 bolts to the bottom of the cabinet. Furnish attachment hardware for connecting the riser to the cabinet. Manufacture
 the unit to CalTrans specifications. Ensure that the outside surface of the riser has a smooth, uniform, natural finish
 unless controller cabinet painting is shown on the plans. If painting is required, prepare and paint the riser to match
 the cabinet.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 733.05 Flasher Controller. Furnish solid-state flasher that complies with NEMA TS-1, Section 8, and have
 two circuits, each rated at 10 amperes. Furnish a cabinet that conforms to applicable requirements of 733.03.A,
 except that the following items are not required: a small door-in-door (police door), shelves, and a fan. Ensure
 
 that the cabinet size is not less than 12 inches (300 mm) high by 10 inches (250 mm) wide by 6 inches (150 mm)
 deep. Furnish cabinets that are designed for pole mounting with a 1-1/2 inch (38 mm) or larger conduit opening in
 the bottom. Ensure that the auxiliary equipment includes: on-off power switch with integral 20-ampere circuit
 breaker, lightning protection devices on incoming power lines, interference filters, terminal blocks, and a ground
 bus bar.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 733.06 Controller, Master, Traffic Responsive.
 A. Description. The traffic responsive master controller is one component of a distributive processing, traffic
 responsive, control, and monitoring “closed loop” system. The master controller’s principal operational task is to
 select and implement traffic signal timing plans in response to both actual traffic conditions or time based events.
 The master controller monitors, in real time, local intersection activity, and overall system performance, reporting
 failures and status conditions to the Remote Monitoring Station.
 The master controller is typically located in a local intersection cabinet; however, in special circumstances it
 may be located at a Remote Monitoring Station site. The master controller is capable of uploading/downloading
 information to local intersection controllers and the Remote Monitoring Station.
 B. Functional Requirements.
 1. Design. Furnish a solid state, digital microprocessor master controller design. Furnish a controller
 that uses menu driven prompts, unless of Type 170 design. If the master controller is used with Type 170E or Type
 2070 controllers, provide software unless otherwise shown on the plans.
 Furnish a master controller that has a RS-232 port for connection to a laptop computer or printer. Furnish
 software and connector cables for communication with a laptop.
 2. Local Controllers. Ensure that each master controller is able to supervise and communicate with at
 least 24 local intersection controllers.
 3. System Detectors. Ensure that each master controller is able to analyze traffic sensor data from at
 least 32 system detectors. Distribute system detectors up to eight per intersection, but do not exceed the total
 system sensor capacity.
 Ensure that the detectors are assignable to each of the computational channels in each group, with the
 channels representing cycle selection, directionality (offset), non-arterial flow (split), and special congestion
 indicators of queue or occupancy.
 Furnish a master controller that is capable of monitoring and detecting system detector failure and
 removing failed detectors from volume and occupancy calculations. Upon resumption of satisfactory sensor
 operation, sensors shall automatically resume input to volume and occupancy calculations.
 4. Timing Patterns. Ensure that each master controller provides a minimum of 16 selectable patterns.
 Ensure that each pattern shall consist of a combination of cycle, offset, and split numbers for each intersection in
 the system.
 Furnish a master controller that is capable of implementing a “free” mode whereby all intersection
 controllers will operate without system coordination and a “flash” mode whereby all intersection controllers will
 operate in a flashing operation.
 5. Operational Modes. Ensure that each master controller is able to operate in the following modes of
 operational control:
 a. Traffic responsive mode whereby pattern selection is based on dynamic traffic conditions as measured
 by system sensors located in the control area. As a minimum, base the pattern selection on the quantitative traffic
 flow parameters of volume, occupancy, and directionality of the arterial traffic.
 Base transfer of patterns on programmable threshold values. Furnish system sensors that are capable of
 selective weighting.
 
 b. Time of day/day of week (time base) mode whereby pattern selection is based on a preprogrammed
 event scheduler with automatic adjustments for seasonal daylight savings time changes. Ensure that this mode of
 operation is able to call or override traffic responsive mode.
 c. Manual override mode whereby pattern selection is made by operator control at the Remote
 Monitoring Station or master controller site.
 Ensure that the system coordination control for each master controller is selected on a priority basis. The
 priority from highest to lowest is as follows:
 a.
 
 Manual control entry or remote command
 
 b.
 
 Time base control
 
 c.
 
 Traffic responsive control
 
 6. Reports. Ensure that each master controller monitors and formats intersection and system information
 for immediate output to the Remote Monitoring Station or for storage for a minimum period of 48 hours. As a
 minimum, ensure that the following types of reports are generated:
 a. A local intersection activity log showing the time, date and activity of all monitored local intersection
 failure conditions.
 b.
 
 A system sensor failure log that includes time, sensor location, and type of failure.
 
 c.
 
 A system log with pattern changes.
 
 d.
 
 A system sensor data log that includes volume and occupancy for all system sensors.
 
 7. Alarms. Ensure that each master controller continuously monitors intersection and system information
 for various systems and user defined critical conditions. Upon detection of an alarm condition, ensure that the
 master controller attempts to transmit alarm information to the Remote Monitoring Station or a preprogrammed
 telephone number. In case of failure to connect to the central software, the master will continue to periodically
 retry reporting to the Remote Monitoring Station.
 8. Communications. Furnish a master controller that supports two-way dial-up communications to a
 Remote Monitoring Station computer for control, monitoring, data collection, and for timing pattern updating
 purposes. Through continuous, 7 days/week, 24 hours/day system monitoring, ensure that the master controller is
 able to automatically dial-up the Remote Monitoring Station computer upon detection of user defined critical alarm
 conditions.
 Furnish a master controller that includes any communication devices or modems necessary to interface
 with the local intersection controllers within its control area.
 9. Security. Furnish a master controller that provides for a user specified security code before any data is
 altered. In order to view any parameter, ensure that a security code entry is not required. Furnish a master controller
 that has the ability to disable security code requirements, allowing for perpetual access without requiring hardware
 changes.
 733.07 Remote Monitoring Station.
 A. Description. The Remote Monitoring Station describes a distributive processing, traffic responsive, control
 and monitoring “closed loop” system. The system monitors, in real time, local intersection activities, and overall
 system performance, reporting failures and status conditions both automatically and by operator request. In order
 to meet current and future traffic control needs, the system also provides extensive control monitoring, data
 collection, reporting, and analysis functions.
 For complete user flexibility, the system provides full access of each local system intersection controller from
 the Remote Monitoring Station site. Full access includes the capability to upload all time settings, operation
 parameters, and status information, as well as the capability to download all time settings and operation parameters.
 B. System Architecture. The system consists of four principal elements:
 1. Local intersection controller (see 733.02)
 
 2.
 3.
 4.
 
 Communication links
 Traffic responsive master controller (see 733.06)
 A Remote Monitoring Station consisting of computer equipment and software
 
 C. Local Intersection Controllers. Furnish controller units conforming to 733.02 for the type of controller
 shown on the plans. Furnish a controller that has internal communication capability compatible with the type of
 interconnect cable shown on the plans. Furnish a local system controller that is capable of processing controller
 and detector data and provide all necessary intersection control functions.
 D. Communications. Ensure that communication between the Remote Monitoring Station and the master
 controller is provided. Furnish communications at the Remote Monitoring Station site by the maintaining agency,
 unless otherwise shown on the plans.
 Include error checking in the software to assure transmission and reception of valid data between the local
 controller, master controller, and the Remote Monitoring Station.
 E. Equipment. Ensure that the Equipment provided at each Remote Monitoring Station location is as shown on
 the plans and, as a minimum, consists of the following items:
 1.
 
 Computer with monitor
 
 2.
 
 Software
 
 3.
 
 Communications
 
 4.
 
 Accessory Items
 
 F. System Functional Requirements. The system software provides a simplified user friendly, color menu
 format at the Remote Monitoring Station. Ensure that no special computer programming skills are required for the
 user to fully access and operate this control and monitoring system.
 1. Graphical Representation. Furnish system software that enables the operator to display in color, the
 vehicular signals, pedestrian signals, and detector actuations in a real time mode. Ensure that the user is able to
 construct an intersection layout graphically by using predetermined intersection shapes.
 2. System Capacity. Furnish a Remote Monitoring Station software that has the capacity to monitor and
 control at least 24 traffic responsive masters. Ensure that the central software is also capable of monitoring and
 controlling isolated system controllers.
 Furnish a system software that has the capability to manually select any timing plan, free mode or flash
 mode.
 Ensure that the system software has the capability of accepting, formatting, and processing data from at
 least 32 system detectors from each master controller.
 3. Data Transfer. Ensure that it is possible to upload/download the signal timing database, including
 coordination, and preemption settings, between the Remote Monitoring Station and the master controller or local
 intersection.
 Furnish a Remote Monitoring Station that provides a means to compare a currently uploaded timing
 database with a previously developed database stored in the Remote Monitoring Station memory. Ensure that it
 reports differences in the databases.
 During either uploading or downloading operations, ensure that the normal traffic control operations are
 not suspended.
 4. Security. Furnish a Remote Monitoring Station that provides for a user specified security code before
 any data is altered. Maintain controller access procedures from the Remote Monitoring Station allowing the user
 full security control of all system components from a remote location.
 5. Isolated Intersection Management. Furnish a Remote Monitoring Station software that includes the
 capability of accessing system controllers at remote intersection locations. Ensure that this capability includes total
 access to controller timing parameters, alarm conditions, detector data, and intersection status conditions in real
 
 time without the use of a master controller. Ensure that this feature utilizes the local intersection controller with a
 dial-up modem and telephone service.
 733.09 Uninterruptible Power Supply(UPS).
 A. Operation. In addition to the material requirements below, furnish a UPS system with a minimum two and
 one half (2.5) hours of full run-time operation for an “LED-only” intersection with 1000 watts of active output
 power.
 Furnish a UPS compatible with all of the following traffic signal equipment; NEMA TS-1 and TS-2 controllers
 and cabinets, Model 332 & 336 cabinets, Type 170 & 2070 controllers and electrical service pedestals.
 The maximum transfer time allowed, from disruption of normal utility line voltage to stabilized inverter line
 voltage from batteries, shall be 65 milliseconds or less. The same maximum allowable transfer time shall also
 apply when switching from inverter line voltage to utility line voltage.
 Include a means to switch the intersection from full-operation to flashing operation after 2-hours of run-time.
 This is to conserve battery operation during an extended utility power outage.
 Include standard form C relay contacts to trigger an alarm within the controller assembly, informing a
 technician the system is operating on battery backup.
 Operating temperature for both the inverter/charger, power transfer relay and manual bypass switch shall be 35 °F to +165 °F (-37 °C to +74 °C).
 Both the power transfer relay and manual bypass switch shall be rated at 240VAC/30 amps, minimum.
 The UPS shall bypass the utility line power whenever the utility line voltage is outside the following voltage
 range: 100VAC to 130 VAC, + 2 VAC.
 When utilizing battery power, the UPS output voltage shall be between 110 VAC and 125 VAC, pure sine
 wave output, 60Hz ± 3Hz.
 When the utility line power has been restored between 100 VAC and 130 VAC for more than 30 seconds, the
 UPS shall dropout of battery backup mode and return to utility line mode.
 In the event of inverter/charger failure, battery failure or complete battery discharge, the power transfer relay
 shall revert to the NC (and energized) state, where utility line power is connected to the cabinet.
 Recharge time for the battery, from “protective low-cutoff” to 80% or more of full battery charge capacity,
 shall not exceed 10 hours.
 Include all necessary wiring and hardware for mounting (shelf angles, rack, etc).
 Furnish a UPS with available buck/boost mode operation, with a minimum input voltage range of 85 to 150
 vrms. The unit display shall indicate when buck/boost mode is engaged. Default buck/boost setpoints shall be 108
 vrms and 132 vrms unless specified otherwise in the Plans.
 Furnish a UPS with an Ethernet port for remote monitoring and control. Provide interface software unless the
 Ethernet port has built-in web browser compatibility. Remote communication shall have the ability to make setting
 changes, review status, retrieve alarm and event logging that is time and date stamped for up to 50 events. The
 logs shall be printable.
 Ensure the UPS cabinet has a mastic tape, neoprene foam, or silicone weather-resistant seal between the cabinet
 bottom flange and the concrete foundation. Minimum tape thickness shall be 1/8-inch (3 mm) and the tape shall be
 continuous with no gaps between tape pieces or between cabinet and foundation. Sealing tape shall completely
 cover the bottom cabinet flange and shall be rated for a temperature range of at least -30 °F to +140° F.
 The UPS output notifications for on battery, battery 2 hour timer and low battery shall be wired into the traffic
 signal back panel to provide special status alarms for each output into the signal controller.
 This item shall include a red LED status indicator lamp to allow maintenance personnel and law enforcement
 to quickly assess whether a traffic signal cabinet is being powered by a UPS. The LED housing shall be NEMA
 4X, IP65 or IR66, rated for outdoor use and be tamper/shatter resistant. It shall be a domed enclosure contained a
 
 red lens with LED that is visible from 100 foot minimum. The enclosure and LED lamp unit should be placed and
 centered on the top surface of the UPS cabinet and sealed from water intrusion. It should be wired using minimum
 20 GA stranded, insulated hookup wire to the status relay outputs of the UPS.
 The wires shall be terminated by lugs at the display end and permanently labeled "Backup Power Status
 Display," with wire polarity indicated. The red LED shall only illuminate to indicate the cabinet is operating under
 UPS backup power (the "backup" operating condition). This item also includes programming the UPS status relay
 outputs to produce the lamp status displays. These status displays will be solid 100% duty cycle (not flashing)
 displays. The operating voltage of the LED lamp shall be 120V AC unless otherwise indicated.
 B. Maintenance, Displays, Controls and Diagnostics. Furnish a UPS with a backlit LCD display that includes
 an event counter, hour meter, line and battery voltages/percentages and fault status. The LCD display shall have
 touch keys for changing display statuses and to reset counters, hour meter date and time.
 Furnish a UPS with lightning surge protection compliant with IEEE/ANSI C.62.41.
 Furnish two (2) sets of equipment lists, operation and maintenance manuals, and board-level schematic and
 wiring diagrams of the UPS, and the battery data sheets. Manual shall conform to Caltrans Transportation Electrical
 Equipment Specifications 1999, Chapter 1 Section 1.2.4.2.
 C. Battery System. Supply a minimum of four (4) batteries with the UPS system. Each battery shall be 12VDC
 and be rated at a minimum of 105 Ahrs, 20-hour discharge rate to 1.8 volts/cell at 77 degrees Fahrenheit (25 degrees
 Celsius), to achieve the 2.5 hour run time requirement. Furnish batteries easily replaced and commercially available
 off the shelf.
 Furnish deep cycle, sealed prismatic lead-calcium based AGM/VRLA (Absorbed Glass Mat/ Valve Regulated
 Lead Acid) batteries.
 Furnish batteries certified in writing by the manufacturer to operate over a temperature range of -13 °F to +165
 °F (– 25 C to +74 C).
 Place all batteries on battery heater mats in the enclosure. The battery heater mats are designed to extend the
 life of the batteries.
 An integral system shall prevent the battery from destructive discharge and overcharge. Batteries shall not be
 recharged when battery temperature exceeds 122°F+5°F (50°C±3°C).
 D. Enclosure. Furnish an enclosure mountable to a standard Model 332, NEMA TS-1 and TS-2 traffic signal
 cabinet and be constructed of natural unpainted aluminum. Furnish cabinet size adequate to house “all” the UPS
 equipment including the controller unit, manual bypass switch and the (4) batteries. Key the enclosure to the State
 master #2 lock and include 2 keys.
 Furnish a base seal for use between the enclosure to the concrete foundation or riser of continuous tape gasket
 material, minimum 1/8-inch (3 mm) thickness. Completely seal the interface to the adjacent controller cabinet with
 silicone caulk.
 Furnish an enclosure with a vent, fan and thermostat as per Caltrans Transportation Electrical Equipment
 Specifications Chapter 7, Section 2-Housings.
 E. Warranty. Provide a two (2) year factory-repair warranty for parts and labor on the UPS from date of
 acceptance by the State. Warrant batteries for full replacement for two (2) years from date of purchase.
 Furnish materials according to the Department's TAP.
 733.10 Centrally Controlled Arterial Traffic Signal System. Furnish materials according to the Department’s
 Traffic Authorized Products (TAP) List.
 
 740 PAVEMENT MARKING MATERIAL
 740.01
 General. Permanent pavement marking materials that meet the requirements of this specification
 and that have passed the service test required by Supplement 1047 are included on the Approved List maintained
 by the Office of Materials Management (OMM). OMM may retest pavement marking materials pre-qualified by
 a service test to determine formulation compliance to pre-qualified material and compliance with physical
 properties specified herein. Certified test data and samples will be furnished by the manufacturer to OMM. Failure
 of testing or certified test data to show formulation conforming to pre-qualified material or compliance with
 specified physical properties may be cause for removal of the material from the Approved List.
 Ensure that the marking material is delivered in containers that are clearly marked to indicate the number of
 gallons (liters), weight or size of material, material density (weight per unit volume), material color, batch number
 or other similar manufacturer’s identification, date of production, and the company name and address.
 740.02
 Traffic Paint. Furnish white and yellow ready-mixed traffic paint suitable for marking various types
 of pavement. Furnish paint that is a suitable binder for glass beads, 740.09 Type A, on pavement exposed to
 traffic. Furnish paint that will not deteriorate in storage, within one year after date of receipt, to the extent that it
 cannot be readily broken up with a paddle to a smooth uniform paint capable of easy application by spray.
 Furnish paint that does not bleed or discolor when sprayed on asphalt concrete surfaces.
 Type 1 paint is the fast dry, water-based, 100 percent acrylic type.
 Type 1A paint is fast dry, water-based, 100 percent acrylic type, used for cold weather applications.
 Ensure that Type 1 and Type 1A paint conforms to the following requirements:
 Property
 
 Test Method
 
 Total Solids
 
 ASTM D 2369
 
 Titanium Dioxide, rutile
 type II
 Pigment % by Weight
 Weight per Gallon
 Color
 Viscosity (krebs units)
 Lab Drying Time
 
 ASTM D 1394
 ASTM D 3723
 ASTM D 1475
 Supplement 1047
 ASTM D 562
 ASTM D 711
 
 Requirements
 (Applies to both White and Yellow, unless noted)
 70% minimum by weight
 58% minimum by volume
 1 lb/gal (120 g/l) minimum, White
 0.2 lb/gal (24 g/l) minimum, Yellow
 +/- 2% of qualifying sample
 +/- 0.3 lb/gal (36 g/L) of qualifying sample
 Appendix A
 70 minimum and 95 maximum @ 77 °F (25 °C)
 10 minutes max. @ 77 °F (25 °C), 50% RH
 12 minutes max. @ 50 °F (10 °C), 50% RH
 14 minutes max. @ 35 °F (1.7 °C), 50% RH
 
 Prequalify materials according to Supplement 1047. Use materials certified according to Supplement 1089.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s Approved List.
 740.03
 Polyester Pavement Marking. Ensure that the polyester pavement marking material supplied is a
 two part polyester system capable of being applied at ambient temperature down to 50 °F (10 °C). Ensure that the
 material is capable of retaining reflective glass beads, 740.09 Type B, after application.
 Ensure that the catalytic component of the system is the commercially available type recommended by the
 manufacturer of the polyester.
 Ensure that the ratio of the catalyst to resin is specified by the manufacturer.
 Ensure that the polyester conforms to the following requirements:
 
 Minimum Maximum
 1. Consistency, Krebs units ASTM D 562, Procedure A
 70
 90
 2. Field Dry Time (No Track), minutes
 -45
 Furnish pavement marking material that will be in “no tracking condition” in 45 minutes.
 The “no tracking condition” will be determined by applying the markings and beads at the
 specification requirements to dry pavements at a low temperature of 50 °F (10 °C) and high
 temperature of 120 °F (49 °C). Run tests at the manufacturer’s highest and lowest
 recommended application humidity. The marking materials will be applied at the
 manufacturer’s recommended application temperature. The “no tracking” time will be
 determined by passing over the line with a passenger car at a speed of 25 to 35 mph (44 to
 55 kmph) in a simulated passing maneuver. A line showing no visual deposition of the
 material to the pavement surface when viewed at a distance of 50 ft (15 m) will be
 considered as showing “no tracking” and conforming to this requirement for time to “no
 track”.
 3. Prime Pigment Content, percent by weight of paint
 White ASTM D 1394
 13.9
 -Yellow ASTM D 126 or Department approved lab method
 13.8
 -4. Pigment Content, percent by weight of paint ASTM D 2698
 White
 -40
 Yellow
 -41
 5. Nonvolatile Vehicle Solids Content, percent by weight of paint
 FED STD 141C, Method 4053.1
 White
 31
 -Yellow
 29
 -6. Fineness of Dispersion, ASTM D 1210 micrometers
 50
 -7. Bleeding Ratio, FED STD TT-P-115F, Section 4.3.2
 White
 0.93
 -Yellow
 0.92
 -8. Color:
 a. White, Daylight Directional Reflectance, ASTM E 1347
 85
 -b. Yellow
 50
 -1. Refer to Highway Yellow Color Tolerance Chart PR Color
 No. 1, June, 1965 U.S. Dept. of Transportation, FHWA:
 Yellow, Color Difference 595-33538, ASTM D 2244
 i. Measure E, L, a, b as Cielab, Source “C”
 L
 +0.75
 +1.0
 a
 +0.9
 +1.7
 b
 +4.4
 +5.1
 9. Dry Opacity, ASTM D 2805 at 0.005 wet
 0.97
 -Fed Std 141 No 4121 Process B, Method A, white and yellow
 10. Condition in container, FED STD 141 No 3011.2,
 5
 hand stirring by spatula, minutes
 Prequalify materials according to Supplement 1047. Use materials certified according to Supplement 1089.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s Approved List.
 740.04
 Thermoplastic Pavement Marking. Furnish thermoplastic pavement marking material formulated
 expressly for use as retroreflective pavement markings on asphalt concrete or Portland cement concrete pavement.
 Furnish material that includes a mixture of Alkyd resins-19% minimum by weight at least one of which is solid at
 room temperature, and contains premixed glass beads 740.09 Type C, 30% minimum by weight, with a 1.50
 minimum index of refraction. Ensure that the ingredients are well mixed so that all parts are evenly dispersed
 throughout. Ensure that there are no foreign objects, skins, dirt, or such ingredients that would cause staining,
 
 discoloration, or bleeding. Furnish suitable materials for application in molten form by extrusion method. Ensure
 that the material is capable of retaining reflective glass beads, 740.09 Type C, after application.
 A. Specific Gravity. Ensure that the thermoplastic compound has a specific gravity of 1.6 to 2.3 at 77 °F (25 °C)
 ASTM D 792.
 B. Flowability. Meet percent residue requirements according to
 1. AASHTO M 249, Section 4.3.6 and
 2. AASHTO M 249, Section 4.3.8
 C. Drying Time. AASHTO M 249, section 4.3.2.
 D. Field Placement Stability. After proper application and drying time, ensure that the material is not tacky and
 does not have an appreciable deformation or discoloration when subjected to typical vehicular traffic, and in air or
 road temperatures between -30 and 140 °F (-34 and 60 °C). Ensure that when the material is properly applied that
 it forms markings of a constant cross-section with a uniform density and character. Ensure that the markings
 maintain their original shape and pavement position.
 E. Ring and ball Softening Point. Furnish a material that has a softening point of not less than 190 °F (88 °C)
 when tested according to ASTM E 28.
 F. Impact Resistance. AASHTO M 249, section 4.3.4
 G. Pigment Content. Furnish yellow material containing a minimum of 5 percent by weight of primary yellow
 (lead chromate) pigment (or a lead free pigment) (measured according to ASTM D 126 or Department approved
 lab method). Furnish white material containing a minimum of 10 percent Titanium Dioxide-Rutile Type -2 by
 weight of white pigment.
 H. Color.
 a. White, Daylight Directional Reflectance, ASTM E 1347
 b. Yellow
 1. Refer to Highway Yellow Color Tolerance Chart PR Color No. 1, June,
 1965 U.S. Dept. of Transportation, FHWA: Yellow, Color Difference
 595-13538, ASTM D 2244
 Measure E, L, a, b as Cielab, Source “C”
 L
 a
 b
 I.
 
 Minimum Maximum
 75
 -50
 --
 
 +0.75
 +0.9
 +4.4
 
 +1.0
 +1.7
 +5.1
 
 Yellowness Index, AASHTO M 249, section 4.3.7
 
 Prequalify materials according to Supplement 1047. Use materials certified according to Supplement 1089.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s Approved List.
 740.05
 Preformed Pavement Marking. Furnish the preformed material suitable for retroreflective
 pavement markings on asphalt concrete or portland cement concrete pavement. Furnish material that is free of
 cracks and that has edges that are straight, true, and unbroken. Ensure that the material is flexible, formable, and
 suitable for application with an adhesive without heating. Furnish material containing glass beads uniformly
 distributed throughout with a 1.50 minimum index of refraction. Ensure that the material has a uniform surface
 layer of firmly bonded glass beads to provide the initial minimum specific luminance values specified for the
 various types of material.
 Furnish material that resists deterioration by contact with highway deicing chemicals or because of the oil content
 of asphalt concrete pavement, or from oil droppings and other effects of traffic.
 A. Type A1 Material. Furnish Type A1 material conforming to ASTM D 4505, Level 1, Classes 2 or 3, and
 that have a thickness of not less than 0.090 inch (2.28 mm), including any pre-coated adhesive layer.
 
 B. Type A2 Material. Furnish Type A2 material conforming to ASTM D 4505, Level 1, Classes 2 or 3, , and
 that have a thickness of not less than 0.060 inch (1.52 mm), including any pre-coated adhesive layer.
 C. Type A3 Material. Furnish Type A3 material conforming to ASTM D 4505, Level 1, Classes 2 or 3, skid
 resistance level A, and that have a minimum thickness at the thinnest portion of the cross-section of not less than
 0.020 inch (0.50 mm), including any pre-coated adhesive layer.
 Prequalify materials according to Supplement 1047. Furnish materials according to the Department’s Approved
 List.
 740.06
 Work Zone Pavement Marking. Furnish work zone pavement marking material conforming to
 ASTM D 4592, Type I (removable) or Type II (non-removable) with the following modifications:
 A. Type I (removable): 0.030-inch (0.76 mm) minimum thickness.
 B. Type II (non-removable): 0.015-inch (0.38 mm) minimum thickness.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s Approved List.
 740.07
 Epoxy Pavement Marking Material. Ensure that the material supplied is a 100 percent solids twopart epoxy system capable of being applied at ambient temperature down to 50 °F (10 °C). Furnish a slow cure
 material capable of retaining reflective glass beads 740.09 type D, after application.
 Furnish epoxy conforming to the following requirements:
 A. Formulation. Furnish epoxy formulated as a Long Life Pavement Marking System, capable of providing a
 minimum of 4 years of performance, free of any peroxides and any Tri-methyolpropane Tri-acrylate) TMPTA and
 other multi-functional monomers. Ensure that the epoxy is designed to provide simple volumetric mixing ratio of
 its components (such as 2:1).
 B. Epoxide Number. Ensure that the epoxide number of the epoxy resin is the manufacturer’s target value 0.05
 as determined by ASTM D 1652 for both white and yellow Part A on a pigment free basis.
 C. Amine Number. Ensure that the amine number of the curing agent (Part B) is the manufacturer’s target value
 50 according to ASTM D 2074 on a pigment free basis.
 D. Laboratory Drying Time. Ensure that the pavement marking material, when mixed in the proper ratio and
 applied at the properly prescribed wet film thickness at 75  2 °F (24  0.5 °C) and with the proper saturation of
 glass beads, exhibit a no tracking time of no greater than 40 to 45 minutes when tested according to ASTM D 711.
 E. Field Time to No-Track. Furnish pavement marking material that will be in “no tracking condition” between
 15 to 45 minutes. The “no tracking condition” will be determined by applying the markings and beads at the
 specification requirements to dry pavements at a low temperature of 45 °F(7 °C) and high temperature of 120 °F
 (49 °C). Run tests at the manufacturer’s highest and lowest recommended application humidity. The marking
 materials will be applied at the manufacturer’s recommended application temperature. The “no tracking” time will
 be determined by passing over the line with a passenger car at a speed of 25 to 35 mph (44 to 55 kmph) in a
 simulated passing maneuver. A line showing no visual deposition of the material to the pavement surface when
 viewed at a distance of 50 ft (15 m) will be considered as showing “no tracking” and conforming to this requirement
 for time to “no track”. Protect the line from tracking during the setting period by coning off or as shown on the
 plans.
 F. Field Curing. Furnish epoxy pavement marking material capable of fully curing at a constant surface
 temperature of 45 °F (7 °C) or above.
 G. Hardness. Furnish epoxy pavement marking materials, when tested according to ASTM D 2240, that have a
 Shore D Hardness of between 70 and 90. Allow samples to cure at room temperature 75  2 °F (24  0.5 °C) for
 a minimum of 24 hours and a maximum of 72 hours before performing the indicated test.
 H. Certified test data. Provide a material manufacturer’s certified test data showing the material complies with
 the provisions of this specification. The provisions of a certification of compliance do not waive a state inspection,
 sampling, or testing.
 I. Infrared Spectra. Supply a copy of the infrared spectra of each component on each lot number
 
 J. Material Performance Qualifications. Ensure that the manufacturer has expertise and performance history
 including: completed and passed service tests according to Supplement 1047. ; verifiable installations; ample
 production capacity; proper facility; compliance with EPA regulations; verifiable quality control program; and has
 passed a minimum of 4 years of performance (durability and retroreflectivity) on concrete or asphalt surface in the
 State.
 K. Condition in Container. Fed Std 141 No. 3011.2 Hand stirring by spatula. 5 minutes maximum
 Prequalify materials according to Supplement 1047. Use materials certified according to Supplement 1089.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s Approved List.
 740.08
 Heat-Fused Preformed Plastic Pavement Marking Material. Furnish heat-fused preformed
 plastic pavement marking materials conforming to the following Type A, Pre-heated tape and Type B, Post-heated
 tape:
 Type A90 and B90 - 90 mil thickness (2.29 mm)
 Type A125 - 125 mil thickness (3.18 mm)
 Type B125 - 125 mil thickness (3.18 mm)
 Glass beads ..................................................................................... .740.09
 Prequalify materials according to Supplement 1047. Furnish materials according to the Department’s Approved
 List.
 740.09
 Glass Beads. Furnish certified test data for the arsenic and lead content of all glass bead samples
 sent to the Department for testing to ensure that all glass beads furnished to the Department contain no more than
 200 parts per million of arsenic or lead as determined in accordance with Environmental Protection Agency testing
 methods 3052, 6010B, or 6010C, according to SEC 1504 STANDARDS. Section 109 of title 23, United States
 Code, (r) Pavement Markings.
 A. Type A. Furnish Type A glass beads for traffic paint conforming to Supplement 1008 and to AASHTO M
 247, Type 1 without flotation properties but dual coated (for moisture resistance and adhesion), with the following
 exception: 4.6 Flotation Test.
 Ensure that the glass beads for traffic paint are packaged in bags designated “740.02”. Use materials certified
 according to Supplement 1089.
 B. Type B. Furnish Type B glass beads for polyester marking material conforming to Supplement 1008 and
 AASHTO M 247, Type 1 with 50  5 percent flotation coating and ensure that a 50  5 percent moisture resistant
 coating is retained on each sieve, with the following exception: 4.6 Flotation Test. Ensure that the minimum
 percent floating equals 90 of flotation coated beads or 40.5 percent of total mixture.
 Ensure that the glass beads for polyester marking material are packaged in bags designated “POLY”.
 Use materials certified according to Supplement 1089.
 C. Type C. Furnish Type C glass beads for thermoplastic material conforming to Supplement 1008 and meeting
 the following specification.
 Sieve Size
 Percent Retained
 No. 16 (1.18 mm)
 3 maximum
 Refractive Index
 No. 20 (850 µm)
 5 to 20
 Roundness
 No. 40 (425 µm)
 65 to 95
 Coating
 No. 50 (300 µm)
 0 to 5
 Ensure the glass bead packaging is clearly marked “THERMO”
 
 1.50 to 1.60
 80 minimum
 Moisture resistant
 (for drop-on beads only)
 
 Use materials certified according to Supplement 1089.
 D. Type D. Furnish Type D glass beads for Epoxy Pavement Marking conforming to Supplement 1008.
 
 Ensure that the glass bead packaging clearly indicates EPOXY - SIZE I or EPOXY SIZE II.
 Ensure that the glass beads have the following gradation when tested according to Supplement 1008.
 SIZE I
 Sieve Size
 Percent Retained
 No. 10 (2.00 mm)
 0
 No. 12 (1.70 mm)
 0 to 5
 No. 14 (1.40 mm)
 5 to 20
 No. 16 (1.18 mm)
 40 to 80
 No. 18 (1.00 mm)
 10 to 40
 No. 20 (850 µm)
 0 to 5
 Pan
 0 to 2
 
 SIZE II
 Sieve Size
 Percent Retained
 No. 20 (850 µm)
 0 to 5
 No. 30 (600 µm)
 5 to 20
 No. 50 (300 µm)
 30 to 75
 No. 80 (180 µm)
 9 to 32
 No. 100 (150 µm)
 0 to 5
 Pan
 0 to 2
 
 Reflective Media: Ensure that the glass beads are smooth, clear, free from any air inclusions, and scratches
 that might affect their functions as a retro-reflective media, and that have the characteristics listed below.
 Roundness (Percent by Weight): Ensure that not more than 20 percent of the glass beads are irregular or
 fused spheroids and that at least 80 percent of the beads are true beads.
 Index of Refraction: Ensure that the refractive index of the beads is a minimum of 1.50 as determined by the
 liquid immersion method at 77 °F (25 °C). Ensure that the silica content of glass beads is not less than 60 percent.
 Coating: Furnish Size I glass beads that are coated with a silane-type adherence coating to enhance its
 embedment in, and adherence to the applied binder film. Ensure that the coated beads emit a yellow-green
 fluorescence when tested by the Dansyl Chloride test procedure. Furnish Size II glass beads that are treated with
 a moisture-proof coating. Ensure that both types of glass beads show no tendency to absorb moisture in storage
 and remain free of clusters and lumps. Ensure that they flow freely from the dispensing equipment at any time
 when surface and atmosphere conditions are satisfactory for marking operations.
 Determine the moisture-resistance of the glass beads on the basis of AASHTO T 346 section 9.
 Use materials certified according to Supplement 1089.
 740.10 Spray Thermoplastic Pavement Marking.
 Furnish spray thermoplastic pavement marking material specially formulated to be used as retroreflective
 pavement markings on asphalt concrete or Portland cement concrete pavement. Furnish material that includes a
 mixture of resins, at least one of which is solid at room temperature, and contains uncoated premixed glass beads,
 740.09 Type C. Ensure that the ingredients are well mixed so that all parts are evenly dispersed throughout. Ensure
 that there are no foreign objects, skins, dirt, or such ingredients that would cause staining, discoloration, or bleeding.
 Furnish suitable materials for spray application in molten form. Ensure that the material is capable of retaining drop
 on reflective glass beads, 740.09 Type C, after application.
 A. Composition.
 
 White
 Yellow
 Binder
 25% Min.
 25% Min.
 TiO2 Pigment (Type II Rutile)
 10% Min.
 Lead-Free Pigment (Yellow 83)
 N/A
 *
 or Leaded Pigment (Yellow 83)
 N/A
 **
 Inter mixed Glass Beads
 30% Min. (by weight)
 30% Min. (by weight)
 Filler
 35% Max.
 42% Max.
 *amount of lead-free pigment is at the discretion of the manufacturer, as long as all other compositional
 requirements are met
 **Furnish yellow material containing a minimum of 5 percent by weight of primary yellow (lead chromate)
 pigment (measured as per ASTM D 126 or Department approved lab method)"
 B. Binder. Furnish alkyd-based binder consisting of a mixture of synthetic resins, at least one of which is solid
 at room temperature, and high boiling plasticizers. Ensure at least one third of the binder composition is maleic
 modified glycerol ester of rosin and is no less than 8 percent by weight of the entire material formulation.
 C. Pigment. Furnish titanium dioxide pigment that is a Rutile type with a minimum purity of 92%.
 Use lead-free or leaded Pigment Yellow 83 produced to meet the requirements of FED 595 Color No. 13538.
 D. Filler. Ensure filler to be incorporated with the resins is a white calcium carbonate, silica, or any approved
 substitute. Ensure that any filler, which is insoluble in 6N hydrochloric acid, passes a 150 μm (No. 100) sieve.
 E. Color. Furnish white spray thermoplastic that is pure white and free from any tint and has a minimum daylight
 reflectance (Y) of 75. When tested according to ASTM D 4960 and E313 the yellowness index is not to exceed
 0.15.
 Visually match yellow spray thermoplastic with FED 595 Color No. 13538. Ensure daytime reflectance (Y) is
 greater than 45.
 Ensure white and yellow colors fall within the chromaticity coordinates of the color box in Appendix A of
 Supplement 1047.
 G. Specific Gravity. Furnish spray thermoplastic material that has a specific gravity of 1.85-2.15.
 H. Softening Point. After heating the marking compound for 4 hours ± 5 min. at 375ºF ± 3ºF (190ºC ± 2ºC) and
 testing in accordance with ASTM E 28, ensure material has a minimum softening point of 180ºF (82°C) as
 measured by the ring and ball method.
 I. Bond Strength. After heating the marking compound for 4 hours ± 5 min. at 375ºF ± 3ºF (190ºC ± 2ºC)
 ensure tensile bond strength exceeds 180 psi (1.24 MPa) when tested in accordance with ASTM D 4796.
 J. Impact Resistance. After heating the marking compound for 4 hours ± 5 min. at 375ºF ± 3ºF (190ºC ± 2ºC)
 ensure impact resistance is a minimum of 50 inch pounds (0.576 kilogram meters) when tested in accordance with
 ASTM D 2794. Ensure no cracks or bond loss occurs when a 0.0625 inch (1.587 mm) thick film drawdown is made
 at 375ºF ± 3ºF (190ºC ± 2ºC) on an unprimed sandblasted Portland cement concrete block. Test sample with a male
 indentor 5/8-inch (15.875-mm) and no female Die, at room temperature.
 K. Indentation Resistance. When tested according to ASTM D 2240 using a Shore Durometer, Type A2, with a
 2.2 pound (1 kg) load, ensure hardness is between 5 and 30 after 15 seconds of contact with the sample. Ensure
 durometer and sample is at 113ºF ± 3ºF (45ºC ± 2ºC).
 Prequalify materials according to Supplement 1047. Use materials that follow the requirements of Supplement
 1089.
 
 748 WATER MAIN AND SERVICE BRANCH MATERIAL
 748.00 Acceptance. Follow the requirements listed in each 748 section.
 748.01 Ductile Iron Pipe, Joints, and Fittings. Furnish ductile iron pipe conforming to ANSI/AWWA
 C151/A21.51 and to ANSI/AWWA C150/A21.50 for thickness design. Furnish pipe with a cement mortar lining
 conforming to ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4. Furnish gaskets conforming to ANSI/AWWA for each length of pipe
 and suitable for the type of joint of the pipe. Ship gaskets in a separate container.
 Furnish push-on joints, mechanical joints, and boltless restrained joints conforming to ANSI/AWWA
 C111/A21.11. For restrained joints, ensure that the restraint is a design approved by the owner of the utility and
 provides a positive lock designed to prevent joint separation. Steel locking segments molded into a gasket to grip
 the pipe do not meet the requirements for this joint.
 Ball and socket joints are suited for underwater installations. The Contractor may use ball and socket joints for
 other types of installations where an appreciable amount of joint deflection and a positive lock against joint
 separation are required.
 Manufacture fittings for ductile iron pipe according to ANSI/AWWA C110/A21.10 or ANSI/AWWA
 C153/A21.53, and ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11. For fittings 16 inches (406 mm) or larger, use ductile iron only.
 Ensure that fittings are cement mortar lined according to ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 748.02 Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe, Joints, and Fittings. Furnish PVC pipe conforming to AWWA C
 900, AWWA C 905, AWWA C 909, or ASTM D 2241. Furnish push-on type pipe joints conforming to ASTM D
 3139 with a thickened bell and with a rubber gasket conforming to ASTM F 477.
 Use PVC, PE, or PB pipe and couplings, and solvent cements made from compounds that are tested and certified
 as suitable for potable water distribution products by the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) Testing Laboratory
 or the Canadian Standards Association Testing Laboratory, or any other similarly accredited testing agency
 acceptable to the Laboratory. Do not use PVC, PE, or PB pipe and couplings, or solvent cements containing any
 ingredient in an amount that has been demonstrated to migrate into water in quantities considered to be toxic, as
 tested according to Sections 3 and 4 of NSF Standard Number 14.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 748.03 Polyethylene (PE) Service Branches and Fittings. Furnish PE service branches and fittings
 conforming to AWWA C901.Furnish material with plain ends conforming to the potable waterline requirements
 specified in 748.02.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 748.04 Glass-Fiber-Reinforced Polymer Mortar Pipe (RPMP), Joints, and Fittings. Furnish RPMP
 conforming to ASTM D 3517 or AWWA C 950. Design of underground and above ground glass-fiber-reinforced
 polymer mortar pipe and fittings shall meet design requirements of AWWA M 45: Fiberglass Pipe Design Manual.
 Furnish double-bell push-on type fiberglass joints conforming to ASTM D 4161 and with a rubber gasket
 conforming to ASTM F 477. Furnish restrained joints and fittings conforming to ASTM D 3517 or AWWA C 950.
 Provide a minimum pipe stiffness of 18 psi.
 Furnish certified test data as defined in 101.03 to the Engineer.
 748.05 Copper Service Branches and Fittings. Furnish copper service branches conforming to ASTM B 88
 (ASTM B 88M), Type K. Assemble branches using flare-type compression fittings conforming to AWWA C 800.
 Ensure a minimum working pressure for the branches of 150 pounds per square inch (1.0 MPa). Use either coil
 type (temper 060 annealed) or drawn type (temper H) material.
 Furnish high-quality copper brass fittings with AWWA C 800 dimensions.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 
 748.06 Steel Pipe Encasement. Furnish steel casing pipe conforming to ASTM A 139/A 139M, Grade B or
 ASTM A 53, Grade B, that is galvanized on exterior and interior surfaces as specified in C&MS 711.02. Furnish
 the manufacturer’s certification. Steel casing pipe shall have a minimum wall thickness as shown below:
 Pipe Diameter
 Wall Thickness
 (in)
 (mm)
 Designation
 4 to 10
 100 to 260
 Standard
 12 to 22
 300 to 560
 Standard
 24 and larger 600 and larger Extra-strong
 
 Wall Thickness
 (in)
 (mm)
 0.237 to 0.365
 6.02 to 9.27
 0.375
 9.53
 0.500
 12.7
 
 For steel casing pipe specified to be bored or jacked, provide ungalvanized pipe with 0.500-inch minimum wall
 thickness.
 748.07 Polyethylene Encasement. Furnish 8-mil (200 m) thick polyethylene encasement material conforming
 to ANSI/AWWA C105/A21.5.
 748.08 Gate Valve and Valve Box. Furnish ductile iron gate valves conforming to AWWA C 509 resilient
 seated.
 Gate valves shall open counter-clockwise. Use valves suitable for push-on and mechanical joints for ductile iron
 pipe and for push-on joints for PVC pipe.
 Furnish cast iron valve boxes consisting of adjustable two or three-piece with cover and with a base
 corresponding to the size of the valve. Use heavy-duty type valve boxes for locations within existing or proposed
 pavement, driveway, or other traveled areas. Ensure that valve boxes are coated with an asphaltic coating by the
 manufacturer. The cover shall have the word “WATER” cast in it.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 748.09 Inserting Valve and Valve Box. Furnish inserting valves that operated like ordinary gate valves, with
 the same gate and seating assembly as AWWA C 509 gate valves. Furnish material that consist of a two-piece
 sleeve for assembly around the main the valve, and a valve box conforming to 748.08. Furnish the equipment
 necessary to drill the main wall and insert the valve according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 748.10 Cutting-in Sleeve, Valve, and Valve Box. Furnish cutting-in valves with the same gate and seating
 assembly as AWWA C 509 gate valves. Furnish material that consists of a cutting-in sleeve and valve suitable for
 assembling over the ends of a cutout length of existing pipe, according to the manufacturer’s recommendations,
 and a valve box conforming to 748.08. Furnish sleeves and valve joints of the mechanical joint type.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 748.11 Tapping Sleeve, Valve, and Valve Box. Furnish tapping valves with the same gate and seating assembly
 as AWWA C 509 gate valves. Furnish material that consists of a two-piece sleeve for assembly around the main,
 the valve, and a valve box conforming to 748.08. Furnish cast iron, epoxy-coated steel, or stainless steel tapping
 sleeves. Furnish the equipment necessary to drill the main wall through the valve according to the manufacturer’s
 recommendations.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 748.12 Tapping Saddle and Corporation Stop. Furnish iron, bronze, brass, or, AWWA C 223, stainless steel
 tapping saddles. Furnish band type or double-strap type tapping saddles, with International Pipe Standard (IPS)
 tapping or AWWA tapered thread inlet.
 For use with saddles, provide bronze alloy corporation stops with IPS inlet thread of AWWA tapered thread and
 with outlet thread compatible with connecting pipe, without special adapters. For direct tapping, provide bronze
 alloy corporation stops with AWWA tapered inlet thread and with outlet thread compatible with connecting pipe,
 without special adapters.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 
 748.13 Service Stop and Service Box. Furnish bronze service stops with coupling threads conforming to
 AWWA C 800. Use service stops designed so that water pressure from the inlet side of the body provides additional
 sealing action. Furnish service stops that open counter-clockwise.
 Use Buffalo type service boxes. Furnish covers that have the word “WATER” cast in raised letters. Securely
 fasten covers with a bronze or brass bolt.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 748.14 Meter, Setting, Stop, and Chamber. Furnish meter setting yokes that allow the meter to be readily
 installed without disturbing piping. Furnish angle pattern meter stops with lock wings for the street side of the
 meter piping. Furnish check valves for the customer side of the meter piping. Furnish chambers composed of
 concrete, vitrified clay, PVC, or PE. Furnish double walled, tightly fitting lids.
 748.15 Fire Hydrant. Furnish cast iron, dry-barrel post type fire hydrants conforming to AWWA C 502, with
 the following modifications:
 Furnish hydrants incorporating an approved groundline breakable flange and valve stem coupling.
 Furnish compression type hydrants with the valve opening against the pressure. Ensure that the valve end of the
 valve stem is designed to eliminate contact of dissimilar metals. Ensure that the valve stem is at least 1-inch (25
 mm) diameter or 1-inch (25 mm) square steel between the hydrant operating nut and the valve, except for the valve
 stem coupling located at the point corresponding to the breakable flange.
 Furnish a main valve port that is at least 4 1/4-inch (108 mm) diameter. Furnish a rubber faced valve.
 Ensure that the hydrant is designed so the nozzles may be oriented to point in any direction. Ensure that the
 hydrant connection to the pipe has at least a 6 inches (150 mm) inside diameter. Furnish push-on or mechanical
 type joints conforming to ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11.
 Ensure that the hydrant has one center-front pumper nozzle of 4-inch (100 mm) internal diameter with male
 threads to match the fire apparatus of the maintaining agency. Furnish two hose or streamer nozzles of 2 1/2-inch
 (63 mm) internal diameter with male threads to match apparatus of the maintaining agency. Ensure that nozzle
 sections are designed to lock into the hydrant body using locking lugs or threads. Furnish nozzles with threaded
 cast iron caps having an integral nut of the same design as the hydrant operating nut.
 Contact the maintaining agency to determine the desired color and number of coats of enamel for the hydrants.
 Furnish materials according to the Department’s QPL.
 
 