TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
 DIVISION 100 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
 101
 102
 103
 104
 105
 106
 107
 108
 109
 110
 111
 112
 113
 
 Definitions and Terms
 Bidding Requirements and Conditions
 Award and Execution of Contract
 Scope of Work
 Control of Work
 Control of Materials
 Legal Relations and Responsibility to Public
 Prosecution and Progress
 Measurement and Payment
 Mobilization and Demobilization
 Value Engineering Change Proposal
 Maintenance and Control of Traffic During Construction
 Quality Control/Quality Acceptance
 
 DIVISION 200 - EARTHWORK
 201
 202
 203
 204
 205
 206
 207
 208
 209
 210
 211
 212
 213
 214
 215
 216
 
 Staking
 Clearing and Grubbing
 Removal of Structures and Obstructions
 Roadway and Drainage Excavation
 Borrow and Excess Excavation Sites
 Embankment
 Subgrade
 Chemically Stabilized Roadbed
 Ditching and Shouldering
 Embankment Drainage Blankets
 Final Dressing
 Erosion Control
 Water Pollution Control
 Geotextile Construction
 Treatment of Open Sinkholes
 Settlement Platforms
 
 DIVISION 300 - AGGREGATE BASE COURSES
 301
 302
 303
 304
 
 Traffic-Bound Base
 Dense Graded Aggregate Base (DGA) and Crushed Stone Base (CSB)
 Pavement Drainage Blanket
 Geogrid Reinforcement for Subgrade and Aggregate Base Courses
 
 i
 
 DIVISION 400 - ASPHALT PAVEMENTS
 401
 402
 403
 404
 405
 406
 407
 408
 409
 410
 411
 412
 
 Asphalt Mixing Plant Requirements
 Control and Acceptance of Asphalt Mixtures
 Production and Placement of Asphalt Mixtures
 Open-Graded Friction Course (OGFC)
 Asphalt Seal Coat
 Asphalt Curing Seal and Asphalt Prime and Tack Coats
 Asphalt Mixture for Pavement Wedge
 Asphalt Pavement Milling and Texturing
 Asphalt Mixture Using Reclaimed Materials
 Asphalt Pavement Ride Quality
 Asphalt Wedge Curbs and Mountable Medians
 Stone-Matrix Asphalt (SMA)
 
 DIVISION 500 - PCC PAVEMENT AND NON-STRUCTURAL CONCRETE
 CONSTRUCTION
 501
 502
 503
 504
 505
 506
 507
 508
 509
 510
 511
 512
 
 JPC Pavement, PCC Base, and JPC Shoulders
 JPC Pavement 24/48/72
 Diamond Grinding JPC Pavement
 Breaking and Seating JPC Pavement
 Concrete Sidewalks, Steps, and Entrance Pavements
 Concrete Curbs and Gutters
 Concrete Mountable Median and Standard Barrier Median
 Permanent Concrete Median Barriers
 Temporary Concrete Median Barriers
 Sealing and Patching Concrete with Epoxy Resin
 Grouting and Epoxy Bond Coat
 Hook Bolts with Expansion Anchors
 
 DIVISION 600 - STRUCTURES AND CONCRETE
 601
 602
 603
 604
 605
 606
 607
 608
 609
 610
 611
 612
 613
 614
 615
 
 Concrete
 Steel Reinforcement
 Foundation Preparation and Backfill
 Bearing Piles
 Prestressed and Precast Concrete Products
 Bridge Restoration and Waterproofing with Concrete Overlays
 Structural Steel Bridges
 Concrete Bridges
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs
 Concrete Box Culverts and Concrete Headwalls
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box Culvert Sections
 Structural Plate Soil Interaction Structures
 Retaining Walls
 Maintenance Cleaning and Painting Steel Bridges
 Precast Three Sided Structures
 
 ii
 
 DIVISION 700 - DRAINAGE, TRAFFIC, AND ROADSIDE CONSTRUCTION
 701
 702
 703
 704
 705
 706
 707
 708
 709
 710
 711
 712
 713
 714
 715
 716
 717
 718
 719
 720
 721
 722
 723
 724
 725
 726
 
 Culvert Pipe, Entrance Pipe, Storm Sewer Pipe, and Equivalents
 Slotted Drain Pipe
 Slope Protection and Channel Lining
 Underdrains
 Cored Hole Drainage Box Connector
 Encasement Pipe
 Tunnels by Use of Steel Liner Plates
 Filling and Capping, Safeloading, and Plugging Abandoned Underground
 Structures
 Flume Inlets and Paved Ditches
 Small Drainage Structures
 Prefabricated Vertical Wick Drains
 Raised Pavement Markers
 Permanent Pavement Striping
 Durable Pavement Striping
 Panel Traffic Signs
 Roadway Lighting Systems
 Intersection Markings
 Bridge End Object Markers
 Guardrail
 Metal Handrails
 Fence
 Removing, Resetting, or Replacing Fence
 Signal Systems
 Planting Vines, Shrubs, and Trees
 Crash Cushions
 Right-of-Way Monuments
 
 DIVISION 800 - MATERIALS DETAILS
 801
 802
 803
 804
 805
 806
 807
 808
 809
 810
 811
 812
 813
 814
 815
 816
 817
 
 Cement
 Admixtures for Concrete
 Water
 Fine Aggregates
 Coarse Aggregates
 Asphalt Materials
 Joint Materials
 Waterproofing Materials
 Structural Plates for Pipes, Pipe Arches, and Arches
 Pipe and Pipe Arches
 Steel Reinforcement
 Structural Steels
 Miscellaneous Metals
 Guardrail Systems
 Cast Aluminum Bridge Railing Posts
 Woven-Wire Fencing Materials
 Chain Link Fencing Materials
 
 iii
 
 818
 819
 820
 821
 822
 823
 824
 825
 826
 827
 828
 829
 830
 831
 832
 833
 834
 835
 836
 837
 838
 839
 840
 841
 842
 843
 844
 845
 846
 
 Wood Products
 Tunnel Lining Materials
 Timber Poles
 Structural Steel Coatings
 Elastomeric Bearing Pads
 Concrete Curing Materials
 Masonry Materials
 De-Icers
 Epoxy Resin Systems
 Erosion Control Materials
 Masonry Coating Materials
 Hardware for Timber Structures
 Retroreflective Materials
 Construction Zone Temporary Marking Tapes
 Sign Posts
 Sign Substrates
 Roadway Lighting Materials
 Signal System Materials
 Durable Preformed Pavement Markings Type I Tape
 Extruded Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Materials
 Flexible Delineator Posts
 KY Type I Glass Beads
 Raised Pavement Markers
 Latex Admixture
 Pavement Striping Paint
 Geotextile Fabrics
 Mineral Admixtures for Concrete
 Fabric Wrapped Backfill Drain Materials
 Durable Waterborne Paint
 
 Appendix A Tabulation of Construction Tolerances
 Appendix B Index
 
 iv
 
 DIVISION 100
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
 SECTION 101  DEFINITIONS AND TERMS
 101.01 GENERAL. These Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
 are written to the bidder, before the award of the Contract, and to the Contractor after
 award. The sentences which direct the Contractor to perform work are written in active
 voice-imperative mood. These directions to the Contractor are written as commands. For
 example, a requirement to provide cold weather protection would be expressed as,
 “Provide cold-weather protection for concrete,” rather than “The Contractor shall provide
 cold weather protection for concrete.” In the imperative mood, the subject “the bidder” or
 “the Contractor” is understood.
 All other requirements to be performed by others have been written in active voice.
 Sentences written in active voice identify the party responsible for performing the action.
 For example, “The Engineer will determine the density of the compacted material.”
 Certain requirements of the Contractor may also be written in active voice, rather than
 active voice-imperative mood.
 Sentences that define terms, describe a product or desired result, or describe a
 condition that may exist are not written in either active voice or imperative mood. These
 types of sentences that describe a condition use verbs requiring no action. For example,
 “The characteristics of the soils actually encountered in the subgrade may affect the
 quality of cement and depth of treatment necessary.”
 101.02 ABBREVIATIONS. The following abbreviations, when used in the Contract,
 represent the full text shown.
 AAN
 AAR
 AASHTO
 ADA
 ADT
 ACHP
 ACPA
 ACI
 AGC
 AI
 AIA
 AISC
 AISI
 AN
 ANSI
 APD
 APWA
 AQ
 AQR
 ARTIMIS
 ARA
 AREA
 ASA
 ASCE
 ASLA
 AST
 ASTM
 ATSSA
 AVL
 AWPA
 AWWA
 
 American Association of Nurserymen
 Association of American Railroads
 American Association of State Highway and Transportation
 Officials
 American with Disabilities Act
 Average Daily Traffic
 Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
 American Concrete Pavement Association
 American Concrete Institute
 Associated General Contractors of America
 Asphalt Institute
 American Institute of Architects
 American Institute of Steel Construction
 American Iron and Steel Institute
 Advance Notification
 American National Standards Institute
 Appalachian Development Highway System Program
 American Public Works Program
 Air Quality
 Air Quality Report
 Advanced Regional Traffic Interactive Management and
 Information System
 American Railway Association
 American Railway Engineering Association
 American Standards Association (now ANSI)
 American Society of Civil Engineers
 American Society of Landscape Architects
 Above Ground Storage Tank System
 American Society for Testing and Materials
 American Traffic Safety Services Association
 Automatic Vehicle Location
 American Wood Preservers’ Association
 American Water Works Association
 
 101—1
 
 AWS
 BA
 BDR
 BHR
 BMP
 BTEX
 BTS
 CAAA
 CAD
 CADD
 CAP
 CBD
 CDE
 CE
 CEQ
 CERCLA
 CFR
 CIO
 CMAQ
 CMS
 CO
 COA
 COE
 CR
 CRA
 CSRP
 CRSI
 CTP
 CVO
 DAQ
 dBA
 DBE
 DEA
 DEIS
 DEP
 DFWR
 DHV
 DOE
 DOI
 DOW
 DROD
 DSEIS
 DSHE
 DWM
 EA
 EIS
 EO
 EPA
 ER
 ESA
 ESBA
 ESAL
 FAPG
 FHPM
 FHWA
 FIA
 
 American Welding Society
 Biological Assessment
 Bridge Development Report
 Bridge Hydraulics Report
 Best Management Practices
 Benzene, Toluene, Ethylbenzene, Xylene
 Bureau of Transportation Statistics
 Clean Air Act Amendment (1990)
 Certified Agricultural District
 Computer Aided Drawing and Design
 Communicating All Promises
 Central Business District
 Chief District Engineer
 Categorical Exclusion
 Council on Environmental Quality
 Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
 Liability Act
 Code of Federal Regulations
 Chief Information Officer
 Congestion Management and Air Quality Improvement Program
 Changeable Message Sign
 Carbon Monoxide
 Class of Action
 US Army Corps of Engineers
 County Road
 Cultural Resource Assessment
 Conceptual Stage Relocation Plan
 Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute
 Comprehensive Transportation Plan
 Commercial Vehicle Operations
 KNREPC, Division for Air Quality
 Decibels (A-Weighting)
 Disadvantaged Business Enterprise
 Division of Environmental Analysis
 Draft Environmental Impact Statement
 Department for Environmental Protection
 Kentucky Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources
 Design Hourly Volume
 Determination of Eligibility
 US Department of The Interior
 KNREPC, Division of Water
 Draft Record of Decision
 Draft Supplementation Environmental Impact Statement
 Deputy State Highway Engineer
 KNREPC, Division of Waste Management
 Environmental Assessment
 Environmental Impact Statement
 Executive Order
 US Environmental Protection Agency
 Federal-Aid Highway Emergency Relief Program
 Endangered Species Act
 Endangered Species Biological Assessment
 Equivalent Single Axle Load
 Federal Aid Policy Guide
 Federal Highway Program Manual
 Federal Highway Administration
 Federal Insurance Administration
 
 101—2
 
 FIRM
 FLH
 FOIA
 FONSI
 FPPA
 FR
 FRA
 FSEIS
 FSS
 FTA
 FWS
 FY
 GIS
 GMS
 HABS
 HAER
 HAR
 HC
 HES
 HOV
 HTF
 HUD
 HZM
 IA
 ICAR
 IJR
 IM
 ISTEA
 ITS
 JPC
 KAHC
 KCPA
 KEPSC-RI
 KM
 KNREPC
 KRMCA
 KRS
 KTC
 KYTC
 Leq (h)
 LESA
 LOS
 LTAP
 LRP
 MAGLEV
 MCL
 MOA
 MOU
 MPO
 MSA
 MUTCD
 
 Flood Insurance Rate Maps
 Federal Lands Highways Program
 Freedom of Information Act
 Finding of No Significant Impact
 Farmland Protection Policy Act
 Federal Register
 Federal Railroad Administration
 Final Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement
 Federal Specifications and Standards, General Services
 Administration
 Federal Transit Administration
 US Fish and Wildlife Service
 Fiscal Year
 Geographic Information System
 Groundwater Management Systems
 Historic American Buildings Survey
 Historic American Engineering Record
 Highway Advisory Radio
 Hydrocarbons
 Hazard Elimination System
 High Occupancy Vehicle
 Highway Trust Fund
 Housing and Urban Development
 Hazardous Material
 Independent Assurance
 Intergovernmental Coordination and Review
 Interchange Justification Report
 Interstate System/Interstate Maintenance Program
 Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency
 Act of 1996 (superseded by TEA-21)
 Intelligent Transportation System
 Jointed Plain Concrete
 Kentucky Association of Highway Contractors
 Kentucky Concrete Pavement Association
 Kentucky Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control-Roadway
 Inspectors
 Kentucky Method
 Kentucky Natural Resources and Environmental
 Protection Cabinet
 Kentucky Ready Mixed Concrete Association
 Kentucky Revised Statutes
 Kentucky Transportation Center
 Kentucky Transportation Cabinet
 Level Equivalent for One Hour
 Land Evaluation and Site Assessment
 Level of Service
 Local Technical Assistance Program
 Long Range Plan
 Magnetic Levitation Transportation Technology
 Deployment Program
 Materials Central Laboratory
 Memorandum of Agreement
 Memorandum of Understanding
 Metropolitan Planning Organization
 Metropolitan Statistical Area
 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
 Highways
 
 101—3
 
 MVE
 NAAQS
 NAC
 NAPA
 NCAT
 NCHRP
 NCR
 NDR
 NEC
 NEMA
 NEPA
 NFIP
 NGVD
 NHI
 NHPA
 NHS
 NHTSA
 NIST
 NMA
 NMFS
 NOAA
 NOV
 NOx
 NPDES
 NPHQ
 NPS
 NRCS
 NRHP
 NRMCA
 NSR
 NTI
 NTIS
 NTPEP
 NWIM
 OEP
 OGC
 OMS
 OPA
 OSA
 OSHA
 PAH
 PAIKY
 PCCC
 PCCN
 PE
 PE
 PM10
 PMS
 PMS
 ppm
 QA
 QAT
 QC
 QCP
 QL
 RCRA
 
 Motor Vehicle Enforcement
 National Ambient Air Quality Standards
 Noise Abatement Criterion
 National Asphalt Pavement Association
 National Center for Asphalt Technology
 National Cooperative Highway Research Program
 Non-Conformance Report
 National Driver Registration
 National Electric Code
 National Electrical Manufacturer’s Association
 National Environmental Policy Act
 National Flood Insurance Program
 National Geodetic Vertical Datum
 National Highway Institute
 National Historic Preservation Act
 National Highway System
 National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
 National Institute for Standards and Technology
 Non-Major Action
 National Marine Fisheries Service
 National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration
 Notice of Violation
 Nitrogen Oxides
 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
 National Partnership for Highway Quality formerly
 National Quality Initiative (NQI)
 National Park System
 National Resources Conservation Service formerly SCS
 National Register of Historic Places
 National Ready Mix Concrete Association
 Noise Study Report
 National Transit Institute
 National Technical Information Service
 National Transportation Product Evaluation Program
 National Wetland Inventory Map
 FHWA Office of Environmental Policy
 Office of General Counsel, Transportation Cabinet
 Operations Management System
 Office of Public Affairs, Transportation Cabinet
 Office of State Archeologist
 Occupational Safety and Health Administration
 Polynuclear Aromatic Hydrocarbons
 Plantmix Asphalt Industry of Kentucky
 Percentage Catalyst Cold-Start
 Percentage Catalyst Hot-Start
 Preliminary Engineering
 Professional Engineer
 Inhalable Particulates
 Pavement Management System
 Pavement Marking System
 Parts per Million
 Quality Acceptance
 Quality Acceptance Team
 Quality Control
 Quality Control Plan
 Qualified Laboratories
 Resource Conservation Recovery Act
 
 101—4
 
 ROD
 RS
 RVP
 RWIS
 SAE
 SASHTO
 SCH
 SCS
 SHA
 SHE
 SHRP
 SHPO
 SIC
 SIP
 SOx
 SP
 SPIB
 SR
 SS
 SSPC
 STOC
 STP
 STIP
 SUPP
 SYP
 TCM
 TCP
 TDIP
 TE
 TEA-21
 TEBM
 TIP
 TMA
 TMC
 TRAC
 TRIMARC
 TRB
 TSD
 TSM
 TSO
 TSP
 UA
 UATS
 UL
 UNL
 UPWP
 USC
 USCG
 USDA
 USDOT
 USGS
 USNL
 UST
 VECP
 VPH
 
 Record of Division
 Rural Secondary
 Reid Vapor Pressure
 Road Weather Information Station
 Society of Automotive Engineers
 Southern Association of State Highway and
 Transportation Officials
 State Clearinghouse
 Soil Conservation Service
 State Highway Agency
 State Highway Engineer
 Strategic Highway Research Program
 State Historic Preservation Officer
 Standard Industrial Codes
 State Implementation Plan
 Sulfur Oxides
 State Primary (State Maintained)
 Southern Pine Inspection Bureau
 State Road
 State Secondary (State Maintained)
 Steel Structures Painting Council
 Statewide Transportation Operations Center
 Surface Transportation Program
 State Transportation Improvement Program
 Supplemental Road (State Maintained)
 Six Year Plan
 Transportation Control Measures
 Traffic Control Plan
 Technology Deployment Initiatives and Partnerships Program
 Transportation Enhancement Program
 Transportation Equity Act for the 21 st Century (1998-2003)
 Transportation Engineer Branch Manager
 Transportation Improvement Program
 Transportation Management Area
 Transportation Management Center
 Transportation and Civil Engineering Program
 Traffic Response and Incident Management Assisting
 the River Cities
 Transportation Research Board
 Treatment, Storage, and Disposal
 Transportation Systems Management
 Time Sharing Option
 Total Suspended Particulates
 Urbanized Area
 Urban Area Transportation Study
 Underwriters’ Laboratory
 Unscheduled Needs List
 Unverified Planning Work Program
 United States Code
 US Coast Guard
 US Department of Agriculture
 US Department of Transportation
 US Geological Survey
 Unscheduled Needs List
 Underground Storage Tank
 Value Engineering Change Proposal
 Vehicles Per Hour
 
 101—5
 
 VMS
 WBE
 WCLIB
 WER
 WMA
 WMP
 
 Variable Message Sign
 Woman-owned Business Enterprise
 West Coast Lumber Inspection Bureau
 Wetland Evaluation Report
 Warm Mix Asphalt
 Wetland Mitigation Plan
 
 101.03 DEFINITIONS. The following terms, when used in the Contract have the
 meaning described.
 Advertisement
 
 A public announcement, inviting Bid Proposals to perform work
 or furnish materials.
 
 Authorized
 Adjustment
 
 A written order issued by the Engineer to the Contractor detailing
 changes to the specified work quantities that do not increase or
 modify the scope of the original Contract.
 
 As Built Plans
 
 The final Plans reflecting all changes to the original Plans.
 
 Award
 
 The acceptance by the Department of a Bid Proposal.
 
 Base Course
 
 See definition for Pavement Structure.
 
 Best Management
 Practice Plan
 
 The documentation detailing how the Contractor intends to
 conform to the requirements of Section 213 of the Standard
 Specifications.
 
 Bidder
 
 An individual, partnership, firm, corporation, or any acceptable
 combination thereof, or joint venture, submitting a Bid Proposal.
 
 Bid Proposal
 
 The offer of a bidder, on the prescribed form, to perform the work
 and to furnish the labor and materials at the prices quoted.
 
 Bridge
 
 A structure, including supports, erected over a depression or an
 obstruction, such as water, a highway, or a railway, and carrying
 traffic or other moving loads via a track or passageway and with
 an opening measured along the center of the roadway of more than
 20 feet between undercopings of abutments, spring lines of arches,
 or extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes.
 Bridge Length - The dimension of a structure measured along
 the center of the roadway between backs of abutment headwalls or
 between ends of the bridge floor.
 Bridge Roadway Width - The clear width of a structure
 measured at right angles to the center of the roadway between the
 bottom of curbs or, when curbs are not used, between the inner
 faces of a parapet or railing.
 
 Cabinet
 
 The Kentucky Transportation Cabinet.
 
 Calendar Day
 
 Any day shown on the calendar, beginning and ending at
 midnight.
 
 Change Order
 
 A written order issued by the Engineer to the Contractor detailing
 significant changes to the specified work quantities or that
 increase or modify the scope of the original Contract. Upon
 execution by the Contractor and Commissioner, the Change Order
 
 101—6
 
 becomes a Supplemental Agreement. A Change Order may also
 necessitate the Engineer to prepare and submit a Construction
 Revision, i.e. where changes involve adjustments to right of way,
 typical sections or pavement structures, major components, etc. A
 Change Order may additionally require the Cabinet to execute an
 Official Order when project limits are adjusted or when major
 project scope changes are needed.
 Channel
 
 A natural or artificial watercourse.
 
 Codes
 
 Code numbers listed with pay items are bid item code numbers
 used in project Bid Proposals.
 
 Commercial
 Quality or Grade
 
 Materials readily available from commercial sources.
 materials require no sampling or testing.
 
 Commissioner
 
 Chief Executive Officer of the Department of Highways or a duly
 authorized representative. When this title is not formally assigned,
 the Secretary of the Transportation Cabinet assumes this role.
 
 Commonwealth
 
 The Commonwealth of Kentucky.
 
 Construction
 Revision
 
 Any change in the Plans authorized by the Department.
 
 Contract
 
 The written agreement between the Department and the Contractor
 setting forth the obligations of the each party for the performance
 of the prescribed work. The Contract includes the Bid Proposal,
 Contract Form, Contract Payment Bond, Contract Performance
 Bond, Standard Specifications, Supplemental Specifications,
 Standard Drawings, Plans, Special Provisions, Special Notes, DBE
 Utilization Plan when applicable, Notice of Award, Notice to
 Begin Work, all change orders, and all Supplemental Agreements,
 all of which constitute one instrument.
 
 Contract Form
 
 A document describing the work and the specifications to which
 the work shall be performed, which, when signed by an agent of
 both the Department and the Contractor, binds both parties to the
 terms described therein.
 
 Contract Payment
 Bond
 
 The form of security furnished by the Contractor and his surety
 and approved by the Commissioner as security for the faithful
 payment in full of all legal accounts for labor, materials, and
 supplies furnished in the Contract.
 
 Contract Item or
 Pay Item
 
 A specific unit of work that a price is provided for in the Contract.
 
 Contract
 Performance Bond
 
 The security furnished to the Department to guarantee completion
 of the work according to the Contract.
 
 Contract Time
 
 The number of working days or calendar days allowed for
 completion of the Contract. When a calendar date of completion
 is shown in the Bid Proposal instead of a number of working or
 calendar days, complete the Contract by that date.
 
 Contractor
 
 The individual, partnership, firm, corporation, or any acceptable
 
 101—7
 
 These
 
 combination thereof, or joint venture, contracting with the
 Department of Highways for performance of the work.
 Controlling Item
 or Operation
 
 An item or operation that, if delayed, will delay the completion
 time of the Contract. The Engineer will determine the controlling
 items or operations based upon the Contractor’s submitted
 scheduling documents. When a Critical Path Method schedule is
 required, the controlling items or operations will be determined
 from the Critical Path.
 
 County
 
 The county containing the project.
 
 Culvert
 
 Any structure not classified as a bridge providing an opening
 under the roadway.
 
 Department
 
 The Kentucky Department of Highways.
 
 Design Quantity
 
 The original Contract quantity not including contingencies.
 
 Detour
 
 The directing of traffic onto another roadway to bypass a
 temporary traffic control zone.
 
 Disadvantaged
 Business
 Enterprise (DBE)
 
 A for profit small business where socially and economically
 disadvantaged individuals own at least 51 percent interest and also
 control management and daily business operations of the
 company.
 
 Diversion
 
 The directing of traffic onto a temporary roadway or alignment
 placed in or next to the right-of-way.
 
 Employee
 
 Any person working on the project who is under the direction or
 control of, or receives compensation from, the Contractor or
 subcontractor.
 
 Engineer
 
 The State Highway Engineer of the Department, or a duly
 authorized representative responsible for engineering supervision
 of the Contract.
 
 Equipment
 
 All machinery and equipment, together with the necessary
 supplies for upkeep and maintenance, and also tools and apparatus
 necessary for the proper construction and acceptable completion of
 the work.
 
 Extra Work
 
 An item of work not provided for in the Contract as awarded but
 found essential by the Engineer for the satisfactory completion of
 the Contract.
 
 Federal Project
 
 Any project funded wholly or in part by the Federal Government.
 
 Final Estimate
 
 The final Contract payment amount for all quantities of work
 including all changes from the design quantity.
 
 Force Account
 
 A basis of payment for the directed performance of highway
 construction work with payment based on the actual cost of labor,
 equipment, and materials furnished and considerations for
 
 101—8
 
 overhead and profit according to Subsection 109.04.
 Formal Acceptance
 
 Acceptance by the Department upon completion of all the
 requirements of the Contract, which relieves the Contractor of
 further obligation for the work.
 
 Highway
 
 A general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular
 travel, including the entire area within the right-of-way.
 
 Highway
 Separation
 
 Any structure carrying highway traffic over or under another
 highway or street.
 
 Highway-Railway
 Separation
 
 Any structure carrying highway traffic over or under the tracks of
 any railway.
 
 Holidays
 
 New Year’s Day. The first day of January plus one other day
 determined by the Governor of Kentucky each year.
 Martin Luther King Day. The third Monday in January.
 Good Friday. Friday before Easter.
 Memorial Day. The last Monday in May.
 Independence Day. The fourth day of July.
 Labor Day. The first Monday in September.
 Presidential Election Day. The first Tuesday after the first
 Monday in November of presidential election years.
 Veteran’s Day. The eleventh day of November.
 Thanksgiving Day. The fourth Thursday in November plus the
 following Friday.
 Christmas Day. The twenty-fifth day of December plus one other
 day determined by the Governor of Kentucky each year.
 These holidays are subject to subsequent changes by the General
 Assembly of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
 
 Independent
 Assurance
 
 The Department’s Division of Materials will conduct testing to
 provide an unbiased and independent evaluation of all sampling
 and testing procedures used in the acceptance program.
 
 Inspector
 
 The Engineer’s authorized representative assigned to make
 detailed inspections of Contract performance.
 
 Laboratory
 
 The official testing laboratory of the Department.
 
 Local Traffic
 
 Traffic that has either its origin or destination at some point within
 the limits of the project or an adjacent project. Local traffic
 includes traffic on all side roads that lead into the project without
 another satisfactory outlet over a passable road or street and school
 buses and mail delivery vehicles making stops within the project.
 
 Major and Minor
 Items
 
 All original Contract items having a value of 10 percent or more of
 the original Contract amount, based on the original Contract price
 and original estimated quantity, are major items. All remaining
 items are minor items.
 
 Masonry
 
 Concrete or stone masonry.
 
 Materials
 
 Any substances used in connection with the construction and
 
 101—9
 
 maintenance of
 appurtenances.
 
 any structure
 
 or
 
 the
 
 roadway and
 
 its
 
 Median
 
 The portion of a divided highway separating the traveled ways for
 traffic moving in opposite directions.
 
 Minor Structures
 
 Any structure not classified or defined as a bridge or a culvert,
 including catch basins, inlets, manholes, retaining walls, steps,
 buildings, fences, and other miscellaneous items.
 
 New
 
 Never been used before.
 
 Non–Conformance
 Report
 
 A formal written document of notification detailing a deficiency,
 or non-conformance in characteristic, documentation, or
 procedure, which renders the quality of an item or activity
 unacceptable or indeterminate. Corrective action is required,
 including but not limited to, supportive documentation of
 correction for the deficiency.
 
 Notice of Award
 
 Written notice to the Contractor stating that their Bid Proposal has
 been accepted by the Cabinet.
 
 Notice to
 Contractors
 
 The official notice inviting bids for the proposed highway
 improvements.
 
 Notice to Begin
 Work
 
 Written notice to the Contractor to proceed with the Contract
 work. When applicable, the Engineer will begin counting
 Contract time (working days) starting with the Notice to Begin
 Work date.
 
 Quality
 Acceptance
 
 QA consists of all planned and systematic actions necessary,
 including construction inspection and contract administration, to
 provide adequate confidence that a product or service will satisfy
 specified requirements for quality.
 QA serves to provide
 confidence in the Contract requirements, which include materials
 handling and construction procedures, calibration and maintenance
 of equipment, production process control and any sampling,
 testing and inspection which is performed by the Department for
 these purposes.
 
 Quality Control
 
 The sum total of activities performed by the Contractor to ensure
 the end product meets the Contract requirements.
 
 Quality Control
 Plan
 
 A detailed description in manual format of the type and frequency
 of inspection, staffing, materials handling and construction
 procedures, calibration and maintenance of equipment, production
 process control, sampling, and testing deemed necessary to
 measure and control quality as specified by the Contract
 documents.
 
 Qualified
 Laboratories
 
 Department approved laboratories used for sampling and testing of
 material.
 
 Pavement
 
 The combination of base course and surface course placed on a
 
 101—10
 
 Structure
 
 subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the roadbed.
 Subgrade. The top surface of a roadbed upon which the
 pavement structure and shoulders including curbs are constructed.
 Base Course. The layer or layers of specified or selected
 materials of designed thickness placed on a subgrade to support a
 surface course.
 Surface Course (Wearing Course). One or more layers of a
 pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load, the
 top layer of which resists skidding, traffic abrasion, and the
 disintegrating effects of climate.
 
 Pay Item or
 Contract Item
 
 A specific unit of work that a price is provided for in the Contract.
 
 Plans
 
 The approved Contract drawings including the plan, profile, and
 cross section sheets; general notes; the working drawings;
 supplemental drawings; and construction revisions showing the
 location, type, character, dimensions, and details of the work
 required.
 
 Professional
 Archaeologist
 
 An individual with a Masters degree in archaeology or
 anthropology, or an individual with Society of Professional
 Archaeologists certification, specializing in historic or prehistoric
 archaeology and having field experience in archaeological
 investigation.
 
 Profile Grade
 
 The trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top surface of the
 proposed wearing surface, usually along the longitudinal
 centerline of the roadbed. Profile grade means either the elevation
 or gradient of such trace according to the context.
 
 Project
 
 The specific section of the highway, including approaches and all
 appurtenances, and construction to be performed under the
 Contract.
 
 Project
 Completion
 
 The satisfactory completion of all work relating to both Contract
 Bid Proposal items and items added by supplemental agreement.
 
 Project
 Completion Notice
 
 The notice issued by standard form that the Project has been
 satisfactorily completed and is ready for final inspection.
 
 Proper Local
 Authorities
 
 Officials authorized by law to act for counties and other civil
 subdivisions.
 
 Proposal Guaranty
 
 The security furnished with a Bid Proposal guaranteeing that a
 bidder submitting an accepted Bid Proposal enters into the
 Contract.
 
 Ramp
 
 An interconnecting roadway of a traffic interchange, or a
 connection between highways at different levels or between
 parallel highways on which vehicles may enter or leave a
 designated roadway.
 
 Responsive Bid
 
 A Bid Proposal which conforms to all requirements of the
 proposal pamphlet.
 
 Responsible Bidder
 
 A bidder who is physically organized and equipped with the
 
 101—11
 
 financial resources to undertake and complete the contract.
 Responsible
 Contractor
 
 A Contractor that has the requisite skill, resources, desire, and
 integrity to complete the work in conformance with the provisions
 of the Contract.
 
 Right-of-Way
 
 A general term denoting land, property, or interest, acquired for or
 devoted to transportation purposes.
 
 Road
 
 A general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular
 travel, including the entire area within the right-of-way.
 
 Roadbed
 
 The graded portion of a highway within the top and side slopes,
 prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure, shoulders,
 and median.
 
 Roadside
 
 A general term denoting the area adjoining the outer edge of the
 roadway. Extensive areas between the roadways of a divided
 highway may also be considered roadside.
 
 Roadside
 Development
 
 Those items necessary to the complete highway providing for the
 preservation of landscape materials and features; the rehabilitation
 and protection against erosion of all areas disturbed by
 construction through seeding, sodding, mulching, and the placing
 of other ground covers; such suitable planting and other
 improvements as may increase the effectiveness and enhance the
 appearance of the highway.
 
 Roadway
 
 The portion of a highway within the limits of construction.
 
 Shoulder
 
 The portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for
 accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use, and for
 lateral support of base and surface courses.
 
 Sidewalk
 
 That portion of the roadway outside normal vehicle paths
 constructed primarily for the use of pedestrians.
 
 Skew or Skew
 Angle
 
 The acute angle formed by the intersection of a line normal to the
 centerline of the roadway with a line parallel to the face of the
 abutments, or in the case of culverts, with the centerline of the
 culverts.
 
 Special Notes
 
 See definition for Specifications.
 
 Special Provisions
 
 See definition for Specifications.
 
 Specifications
 
 A general term applied to written directions, provisions, and
 requirements pertaining to performance of the work.
 Specifications are included in documents such as the Special
 Notes, Special Provisions, Standard Specifications, or
 Supplemental Specifications.
 Special Notes. Specifications developed for a specific item of
 work which may be appropriate only for a particular project but
 may become standard if regularly used as future projects using the
 item develop.
 Special Provisions. Additions and revisions to the Standard
 
 101—12
 
 and Supplemental Specifications covering conditions peculiar to
 an individual project.
 Standard Specifications. A book of specifications approved
 for general application and repetitive use by the Department
 entitled, “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
 Construction”.
 Supplemental Specifications. Additions and revisions to the
 Standard Specifications that are made subsequently to issuance of
 the Standard Specifications.
 Specified
 Completion Date
 
 The date by which the Contract work is specified to be completed.
 
 Standard
 Drawings
 
 Detailed drawings approved for repetitive use.
 
 Standard
 Specifications
 
 See definition for Specifications.
 
 State Highway
 Engineer
 
 The State Highway Engineer of the Department acting directly or
 through an authorized representative.
 
 Street
 
 A general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular
 travel in a city, including the entire area within the right-of-way.
 
 Structures
 
 Bridges, culverts, or minor structures.
 
 Subcontractor
 
 An individual, firm, or corporation who, with the written consent
 of the Department, subcontracts any part of the Contract. First tier
 Subcontractors are those to whom the Contractor subcontracts a
 portion of the work. Second tier Subcontractors are those to
 whom a first tier Subcontractor subcontracts a portion of the work.
 
 Subgrade
 
 See definition for Pavement Structure.
 
 Substructure
 
 All of that part of the structure below the bearings of simple and
 continuous spans, skewbacks of arches and tops of footings or
 rigid frames, together with the back walls, wingwalls, and wing
 protection railings.
 
 Superintendent
 
 The Contractor’s authorized representative in responsible charge
 of the work.
 
 Superstructure
 
 The entire structure except the substructure.
 
 Supplemental
 Agreement
 
 A written agreement executed by the Contractor and the
 Commissioner, with the consent of the surety when required,
 covering significant changes, and revised or new unit prices and
 items, that supplements the original Contract. See also Change
 Order.
 
 Supplemental
 Drawings
 
 Drawings included in the Plans to specify construction details.
 
 Supplemental
 Specifications
 
 See definition for Specifications.
 
 101—13
 
 Surety
 
 The corporation, firm, or individual, other than the Contractor,
 executing a bond furnished by the Contractor.
 
 Surface Course
 (Wearing Course)
 
 See definition for Pavement Structure.
 
 Temporary
 Structures
 
 Structures required for the use of traffic during construction and
 not remaining a part of the permanent roadway.
 
 Through Traffic
 
 All traffic other than traffic defined as Local Traffic.
 
 Titles or Headings
 
 The titles or headings of the Sections and Subsections herein are
 intended for convenience of reference and shall not have any
 bearing on their interpretation.
 
 Traveled Way
 
 The portion of the roadway used for the movement of vehicles,
 exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes.
 
 Warm Mix
 Asphalt
 
 An asphalt mixture which any of the approved “warm mix
 technologies” such as water injection, chemical additives, or wax
 additives have been utilized.
 
 Work
 
 The furnishing of all labor, materials, equipment, and other
 incidentals necessary or convenient to the successful completion
 of the project or Contract item and the performance of all duties
 and obligations imposed by the Contract.
 
 Working Day
 
 A calendar day, exclusive of Saturday, Sunday, holidays, or days
 when the weather, seasonal, or temperature limitations of the
 specifications, or other conditions beyond the control of the
 Contractor, prevent, as judged by the Engineer, construction
 operations from proceeding for at least 5 hours by the normal
 working force engaged in performing the controlling item or items
 of work.
 
 Working Drawings
 
 Stress sheets, shop drawings, erection plans, falsework plans,
 framework plans, cofferdam plans, bending diagrams for
 reinforcing steel, or any other supplementary plans or similar data
 the Contractor is required to submit to the Engineer for review.
 
 101—14
 
 SECTION 102  BIDDING REQUIREMENTS AND
 CONDITIONS
 102.01 PREQUALIFICATION OF BIDDERS. All organizations and individuals
 bidding on Department projects and accepting subcontracts on Department projects must
 apply for and receive Department prequalification and possess a Certificate of Eligibility
 as provided in regulations published by the Department according to KRS Section
 176.140.
 The Department reserves the right to waive this requirement on certain projects in
 connection with the letting of contracts not covered by the statutes. The Department will
 place a waiver of this requirement in the Notice to Contractors and the Bid Proposal for
 such projects.
 102.02 CURRENT CAPACITY RATING.
 The Department will determine the
 current capacity rating of a bidder as the net difference between the bidder’s maximum
 capacity rating as set forth in a Certificate of Eligibility and the total value of uncompleted
 Contract work, held as a prime contractor, that the bidder is performing for any owner.
 The Department will determine the value of uncompleted Contract work, held as a
 prime contractor, that the bidder is performing from the last approved pay estimate for
 each uncompleted Contract. The Department will not give credit for any work
 subcontracted.
 The Department will divide the total Bid Proposal of a joint venture equally among
 the participants in the joint venture. The Department will divide the total value of the
 uncompleted work of joint ventured projects equally among the joint venturers in
 determining a bidder’s current capacity rating.
 The Department will not consider Bid Proposals exceeding the current capacity rating
 of a bidder.
 102.03 CONTENTS OF THE BID PROPOSAL FORM. The Bid Proposal form will
 be
 available
 on
 the
 Department
 internet
 website
 (http://transportation.ky.gov/Construction-Procurement/Pages/default.aspx) .The form
 states the location and description of the contemplated construction and shows the
 approximate estimate of the various quantities and kinds of work to be performed or
 materials to be furnished, and includes a schedule of items for which unit bid prices are
 invited. The Bid Proposal form states the time allowed to perform the work, the amount
 of the Proposal Guaranty, and the date, time, and place of the opening of the Bid
 Proposals. The form also includes any special provisions or requirements varying from or
 not contained in the Standard Specifications.
 The Department considers the Plans, Specifications, and other documents designated
 in the Bid Proposal form a part of the Bid Proposal whether attached or not.
 102.04 BIDDER REGISTRATION. The Department reserves the right to disqualify or
 refuse to place a bidder on the eligible bidder’s list for a project for any of the following
 reasons:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 5)
 
 failure to comply with any prequalification regulations of the Department;
 default under previous contracts;
 when a bidder’s existing, uncompleted contracts and subcontracts with the
 Department are behind schedule to the extent that they might hinder or prevent
 prompt completion of any additional contracts;
 when either the actual progress for all of a bidder’s existing grade and drain; or grade,
 drain, and surfacing; or bridge contracts and subcontracts is 20 percent or more
 behind the scheduled progress for the contracts and subcontracts, or when any one of
 the bidder’s contracts or subcontracts is 30 percent or more behind schedule;
 when the average actual progress for all of a bidder’s surfacing or resurfacing,
 seeding, signing, or other miscellaneous contracts and subcontracts is 50 percent or
 
 102—1
 
 6)
 
 7)
 
 more behind the scheduled progress or when any one of these contracts or
 subcontracts exceeds the original Contract time or completion date without
 significant cause;
 failure to reimburse the Commonwealth for monies owed on any previously awarded
 contracts, including those contracts where the prospective bidder is party to a joint
 venture and the joint venture fails to reimburse the Commonwealth for monies owed;
 and
 failure to reimburse the Commonwealth for monies owed for plans and Bid Proposal
 forms.
 
 The Department will resume placing the bidder on the eligible bidder’s list for
 projects after the bidder improves his operations to the satisfaction of the State Highway
 Engineer.
 102.05 INTERPRETATIONS OF QUANTITIES IN BID SCHEDULE. The
 Department’s estimated quantities appear in the bid schedule only for the purpose of
 comparing the Bid Proposals. The Department will pay the Contractor only for the actual
 quantities of work performed and accepted or materials furnished according to the
 Contract. The Department may increase, decrease, or omit the estimated quantities of
 work and materials furnished.
 102.06 EXAMINATION OF PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS, SPECIAL
 PROVISIONS, SPECIAL NOTES, AND SITE OF WORK. Examine the site of the
 proposed work, the Bid Proposal, Plans, specifications, contract forms, and bulletins and
 addendums posted to the Department’s website and the Bid Express Bidding Service
 Website before submitting the Bid Proposal. The Department considers the submission of
 a Bid Proposal prima facie evidence that the bidder has made such examination and is
 satisfied as to the conditions to be encountered in performing the work and as to the
 requirements of the Contract.
 Professing ignorance or a misunderstanding regarding requirements of the work by
 the Prime Contractor or any subcontractor or supplier, does not in any way serve to
 modify the provisions of the Contract. Consider existing field conditions, utilities, soil
 characteristics, traffic control, and other jobsite characteristics as requirements of the
 contract to be dealt with accordingly.
 102.07
 
 PREPARATION OF BID PROPOSAL.
 
 102.07.01 General. Submit the Bid Proposal on forms furnished on the Bid Express
 Bidding Service website (www.bidx.com). Specify a unit price in figures for each pay
 item for which a quantity is given and show the products of the respective unit prices and
 quantities written in figures in the column provided for that purpose. Round the products
 by dropping all digits past the cent. Indicate the total amount of the Bid Proposal,
 obtained by adding the rounded amounts of the items. Write in ink or type all figures.
 When an item in a Bid Proposal allows a bidder to make a choice, indicate a choice
 according to the specifications for that particular item.
 Bid proposals submitted shall use an eligible Digital ID issued by Bid Express. When
 proposing as an individual, indicate the name and post office address of the individual.
 When proposing as a partnership, indicate the name and post office address of each
 partnership member. When proposing as a joint venture, indicate the name and post office
 address of each member or officer of the firms represented by the joint venture. When
 proposing as a corporation, indicate the name of the corporation and the business address
 of its corporate officials.
 102.07.02 Computer Bidding. Subsequent to registering for a specific project, use
 the Department’s Expedite Bidding Program on the internet website of the Department of
 Highways,
 Division
 of
 Construction
 Procurement
 
 102—2
 
 (http://transportation.ky.gov/Construction-Procurement/Pages/default.aspx).
 Download
 the bid file from the Bid Express Bidding Service Website to prepare a Bid Proposal for
 submission to the Department. Submit Bid Proposal electronically through Bid Express
 Bidding Service.
 In case of a dispute, the Bid Proposal and bid item sheets created by the Highway Bid
 Program take precedence over any bid submittal.
 Furthermore the Department takes no responsibility for loss, damage of disks or the
 compatibility with the bidder's computer equipment or software.
 102.08 IRREGULAR BID PROPOSALS. The Department will consider Bid
 Proposals irregular and will reject them when the bidder either:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 
 omits both a unit price for any pay item and an amount for the entire quantity of the
 same pay item, except when the Bid Proposal allows a choice of authorized pay
 items; or
 submits zero as a unit price for any pay item or as an amount for the entire quantity of
 the same pay item except when the Bid Proposal form allows a choice of authorized
 pay items; or
 fails to submit the bid on the current revised pay items
 fails to submit the bid on required addenda; or
 fails to have a bid bond/cashier’s check, etc
 
 The Department will consider Bid Proposals irregular and may reject them for the
 following reasons:
 1) when there are unauthorized additions, conditional or alternate bids, or
 irregularities of any kind which may tend to make the Bid Proposal incomplete, indefinite,
 or ambiguous as to its meaning; or
 2) when the bidder adds any provisions reserving the right to accept or reject an
 award, or to enter into a Contract pursuant to an award; or
 3) any failure to comply with the provisions of Subsection 102.07; or
 4) Bid Proposals in which the Department determines that the prices are
 unbalanced; or when the sum of the total amount of the Bid Proposal under consideration
 exceeds the bidder’s Current Capacity Rating.
 102.09 BID PROPOSAL GUARANTY. The Department will reject and will not read
 any Bid Proposal that is not accompanied by a guaranty in the form of a cashier’s check,
 certified check, or bid bond and in an amount no less than the amount indicated on the Bid
 Proposal form. Bid Proposals must have a bid proposal guaranty in the amount indicated
 in the bid proposal form accompany the submittal. A guaranty in the form of a paper bid
 bond, cashier’s check, or certified check in an amount no less than the amount indicated
 on the submitted electronic bid is required when the electronic bid bond was not utilized
 with the Bid Express Bidding Service. Paper bid bonds must be delivered to the Division
 of Construction Procurement prior to the time of the letting. Make the cashier’s check,
 certified check, or bid bond payable to the Kentucky State Treasurer.
 102.10 DELIVERY OF BID PROPOSALS. Submit all Bid Proposals prior to the
 time specified in the Notice to Contractors. Submit all bids electronically using Bid
 Express Bidding Services and the requirements thereof.
 102.11 WITHDRAWAL OR REVISION OF BID PROPOSALS. Bid Proposals can
 be withdrawn in accordance the requirements of the Bid Express Bidding Service prior to
 the time of the Letting.
 
 102—3
 
 102.12 COMBINATION BID PROPOSALS. The Department may issue Bid
 Proposals for projects in combination or separately. Submit Bid Proposals on either the
 combination or the separate projects of the combination. The Department reserves the
 right to make awards on combination bids or separate bids to the best advantage of the
 Department.
 102.13 PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENT OF BID PROPOSALS. The Department will
 publicly announce all Bid Proposals at the time indicated in the Notice to Contractors.
 102.14 DISQUALIFICATION OF BIDDERS. The Department may consider any of
 the following reasons sufficient for the disqualification of a bidder and the rejection of the
 bidder’s Bid Proposal(s):
 1)
 2)
 
 more than one Bid Proposal for the same work submitted by an individual, firm, or
 corporation under the same or different name;
 evidence of collusion among bidders. The Department will not recognize participants
 in such collusion as bidders for any future Department work until the Department
 reinstates such participant as a qualified bidder.
 Collusive bidding is a violation of the law and may result in criminal
 prosecution, civil damage actions, and State and Federal administrative sanctions.
 
 102.15 PROCESS AGENT. Every corporation doing business with the Department
 shall submit evidence of compliance with KRS Sections 271A.070, 271A.385, 271A.555,
 271A.565, and 271A.615, and file with the Department the name and address of the
 process agent upon whom process may be served.
 Every individual residing in another state, or members of a co-partnership who reside
 in another state, doing business with the Department shall file with the Department the
 names and addresses of at least 2 persons residing in Kentucky upon whom process may
 be served.
 When any change is made in any such corporation’s, individual’s, or co-partnership’s
 process agent, the corporation, individual, or co-partnership shall immediately file with the
 Department a statement of the change. The former agent shall remain agent for the
 purpose of service of process until the bidder files a statement with the Department
 designating the new agent.
 Submit or file evidence of compliance with the KRS Sections cited above and/or
 designation of process agents, as required by this section, with the Department at the time
 of qualifying or at the time of submitting a Bid Proposal, or at any time prior to the
 issuance of the Contract and work order and/or purchase order.
 
 102—4
 
 SECTION 103  AWARD AND EXECUTION OF CONTRACT
 103.01 CONSIDERATION OF BID. The Department will tabulate the bid as soon as
 possible after opening the Bid Proposals and will compare the bids based on a correct
 summation of items at the prices bid. The Department will then make the result public. In
 the event of a discrepancy between unit bid prices and extensions, the Department will use
 the unit bid price. The Commissioner reserves the right to reject any or all Bid Proposals
 and to waive minor technicalities if doing so is in the best interest of the Commonwealth.
 103.02 AWARD OF CONTRACT. Unless rejecting all Bid Proposals, the Department
 will award the Contract to the lowest responsible bidder, without discrimination on the
 grounds of race, creed, color, sex, or national origin, whose Bid Proposal complies with
 the requirements of the law, the regulations, and the Contract.
 The Department may reject unbalanced Bid Proposals and award the Contract to the
 next lowest acceptable bidder.
 The Department will normally award the Contract within 10 working days after the
 date of receiving Bid Proposals unless the Department deems it best to hold the Bid
 Proposals of any or all bidders for a period not to exceed 60 calendar days for final
 disposition of award. The Department may hold the Bid Proposal of the lowest bidder
 longer than 60 days if the bidder concurs. The Department will mail the official Notice of
 Award to the address shown on the Contractor’s Certificate of Eligibility.
 103.03 CANCELLATION OF AWARD. The Department reserves the right to cancel
 the award of any contract at any time before the execution of that contract by all parties
 without any liability against the Department.
 103.04 RETURN OF PROPOSAL GUARANTIES. The Department will return the
 Proposal Guaranties of all except the 2 lowest bidders within 5 calendar days after
 checking, tabulating, and comparing the Bid Proposals. The Department will hold the
 Proposal Guaranty of the lowest bidder and the Proposal Guaranty of the second lowest
 bidder, as determined by the Commissioner, until the Department awards the Contract and
 executes and approves the Contract and bonds of the successful bidder, or until the
 Department rejects all Bid Proposals. If the Department does not make an award within
 60 calendar days, the Department will return all Proposal Guaranties.
 The Department will not release a bidder from the obligations of the Bid Proposal
 because of an alleged error in the preparation of the Bid Proposal unless the Department
 retains the bidder’s Proposal Guaranty.
 103.05 REQUIREMENT OF CONTRACT BONDS.
 To be acceptable to the
 Department, the surety must have a minimum A. M. Best rating of an “A-”, be listed on
 the U.S. Treasury Listing of approved sureties for an amount equal to or greater than the
 amount of the bond and be an admitted carrier in the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
 Submit Contract bonds conditioned upon the faithful performance of the requirements of
 the Contract and any modifications in conformity with the Contract; payment of proper
 compensation under the required labor and wage conditions as provided in the Contract;
 payment of claims against the Contractor for materials, labor and supplies; and
 reimbursement to the Department for any overpayment made on the Contract. Maintain
 the Contract bonds in full force for the time required by law. If at any time during the
 performance of the Contract the surety company falls below the minimum acceptable
 requirements, the Contractor shall file new bonds in an amount established by the
 Commissioner, or his designee, within 14 calendar days of such failure to meet the
 minimum requirements.
 The surety of the Contract bonds shall only sign a prescribed form through a duly
 appointed power of attorney with certifications acceptable to the Department. File an
 attested copy of all certifications of attorneys-in-fact with the Franklin County Court Clerk
 prior to submission to the Department and file a certified copy with the Department.
 
 103—1
 
 All non-resident agents of Kentucky signing the bonds as representatives of a surety
 company shall obtain the countersignature of a licensed Kentucky agent of the insurer as
 required by law. All appointments of attorneys-in-fact shall contain a provision that the
 appointment will not be revoked without giving the Department notice in writing at least
 30 calendar days prior to the effective date of the revocation and filing same with the
 Franklin County Court Clerk. More than one surety may execute a bond for any one
 Contract, and, in such event when 2 or more sureties are provided on such bond, each
 surety shall be liable and obligated for the full amount required herein before.
 The Department reserves the right to copy the surety on all of its communications
 with the Contractor concerning the Contractor’s performance, or performance
 deficiencies, on the project and further reserves the right to communicate directly with the
 surety to inform them of the Contractor’s performance, or performance deficiencies, on
 the bonded project.
 103.06 EXECUTION OF CONTRACT. Within 15 calendar days after receiving the
 Contract, execute and file it with the Department along with the following items:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 5)
 
 the Contract bonds required in Subsection 103.05;
 satisfactory evidence of required liability insurance;
 satisfactory evidence of compliance with Subsection 102.15;
 when the bidder lists proposed subcontractors in the Bid Proposal, and the amount of
 work proposed to be subcontracted is not to be deducted from the bidder’s current
 capacity rating, then submit Form TC 14-9, Confirmation of Subcontract, reported in
 the Bid Proposal. Sign submittal and obtain signatures of each proposed
 subcontractor. Verify all signatures by a notary public.
 when the Bid Proposal form designates a certain percentage of the Contract as the
 Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) portion, submit the necessary number of
 agreements with DBEs to meet or exceed these designated percentages. Execute an
 agreement with each DBE that includes the items of work, the unit price that the DBE
 will be paid for each item, and notarized signatures of both parties. Should the bidder
 fail to reach the designated DBE percentages, then the Department will consider
 whether the bidder made reasonable efforts to meet these percentages prior to issuing
 a work order.
 
 Execute the Contract and bonds only on the form furnished by the Department. Upon
 the filing with the Department by the Contractor of the executed Contract accompanied by
 the listed items, the Commissioner will, within the period not exceeding 30 calendar days
 from the date of such filing, make final disposition of the Contract and, if Contract bonds
 are approved, will issue Notice to Begin Work. Should the Department withhold the
 Notice to Begin Work in excess of the 30 calendar day period, the Contractor shall have
 the option of accepting or rejecting the Contract without forfeiting the Proposal Guaranty.
 103.07 APPROVAL OF CONTRACT. The Contract is not binding until the
 Commissioner executes it and certain agencies of the Commonwealth, as required by law,
 certify that sufficient funds are available.
 103.08 FAILURE TO EXECUTE CONTRACT. The bidder’s failure to execute the
 Contract or to comply with all requirements of Subsection 103.06 within 15 calendar days
 after the Contract has been received by the bidder will be just cause for the Department to
 nullify the award. It is understood by both the bidder and the Commissioner that, in the
 event of the annulment of the award, the bidder will forfeit the amount of guaranty
 deposited with the Bid Proposal as agreed liquidated damages to the Commonwealth; not
 as a penalty, but in liquidation of damages sustained. The Department can then make an
 award to the next lowest responsible bidder; or readvertise the work or take other action as
 provided by statute on this subject, as the Commissioner may elect. A bidder who forfeits
 a Proposal Guaranty according to this Section will not be considered in future bid
 proposals for the same project unless there has been a substantial change in the design of
 
 103—2
 
 the project subsequent to the forfeiture of the Guaranty.
 
 103—3
 
 SECTION 104  SCOPE OF WORK
 104.01 INTENT OF CONTRACT. The intent of the Contract is to provide for the
 construction and completion of the full scope of the work described. Furnish all labor,
 materials, equipment, tools, transportation, and supplies required to complete the work
 according to the Contract.
 104.02
 
 ALTERATIONS OF PLANS OR CHARACTER OF WORK.
 
 104.02.01 General. At any time, and without invalidating the Contract or releasing
 the surety, the Engineer reserves the right to make, in writing, changes in quantities and
 alterations in the work when necessary to complete the project satisfactorily. Perform the
 work as altered.
 When alterations or changes in quantities significantly change the character of the
 work under the Contract, the Department will adjust the Contract. The Department will
 not consider loss of anticipated profits. Before performing the significantly changed work,
 reach agreement with the Department concerning the basis for the adjustment. Absent an
 agreement, the Engineer will determine a fair and equitable adjustment.
 If the alterations or changes in quantities do not significantly change the character of
 the work, the Department will make payment as provided elsewhere in the Contract. A
 significant change occurs when:
 1)
 2)
 
 the character of the work is altered materially in kind or nature from that
 involved or included in the original proposed construction or,
 the quantity of a major item of work, as defined in Subsection 101.03, increases
 above 125 percent or decreases below 75 percent of the original Contract
 quantity. The Department will allow an adjustment in cost only for the quantity
 in excess of 125 percent of the original Contract quantity, or in case of a
 decrease below 75 percent, to the actual amount of work performed.
 
 104.02.02 Overrun and Underrun Formulas. The Department will use the
 following supplemental formulas to determine the adjusted unit prices for the items listed
 herein when a listed item is a major item and either an underrun or overrun of more than
 25 percent occurs in its constructed quantity. This formula does not apply to items not
 specifically listed in this Subsection.
 The excessive underrun of an item is defined as 75 percent of the original Contract
 quantity of the item minus the final quantity of the item. The excessive overrun of an item
 is defined as the final quantity of the item minus 125 percent of the original Contract
 quantity of the item.
 The Department will apply this subsection when all the following conditions are met:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 an excessive underrun or overrun occurs for one or more of the bid items listed
 below;
 the affected item is a major item, as defined in Subsection 101.03; and
 the final quantity of the affected item is at least 30 percent of the original
 Contract quantity. When the final quantity of the affected item is less than 30
 percent of the original Contract quantity, the Department will not apply the
 formula but will prepare a supplemental agreement according to Subsections
 109.03 and 109.04.
 The specified bid items which are covered by this subsection are:
 •
 •
 •
 •
 •
 
 Pavement Markers
 Pavement Striping (temporary and permanent)
 Temporary Marking Tape
 Delineators
 Asphalt Pavement Milling and Texturing
 
 104—1
 
 •
 •
 •
 •
 
 Concrete Overlay Latex
 Concrete Overlay Low Slump
 Concrete Class M for Full Depth Patching
 Partial Depth Patching
 
 The Department will apply this subsection to other bid items when specified in the
 Contract.
 For the excessive underrun and overrun quantities, the Department will adjust the
 payment according to the appropriate following formula:
 Excessive Underrun Formula
 NP = OP + (EU x 0.25 x OP)
 FQCI
 Excessive Overrun Formula
 NP = OP - (EO x 0.25 x OP)
 FQCI
 Where:
 NP = New Unit Price
 OP = Original Unit Price Bid by Contractor
 EU = Excessive Underrun
 EO = Excessive Overrun
 FQCI = Final Quantity Contract Item
 When the Contractor submits a completed Bid Proposal for a project containing one
 or more of the listed items, the Contractor agrees to accept payment for excessive
 underruns or excessive overruns in the quantities of these items according to the
 appropriate formula. The Contractor further agrees that the formulas provide full and
 complete compensation for the excessive underrun or excessive overrun quantities,
 including any and all unreimbursed expenses, loss of expected reimbursement, loss of
 anticipated profits, delay, inefficiency, and all other costs.
 104.02.03 Differing Site Conditions. Differing site conditions exist when one party
 discovers that:
 1)
 2)
 
 subsurface or latent physical conditions differ materially from those shown in the
 Contract, or
 unknown subsurface or latent physical conditions differ materially from
 conditions normally encountered or from those generally recognized as inherent
 in the work provided for in the Contract.
 
 Promptly notify the Engineer and make written notice within 7 calendar days of
 encountering the differing conditions. Await guidance from the Engineer before disturbing
 the conditions and before performing the affected work.
 Upon written notification, the Engineer will investigate the conditions and determine
 if the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time
 required for the performance of work under the Contract. When justified, the Engineer
 will make an adjustment, in time, or cost, or both, excluding anticipated profits, and
 modify the Contract in writing accordingly. The Engineer will notify the Contractor
 whether or not the conditions warrant an adjustment.
 The Department will allow no Contract adjustment unless the Contractor provides the
 required written notice.
 104.03
 
 EXTRA WORK. Perform Extra Work for which there is no quantity or price in
 
 104—2
 
 the Contract only by supplemental agreement. The Department will pay for this Extra
 Work at a unit price or lump sum price agreed upon and included in a written
 supplemental agreement executed by all parties to the Contract as specified in Subsection
 109.04. The Department will consider an extension of Contract time for Extra Work
 according to Subsection 108.07. When requested by the Engineer, provide justification
 and all necessary documentation to support proposed prices or time extensions. The
 Engineer may direct, in writing, time-sensitive or emergency work be progressed while the
 supplemental agreement is being processed. In the event work is directed without an
 executed supplemental agreement, cost records shall be kept and reconciled daily
 conforming to specification 109.04.02. Waiting for an executed supplemental agreement
 when the Engineer directs work to progress as above, waives the right to claim for delays
 associated with the subject extra work.
 104.04 RIGHTS IN AND USE OF MATERIALS FOUND ON THE WORK. The
 Contractor, with the Engineer’s approval, may use on the project stone, gravel, sand, or
 other material found in the excavation that the Engineer determines is suitable. The
 Department will pay both for the excavation of such materials at the corresponding
 Contract unit price and for the pay item for which the excavated material is used. Replace
 all excavated material so removed and used with other acceptable material at no additional
 expense to the Department. The Department will not charge the Contractor for the
 materials found in the excavation and used in the work. Do not excavate or remove any
 material from outside the grading limits, as indicated by the slope and grade lines, without
 the Engineer’s written authorization.
 Take ownership of and dispose of any materials of value, such as merchantable
 timber or coal, that may be encountered during construction of the project and that are not
 necessary to perform or complete the work. Leave a sufficient amount of material on the
 site to complete the project according to the Contract.
 
 104—3
 
 SECTION 105  CONTROL OF WORK
 105.01
 
 AUTHORITY OF DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL.
 
 105.01.01 Authority of the Engineer. The Engineer will decide all questions
 regarding the quality and acceptability of materials furnished, work performed, and the
 rate of progress of the work; all interpretation of the Plans and Specifications; and the
 acceptable fulfillment of the Contract. The Engineer will, in writing, suspend the work,
 wholly or in part when the Contractor fails to correct conditions unsafe for the workmen
 or the general public; for failure to carry out Contract provisions; for failure to carry out
 orders; for periods of unsuitable weather; for conditions unsuitable for the prosecution of
 the work; or for any other condition or reason determined to be in the public interest.
 The Engineer will decide all questions concerning the interpretation of the Contract
 relating to the work, and all questions concerning the acceptable fulfillment of the work
 performed by the Contractor. The Engineer will determine the quantity and quality of the
 several kinds of work performed and materials furnished that the Department will pay for
 under the Contract, and such decision and estimate will be final and conclusive. In case
 any question arises, the Engineer’s estimate will be a condition precedent to the right of
 the Contractor to receive any money due under the Contract. The Contractor may appeal
 to the Commissioner any decision of the Engineer by procedures outlined in Subsection
 105.13. The Engineer will answer any questions as to the meaning of the Contract, or any
 obscurity as to the wording of the Contract and give all directions and explanations
 necessary to make definite any of the provisions of the Contract, or necessary to complete
 or give them due effect.
 The Contractor may request and the Engineer will provide written instructions
 concerning any significant item.
 Staff Engineers and Engineering Technologist Supervisors have the authority to
 inspect the work, coordinate inspection activities, and reject substandard work and
 materials; however, all plan changes and/or project decisions shall be authorized by the
 Engineer.
 105.01.02 Authority of Inspectors. Inspectors employed by the Department are
 authorized to inspect all work performed and materials furnished. Such inspection may
 extend to all or any part of the work and to the preparation, fabrication, or manufacture of
 the materials furnished. The inspector is not authorized to alter or waive provisions of the
 Contract. The inspector is not authorized to issue instructions contrary to the Contract, or
 to act as foreman for the Contractor. However, the inspector has the authority to reject
 work or materials until any questions at issue are referred to and as the Engineer decides.
 105.01.03 Inspection of Work. Provide the Engineer access to all materials and
 each part or detail of the work, and furnish the Engineer with such information and
 assistance as required to make a complete and detailed inspection.
 At the Engineer’s request, at any time before acceptance of the work, remove or
 uncover such portions of the finished work as directed. After examination, restore said
 portions of the work to the standard required by these Specifications. Should the work
 thus exposed or examined prove acceptable, the Department will pay for the uncovering,
 or removing, and the replacing of the covering or making good of the parts removed as
 Extra Work. Should the work so exposed or examined prove unacceptable, perform the
 uncovering, or removing, and the replacing of the covering or making good of the parts
 removed at no expense to the Department.
 As the Engineer directs, remove and replace, at no expense to the Department, all
 work performed or materials used without the Engineer’s supervision or inspection, unless
 the Engineer failed to inspect after having been given 3 working days notice in writing
 that the work was to be performed.
 When any unit of government or political subdivision or any railroad corporation
 pays a portion of the cost of the work covered by the Contract, provide access to its
 respective representatives to inspect the work. Such inspection in no way makes any unit
 
 105—1
 
 of government or political subdivision or any railroad corporation a party to this Contract,
 and in no way interferes with the rights of either party hereunder.
 105.01.04 Removal of Defective and Unauthorized Work. Remedy, or remove
 and replace in an acceptable manner, at no expense to the Department, all work which has
 been rejected. The Department will consider any work performed beyond the lines and
 grades specified in the Plans or as given, except as herein provided, or any Extra Work
 performed without a supplemental agreement, as unauthorized and at no expense to the
 Department. The Department will not measure such work for payment.
 Should the Contractor decline or neglect to begin the removal and the replacement of
 any defective work or remove any unauthorized work within the amount of time stated in
 a written notice to do so has been given him, the Department may retain all monies due or
 which may become due the Contractor until the requirements of these Specifications have
 been met. When deemed best by the Commissioner, the Commissioner will employ the
 necessary labor to make good or remove such defective or unauthorized work and deduct
 the cost from any monies due or to become due the Contractor.
 105.02 PLANS AND WORKING DRAWINGS. Roadway plans will, in general,
 show alignment, profile, typical section of improvement, and general cross sections.
 Structure plans will, in general, show in detail all dimensions of the work
 contemplated. When the structure plans do not show all dimensions in detail, they will
 show general features and such details as are necessary to give a comprehensive idea of
 the structure. When such drawings are necessary to give comprehensive idea of the
 structure, submit detailed shop or working drawings to the Department for review. The
 Contractor shall bear all risk for work done or material ordered prior to the Department’s
 review of these drawings for the structures involved.
 Submit working drawings for steel structures consisting of shop detail, erection, and
 other working plans, showing details, dimensions, size of materials, and other information
 necessary to completely fabricate and erect the work.
 Submit working drawings for concrete structures consisting of such detailed plans as
 required to successfully prosecute the work and which are not specified in the Plans.
 These may include plans for falsework, bracing, centering and form work, cofferdams,
 caissons, layout diagrams, and diagrams for bent reinforcement.
 Submit electrical shop drawings, design data, and descriptive literature for materials
 in electronic format to the Division of Traffic Operations for approval. Drawings and
 literature shall be submitted for lighting and signal components. Notify the Engineer when
 submitting information to the Division of Traffic Operations. Do not begin work until
 shop drawings are approved.
 Submit shop drawings for traffic counting equipment and materials in electronic
 format to the Engineer or the Division of Planning. Notify the Engineer when submitting
 information directly to the Division of Planning. Do not begin work until shop drawings
 are reviewed and approved.
 Submit the working drawings in a timely manner to allow for a corresponding review
 and include this review time in the project’s schedule. . The Department will review the
 Contractor’s working drawings in general only. The Department’s review does not relieve
 the Contractor from any responsibility whatsoever.
 Upon final review of all working drawings, submit to the Department copies of the
 final detailed drawings and upon completion of the work, surrender to the Department the
 original tracings.
 Include in the Contract price the cost of furnishing all working drawings.
 105.03 RECORD PLANS. Record Plans are those reproductions of the original Plans
 on which the accepted Bid Proposal was based and signed by a duly authorized
 representative of the Department. The Department will make these plans available for
 inspection in the Central Office at least 24 hours prior to the time of opening bids and up
 to the time of letting of a project or projects. The quantities appearing on the Record Plans
 
 105—2
 
 are the same as those on which Bid Proposals are received. The Department will use these
 Record Plans as the controlling plans in the prosecution of the Contract. The Department
 will not make any changes on Record Plans subsequent to their issue unless done so by an
 approved contract modification. The Department will make 2 sets of Record Plans for
 each project, and will maintain one on file in the Central Office and one of file in the
 District Office. The Department will furnish the Contractor with the following: 1 full size,
 2 half size and an electronic file copy of the Record Plans at the Pre-Construction
 conference.
 105.04 CONFORMITY WITH PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS. Perform all work
 and furnish all materials in reasonably close conformity with the lines, grades, cross
 sections, dimensions, and material requirements specified in the Contract. Where definite
 tolerances are specified in the Contract, the Department will use such tolerances to
 establish the limits of reasonably close conformity. Where tolerances are not specified in
 the Contract, the Engineer will determine the limits of reasonably close conformity in each
 individual case.
 When the Engineer finds the materials or workmanship of the finished product to be
 outside the contract requirements, the Engineer may allow the material and finished
 product to be left in place in instances where leaving such material and product in place is
 in the best interest of the Department and the travelling public. In this event, the Engineer
 will document the basis of acceptance by Contract modification providing for an
 appropriate adjustment in the Contract price for such work or materials as he deems
 necessary to conform to his determination based on engineering judgment.
 When the Engineer finds that the materials, the finished product in which the
 materials are used, or the work performed are not in reasonably close conformity with the
 Contract and have resulted in an inferior or unsatisfactory product, remove, replace, or
 correct the work and materials at no additional expense to the Department.
 When referenced standards, such as those promulgated by AASHTO, ASTM, or other
 recognized organizations, or the Department’s own specifications, standard drawings, or
 similar documents are revised subsequent to the letting date, the Contractor may propose
 to furnish materials or perform work conforming to the latest edition at the time the work
 is done. The Engineer may approve such a request if the material or work is deemed to be
 equal to or better than originally required; however, the Engineer may require a reduction
 in bid prices before granting approval when the revision significantly reduces the cost of
 furnishing material or performing the work. In the event of any dispute, the Department
 will select the referenced standard current at the date of advertisement for Bid Proposals or
 the standard specifically referenced in the Contract to determine the cost.
 105.05 COORDINATION OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS. All documents defined
 under Contract in Subsection 101.03 are essential parts of the Contract. A requirement
 occurring in one is as binding as though occurring in all. They are complementary and
 describe and provide for a complete contract. In the case of a discrepancy, the governing
 ranking will be:
 Dimensions
 1. Plan
 2. Calculated
 3. Scaled
 
 105—3
 
 Documents
 1. Questions and Answers from the Division of Construction Procurement Website
 2. CAP report
 3. Special Notes
 4. Special Provisions
 5. Plans
 6. Standard Drawings
 7. Supplemental Specifications
 8. Standard Specifications
 Do not take advantage of any apparent error or omission in the Contract.
 Immediately notify the Engineer upon discovering such an error or omission. The
 Engineer will then make any necessary corrections and interpretations deemed necessary
 for fulfilling the intent of the Contract.
 105.06 COOPERATION BY CONTRACTOR. Maintain copies of the Plans and
 Specifications at the site of the work at all times and furnish copies to each foreman.
 Require each foreman to have with him on the site, at all times, a copy of that part of the
 Plans and Specifications applying to the work he is directing. Be present or have a
 representative present on the project at all times, when construction is in progress, to
 receive and carry out such instructions as the Engineer may give. Provide reasonable
 facilities to enable the Engineer to inspect the workmanship and materials entering into the
 work, and cooperate in setting and preserving survey stakes, bench marks, etc., and in all
 other things necessary to satisfactorily complete the work as contemplated.
 When the Department lets separate contracts within the limits of any one project or
 for adjacent projects, conduct the work so as not to interfere with or hinder the progress or
 completion of the work being performed by other contractors. Cooperate with contractors
 working on the same project or adjacent projects. In case of a dispute with other
 contractors, the Engineer will arbitrate and will make a final and binding decision.
 Progress work according to specification 108.04.
 The Contractor shall assume all liability, financial or otherwise, in connection with
 the Contract and shall protect and save harmless the Department from any and all damages
 or claims that may arise because of inconvenience, delay, or loss experienced by him
 because of the presence and the operations of other contractors working within the limits
 of the same project. The Contractor shall assume all responsibility for all work not
 completed or accepted on the Contract because of the presence and operations of the other
 contractors.
 As far as possible, arrange the work and place and dispose of the materials being used
 so as not to interfere with the operations of the other contractors within the limits of the
 same project or on adjacent projects. Join the work with that of the other contractors in an
 acceptable manner, and perform it in proper sequence with the work of the other
 contractors.
 Informal Partnering is encouraged between the Department and Contractor. The
 partnering process is intended to encourage the foundation of a cohesive partnership
 between the Department and the Contractor. This partnership will be structured to draw
 on the strengths of each organization to identify and achieve reciprocal goals within the
 bounds of the Contract. Common objectives will be structured to meet each project’s
 needs, but will include such basic criteria as effective and efficient contract performance,
 safety, and contract completion on schedule and within budget.
 The Contractor and the Department should both be aware that the partnering process
 includes more than their relationship. The “Team” should also include utility companies,
 local officials, emergency personnel such as fire and police, and anyone else for which the
 project effects or who could affect the progress of the project.
 The partnering process in no ways alters the Contract itself. Also, the establishment
 of a partnering process or charter for a project will not change the legal relationship of the
 parties to the contract nor relieve either party from any of the terms of the contract.
 
 105—4
 
 Scheduling on-site project meetings at a regular or ‘as-needed’ basis is encouraged to
 discuss and resolve issues regarding the project throughout the duration of the Contract.
 Contractor, subcontractor, and Department personnel should attend these meetings, and if
 need be, any appropriate persons needed to discuss specific issues. Record the minutes of
 each meeting and distribute to all partners. It will be the responsibility of the Contractor
 and the Department to act equally in hosting these meetings.
 Informal Partnering will not be measured for payment and the Department will
 consider all costs associated with the informal partnership incidental to the project.
 105.07 COOPERATION WITH UTILITIES. The Department will notify all utility
 facility owners or other parties affected and endeavor to have all necessary adjustments of
 utility fixtures, pipelines, and other appurtenances in conflict with construction made as
 soon as practical.
 The Department will arrange to have the owners of all water lines, gas lines, wire
 lines, service connections, water and gas meter boxes, water and gas valve boxes, light
 standards, cables, signals, sewers, and all other utility appurtenances in conflict with the
 limits of the proposed construction relocate or adjust those facilities in conflict except as
 otherwise provided for in the Contract.
 Consider all of the permanent and temporary utility facilities in their present or
 relocated positions, as specified in the Special Note for Utilities/Impact on Construction
 included in the Bid Proposal form, when preparing a Bid Proposal. The Department will
 not allow any additional compensation for delays, inconvenience, or damage sustained by
 the Contractor due to any interference from the said utility appurtenances or due to the
 operation of moving them. The Department will review requests for an extension of
 Contract time for such delays according to Subsection 108.07.
 Prior to any excavation activities, comply with the requirements for Excavators in the
 Underground Facility Damage Prevention Act of 1994 which is contained in KRS
 367.4901 through 367.4917.
 105.08 PROTECTION AND RESTORATION OF EXISTING ROADWAY
 FACILITIES. Protect and preserve all existing roadway facilities including:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 those which are to remain in place and remain in service as a part of the improved
 roadway;
 those which are to be removed and reused as a part of the improved roadway; and
 those which are to be removed and neatly stacked along the right-of-way for future
 Department use.
 
 Restore and replace in kind any such existing facilities damaged or destroyed by the
 Contractor through faulty handling as the Engineer directs, at no expense to the
 Department.
 105.09 CONSTRUCTION STAKES, LINES, AND GRADES. Unless the Contract
 specifies otherwise, the Engineer will establish lines, slopes, and grades, and will furnish
 the Contractor with all necessary information relating to lines, slopes, and grades.
 Furnish, set, and preserve the stakes and marks necessary to construct the project
 according to the established lines, slopes, and grades as provided in Section 201.
 105.10
 
 HAULING.
 
 105.10.01 Hauling to Projects. According to Subsections 107.01 and 109.01.05,
 perform the hauling of materials and all other hauling in conjunction with the construction
 of a project so as not to violate any of the truck size, gross weight, axle weight, or tire
 width limitations provided by law or regulation, such as KRS 189.221, KRS 189.222, and
 all other regulatory statutes relating to the provisions outlined in this section.
 
 105—5
 
 105.10.02 Hauling Within Project Limits.
 A) Grade and Drain Projects. The Department will not restrict vehicles operating
 at any phase of grade and drain construction as to any type of equipment or
 loading except as provided under Subsection 207.03.03 and as specified
 hereinafter for Hauling Over Structures.
 B) Hauling Over Structures. Inspect and examine all structures, including
 drainage structures, existing and newly constructed, to determine whether or not
 any structure has been damaged before beginning hauling. For damaged
 structures, request the Department to appraise the existing damage and grant a
 release, in writing, from liability for the damage disclosed, or otherwise stand
 liable. Repair all damage to the structure, including joints that may be incurred
 as a result of the hauling operations, at no expense to the Department. Submit
 for the Engineer’s review and approval all proposed methods to protect
 structures prior to the start of hauling.
 The Department additionally limits the operation of construction vehicles
 over structures as follows:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 
 8)
 9)
 
 obtain written approval from the Engineer before any off-highway vehicle is
 operated, empty or loaded, over a structure;
 do not exceed the design load limits or rated load limits of the structure
 based on the equipments tire size, wheel base, axle weight, and axle
 spacing, without approval from the Engineer;
 consider temporary dead loads of stored materials, stationary equipment,
 formwork/falsework, etc. when determining the load limits of the structure;
 limit the movement of off-highway construction vehicles across bridges to
 one-lane operation centrally aligned with the bridge and at intervals between
 vehicles no less than 100 feet;
 maintain bridge floors free from spilled materials, lumber, or any other
 impact producing obstruction;
 do not use an earth cushion on bridge;
 prior to hauling construction loads over a bridge, construct temporary
 approaches 100 feet in length with the 50 feet adjacent to each end of the
 bridge constructed to the finished grade elevation of the bridge. Maintain
 temporary ramps and approaches, at the direction of the Engineer, to
 minimize the impact of moving construction loads onto the highway
 structure;
 for off-highway construction vehicles on the approaches and bridges, do not
 exceed a speed of 10 mph; and
 protect from overloads, by temporary fill or by other means, culverts,
 regardless of span, pipe culverts, and other items which are covered or
 which are to be covered by fill or backfill.
 
 C) Hauling Over Pavements Within Project Limits. During the construction of
 surfaces or pavements, equip all hauling vehicles operating over the subgrade
 and base, intermediate, and surface courses with rubber tires. Ensure that all
 hauling vehicles operating over the base, intermediate, and surface courses
 conform to the axle weight and tire width limitations provided by law or
 regulation.
 Limit hauling over pavements as follows:
 1)
 2)
 
 do not allow the gross weight to exceed the posted load limit of a bridge in
 any instance; and
 comply with any decreased gross weight limits when, in the Engineer’s
 judgment, the roadway or structures would be damaged by allowing the
 posted load limit.
 
 105—6
 
 105.11 MAINTENANCE DURING CONSTRUCTION. Maintain the work during
 construction and until the Department accepts the project. Provide maintenance through
 continuous and effective work prosecuted day by day, with adequate equipment and forces
 keeping the roadway or structures in satisfactory condition at all times.
 In the case of a contract for the placing of a course upon a course or subgrade
 previously constructed, maintain the previous course or subgrade until completing the
 succeeding course.
 Include the cost of all maintenance work in the unit prices bid on the appropriate pay
 items.
 The Department will be responsible for routine roadway maintenance operations such
 as mowing, ditching, snow removal, signing, lighting and pothole patching for portions of
 the roadway that remain open to traffic and unaffected by Contractor operations. The
 Department will conduct these operations in a manner not to disturb the construction
 operations.
 Once a segment of permanent guardrail from terminal to terminal is installed in
 accordance to Contract documents and payment has been made, the Department will pay
 for damage caused by vehicular accidents at the contract unit bid prices. For segments of
 existing guardrail that are damaged due to a vehicular accident, the Department will pay to
 replace the guardrail at the contract unit bid prices or a supplemental price will be
 determined in instances where the item does not exist in the contract. Partially installed
 segments, temporary guardrail, and any guardrail damage due to contractor activities shall
 be maintained and repaired within 48 hours of damage at the Contractor’s expense.
 105.12 FINAL INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE OF WORK. The Department
 will not consider the work complete and will not make final payment until the Contractor
 clears the right-of-way, borrow pits, and all ground the Contractor occupies in connection
 with the work of all rubbish, equipment, excess materials, temporary structures, and
 weeds. Place rubbish and all waste materials of whatever nature, other than hazardous
 materials, on either public or private property in a location out of view from the roadway
 and in a manner acceptable to the Department that does not present an unsightly
 appearance. Restore in an acceptable manner all property, both public and private, that
 was damaged in the prosecution of the work. Drain all ditches and all borrow pits where
 practical, and leave all space under structures unobstructed and in such condition that drift
 will not collect and induce scouring.
 Notify the Engineer when the project is near completion. The Engineer will then advise
 in writing all work items that are unsatisfactory. When these work items are complete to
 the Engineer’s satisfaction, the Engineer will call the project complete and issue a Project
 Completion Notice. When there are seasonal limitations or other compelling situations,
 the Engineer may call the project complete without requiring correction of the
 unsatisfactory work items until weather permits or the situation is remedied. When the
 project is called complete, it is ready for the Department’s final inspection.
 Notify the Engineer when all electrical items are complete. The Engineer will then
 perform an electrical final inspection and will notify the Contractor in writing with the
 corrective work required. Electrical items will be inspected when the electrical work is
 complete and are not subject to waiting until the project as a whole has been completed.
 The Engineer will notify the Division of Traffic Operations within 3 days that all electrical
 items are complete and ready for a final inspection. A final inspection will be completed
 within 90 days after the Engineer notifies the Division of Traffic Operations of the
 electrical work completion.
 Energize all electrical items prior to notifying the Engineer that all electrical items are
 complete. Electrical items must remain operational until the Division of Traffic
 Operations has inspected and accepted the electrical portion of the project. Payment for
 the electrical service is the responsibility of the Contractor from the time the electrical
 items are energized until the Division of Traffic Operations has accepted the work.
 Complete all corrective work within 90 calendar days of receiving the original
 electrical inspection report. Notify the Engineer when all corrective work is complete. The
 
 105—7
 
 Engineer will notify the Division of Traffic Operations that the corrective work has been
 completed and the project is ready for a follow-up inspection. Upon re-inspection, if
 additional corrective work is required, complete within the same 90 calendar day
 allowance. The Department will not include time between completion of the corrective
 work and the follow up electrical inspection(s). The 90 calendar day allowance is
 cumulative regardless of the number of follow-up electrical inspections required.
 The Department will assume responsibility for the electrical service on a project once
 the Division of Traffic Operations gives final acceptance of the electrical items on the
 project. The Department will also assume routine maintenance of those items. Any
 damage done to accepted electrical work items by other Contractors shall be the
 responsibility of the Prime Contractor. The Department will not be responsible for
 repairing damage done by other contractors during the construction of the remaining
 project.
 Failure to complete the electrical corrective work within the 90 calendar day allowance
 will result in penalties assessed to the project. Penalties will be assessed at ½ the rate of
 liquidated damages established for the contract.
 The Department and other appropriate agencies, such as FHWA, will complete final
 inspections on all items of work for Formal Acceptance within 90 calendar days of the
 date of issuance of the Project Completion Notice with the exception of striping, seeding,
 other erosion control items, tree planting, and landscaping. The Department will make
 final inspections on seeding and other erosion control items according to Section 212. The
 Department will make final inspections on tree planting and landscaping as the Contract
 specifies. The Department will make individual final inspections on particular groups of
 work items such as structures, electrical, grade and drain, and surface. The Department
 may make final inspections before the project is called complete on items of work that
 have been completed. The Engineer will issue written final inspection reports for items of
 work upon completion of each final inspection. The reports will include a list of all
 uncompleted work and required corrective work.
 The Engineer will issue a
 Comprehensive Final Inspection Report that will include all inspection reports with the
 exception of striping, seeding, tree planting and landscaping. Complete all items of
 uncompleted work and all required corrective work listed in the final inspection reports
 within 90 calendar days of receiving the Engineer’s comprehensive final inspection report.
 When the specified seasonal or temperature limitations prohibit the Contractor from
 performing the work, complete the work within 90 calendar days after the date the
 Engineer directs. When the final inspection report is received apart from the
 Comprehensive Final Inspection Report, corrective work for striping, seeding and other
 erosion control items, tree planting, and landscaping shall be completed within 90 calendar
 days of receiving the Engineer’s inspection report.
 When the following occur, substitute the deferral date for the date of the Engineer’s
 comprehensive final inspection report when determining the above time limits for
 completion of uncompleted work and corrective work:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 the Contract specifies deferral of payment,
 the project is complete before the date the Department can make payment (deferral
 date), and
 the deferral date is later than the date of the Engineer’s comprehensive final
 inspection report.
 
 When applicable, submit required as-built drawings, project documentation, and
 required information on materials incorporated into the project. Consider them as
 uncompleted work or required corrective work.
 If there is a dispute regarding any of the items listed as uncompleted work or required
 corrective work on any of the final inspection reports, submit in writing a letter of dispute
 to the Engineer within 30 days of receipt of the report. The Department will respond back
 in writing to the letter of dispute within 21 days. If there is still a dispute, proceed
 
 105—8
 
 according to Subsection 105.13. When the dispute does not apply to all items of work in
 the report, complete the items not in dispute as specified herein.
 The Department will assess liquidated damages according to Subsection 108.09 for
 failure to complete the required work items within the specified time period. After 30
 days of liquidated damages, the Department may proceed according to Subsections 102.04
 and 108.10.
 When all uncompleted work and required corrective work is finished, the Department
 will make Formal Acceptance of the project and take responsibility for the project, subject
 to Section 107.14. Formal Acceptance is effective as of the date all corrective work was
 completed. If there are no uncompleted work items or required corrective work listed on
 any of the final inspection reports, the Department will make Formal Acceptance as of the
 project completion date.
 105.13 CLAIMS RESOLUTION PROCESS. The Engineer and Contractor should
 attempt to resolve project disputes as they arise. When project issues remain unresolved,
 contract parties may take the following course of action. The Kentucky Administrative
 Regulations (KAR 603 2:015 Sections 9 & 10) and Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS
 13B.140) mandate the process for resolving project claims.
 The Contractor must notify the Engineer of the intent to file a claim by submitting
 form TC 63-32, “Notice of Changed Condition/Disagreement” to initiate the claims
 process. Form TC 63-32 must be submitted to the Engineer within 10 days of the date that
 the Contractor knew of or should have known of the events causing the claim. If the claim
 is for extra work as defined by subsection 104.03, submit TC 63-32 prior to beginning the
 disputed work. If the TC 63-32 is not received as required or if it is received after the 10day deadline, the Cabinet will not consider a claim.
 The Engineer will respond to the Contractor notifying them of the receipt of notice of
 the claim by submitting form TC63-33, “Acknowledgement of Notice of Changed
 Condition/Disagreement,” to the Contractor. The Engineer will send this form within 7
 days of receiving form TC 63-32.
 Once the proper forms are submitted for the particular work involved in the claim, the
 Contractor must complete the work as the contract documents and Engineer direct. Both
 parties should carefully track this work and associated costs according to Subsection
 109.04. The Contractor’s compliance with this provision and the Engineer’s accounting
 of the costs does not validate the claim. When the Engineer determines a claim is justified,
 the Department will pay for it as Extra Work as provided in Subsection 104.03. This
 provision does not establish a claim contrary to the terms of Subsection 104.02.
 Submission of the claim will proceed in one of the following methods:
 1.
 
 2.
 
 3.
 
 When the claim involves extra work, submit a report detailing the dollar amount
 of the claim, the basis of the claim, and any supporting documentation to the
 Engineer no later than 30 days after the receipt of form TC 63-44, “Final
 Inspection and Formal Acceptance Report of Completed Construction.”
 When the claim involves final quantities and payments, submit a report detailing
 the dollar amount of the claim, the basis of the claim, and any supporting
 documentation to the Engineer no later than 60 days after receipt of form TC 6334, “Final Release,” as sent by the Department.
 When the claim involves a delay, submit a report detailing the dollar and time
 amount of the claim, the basis of the claim, an as-built schedule compared with
 the as-bid schedule indicating the delay or delays, a description detailing the
 responsible party and actions causing the delay, and any supporting
 documentation to the Engineer no later than 30 days after the receipt of form TC
 63-44, “Final Inspection and Formal Acceptance Report of Completed
 Construction.” If the Contractor did not submit an as-bid schedule at the Pre-
 
 105—9
 
 Construction Meeting or a written narrative in accordance with Subsection
 108.02, the Cabinet will not consider the claim for delay.
 Upon the submission of the claim materials by the Contractor, the Engineer and
 District T.E.B.M. will have 60 days to attempt to settle the claim with the Contractor. If
 the claim is not settled, the District will submit it to the Director of the Division of
 Construction who will have 90 days to make a final determination.
 Prior to making the final determination, Director will hold an informal conference
 with the Contractor for the purpose of reaching a resolution to the claim or identifying
 issues needing resolution. If the conference is unsuccessful, the Director will notify the
 Contractor of the Cabinet’s decision (the final determination) and the Contractor’s right to
 a hearing according to the KAR 603 2.015 Section 10.
 Should the Engineer or Director fail to meet the previously mentioned deadlines, their
 inaction indicates a denial of the claim. Should the Director fail to submit a final decision
 within the deadline stipulated previously, the Cabinet will bear the costs associated with
 the hearing officer should such an event occur.
 Upon a written agreement of both parties, the claim could be mediated through a
 formal nonbinding mediation with a mutually agreed upon mediator. The parties will
 equally share the costs associated with this action. If either party terminates the
 mediation, the Contractor may still request a hearing according to KRS Chapter 13B and
 has 30 days from the notice of termination of the mediation to make such a request.
 If the Contractor wishes to request a hearing, they must do so within 30 days of the
 notification of the Cabinet’s final decision and should be in accordance with KRS Chapter
 13B. The previous Administrative Claims Process must be exhausted prior the Contractor
 requesting an Administrative Hearing.
 The Contractor may choose to forego the KRS Chapter 13B Administrative Hearing
 and may at any time file a lawsuit with the Franklin County Circuit Court in Frankfort,
 Kentucky.
 
 105—10
 
 SECTION 106  CONTROL OF MATERIALS
 106.01 SOURCE OF SUPPLY AND MATERIALS REQUIREMENTS. Provide
 materials that conform to all requirements of the Contract. At the Department’s option,
 the Engineer may approve the materials at the source of supply before delivery is started.
 When requested by the Engineer, submit representative samples of the materials intended
 for use in the work for the Engineer to examine and test according to Subsection 106.02.
 The Department may inspect or test all materials at any time during their preparation,
 storage, and use. If the Department determines that previously approved materials from
 any source are not uniform and satisfactory or that the product from any source proves
 unacceptable, cease operations. Provide acceptable material and resume operations. Do
 not use material which, after approval, has in any way become unfit for use. Use only new
 materials.
 106.02 SAMPLES, TESTS, AND CITED SPECIFICATIONS. The Department will
 bear the cost of conducting tests except as otherwise provided. The Engineer will collect
 samples at the site of work and will retain custody of the samples until delivered to the
 laboratory, to a common carrier, or to the US Postal Service. The Contractor may deliver
 to the laboratory samples that a Department employee placed in containers and sealed with
 a Department seal. The Department will not accept for testing any samples submitted in
 any other manner. When requested, give the Engineer assistance in obtaining samples.
 Perform, or ensure that the material producer performs, all testing necessary for
 quality control and process control. The Department will sample and test to ensure the
 acceptability of the materials incorporated into the work.
 The Department will sample, test, and approve all materials in conformance with the
 Department’s Kentucky Methods and the Manual of Field Sampling and Testing Practices;
 but the Department reserves the right to sample at any point and to perform any additional
 or special tests necessary to ensure the suitability of the material for its intended use. The
 Department may charge the supplier or Contractor for the cost of any additional test or
 inspection of unacceptable material.
 The Department will bear only the costs of normal acceptance testing of materials
 actually used in the work. Show good faith and request sampling of only those sources
 from which material will be furnished for the project. Do not use Department sampling
 and testing to investigate various potential materials sources for informational purposes.
 When the Contractor submits samples from or requests sampling of materials sources that
 are not used, the Department may charge the Contractor for the cost of sampling and
 testing the source.
 Bear the cost of special investigations or tests beyond the normal acceptance testing,
 which are required to determine the degree of acceptability of finished work that
 incorporates materials not conforming to the Contract. This provision applies to materials
 on which testing is not normally completed until after their incorporation into the work.
 This provision is not a means to use materials that are previously tested and rejected prior
 to use. The Department or a Department approved commercial testing laboratory will
 perform these tests and investigations.
 Whenever reference is made to the standards of AASHTO, ASTM, Federal
 Specifications, or standards promulgated by other recognized societies or organizations,
 the current specification at the date of the bid letting is applicable.
 When a sieve number is designated in these Specifications, use sieves that conform to
 AASHTO M 92.
 Fabricate, purchase, or otherwise furnish any special equipment necessary to obtain
 samples when the Contract requires.
 106.03
 
 PLANT INSPECTION.
 
 106.03.01 General. The Engineer may undertake the inspection of materials at the
 source. For plant inspections, conform to the following conditions:
 
 106—1
 
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Cooperate with and assist the Engineer, and ensure that the producer cooperates
 with and assists the Engineer.
 Provide the Engineer full entry at all times to such parts of the plant as may
 concern the manufacture or production of the materials being furnished.
 For tests performed at the source of supply or other locations for the convenience
 of the Contractor, the Engineer may require the Contractor to furnish a suitable
 laboratory and the necessary testing equipment.
 Provide and maintain adequate safety measures, according to Subsection
 107.01.01.
 
 The Department reserves the right to retest all materials that are tested at the source of
 supply, after delivery and prior to their incorporation into the work. The Department
 reserves the right to reject all retested materials that fail to conform to the requirements of
 the Contract.
 106.03.02 Field Laboratory. Provide a field laboratory at the site of asphalt plants,
 and the site of mixing or batching concrete. Locate the field laboratory conveniently near
 the plant and conform to the applicable requirements of Subsection 401.02.01 A). Include
 a supply of water when it is required to perform the necessary testing. Provide this field
 laboratory for the exclusive use of the Engineer, the technicians employed by the
 Contractor, or the material producer, to perform testing for quality control and process
 control.
 At material or product sources other than those listed above, the Engineer will
 determine if the field laboratory will be required for proper testing and inspection of the
 material or product.
 106.04 BUY AMERICA REQUIREMENT. Follow the “Buy America” provisions as
 required by Title 23 Code of Federal Regulations § 635.410. Except as expressly provided
 herein all manufacturing processes of steel or iron materials including but not limited to
 structural steel, guardrail materials, corrugated steel, culvert pipe, structural plate,
 prestressing strands, and steel reinforcing bars shall occur in the United States of America,
 including the application of:
 • Coating,
 • Galvanizing,
 • Painting, and
 • Other coating that protects or enhances the value of steel or iron products.
 The following are exempt, unless processed or refined to include substantial amounts of
 steel or iron material, and may be used regardless of source in the domestic manufacturing
 process for steel or iron material:
 • Pig iron,
 • Processed, pelletized, and reduced iron ore material, or
 • Processed alloys.
 
 The Contractor shall submit a certification stating that all manufacturing processes
 involved with the production of steel or iron materials occurred in the United States.
 Produce, mill, fabricate, and manufacture in the United States of America all
 aluminum components of bridges, tunnels, and large sign support systems, for which
 either shop fabrication, shop inspection, or certified mill test reports are required as the
 basis of acceptance by the Department.
 Use foreign materials only under the following conditions:
 
 106—2
 
 1) When the materials are not permanently incorporated into the project; or
 2) When the delivered cost of such materials used does not exceed 0.1 percent
 of the total Contract amount or $2,500.00, whichever is greater.
 The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer the origin and value of any foreign material
 used.
 106.05 CERTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE. The Engineer may allow use prior to
 sampling and testing of certain materials accompanied by Certificates of Compliance
 stating that such materials fully comply with the requirements of the Contract. Deliver
 each lot of such materials to the work site with a Certificate of Compliance that is signed
 by an authorized agent of the testing agency and that clearly identifies the lot. The
 Engineer may sample and test materials used on the basis of Certificates of Compliance at
 any time, and when such materials fail to conform to the Contract, the Engineer will reject
 them, whether in place or not.
 The Engineer will determine the form and distribution of Certificates of Compliance.
 The Engineer reserves the right to refuse permission to use materials on the basis of
 Certificates of Compliance.
 106.06 DEFECTIVE MATERIAL. Remove materials delivered to the work site that
 fail to conform to the requirements of the Contract and dispose of them so as to prohibit
 their return to the site or incorporation into the work. If the Contractor declines or
 neglects to remove unsatisfactory material from the work site within the time that the
 Engineer directs such removal, the Department may retain all monies due or which may
 become due the Contractor on pay estimates until the Contractor removes the
 unsatisfactory material. As an alternative, the Commissioner may elect to employ the
 necessary labor to remove and dispose of the unsatisfactory materials and deduct the cost
 of same from any money due or that may become due the Contractor.
 106.07 DEPARTMENT–FURNISHED MATERIAL. Furnish all materials required
 to complete the work, except those specified as Department-furnished. The Department
 will deliver or make available Department-furnished materials at locations specified in the
 Contract. Include the cost of handling and placing all Department-furnished materials
 after they are turned over to the Contractor in the Contract price for the item incorporating
 the Department-furnished materials.
 The Department will hold the Contractor responsible for all Department-furnished
 material that is turned over to the Contractor. The Department will deduct from any
 monies due the Contractor to make good on any material shortages and deficiencies, from
 any cause whatsoever, and for any damage that may occur after such turnover, and for any
 demurrage charges.
 The Department will apply the requirements of this section to Department-furnished
 items that the Contractor is required to return to the Department, such as, but not limited
 to, traffic signals and structural steel members.
 106.08 STORAGE OF MATERIALS. Store materials to ensure preservation of their
 quality and fitness for the work. Locate stored materials to facilitate prompt inspection.
 The Contractor may use that portion of the right-of-way not required for construction of
 the roadway for storing materials, plant, and equipment. Provide any additional space
 required at no expense to the Department.
 If the Department provides partial payment for material prior to the Contractor
 incorporating them into the work, store these materials according to Subsection 109.05.01.
 106.09 LIST OF APPROVED MATERIALS. Due to the special or lengthy tests
 required for approval of certain materials, the Department maintains a List of Approved
 
 106—3
 
 Materials. Use only materials included on the List of Approved Materials at the time of
 use on the project. The Department will sample and test materials on the list after delivery
 to the project as specified or when deemed necessary, and will reject any material found
 not to conform to the Contract regardless of any prior approval.
 106.10 FIELD WELDER CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS. All field welding
 must be performed by a certified welder unless otherwise noted. Welder’s or welding
 operator’s qualifications to perform field welding shall remain effective for 2 years from
 the date of test unless:
 1)
 2)
 
 the welder or welding operator is not engaged in the welding process for which the
 welder or welding operator is qualified for a period exceeding 6 months; or
 in the judgment of the Engineer, there is reason to question the welder’s or welding
 operator’s ability.
 
 Keep records of the types of welds and dates engaged in welding within the 2-year
 period to maintain the welder’s or welding operator’s qualification. If the Contractor fails
 to maintain such records for review and use in each project’s records, the Department will
 require the welder or welding operator to be retested at any time.
 
 106—4
 
 SECTION 107  LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY
 TO PUBLIC
 107.01 LAWS TO BE OBSERVED. In all operations connected with the work, the
 Department will require strict compliance with all state, federal, and local ordinances,
 regulations, laws, and bylaws controlling or limiting in any way the actions of those
 engaged on the work, in such manner to save the Commonwealth, its agents, and
 employees harmless.
 107.01.01 Safety, Health, and Sanitation. Comply with all applicable state,
 federal, and local laws governing safety, health, and sanitation. Provide all safeguards,
 safety devices, and protective equipment and take all other actions that are reasonably
 necessary to protect the life and health of all employees and personnel on the project,
 provide for the safety of the public, and protect all property affected by the performance of
 the work covered by the Contract, and as the Engineer directs.
 As provided in KRS Chapter 338 in the Kentucky Occupational Safety and Health
 Act and in subsequent regulations and standards promulgated by the Kentucky
 Occupational Safety and Health Standards Board, do not require any personnel employed
 in performance of the Contract, including employees of subcontractors, to work in
 surroundings or under working conditions that are unsanitary, hazardous, or dangerous to
 the employee’s health and safety.
 
 Ensure that all workers exposed to construction equipment or highway traffic
 wear high visibility safety apparel that conforms to and is labeled as meeting
 Performance Class 2 or 3 of the ANSI/ISEA 107-2004 publication. Additionally, for
 nighttime work, the Department will require flaggers to wear ANSI Performance
 Class 3 apparel.
 Provide fall protection according to 29 CFR Part 1926 as adopted by Kentucky
 Administrative Regulations. Include but do not limit to the following protection: safety
 nets, safety belts, lifelines, lanyards, life vests, hand rails, temporary bridge flooring, or
 equivalent protection.
 For work over a navigable stream, unless working exclusively on a bridge deck,
 provide a manned power boat. Position the boat under personnel for rescue whenever
 work is in progress.
 107.01.02 Motor Vehicle Laws. Obey all Motor Vehicle Laws on all state, federal,
 and county roads and city streets, including roads and streets used as detours and roads
 and streets under construction beyond the limits of the proposed improvement specified in
 the Contract. Obey the specific provisions of such laws within the limits of construction
 when stated in the Contract for that particular type of construction.
 107.01.03 Water Pollution. Conform to the Department’s requirements for abating
 and minimizing water pollution as specified in Section 213.
 107.01.04 Air Pollution. Perform construction activities in a manner that prevents
 air pollution from occurring as the result of burning (where allowed), drilling, blasting,
 production of materials, hauling, or any other necessary construction operations of any
 kind. Conform to the applicable provisions of KRS Chapter 224 and regulations issued by
 the responsible state and federal agencies, and conform to regulations established by local
 governmental agencies pursuant to KRS Chapter 77.
 Apply water or other approved materials when, where, and as directed or approved by
 the Engineer in order to effectively prevent and control dust from becoming an air
 pollutant, safety hazard, or other type nuisance during the construction of a project. For
 failure to perform this item of work satisfactorily, the Department will defer the
 processing of any pay estimates due the Contractor for the project, until the work is in
 compliance.
 When dust results entirely from the performance of the work, include all costs for
 providing dust control in the pay items for the work being performed.
 
 107—1
 
 When dust is caused either partially or entirely by the traveling public, the
 Department will pay for the water at the Contract unit price per 1,000 gallons. The
 Contractor may use materials other than water to prevent and control dust caused partially
 or entirely by the traveling public, provided the Engineer approves the use of such
 materials and the Contractor furnishes and applies the materials at no expense to the
 Department.
 When the Contract designates blast cleaning concrete and steel surfaces, perform the
 blast cleaning as specified in the Contract. Choose a method allowed by the Contract that
 conforms to the air and water pollution regulations applicable to the county or city where
 the site of work is located and to the applicable safety and health regulations. Discontinue
 any method that does not consistently provide satisfactory work and conform to the above
 requirements, and replace it with an acceptable method. While blast cleaning, confine all
 debris of every type, including dirty water, resulting from the blast cleaning operation.
 Immediately and thoroughly clean debris from the blast–cleaned surfaces and all other
 areas where any escaped debris may have accumulated.
 Perform all drilling, grinding, and sawing of rock, shale, concrete, and other similar
 dust-producing materials with equipment provided with water sprays, fabric-filtered
 collection systems, or other suitable devices to prevent excessive dust from becoming
 airborne.
 Perform all burning according to Regulation 401 KAR 63:005.
 107.01.05 Highways Through National Forests and National Parks. When the
 construction of all or a portion of a project is through a National Forest, National Park, or
 other type of governmentally controlled property, perform the work according to the
 Clearing and Fire Plans stated herein, as applicable.
 The Contract will indicate the portion of a project that is within a National Forest,
 National Park, or other governmentally controlled property. The Contractor is responsible
 for determining the extent to which this subsection is applicable to a specific project.
 A) Clearing Plans. Perform the clearing operation according to the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Plainly mark the boundaries of the clearing limits specified in the Plans or
 established by the Engineer prior to clearing.
 Do not cut or damage any residual stand of trees, shrubs, or ground cover
 outside the boundaries of the clearing limits.
 Contrary to Subsection 104.05, yard or stockpile merchantable timber
 within the clearing limits for disposition by the governmental agency in
 charge of the forest or other type property.
 Dispose of logs, brush, limbs, stumps, and all other undesirable materials by
 burning, chipping, or hauling to approved dumps or waste areas. Perform
 burning as prescribed in the Fire Plan.
 
 B) Fire Plan. The term Forest Officer-in-Charge means the officer or employee of
 the U.S. Forest Service designated by the Forest Supervisor to supervise burning
 and fire precautions on the project. The Forest Officer-in-Charge will be the
 District Ranger, or his designated representative.
 Comply with all Kentucky State Fire Laws and the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 Do not perform burning without written permission from the Forest
 Officer-in-Charge. The Forest Officer-in-Charge will stipulate the hours for
 burning and the time to extinguish all fires.
 Prior to beginning any burning, submit to the Forest Officer-in-Charge a
 burning plan stating the intended burning times and dates. Prior to
 beginning any burning, notify the Forest Officer-in-Charge.
 Maintain an on-site representative authorized to receive and carry out all
 instructions issued by the Forest Officer-in-Charge with regard to the
 burning and fire precautions.
 
 107—2
 
 4)
 
 At all times when burning is in progress, maintain a sufficient number of
 personnel to control the fires. Attend to all fires at all times.
 5) Maintain adequate fire tools on the project at all times when burning is in
 progress, and store the tools in sealed tool boxes clearly marked “FOR FIRE
 ONLY”. The US Forest Service will provide these boxes, and the Forest
 Officer-in-Charge will specify the location to place each box. Keep each
 box as near the burning as practical, and never more than 1/8 mile from the
 burning. Move the fire tools along the job as the burning operation
 progresses. Maintain the fire tools ready for fire-fighting at all times, and
 return the tools to the U.S. Forest Service in serviceable condition after
 completing the burning operations.
 6) Provide a satisfactory water pump with 500 feet of one-inch or 1 1/2-inch
 hose and a minimum of 300 gallons of available water.
 7) Provide adequate spark arresters acceptable to the Forest Officer-in-Charge
 for all steam and internal combustion engines, including tractors, trucks,
 power rollers, power shovels, and chain saws. Confine the use of welding
 equipment, cutting torches, and similar equipment to an area cleared of all
 vegetation, leaves, and debris. Do not refuel power saws while hot. Refuel
 power saws only on a roadway or other cleared area.
 8) Remove all flammable material for a distance of no less than 500 feet from
 brush or debris to be burned.
 9) Prohibit smoking at such times as the Forest Officer-in-Charge deems
 necessary as a precautionary measure. At such times, allow smoking only
 in designated places cleared of debris, leaves, or other flammable material
 and approved by the Forest Officer-in-Charge.
 10) The Contractor shall bear full responsibility (monetary or otherwise) for all
 fires resulting from his operations.
 11) Notify the Forest Officer-in-Charge immediately in the event of escape of
 any fire, and act immediately to control the fire.
 The Forest
 Officer-in-Charge may, at his discretion, take charge of the fire control
 operations. Provide the Forest Officer-in-Charge with sufficient personnel,
 tools, and equipment as the Forest Officer-in-Charge deems necessary to
 control any fire caused by the project activities. The Contractor’s actions in
 this regard shall not minimize the liability of the Contractor for damages
 and for the cost of controlling the fire.
 C) Measurement and Payment. The Department will not measure or pay for any
 work required by this Subsection. The Department considers this work as
 incidental to other items in the Contract.
 107.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY AND UTILITIES. The Department will make every effort
 to provide all necessary right-of-way and to clear all utility facilities on each project, but
 when the right of entry is lawfully withdrawn or invalidated, or when because of some
 other unforeseen reason either the right-of-way or the right of entry is obstructed resulting
 in delays, the Engineer may extend the Contract because of these delays, according to
 Subsection 108.07.
 107.03 LABOR REQUIREMENTS. Comply with all state and federal labor laws and
 with the wage requirements specified in the Contract. The Department will set forth these
 requirements in the Contract. Do not discriminate against any worker because of race,
 creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, age, or handicap.
 107.04 PERMITS, LICENSES, TAXES. Procure all permits, licenses, inspections,
 and memberships, pay all charges, fees, and taxes, and give all notices necessary and
 incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the work. When any portion of the project
 is located in an Enterprise Zone as defined in KRS 154, Subchapter 45, the Department
 will not seek an exemption from sales and use tax provided for in KRS Chapter 139.
 
 107—3
 
 Accordingly, the Department will not execute any certificates of exemption for the
 purchase of building materials or any other tangible personal property to be incorporated
 into the project.
 107.05 PATENTED DEVICES, MATERIALS, AND PROCESSES. When using
 any design, device, material, or process covered by letters of patent or copyright, provide
 for such use by suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner. The Contractor and
 the Surety shall indemnify and save harmless the Commonwealth, any affected third party,
 or political subdivision from any and all claims for infringement by reason of the use of
 any such patented design, device, material, or process, or any trademark or copyright, and
 shall indemnify the Commonwealth for any costs, expenses, and damages which it may be
 obliged to pay by reason of an infringement, at any time during the prosecution or after the
 completion of the work. The use of such designs, devices, materials, or processes on
 Federal aid projects must also be in compliance with FHWA’s proprietary item policy.
 107.06 RESTORATION OF SURFACES OPENED BY PERMIT. Do not allow any
 openings to be made in any surface or pavement except with the written permission of the
 Department. If the Department grants an encroachment permit to any person or
 corporation resulting in the need for an opening in the surface or pavement, perform
 necessary repair work at the opening as the Engineer directs and at the expense of the
 party to whom the permit was granted.
 107.07 FEDERAL AID PARTICIPATION.
 When the Federal Government
 participates in the cost of the work covered by the Contract, proceed with the work under
 the supervision of the Commonwealth, but subject to the inspection and approval of the
 proper officials of the Federal Government and according to the applicable federal
 statutes, rules and regulations.
 The Federal Government’s inspection will not make the Federal Government a party
 to this Contract and will not interfere with the rights of either party under this Contract.
 107.08 PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND SAFETY. Store materials and conduct work
 to cause the minimum necessary obstruction to the traveling public.
 For roads under construction that are used by the traveling public, maintain the
 roadbed, subgrade, or newly laid surface in a condition that the public can travel over in
 comfort and safety. Whenever the alignment of the new roadway and the grade line
 specified in the Plans or as established by the Engineer require any excavation or the
 construction of an embankment on any part of the existing traveled road, perform the work
 through completion with continuous, successive operations as quickly as practical, and
 maintain the completed work in a smooth and acceptable condition. Maintain open,
 passable sections where the old road and the new road coincide with as little
 inconvenience to the traveling public as possible. Do not close any sections of the road
 without first obtaining the Engineer’s written permission.
 The Contractor is responsible for accidents that may have been caused by poor
 design, improper signing, poor maintenance or other deficiencies associated with
 temporary crossings.
 107.09 RAILWAY-HIGHWAY PROVISIONS. When the Plans require hauling
 materials across the tracks of any railway, the Department will arrange with the railway
 company for permission for the Contractor to cross the railway right-of-way and tracks,
 provided that the Contractor executes a license agreement satisfactory to the railway
 company and agrees to reimburse the railway company for all costs associated with
 providing and removing temporary grade crossings, and for all costs of other work or
 items the railway company deems necessary for protection of its property and operations.
 When the Contractor desires railway crossings for his convenience, the Contractor shall
 make his own arrangements for the use of such crossings.
 Perform all work on the railway right-of-way at times and in a manner to not
 
 107—4
 
 unnecessarily interfere with the movement of trains or traffic upon the track of the railway
 company, and according to all other requirements of the Contract. Take all precautions to
 avoid accidents, damage, delays or interference with the railway company’s trains or other
 property.
 When work includes construction, maintenance, or demolition of a railroad bridge,
 conform to the personnel safety rules for bridge workers. These rules are consistent with
 existing OSHA regulations, but the FRA will be the enforcement agency. The rules are
 published in the June 24, 1992 Federal Register.
 107.10 CONSTRUCTION OVER OR ADJACENT TO NAVIGABLE WATERS.
 Conduct all work over, on, or adjacent to navigable waters in a manner that does not
 interfere with the free navigation of the waterway and does not impair the existing
 navigable depths except as allowed by permit issued by either the US Coast Guard or the
 US Army Corps of Engineers.
 107.11 USE OF EXPLOSIVES. Comply with Federal, State, and local regulations on
 the purchase, transportation, storage, and use of explosive material. Regulations include
 but are not limited to the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 
 KRS 351.310 through 351.9901.
 805 KAR 4:005 through 4:165
 Applicable rules and regulations issued by the Office of Mine Safety and
 Licensing.
 Safety and health. OSHA, 29 CFR Part 1926, Subpart U.
 Storage, security, and accountability. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and
 Firearms (BATF), 27 CFR Part 181.
 Shipment. DOT, 49 CFR Parts 171-179, 390-397.
 National Park Service regulations. For projects in National Parks, also
 comply with NPS Director’s Order #65, Explosives Use and Blasting
 Safety.
 
 Submit a general blasting plan for acceptance at least 30 days before drilling
 operations begin. Include, as a minimum, the working procedures and safety precautions
 for storing, transporting, handling, detonating explosives, and addressing misfires on the
 project. Specifically address how traffic will be impacted and what procedures and plans
 are in place to limit and address accident occurrence.
 Notify each property owner and public utility company having structures or facilities
 in proximity to the site of the work of the intent to use explosives. Give such notice
 sufficiently in advance to enable those being notified to take the necessary steps to protect
 their property from injury.
 Preserve the original bearing value of rock located under proposed structure
 foundations from damage by blasting, by concussion from blasting, or by excessive
 breakage. The Contractor shall bear any increases in structure costs caused by blasting
 damage to rock under proposed foundations.
 107.12
 
 PROTECTION AND RESTORATION OF PROPERTY.
 
 107.12.01 General. Do not enter upon private property for any purpose without
 obtaining permission from the property owner.
 The Contractor is responsible for preserving all public and private property and shall
 use every precaution necessary to prevent such damage or injury. Exercise the necessary
 precautions to prevent damage to pipes, conduits, and other underground structures.
 Carefully protect from disturbance or damage all land monuments and property marks
 until the Engineer has witnessed or otherwise referenced their location, and do not remove
 them until directed.
 The Contractor is responsible for all damage or injury to property resulting from any
 act, omission, neglect, or misconduct in the Contractor’s manner or method of executing
 
 107—5
 
 the work, or due to the Contractor’s non-execution of the work, or due to defective work
 or materials.
 When or where any direct or indirect damage or injury occurs to public or private
 property by or on account of any act, omission, neglect, or misconduct in the Contractor’s
 execution, or lack of execution of the work, the Contractor shall restore, at no expense to
 the Department, such property to a condition similar or equal to that existing before such
 damage or injury was done.
 If the Contractor fails to restore such property or repair such damage or injury within
 a reasonable time, then the Department may, upon 48 hours notice, proceed to repair,
 rebuild, or otherwise restore such property, and the Department will deduct the cost
 thereof from any monies due or that may become due to the Contractor under the Contract.
 107.12.02 Preservation of Mailboxes. The Contractor is responsible for preserving
 mailboxes within the right-of-way and easements for the project. Remove and relocate
 mailboxes as necessary during construction of the project, and reinstall at their permanent
 location as soon as is practical. During construction of the project, provide access to
 mailboxes for US Postal Service vehicles at all times. Install mailboxes at both their
 temporary and final locations according to the requirements of the Department and the US
 Postal Service. When a new post is necessary for the final installation, furnish a 4-inch by
 4-inch by 7-foot treated wood post, conforming to Section 820. Install other types of posts
 conforming to the requirements of the Department and the US Postal Service when the
 post is furnished by the owner of the mailbox.
 Except for surfacing materials, perform all work necessary to preserve, remove,
 relocate, and reinstall mailboxes, and maintain access for US Postal Service vehicles, at no
 expense to the Department.
 107.13 RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGE CLAIMS.
 The Contractor shall
 indemnify and save harmless the Commonwealth, the Department, and all its officers,
 agents, and employees from all suits, actions, or claims of any character brought on
 account of any of the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 
 injuries or damages sustained by any person or property resulting from the
 Contractor’s acts;
 neglecting safeguarding the work;
 acts, omissions, neglect, or misconduct;
 claims or amounts recovered from any infringement of patent, trademark, or
 copyright; and
 claims or amounts arising or recovered under the Workers Compensation Act, or any
 other law, ordinance, order, or decree.
 
 The Department will retain money due the Contractor in amounts sufficient to cover
 the cost of such suits, actions, or claims for the use of the Commonwealth.
 By executing this Contract, the parties do not intend to create for the public or any of
 its members a third party beneficiary, or to authorize anyone not a party to the Contract, a
 suit for personal injuries or property damage.
 107.14 CONTRACTOR’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR WORK. Until the Department
 makes final written acceptance of the work, protect against injury or damage to any part of
 the work by the action of the elements, or from any other cause, whether arising from the
 execution, or from the non-execution, of the work. Rebuild, repair, and restore any
 portion of the work damaged by any of the above causes. The Contractor shall bear the
 expense of such repairs except for damages to the work due to unforeseeable causes
 beyond the control of and without fault or negligence of the Contractor, including but not
 restricted to acts of God or of the public enemy, acts of the Government, slides that the
 Engineer finds to have been unavoidable, and ordinary wear and tear on any section of the
 road that the Engineer orders opened to traffic.
 The Department may issue written encroachment permits to make openings in, along,
 
 107—6
 
 or across the road, but in such cases the individuals or organizations obtaining the permit
 shall perform the work.
 107.15 CONTRACTOR’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR UTILITY PROPERTY AND
 SERVICES. At points where the work is adjacent to the properties of utility companies
 or others to which damage from performing the work might result in considerable
 expense, loss, or inconvenience, do not start the work without first making all
 arrangements necessary to protect the adjacent property. Cooperate with the owners of
 any underground or overhead utility lines while they remove or relocate such utilities so
 that their operations progress in a reasonable manner with minimal duplication, and so that
 the services rendered by those parties is not unnecessarily interrupted.
 Use all possible care in excavating on the project to avoid damaging existing utilities,
 whether the utilities are or are not specified in the Plans. Elevations and locations of
 existing utilities specified in the Plans are approximate only. As specified in Subsection
 107.12, the Contractor is responsible for protecting and restoring existing utility property
 specified in the Plans.
 In the event that water and utility services are interrupted as a result of accidental
 breakage, or as a result of being exposed or unsupported, promptly notify the proper
 authority and cooperate with that authority to restore services. When water service is
 interrupted, perform the repair work continuously until the service is restored. Do not
 perform work around fire hydrants until the local fire authority approves the plan for
 restoring service.
 Prior to any excavation activities, comply with the requirements for Excavators in the
 Underground Facility Damage Prevention Act of 1994 which is contained in KRS 367
 Sections 1 through 10.
 107.16 PERSONAL LIABILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS. In carrying out any of
 the provisions of the Contract, or in exercising any power or authority granted to them by
 or within the scope of the Contract, the Commissioner, Engineer, or their authorized
 representatives have no liability, either personally or as officials of the Commonwealth; in
 all such matters they act solely as agents and representatives of the Commonwealth.
 107.17 NO WAIVER OF LEGAL RIGHTS. The Department is not precluded or
 estopped, by any measurement, estimate, or certificate made either before or after the
 completion and acceptance of the work and payment for the work, from showing the true
 quantity and character of the Contractor’s work and materials furnished by the Contractor,
 or from showing that any such measurement, estimate, or certificate is untrue or
 incorrectly made, or that the Contractor’s work or materials that the Contractor furnishes
 do not conform to the Contract.
 The Department is not precluded or estopped, notwithstanding any such
 measurement, estimate, or certificate and payment according thereto, from recovering
 from the Contractor and his surety such damages as it may sustain by reason of the
 Contractor’s failure to comply with the terms of the Contract. Neither the Department’s
 acceptance, or the acceptance of any representatives of the Department, nor any payment
 for or acceptance of the whole or any part of the work, nor any extension of time, nor any
 Department possession of the work operate as a waiver of any portion of the Contract or of
 any power herein reserved, or any right to damages herein provided. A waiver of any
 breach of the Contract does not operate as a waiver of any other or subsequent breach.
 The Contractor, without prejudice to the terms of the Contract, is liable to the
 Department for latent defects, fraud or such gross mistakes as may amount to fraud, and
 the Department’s rights under any warranty or guaranty.
 107.18 REQUIRED LIABILITY INSURANCE. In addition to any other forms of
 insurance or bonds required under the terms of the Contract, carry insurance of the
 following kinds and amounts:
 A) Public Liability Insurance. Furnish proof of insurance to the Department, with
 
 107—7
 
 B)
 
 C)
 
 D)
 
 E)
 
 F)
 
 respect to all construction operations, for regular Contractors’ Public Liability
 Insurance providing for a limit of no less than (amount shown in the Bid Proposal)
 dollars for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of one person, and
 subject to that limit for each person, a total limit of (amount shown in the Bid
 Proposal) dollars for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of 2 or
 more persons in any one accident.
 Property Damage Liability Insurance. Furnish proof of insurance to the
 Department, with respect to all construction operations, for regular Contractors’
 Property Damage Liability Insurance providing for a limit of no less than (amount
 shown in the Bid Proposal) dollars for all damages arising out of injury to or
 destruction of property in any one accident, and subject to that limit per accident, a
 total (or aggregate) limit of (amount shown in the Bid Proposal) dollars for all
 damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property during the policy period.
 Protective Public Liability Insurance. Furnish proof of insurance (carried in the
 Contractor’s own behalf) to the Department, with respect to all subcontractor
 construction operations, for regular Contractors’ Protective Public Liability Insurance
 providing for a limit of no less than (amount shown in the Bid Proposal) dollars for
 all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of one person, and subject to that
 limit for each person, a total limit of (amount shown in the Bid Proposal) dollars for
 all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of 2 or more persons in any one
 accident.
 Protective Property Damage Liability. Furnish proof of insurance (carried in the
 Contractor’s own behalf) to the Department, with respect to subcontractor
 construction operations, for regular Contractors’ Protective Property Damage
 Liability Insurance providing for a limit of no less than (amount shown in the Bid
 Proposal) dollars for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property in
 any one accident and, subject to that limit per accident, a total (or aggregate) limit of
 (amount shown in the Bid Proposal) dollars for all damages arising out of injury to or
 destruction of property during the policy period.
 Liability Insurance for Highway and Railroad Separation. Furnish proof of
 insurance (carried in the behalf of the Railroad Company shown in the Bid Proposal)
 to the Department, with respect to all construction operations and subcontractor
 construction operations, for Railroad Company regular Protective Public Liability
 Insurance providing for a limit of no less than (amount shown in the Bid Proposal)
 dollars for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of one person, and,
 subject to that limit for each person, a total limit of (amount shown in the Bid
 Proposal) dollars for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of 2 or
 more persons in any one accident, and regular Protective Property Damage Liability
 Insurance providing for a limit of no less than (amount shown in the Bid Proposal)
 dollars for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property in any
 accident and, subject to that limit per accident, a total (or aggregate) limit of (amount
 shown in the Bid Proposal) dollars for all damages arising out of injury to or
 destruction of property during the policy period.
 General. Carry the insurance herein before specified until all work required to be
 performed under the terms of the Contract is satisfactorily completed as evidenced by
 the Formal Acceptance by the Commonwealth. When the Contract is a joint venture,
 each party to such undertaking shall furnish proof of endorsement on any insurance
 required indicating the extension of coverage to that contract undertaking, or the joint
 venture shall provide the coverage required for the undertaking by a contract of
 insurance for that purpose. Provide insurance at no expense to the Department.
 When subletting any part of the work, provide on behalf of the subcontractors or
 ensure that when subletting the subcontractors provide similar insurance to cover
 their operations.
 
 107—8
 
 SECTION 108  PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS
 108.01 SUBCONTRACTING OF CONTRACT. Do not subcontract, sell, transfer,
 assign, or otherwise dispose of the Contract or Contracts or any portion of the Contract or
 Contracts, or of the right, title, or interest therein, without the Engineer’s written consent.
 When the Engineer gives such consent, the Engineer will allow the Contractor to
 subcontract a portion, but the Contractor must perform with his own organization work
 amounting to no less than 30 percent of the total Contract cost. The Department will not
 allow any subcontractor to exceed the percentage to be performed by the Contractor and
 will require the Contractor to maintain a supervisory role over the entire project. Do not
 allow any subcontractor to further subcontract any portion of the work without obtaining
 written consent from the Engineer. When the Engineer gives such consent, the first tier
 subcontractor may further subcontract a portion of his work not to exceed 50 percent of
 the work originally subcontracted to him by the Contractor. Do not allow any second tier
 subcontractor to subcontract any portion of the work.
 The Engineer’s written consent to subcontract, assign, or otherwise dispose of any
 portion of the Contract does not, under any circumstances, relieve the Contractor of his
 liabilities and obligations under the Contract. The Engineer will make transactions only
 with the Contractor. The Engineer will recognize subcontractors only in the similar
 capacity of employees or workers of the Contractor who are subject to the same
 requirements as to character and competence as specified in Subsection 108.06.
 108.02 PROGRESS SCHEDULE.
 Specification 108.02 applies to all Cabinet projects except the following project types:
 • Right of Way Mowing and/or Litter Removal
 • Waterborne Paint Striping
 • Projects that contain Special Provision 82
 • Projects that contain the Special Note for CPM Scheduling
 The scheduling documents are considered the Contractor’s plan of action. The
 Contractor may change their plan of action as needed. However, the Contractor must
 inform the Cabinet of deviations from the schedule, giving the Cabinet a 24-hour notice
 prior to working on items deviating from the schedule. The 24-hour notice can be reduced
 if approved by the Engineer. The Contractor should attempt to follow their schedule if
 possible and any deviations must be reflected in the next schedule update.
 Working without the submittal of a Written Narrative is violation of this specification
 and additionally voids the Contractor’s right to delay claims.
 If the Engineer deems a Preconstruction Conference necessary, submit a written
 narrative as described below at least two working days prior to the Preconstruction
 Conference. During the Preconstruction Conference, the Contractor shall make a verbal
 presentation of their progress schedule detailing their proposed progression of work,
 including the items discussed in the written narrative. If the Engineer does not deem a
 Preconstruction Conference necessary, the Contractor will submit a Written Narrative to
 the Engineer at least two working days prior to the start of work. Any submission of
 scheduling documents must be in triplicate and be accompanied by a signed statement of
 approval by the Contractor’s project superintendent/manager. The written narrative
 submitted prior to work or the Preconstruction Conference, is assumed to be the
 Contractor’s as-bid plan and may need to be revised as these conditions allow.
 These initial project schedule documents should reflect the Contractor’s schedule as
 the project was bid. Any questions that the Contractor may have that would lead to
 changes in this schedule should be discussed at the Preconstruction Conference and the
 initial schedule can be adjusted based on those discussions.
 The Department will review the schedule in general for the purpose of managing its
 employees and resources, and for conformance to the specifications, and flow of logic.
 The Department accepts no liability for determining the Contractor’s ability to meet their
 
 108—1
 
 schedule as it is Contractor’s sole responsibility to provide an accurate and feasible
 schedule. All schedule risk rests with the Contractor.
 When the Written Narrative is not received for review two working days prior to the
 preconstruction conference, or if they are not in conformance with the specifications, the
 preconstruction conference will be postponed until two working days after submission of
 an acceptable Written Narrative.
 When at the Preconstruction Conference, or anytime during the project, the Engineer
 determines that the project warrants the submittal of an Activity Bar Chart, the Contractor
 will have 30-days to submit the baseline progress schedule documents consisting of a
 Written Narrative and Activity Bar Chart. These documents should describe the schedule
 in Level 1 detail for the upcoming 45 days and at least Level 2 detail for the remainder of
 the project (the Levels of Detail are described in part D of this section). These baseline
 documents should be updated monthly, or as agreed upon by the Contractor and Engineer,
 to reflect project progress.
 The submittal of bar chart or Critical Path Method schedule does not relieve the
 Contractor’s requirement to submit a Written Narrative schedule.
 When there is no Preconstruction Conference, or when the Engineer determines that a
 Written Narrative alone will suffice for the progress scheduling documents, updates will
 occur through bi-weekly progress schedule meetings between the Contractor and
 Engineer. The format and frequency of these meetings may be adjusted only when
 mutually agreed upon by the Engineer and Contractor.
 When baseline scheduling or update scheduling documents are not submitted within
 their time limitations, or when any of the provisions within this section of the project
 specifications are not satisfied, the progress pay estimates will be held until the scheduling
 documents are presented or the outstanding provisions are satisfied. When the provisions
 of this section have not been satisfied such that two consecutive progress payments have
 been held, the Department will continue to withhold progress payments and will charge
 the Contractor a daily penalty equal to one half the project’s liquidated damages rate
 starting from the date the scheduling documents were due and continuing until the
 provisions of this section are met. Any costs associated with these scheduling
 requirements and updates are incidental to the project.
 A) Written Narrative. Submit the Written Narrative Schedule using form TC 6350 available at the Division of Construction’s website
 (http://www.transportation.ky.gov/construction/ResCenter/ResCenter.htm). The
 initial written narrative shall include, but may not be limited to the following:
 1.
 
 2.
 
 3.
 4.
 
 Provide a description that includes how the Contractor will sequence and
 stage the work, how the Contractor plans to maintain and control traffic
 being specific and detailed, and what equipment and crew sizes are planned
 to execute the work.
 Provide a list of project milestones including, if applicable, winter shutdowns, holidays, or special events. The Contractor shall describe how these
 milestones and other dates effect the prosecution of the work. Also, include
 start date and completion date milestones for the contract, each project if the
 contract entails multiple projects, each phase of work, site of work, or
 segment of work as divided in the project plans, proposal, or as subdivided
 by the Contractor.
 Provide a list of Owner responsibilities and associated timelines, including
 any submittals, shop drawings, or any other items that are to be reviewed by
 the Department.
 Discuss any known problems that the Contractor foresees including any
 utilities or railway related issues.
 
 B) Activity Bar Chart. The initial activity bar chart shall include, but is not
 limited to the following:
 
 108—2
 
 1.
 2.
 
 Display the calendar time-line on the x-axis where the minor time divisions
 will be no greater than one day.
 Display as-bid start dates and activity durations of items including but not
 limited to the activities. The project items, material fabrications, document
 approvals, or other time-sensitive items that will occur within the first 45
 calendar days of the project must be listed in Level 1 detail.
 
 C) Updates.
 1)
 
 2)
 
 3)
 
 All scheduling documentation should be updated to show progress from a
 date not more than one week prior to the submission date. The updated
 schedule documents should describe the upcoming 45 days of activities in
 Level 1 detail and the remainder of the project in at least Level 2 detail, as
 described below in Section D.
 The updated completion date based on current progress should be evident.
 In the event the progress schedule shows the project to be completed past
 the contract’s completion date, the narrative shall address how the
 Contractor plans to prosecute the work to get the project back to within the
 contract time allowed. Any float, or any time remaining between the last
 item of work and the contract completion date, will not be held against the
 Contractor. The Cabinet will not reduce the contract time because of float
 without just compensation to the Contractor.
 When it is necessary to provide a project schedule update, the updated
 narrative must contain, but may not be limited to the following items:
 •
 
 •
 •
 4)
 
 Provide updates on the items of work to include any delays or gains to
 the previously submitted scheduled items such as rain events,
 unforeseen utility delays, discrepancies in geologic data, agreements or
 change orders approved by the Cabinet, or other issues that affect the
 items of the previous submittal.
 List any changes to the maintenance of traffic as previously submitted
 and explain why the change will need to be made.
 Discuss any other issues that the Contractor foresees that may affect the
 schedule that were not listed in the previous submittal.
 
 The updated bar chart shall include, but is not limited to the following.
 •
 •
 
 Update the start dates and activity durations of items on the previously
 submitted bar chart.
 The project items, material fabrications, document approvals, or other
 time-sensitive items that will occur within the next 45 calendar days of
 the update submission must be listed in Level 1 detail.
 
 D) Levels of Detail.
 1)
 
 2)
 
 Level 1. This level of detail presents a logically flowing schedule of the
 daily activities required to complete the project. The maximum activity
 length should be 10-days unless approved by the Engineer. Locations
 and/or stations numbers should be used to further describe activities.
 Level 2. This level of detail presents the logical progression of activities
 required to complete the controlling items of work, in the time limits
 allotted in the contract documents, to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 
 108.03 PRECONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE. After Contract award, the Engineer
 may schedule a Preconstruction Conference. If the project type requires a final inspection
 by Central Office, Division of Construction, the Engineer will consult the Division of
 Construction prior waiving the right to request a Preconstruction Conference. The purpose
 
 108—3
 
 of the Preconstruction Conference is to bring the Contractor and Department together as a
 team for the project in question. Communication lines should be established and open
 discussions of project issues should be held. At the close of this conference, the
 contractual parties of the project should have a similar understanding of the project
 schedule, project issues, party responsibilities, and project goals. The discussions and
 agreements occurring at this conference should be audio recorded as well as kept in
 written format. The Engineer will keep this documentation in the project file. The written
 or audio documentation of this conference will be provided to the Contractor, and to other
 parties in attendance upon request in a timely manner.
 The Preconstruction Conference is comprised of 3 separate meetings that may be held
 concurrently or at separate times and places. These meetings include a Preconstruction
 Meeting, a Right-of-Way and Utilities Meeting, and an EEO and DBE/WBE Meeting.
 The Right-of-Way and Utilities Meeting and the EEO and DBE/WBE Meeting are
 specialty meetings and are self-explanatory. The Preconstruction Meeting should involve
 discussions of, but not be limited to, the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 8)
 9)
 10)
 11)
 12)
 13)
 14)
 
 Project information
 Project Plans & Proposal
 Designating key personnel of all parties (names of the project superintendent, the
 safety officer, the project and company EEO officers, Project Traffic
 Coordinator, and the names and telephone numbers of persons responsible for
 traffic control 24 hours per day, 7 days a week)
 Materials, suppliers, equipment (owned/rented), subcontractors, and personnel
 resources
 DBE/WBE Work (the Contractor should present a letter from each DBE/WBE
 subcontractor designating the superintendent and stating that this individual is
 not affiliated with the prime contractor)
 Contract time and Project Progress Schedule (specifically, key dates, local
 events, project milestones, Department responsible activities, work day/hour
 restrictions, maintenance of traffic, and work methods)
 Permits
 Staking (designating the Professional Engineer/Licensed Surveyor)
 Environmental issues (designating inspector and presenting BMP, seeding, and
 spill prevention plans)
 Blasting
 Waste/Borrow Sites and hauling limitations
 Public and worker safety plans
 Traffic Control Plans (traffic signing diagrams should be presented)
 Requirements for future meetings (the Contractor should hold Prepave, Prepour,
 and any other preliminary meeting the Engineer requests)
 
 It is critical that the Preconstruction Meeting involve the Contractor’s presentation of
 their proposed work plan to the Department staff in attendance. If the Contractor does not
 provide the required submissions, the Engineer may order the preconstruction conference
 suspended until such time as the Contractor furnishes them. Do not begin work until the
 preconstruction conference has been concluded. The Engineer will not allow additional
 compensation or an extension of Contract time as a result from any delays due to such as
 suspension.
 108.04 PROSECUTION OF THE WORK. Do not begin the work until receiving the
 Commissioner’s official Notice to Begin Work. After receiving notice, begin work within
 the following schedule:
 1)
 
 when the Contract stipulates Contract time in working days, begin work within 30
 calendar days of the date specified in the Notice to Begin Work, and prosecute the
 work efficiently and continuously with adequate force and equipment to completion
 within the number of days allowed;
 
 108—4
 
 2)
 
 when the Contract stipulates Contract time in calendar days, begin work after receipt
 of the Notice to Begin Work, and prosecute the work efficiently and continuously
 with adequate force and equipment to completion within the number of days allowed;
 and
 3) when the Contract specifies a fixed completion date, begin work after receipt of the
 Notice to Begin Work at such time as will enable completion of the work by the
 specified completion date.
 When awarded multiple projects, schedule the work to meet the completion
 requirements of all projects. Neither excessive workload nor coordinating multiple
 projects will be consideration for time extensions. Once work on a project has started,
 progress the work actively to completion.
 108.05 LIMITATIONS OF OPERATIONS. Limit operations so that there is not an
 unnecessarily large section of the roadway under construction at any time causing undue
 inconvenience to the traveling public. In the prosecution of the work, start operations at
 such points as the Engineer may direct. When operations have temperature or seasonal
 limitations, schedule the work to comply with any specification, manufacturer, or supplier
 requirements. When ordered by the Commissioner, open any or all sections to travel,
 whether the whole length of road is completed or not.
 108.06
 
 CHARACTER OF WORKERS, METHODS, AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 A) General. Employ, at all times, sufficient labor and equipment for prosecuting the
 work to full completion in the manner and time required by the Contract.
 Employ workers that have sufficient skill and experience to properly perform the
 work assigned to them. Employ workers engaged in special work or skilled work that
 have sufficient experience in such work and in the operation of the equipment
 required to perform all work properly and satisfactorily.
 If the Engineer judges that any person employed by the Contractor does not
 perform the work in a proper and skillful manner or is intemperate or disorderly, at
 the written request of the Engineer, the Contractor shall remove such person from the
 project and shall not employ such person again in any portion of the work without the
 approval of the Engineer. Should the Contractor fail to remove such person or
 persons as directed, or fail to furnish suitable and sufficient personnel for the proper
 prosecution of the work, the Engineer may suspend the work by written notice until
 the Contractor complies with such orders.
 Use only equipment of sufficient size and in such mechanical condition as to
 conform to the requirements of the work and to produce a satisfactory quality of
 work. Use equipment that does not harm the roadway, adjacent property, or other
 highways.
 When a weight or weight range is specified for compaction equipment, use
 equipment that has a plate or sign attached showing its weight, or minimum and
 maximum weights when applicable. In lieu of the plate or signs, the Contractor may
 weigh the equipment on scales certified by the Division of Weights and Measures
 before using the equipment on each project.
 When the methods and equipment that are used to accomplish the construction
 are not prescribed in the Contract, use any methods or equipment that will, to the
 satisfaction of the Engineer, accomplish the Contract work in a manner conforming to
 the Contract.
 B) Alternate Methods and Equipment. When the Contract specifies certain methods
 and equipment, use such methods and equipment unless the Engineer authorizes
 others. Request approval from the Engineer to use a method or type of equipment
 other than those specified in the Contract. Make the request in writing and include a
 full description of the methods and equipment proposed and an explanation of the
 reasons for desiring to make the change. If the Engineer’s approval is granted, the
 Contractor is fully responsible for producing construction work according to the
 Contract. If, after trial use of the substituted methods or equipment, the Engineer
 
 108—5
 
 determines that the work produced does not conform to the Contract, discontinue the
 use of the substitute method or equipment and complete the remaining construction
 with the specified methods and equipment. Remove the deficient work and replace it
 with work of specified quality, or take such other corrective action as the Engineer
 may direct, at no expense to the Department. The Engineer will not change the basis
 of payment or the Contract time for the construction items involved as a result of
 authorizing a change in methods or equipment.
 108.07
 
 DETERMINATION AND EXTENSION OF CONTRACT TIME.
 
 108.07.01 General. When the Engineer suspends or delays the performance of
 work, in writing, for an unreasonable period of time (not originally anticipated, customary,
 or inherent to the construction industry) and the Contractor believes that additional
 compensation or Contract time is due because of the suspension or delay, the Contractor
 shall submit to the Engineer, in writing, a request for an adjustment within 7 calendar days
 of receipt of the notice to resume work. Include the reasons and support for the
 adjustment in the request.
 If the Engineer agrees that the cost or time required for the performance of the
 Contract has increased because of the suspension and the cause of the suspension was
 beyond the control of and not the fault of the Contractor, its suppliers, or subcontractors at
 any approved tier, and not caused by weather, the Engineer will make an adjustment
 (excluding profit) and modify the Contract in writing, accordingly. The Engineer will
 notify the Contractor whether or not conditions warrant an adjustment. The Department
 will not allow any Contract adjustment if:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 the Contractor does not provide the required written notice, or
 the performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause, or
 an adjustment is provided for or excluded under any other term or condition of the
 Contract.
 
 108.07.02 Working Days. When the Contract time is specified in working days the
 Engineer will charge all working days that occur, beginning with the 31st calendar day
 following the date of the Notice to Begin Work, to the Contract even when the Contractor
 is not performing work, except that during December, January, February, and March, the
 Engineer will not charge working days to the Contract regardless of whether or not the
 Contractor is performing work. During the months when the Engineer is charging
 working days, the Engineer will furnish the Contractor biweekly statements showing the
 number of days charged for the period, the total number of days charged to the Contract
 through that date, and the number of days remaining for completion of the Contract. The
 Contractor acknowledges acceptance of, and agreement with, all bi-weekly statements
 unless the Contractor submits a written protest containing supporting evidence for a
 change within 14 calendar days of receiving the bi-weekly statement.
 The Department bases the specified Contract time on the original quantities of work
 as defined in Subsection 102.05. The Engineer will not shorten the Contract time when
 the final Contract cost is less than the original Contract cost because of net decreases in
 the quantities or the elimination of items. When the final Contract cost is greater than the
 original Contract cost because of net increases in the original quantities or the addition of
 items, the Engineer will grant an extension of the Contract time. The Engineer will
 determine the number of additional working days due for the additional work by dividing
 the value of the additional work by the value of the original Contract work and
 multiplying this ratio by the number of original Contract working days. When, however,
 the Engineer determines that the additional work is of such character, or occurs so near the
 time of completion of the project, that the Contractor requires more time to complete the
 additional work than is indicated by the working day/Contract amount ratio, the Engineer
 may extend the Contract time by as much as the anticipated number of working days
 necessary to complete the additional work. In these instances, the Engineer will establish
 
 108—6
 
 the number of allowable working days at the time the Contractor agrees to perform the
 additional work.
 The Contract may require that, before the Contractor orders or uses specific materials
 or products, the Contractor submit to the Department shop drawings, manufacturer’s
 brochures or specifications, material certifications or mill test reports, and other similar
 requirements describing each of the specific materials or products identified. When any
 such requirements are applicable, the Department considers obtaining, preparing, or
 producing that which is required, gaining the necessary review or approval by the
 Department, and obtaining delivery to the project of these materials or products as an
 essential part of the Contract. When the Engineer deems that the Contract item or job-site
 operation associated with these requirements is the controlling item or operation, the
 Engineer will charge working days without regard to conditions on the project site, until
 the Contractor delivers sufficient materials or products, or other conditions arise, which
 causes a job-site operation to become the controlling operation.
 When the Contract specifies that the Contractor wait for a period of time after
 embankment construction to achieve anticipated settlement, the Engineer will not consider
 the embankment where settlement is anticipated as the controlling item during the waiting
 period. If the Engineer determines that the controlling item or operation is delayed by the
 settlement period, the Engineer will not charge working days until the specified waiting
 period and settlement is complete. The Engineer will charge working days when work can
 begin or resume on the controlling item or operation.
 108.07.03 Calendar Days. When contract time is specified in calendar days, the
 Engineer will charge every calendar day, beginning with the calendar day following the
 date of the Notice to Begin Work, including all Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, and
 non-working days, to the Contract. The Engineer bases the Contract time on the original
 quantities of work as defined in Subsection 102.05. The Engineer will not shorten the
 Contract time when the final Contract cost is less than the original Contract cost because
 of net decreases in the quantities or the elimination of items. When the final Contract cost
 is greater than the original Contract cost because of net increases in the original quantities
 or the addition of items, the Engineer will grant an extension of the Contract time. The
 Engineer will determine the number of additional calendar days due for the additional
 work by dividing the value of the additional work by the value of the original Contract
 work and multiply this ratio by the number of original Contract calendar days. When,
 however, the Engineer determines that the additional work is of such character, or occurs
 so near the time of completion of the project, that the Contractor requires more time to
 complete the additional work than is indicated by the calendar day/Contract amount ratio,
 the Engineer may extend the Contract time by as much as the anticipated number of
 calendar days necessary to complete the additional work. In these instances, the Engineer
 will establish the number of allowable calendar days at the time the Contractor agrees to
 perform the additional work.
 The Engineer will not allow any extension of time for weather or resulting conditions,
 except for delays caused by earthquakes, tornadoes, or other similar catastrophic forces.
 108.07.04 Fixed Completion Date. When contract time is specified as a fixed
 completion date, complete all work on the project by that date regardless of the length of
 time between the Notice to Begin Work and the specified completion date.
 The Engineer bases the Contract time on the original quantities of work as defined in
 Subsection 102.05. The Engineer will not shorten the Contract time when the final
 Contract cost is less than the original Contract cost because of net decreases in the
 quantities or the elimination of items. When the final Contract cost is greater than the
 original Contract cost because of net increases in the original quantities or the addition of
 items, the Engineer will grant an extension of the Contract time. The Engineer will
 determine the length of the extension of time, in calendar days, due for the additional work
 by dividing the value of this additional work by the value of the original Contract work
 and multiply this ratio by the number of calendar days from Notice to Begin work to the
 original fixed completion date. When the Engineer determines that the additional work is
 
 108—7
 
 of such character, or occurs so near the time of completion of the project, that the
 Contractor requires more time to complete the additional work than is indicated by the
 Contract time/Contract amount ratio, the Engineer may extend the Contract time by as
 much as the anticipated number of calendar days necessary to complete the additional
 work. In these instances, the Engineer will establish the number of allowable calendar
 days at the time the Contractor agrees to perform the additional work.
 When the period between the execution of the Contract and the issuance of the Notice
 to Begin Work exceeds 30 calendar days, as provided in Subsection 103.06, the
 Department may extend the fixed completion date by the number of calendar days the
 Notice to Begin Work was withheld in excess of the 30 calendar days.
 The Engineer will not allow any extension of time for weather or resulting conditions,
 except for delays caused by earthquakes, tornadoes, or other similar catastrophic forces.
 108.08 SUSPENSION OF WORK. The Engineer may order the Contractor in writing
 to suspend, delay or interrupt all or part of the work for such period of time as the
 Engineer may determine to be appropriate for the convenience of the Commonwealth.
 If the Engineer suspends or delays the performance of all or any portion of the work
 for an unreasonable period of time (not originally anticipated, customary, or inherent to
 the construction industry) and the Contractor believes that additional compensation or
 Contract time is due as a result of such suspension or delay, the Contractor shall submit to
 the Engineer, in writing, a request for adjustment within seven calendar days of receipt of
 the notice to resume work. The request shall set forth the reasons and support for such
 adjustment.
 Upon receipt, the Engineer will evaluate the Contractor’s request. If the Engineer
 agrees that the cost and/or time requested for the performance of the Contract has
 increased as a result of such suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions
 beyond the control of and not the fault of the Contractor, subcontractors at any tier, its
 suppliers, or weather, the Engineer will make an adjustment (excluding profit) and modify
 the Contract in writing accordingly. The Engineer will notify the Contractor whether or
 not the adjustment is warranted.
 The Engineer will not allow any Contract adjustment unless the Contractor has
 submitted the request for adjustment within the prescribed time.
 The Engineer will not allow a Contract adjustment under this clause to the extent that
 the performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause, or for which
 an adjustment is provided or excluded under any other term or condition of this Contract.
 108.09 FAILURE TO COMPLETE ON TIME. For each calendar day that the
 Contractor fails to complete the work after the final Contract time allowed according to
 Subsection 108.07 for the completion of the Contract, the Department will deduct the
 applicable daily charge specified in this subsection from any money due the Contractor;
 not as a penalty, but as agreed liquidated damages. The Department will deduct daily
 charges as agreed liquidated damages for each calendar day without regard to inclement
 weather or the temperature limitations in the Contract, except that the Department will not
 deduct liquidated damages when the specified seasonal or temperature limitations prohibit
 the Contractor from performing work on the controlling item or operation. The
 Department will charge the agreed liquidated damages on a calendar day basis regardless
 of whether the Contract time is measured in calendar days, working days, or is established
 as a specified completion date contract.
 Because the prosecution of work in connection with the construction of road and
 bridge projects will inconvenience the public, obstruct traffic, and interfere with business,
 complete the work as quickly as practical. Also, the Department’s costs for the
 administration of the Contract, including inspection, engineering, supervision, and
 maintaining detours, increases with the time that the Contractor takes to execute the work.
 When the Department allows the Contractor to continue and to finish the project
 beyond the Contract time, such permission does not operate as a waiver by the Department
 of any of its rights under the Contract.
 
 108—8
 
 The Engineer may require the Contractor to perform work to fulfill the requirements
 of Subsections 212.03.03 D), 212.03.03 F), 713.03.05, and 714.03.06 after the Contract
 time has elapsed and after the Engineer has declared the project otherwise complete. The
 Department will not assess liquidated damages for this work provided that the Contractor
 completes the work within the following periods:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 complete topdressing work specified in Subsection 212.03.03 D) within 60 calendar
 days after the Engineer’s direction to begin this work; and
 complete corrective work to fulfill the seeding acceptance requirements of Subsection
 212.03.03 G) within 30 days after the Engineer’s direction to correct the seeding, or
 at a later date that the Engineer directs at the time of inspection.
 complete corrective work to fulfill the striping acceptance requirements of Subsection
 713.03.05 and 714.03.06 within 30 days after the Engineer’s direction to correct the
 striping, or at a later date that the Engineer directs at the time of inspection.
 
 When the Contractor has not completed this work within the time period allowed
 above as applicable, the Department will assess liquidated damages at 25 percent of the
 original Contract daily charge from the expiration of the time allowed above until the
 Contractor completes the specified work, except that the Department will not deduct
 liquidated damages when the specified seasonal or temperature limitations prohibit the
 Contractor from performing work on the controlling item or operation..
 The Department will apply the following schedule of agreed liquidated damages:
 Original Contract Amount
 (From)
 (To and including)
 0.00
 100,000.00
 100,000.01
 500,000.00
 500,000.01
 1,000,000.00
 1,000,000.01
 5,000,000.00
 5,000,000.01
 10,000,000.00
 10,000,000.01
 20,000,000.00
 20,000,000.01
 or more
 
 Daily Charge
 250.00
 750.00
 1,650.00
 2,400.00
 3,250.00
 4,000.00
 4,750.00
 
 108.10 DEFAULT AND TERMINATION OF CONTRACT. The Commissioner,
 after giving due notice to the Contractor and his Surety, has the authority to take the
 prosecution of the work out of the hands of the Contractor or Surety, or both, for any
 breach of the Contract that the Contractor commits, as follows:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 8)
 9)
 
 failure to begin the work under the Contract within the time specified
 failure to prosecute the work with sufficient forces, equipment, or materials to
 complete the work within the time specified
 failure to perform the work satisfactorily
 discontinuing the work before completion without the Engineer’s permission
 neglecting or refusing to remove such materials or to perform anew such work that
 the Engineer rejects as defective or unsuitable
 bankruptcy or insolvency, or committing any acts of bankruptcy or insolvency
 allowing any final judgment against him to remain unsatisfied for a period of 10
 calendar days
 making an assignment for the benefit of his creditors
 for any other reason, failing to carry on the work according to the Contract
 
 The Commissioner will give the Contractor and his Surety written notice specifying
 the delay, neglect, or default and the action required. When the Contractor or his Surety,
 within a period of 10 calendar days after such notice, fails to proceed satisfactorily in
 compliance therewith, the Commissioner then has full power and authority to take the
 work out of the hands of the Contractor or Surety, or both; to use any or all suitable
 
 108—9
 
 materials and equipment on the project; or to enter into Contract, or use such other
 methods as required to complete the work.
 Any contractor employed by the Surety to perform work on the project shall comply
 with the prequalification requirements of Subsection 102.01.
 When the Commissioner takes over the incomplete work under any of the provisions
 of this section, the Department will deduct all additional costs and damages, and the costs
 and charges of completing the same from monies due or to become due the Contractor;
 and when the total of such damages, costs, and charges exceeds the balance of the
 Contract price that would be payable to the Contractor had he completed the work, then
 the Contractor and Surety shall, on demand, pay to the Department the amount of such
 excess.
 108.11 EMERGENCY DEFERMENT OR TERMINATION OF CONTRACT.
 When a national emergency exists, by reason of war conditions involving the US; by
 reason of orders of the US Government or its duly authorized agencies; or by Executive
 Order with respect to the prosecution of war or to national defense; and such emergency,
 upon a finding by the Department, creates a shortage of materials, labor, or equipment that
 prevents the Contractor from proceeding with his contract, the Department and the
 Contractor may defer such construction in whole or in part, or the Department may
 terminate such contract, or any part thereof.
 108.11.01 Deferment. In all cases where the Department defers construction, the
 Department and the Contractor will execute a written agreement stating the terms and
 conditions of such deferment.
 108.11.02 Termination. When the Department terminates the Contract or any
 portion of the Contract, and the Contractor is released before completing all items of work
 included in the Contract, the Department will pay for the actual items of work completed.
 The Department will pay on the basis of agreed prices for the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 Items that have no unit prices included in the Contract.
 Contracts that the Department has decreased in excess of 25 percent and the
 Contract unit prices are not sufficient to equitably reimburse the Contractor for
 overhead.
 Major items where the Department has decreased the total cost of the major item
 in excess of 25 percent. A major item is defined in Subsection 101.03.
 
 The Department will not pay for any claim for anticipated profits.
 The Department may, at the Engineer’s option, purchase unused materials that the
 Contractor has obtained and that the Department has inspected, tested, and accepted, at
 such points of delivery as the Department designates and at a cost shown by receipted bills
 or other proper evidence.
 108.12 TERMINATION OF CONTRACT IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST. When
 unexpected state, federal , or local conditions of extraordinary significance occur which
 are beyond the control of both the Contractor and the Department, causing the Department
 to determine that termination of a contract will be in the public interest, the Department
 will terminate all or selected portions of the work in the Contract that remain incomplete.
 The Engineer will then determine equitable payment procedures to adequately compensate
 the Contractor for this unusual and unexpected termination of the Contract. The
 Department will compensate the Contractor for a terminated contract in an amount not
 exceeding the original total Contract amount, unless the Engineer approved change orders
 for increases prior to the occurrence of the unexpected conditions or the Engineer makes
 subsequent field measurements of authorized excavation and other such variable items that
 verify that the Contractor completed quantities in excess of the Contract quantities.
 
 108—10
 
 108.13 TERMINATION OF CONTRACTOR’S RESPONSIBILITY.
 The
 Department will consider the Contract complete when the Contractor has completed all
 work, the Commissioner has accepted the project, and the Contractor has complied with
 all obligations relative to the Contract and the bonds, except as provided in Subsection
 107.17.
 
 108—11
 
 SECTION 109  MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
 109.01
 
 MEASUREMENT OF QUANTITIES.
 
 109.01.01 General. The Engineer will measure all work completed under the
 Contract according to the English system.
 A station, when used as a definition or term of measurement, will be 100 linear feet
 measured horizontally.
 The Engineer will determine quantities of material the Contractor furnishes and work
 the Contractor performs under the Contract using measurement methods and computations
 generally recognized as conforming to good engineering practice.
 The Engineer will take longitudinal measurements for area computations of pavement
 surfaces horizontally, and make no deductions for individual fixtures having an area of
 one square meter or less. The Engineer will determine transverse measurements for area
 computations of pavement surfaces using the neat dimensions specified in the Plans or
 ordered in writing except the Department will measure JPC Pavement according to
 Subsection 501.04.
 The Engineer will measure structures according to neat lines specified in the Plans or
 as altered by the Engineer to fit field conditions.
 For all items measured by the linear foot, such as pipe culverts, guardrail,
 underdrains, etc., the Engineer will measure parallel to the base or foundation of the
 structures unless otherwise specified in the Plans.
 In computing volumes of excavation and embankments, the Engineer will use the
 average end area method or other acceptable methods. For the purpose of ascertaining the
 quantities, the Engineer will use the planimeter.
 The Engineer will specify and measure the thickness of plates and galvanized sheet
 used in the manufacture of corrugated metal pipe, metal plate pipe culverts and arches, and
 metal cribbing.
 When the Contract uses the term “ton”, it means the short ton consisting of 2,000
 pounds. A metric ton consists of 1 000 kilograms.
 The Engineer will measure asphalt materials by the gallon or ton. The Engineer will
 measure volumes at 60 °F or will make corrections to determine the volume at 60 °F,
 using ASTM D 1250 for asphalts or ASTM D 633 for tars. When the Contractor ships
 bituminous materials by truck or transport, the Engineer may use net certified weights,
 subject to correction for loss, for computing quantities. Certify weights according to the
 Department’s current procedures.
 The Engineer will measure cement by the ton.
 When the Contract uses the term “lump sum” as an item of payment it means the
 complete payment amount for the work described.
 When the Contract specifies a complete structure or structural unit (in effect, “lump
 sum” work) as the unit of measurement, the structure or structural unit will include all
 necessary fittings and accessories.
 When the Contract specifies standard manufactured items such as fence, wire, plates,
 rolled shapes, pipe, or conduit, and these items are identified by thickness or diameter, unit
 weight, section dimensions or other dimensions, such identification refers to nominal
 weights or dimensions. Unless the Department specifies more stringent tolerances, the
 Engineer will accept manufacturing tolerances established by the industries involved.
 When the Contract designates design quantities for a specific portion of the work as
 the pay quantities, the Engineer will use these as the final pay quantities for that specific
 portion of the work, unless the Engineer revises the dimensions of said portions of the
 work from those specified in the Plans. When the Engineer’s revised dimensions result in
 an increase or decrease in the quantities of such work, the Engineer will revise the final
 pay quantities accordingly.
 The Engineer will perform final measurement of only those quantities that are
 delivered, in-place, and accepted. When weights include rejected material, the Engineer
 will deduct the quantity of such rejected material from the final measurement.
 For the measurement of concrete or stone masonry, the Engineer will include only
 
 109—1
 
 that volume within the neat lines as specified in the Plans or as the Engineer has staked.
 The Engineer will use the prismoidal formula in computing the volumes of structures, or
 portions of structures, having end sections of unequal areas.
 The Engineer will measure quantities of work or materials not included herein
 according to the applicable Sections in these Standard Specifications. When not so
 specified, the Engineer will measure other quantities according to well recognized
 practices and will not consider local rules or customs.
 109.01.02 Weighing - General. Except as otherwise provided, furnish all scales.
 Provide scales that are suitable for the purposes intended and conform to the tolerances
 and specifications of the Division of Weights and Measures. Have all scales inspected to
 ascertain their accuracy whether operating at a commercial plant or operating on the
 project. Ensure that all scales are inspected, by a representative of a commercial scale
 company registered with the Division of Weights and Measures, within 3 months before
 the beginning of production, every 3 months during production, and any other time the
 Engineer deems necessary. The Engineer will accept inspection by the Division of
 Weights and Measures as a substitute for a commercial scale company inspection.
 Keep a copy or ensure that the material supplier keeps a copy of the latest report of
 inspection by the Division of Weights and Measures or commercial scale company on file
 at the scale location.
 Furnish or ensure that the material supplier furnishes all personnel necessary to
 perform weighing, including tare weighing, and to prepare all required records.
 Use properly housed truck pit-scales of an approved type that are tested, or automatic
 printing scales as specified in Subsection 109.01.03. Use scales that are accurate to within
 0.2 percent throughout their entire weighing range.
 Certify or ensure that the material supplier certifies the quantities furnished each day
 for all materials which the Department will pay for in tons.
 Complete or ensure that the material supplier completes a weight ticket for each load
 of material delivered to the project and that the weigher or plant manager signs each
 weight ticket, unless otherwise approved by the Engineer. Ensure redistribution yards
 provide the producing source of the material on the ticket.
 A) Weight Tickets. Ensure that the weigher or plant manager prepares or signs
 each weight ticket, unless otherwise approved by the Engineer.
 B) Daily Summary. Prepare or ensure that the material supplier prepares the daily
 summary, and ensure that the plant manager signs the summary certifying that
 the day’s total net weight is correct.
 C) Tare Sheet. Prepare or ensure that the material supplier prepares the daily tare
 sheet, when used, and ensure that the plant manager signs the tare sheet
 certifying that the tare data is correct.
 Provide the completed and signed daily summary and daily tare sheet to the Engineer
 on the project within 3 working days.
 When hauling material over a route passing a permanent scale installation operated
 by the Department of Vehicle Regulation (DVR), the DVR will weigh each load. Ensure
 that the driver advises the state weigher that his load is going to a Transportation Cabinet
 project, and that the driver requests a ticket. Provide this to the Department representative
 receiving the material along with the supplier’s ticket.
 At temporary locations utilizing portable scales, ensure that the trucks stop for check
 weighing when the DVR officer or the Engineer directs.
 The Engineer will select trucks on a random basis for check weighing on other
 approved scales. The Engineer may have these check weights performed on loaded trucks
 to check gross weight, or empty trucks to check tare weight, or both.
 Each time the Engineer directs a truck away from the project haul route to another
 scale, and when the check weighing indicates the accuracy of the Contractor’s or material
 supplier’s scales is acceptable, the Department will pay the agreed unit price of $2.50 per
 mile or $25.00 or each truck checked, whichever is larger, for Scale Check
 
 109—2
 
 Reimbursement.
 The Engineer will measure the distance for Scale Check Reimbursement as the total
 additional distance haul vehicles travel for acceptable scale checks based on the vehicle
 odometer to the nearest 0.1 mile. The Department will pay the agreed unit price per mile
 or per truck checked as full compensation for all costs and delays associated with the
 check weighing.
 If the check weighing or any additional checks performed by or at the Engineer’s
 direction show, that the accuracy of the Contractor’s or material supplier’s scales is not
 acceptable, the Department will not pay for any Scale Check Reimbursement, and the
 Engineer will adjust pay weights as specified below.
 The Contractor’s or material supplier’s scales are not acceptable if tare check weights
 are more than 0.4 percent plus 120 pounds greater than the initial weight, and gross check
 weights are more than 0.4 percent plus 120 pounds less than the initial weight, when
 checked at a permanent scale location. If the Engineer deems it appropriate, the Engineer
 will modify initial tare weights by the estimated fuel consumption between the initial
 weight and check weight. If the Engineer determines that the check weights are outside
 these tolerances, the Engineer will direct the Contractor to perform additional checks to
 determine if net pay weights are within specified tolerances. If the Engineer determines
 that pay weights are outside these tolerances, the Engineer will reduce, by the difference
 greater than the specified tolerance for check weighing, the net weights of all loads
 previously weighed that day and all previous days back to the latest acceptable check
 weight or the latest scale certification, or for the previous 10 working days, whichever is
 least.
 For check weights that are determined on scales with short platforms requiring split
 weights, the Department will accept check weights that are within 1.0 percent of the initial
 weight; if not, the Department will require check weights determined on a larger scale and
 apply the tolerance for check weights and adjustments specified for permanent scales.
 For check weights that are determined by DVR portable scales, the Department will
 accept check weights that are within 2.0 percent of the initial weight; if not, the
 Department will require check weights determined on a permanent scale and apply the
 tolerance for check weights and adjustments specified for permanent scales.
 When check weights that are determined on permanent scales are outside the
 specified 0.4 percent tolerance, the Department will require that the certifying firm
 immediately order the Contractor to have an approved scale company check the
 Contractor’s or material supplier’s scales. The Engineer may either suspend weighing
 operations or may allow weighing to continue with the Engineer making appropriate
 adjustments until an approved scale company has checked the scales.
 The Department will not make separate measurement or payment for work required
 by this section other than Scale Check Reimbursement. The Department considers all
 work necessary to determine the weight of materials as incidental to the Contract unit
 prices for the various items that include such materials.
 Obtain actual truck weights for all deliveries except as otherwise provided; the
 Department will accept railroad weights on aggregate deliveries of less than 10,000 tons.
 Include in the Contract unit prices for the various pay items of the project, all other
 costs in connection with furnishing, installing, certifying or testing, and maintaining
 scales; for furnishing check weights and scale house; and all other items specified in this
 Section for weighing highway and bridge construction materials for proportioning or
 payment.
 On a daily basis, weigh empty trucks used to haul material that the Department pays
 for by weight when the Engineer directs, and identify each truck with a plainly legible
 mark.
 When the Department measures a material in units of weight and the Contractor
 delivers the material in standard containers of uniform size, the Engineer may measure the
 material by counting the containers and converting the count to weights provided that the
 material supplier prints the net weight of the materials on the container and the Contractor
 provides certification to the Engineer that the net weights are accurate within the
 tolerances allowed. Dispose of, or remove from the work, all empty containers when and
 
 109—3
 
 as the Engineer directs.
 As an alternative to the specified units of measure, the Contractor may request the
 following:
 1)
 2)
 
 For material specified to be measured by volume, the Contractor may request
 that the Engineer measure the material by weight and convert the weight to
 volume for payment.
 For material specified to be measured by weight, the Contractor may request that
 the Engineer measure the material by volume and convert the volume to weight
 for payment.
 
 Obtain the Engineer’s approval, in writing, prior to implementing either of these
 alternatives. If approved, the Engineer will determine the conversion factors between the
 volume and weight measurements.
 109.01.03 Automatic Printing Scales. Use the following types of scales:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 Truck scales with an automatic printer
 Scales used for automatic batching and recording in batch plants producing
 asphalt mixtures (when surge or storage bins are not used)
 A weigh box or hopper located under a surge or storage bin
 
 Do not use belt scales for determining pay weights.
 Use only automatic printers that are an integral part of the scale equipment or the
 scale, and directly connected so that gross weights cannot be manually entered. The
 Department will allow the manual entry of truck tare weights, truck numbers, or other
 data.
 Equip all aggregate sources and hot-mix asphalt plants furnishing materials that the
 Department pays for directly by weight with automatic printing scales for determining pay
 weights. The Engineer may grant exceptions to this requirement for installations that
 normally supply a total of less than 10,000 tons of material per year to Department
 projects.
 A) Truck Tare Weights. Determine truck tare weights by weighing each truck
 once daily at random times on an approved scale. Submit a tare sheet showing
 all tare weights at the end of each working day.
 The only exceptions to this requirement are:
 1)
 2)
 
 3)
 
 When using truck scales and the capability exists, determine each truck tare
 just prior to loading each load and print it on the weight ticket. In this case,
 the Department will not require the daily tare sheet.
 When the automatic printing scales are so designed and operated that tare
 weight is not used to calculate net weight, determine the tare weight of each
 truck before that truck begins hauling. In this case, the Department will not
 require further tare weighing or the daily tare sheet.
 When all hauling is within the project limits or on the Contractor’s haul
 roads, and the automatic printing scales are designed and operated so that
 tare weight is not used to calculate net weight, determine tare weights only
 as the Engineer deems necessary to conform to Subsection 105.10.02.
 
 B) Printing. Use an automatic printer that produces a weight ticket for each load,
 in the required number of copies, and that contains all information that is shown
 on the Department’s conventional weight ticket in digital form. Ensure that the
 weight tickets for each project indicate a sequential load number for each load.
 When using the weights that are printed in conjunction with automatic batching
 at asphalt batch plants, use a system that prints the weight of each individual
 batch component, the total weight of each batch, and the total weight of all
 
 109—4
 
 batches in each truck load.
 Submit weight tickets that show truck tare and gross weight on each ticket.
 The Contractor may show weights in tons in lieu of pounds, provided that
 the Contractor shows the weight to at least 0.01 ton.
 Provide a ticket that includes the certification stating the material is to be
 used on a Department project only and space for the signature of the Department
 representative receiving the material on the project.
 C) Certification of Quantities. Certify or ensure that the material supplier certifies
 the daily quantities, and conform with the following requirements:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 
 Use automatic printing scales, and perform accuracy checks of both the
 scales and the printing system, that conform to the Contract.
 Ensure that the weigher or plant manager signs each ticket, unless otherwise
 approved by the Engineer.
 Determine the pay quantity for each day as the certified quantity, less any
 material not actually delivered to the project, and less any deductions.
 Prepare or ensure that the material supplier prepares the daily tare sheet
 (when used) and ensure that the plant manager signs the document,
 certifying that the tare data is correct.
 Submit the completed and signed daily summary and daily tare sheet to the
 Engineer within 3 working days.
 The Department reserves the right to inspect the Contractor’s (or material
 supplier’s) weighing equipment and procedures at any time, and to
 occasionally check-weigh a truck on other approved scales.
 
 D) Scale and Printer Accuracy. Use scales with a degree of accuracy that
 conforms to the Contract. Use an automatic printing system with a degree of
 accuracy that conforms to the requirements of the Division of Weights and
 Measures. Note that the requirements listed in Subsection 401.02.03 are related
 to the accuracy of the batching process in automatic batch plants, and are not
 related to weighing for determining pay quantities.
 When observed during production, ensure that the printed weight is within
 60 pounds of the weight shown on the scale display.
 E) Printer or Scale Malfunction. If the automatic printer becomes inoperative or
 is recording weights that are outside the specified accuracy tolerance, continue
 production only if weights can be read directly and produce weight tickets
 manually. However, continue manual weighing and preparing tickets manually
 only until the end of the workday in which the printer malfunction occurs.
 If the scales malfunction or are operating outside the specified accuracy
 tolerance, continue production by weighing the material on other scales that
 conform to the Contract.
 Notify the Engineer immediately of any scale or printer malfunction.
 When manually weighing or preparing tickets due to equipment
 malfunction, proceed as follows:
 1)
 
 2)
 3)
 
 Truck Tare Weights. Determine truck tare weights by weighing each truck
 once daily at random times on an approved scale. Submit a tare sheet
 showing all tare weights at the end of each working day. Prepare or ensure
 that the material supplier prepares the daily tare sheet and ensure that the
 plant manager signs the document, certifying that the tare data is correct.
 Weight Tickets. Manually weigh each load of material and issue a hand
 written ticket for each load and certify by signing each ticket.
 Daily Summary Sheet. Prepare or ensure that a summary sheet is prepared
 as follows:
 a)
 b)
 
 list all loads shipped that day
 truck number and load number for each load
 
 109—5
 
 c)
 d)
 
 net weight of each load
 total net weight shipped that day, supported by an adding machine tape
 
 The Department will accept a computer printout in lieu of the standard
 form, provided it includes a certification similar to the standard form, space
 for the signature of the plant manager, space for the checkers signature, and
 space for the Engineers signature of approval.
 If the Contractor uses equipment that is capable of calculating a
 cumulative total of net weights for each material and printing the cumulative
 total for the project on each ticket as the day progresses, with the final ticket
 showing the daily total for the project, then the Department will accept a
 daily summary without the listing of individual loads.
 4)
 
 Certification of Quantities. Certify the quantity according to Subsection
 109.01.02.
 
 109.01.04 Weighing Small Quantities. After obtaining the Engineer’s approval, the
 Contractor may certify the quantities of certain materials, in lieu of the Engineer weighing
 them. The materials, maximum daily quantities, and maximum quantities per project
 covered by this subsection are as follows.
 Item
 Aggregates
 Plant-mixed aggregate bases
 Cement-treated bases
 Asphalt Prime or Tack
 Asphalt Millings
 Asphalt Mixtures
 
 Maximum
 Daily Quantity
 100 tons
 100 tons
 50 tons
 5 tons
 100 tons
 50 tons
 
 Maximum Quantity
 Per Product
 200 tons
 200 tons
 100 tons
 20 tons
 200 tons
 100 tons
 
 109.01.05 Overloads. The Department will not pay for that portion of any load that
 exceeds the legal or authorized load limit.
 Weigh all material on approved scales. Accompany each shipment with a certified
 weight ticket.
 The Engineer may direct the Contractor to reweigh any shipment if the Engineer
 determines that the stated weight appears to be incorrect. The Engineer may direct the
 Contractor to discontinue weighing by any method and require weighing by other
 approved means at any time the Engineer discovers unsatisfactory results.
 109.02 SCOPE OF PAYMENT. Receive and accept the compensation provided for in
 the Contract as full payment for furnishing all materials and for performing all work under
 the Contract, including changes in work, materials, or Plans as provided herein, in a
 complete and acceptable manner; for all risk, loss, damage, or expense of whatever
 character arising out of the nature of the work or the prosecution thereof; and for all
 expenses incurred in consequence of the suspension or discontinuance of the work as
 specified under the Contract. The Department’s payment of any estimate does not relieve
 the Contractor of any obligation to make good any defective work or material.
 Accept the Department’s payment of the Contract unit prices for the various bid items
 of the Contract as full compensation for all labor, materials, supplies, equipment, tools,
 and all things of whatever nature required for the complete incorporation of the item into
 the work the same as though the items were to be read “In Place”.
 109.03 COMPENSATION FOR ALTERED QUANTITIES. Should the Engineer
 require any alterations in the Plans, as described in Subsections 102.05 and 104.02, that
 result in an increase or decrease in the quantities of the work, the Contractor shall accept
 the Contract unit prices for the actual quantities of work performed as payment in full,
 except as provided for by supplemental agreement and except that should any alteration
 
 109—6
 
 directly cause the loss of any work or material that the Contractor has already furnished
 under the terms of the original Contract, the Department will reimburse the Contractor for
 the actual cost of such work or of salvaging such material.
 109.04 EXTRA WORK. The Department will pay for extra work performed according
 to Subsection 104.03 at a lump sum price or at unit prices stipulated in a supplemental
 agreement; or, in lieu of such agreement, the Department may require the Contractor to
 perform such work on a force account basis.
 109.04.01 Supplemental Agreement.
 The Department may enter into a
 supplemental agreement with the Contractor to perform work which is not included in the
 original Contract, or as provided in Subsection 104.02. Both the Department and the
 Contractor will execute the supplemental agreement. An executed supplemental
 agreement immediately becomes a part of the original Contract, and is subject to all
 general and special provisions of the original Contract.
 109.04.02 Force Account Work. When the Contractor and the Department cannot
 agree to either a lump sum price or unit price for extra work, the Department may direct
 the Contractor to perform such work on a force account basis. The Department will pay
 for extra work on a force account basis as outlined hereinafter, only when all items of
 work are agreed to in writing before the Contractor begins the work.
 A) Labor. For all labor and for foremen in direct charge of the specific operations,
 the Department will pay the Contractor:
 1)
 2)
 
 3)
 
 the actual cost of wages paid, but at rates not to exceed those for comparable
 labor currently employed on the project, as the Engineer determines;
 an amount equal to the sum of the products of established labor burden
 percentages and the actual cost of wages. The amounts determined by the
 established labor burden percentages constitute full compensation for the
 cost of workers’ compensation insurance, social security taxes,
 unemployment compensation insurance, public liability insurance; and any
 other taxes or insurance which are added to labor costs; and
 an amount equal to 25 percent of the actual cost of wages and the other costs
 identified above. This amount is full compensation for office overhead and
 general superintendence.
 
 B) Materials. For all materials that the Contractor incorporates into the work and
 the Engineer accepts, the Department will pay the actual cost of such material,
 including transportation charges and sales taxes, to which the Department will
 add a sum equal to 15 percent.
 C) Equipment and Tools. For any machinery or special equipment that the
 
 Engineer has authorized for use and the Contractor has used, the Department
 will pay the rental rate stated on the rental company invoice for the actual
 agreed time and rate that such equipment is required on the work and will
 add an amount equal to 15 percent of the rental sum as full compensation for
 fuel, lubricants, and filters.
 The Department will pay for equipment that the Contractor is already using
 on the project, and which is not obtained specifically for the force account work
 based on an hourly rate. The Department will determine the hourly rate by
 taking the Blue Book monthly rental rate, adjusted for age and geographic
 region, dividing it by 176 and adding the Blue Book estimated operational cost.
 The Department will pay rental rates for equipment required to be on standby at
 one half the normal rate, excluding operational cost, and pay for standby time for
 a maximum of 8 hours per day and 40 hours per week.
 The Engineer will measure the rental of equipment by time in hours of
 actual working time and the necessary traveling time of the equipment
 within the limits of the project, unless the Engineer has ordered special
 109—7
 
 equipment in connection with force account work, in which case the
 Engineer will also include travel time and transportation to the project.
 The Department will not pay rental rates or percentages for the use of small
 tools and manual equipment.
 D) Bonds. The Department will pay an amount equal to the product of an
 established percentage and the summation of the total cost of the foregoing
 items. This amount constitutes full compensation for the Contractor’s bond
 costs.
 E) Records and Statements. Compare all records of force account work with the
 Engineer at the end of each day. Prepare all force account records on suitable
 forms that the Engineer will provide for this purpose. Sign and obtain the
 Engineer’s signature on each form. Retain one copy and provide the original to
 the Engineer at the end of each day. Certify and submit all requests for payment
 of force account work, with signed records of the costs, to the Engineer no later
 than one week before the closing date of the current pay estimate period, or other
 designated periods as directed.
 Furnish satisfactory evidence of the actual rates paid for workers
 compensation insurance, social security tax, unemployment insurance, public
 liability insurance, and bonds.
 Furnish statements, accompanied and supported by original receipted
 invoices, for all materials used, including transportation charges. When the
 Contractor does not specifically purchase materials for the force account work
 and uses materials from his stock, the Contractor shall include, in lieu of the
 original invoices, an affidavit certifying that the Contractor took such materials
 from stock, that the Contractor actually used that quantity in the force account
 work, and that the cost for which the Contractor is requesting payment represents
 his actual cost.
 F) Overhead. The Department will pay for overhead cost associated with
 administering the work, not to exceed 5 percent, when a Subcontractor performs
 the work.
 109.05 PARTIAL PAYMENTS. The Department will make partial payments biweekly as the work progresses. The Department will base the partial payments on
 estimates that the Engineer prepares of the value of the work performed, materials placed,
 and for materials delivered for which the Department allows payment.
 For each partial payment, the Department will pay 100 percent of the value computed
 from the bi-weekly estimate as due, less any previous partial payments.
 The Engineer will furnish to the Contractor a copy of each pay estimate, which will
 show in detail the amount of all quantities that the Department will pay.
 109.05.01 Materials on Hand.
 A) General. The Department will make partial payments only after the materials
 are delivered to a site that the Department owns or controls, and stored in a
 manner that protects them from theft or damage. The Engineer may require the
 Contractor to submit certified statements showing the actual cost of each
 material for which the Contractor requests partial payment and the quantity of
 material delivered.
 A storage site owned or controlled by the Department is a site on land
 owned by the Department or on land for which the Department has been granted
 a temporary easement. When a temporary easement is necessary for the storage
 site, obtain a lease for the site, and grant the Department a temporary easement at
 no charge. In such cases, obtain a lease for the duration of the Contract and
 grant a temporary easement that gives the Department full control of the site.
 The Department’s partial payments for materials on hand do not constitute
 final acceptance of those materials and do not relieve the Contractor of any
 responsibility for the loss or deterioration of the materials due to any cause.
 
 109—8
 
 Replace, at no expense to the Department, any materials lost or rejected for
 noncompliance with the Contract as a result of segregation, mixing with foreign
 materials, deterioration, or other causes. The Department will have full control
 of the disposition or use of all materials for which the Department makes partial
 payments.
 The Department will make payments only for such materials which conform
 to the Contract. The Engineer will base payments upon the quantity of materials
 stored on the closing date of the pay estimate. The Department will not pay for
 any stored material in excess of that required for the project; the maximum
 quantity the Department will pay for will be the design quantity as increased or
 decreased by approved changes. The Department will not compensate the
 Contractor for additional haul or extra handling charges.
 B) Payments. The Department may make partial payments for nonflammable and
 nonperishable materials that the Contractor will be incorporating into Contract
 items for the project, which conform to the Contract, for which the Contractor
 has documented and certified the delivered quantities, and which the Contractor
 has stockpiled and protected as required herein and as required by the Engineer.
 Upon written request from the Contractor, the Department will make partial
 payments for up to 95 percent of the Contractor’s documented cost of each
 stockpiled material when the total documented cost of all the units of the
 material is more than $10,000.00 or 3 percent of the project’s total bid price.
 Support the documented costs by copies of receipts showing the Contractor’s
 payment for the stockpiled material. Provide the receipts to the Engineer no later
 than 30 days after the Department makes payment. However, the Department
 will not allow the total amount for partial payments for the materials for a
 Contract item to be more than 75 percent of the Contract unit cost of the item
 that the Contractor is constructing with the materials.
 When the Contractor has completely erected and connected all structural
 steel, as specified in the Plans, the Department will make an additional partial
 payment. The Department will make partial payments for structural steel only
 after the Contractor completes and the Engineer approves both the fabrication
 and shop painting, and after the Engineer approves the manner of storing the
 steel. The Department will make this payment in an amount such that the total
 partial payments through the erection stage are 97 percent of the Contract price
 for structural steel. The Department will pay for the remaining 3 percent when
 the Contractor has satisfactorily completed the painting of the structural steel.
 109.06 ACCEPTANCE AND FINAL PAYMENT. Within 180 days after the
 Engineer has completed final inspection and acceptance of the work, the Engineer will
 compile a final estimate for the Contract, showing the final quantities of all work
 performed, all retained percentages, and all deductions from the final amount for
 liquidated damages and any other deductions provided for in the Contract. The Engineer
 will submit the final estimate to the Contractor for his review. Within 60 calendar days
 after receiving the final estimate, submit to the Engineer a written statement of agreement
 with the final estimate or a written statement of disagreement with the final estimate.
 Upon the Contractor’s agreement with the final estimate, or when the Contractor makes no
 acceptable statement of disagreement within the 60 calendar days provided herein, the
 Engineer will process the final estimate for payment. The Department will consider the
 Contractor’s written statement of disagreement with the final estimate acceptable only if it
 contains an item-by-item list of the items that the Contractor does not agree with and the
 reasons for disagreeing with each listed item. When the Contractor submits an acceptable
 statement of disagreement with the final estimate, the Engineer will withhold payment of
 the final estimate to determine the validity of the Contractor’s disagreement(s). After
 consideration of the Contractor’s statement, the Engineer may revise the final estimate
 according to the judgment of the validity of the Contractor’s disagreement(s).
 After the Department deducts the total amount of all previous payments, liquidated
 damages, and any other appropriate deductions, the Department will certify the amount of
 
 109—9
 
 money due the Contractor for payment to the Commonwealth as required by law. The
 Contractor’s acceptance of payment for the final quantities constitutes as a release to the
 Commonwealth and the Department.
 When the final release is sent to the Contractor shows that he has been overpaid, then
 he has 60 days to refund the overpayment or submit a written statement of disagreement
 with the estimate. Failure to make this restitution will subject the Contractor to the
 provisions of Subsection 102.04. The Department does not waive any rights to recover
 the overpayment.
 109.07 PRICE ADJUSTMENTS. Due to the fluctuating costs of petroleum products,
 the Department will adjust the compensation of specified liquid asphalt items and diesel
 fuel in contracts when contract quantity thresholds are met.
 109.07.01 Liquid Asphalt. The Department will compare the Kentucky Average
 Price Index (KAPI), for the month that the Contract is let, to the index for the month that
 the Contractor places the material on the project to determine the percent change. When
 the original contract quantity for asphalt items is equal to or greater than 3,000 tons and
 when the average price of the liquid asphalt products increases or decreases more than 5
 percent, the Department will adjust the Contractor’s compensation. The KAPI is
 calculated monthly using the average price, per ton at the terminal, from the active
 suppliers of liquid asphalt.
 Adjustable Contract Items:
 • Asphalt Curing Seal
 • Asphalt Prime Coat
 • Asphalt Mixture for Base, All Classes
 • Asphalt Mixture for Binder, All Classes
 • Asphalt Mixture for Surface, All Classes
 • Sand Asphalt Surface
 • Asphalt Open-Graded Surface
 • Asphalt Seal Coat
 • Asphalt Mixture for Leveling and Wedging
 • Asphalt Mixture for Scratch Course
 • Drainage Blanket - Type II – Asphalt
 • Stone Matrix Asphalt Base
 • Stone Matrix Asphalt Surface
 The Department will determine the price adjustment using the following formulas:
 Asphalt Price Adjustment = (Q x A/100) x (PC - PL)
 Where:
 Q = Tons of material or mixture placed each month.
 A = Percent of material or mixture that is asphalt.
 PL = KAPI for the month that the Contract is let.
 PC = KAPI for the month that the Contractor places the material or mixture.
 The job-mix formula for asphalt base, binder, and surface mixtures determines “A”,
 which is the percent of asphalt. For recycled mixtures, the Department will determine the
 adjustment for the new asphalt cement only. The Department will consider materials for
 prime and seal as 100 percent asphalt.
 
 109—10
 
 109.07.02 Fuel. The Department will adjust the Contractor’s compensation when
 the average price of diesel fuel increases or decreases more than 5 percent and the original
 Contract quantity for the item on which the fuel is consumed is equal to or greater than the
 threshold quantities listed in the following table.
 Item
 Threshold Quantity
 Fuel/Work
 Roadway Excavation
 10,000 cubic yards
 0.25
 Embankment-in-Place
 10,000 cubic yards
 0.25
 Borrow Excavation
 10,000 cubic yards
 0.25
 Lime or Cement Stabilized Roadbed
 2,000 square yards
 0.14
 DGA Base or Crushed Stone Base
 5,000 tons
 0.52
 Crushed Aggregate
 5,000 tons
 0.52
 Used for Embankment Stabilization
 Drainage Blanket,
 Cement Treated or Untreated
 5,000 tons
 0.52
 Drainage Blanket, Asphalt Treated
 5,000 tons
 2.25
 Crushed Sandstone Base (Cement Treated) 5,000 tons
 0.52
 Asphalt Mixtures for
 2.25
 Pavements or Shoulders
 3,000 tons (1)
 0.42
 PCC Pavement, Base, or Shoulders
 2,000 square yards (2)
 Structural Category Concrete, Class A,
 1.50
 AA, AAA, & A Modified
 350 cubic yards (3)
 (1)
 Total of all asphalt mixture Contract items.
 (2)
 Total of all JPC pavement, JPC shoulder, and PCC base, Contract
 items.
 (3)
 Total of all concrete items of the classes listed within the Structural
 Concrete Category .
 The Department will determine the price adjustment using the following formulas:
 Fuel Price Adjustment = Q x F x (PC - PL)
 Where:
 Q =
 F =
 PL =
 
 PC =
 
 Quantity for applicable item placed or performed that month.
 The fuel to work unit ratio for each applicable item.
 Average reseller price of diesel fuel, excluding taxes, discounts, and
 superfund line items, in the Kentucky region for the month that the Contract
 is let.
 Average reseller price of diesel fuel, excluding taxes, discounts, and
 superfund line items, in the Kentucky region for the month that the
 Contractor uses the fuel on the project.
 
 109.07.03 Payments and Deductions. When thresholds are met, the Department
 will adjust the Contractor’s compensation for each eligible pay item, paid or deducted,
 monthly.
 If later price decreases indicate that the Department made an overpayment, the
 Department will withhold the overpayment from succeeding pay estimates on the project,
 or the Contractor shall immediately refund the over payment to the Department.
 When the Contractor places materials during any month after the month that the
 Contract time (including all approved time extensions) expires, the Department will use
 the average price for the month that the Contractor places the material or the average price
 
 109—11
 
 for the last month of the Contract time; whichever is least.
 The Department will not grant a time extension for any overrun in the Contract
 amount due to payments made according to this section. The Department will not make
 any additional compensation due to adjustments made according to this section.
 The Department will adjust the Contractor’s compensation on the following months
 pay estimate and on the final pay estimate. The Department will make the final
 adjustment of the Contractor’s compensation on the final estimate for the project.
 
 109—12
 
 SECTION 110  MOBILIZATION AND DEMOBILIZATION
 110.01 MOBILIZATION. This subsection describes the requirements for mobilization
 when “Mobilization” is included in the Bid Proposal as a separate bid item.
 Perform all preparatory work and operations necessary to move personnel,
 equipment, supplies, and incidentals to the project site; to establish offices, buildings, and
 other facilities that are necessary for performing the work; and to accomplish all other
 work or operations that must be performed, including costs that must be incurred, to begin
 work on the project.
 Do not bid an amount for Mobilization that exceeds 5 percent of the sum of the total
 amounts bid for all items in the Bid Proposal, excluding Mobilization, Demobilization,
 and contingent amounts established for adjustments and incentives. The Department will
 automatically adjust any Bid Proposals that are in excess of this amount down to 5 percent
 to compare Bid Proposals and award the Contract. The Department will award a Contract
 for the actual amount bid when the amount bid for Mobilization is less than 5 percent, or
 the Department will award the Contract for the adjusted bid amount of 5 percent when the
 amount bid for Mobilization is greater than 5 percent. If any errors in unit bid prices for
 other Contract items in a Contractor’s Bid Proposal are discovered after bid opening and
 such errors reduce the total amount bid for all other items, excluding Mobilization,
 Demobilization, and contingent amounts established for adjustments and incentives, so
 that the percent bid for Mobilization is larger than 5 percent, the Department will adjust
 the amount bid for Mobilization to 5 percent of the sum of the corrected total bid amounts.
 110.02 DEMOBILIZATION.
 This subsection describes the requirements for
 demobilization when “Demobilization” is included in the Bid Proposal as a separate bid
 item.
 Perform all work and operations necessary to accomplish Final Cleaning-Up as
 specified in Subsection 104.05; to move personnel, equipment, supplies, and incidentals
 from the project site; to remove all offices, buildings, and other facilities that were
 necessary for performing the work; and to accomplish all other work that must be
 performed, including costs that must be incurred, after acceptable completion of
 construction operations on the project.
 Bid an amount for Demobilization that is a minimum of $1,000 or 1.5 percent of the sum
 of the total amounts bid for all other items in the Bid Proposal, excluding Mobilization,
 Demobilization, and contingent amounts established for adjustments and incentives. The
 Department will automatically adjust any Bid Proposal that is less than this amount up to
 $1,000 or 1.5 percent to compare Bid Proposals and award the Contract. The Department
 will award a Contract for the actual amount bid when the amount bid for demobilization
 exceeds 1.5 percent, or the Department will award the Contract for the adjusted bid
 amount when the amount bid for demobilization is less than the minimum of $1,000 or
 less than 1.5 percent of the sum of the total amounts bid for all other items in the Bid
 Proposal, excluding Mobilization, Demobilization, and contingent amounts established for
 adjustments and incentives.
 110.03 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure all work performed as part
 of Mobilization as a lump sum, when Mobilization is included in the Bid Proposal as a
 separate bid item.
 The Department will measure all work performed as part of Demobilization as a lump
 sum, when Demobilization is included in the Bid Proposal as a separate bid item.
 110.04 PAYMENT. The Department will pay for the quantities at the Contract unit
 price as follows.
 When Mobilization is included in the Bid Proposal as a separate bid item, the
 Department will make partial payments for Mobilization in 2 equal or approximately equal
 payments. The Department will make the first payment on the first pay estimate on which
 
 110—1
 
 the Contractor’s total earned value on Contract items, other than Mobilization, exceeds
 $1,000.00. The Department will make the second payment on the first pay estimate on
 which the Contractor has earned 5 percent or more of the total Contract amount for
 Contract items, other than Mobilization. The Department will make both payments
 simultaneously when these requirements are met at the same time. When Mobilization is
 not included in the Bid Proposal as a separate bid item, then the Department will consider
 all costs associated with mobilization incidental to the Contract and will make no separate
 payment for mobilization.
 When Demobilization is included in the Bid Proposal as a separate bid item, the
 Department will pay for Demobilization according to the following schedule:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 25 percent upon formal acceptance of the project
 50 percent when the final estimate is submitted to the district office
 25 percent when the final estimate is paid
 
 The Department will withhold an amount equal to $1,000 for demobilization, regardless of
 the schedule listed above. The $1,000 withheld for demobilization will be paid when the
 final estimate is paid.
 Upon request, 100 percent of Demobilization will be paid 180 calendar days after
 formal acceptance of the project, except for $1,000 withheld to be paid with the final
 estimate.
 When Demobilization is not included in the Bid Proposal as a separate bid item, then
 the Department will consider all costs associated with demobilization incidental to the
 Contract and will make no separate payment for demobilization.
 When Mobilization and Demobilization are included in the Bid Proposal as separate
 bid items, the Department will make payment under:
 Code
 2568
 2569
 
 Pay Item
 Mobilization
 Demobilization
 
 Pay Unit
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 
 110—2
 
 SECTION 111  VALUE ENGINEERING CHANGE
 PROPOSAL
 111.01 DESCRIPTION. A Value Engineering Change Proposal (VECP) is a cost
 reduction plan that is initiated, developed, and submitted by the Contractor to the
 Department for modifying the plans, specifications, or other contract requirements. These
 provisions do not apply to a proposal unless it is identified as a VECP when it is
 submitted.
 A VECP requires changes in the contract that result in savings to the Department
 without impairing essential functions and characteristics of the facility while maintaining
 and meeting all design and Cabinet policies, environmental requirements, and project
 commitments. Essential functions and characteristics include but are not limited to service
 life, reliability, economy of operation, ease of maintenance, standardized features, safety,
 satisfaction of customer needs, desired ability, and special design requirements.
 VECP’s proposing a total savings of less than $25,000 (twenty-five thousand dollars)
 will normally not be considered unless there are additional non-monetary savings to the
 Department. The Department reserves the right not to consider any VECP.
 111.02 CONCEPTUAL VALUE ENGINEERING CHANGE PROPOSAL
 (CVECP). The Contractor may submit for review a CVECP provided that it contains
 enough information to clearly define the work involved and the benefits to be realized.
 Written notification by the Department that the review has been completed and that the
 CVECP appears favorable merely indicates that the engineering and plan development
 may continue for submittal of the formal VECP and is not authorization for any
 construction work to begin. Should the Contractor continue with the development of the
 formal VECP, the Department may reject the VECP if the expected benefits are not
 realized once the formal proposal is complete. The approval of the CVECP and the
 Department’s decision to reject the formal VECP that is submitted shall be final and will
 not be subject to the provisions of Subsection 105.13.
 111.03
 
 VALUE ENGINEERING CHANGE PROPOSAL (VECP)
 
 111.03.01 Documentation. VECP’s will be processed in the same manner as
 prescribed for any other alteration of the Contract requiring a Supplemental Agreement.
 As a minimum, the following information shall be submitted by the Contractor with each
 VECP:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 4)
 
 5)
 
 A detailed description of the difference between the existing Contract
 requirements and the proposed changes and the comparative advantages and
 disadvantages of each.
 A complete set of Plans and construction details when necessary, showing
 proposed revisions to the original Contract.
 A detailed cost estimate for performing the work under the existing Contract and
 under the proposed change. Include pay items, pay units, quantities, and unit
 prices. Include in the unit prices all costs for labor, materials, supplies,
 equipment, tools, and all incidentals required for the complete incorporation of
 the option into the work. Present the net savings as the difference between the
 costs of performing the work according to the existing Contract and the costs of
 performing the work according to the proposed changes.
 A statement of the deadline for adopting the VECP in order to obtain the
 maximum cost reduction during the remainder of the Contract, noting any effect
 on the Completion Date or any specified Milestone Date(s) and any other
 schedule impacts.
 A prediction of any effects the proposed changes would have on Department
 costs other than construction, such as maintenance and operating costs and life
 cycle costs.
 
 111—1
 
 6)
 
 A statement of the effect the proposal would have on the time for completion of
 the Contract.
 
 111.03.02 Submission and Review. VECP’s submitted by the Contractor will be
 processed as expeditiously as possible; however, the Department will not be
 liable for any delay in acting upon proposals submitted. The Contractor may
 withdraw, wholly or in part, any VECP not accepted by the Department within
 the time specified in Subsection 111.03.01 (4).
 The Department will determine the acceptability of a VECP and the
 estimated net cost savings to be realized from adoption of all or any part of the
 proposal. Within 45 calendar days after receipt of the required minimum
 information, as specified in Subsection 111.03.01, the Department will review
 and provide notification of whether the VECP is accepted or rejected.
 The Department may reject a VECP for the following criteria:
 • Inconsistent with established Department policies
 • Inconsistent with project design policies or criteria
 • Corrects a contract omission or plan error
 • The project is a Design-Build project.
 The Contractor must understand the following:
 • The Contractor has no claim to additional costs or delays,
 including development costs; loss of anticipated profits; or
 increased material or labor costs if the VECP is rejected.
 • The Department has sole authority in determining the acceptance
 of any VECP.
 • The Department reserves the right to reject all unacceptable work
 resulting from an approved VECP and can require that rejected
 work be removed and re-constructed under the original contract.
 • The proposal will be disqualified if requests for additional
 information are not immediately met.
 111.03.03 Acceptance. The decision of the Department to accept or reject a
 VECP shall be final and will not be subject to the provisions of Subsection 105.13.
 The Department reserves the right not to consider any VECP. The Director of
 Construction will make the decision on the acceptance of the VECP. An informal
 meeting with the Director of Construction may be requested.
 111.03.04 Notification. The Contractor will be notified in writing of the
 Department’s decision to accept or reject each VECP submitted under these
 provisions. If a proposal is accepted in whole or in part, such acceptance will be by
 letter from the Director of Construction. If the approval is conditional, the letter will
 note those conditions. If a VECP is accepted, the Department will execute a
 Supplemental Agreement that incorporates the necessary Contract modifications. The
 Department reserves the right to include in the supplemental agreement any
 conditions it deems appropriate for consideration, approval, and implementation of
 the VECP. Perform all work according to the terms of the existing Contract until the
 Department executes a supplemental agreement.
 The Department's approval of a VECP voids any restrictions that the Contractor
 had imposed on the use or disclosure of the information that the Contractor included
 in the VECP, and the Department then has the right to use, duplicate, and disclose, in
 whole or in part, any data necessary to implement any portion of the proposal on this
 project and all other Department projects.
 111.03.05 Contr act Time. The Department will adjust the Contract completion
 time for any time savings realized by implementing a VECP. The Department may
 not provide any incentive pay for early completion days resulting from time savings
 related to an approved VECP. The Department will grant additional contract time
 when specified in the supplemental agreement.
 
 111—2
 
 111.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure the quantities for all revised
 work specified in the supplemental agreement according to Section 109.
 The Department will measure the net savings in cost by subtracting the estimated
 construction costs of the proposed and accepted option from the estimated construction
 costs in the original Contract. Third party engineering and development costs incurred by
 the Contractor and third party review costs incurred by the Department, when
 substantiated by invoice, shall be subtracted from the computed net savings of the VECP.
 111.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment directly for all completed and
 accepted revised work specified in the change order or supplemental agreement according
 to Subsection 109.04.
 The Department will make payment for 50 percent of the net savings in cost for the
 approved VECP.
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 Item Code
 10121NX
 
 Description
 Value Engineering
 
 Unit
 Dollar
 
 111—3
 
 SECTION 112  MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL OF
 TRAFFIC DURING CONSTRUCTION
 112.01 DESCRIPTION. Maintain, control, and protect vehicular, bicycle, and
 pedestrian traffic adjacent to and within the construction area.
 112.02 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT. Provide certification that all Work Zone
 Category I, II, and III Devices are compliant with NCHRP 350 or MASH 08.
 112.02.01 Channelization Devices.
 A) Traffic Cones, Drums, Barricades, Tubular Markers, Vertical Panels, and
 Object Markers. Conform to the Standard Drawings and the MUTCD.
 Regardless of the roadway type and time of day, use only 28 inch or larger cones
 and tubular markers.
 B) Temporary Concrete Barrier. Conform to Subsection 509.02.
 112.02.02 Retroreflective Material. Conform to Section 830.
 112.02.03 Lighting Devices. Conform to the MUTCD.
 112.02.04 Signs.
 A) Warning Signs. Conform to Section 830, the Standard Drawings and the
 MUTCD. Use fluorescent orange work zone sign sheeting from the
 Department’s List of Approved Materials.
 B) Low Shoulder Signs. Conform to Section 830, the Standard Drawings and the
 MUTCD. Use fluorescent orange work zone sign sheeting from the
 Department’s List of Approved Materials.
 C) Guide Signs. Conform to Section 830, the Standard Drawings and the MUTCD.
 Use Type III or Type IV sheeting from the Department’s List of Approved
 Materials.
 D) Portable Changeable Message Signs. Conform to the requirements the
 Contract specifies.
 E) Arrow Panels. Conform to the Standard Drawings and the MUTCD. Mount on
 traffic-worthy carriages that meet all applicable safety standards. Use either
 diesel powered, electric, or solar powered.
 112.02.05 Temporary Pavement Markings.
 A) Delineators. Conform to Section 830, Type A or B.
 B) Delineator Posts. Conform to Section 832.
 C) Temporary Striping.
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Paint Application Equipment. Conform to Subsection 713.02.
 Paint. Conform to Section 842.
 Drop on Glass Beads. Conform to Section 839.
 Tape. Conform to Section 831 using only new tape.
 
 D) Temporary Raised Pavement Markers, Type IVA.
 Department’s List of Approved Materials.
 
 Select from the
 
 112.02.06 Asphalt Surfacing Materials. Conform to materials requirements in
 Division 400 for the mixture the Contract specifies.
 112.02.07 Asphalt Base Materials. Conform to materials requirements in Divisions
 300 and 400 for the bases the Contract specifies.
 
 112—1
 
 112.02.08 Water for Dust Control. Conform to Section 803.
 112.02.09 Crash Cushions. Conform to the requirements the Contract specifies.
 112.02.10 Temporary Traffic Signals. Conform to the MUTCD. Furnish signals
 with lenses having a diameter of 12 inches. Furnish controllers having timing intervals and
 cycle lengths that are changeable without special tools and the following:
 A) Two Phase.
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 
 An adjustable cycle length from 40 seconds to 240 seconds in maximum 10
 second increments.
 Adjustable signal split intervals for two phases.
 Adjustable yellow clearance intervals for two phases to include the range
 from 3 seconds to 5 seconds.
 Adjustable all-red clearance intervals for two phases to include the range
 from 20 seconds to 60 seconds.
 Capability of adjusting the above interval functions by changing keys or
 pins, or by keyboard entry of the desired timing.
 Capability of adjusting the cycle length by changing a gear or by keyboard
 entry of the desired cycle length.
 
 B) Multiple Phase.
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 
 Capability of handling vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
 An adjustable cycle length from 0 to 255 seconds in one second increments.
 An adjustable signal split interval for 8 phases in a standard dual-ring
 configuration.
 An adjustable yellow clearance interval for all phases in the range of 3 to 5
 seconds.
 An adjustable all-red clearance interval in the range of 0 to 5 seconds.
 Capability of implementing a minimum of three separate timing plans.
 Capability of actuated operation.
 
 112.02.11 Truck Mounted Attenuator (TMA). Use only NCHRP 350 TL-3 or
 MASH 08 compliant devices.
 112.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 112.03.01 General Traffic Control. Maintain the portion of the project used by
 public traffic, and adequately accommodate through and local traffic. The Department’s
 intent is for the traffic control plan and devices to provide the Public a safe and
 manageable roadway. In the event the Contractor feels additional measures are necessary
 to protect the work, these shall be at the Contractor’s expense unless they are determined
 to be an omission of the Contract and added by supplemental agreement. The Department
 will be responsible for normal routine maintenance according to Subsection 105.11.
 Furnish, erect, and maintain all traffic control devices, including signs, signals,
 channelization devices, temporary pavement markings, pilot cars and other items
 necessary to maintain traffic according to the Standard Drawings, MUTCD, plans, TCP,
 and the ATSSA “Quality Standard for Work Zone Traffic Control Devices” manual
 throughout the duration of the project.
 All flaggers shall be trained in current MUTCD flagging procedures. Proof of
 training must be available for review at the Department’s request. Flagging credentials
 must be current within the last 5 years.
 The Department will specify in the Contract either to close all or a portion of the
 section of highway under construction to through traffic, or to maintain traffic through the
 
 112—2
 
 project. The Department will outline specific requirements to properly maintain and
 control traffic in a Traffic Control Plan (TCP). The TCP will include the traffic control
 scheme and phasing. The Department will consider a deviation from the TCP. Submit the
 proposed changes in the TCP to the Engineer in writing. If the Department approves the
 alternate TCP, the Engineer will remit approval to the Contractor, in writing.
 Make provisions for the timely passage of an emergency vehicle through the work
 zone. When maintaining traffic over a section of highway or a bridge, provide facilities for
 the safe movement of traffic at all times.
 Notify the Engineer before erecting traffic control devices, changing the location of
 devices in place, or beginning a traffic operation of any kind, except in case of an
 emergency. In the case of an emergency, the Engineer may direct immediate procurement
 of safety and warning devices as necessary to safeguard traffic. Notify the Engineer in
 writing a minimum of one week in advance, when it is necessary for the Department to do
 work such as detour signing outside the limits of the project.
 Place all traffic control devices starting and proceeding in the direction of the flow of
 traffic. Remove traffic control devices starting and proceeding in the direction opposite to
 the flow of traffic.
 Take responsibility for all damage caused by the failure of any traffic control device
 or person protecting it. Whenever evidence of damage is found before the job is called
 complete, the Engineer may order immediate removal and replacement of the damaged
 portion of the work.
 Remove all traffic control devices when they are not needed for the project. Take
 ownership of the devices, unless the Contract specifies otherwise.
 Do not mix traffic control devices, cones, barrels, grabber cones, etc., within the same
 project unless approved by the Engineer. Use barrels or Type II barricades for operations
 lasting more than three (3) days and for nighttime operations.
 A) Approach Roads and Intersections. Furnish, install, and maintain traffic
 control devices required on approach roads and all intersecting roadways. Install
 these devices a minimum of 1,500 feet from the construction limits of the
 project. Ensure the condition of all traffic control devices conform to the
 ATSSA “Quality Standard for Work Zone Traffic Control Devices” manual
 throughout the duration of the project. Traffic control devices include
 channelization devices, signs, and detour signs, temporary pavement markings,
 and other items necessary to maintain and control traffic in the construction
 zone.
 B) Lighting Devices. Ensure lighting devices are visible every night between
 sunset and sunrise.
 C) Route Markers. Maintain Department owned route markers and signs that will
 remain within the limits of construction.
 D) Pavement Openings. Barricade all pavement openings and other hazards.
 Provide them with warning signs that are visible at night.
 E) Low Shoulder Signing. Provide these signs where the shoulders are low or
 where traffic diverts through channels other than the normal lanes. Provide signs
 for all surfacing, resurfacing, or widening projects that require maintenance of
 traffic adjacent to shoulder construction.
 F) Signs. Completely cover existing, permanent, and temporary signs which do not
 properly apply to the current traffic phasing, and maintain the covering until the
 signs are applicable or are removed. Use only porous cloth or geotextile fabric
 for sign covers. The Department will not consider tipping over portable signs or
 turning sign faces 90 degrees as acceptable methods.
 With the Engineer, review all signing before traffic uses any lane closures,
 crossovers, diversions, or detours. Do not begin work until the Engineer has
 approved all signing. Maintain all signs in good condition, including cleaning or
 renewing the surfaces as necessary to provide clear visibility and high
 retroreflectivity at all times.
 
 112—3
 
 Place temporary signing in locations that do not obstruct the visibility of
 existing signs.
 All signs are to be single layered. Overlay placards will not be permitted.
 Unless the Engineer directs otherwise, post mount all signs intended to
 remain in place for more than 3 days.
 G) Arrow Panels. Have available one portable flashing arrow in reserve. Place the
 reserve arrow in operation if one is damaged or if there is mechanical or
 electrical failure.
 H) Temporary Traffic Signals. Construct temporary traffic signals according to
 the MUTCD, Chapter 4D and as the Contract specifies. Submit proposed
 layouts for temporary signal head placement in writing to the Engineer for
 written approval. Use a central controller using a hard wire or radio connection
 to coordinate the signal indications at all approaches of the intersection. Mount
 the signal indications according to one of the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 I)
 
 One signal indication on each side of the highway on each approach;
 Two signal indications suspended on a span wire over the highway on each
 approach; or
 One signal indication mounted on a mast arm or span wire above the
 highway with a second signal indication mounted on the right side of each
 approach.
 
 TMAs. Mount the attenuator on a support vehicle that is in close conformity to
 the one it was tested with for NCHRP compliance. Prevent shifting during
 impact. Furnish installation details to the Engineer before installing the TMA on
 the project.
 
 112.03.02 Long Term Lane Closure. A long term lane closure is defined as a lane
 closure that remains for more than 3 days and is not taken down at the end of each day’s
 work.
 112.03.03 Equipment and Traffic Control Devices Not In Use. When construction
 equipment and/or traffic control devices are not in use, place them outside the clear zone,
 beyond the ditch line, behind guardrail, or off existing right-of-way. The Engineer will
 approve these locations if they are within the existing right-of-way. The Engineer will
 designate specific areas within the right-of-way where personal vehicles may park. Move
 vehicles and construction equipment with the flow of traffic, not against the normal traffic
 flow. When entering and leaving the work zone, do not interfere with or cause hazard to
 traffic flow.
 112.03.04 Temporary Facilities or Crossings. Provide and maintain temporary
 facilities, including approaches and crossings in a safe condition. Provide and maintain
 intersections with roads, streets, trails, and entrances to businesses, parking lots,
 residences, and farms.
 Construct temporary approaches and bridges according to the Contract including all
 grading and necessary drainage.
 Construct or reconstruct diversions (by-pass detours), detours, and median crossovers
 including associated earthwork, for the handling of traffic across new pavements as
 specified in the Standard drawings, in the Plans, in the TCP or elsewhere in the Contract.
 The Department will be responsible for snow removal on these facilities.
 Obtain the Engineer’s approval for temporary facilities constructed solely to
 accommodate construction operations. When approved, construct and maintain such
 temporary facilities, including furnishing and applying surfacing and dust control
 materials.
 When temporary facilities are no longer needed, remove facilities and restore the
 area. Pave all temporary roadways intended for public traffic with asphaltic materials as
 the Contract specifies or as the Engineer directs.
 
 112—4
 
 112.03.05 Roadways Closed to Through Traffic. Obtain the Department’s
 permission before closing a roadway or limiting public traffic on the roadway.
 When a section of highway closes to through traffic, provide and maintain
 satisfactory temporary facilities for the maintenance of local traffic. Provide and maintain
 satisfactory crossings for all cross roads and cross streets kept open to traffic.
 When the Department closes the road under construction to through traffic, the
 Department will relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for maintaining the road and
 marking suitable detours for through traffic.
 112.03.06 Shoulder Edge Drop-Offs. Conform to the requirements the Contract
 specifies.
 112.03.07 Temporary Barrier Walls. Construct temporary barrier walls according
 to Subsection 509.03.
 112.03.08 Temporary Crash Cushions. Construct temporary crash cushions as the
 Contract specifies.
 112.03.09 Blasting. During blasting operations, halt traffic no more than the time
 the Contract specifies to allow the execution of the shot and for removal of rock fragments
 and debris. The Contract will also specify hours when blasting is not allowed. When
 using explosive charges, halt all traffic on either side of the impending explosion. Have
 suitable equipment at the site for removing blasted material, debris, and for cleaning the
 existing pavement and shoulder area. After all blasts, inspect the pavement for debris and
 damage that may be a hazard to traffic. Clear debris before allowing traffic to proceed on
 the affected section.
 112.03.10 Removal of Permanent Pavement Markings. Remove all permanent
 markings and raised pavement markers that do not conform to the traffic operation in use.
 Remove striping according to Section 713.03.04. Remove raised pavement markers
 according to Subsection 403.03.02.
 When the marker’s casting will conform to the final marking scheme but does not
 conform to the current traffic operation, the Department may allow lens removal in place
 of removing the entire marker. Additionally, when weather would prohibit patching for
 marker removal within 24 hours, the Department may allow lens removal until such time
 weather permits patching.
 112.03.11 Temporary Pavement Markings.
 A) Placement and Removal of Temporary Raised Pavement Markers. Place
 and remove temporary raised pavement markers when the Contract specifies.
 Install temporary pavement markers according to the manufacturer’s
 recommendations. Replace missing or damaged temporary markers within 3
 calendar days. After completion of the work, remove the markers from the job
 site, including the primer and adhesive. Take ownership of the temporary
 markers at the end of the project.
 B) Placement and Removal of Temporary Striping. Place temporary striping on
 new construction, resurfacing, pavement restoration, pavement rehabilitation and
 other projects that have existing pavement markings as the Contract specifies.
 On interstates and parkways, and other roadways approved by the State Highway
 Engineer, install pavement striping that is 6 inches in width. On other routes,
 install pavement striping that is 4 inches in width. Ensure that all lines have
 clean edges with a width tolerance of plus 1/2 inch.
 
 112—5
 
 Except on new construction or where markings do not exist, prepare and
 keep a written record of the existing pavement markings locations, and furnish a
 copy to the Engineer before removing or obliterating the markings.
 Apply temporary striping when any course of a new pavement is to be
 driven over by the public, including patching, milling, leveling, and wedging
 courses, except when existing centerline markings are plainly visible and not
 obscured. Install the pavement marking material for centerlines and lane lines
 every day before sunset that day. The Department will defer installation of
 edgeline markings until all shoulder paving is complete, except on Interstate and
 Parkway roads or when the Contract specifies otherwise. When rain or other
 unavoidable occurrences prevent marking before sunset, mark the pavement as
 soon as conditions permit. Locate no passing zones as the Engineer directs.
 1)
 
 2)
 
 Removable Striping. Use removable striping tape when different phases of
 construction will require the relocation of striping to different positions on
 the same pavement. Relocate lane lines, edgelines, and other pavement
 markings as the Standard Drawings and the Contract specify. Do not use
 removable material as a permanent marking unless the Engineer directs.
 Non-removable striping material. Use either tape or paint where the striping
 is to be covered by subsequent paving courses and for temporary paved
 facilities which will be removed before completing the project. Apply paint
 according to Section 713.
 Maintain the following minimum retroreflectivity requirements at all times:
 White:
 Yellow:
 
 175 mcd/lux/square meter
 150 mcd/lux/square meter
 
 Additionally, when temporary striping that is to remain in use for more than
 120 days, provide striping with the following minimum initial retroreflectivity
 readings:
 White:
 Yellow:
 
 300 mcd/lux/square meter
 225 mcd/lux/square meter
 
 The Engineer may visually accept the markings intended for less than 120
 days use but may obtain retroreflectivity readings at any time conformance to the
 minimum retroreflectivity readings are in doubt. When striping that is to remain
 in use for more than 120 days, the Department will obtain retroreflectivity
 readings within five days of application of temporary striping using an approved
 30 meter geometry handheld or mobile retroreflectometer. The Department will
 determine acceptance of the temporary striping in accordance with KM-202 or
 KM-203 as applicable. When the Department determines the striping is not
 acceptable, complete corrective work within 24 hours.
 Maintain all markings throughout the duration of the project. Replace
 missing or damaged stripes or tape within 3 days. Remove all markings placed
 in error or markings that do not conform to the traffic scheme in use.
 112.03.12 Project Traffic Coordinator (PTC). Designate an employee to be the
 project PTC. Ensure that the PTC inspects the project traffic control scheme at a minimum
 of once per shift; reports all incidents within the work zone to the Engineer; and performs
 all other traffic control duties the Contract specifies. Furnish the name, and telephone
 number of the PTC, where he can be reached at all times. Furnish this information to the
 Engineer. The required qualifications of the PTC are dependent on the classification of the
 Project. Consider the project unclassified unless it is designated as Significant in the
 proposal.
 
 112—6
 
 A) For Significant Projects. Designate a qualified Work Zone Traffic Control
 Supervisor (WZTCS) as the PTC. Ensure the PTC is present on site when
 setting up, taking down, or affecting the traffic control scheme or phasing and as
 required by the Traffic Control Plan. The Department may allow a Work Zone
 Traffic Control Technician (WZTCT) to conduct traffic control reviews for
 maintenance purposes when under the supervision of the WZTCS.
 B) For Unclassified Projects. Designate a qualified WZTCS or WZTCT as the
 PTC. When a WZTCT serves at the PTC, the Contractor must designate the
 WZTCS who will act as their supervisor and be available upon request when
 needed. The PTC is required to be present on site when setting up, taking down,
 or affecting the traffic control scheme or phasing and as required by the Traffic
 Control Plan.
 After October 1, 2008 the Department will require the PTC to have successfully
 completed the applicable qualification courses. Personnel that have not successfully
 completed the applicable courses by that date will not be considered qualified. Prior to
 October 1, 2008, conform to Subsection 108.06 A) and ensure the designated PTC has
 sufficient skill and experience to properly perform the task.
 112.03.13 Existing Signalized Intersections. Use traffic signals for the control of
 traffic through presently signalized intersections. Use flaggers to expedite the flow of
 traffic, if directed by the Engineer or as specified in the Contract.
 Cover, turn, or take down all signal heads that are not in use. Clearly indicate the
 signals are not in operation. Install new signal conductors with sufficient slack in the
 cable to allow for a lateral movement of the signal indication of at least 15 feet in either
 direction from the specified location.
 During construction, the Department will allow the traffic signal controller to operate
 in the pre-timed mode using the recall ability of the signal controller. The Department
 will provide assistance in adjusting signal controller timing, when requested. Submit a
 request for assistance in writing to the Engineer.
 Cover and leave in place left turn signals when left turn lanes are used for through
 and left turning traffic. Shift through traffic signals to the left to a position that will
 provide visible signal indications for through and left turning traffic.
 When the signals are relocated, locate them within or on the projected lane lines for
 each lane of traffic as directed by the Engineer. Submit proposed layouts for temporary
 signal head placement in writing to the Engineer for written approval.
 After roadway work within the intersection is completed, adjust traffic signal
 indications back to their permanent locations as specified in the Contract. Remove excess
 lengths of signal conductors and permanently connect the signals.
 112.03.14 Department Ordered Opening Before Completion. When any section
 of roadway is in an acceptable condition and the Commissioner determines that the public
 convenience demands it, the Engineer shall direct the roadway to open to public traffic.
 Correct construction deficiencies found during interim project inspections and final
 inspection. After the opened section of roadway is inspected and accepted, the
 Department will take responsibility for further expenditures for that accepted section.
 112.03.15 Non-Compliance of Maintain and Control of Traffic. It is the
 Contractor’s responsibility to conform to the traffic control requirements in the TCP,
 Proposal, plan sheets, specifications, and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
 Unless specified elsewhere in the contract, a penalty will be assessed in the event of
 non-compliance with Maintain and Control of Traffic requirements. These penalties will
 be assessed when the Contractor fails to correct a situation or condition of non-compliance
 with the contract traffic control requirements after being notified by the Engineer. The
 calculation of accrued penalties for non-compliance will be based upon the date/time of
 notification by the Engineer.
 The amount of the penalty assessed for non-compliance will be determined based
 
 112—7
 
 upon the work zone duration, as defined by the MUTCD, and will be the greatest of the
 different calculation methods indicated below:
 A) Long-term stationary work that occupies a location more than 3 days.
 Correct the non-compliant issue within 24 hours from initial notification by the
 Engineer. If the issue is not corrected within 24 hours from the initial
 notification, a penalty for non-compliance will be assessed on a daily basis
 beginning from the initial notification of non-compliance. The Contractor will
 be assessed a $1,000 daily penalty or the amount equal to the contract liquidated
 damages in Section 108.09, whichever of the 2 is greater. The penalty for noncompliance will escalate as follows for continued non-compliance after the
 initial notification.
 3 Days after Notification
 $1,500 daily penalty or 1.5 times the contract liquidated damages daily charge
 rate in Section 108.09, whichever is greater.
 7 Days after Notification
 $2,000 daily penalty or double the contract liquidated damages daily charge rate
 in Section 108.09, whichever is greater.
 B) Intermediate-term stationary work that occupies a location more than one daylight
 period up to 3 days, or nighttime work lasting more than 1 hour.
 Correct the non-compliant issue within 4 hours from initial notification by the
 Engineer. If the issue is not corrected within 4 hours from notification, a penalty
 for non-compliance will be assessed on an hourly basis beginning from the initial
 notification of non-compliance. The penalty for non-compliance will be assessed
 at $200 per hour.
 C) Short-term stationary is daytime work that occupies a location for more than 1 hour
 within a single daylight period.
 Correct the non-compliant issue within 1 hour from initial notification by the
 Engineer. If the issue is not corrected within 1 hour from notification, a penalty
 for non-compliance will be assessed on an hourly basis beginning from the initial
 notification of non-compliance. The penalty for non-compliance will be assessed
 at $200 per hour.
 If the Contractor remains in violation of the Maintain and Control of Traffic requirements,
 or if the Department determines it to be in the public’s interest, work will be suspended in
 accordance with Section 108.08 until the deficiencies are corrected. The Department
 reserves the right to correct deficiencies by any means available and charge the Contractor
 for labor, equipment, and material costs incurred in emergency situations.
 112.03.16 Roadway Condition. Any dirt, debris, dust, or other material which may
 inhibit the driving conditions of the traveling public must be addressed and cleaned at the
 Contractor’s expense.
 112.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 112.04.01 Maintain and Control Traffic. The Department will measure the
 quantity by the lump sum. The Department will not measure traffic control devices such
 
 112—8
 
 as drums, traffic cones, barricades used for channelization purposes, delineators, object
 markers, lane closures not left in place more than 3 days and nights, temporary facilities
 constructed solely for construction traffic and vertical panels and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work. The Department will not measure the flaggers; traffic
 control coordinator; removal of pavement striping or removal of pavement markings, and
 will consider these items incidental to this item of work.
 112.04.02 Temporary Signs. The Department will measure the quantity in square
 feet. The Department will measure each installation and reinstallation of post mounted
 signs. Signs posted by methods other than post mounting will be measured only at their
 first installation. The Department will not measure sign maintenance or subsequent
 relocation of non-post mounted signs and will consider them incidental to this item of
 work. The Department will measure signs for payment when they are required by the
 MUTCD, Standard Drawings, TCP, the Contract, or the Engineer. Additional signs will
 be considered incidental to this item of work. The Department will measure replacement
 units for payment, only when the Engineer determines replacement is required resulting
 from normal deterioration of the signs due to environmental conditions.
 112.04.03 Tubular Markers. The Department will measure the quantity by each
 individual unit, including replacement unit. The Department will not measure installation
 or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 112.04.04 Barricades. The Department will measure the quantity by each individual
 unit not used for channelization purposes and not specified in the Standard Drawings. The
 Department will not measure installation, maintenance, or removal for payment and will
 consider them incidental to this item of work.
 112.04.05 Arrow Panels. The Department will measure the quantity by each
 individual unit. The Department will not measure the reserved flashing arrows for
 payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work. The Department will not
 measure installation, maintenance, or removal for payment and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work.
 112.04.06 Portable Changeable Message Sign. The Department will measure the
 quantity by each individual unit. The Department will not measure installation,
 maintenance, or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of
 work.
 112.04.07 Temporary Pavement Striping. The Department will measure the
 quantity in linear feet. The Department will measure the quantity for payment only once
 per course. The Department will not measure corrective work, maintenance of markings,
 or the removal of striping tape for payment and will consider them incidental to this item
 of work. The Department will not measure striping for payment when it fails to meet
 retroreflectivity requirements and is not corrected prior to its end of use.
 112.04.08 Temporary Pavement Marker Type IVA. The Department will
 measure the quantity by each individual unit, including replacement unit. The Department
 will not measure installation, maintenance, or removal for payment and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work.
 112.04.09 Temporary Relocation of Signal Heads. The Department will measure
 the quantity of temporary relocation of existing signal heads by each individual unit. The
 Department will not measure temporary relocation of new signal heads for payment and
 will consider it incidental to the traffic signal bid items.
 112.04.10 Temporary Traffic Signals-Two Phase. The Department will measure
 the quantity by each individual unit, not including signals that are to become permanent.
 
 112—9
 
 The Department considers a unit to include all components necessary to signalize the
 intersection. The Department will not measure installation, maintenance, timing
 adjustment, electrical service, or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to
 this item of work.
 112.04.11 Temporary Traffic Signals-Multi-Phase The Department will measure
 the quantity by each individual unit, not including signals that are to become permanent.
 The Department considers a unit to include all components necessary to signalize the
 intersection. The Department will not measure installation, maintenance, timing
 adjustment, electrical service, or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to
 this item of work.
 112.04.12 Temporary Crash Cushions. The Department will measure the quantity
 according to the Contract. The Department will not measure installation, maintenance, or
 removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 112.04.13 Truck Mounted Attenuator (TMA). When listed as a bid item, the
 Department will measure the quantity by each individual unit.
 112.04.14 Pavement Striping Removal. The Department will measure the quantity
 of Department authorized pavement striping and marking removal by the unit listed in the
 Contract. The Department will not measure the unauthorized removal of pavement
 striping or markings for payment. When not listed as a bid item, the Department will
 consider removing pavement striping and markings incidental to Maintain and Control
 Traffic. The Department will not measure any corrective work required due to the
 removal process for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 112.04.15 Temporary Concrete Barrier. The Department will measure the
 quantity according to Subsection 509.04. The Department will not measure installation,
 maintenance, or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of
 work.
 112.04.16 Water for Dust Control. When listed as a bid item the Department will
 measure the quantity in gallons.
 112.04.17 Lane Closures. The Department will measure the quantity of Long Term
 Lane Closures by each individual unit installed, and accepted. The Department will not
 measure maintenance or removal of each lane closure and will consider it incidental to this
 item of work. The Department will not measure traffic control devices such as cones,
 barrels, and barricades used for delineation in conjunction with the Lane Closure and will
 consider them incidental to this item of work. The Department will measure signs,
 striping, barrier wall and other traffic control devices listed as bid items in the Contract
 separately for payment.
 The Department will not measure lane closures other than Long Term Lane Closures
 for payment and will consider them incidental to Maintain and Control Traffic.
 112.04.18 Diversions (By-Pass Detours). The Department will measure the
 quantity by lump sum completed, accepted, and then removed. The Department will not
 measure grade and drain work for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of
 work. The Department will measure base course and surface course items for payment
 according the applicable sections of Divisions 300 and 400. The Department will not
 measure installation, maintenance, or removal for payment and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work.
 112.04.19 Temporary Median Crossovers. The Department will measure the
 quantity by lump sum completed, accepted, and then removed. The Department will not
 measure grade and drain work for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of
 
 112—10
 
 work. The Department will measure base course and surface course items for payment
 according the applicable sections of Divisions 300 and 400. The Department will not
 measure installation, maintenance, or removal for payment and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work.
 112.04.20 Temporary Approaches. The Department will measure the quantity
 under the appropriate sections for grade, drain, and surface. The Department will not
 measure installation, maintenance, or removal for payment and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work.
 If a temporary approach is requested which would break interstate access control or
 right-of-way fence, then FHWA approval is required. Interstate access breaks or breaks in
 right-of-way fence for Contractor construction convenience is strongly discouraged. In the
 event that a request is made, a professionally engineered break and approach are required.
 Submit a request to the Engineer, for coordination with the FHWA, at least two weeks
 prior to anticipated use.
 112.04.21 Temporary Bridges. When listed as a bid item, the Department will
 measure the quantity by each individual unit completed, accepted, and then removed.
 Otherwise, the Department will consider temporary bridges incidental to Diversions,
 Temporary Median Crossovers, or to grade and drain work for temporary approaches.
 The Department will not measure installation, maintenance, or removal for payment and
 will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 112.04.22 Law Enforcement Officer. When stipulated by Contract, provide offduty law enforcement to include at least one officer, properly trained in work zone traffic
 control and having the authority to enforce regulations within the work zone, per vehicle
 with each vehicle having law enforcement markings and a top mounted light bar.
 112.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02650
 02562
 03225
 02012, 02013, 02014
 02775
 02671
 06549-06551,
 06603-06605
 06510-06513
 06514-06517
 06585-06588
 04953
 04933
 04934
 ----06530-06533
 ----02242
 02653
 02651
 02655
 --------02654
 20411ED
 
 Pay Item
 Maintain and Control Traffic(1)
 Temporary Signs
 Tubular Markers
 Barricades, Type
 Arrow Panel
 Portable Changeable Message Sign
 Pavement Striping – Temporary Removable
 Tape, Size and Color
 Pavement Striping – Temporary Paint, Size
 Pavement Striping – Permanent Paint, Size
 Temporary Pavement Marker,
 Type IVA, Direction, Color, Temporary
 Temporary Relocation of Signal Heads
 Temporary Signal - Two Phase
 Temporary Signal - Multi-Phase
 Temporary Crash Cushions
 Pavement Striping Removal, Size
 Temporary Concrete Barrier
 Water
 Lane Closures
 Diversions (By-Pass Detours)
 Crossovers
 Temporary Approaches
 Temporary Bridges
 Truck Mounted Attenuator
 Law Enforcement Officer
 
 112—11
 
 Pay Unit
 Lump Sum
 Square Foot
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 See Subsection 725.04
 Linear Foot
 See Subsection 509.05
 M Gallon
 Each
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 See Applicable Sections
 Each
 Each
 Hour
 
 (1)
 
 The Department will make partial payments for Maintain and
 Control Traffic according to Subsection 109.05.
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 112—12
 
 SECTION 113  QUALITY ASSURANCE
 113.01 GENERAL. Take responsibility for the quality of construction and materials
 incorporated into the work. Perform all quality control inspection, sampling, and testing.
 The Department may use the results of the Contractor's inspection, sampling, and testing
 as a part of its acceptance procedures, provided the Contractor maintains a Departmentapproved Quality Control Plan (QCP) and the results are verified by the Department’s
 tests.
 113.02 COORDINATION MEETING. Meet with the Engineer either as part of the
 preconstruction conference, or as a separate meeting, before the start of construction, and
 discuss the QCP. During the meeting, a mutual agreement of the plan details will be
 developed, including the forms for recording the operations, control activities, testing,
 administration, and the interrelationship of the QCP. Minutes of the coordination meeting
 shall be prepared by the QCP Manager, signed by the Contractor and the Engineer, and
 filed separately as part of the QCP. Subsequent conferences may be called by the
 Contractor or the Engineer to reconfirm mutual agreement and address deficiencies in the
 QCP or procedures which may require corrective action by the Contractor. Nothing in this
 section shall be construed to override the preconstruction conference or the
 preconstruction conference minutes. Do not start work without an approved QCP.
 113.03 QUALITY CONTROL (QC). Provide and maintain a quality control system
 that will assure all materials and products submitted to the Department for acceptance will
 conform to the Contract requirements whether manufactured or processed by the
 Contractor, or procured from producers, subcontractors, or vendors. Perform the
 inspections and tests required to substantiate product conformance to the Contract.
 Document all quality control inspections and tests, and provide a copy to the Engineer.
 Maintain adequate records of all inspections and tests. Include in the records the nature,
 number, and type of deficiencies found, the quantities rejected, and the nature of
 corrective action taken. Perform equipment calibrations and maintain qualified personnel
 as the Contract requires to ensure conformance to Contract requirements. Procedures will
 be subject to Department approval.
 Develop, furnish, execute, and maintain a QCP including, but not limited to,
 inspecting, testing, and ensuring conformance to the Contract, in order to establish an
 effective level of quality control. Prosecuting the QCP shall include all on-site materials
 testing and monitoring of the producer’s testing such as hot-mix asphalt plant testing,
 aggregate plant testing, and concrete plant testing. Include the following:
 A) QCP Submittal. Submit the QCP to the Engineer before beginning work. After
 beginning work under the approved QCP, continuously prosecute the work in
 accordance with this QCP. Obtain approval from the Engineer before implementing
 any changes to the QCP.
 B) Documentation. Maintain all records that provide factual evidence that quality
 control activities and test have been performed. Include in these records the work of
 Subcontractors and suppliers. Forms for these records shall be as approved by the
 Department.
 C) Personnel. After approval of the QCP by the Engineer, maintain the QCP staff at
 approved plan levels at all times until the demobilization of the Contractor forces
 upon project completion.
 The primary duty of the QCP personnel on the project is implementing the QCP.
 Provide a QCP organization consisting of a QCP Manager and sufficient number of
 qualified personnel to ensure Contract compliance.
 
 113—1
 
 113.04 QUALITY ACCEPTANCE (QA). The Department will be responsible for
 determining the acceptability of the material produced. The Quality Acceptance Team
 (QAT) will check the validity of the QCP through an appropriate review of documentation
 and random quality acceptance testing.
 The QAT will conduct random QA inspections for the duration of the Contract;
 inspect the full spectrum of on-going construction activities; review documentation;
 compare inspections and testing results with the QCP results; and prepare a written report
 of the results. Testing by the QAT will be performed at 25 percent of the rate specified in
 the Field Sampling Manual. Testing may be increased at the discretion of the Engineer.
 Testing will be performed at randomly selected locations without prior notification of the
 Contractor.
 When the QAT testing results show work to be outside of specification requirements
 or not in agreement with the QCP results, the Department may shut down that portion of
 the work or the entire project until the cause of the failure or discrepancy is determined
 and procedures are corrected.
 113.05 ACCEPTANCE.
 Subsection 105.12.
 113.06
 
 The Department will make final acceptance according to
 
 CLAIMS. The Department will handle claims according to Subsection 105.13.
 
 113.07 DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROCEDURES.
 As part of Quality
 Control/Quality Acceptance (QC/QA) for pay items and materials, both the Department
 and the Contractor will perform inspections and tests. The Contractor will perform the
 quality control tests, and the Department will perform verification tests of the Contractor’s
 quality control test results at a reduced frequency. The Department will base the pay or
 material acceptance on the Contractor’s quality control test results provided the test results
 are verified by the Department. For a particular pay item or material, the appropriate
 specification will provide testing frequencies and the Department’s verification
 procedures.
 A) Avoidance of Disputes. Make every effort to avoid disputes. Use partnering
 concepts to aid in preventing or resolving any dispute. Monitor as follows to ensure
 that all data are reliable, unbiased, and truly representative of the product quality:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 
 Ensure personnel and laboratory facilities meet the specified certification
 requirements.
 Ensure all samples are obtained according to KM 64-113, Sampling Materials by
 Random Number Sampling.
 Ensure communication of test results between parties occurs within the specified
 time limits.
 Discuss all questions regarding the specifications, KM’s, or sampling and testing
 procedures during the preconstruction, pre-paving, or similar type of meeting to
 clarify any confusion.
 Resolve disputes at the lowest appropriate level of authority.
 
 B) Procedures. When the Contractor’s quality control test results and the Department’s
 verification test results are not within the specified tolerances, and a dispute is
 therefore unavoidable, use the following procedures to resolve the dispute:
 1)
 2)
 
 Project Level Dispute Resolution. Together with the Engineer, attempt to
 determine the reason for the discrepancy at the project level by having testing
 personnel review previous tests and other possible factors.
 Materials Central Laboratory (MCL) Level. If the dispute is not resolved at the
 project level, the MCL will conduct further investigation. In this investigation,
 the MCL will include the following, when applicable:
 
 113—2
 
 1)
 
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 
 8)
 
 Review of all available test data, including the following:
 • current disputed results;
 • prior acceptance testing data;
 • Contractor’s process control documentation; and
 • Department’s Independent Assurance (IA) sampling and testing results.
 Check of Contractor and Department calculations. Compare conflicting
 data by statistical means (e. g., f-test and t-test).
 Evaluation of Contractor and Department sampling procedures.
 Inspection of the equipment setup, calibration, and maintenance.
 Retesting of all retained samples available.
 Monitoring of the specified testing procedures.
 Evaluation of the history of performance of the Contractor and the
 Department personnel and testing equipment involved. Review of test
 results from previous projects. Review of the results of previous dispute
 resolutions.
 Additional comparative or split-sample testing.
 
 At the conclusion of the investigation, MCL personnel will make a
 recommendation of resolution to the Contractor and the Engineer.
 C) Third Party Resolution Level. If the dispute is not resolved at the MCL level, the
 Department and Contractor will use a mutually agreed upon laboratory. The results
 from the mutually agreeable laboratory will be final and binding.
 The Department will prepare a written report describing the dispute, all subsequent
 actions, and the final resolution for inclusion in the project documentation.
 113.08
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 113.08.01 QC. When listed as a bid item, the Department will measure the quantity
 by the lump sum. The Department will not measure the QCP, any actions and personnel
 required to carry out the QCP, any testing, any testing equipment, or any other work
 necessary to perform the specified QC/QA procedures for payment and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work.
 113.08.02 Dispute Resolution.
 If the independent laboratory testing and
 investigation indicates that the Department’s tests are correct, pay the cost of the
 investigation. If the independent laboratory testing and investigation indicates that the
 Department’s tests are not correct, the Department will pay the cost of the investigation.
 When the dispute is resolved at any level, and the Department’s verification tests are
 correct, the Department will base the Contractor’s pay on the Department’s verification
 test results rather than on the Contractor’s quality control test results. When the
 Department’s verification tests are not correct, the Department will base the Contractor’s
 pay on the Contractor’s quality control test results as the appropriate section or subsection
 specifies.
 113.09
 Code
 ----
 
 PAYMENT.
 Pay Item
 QC, Type
 
 Pay Unit
 Lump Sum
 
 113—3
 
 DIVISION 200
 EARTHWORK
 
 SECTION 201  STAKING
 201.01 DESCRIPTION. When listed as a bid item, furnish all personnel, equipment,
 stakes, and hubs necessary to construct the roadway and appurtenant structures to the
 grade and alignment specified in the Contract. When no bid item is listed, the Department
 will perform staking.
 201.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT. Reserved.
 
 201.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 201.03.01 Contractor Staking. Perform all necessary surveying under the general
 supervision of a Professional Engineer or licensed Land Surveyor.
 The Department’s Engineer will perform the following:
 1)
 
 Provide adequate control points to allow prompt re-establishment of the survey
 centerline, right-of-way, temporary easements, ramps, crossroads, frontage
 roads, and all other surveying needs during construction.
 Set permanent or temporary bench marks as required.
 Take “check sections” to verify that construction is to grade and alignment as
 specified in the Contract.
 
 2)
 3)
 
 The Contractor will perform the following:
 1)
 
 Re-establish the centerline and set such additional points as may be necessary for
 construction of the project. Verify the accuracy of the horizontal and vertical
 control as established by the Department’s Engineer before beginning
 construction.
 Establish clearing lines so that the project may be cleared without violating the
 limits of the right of way.
 Set slope stakes right and left of the survey centerline at 50-foot to 100-foot
 intervals to guide the contractor in constructing the cuts and fills. These stakes
 are generally set to shoulder grade for fills and ditch grade for cuts. The cut or
 fill information, slope, and distance from centerline should be on the front face
 of the stake; the station number should be on the back of the stake. This stake
 should be guarded with a lath that has the station number written on the side
 facing the centerline.
 Grade Stakes (Bluetops). Fine grade control will be set by the Contractor to
 establish sub-grade sections by setting hubs (referred to as blue tops) every 50
 feet. These blue tops are set to the hundredth of a foot in elevation and are
 located left and right of pavement centerline, usually at the edge of metal.
 Bluetops will be set for the top of sub-grade and the top of aggregate base and/or
 drainage blanket material. Refer to Section 204.03.10 and Section 302.03.06 for
 construction tolerances of sub-grade and aggregate base or drainage blanket.
 Stake all structures (bridges, culverts, pipe, and other appurtenances) so that they
 can be built to the proper line and grade as shown on the plans and to perform
 the function for which they were designed.
 
 2)
 3)
 
 4)
 
 5)
 
 201.03.02 Department Staking. The Department’s Engineer will set all stakes
 necessary for the construction of the roadway and appurtenant structures to the proper
 grade and alignment in accordance with the contract.
 201.03.03 Electronic Surveying. The Department encourages the use of new and
 advanced technology in the construction of its roads and structures. However, the
 following restrictions apply:
 1)
 
 Tolerances are unchanged. Refer to Section 204.03.10 and Section 302.03.06.
 
 201—1
 
 2)
 
 3)
 4)
 5)
 
 Sub-grade check sections are to be done every 500 feet in tangent sections and
 every 100 feet in curves using conventional survey methods to establish
 bluetops and to verify the correct operation of the electronic equipment.
 Define the check section locations by a hub and stake with centerline station,
 offset, if any, and elevation plainly marked.
 The Contractor will submit his electronic data files to the Department’s
 Engineer as they are developed so that the Engineer can reference the data for
 verification of the field work.
 Provide slope stakes and layout references as required in Subsection 201.03.01
 part 3) when requested by the Engineer.
 Provide electronic field book reports that clearly define survey numbers with
 x, y, z coordinates, horizontal and vertical roadway alignments, templates,
 digital terrain models (DTMs) and any other digital background files used.
 
 201.04 MEASUREMENT.
 201.04.01 Contractor Staking. When listed as a bid item, the Department will
 measure staking as lump sum. The Department will not measure surveying required to
 correct any errors or inaccuracies resulting from construction operations for payment.
 Complete the general layout of the project under the supervision of a Licensed
 Professional Engineer or Land Surveyor.
 201.04.02 Department Staking. The Department will not measure quantities for
 payment. When any stakes are disturbed due to unwarranted negligence of the Contractor,
 the Department will measure the work required to reset the stakes and deduct the cost
 from monies due the Contractor.
 201.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and accepted
 quantities under the following:
 Code
 02726
 
 Pay Item
 Staking
 
 Pay Unit
 Lump Sum
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 201—2
 
 SECTION 202  CLEARING AND GRUBBING
 202.01 DESCRIPTION. Clear, grub, remove, and dispose of all vegetation, buildings
 and foundations not removed by others, and debris within designated limits inside the
 right-of-way and easement areas. Do not remove objects designated to remain or to be
 removed according to other provisions of the Contract. Also, protect from injury or
 defacement all vegetation and objects designated to remain.
 202.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT. Reserved.
 
 202.03 CONSTRUCTION.
 Notify the Natural Resources and Environmental
 Protection Cabinet, Division of Air Quality in writing before demolishing any building
 located within the right-of-way.
 When unexpected asbestos, underground storage tanks, or other hazardous materials
 are encountered, cease operations and notify the Engineer.
 The Engineer will designate all trees, shrubs, plants, and other items to remain. For
 cut or scarred surfaces of trees or shrubs selected for retention, perform tree trimming
 surgery as the Engineer directs.
 202.03.01 Clearing and Grubbing. Clear the entire area of the right-of-way of all
 weeds, brush, briers, bushes, trees, stumps, and other protruding obstructions, except
 within areas the Engineer designates to remain undisturbed. In addition, grub all bushes,
 trees, roots, and stumps within the line of slope stakes, except undisturbed stumps, roots,
 and nonperishable solid objects which will be a minimum of 3 feet below subgrade or
 slope of embankments. Remove stumps and nonperishable solid objects under
 embankments more than 6 inches above the groundline or low water level.
 Perform all clearing and grubbing operations according to Sections 212 and 213.
 Completely dispose of any materials resulting from clearing and grubbing by
 approved methods at approved locations. The Department will allow burning of perishable
 material when performed according to Regulation 401 KAR 63:005. When conditions or
 401 KAR 63:005 prohibit burning, use an alternate approved method. When disposal is
 by burying, provide a cover of at least one foot, and grade and shape as the Engineer
 directs. Obtain written approval from the Engineer before placing any organic material
 within the right-of-way.
 Do not place any material resulting from clearing and grubbing off the right-of-way
 without written permission from the property owner. Furnish a copy of the owner’s
 written permission to the Engineer.
 Do not place material resulting from clearing and grubbing on the right-of-way within
 view of any public road, without written approval. The Engineer may require the material
 placed within view of a public road to be covered with soil that will support vegetation.
 Seed and protect the soil as required by the Contract.
 Take ownership of all merchantable timber in the clearing area that has not been
 removed from the right-of-way before starting construction.
 Remove low hanging, unsound, and unsightly branches on trees and shrubs
 designated to remain, as directed. Trim branches of trees extending over the roadbed
 surface to provide a minimum clear height of 20 feet.
 When specified in the Plans or required by the Engineer, construct brush barriers
 according to Subsection 212.03.01.
 When utility relocation is still being performed, or is part of the work, schedule the
 clearing of the utility easements as a priority to expedite their relocation.
 202.03.02 Removing Trees or Stumps. Remove and dispose of the tree, stump, and
 roots.
 202.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will not measure both Clearing and
 Grubbing and Removing Trees or Stumps on the same area. The Department will not
 measure necessary Clearing and Grubbing or Removal of Trees or Stumps when not listed
 
 202—1
 
 as a separate bid item.
 202.04.01 Clearing and Grubbing. The Department will specify in the Plans the
 quantities of the entire area of right-of-way, including all easements, in acres, but will
 measure by lump sum. The Department will not consider discrepancies in the plan
 quantity unless they are directly caused by approved plan changes.
 202.04.02 Removing Trees or Stumps. The Department will measure the quantity
 by each individual unit when included as a bid item. The Department will include only
 trees or stumps one foot in diameter or larger, measured 2 feet above the ground or across
 the top of existing stumps less than 2 feet in height. The Department will not measure the
 removal of smaller trees or stumps for payment and will consider their removal incidental
 to this item of work.
 202.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02545
 02460
 
 Pay Item
 Clearing and Grubbing
 Remove Trees or Stumps
 
 Pay Unit
 Lump Sum
 Each
 
 For changes in payment for Clearing and Grubbing, due to approved plan changes,
 the Department will compute these changes at a unit price rate based on the lump sum
 price bid divided by the total estimated area of Clearing and Grubbing specified in the
 original Plans.
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 202—2
 
 SECTION 203  REMOVAL OF STRUCTURES AND
 OBSTRUCTIONS
 203.01 DESCRIPTION. Remove, wholly or in part, and dispose of fences, structures,
 pavements, abandoned pipelines, and any other obstructions outside the typical section
 that are not designated or allowed to remain. Also, salvage designated materials, and
 backfill the resulting trenches, holes, and pits.
 203.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT. Reserved.
 
 203.03 CONSTRUCTION. Raze, remove, and dispose of all structures, fences, and
 other obstructions, any portions of which are on the right-of-way. Remove all designated
 salvable material without damage and store within the project limits, as the Engineer
 directs.
 Fill basements or cavities left by structure removal to the level of the surrounding
 ground and, when within embankment limits, fill according to Section 206.
 Clean all septic tanks within the permanent right-of-way according to Subsection
 107.01, and fill them with granular material or remove them as the Engineer directs.
 Except for removing structures or pipe, backfilling cavities left by structure removal,
 and removing or filling septic tanks, perform all work described in this section only in
 areas that are outside the typical section. Perform removal work within the typical section
 according to Sections 202, 204, 206, and 603.
 203.03.01 Existing Bridges. Remove all existing structures, including foundations,
 conforming to the definition of a bridge.
 Take ownership of existing structures, and dispose of them according to Subsection
 202.03. Immediately remove any material entering the stream due to removing the
 existing structure from the waterway.
 When specified in the Contract, remove the members of the superstructure, without
 damage, in transportable sections, and carefully store them on the right-of-way at an
 accessible location above high water. Before removing the superstructure, matchmark the
 parts with paint.
 Remove all portions of abutments exposed in the finished work, all of the piers above
 the stream bed, and any parts of either abutments or piers that interfere with planned
 construction of the new work.
 Excavate existing embankment approaches to structures removed, and lying outside
 the limits of the new construction, to a minimum slope of 2:1.
 203.03.02 Masonry Structures other than Bridges. Completely remove existing
 structures, including their foundations, as specified in the Contract. Dispose of the
 resulting material, and fill any resulting holes or pits. Excavate all slopes that may result,
 such as stream sides, that lie outside the limits of new construction to a minimum slope of
 2:1.
 203.03.03 Partial Removal of Structures. When the Contract specifies using any
 parts of an existing structure as permanent parts of a new structure, remove only such
 portions specified in the Contract. Repair all damage caused to the portion remaining.
 In removing manholes, catch basins, and inlets, connecting live sewers, rebuild and
 properly reconnect them. Maintain satisfactory by-pass service during such construction
 operations.
 203.03.04 Removing Pipe. Conform to Section 701.
 203.03.05 Removing Guardrail. Conform to Section 719.
 203.03.06 Pavement, Sidewalks, Curbs, and Similar Items. Completely remove
 all cement concrete pavement or base, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, paved ditches, asphalt
 
 203—1
 
 pavements, granular bases, and similar items.
 When the Contract specifies leaving portions of the existing structures in place,
 remove the old structures to an existing joint, or cut them to a true line with a vertical face.
 Remove structures to provide for proper grades and connections in the new work.
 203.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will not measure for payment items
 removed from within the typical section, except for structures, guardrail, and septic tanks.
 The Department will measure removing pipe according to Section 701 and removing
 guardrail according to Section 719.
 When only removing a portion of an existing structure, the Department will measure
 the various items separately.
 203.04.01 Removing Existing Structure. Unless a bid item is included in the
 proposal, the Department will not measure structures other than bridges and concrete box
 culverts for payment. When a bid item is included in the proposal, the Department will
 measure the quantity as the number of structures of the type specified actually removed.
 The Department will not measure excavation for removing and shaping slopes for
 payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 203.04.02 Removing Concrete Masonry. The Department will not measure
 removing concrete masonry but will make final payment at the Contract unit price for the
 design quantity specified in the plans. When it can be shown actual quantities vary from
 the design quantity by more than 10 percent, the Department will measure the actual
 quantity in cubic yards.
 203.04.03 Removing (Wet or Dry) Stone Masonry. The Department will measure
 the quantity in cubic yards.
 203.04.04 Septic Tank Treatment. The Department will measure the quantity by
 each individual unit treatment, cleaning and filling, or removing.
 203.04.05 Other Items as Listed in the Contract. The Department will measure
 these quantities in the units established in the Contract.
 203.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02731
 02403
 02402
 02404
 -----
 
 Pay Item
 Remove Structure
 Remove Concrete Masonry
 Remove Stone Masonry
 Septic Tank Treatment
 Other items as listed in the Contract
 
 Pay Unit
 Lump Sum
 Cubic Yard
 Cubic Yard
 Each
 As established in the Contact
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 203—2
 
 SECTION 204  ROADWAY AND DRAINAGE EXCAVATION
 204.01 DESCRIPTION. Remove and dispose of all materials taken from within limits
 of the work contracted, meaning the calculated material lying between the original ground
 line and the excavation limits established or approved by the Engineer as shown on the
 final cross sections.
 204.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT. Reserved.
 
 204.03 CONSTRUCTION. Excavate for cuts and roadbeds, embankment foundation
 benches, embankment subgrades, under-cutting subgrades in cut sections, shoulders,
 slopes, ditches, waterways, intersections, approaches, balance excavation, inlet and outlet
 ditches, and channel changes, all as specified in the Contract.
 Remove and dispose of miscellaneous structures from within the limits of the typical
 section according to Section 203.
 Protect and preserve all existing culverts, pipelines, conduits, subdrains, or parts there
 of that may continue to be used without any change. Repair or replace any culvert,
 pipeline, conduit, or subdrain damaged from operations or negligence during the life of the
 Contract.
 During construction, ensure that the roadway is well drained at all times.
 204.03.01 Classification. Without regard to the materials encountered, all roadway
 and drainage excavation is unclassified and the Department will consider it Roadway
 Excavation. Any reference to rock, earth, or any other material on the Plans or cross
 sections, whether in numbers, words, letters, or lines, is solely for the Department’s
 information and is not an indication of classified excavation or the quantity of either rock,
 earth, or any other material involved. The bidder must draw his own conclusions as to the
 conditions to be encountered. The Department does not give any guarantee as to the
 accuracy of the data and will not consider any claim for additional compensation when the
 materials encountered are not in accord with the classification shown.
 204.03.02 Slopes. Do not remove or loosen any material outside of the required
 slopes. Leave all rock cut slopes with a uniform surface, and remove all loose or
 overhanging rock. Do not gouge or dig holes in back slopes or in embankment slopes.
 The Engineer may vary the slopes in cuts during construction, depending upon the
 material encountered in excavation to secure sufficient material for the formation of
 embankment and shoulders, to prevent landslides, to improve sight distance, or for any
 other reasons widening or variations are deemed to be to the best advantage of the work.
 When making a cut on any section of the roadway in any material that may slide, excavate
 to the slope lines as specified in the Plans or as the Engineer directs. Do not form vertical
 slopes during the process of excavation of such cuts, except in stage construction when
 leaving material in cuts for future shoulder construction.
 204.03.03 Serrated Slopes. When the Plans designate locations to construct serrated
 slopes and when soft rock or shale are encountered at the designated locations, excavate
 these materials by bulldozing or ripping, without drilling and blasting, in a manner that
 serrates the cut faces to a stepped pattern.
 Round all soil overburden and talus material above the serrated slopes to blend with
 the original ground. Construct the top half step tread of a serrated slope just below the
 surface where the soil overburden contacts the soft rock or shale and continue the steps to
 the bottom of the cut slope, unless hard rock or hard shale formations are encountered
 which indicate that the lower limits of the rock disintegration zone have been reached.
 When hard rock or hard shale formations which must be blasted are encountered within
 the cuts being serrated, end the steps of the serrated slope by blending them into the hard
 rock or shale. Construct the step risers in the serrated slopes to the height specified in the
 Plans with the approximate width of the step treads being the height of the risers
 multiplied by the designated cut slope ratio. Make the midpoints of treads of the steps
 
 204—1
 
 coincide approximately with the staked slope lines. Blend the first and last steps of a
 serrated slope into the staked slope line. Construct the first and last steps of a serrated
 slope to a width of approximately one-half the normal step tread width. Construct the step
 treads approximately level rather than parallel to the ditch line grades. When the steps
 extend throughout the length of a cut, round the ends of the steps and blend them into the
 adjacent ground.
 The Engineer will not require thorough final dressing of the serrated slopes.
 However, remove large pieces of rock or other dangerous material which might fall from
 the steps and create safety hazards or maintenance problems. Seed and protect the
 serrated slopes according to the Plans and Section 212.
 204.03.04 Presplitting. Presplit all rock and shale formations within the roadway
 excavation limits that are conducive to excavation by drilling and blasting at the
 designated slope lines. Perform the presplitting before blasting and excavating the interior
 portion of the specified cross section at any location.
 Perform presplitting to obtain smooth faces in the rock and shale formations.
 Develop presplit faces that are free of all loose or crushed pieces and do not deviate more
 than 6 inches inwardly from the designated slope lines or offset drill holes, nor more than
 one foot outwardly, except where seams, broken formations, or earth pockets may cause
 unavoidable irregularities. The Engineer may stop the presplitting when he determines
 that materials have become unsuitable for presplitting. The Department will measure for
 payment material lying outside the typical section that must be removed due to seams,
 broken formations, or earth pockets, including any earth overburden removed with this
 material.
 204.03.05 Landslides. When directed, remove and dispose of all landslides. The
 Department will measure landslides in place, by the cross section method, before removal
 of material.
 204.03.06 Ditches. Ditches include channel changes, inlet and outlet ditches, side
 ditches, surface ditches, wing ditches, and such other required ditches.
 Construct side ditches draining from cuts toward embankments to avoid erosion
 damage to embankments by directing water coming from cuts away from fills.
 Do not place material removed in cleaning or opening of ditches on cut slopes.
 Remove all debris from ditches before requesting formal acceptance.
 204.03.07 Use of Excavated Materials. Use all suitable excavated material in the
 formation of embankments, subgrade, or shoulders; as backfill for structures; or for other
 purposes specified in the Contract.
 Remove and dispose of all sod and soft or spongy material. Do not use such
 materials in the construction of the grade, except as provided in Subsection 206.03.
 Take ownership and dispose of any coal excavated from the project within the typical
 section, or as directed. Do not use coal in embankments except in small quantities and
 then only when thoroughly mixed with other materials.
 Do not dispose of excavated material without approval. Do not assume disposal sites
 for excess excavation are available within the right-of-way. When approved, dispose of
 excess material adjacent to the embankment or incorporate it in the normal embankment
 construction within the right-of-way limits. Do not perform irregular or partial widening
 of embankments. Do not place excess material between cut slopes and the right-of-way
 limits, except for the purpose of filling depressions, gullies, and other cavities; and, when
 so placed, shape the material to conform with the adjacent ground.
 A) Channel Lining, Class IV. Prepare broken stone from formations consisting
 primarily of limestone, or if specified in the Plans, durable sandstone or durable
 shale (SDI equal to or greater than 95 according to KM 64-513) that are
 encountered in roadway excavation or obtained from borrow excavation.
 Provide stone so that at least 80 percent, by volume, of individual stones
 
 204—2
 
 range in size from 1/4 to 1 1/2 cubic foot. Use smaller sized stones for filling
 voids in the upper surface and dressing to the proper slope. The Engineer will
 accept the size and gradation of the material based on visual inspection. The
 Engineer may allow material not conforming to the specified size and gradation
 when it is acceptable for the intended use.
 Shape ditches and channels as specified to receive the channel lining.
 Unless solid rock is encountered, begin the channel lining in a trench 2 feet
 below the natural ground or 2 feet below the channel flowline when the flowline
 is not lined. Where encountering solid rock, end the slope protection at the solid
 rock line.
 Construct Channel Lining, Class IV to the minimum thickness specified in
 the Plans. Place the stone in a manner to produce a surface not varying more
 than 6 inches from a true plane.
 B) Spreading Stockpiled Topsoil. If the Contract includes Spreading Stockpiled
 Topsoil as a bid item, or when otherwise specified in the Contract, salvage
 topsoil from within the limits of the slope lines and store it in stockpiles. Before
 removing the topsoil, clear the areas of all weeds, brush, stumps, stones, and
 other debris. Remove the topsoil only from areas and to depths specified in the
 Plans or as the Engineer directs. Avoid mixing subsoil or other unsuitable
 material with the topsoil. Place sod removed from embankment areas according
 to Subsection 206.03 in the topsoil stockpiles. Place the stockpiles along the
 project at approved locations. Neatly dress each stockpile, when completed.
 Perform temporary or permanent seeding on the stockpiles.
 When Spreading Stockpiled Topsoil is a bid item, the Department will allow
 the topsoil to be spread directly on the areas designated to receive the topsoil,
 without stockpiling, provided that seeding and protection operations are ready to
 begin.
 204.03.08 Disposal of Excess Material. When excess material is encountered on a
 project, dispose of it according to section 205.02.
 204.03.09 Roadbed. In addition to the limits of the roadbed as defined in
 Subsection 101.03, extend the roadway excavation to the ditch lines in cuts. Conduct
 roadway excavation operations to make available a sufficient quantity of selected
 materials to complete the roadbed.
 Remove all rock between ditch lines to a depth below the required grade as specified
 in the Plans or as staked. Unless otherwise specified in the project plans or proposal all
 solid rock excavation in roadway cuts is to extend at least one (1) foot below top of
 subgrade elevation. Leave the final surface of the rock to provide complete drainage.
 Construct the refill over this surface with select material having no stone or spalls larger
 than 4 inches. Place all refill in lifts not exceeding one foot in depth, loose measurement,
 and compact according to Subsection 206.03. The Engineer will make no allowance for
 excavation and refill material to a greater depth below the required grade than as specified
 in the Plans or as staked.
 When encountering unsuitable material at subgrade elevation, remove the material to
 the depths specified in the Plans or as directed. Dry and use material that is unstable due
 to excessive moisture but otherwise suitable. Dispose of the material or use the material
 as refill in embankments as the Engineer directs. Refill with suitable material.
 A) Rock Roadbed. Conduct blasting and excavation operations to make available a
 sufficient quantity of rock to complete the roadbed.
 Construct rock roadbed using limestone, durable sandstone, or durable shale
 (SDI equal to or greater than 95 according to KM 64-513) that is encountered in
 the roadway excavation or obtained from borrow excavation. Do not use rock
 fragments that exceed one foot.
 Excavate all cuts to a minimum of 2 feet below the final subgrade elevation
 and refill with rock in 2 lifts, each approximately one foot thick. Leave the
 
 204—3
 
 excavated surface to provide complete drainage. If excavation is deeper than 2
 feet below subgrade, construct the top 2 feet in 2 lifts, each approximately one
 foot thick and the remaining in lifts not exceeding one foot using rock
 conforming to this section.
 Construct rock roadbed from ditch line to ditch line in cuts, from shoulder to
 shoulder in fills, and throughout the entire project including mainline, ramps, and
 approach roads.
 Perform all handling, stockpiling, or hauling manipulations, including
 overhauling, necessary to provide for the proper distribution of the broken stone.
 In all instances, dump, spread, and smooth each one-foot lift, and compact
 each lift by vibratory rollers weighing at least 5 tons to minimize voids and
 bridging.
 B) Chemically Stabilized Roadbed. Construct according to Section 208.
 204.03.10 Construction Tolerances. Make every reasonable effort to construct the
 project uniformly within the following allowable tolerances and in a manner that will
 minimize the field measurements and computations required to determine if the work is
 satisfactory.
 The Department will allow the following tolerances before making payment for any
 decreases in the quantity or before requiring the rework of the constructed item:
 1)
 
 2)
 
 3)
 4)
 
 5)
 
 6)
 
 204.04
 
 Do not deviate the distance from centerline to the ditch lines in cuts and the
 shoulder lines in fills more than one foot from the dimension specified in the
 Plans. Ensure that the total width of the roadbed is not deficient by more than
 one foot at any location.
 Ensure that the sloped surfaces between the ditch lines or shoulder lines and the
 original ground are not inside the specified slope limits more than 6 inches or
 outside the specified slope limits more than one foot, both measured
 horizontally.
 Excavate cut benches to within one foot above or below the bench elevation
 specified in the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 The Department will not make payment for any earthwork performed outside the
 limits specified by the neat lines of the cross sections on the Plans or by the
 Engineer. Do not remove or place any extra material more than one foot outside
 of these limits without permission, except as provided in Subsections 204.03.04
 and 206.03.
 On grade and drain projects where surfacing is not included, complete the
 subgrade to within ± 0.1 foot of the designated grade at the time of final
 acceptance, except that when rock roadbed is specified, complete it to within ±
 0.2 foot.
 Ensure that all subgrades being prepared for base or surface courses, except
 traffic bound courses, are within ± 1/2 inch of the specified crown section,
 except that when rock roadbed is specified, complete it to within ± 2 inches.
 Uniformly construct these subgrades so the subsequent base and surface courses
 can be constructed within their specified tolerances.
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 204.04.01 Payment for Design Quantities. Unless the Contract provides for
 payment based on field measurements of material excavated, the Department will not
 measure Roadway Excavation but will make final payment at the Contract unit price for
 the design quantity specified within the neat lines of the cross sections on the Plans,
 increased or decreased by authorized adjustments.
 The Department will determine the final quantity of Embankment-in-Place as the
 design quantity, increased or decreased by authorized adjustments.
 The Department will not consider any quantity specified in the Plans for
 contingencies to be part of the design quantity. The Department will include only the
 
 204—4
 
 portion of the contingency quantity actually used, as determined by the Engineer’s
 measurements.
 204.04.02 Authorized Adjustments. The Department will only make adjustments
 to the design quantities of Roadway Excavation or Embankment-in-Place authorized by
 the Engineer for the following reasons:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 4)
 5)
 
 Changes in the quantity of work due to benching, undercutting, changing slopes
 or grades, removing slides, and any other required procedures.
 Decreases in the quantity because of acceptable work not conforming to
 established tolerances.
 Corrections of major errors on the Plans. Major errors are defined as individual
 mistakes of 3 percent or more in the quantity of earthwork between 2
 consecutive cross sections, for omissions, duplications, or other errors in the
 survey or on the Plans, but not for minor discrepancies in the plotting of cross
 sections and in the resulting computation of the volume of earthwork. When
 errors in the lines or grades specified in the Plans cause major errors in
 earthwork quantities, the Department will correct the earthwork quantities
 throughout the entire span of the errors. The Department will not adjust
 earthwork quantities when errors in the lines or grades do not cause major errors
 in the earthwork quantities.
 Arithmetical mistakes.
 Any assumed errors or omissions in the original ground line must be brought to
 the attention of the Engineer before beginning earthwork with copies of the
 survey elevations. If the error is found after earthwork activities have began,
 inform the Engineer within 12 hours and allow the Engineer to check the
 elevations and orientation of the ground line. Failure to notify the Engineer or
 failure to allow the Engineer to check the ground line for errors absolves the
 Cabinet of any claims based on errors or omissions on the location of the ground
 line.
 
 204.04.03 Serrated Slopes. The Department will not measure this work for
 payment and will consider it incidental to either Roadway Excavation or Embankment-inPlace, as applicable.
 The Department will not measure for payment any breakage of the soft rock or other
 material outside the staked slope line.
 204.04.04 Presplitting. The Department will not measure this work for payment
 and will consider it incidental to either Roadway Excavation or Embankment-in-Place, as
 applicable. However, if the Engineer directs in writing slope changes, then the
 Department will pay for the second presplitting operation as Extra Work.
 The Department will not measure for payment any extra material excavated because
 of the drill holes being offset outside the designated slope lines.
 The Department will not measure for payment any material including any earth
 overburden necessary to be removed due to the Contractor’s faulty blasting practices.
 204.04.05 Roadbed. The Department will measure the quantity in cubic yards as
 Roadway Excavation, Borrow Excavation, or Embankment-in-Place, as applicable. The
 Department will not measure any special work necessary to perform rock roadbed
 construction for payment and will consider it incidental to the earthwork bid item.
 The Department will measure the removal of unsuitable material as Roadway
 Excavation. The Department will measure any additional material necessary for refill as
 Roadway Excavation or Borrow Excavation, at its origin. When the material is removed
 from the roadbed and disposed of without the Engineer’s permission, the Department will
 not measure for payment any required refill material.
 The Department will not measure for payment rock refill exceeding 2 feet.
 
 204—5
 
 204.04.06 Landslides. The Department will measure the quantity in cubic yards as
 Roadway Excavation or Embankment-in-Place, as applicable. The Department will not
 measure for payment the removal and disposal of any landslides resulting from faulty
 operations.
 Whenever a landslide extends beyond the right-of-way in wooded areas, and the
 Engineer directs trees and stumps be removed, the Department will measure for payment
 clearing of the additional area under Clearing and Grubbing or Removing Trees and
 Stumps, as provided in the original Contract.
 204.04.07 Ditches. When Ditching or Ditching and Shouldering are listed as a bid
 item, the Department will measure this according to Subsection 209.04. When Ditching
 or Ditching and Shouldering are not listed as a bid item, the Department will not measure
 this work for payment and will consider it incidental to either Roadway Excavation or
 Embankment-in-Place, as applicable.
 204.04.08 Roadway Excavation. The Department will measure the quantity in
 cubic yards based on design quantities with authorized adjustments. The Department will
 base the measurement of the roadway excavation quantities at locations where serrated
 slopes are constructed on the areas and volumes defined by the staked slope lines. The
 Department will not measure for payment any excavated material used for any purpose
 other than that the Plans specify or the Engineer approves.
 When the Contract provides for payment based on field measurements of the material
 excavated, the Department will measure the roadway excavation in its original position by
 taking cross sections before the work starts and after it is entirely completed. The
 Department will compute the volume by the average end-area method. The Department
 will include in its measurement all unavoidable slides and authorized excavation of any
 material below the subgrade.
 Where material has been excavated beyond the slope line and disposed of, without
 being authorized, the Department will measure the disposed material and deduct it from
 the excavated quantities.
 In determining the amount of excess material to be deducted as the result of
 excavation beyond the slope lines set by the Engineer, and disposed of, the Department
 will consider only that portion outside of one foot additional width of embankment on
 each side, widened uniformly. The Department will measure the volume and deduct it
 from the excavation quantities without regard to swell or shrinkage factors.
 Where the amount of roadway excavation is not enough to construct the
 embankments as shown on the plans, the Department will authorize adjustments to
 excavation quantities. The Department will consider excavated material used to complete
 embankments, refill or backfill and obtained from beyond the limits of the roadway
 section, but within the right-of-way, as balance excavation and will make payment for the
 material as Roadway Excavation. When the balance of the material is obtained from
 outside of the right-of-way, the Department will negotiate a cost for the material prior to
 the work beginning.
 204.04.09 Excess Material. When an excess of material exists and is not due to
 authorized adjustments, the Department will consider the acquisition of an excess
 excavation storage site, the disposal of excess material, and the provision of erosion
 control for the site and haul roads incidental to either Roadway Excavation or
 Embankment-in-Place, as applicable. If the excess material is due to authorized
 adjustments, the Department will make provisions for an excess material storage site and
 measure erosion control work for payment according to Subsection 212.04.
 204.04.10 Overhaul. The Department will measure the quantity only for excavation
 added due to authorized adjustments. For all other excavation quantities, the Department
 will not measure this work for payment and will consider it incidental to either Roadway
 Excavation or Embankment-in-Place, as applicable.
 The Department will measure material removed from within Right of Way as
 
 204—6
 
 additional Roadway Excavation or Embankment in place and pay for it as an adjustment to
 plan quantity. The Department will measure the quantity of material excavated from off of
 Right of Way by the Cubic Yard Station. A Cubic Yard Station is the product of the
 volume of material hauled in cubic yards and the distance that the material is hauled, in
 excess of the 2,000 feet of free haul, in stations of 100 feet, as determined by the Mass
 Diagram Method or by analytical methods, up to a total distance of 50 stations. If haul
 distance exceeds 50 stations (5000 feet) the cost of disposing of material will be by
 negotiated price adjustment. No work is to be performed until the price has been
 negotiated and approved by both parties. Notify the Engineer prior to the commencement
 of any overhaul work.
 The Department will pay for Overhaul at 2 percent of the Contract unit price for
 Roadway Excavation or Embankment-In-Place for each Cubic Yard Station, up to a limit
 of 50 stations. The Department will negotiate a price for any overhaul exceeding the 50
 station limit.
 Overhaul (1)
 Haul Distance (feet)
 
 Price Determination
 
 0-2000
 
 Free Haul
 
 2001-7000
 
 D = M * S * U * .02
 
 7001+
 
 Negotiate Price *
 
 M = Cubic Yards of Material Excavated
 S = Number of 100' Stations Between 2001' and 7000' Haul Distances
 U = Unit Price of Excavation
 D = Dollar Amount of Overhaul
 (1) Overhaul will not be paid unless the Engineer has been notified prior
 to the commencement of any overhaul work.
 * Negotiated price must be determined prior to any overhaul work
 commencing.
 204.04.11 Channel Lining, Class IV. Channel Lining, Class IV, will be measured
 in cubic yards as Roadway Excavation, Borrow Excavation, or Embankment-in-Place, as
 applicable. Placing and grading Channel Lining, Class IV will be measured in cubic
 yards.
 204.04.12 Water. The Department will not measure for payment water used to
 provide sufficient moisture for compaction of the roadbed in cut sections.
 204.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02200
 10300NX
 02488
 05998
 
 Pay Item
 Roadway Excavation
 Overhaul
 Channel Lining, Class IV
 Spreading Stockpiled Topsoil
 
 Pay Unit
 Cubic Yard
 Dollars
 Cubic Yard
 Cubic Yard
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 204—7
 
 SECTION 205  BORROW AND EXCESS EXCAVATION
 SITES
 205.01 DESCRIPTION. Locate and acquire areas on or off of the right of way to
 either dispose of excess material or obtain additional material needed to construct the
 project according to plans.
 205.02 DISPOSAL OF EXCESS MATERIAL. Obtain approved sites for placing
 material off the right-of-way. When placing material, avoid any unsightly appearance.
 Place all excess material to avoid the obstruction of drainage. Seed and protect the excess
 material site and all temporary haul roads.
 When encountering unanticipated excess material resulting from landslides or
 approved slope changes, place it within the right-of-way at sites designated by the
 Engineer, or dispose of it off the right-of-way at sites either acquired by or approved by
 the Department.
 205.03 BORROW SITES. Use soil borrow materials with a minimum dry weight
 equal to or greater than the usable soils within the project limits as determined according
 to KM 64-511, and compact the materials to an in-place density according to Subsection
 206.03.03. Furnish and place special borrow materials according to the Contract.
 205.03.01 Historic Preservation. Protect cultural resources on borrow sites pursuant
 to the Historical Preservation Act of 1966.
 Before using any site for borrow material, certify to the Department that a
 professional archaeologist has performed an archaeological reconnaissance survey on the
 site and has completed a report confirming the presence, on the site, of any known cultural
 resources affected that are eligible for, or on, the national register of historic places.
 Additionally, certify to the Department that the state historic preservation officer has
 reviewed the professional archaeologist’s survey report of the site, and concurs with his
 findings. If any applicable cultural resources are present, mitigate according to Section
 106 of the Historical Preservation act of 1966 and certify that the adverse effects upon the
 resources have been palliated before using the site for borrow material.
 For borrow sites designated by the Department, the Department is responsible for
 assurances relative to cultural resources pursuant to the Historical Preservation Act of
 1966.
 If, during the course of borrow operations, any archaeological materials are
 encountered, cease work in the immediate area and notify the Engineer. Provide a
 professional archaeologist to conduct the necessary investigations to determine the
 significance of the cultural resources. Avoid the area of discovery until the investigation
 is complete. Should the resources prove to be significant (eligible for the National
 Register of Historic Places), fulfill the requirements of Section 106 of the Historic
 Preservation Act before proceeding. When operations on the project are suspended due to
 the unanticipated finding of archaeological materials in a previously approved borrow site,
 the Department will adjust the Contract time according to Subsection 108.07.
 205.04 SUBMITTALS. Submit for approval drawings of proposed borrow or excess
 material storage areas, showing the configuration of the original ground and the
 anticipated configuration of the area upon completion of the operations; any preparatory
 work such as benching; provisions for drainage of the area after completing borrow
 operations; and any other necessary information. The Department will not allow
 excavation of borrow pits adjacent to the toe of any embankment. The Department will
 pay for the geotechnical investigation and analysis of the proposed excess material storage
 area when one is requested by the Engineer. Ensure all work is performed by a prequalified geotechnical consultant and according to the Department’s Geotechnical Manual.
 Furnish copies of a written agreement with the property owner, approval of the
 owner(s) of utilities of any nature existing within the proposed area, and approvals from
 all applicable regulatory agencies including but not limited to the Natural Resources and
 Environmental Protection Cabinet, US Forest Service, US Coast Guard, Planning and
 
 205—1
 
 Zoning Commissions. Furnish cross sections and hydraulic computations for excess
 material storage area sites situated in the flood plain of any stream. For these
 computations, define this flood plain as that area required to pass the 100 year flood.
 Indicate with the computations the effect that the excess material site will have on both the
 design flood and the 100 year flood.
 Seed and protect all areas of the area except for noncommercial borrow pits,
 including haul roads, except areas of solid rock and areas to be under water in a pond,
 according to Section 212. The variety of seed may be altered upon written request from
 the property owner.
 205.05 MEASUREMENT. The Department will consider excavated material used to
 complete embankments, refill, or backfill and obtained from beyond the limits of the
 roadway section, but within the right-of-way limits specified in the Plans, as balance
 excavation and will pay for it as Roadway Excavation.
 The Department will consider obtaining the borrow or excess material sites and the
 professional archaeologist or any other work required for its historic preservation and
 conducting erosion control incidental to Embankment in place or Roadway Excavation.
 The Department will not measure overhaul of borrow material within the right of
 way.
 
 205—2
 
 SECTION 206  EMBANKMENT
 206.01 DESCRIPTION. Form embankments with materials from sources specified in
 the Plans or from other approved sources.
 206.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT. Use water conforming to Section 803.
 
 206.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 206.03.01 Embankment Foundations. Remove sod from all embankment areas to
 a depth of approximately 3 inches. The Engineer will not require the removal of sod when
 constructing embankments over marshy areas.
 Remove unsuitable material, including frozen material, encountered in embankment
 areas before placing any embankment material thereon.
 When the height of the embankment, at subgrade elevation, is to be greater than 3 feet
 above existing concrete pavement, either break the pavement until no fragments have a
 dimension greater than 3 feet or remove the pavement. When the height of the
 embankment, at subgrade elevation, is to be 3 feet or less above existing concrete
 pavement, remove the pavement.
 When placing embankment above existing asphalt pavement, break up to destroy all
 cleavage planes or remove as the Engineer directs.
 Cut benches with horizontal and vertical faces into the original ground of
 embankment foundations as required. When practical, benches should be into rock.
 Compact the horizontal face. Provide subsurface drainage as specified in the Plans or as
 the Engineer directs.
 206.03.02 Embankment. Excavate special ditches and channel changes before
 constructing adjacent embankment areas. Complete all embankment for any roadway,
 including ramps, frontage roads within the tolerances specified in Subsection 204.03.10.
 Use only acceptable materials from sources permitted in the Contract. Do not place
 frozen material, stumps, logs, roots, sod, or other perishable materials in any embankment.
 Do not place any stone or masonry fragment greater than 4 inches in any dimension within
 one foot of the finished subgrade elevation, unless rock roadbed is specified as provided in
 Subsection 204.03.10.
 The Department may allow concrete rubble, without protruding reinforcement, to be
 placed in embankment provided that no fragment is larger than one foot in any dimension
 or is placed within 2 feet of the subgrade.
 When crossing marshy or otherwise unstable areas, the Department may allow the
 first lift to exceed one-foot loose depth. Use rock or granular material in the first lift,
 when available, and construct by placing material behind the leading edge of the layer and
 blading into place to avoid unnecessary disturbance to the original ground.
 Drain, clean out, and fill ponds lying within the staked construction limits.
 Construct the upper one foot of the embankment with selected material placed in lifts
 not exceeding one foot loose thickness and compacted according to Subsection 206.03.03.
 When rock roadbed is specified, construct the upper 2 feet of the embankment
 according to Subsection 204.03.09 A).
 A) Embankments of Earth, Friable Sandstone, Weathered Rock, Waste
 Crushed Aggregate, Bank Gravel, Creek Gravel, or Similar Materials.
 Construct in lifts not exceeding one foot in thickness, loose depth, to the full
 width of the cross section, and compact the material. Shape the upper surface of
 the embankment to provide complete drainage of surface water at all times. Do
 not form ruts.
 B) Embankments Principally of Unweathered Limestone, Durable Shale (SDI
 equal to or greater than 95 according to KM 64-513), or Durable Sandstone.
 
 206—1
 
 Construct in lifts not exceeding 3 feet. Ensure that the maximum dimensions of
 boulders or large rocks placed in the embankment do not exceed 3 feet vertically
 and 4.5 feet horizontally. Place rocks having any dimension greater than 2 feet
 at least 2 feet below subgrade elevation. Do not dump rock into final position.
 Distribute the rock to minimize voids, pockets, and bridging. The Engineer will
 not require rolling in the construction of rock embankment. Do not construct the
 rock embankment to an elevation higher than one foot below subgrade elevation.
 C) Embankment of Rock/Shale/Soil Combination. Construct in lifts not
 exceeding one foot in thickness; however, when the thickness of the rock
 exceeds one foot, the Department may allow the thickness of the embankment
 lifts to increase, as necessary, due to the nature of the material, up to 2 feet.
 Apply a sufficient amount of water to induce slaking when mixtures contain 50
 percent or more non-durable shale. Do not dump the mixture into final position.
 Distribute the mixture in a manner that minimizes voids, pockets, and bridging.
 Refer to KM 64-002 for the proper compaction testing for this material.
 D) Embankments Principally of Non-Durable Shale (SDI less than 95
 according to KM 64-513). Remove or break down rock fragments or limestone
 slabs having thickness greater than 4 inches or having any dimension greater
 than 1 1/2 feet before incorporating them into the lift. Construct in loose lifts not
 exceeding 8 inches in thickness. Apply water to accelerate slaking. Uniformly
 incorporate the water throughout the lift using a multiple gang disk with a
 minimum disk diameter of 2 feet or other suitable equipment the Engineer
 approves. Compact with 30-ton static tamping foot rollers in conjunction with
 vibratory tamping foot rollers that produce a minimum compactive effort of 27
 tons and direct hauling equipment over the full width of the lift to aid in
 compaction. When questions arise regarding the durability of shale, use KM 64514 to estimate the durability of the material in the field.
 206.03.03 Compaction. Compact the embankment foundations and embankment to
 a density of at least 95 percent of maximum density as determined according to KM 64511. The Engineer will check density according to KM 64-002.
 During compaction, maintain the moisture content of embankment or subgrade
 material within ± 2 percent of the optimum moisture content as determined according to
 KM 64-511.
 Compact each lift as required before depositing material for the next lift. Provide
 equipment that will satisfy the density requirements at all times. Run the hauling
 equipment, as much as possible, along the full width of the cross section.
 206.03.04 Embankment Adjacent to Structures.
 Subsection 603.03.04 for backfill.
 
 Construct according to
 
 206.03.05 Embankment-in-Place. When the Contract designates original material
 as unsuitable for the embankment foundation, the Department will designate areas of
 Special Excavation and/or treatment and will give instructions about the removal and
 disposal of unsuitable foundation material in the Plans.
 When a bid item of special excavation has not been included in the Contract and the
 original ground is specified in the Plans as suitable to serve as the embankment foundation
 but the Engineer subsequently determines the material is unsuitable to remain in its
 original position, excavate and dispose of the unsuitable foundation material as directed.
 Incorporate the excavated material into embankments when manipulations such as
 spreading thin layers or drying the material make it acceptable for use as embankment-inplace. When excavated material cannot be used in embankments, dispose of the material.
 206.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure excavation of benches as
 Roadway Excavation or Embankment-in-Place, as applicable.
 The Department will measure the removal of unsuitable materials from embankment
 areas as Roadway Excavation or Special Excavation.
 
 206—2
 
 The Department will consider removing sod 3 inches or less in depth; removing
 and/or scarifying of existing pavements in embankment areas; and the addition of water to
 aid compaction incidental to the earthwork bid items.
 The Department will measure the quantity of unanticipated material resulting from
 landslides or authorized slope changes in place before excavation. The Department will
 include the quantity of unanticipated excess material under Embankment-in-Place. The
 Department will measure a second presplitting for payment according to Subsection
 204.04.04.
 206.04.01 Embankment-in-Place. The Department will measure the quantity in
 cubic yards as the design quantity shown within the neat lines of the cross sections on the
 Plans, increased or decreased by authorized adjustments according to Subsection
 204.04.02.
 Regardless of whether the excavated material is used as Embankment-in-Place or is
 disposed of, the Department will measure and pay for the volume of the unsuitable
 foundation material that is excavated as Embankment-in-Place. When the Engineer
 directs that the excavated material be disposed of, then the Department will measure the
 material used to replace the excess material as the same as the excavated volume, and will
 pay for the material as Embankment-in-Place. When the excavated material is used in
 embankment, the Department will make no separate payment for the material necessary to
 replace the excavated material.
 For embankment material obtained outside the right-of-way limits, conform to the
 requirements in Section 205.
 The Department will not measure excavation included in the original Plans that is
 disposed of for payment and will consider it incidental to Embankment-in-Place.
 The Department will not measure overhaul of material for payment and will consider
 it incidental to Embankment-in-Place.
 When payment is made for Embankment-in-Place, the Department will make
 payment for all embankment constructed on the project, including roadway embankment,
 refill in cuts, and embankment placed in embankment benches. The Department will not
 measure materials from authorized Roadway and Drainage Excavation for payment and
 will consider them incidental to the construction of Embankment-in-Place. The
 Department will include under authorized Roadway and Drainage Excavation, mainline
 excavation, embankment benches, special ditches, channel changes, tail ditches, surface
 ditches, interceptor ditches, entrances, and undercuts in rock cuts. The Department will
 not measure borrow excavation used to construct the embankment for payment and will
 consider it incidental to the construction of Embankment-in-Place.
 The Department will make adjustments to embankment-in-place projects when there
 is actually unanticipated excess material on the project. Excess material generated by the
 project phasing will not be considered for adjustment. The Department will make an
 adjustment for the actual costs incurred by the Contractor on the following items:
 excavation of material, clearing and grubbing, erosion control items and fuel adjustments.
 206.04.02 Special Excavation. The Department will measure the quantity in cubic
 yards as the design quantity shown within the neat lines of the cross sections on the Plans,
 increased or decreased by authorized adjustments as specified in Subsections 204.04.01
 and 204.04.02.
 The Department will not measure overhaul of material and will consider it incidental
 to Special Excavation.
 206.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02230
 02204
 02200
 
 Pay Item
 Embankment-in-Place
 Special Excavation
 Roadway Excavation
 
 Pay Unit
 Cubic Yard
 Cubic Yard
 See Section 204.05
 
 206—3
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 206—4
 
 SECTION 207  SUBGRADE
 207.01 DESCRIPTION.
 density.
 207.02
 
 Grade, shape, and compact the subgrade to the required
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT. Use water conforming to Section 803.
 
 207.03 CONSTRUCTION. Prepare a smooth subgrade without indentations to the full
 width of the widest course of the pavement system plus one foot additional width beyond
 each edge.
 Shape the subgrade to conform to the lines, grades, and cross sections specified in the
 Contract or as directed. Remove all high areas of the roadbed and fill all low areas with
 approved material and compact.
 Compact the subgrade to a uniform density throughout according to the density and
 moisture control requirements of Section 206.03.03. Should the subgrade subsequently
 lose its density due to exposure to severe weather conditions, after having been previously
 compacted to the required density during the construction of the grade, recompact it to the
 required density.
 Excavate and backfill areas of yielding or unstable material with approved material as
 the Engineer directs.
 When excess dust is present on the subgrade, either wet the material or completely
 remove and replace it with suitable material before any aggregate is placed thereon, at no
 additional expense to the Department.
 Prepare all subgrades before the base course or pavement construction to allow the
 required testing and checking of the subgrade before placing any aggregate. Furnish
 templates and labor required for checking the subgrade.
 207.03.01 Reshaping and Compacting. Scarify the existing road surface to a depth
 not exceeding 6 inches, and uniformly distribute the material so loosened over the surface
 of the road. Compact the subgrade according to Section 206.
 207.03.02 Construction Tolerances. On grade and drain projects, complete the
 subgrade to the tolerance specified in Subsection 204.03.10.
 When reshaping and compacting is not a bid item, the Engineer may allow minor
 adjustments in plan grades as he deems necessary.
 Before placing base or surface courses on rock subgrade constructed with a 0.2 foot
 tolerance, level it to meet the specified 1/2 inch tolerance for base or surface course
 preparation with materials from the pavement quantities.
 207.03.03 Protection and Maintenance. Complete all ditches and drains in order to
 drain the roadbed. Protect the subgrade. Repair all damage, and restore the subgrade to
 the required template.
 When hauling materials over the completed subgrade, use equipment with pneumatic
 tires. Do not operate equipment of such weight as to cause rutting on the subgrade.
 Do not allow the compaction equipment to cross any bridge deck within the limits of
 the project without permission of the Engineer.
 Do not store or stockpile materials on a completed subgrade.
 207.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will not measure preparation of the
 subgrade when the construction of the grade is a part of the Contract.
 The Department will not measure the repair of yielding or unstable areas for payment
 when construction of the base course or pavement is included in the same contract as
 construction of the grade. When the base and grade are in separate contracts, the
 Department will measure the removal and disposal of such material as Roadway
 Excavation and measure the backfill material as either Roadway Excavation or Borrow
 Excavation, as applicable. When the earthwork bid item is Embankment-in-Place, the
 Department will measure removal and replacement of yielding or unstable material in cut
 
 207—1
 
 areas as Special Excavation.
 The Department will not measure protection and repair of the subgrade for payment
 and will consider it incidental to the earthwork bid items.
 The Department will not measure water used for maintaining moisture for subgrade
 compaction and water used for conditioning the subgrade immediately in advance of base
 or pavement construction and will consider it incidental to the earthwork bid items.
 207.04.01 Reshaping and Compacting. When included as a bid item, the
 Department will measure the quantity horizontally along the centerline of the roadway in
 linear feet, exclusive of ramps, road approaches, cross roads, and frontage roads. When
 the project is a multiple-lane, divided highway, the Department will measure the quantity
 along the centerline of each roadway. When moisture and density control requirements, as
 provided in Subsection 206.03.03, have been waived, the Department will measure only
 the portion, or portions, of the project on which the work is actually done.
 Where it is necessary to excavate to a depth of more than 6 inches in reshaping the
 existing road surface or where it is necessary to pick up the material so loosened and move
 it longitudinally, the Department will measure the entire work as roadway excavation.
 207.04.02 Roadway Excavation.
 according to Subsection 204.04.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity
 
 207.04.03 Borrow Excavation.
 according to Subsection 205.04.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity
 
 207.04.04 Embankment-in-Place.
 according to Subsection 206.04.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity
 
 207.04.05 Dense Grade Aggregate and Crushed Stone Base. The Department will
 measure quantities used to level rock subgrade constructed from a 0.2 foot tolerance to a
 1/2 inch tolerance as pavement quantities according to Subsection 302.04.
 207.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02241
 02200
 02210
 02230
 02204
 00001
 00003
 
 Pay Item
 Reshaping and Compacting
 Roadway Excavation
 Borrow Excavation
 Embankment-in-Place
 Special Excavation
 DGA
 Crushed Stone Base
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 See Subsection 204.05
 See Subsection 205.05
 See Subsection 206.05
 See Subsection 206.05
 See Subsection 302.05
 See Subsection 302.05
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 207—2
 
 SECTION 208  CHEMICALLY STABILIZED ROADBED
 208.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct roadbed stabilization by uniformly mixing the
 specified chemical stabilizer, cement or lime, with the roadbed material, and moistening
 and compacting the resulting mixture.
 208.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 208.02.01 Cement. Select any type conforming to Section 801 except Type IV. Use
 the same type cement throughout the work.
 208.02.02 Lime. Select from the Department’s List of Approved of Materials for
 Lime (Hydrated and Quicklime).
 208.02.03 Asphalt Curing Seal. Use SS-1 or SS-1h conforming to Section 806.
 208.02.04 Water. Conform to Subsection 803.
 208.02.05 Sand. Use natural, crushed, or conglomerate conforming to Section 804.
 208.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 208.03.01 Temperature and Weather Limitations. Only apply stabilizer when the
 ambient air temperature is at least 40 °F in the shade and rising. Do not mix stabilizer
 with frozen soils or with soil containing frost.
 208.03.02 Preparation of Existing Roadway. Before proceeding with other
 construction operations, grade and shape the roadway to 0.1 foot below the grades, lines,
 and cross-section required for the completed roadway. Remove any organic material, such
 as roots, and any rocks larger than 4 inches from the material to be stabilized. Ensure that
 the elevation of the subgrade before stabilization is according to Subsection 204.03.10.
 When using lime as slurry, scarify to the depth required for the stabilization before
 application. Carefully control the depth of stabilization so the surface of the roadbed
 below the scarified material remains undisturbed and conforms to the established cross
 section.
 208.03.03 Application of Chemical. Apply the quantity of stabilizer and mix to the
 depth the Contract specifies or as the Engineer directs. The Department reserves the right
 to increase or decrease the quantity of stabilizer used and depth of treatment as deemed
 necessary by the Engineer.
 The Department will not accept any stabilizer that has been exposed to the open air
 for a period of 4 hours or more for payment. Replace any quantity lost due to rain or
 wind.
 Only allow traffic and equipment required for spreading, watering, or mixing on the
 spread stabilizer.
 Prepare, transport, and distribute stabilizer on the roadbed, and mix it with the soil in
 a manner that will not cause injury, damage, discomfort, or inconvenience to individuals
 or property. Do not apply stabilizer when wind conditions, as determined by the Engineer,
 are such that blowing stabilizer becomes hazardous to traffic, workmen, adjacent property,
 or results in adverse impact upon the public. Do not apply dry chemicals pneumatically.
 A) Cement. Spread the specified quantity of cement required for the full depth of
 treatment uniformly over the surface in one application.
 Only apply cement to an area of such size that all operations, dry mixing
 through cutting final grade, are completed within 6 hours. Perform all operations
 in a continuous manner and complete all operations during daylight hours.
 B) Lime. Only apply lime to an area of such size that all primary mixing operations
 
 208—1
 
 are completed within the same day. Perform all primary mixing operations
 during daylight hours. Spread the lime by any of the following methods:
 1)
 
 2)
 3)
 
 Slurry made with hydrated lime. Mix with water in agitating equipment and
 apply on the scarified area through distributing equipment. Use a distributor
 equipped to provide continuous agitation to ensure a uniform mixture from
 the mixing site until applied to the roadbed.
 Slurry made by slaking quicklime at or near the project site. Gain approval
 of all equipment and procedures before beginning work.
 Dry hydrated or quicklime when specified or when approved by the
 Engineer. Do not use in windy conditions. Use only when saturated soil
 conditions exist and the slurry method would worsen the situation or when
 weather conditions prohibit the use of slurry. Uniformly spread the lime
 without excessive loss. The Engineer will not require scarifying of the
 roadbed before placing dry hydrated or quicklime.
 
 208.03.04 Mixing.
 A) Cement.
 1)
 
 2)
 
 Dry Mixing. Immediately after distributing, mix the cement with the soil
 for the full depth of treatment. Take care to avoid mixing cement below the
 specified depth. Continue mixing until the cement has been sufficiently
 blended with the soil to prevent forming cement balls when applying water.
 Moist Mixing. Immediately after the soil and cement have been dry mixed,
 uniformly apply and incorporate water into the mixture. Apply the water
 uniformly using pressure-distributing equipment. The Department will
 allow application of water during dry mixing when introduced through the
 mixing machine.
 Immediately after mixing, the Engineer will determine the moisture
 content of the soil cement mixture. When directed by the Engineer,
 uniformly apply additional water. Avoid concentration near the surface
 when incorporating water into the soil and cement mixture. After adding
 the last increment of water, continue mixing until 100 percent of the soil
 passes a one inch sieve and at least 80 percent of the soil passes a No. 4
 sieve, exclusive of gravel or stone retained on these sieves.
 After completing the water application and mixing, ensure that the
 moisture content of the mixture is not below the specified optimum moisture
 or more than 2 percent above the specified optimum moisture, and is less
 than the quantity that causes the roadbed to become unstable during
 compaction and finishing. Do not allow any mixture of soil and cement that
 has not been compacted and finished to remain undisturbed for more than
 30 minutes. When the soil-cement mixture is wetted by rain to the extent
 that the moisture content exceeds the tolerance specified herein, reconstruct
 the entire section.
 
 B) Lime. During the period after the application of lime until completion of
 preliminary curing, add water to maintain the moisture content of the material at
 or above its specified optimum at all times. Because water is needed to sustain
 chemical reactions occurring after applying the lime, a continual application of
 water during mixing may be necessary even when the material is at optimum
 moisture when mixing begins.
 1)
 
 Primary Mixing. Immediately after spreading the specified quantity,
 thoroughly mix the lime into the soil for the full depth of treatment.
 Complete the primary mixing operation within 4 hours after applying lime.
 At this time, the result shall be a homogeneous, friable mixture of soil and
 
 208—2
 
 2)
 
 3)
 
 lime, free from clods or lumps exceeding 2 inches in size.
 After primary mixing, shape the lime treated layer to the approximate
 cross section and lightly compact to minimize evaporation loss. Crown the
 surface to provide surface drainage.
 Preliminary Curing (mellowing). Following primary mixing, allow 48
 hours for the roadbed to cure (mellow). The Department will allow
 remixing after 24 hours if the gradation requirement is obtained. The
 characteristics of the soil, temperature, and rainfall may influence the
 mellowing period necessary. During the mellowing period, keep the surface
 of the material moist to prevent drying and cracking.
 Final Mixing and Pulverizing. Within 72 hours after the preliminary curing,
 completely mix and pulverize the roadbed to the full depth of stabilization.
 Continue final mixing until 100 percent of the soil, exclusive of rock
 particles, pass the one inch sieve and at least 50 percent pass a No. 4 sieve.
 
 208.03.05 Compaction and Surface Finish. Compact the mixture uniformly for its
 full depth, to at least 95 percent of the maximum density determined according to KM 64511. The Engineer will determine the density. Compact continuously until completing
 the final compacted surface.
 After curing of the roadbed is completed, correct any stabilized roadbed that does not
 conform to the surface tolerances of Subsection 204.03.10 by leveling approved by the
 Engineer. Only remove material to level in small, isolated spots. Discard any material
 removed from the cured roadbed.
 208.03.06 Curing and Protection. After finishing the roadbed, protect it against
 drying by applying an asphalt curing seal.
 Apply the curing seal as soon as possible, but no later than 24 hours after completion
 of finishing operations. Keep the finished roadbed moist, by continuous sprinkling if
 necessary, until applying the curing seal. Only apply the asphalt material to a roadbed
 surface that is dense, free from loose extraneous material, and that contains sufficient
 moisture to prevent penetration of the asphalt material.
 Provide a curing seal consisting of the asphalt material specified and uniformly apply
 the curing seal at the rate of approximately 2.0 pounds per square yard. The Engineer will
 determine the actual rate and application temperature of asphalt material. Apply the
 curing seal in sufficient quantity to provide a continuous membrane over the roadbed. To
 avoid excessive runoff, apply the seal in 2 or more applications when directed or allowed,
 making each application as soon as possible after the previous application.
 Do not allow any traffic or equipment on the finished surface until 7 days above
 40 °F curing is completed or the roadbed cores achieve a minimum strength requirement
 of 80 psi. The Department will only require cores when the Contractor requests a
 shortened curing time. When a shortened curing time is requested, furnish cores to the
 treated depth of the roadbed at 500 feet intervals for each lane. The Department will test
 the cores using an unconfined compression test.
 If any damage occurs before curing is complete, immediately reseal the damaged
 area.
 If the asphalt material is tacky or sticky, apply a sand blotter material at a rate of
 approximately 5 pounds per square yard, when the Engineer directs, to avoid damage to
 the seal or to avoid tracking material onto other facilities.
 After the curing period, protect any finished portion of the roadbed that equipment
 travels on from being marred or damaged.
 Repair any damage caused by freezing.
 Make every reasonable effort to completely cover the stabilized roadbed with the
 specified pavement courses before suspending work for the winter months. If the
 stabilized roadbed is not completely covered by the specified pavement courses, determine
 and perform any further work necessary to protect and maintain the uncompleted work
 during the winter months. Perform any work necessary to acceptably repair or restore the
 uncompleted work before the beginning of spring paving operations. The Department
 
 208—3
 
 may require cores to be taken to verify that the stabilized roadbed was not unreasonably
 damaged from unprotected winter cycles. Perform all work necessary to protect, maintain,
 or repair the stabilized roadbed subject to the Engineer’s approval.
 208.03.07 Maintenance. Maintain the entire roadway within the limits of the
 Contract, for the duration of the Contract. Keep the roadway continuously intact by
 immediately repairing any defects that may occur either before or after completing the
 stabilized roadbed, at no expense to the Department. When making repairs, completely
 restore the uniformity of the surface and durability of the repaired portion.
 208.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will not measure extra materials, methods,
 or work for payment when used to protect, maintain, or repair uncompleted work.
 208.04.01 Cement. The Department will measure the quantity in tons. The
 Department will not measure cement for payment when exposed to the open air for a
 period of 4 hours; lost due to rain or wind; or used for corrective or reconstructive work.
 208.04.02 Lime. The Department will measure the quantity in tons. The
 Department will not measure lime for payment when exposed to the open air for a period
 of 4 hours; lost due to rain or wind; or used for corrective or reconstructive work.
 When quicklime is furnished for slurry application, the Department will measure the
 quantity in tons at 1.25 times the actual quantity. When hydrated or quicklime is
 furnished for dry application, the Department will measure the actual quantity applied to
 the roadbed.
 208.04.03 Cement Stabilized Roadbed. The Department will measure the quantity
 in square yards. The Department will not measure corrective or reconstructed work for
 payment. The Department will not measure hot-mixed asphalt for payment when used for
 corrective leveling. The Department will not measure water for payment and will consider
 it incidental to this item of work.
 208.04.04 Lime Stabilized Roadbed. The Department will measure the quantity in
 square yards. The Department will not measure corrective or reconstructed work for
 payment. The Department will not measure hot-mixed asphalt for payment when used for
 corrective leveling. The Department will not measure water for payment and will consider
 it incidental to this item of work.
 208.04.05 Asphalt Curing Seal. The Department will measure the quantity in tons.
 The Department will not measure corrective work for payment.
 208.04.06 Concrete Sand for Blotter. The Department will measure the quantity in
 tons.
 208.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02542
 00014
 00008
 00013
 00358
 02702
 (1)
 
 Pay Item
 Cement
 Lime
 Cement Stabilized Roadbed(1)
 Lime Stabilized Roadbed(1)
 Asphalt Curing Seal
 Sand for Blotter
 
 Pay Unit
 Ton
 Ton
 Square Yard
 Square Yard
 Ton
 Ton
 
 When the Engineer increases the depth of treatment, the Department will
 increase the quantity for that portion of the work as follows:
 
 208—4
 
 4 inches additional, multiply by 1.33
 8 inches additional, multiply by 1.50
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 208—5
 
 SECTION 209  DITCHING AND SHOULDERING
 209.01 DESCRIPTION. For ditching, perform all work necessary to provide complete
 drainage of all side ditches, including those on road approaches within the limits of the
 right-of-way, and dispose of materials removed. Additionally, repair eroded areas on
 embankment slopes.
 For shoulders, reshape existing or construct full depth earth shoulders, stabilized
 shoulders, or paved shoulders, and foundations for stabilized or paved shoulders,
 according to the Contract.
 209.02 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT. Construct shoulders, or foundations for
 stabilized or paved shoulders, using materials conforming to Section 206 or 302 as
 specified in the Contract. When rock roadbed construction is specified, conform to
 Subsection 204.03.09 A) for shoulders.
 209.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
 
 209.03.01 Ditching. Remove all vegetation, including bushes and trees less than one
 foot in diameter, and all debris from within the limits of ditching and shouldering
 operations. Dispose of the materials removed by clearing in a manner approved by the
 Engineer. Shape the ditches to the approximate dimensions of the typical section specified
 in the Contract or as the Engineer directs. When the width of an existing roadbed exceeds
 that in the typical section, the Engineer will not require reduction of that width. In the
 absence of a specified typical section, use a section typical of the existing roadway. When
 no specific typical section is called for, use a minimum vertical depth of side ditches of
 one to 2 feet below the finished shoulder elevation. Do not excavate below the elevation
 of the solid rock. Where the roadway width allows, shape all ditches to have a slope no
 steeper than 3:1 from the edge of the shoulder to the bottom of the ditch. Do not perform
 work beyond the ditch lines except where the back slopes are disturbed by the ditching
 operations. Shape the disturbed areas of the back slopes to conform to the adjoining areas.
 Where machine operations are limited by obstructions, provide all handwork necessary to
 provide satisfactory drainage.
 Use or dispose of the material removed from the ditches as approved by the Engineer.
 Submit written permission from the property owner to the Engineer before wasting
 material outside the right-of-way on private property.
 Reshape the ends of metal entrance pipe that may be deformed to original form.
 Remove deposits of soil and other debris from all existing entrance pipe.
 When proper drainage of an entrance pipe cannot be accomplished, the Engineer will
 consider cleaning complete when all soil and debris have been removed to an elevation at
 or below the grade of the finished ditch.
 When entrance pipe has so deteriorated as to become unsuitable for further service, as
 determined by the Engineer, remove and replace according to Section 701 with a pipe of
 similar size, material, and strength.
 A) Protection. Grade existing floater material on traffic-bound surfaces to the
 center or to the opposite side of the road before beginning ditching operations to
 prevent mixing floater material with material removed from the ditches, unless
 otherwise directed by the Engineer. Do not allow excess material to drift across
 the surfaced roadbed. Do not loosen or damage any portion of an existing
 surfaced area.
 Preserve delineators, mailboxes, mileposts, and similar
 installations. When their removal is necessary for the proper execution of the
 work, remove and replace them.
 Do not disturb private and public entrances except when it is necessary to
 remove an existing entrance pipe. Repair or replace any entrance pipe damaged
 during the work.
 When ditching and shouldering or ditching is included in a surfacing or
 resurfacing contract, complete ditching operations and as much of the shoulder
 
 209—1
 
 operations as is practical before beginning surfacing operations.
 Preserve mailboxes as specified in Subsection 107.12.02.
 B) Cleaning Cross Drainage Structures. When the proposal includes either the
 bid item of ditching and shouldering or ditching, clean all drainage structures,
 except box culverts and structures defined as bridges, of all sediment, drift, and
 other debris.
 209.03.02 Shouldering. On projects constructed as grade and drain only, or as grade
 and drain and traffic bound surface, construct the shoulders to the same requirements as
 specified for the subgrade. When shoulder material is of earth, compact a portion of the
 adjacent shoulder with each course of granular base. Before compaction of each course of
 granular base, place shoulder material against the base course to a minimum width of 18
 inches and in sufficient quantity so that, after compaction, the height of the partial
 shoulder conforms to the height of the compacted base course.
 Compact earth shoulders and foundations for paved or stabilized shoulders according
 to Subsection 206.03.03.
 Construct stabilized, aggregate, and paved shoulders as specified in the Contract.
 When reshaping existing shoulders, uniformly shape to a slope at least one inch per
 foot away from the edge of the existing surface. On projects not subject to the
 requirements of a typical section, shape the shoulder to at least 2 feet of width or a reduced
 width when deemed necessary by the Engineer. Furnish material from approved sources
 on or off the right-of-way at no additional expense to the Department.
 A) Drainage. Before construction of permanent lateral drains, provide drainage for
 the subgrade as directed. Construct permanent lateral drains through the full
 width of the earth shoulders at the locations as directed for shoulders greater than
 2 feet in width. On tangents, construct the drains on each side of the road at
 intervals not exceeding 100 feet, and stagger these drains on alternate sides of
 the roadway to provide a drain at intervals of approximately 50 feet. The
 Engineer may require the drains at shorter intervals, provided the increase in the
 number of drains does not exceed 10 percent. Cut the trenches to a width of 18
 inches and to a depth of 2 inches below subgrade, and slope the trenches away
 from the subgrade. In cut sections, the Engineer will not require lateral drains in
 areas where the flowline of the ditch is at or above the subgrade elevation. Skew
 the lateral drains downgrade a maximum of 45 degrees. Backfill the trenches to
 a depth of 6 inches or more with aggregate conforming to Subsection 704.02.
 When coarse aggregate is used for backfilling lateral drains, completely wrap the
 coarse aggregate in geotextile fabric conforming to the Department’s current
 requirements for fabric for subsurface drainage. Do not obstruct drainage
 through the lateral drains during final dressing or other operations. Do not
 construct any permanent lateral drains until completing all of the earthwork
 portion of the shoulder construction.
 B) Mailbox Turnouts. Protect the edge of the mainline pavement according to
 Standard Drawing RPM-110-05 when quantities are included in the Contract.
 C) Shoulder Completion. Due to the safety and protection of the traveling public,
 complete the shoulders on the project at the earliest practical time. When
 shoulder construction is part of this Contract and the pavement is open to public
 traffic, conform to signing requirements for low shoulders according to Section
 112 until the shoulders are completed.
 209.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 209.04.01 Aggregate for Shoulders, Entrances, and Mailbox Turnouts. When
 listed as a bid item, the Department will measure the quantity in tons weighed according
 to Section 109.
 
 209—2
 
 209.04.02 Entrance Pipe. The Department will measure the quantity according to
 Subsection 701.04.
 209.04.03 Granular Base. When the pavement design includes granular base
 material, the Department will measure granular material used in backfilling lateral drains
 in the same manner as the specified granular base material. The Department will not
 measure excavation for lateral drains, disposal of surplus materials, or furnishing and
 placing geotextile fabric for payment and will consider this work incidental to the granular
 base. However, when the pavement design does not include granular base material, the
 Department will consider furnishing aggregate, furnishing geotextile fabric, and
 constructing lateral drains incidental to shoulder construction.
 209.04.04 Ditching. The Department will measure the quantity horizontally as the
 gross length of the ditches cleaned in linear feet along the edge of the shoulder adjacent to
 the front slope of the ditch. The Department will not measure disposal of the materials
 removed by clearing and ditching for payment and will consider it incidental to Ditching.
 The Department will not measure cleaning out pipe structures 36 inches or less in
 diameter; reshaping any deformed ends on metal entrance pipe; and disposing of
 unsuitable entrance pipe for payment and will consider them incidental to Ditching.
 209.04.05 Shouldering. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet
 along the centerline of the roadway, which measurement will include the shoulder
 construction on both sides of the roadway. The Department will not measure disposal of
 the materials removed by clearing and will consider it incidental to Shouldering.
 209.04.06 Ditching and Shouldering. The Department will measure the quantity as
 the gross length of the project measured in linear feet along the centerline of the roadway.
 The Department will include in the quantity all work required on the road approaches
 within the limits of the right-of-way.
 The Department will not measure cleaning pipe structures 36 inches or less in
 diameter; reshaping any deformed ends on metal entrance pipe; and disposing of
 unsuitable entrance pipe and will consider them incidental to Ditching and Shouldering.
 The Department will not measure disposal of the materials removed by clearing and
 ditching and will consider it incidental to Ditching and Shouldering.
 209.04.07 Shoulder Surfacing. The Department will measure according to the
 applicable surfacing section. The Department will not measure the final roadway surface
 course for payment until the shoulders are completed. The Department will make partial
 payments for the final surface course for the portions of the project that the shoulders are
 substantially completed.
 209.04.08 Clean Pipe Structure. When cross drains and entrance pipe that exceed
 36 inches in diameter require cleaning, the Department will measure the quantity by each
 individual unit.
 209.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02237
 02714
 02575
 00067
 00068
 00077
 00003
 00439-00454
 
 Pay Item
 Ditching
 Shouldering
 Ditching and Shouldering
 Aggregate for Shoulders
 Aggregate for Entrances
 Aggregate for Mailbox Turnouts
 Crushed Stone Base
 Entrance Pipe, Size
 
 209—3
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Ton
 Ton
 Ton
 See Subsection 302.05
 See Subsection 701.05
 
 03262
 
 Clean Pipe Structure
 
 Each
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 209—4
 
 SECTION 210  EMBANKMENT DRAINAGE BLANKETS
 210.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct embankment drainage blankets for embankment
 stabilization.
 210.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 210.02.01 Coarse Aggregate (Rock Drainage Blanket). Conform to Section 805.
 210.02.02 Natural Sand (Sand Drainage Blanket). Conform to Section 804.
 210.03 CONSTRUCTION. Construct either a rock drainage blanket or sand drainage
 blanket according to the Plans or as the Engineer directs. When geotextile fabric is
 required, construct the drainage blanket according to Subsection 214.03.06.
 210.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure the quantity in cubic yards
 based on the design quantity.
 210.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 00021
 
 Pay Item
 Drainage Blanket, Embankment
 
 Pay Unit
 Cubic Yard
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 210—1
 
 SECTION 211  FINAL DRESSING
 211.01 DESCRIPTION. Perform Final Dressing, Class A on all grade and drain
 projects and grade, drain, and surface projects. Perform Final Dressing, Class B on
 surfacing projects and resurfacing projects when listed in the proposal as a separate
 Contract item.
 211.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT. Reserved.
 
 211.03 CONSTRUCTION. Perform final dressing to produce a uniform finish to all
 parts of the roadway.
 Do not disturb slopes having satisfactory vegetative covering without the Engineer’s
 approval.
 211.03.01 Final Dressing, Class A. Perform the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 
 Clear the right-of-way of all weeds, briers, bushes, and trees, except those trees
 designated by the Engineer to remain, when clearing and grubbing is a Contract
 item.
 Remove all sediment, drift, and other debris from all entrance structures and
 cross drainage structures.
 Dispose of the materials so removed.
 Shape areas designated by the Engineer to receive seeding and protection.
 Shape and dress shoulders, ditches, and slopes to the lines, grades, and cross
 sections specified in the Contract.
 Shape the slopes of ditches, channels, and borrow pits.
 Fill with suitable material, all holes and depressions resulting from the removal
 of structures, grubbing operations, or other construction operations.
 
 211.03.02 Final Dressing, Class B. Perform according to Final Dressing, Class A,
 except perform work from ditch line to ditch line.
 When solid rock is encountered in ditches, the Engineer will not require excavation
 below the elevation of the solid rock.
 211.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 211.04.01 Final Dressing, Class A. The Department will not measure Final
 Dressing, Class A for payment and will consider it incidental to the earthwork items bid.
 211.04.02 Final Dressing, Class B. The Department will measure Final Dressing,
 Class B as the net length of surfacing or resurfacing in linear feet. When the project is a
 multi-lane, divided highway and a portion is constructed as separate roadways, the
 Department will measure the actual length of the section or sections so constructed as the
 actual length of the right hand roadway as defined by the direction of the stationing. The
 Department will measure the quantity in feet along the centerline of the roadway. The
 Department will include in the quantity all final dressing within the lateral limits defined
 for Final Dressing, Class B, as specified in the Contract, and all necessary final dressing of
 borrow pits, waterways, ramps, cross roads, service roads, frontage roads, multi-level
 roadways, and approaches, and other areas falling outside the limits of the right-of-way
 but being appurtenant to the Contract.
 When the material removed as directed exceeds 12 inches in average depth, measured
 perpendicularly to the existing cross section lines, the Department will measure the
 additional material as Roadway Excavation.
 211.04.03 Roadway Excavation.
 according to Subsection 204.04.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity
 
 211—1
 
 211.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02601
 02200
 
 Pay Item
 Final Dressing, Class B
 Roadway Excavation
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 See Subsection 204.05
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 211—2
 
 SECTION 212  EROSION CONTROL
 212.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct brush barriers, prepare the soil for seeding, apply
 materials, and mulch areas seeded or sodded.
 212.02
 
 MATERIALS. Conform to Section 827.
 
 212.03 CONSTRUCTION. Progressively incorporate erosion control measures with
 the grading operations throughout the duration of the project according to Section 213.
 212.03.01 Brush Barriers. Construct barriers that are dense, 2 to 5 feet in height
 and 4 to 10 feet wide. Do not locate barriers where diverted drainage will create erosion
 problems.
 Do not use brush barriers at sites where the adjacent private property has been
 residentially or commercially developed. Do not construct the barriers at sites easily and
 routinely seen that will detract from the appearance of either the adjacent property or the
 completed highway.
 212.03.02 Topsoil. When included in the Contract as a bid item, either furnish and
 place topsoil or place stockpiled topsoil.
 A) Furnish and Place Topsoil. When the bid item is furnish and place topsoil,
 obtain topsoil conforming to Section 827 from source outside the right-of-way
 limits. Avoid injury to existing planted growths, structures, and paved surfaces
 during topsoil operations.
 Provide equipment and methods of operation that prevent the loading of
 subsoil or other unsuitable material with the topsoil. During hauling operations,
 keep pavement surfaces clean. Promptly and completely remove any topsoil or
 other substances dropped on the surfaces before it is compacted by traffic.
 Prepare areas designated to receive topsoil. Then place and spread topsoil
 to a sufficient loose depth so that after natural settlement and rolling, the
 completed work conforms to the required line, grades, and elevations. Compact
 the topsoil and prepare the area for seeding according to Subsection 212.03.03.
 B) Spreading Stockpiled Topsoil. When the bid item is spreading stockpiled
 topsoil, obtain the material from existing stockpile on or near the project.
 Do not spread topsoil until grading and shaping of the area to receive the
 topsoil has been completed and seeding and protection operations are ready to
 begin. Spread and lightly compact the topsoil to a uniform depth of
 approximately 6 inches over areas specified in the Plans or as the Engineer
 directs. Do not place topsoil on slopes steeper than 3:1.
 Prepare the area for seeding according to Subsection 212.03.03.
 212.03.03 Permanent Seeding and Protection. Grade exposed earth and any other
 erodible areas to a uniform cross section or slope as soon as practical in the judgment of
 the Engineer and then perform permanent seeding and protection at the earliest practical
 time.
 Prepare all areas within the construction limits and right of way limits that can be
 expected to sustain plant growth and are not covered by satisfactory vegetation for
 permanent seeding. The Engineer will designate areas to be seeded.
 A) Seed Mixtures for Permanent Seeding.
 For all projects within urban areas the seed mix will be modified to only include
 Fescue and Ryegrass.
 Seed Mix Type I:
 
 30% Kentucky 31 Tall Fescue (Festuca arundinacea)
 
 212—1
 
 20% Creeping Red Fescue (Festuca rubra)
 35% Hard Fescue (Festuca (Festuca longifolia)
 10% Ryegrass, Perennial (Lolium perenne)
 5% White Dutch Clover (Trifolium repens)
 Seed Mix Type II:
 
 60% Kentucky 31 Tall Fescue (Festuca arundinacea)
 20% Ryegrass, Perennial (Lolium perenne)
 10% (based on pure live seed, PLS) Little Bluestem
 (Schizachyrium scoparium)
 10% Partridge Pea (Cassia fasciculate)
 
 Seed Mix Type III:
 
 40% Kentucky 31 Tall Fescue (Festuca arundinacea)
 15% Perennial Ryegrass Lolium perenne)
 20% Sericea Lespedeza (Lespedeza cuneata)
 15% Partridge Pea (Cassia fasciculate)
 10% (based on pure live seed, PLS) Little Bluestem
 (Schizachyrium scoparium)
 
 1)
 2)
 
 3)
 
 Permanent Seeding on Slopes 3:1 or Less. Apply seed mix Type I at a
 minimum application rate of 100 pounds per acre.
 Permanent Seeding on Slopes Greater than 3:1 in Highway Districts 4, 5, 6,
 and 7. Apply seed mix Type II at a minimum application rate of 100
 pounds per acre plus a nurse crop of either Cereal Rye or German FoxtailMillet based on the time of year. During the months of June through
 August, apply 10 pounds of German Foxtail-Millet (Setaria italica). During
 the months of September through May, apply 56 pounds of Cereal Rye
 (Secale cereale). If adjacent to golf courses replace the crown vetch with
 Kentucky 31 Tall Fescue.
 Permanent Seeding on Slopes Greater than 3:1 in Highway Districts 1, 2, 3,
 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12. Apply seed mix Type III at a minimum application rate
 of 100 pounds per acre plus a nurse crop of either Cereal Rye or German
 Foxtail-Millet based on the time of year. During the months of June
 through August, apply 10 pounds of German Foxtail-Millet (Setaria italica).
 During the months of September through May, apply 56 pounds of Cereal
 Rye (Secale cereale). If adjacent to crop land or golf course replace the
 Sericea Lespedeza with Kentucky 31 Tall Fescue.
 
 B) Procedures for Permanent Seeding. Include a seeding plan in the Best
 Management Practices plan (BMP) according to Section 213. Prepare a seedbed
 and incorporate a minimum of 100 pounds of nitrogen, 100 pounds of phosphate,
 100 pounds of potash, and 3 tons of agricultural limestone per acre. Add
 additional fertilizer and agricultural limestone as needed. Do not apply dry
 agricultural Limestone when it may generate a traffic hazard. Remove all rock
 and dirt clods over 4 inches in diameter from the surface of the seedbed. Unless
 the Engineer directs otherwise, track all slopes 3:1 or greater. Ensure that
 tracking is performed up and down and not across. Native Grass seed should be
 calculated figuring seed on a pure live seed basis (PLS), using the least amount
 of inert matter available. Seed and mulch to produce a uniform vegetation cover
 using the seeding rates as indicated to each application. Mulch with clean, weed
 free straw. Place straw to an approximate 2-inch loose depth (2 tons per acre)
 and anchor it into the soil by mechanically crimping it into the soil surface or
 applying tackifier to provide a protective cover. For the periods of March 1
 through May 15 and from September 1 through November 1, the Department
 
 212—2
 
 may allow the option of using hydromulch at minimum rate of 1,500 pounds per
 acre in place of straw with tackifier. Regardless of materials used, ensure the
 protective cover holds until seeding is acceptably established according to part
 G) of this subsection.
 C) Crown Vetch. When Seed Mix Type II is specified, sow crown vetch seed on
 all areas having a slope 3:1 or steeper and consisting of soil or mixtures of
 broken rock and soil. Also, sow crown vetch on soil seams and crevices within
 or adjacent to rock cuts and flat areas of benched slopes. Sow crown vetch seed
 uniformly at a rate that will provide 9 live seedlings per square yard and at a rate
 of no less than 30 pounds per acre.
 D) Top Dressing. When quantities for 20-10-10 fertilizer are included in the
 Contract, apply a top dressing of 20-10-10 fertilizer to all seeding and sodded
 areas on the project at a rate of 11.5 pounds per 1,000 square feet. Use dry
 fertilizer delivered to the project in bags or bulk. Apply top dressing to all areas
 within the right of way limits where satisfactory vegetation has been established
 or preserved. Apply top dressing at the time the Contract or Engineer designates;
 however, do not apply top dressing during the months of December and January.
 Do not apply top dressing until a satisfactory stand of vegetation exists. The
 Engineer will not require incorporation of these materials into the soil. Reapply
 fertilizer to any top dressed areas that later exhibit streaked or missed areas. Reestablish any vegetation severely damaged or destroyed because of an excessive
 application of fertilizer.
 When seeding performed during the latter part of the project has not had
 time to attain significant growth before completing all other Contract items, the
 Engineer will declare the project complete without regard to top dressing work.
 Perform top dressing at a later time approved by the Engineer. The Engineer
 will not include the time necessary to complete top dressing work in the Contract
 item and will assess no liquidated damages provided the work is completed
 within the time limits according to Subsection 108.09.
 E) Erosion Control Blanket. Install erosion control blankets in ditches, except
 those to be paved or rock lined, to a flow depth of 1.5 feet. Install erosion
 control blankets on final soil-like slopes as designated on the Erosion Control
 Plan and as the Engineer directs. Prepare the bed by loosening the soil to a depth
 of 2 to 3 inches. Apply fertilizer, limestone, and seed at the permanent seeding
 rate. Cover with the erosion control blanket. Roll out the blanket in the
 direction of the anticipated run-off flow. Anchor the blanket at the top and toe of
 slopes and at the top, toe, and edges of channels and ditches as the “Anchoring
 Edges and Ends” figure shows, including burying the blanket. Secure the
 blanket by stapling as the “Stapling Pattern” figure shows. At seams, overlap the
 blanket as the “Seam Overlaps” figure shows. Rework areas that become
 unstable or do not establish vegetation.
 
 212—3
 
 F) Maintenance of Seeded Areas. From the time seeding and protection work
 begins until the date the project is declared complete, keep all seeded areas in
 good condition at all times. Promptly repair any damage to seeded areas or to
 mulch materials as directed. Mow when the Engineer directs.
 G) Acceptance of Seeding. The Engineer will make an inspection to determine the
 acceptability of the seeding between 3 and 6 months after completion of the
 project. The Engineer may delay the inspection when conditions are such that
 the acceptability of the seeding cannot be determined at the end of the 6-month
 
 212—4
 
 period. Ensure the seeded areas have a soil pH level of 6.0 or greater. Ensure
 that at least 90 percent of each seeded area has a minimum of 1,350 live
 seedlings per square yard at the time of inspection, representative of the specified
 seed mixture with no vacant areas larger than 25 square yards. Also, ensure that
 all applicable areas have a minimum of 9 live area seedlings per square yard of
 crown vetch. Conform to this requirement for all permanent seeding performed
 in conjunction with the project regardless of the type of protection used or the
 season in which the seeding is performed.
 When seeding does not conform to the live seedling requirements at the
 time of inspection, submit a corrective work plan to the Engineer for approval
 and perform the additional work necessary to conform to the original
 requirements. The Department reserves the right to specify application rates for
 agricultural lime, fertilizer, seed, and mulch for corrective seeding.
 212.03.04 Sodding. At locations specified in the Contract or by the Engineer,
 prepare the sod bed, incorporate fertilizer and agricultural limestone as needed and place
 sod flush with any adjacent seeded or turfed area, pavement, curb, or other structures.
 The Engineer will make an inspection to determine the acceptability of the sod
 between 3 and 6 months after completion of the project. Ensure that at least 90 percent is
 alive with no area of dead sod larger than one square yard.
 212.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 212.04.01 Brush Barriers. The Department will not measure the quantity of brush
 barriers for payment and will consider construction of brush barriers incidental to Clearing
 and Grubbing.
 212.04.02 Topsoil Furnished and Placed. The Department will measure the
 quantity in cubic yards in the vehicle at the point of delivery.
 212.04.03 Spreading Stockpiled Topsoil. The Department will measure the
 quantity in cubic yards by taking cross sections of stockpiles immediately before
 spreading operations, and taking final cross sections of the stockpile area after spreading
 has been completed and the area neatly dressed.
 When electing to place the topsoil directly without stockpiling, according to
 Subsection 204.03.07 B), then the Engineer will not separately measure the topsoil not
 stockpiled.
 212.04.04 Agricultural Limestone. The Department will not measure the quantity
 of agricultural limestone for payment and will consider it incidental to Seeding and
 Protection and Sodding.
 212.04.05 Fertilizer. The Department will not measure the fertilizer used in the
 seeding or sodding operations for payment and will consider it incidental to these items of
 work.
 The Engineer will measure the fertilizer used for top dressing in tons. The Engineer
 will weigh top dressing according to Section 109.
 212.04.06 Seeding and Protection. The Department will measure the quantity in
 square yards as the design quantity specified in the Plans, increased or decreased by
 authorized adjustments. When it can be shown actual quantities vary from the design
 quantity by more than 10 percent, the Department will measure the actual quantity in
 square yards.
 The Department will include in the authorized adjustments any seeding and
 protection necessary due to catastrophic events that are beyond the control of the
 Contractor.
 The Department will not measure any corrective work required to conform to
 
 212—5
 
 Subsection 212.03.03 F).
 The Department will not measure seeding and protection of areas unnecessarily
 disturbed or disturbed areas outside the limits of construction.
 212.04.07 Erosion Control Blanket. The Department will measure the quantity of
 Erosion Control Blanket by the square yard of surface covered. The Department will not
 measure seeding for payment and will consider it incidental to the Erosion Control
 Blanket. The Department will not measure any reworking of slopes, channels, or ditches
 for payment as it is considered corrective work and incidental to the Erosion Control
 Blanket.
 212.04.08 Sodding. The Department will measure the quantity in square yards. The
 Department will not measure any additional sod necessary to restore areas that fail to
 conform to the original requirements.
 212.04.09 Crown Vetch. The Department will measure the quantity in square yards.
 212.04.10 Mowing. When mowing is required, the Department will measure and
 pay for the quantities under a supplemental agreement.
 212.05 PAYMENT. The Department will pay for the completed and accepted
 quantities under the following:
 Code
 05997
 05998
 05966
 05985
 05950
 05989
 05990
 
 Pay Item
 Topsoil Furnished and Placed
 Spreading Stockpiled Topsoil
 Topdressing Fertilizer
 Seeding and Protection
 Erosion Control Blanket
 Special Seeding Crown Vetch
 Sodding
 
 Pay Unit
 Cubic Yard
 Cubic Yard
 Ton
 Square Yard
 Square Yard
 Square Yard
 Square Yard
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 212—6
 
 SECTION 213  WATER POLLUTION CONTROL
 213.01 DESCRIPTION. Control water pollution through use of berms, dikes, dams,
 sediment basins, fiber mats, netting, gravel, mulches, grasses, slope drains, and other
 erosion control devices or methods. Coordinate these measures with the permanent
 erosion control features specified in Section 212 and the Contract to the extent practical to
 ensure effective and continuous erosion control throughout the construction and post
 construction period.
 213.02
 
 MATERIALS AND PERSONNEL.
 
 213.02.01 Materials. Conform to Section 827.
 213.02.02 Personnel. Provide a qualified erosion and sediment control inspector.
 The Department will require the erosion and sediment control inspector to have
 successfully completed the KEPSC-RI Qualification Training and Testing Course.
 Personnel that have not successfully completed the course will not be considered
 qualified.
 213.03 CONSTRUCTION. Conform to the applicable provisions of KRS Chapters
 220 and 224 of the State Water Pollution Control Laws and other applicable statutes
 relating to the prevention or abatement of water pollution. Conform to the requirements of
 all Federal and State agencies having jurisdictional control over the land the project is
 constructed through. Secure all permits and clearance letters from the appropriate
 agencies for impacts to streams and for borrow and excess material sites, when these areas
 have not been assessed or permitted by the Department.
 Exercise every reasonable precaution to prevent the pollution of streams, lakes, and
 reservoirs. Construct all permanent drainage structures, ditch checks, and paved ditches as
 soon as practical. Conduct and schedule operations to avoid the muddying or siltation of
 streams, lakes, and reservoirs and to avoid damage to fish habitats. While work on an
 item is suspended, do not leave the partially completed item in a manner that will
 contribute to erosion.
 Construct water pollution controls in stream channels only in areas where channel
 changes or channel clearings are specified in the Plans or where necessary for temporary
 or permanent structures. Do not divert water through channel changes until the specified
 channel lining has been constructed or placed, unless there is no alternative in the
 judgment of the Engineer.
 Do not place material removed from the roadway or channel changes in streams,
 stream channels, other areas subject to flooding, or other locations where it may be
 washed away by high stream flows or fast runoff. Do not place harmful materials where
 they may be carried into a stream or into underground water at any time.
 Provide temporary bridges or structures for hauling materials across streams. Do not
 operate mechanized equipment in streams except as required for the construction of
 structures and channel changes, or for clearing channels.
 Keep clearing of stream side trees to the absolute minimum necessary for the
 construction of the project.
 When materials known to produce pollutants are encountered, excavate, place, cover,
 or otherwise deter the material as a potential pollutant according to the Contract and as the
 Engineer directs.
 Do not disturb lands and waters outside the limits of the construction. Before final
 acceptance of the work, reshape all such disturbed areas, including abandoned haul roads,
 storage areas, and plant sites, to conform to the adjacent ground.
 213.03.01 Best Management Practices (BMP). Before any disturbance is made,
 sign the BMP Plan from the proposal, perform an initial site inspection with the Engineer,
 record what areas are to be disturbed to begin the project, designate on this report what
 BMPs will be used, design BMPs according to good engineering practices, and install the
 
 213—1
 
 designated BMPs. Before opening or affecting any new areas, repeat this process and
 ensure all BMPs are installed before starting. The Department will apply a penalty equal
 to the liquidated damages when any disturbance is made without adequate BMPs in place.
 The penalty will be assessed each day until adequate BMPs are installed. Include erosion
 control for all off right of way work performed under a Department acquired permit.
 Ensure that the BMP is available for public inspection throughout the life of the
 project.
 213.03.02 Progress Requirements. Coordinate the progress of both permanent and
 temporary erosion control measures with the clearing, grubbing, and grading operations
 throughout the duration of the project, and according to the BMP.
 The Engineer will limit the area of excavation, borrow, and embankment operations
 commensurate with the Contractor’s capability of maintaining the finish grading, seeding,
 and other such permanent pollution control measures according to the accepted schedule.
 For areas greater than 750,000 square feet submit a written request for approval to the
 Engineer. Keep the duration of the exposure of the uncompleted construction as short as
 practical.
 After exposing areas of erodible material, make every effort to stabilize and protect
 the areas as quickly as possible. Seed and mulch areas at final grade within 14 days.
 Temporary mulch areas not at final grade within 14 days of the last construction activity if
 work is to be stopped for longer than 21 days. Temporary mulch soil stock piles within 14
 days of the last construction activity in that area. Upon failure to coordinate the erosion
 control measures with the grading operations in a manner to effectively control erosion
 and to prevent water pollution, the Engineer will suspend the grading operations and
 withhold monies due on current estimates until all aspects of the work are coordinated in
 an acceptable manner. Additionally, the Department will apply a penalty equal to the
 liquidated damages when all aspects of the work are not coordinated in an acceptable
 manner within 5 days after written notification.
 In case of repeated failures to control erosion, pollution, or siltation, the Engineer
 reserves the right to employ outside assistance or use Department forces to provide the
 necessary corrective measures. The Department will charge such incurred direct costs
 plus project engineering costs to the Contractor and make appropriate deductions from the
 pay estimate.
 213.03.03 Inspection and Maintenance. Ensure a qualified erosion and sediment
 control inspector inspects all erosion control devices weekly and after each 0.5-inch
 rainfall event. Remove all accumulated silt when the devices are one-third full.
 The Engineer will monitor the in-place erosion control for the project once every 7
 calendar days and within 24 hours following a 0.5-inch or greater rainfall. The Engineer
 will furnish the documentation of this monitoring and any proposed changes due to this
 monitoring to the Contractor. This documentation and any proposed changes are to be
 included with the BMP Plan. Initiate corrective action within 24 hours of any noted
 deficiency and complete the work within 7 calendar days of receipt of the report. The
 Contractor shall make a concentrated effort to complete any corrective action required
 prior to the next predicted rainfall event.
 When the Contractor is required to obtain the KPDES permit, it is their responsibility
 to ensure compliance with the inspection and maintenance requirements of the permit.
 The Engineer will perform verification inspections a minimum of once per month and
 within 7 days of a ½ inch or greater rainfall event. The Engineer will document these
 inspections using Form TC 63-61 A. The Engineer will provide copies of the inspection
 only when improvements to the BMP’s are required. Verification inspections performed
 by the Engineer do not relieve the Contractor of any responsibility for compliance with the
 KPDES permit. Initiate corrective action within 24 hours of any noted deficiency and
 complete the work within 7calendar days of receipt of the report. The Contractor shall
 make a concentrated effort to complete any corrective action required prior to the next
 predicted rainfall event.
 
 213—2
 
 213.03.04 Construction Activities Affecting Streams. When in-stream work is
 unavoidable, perform it in a manner and duration to minimize re-suspension of sediments
 and disturbance to substrates and bank or riparian vegetation. To the maximum extent
 practical, perform all work during low flow conditions. Take appropriate measures to
 maintain normal downstream flows and minimize flooding to the maximum extent
 practicable. Investigate for water in-takes or other activities immediately downstream
 affected by increased turbidity resulting from the work. Before beginning any work in the
 stream, give sufficient notice to allow the downstream water users to prepare for any
 temporary change in water quality.
 Use non-erodible fill or riprap that will not adversely affect the biological, chemical
 or physical properties of the receiving waters or cause violations of water quality
 standards. When riprap or channel lining is installed, use a weight and size that will not
 create bank stress or slump conditions.
 On channel slopes not riprapped or otherwise stabilized, re-vegetate stream banks and
 riparian zones concurrently with Project progression to restore beneficial wildlife habitat.
 When specified in the Contract, randomly place, in offset rows, trees and shrubs as
 specified in the Plans; on either one side or both sides of the channel bank; and upstream
 and downstream of a proposed bridge within the disturbed area as specified in the Plans.
 Limit each species to 20 percent of the total. The Contract will specify the seeds, shrubs,
 and trees and include a quantity to be selected from each category. The Plans will include
 the rate of seeding. The Department may allow an adjustment in the plant species and
 quantities based on field conditions.
 Do not dump spoil materials from the watercourse or on-shore operations, including
 sludge deposits, into the watercourse according to Section 404 guidelines of the Clean
 Water Act. Provide areas of deposit of dredged materials with temporary dikes or
 bulkheads for separation and retention of settleable solids.
 When specified in the Plans, place soil excavated from an existing channel at
 designated locations along the new channel. This, and any stockpiling or double handling
 necessary is considered incidental to the earthwork bid items on the project.
 Carry out the fill created by the discharge and any disposition of dredged or
 excavated materials on-shore, and all earthwork operations to control and minimize
 sediment run off and soil erosion to the watercourse.
 Place all permanent structures in the stream to allow fish movement through the site.
 When specified in the Plans, construct artificial riffle structures, flow deflectors, boulders,
 or other types of structures to replace in stream aquatic habitat.
 213.03.05 Temporary Control Measures. Provide and maintain immediate
 permanent or temporary pollution control measures to prevent contamination of adjacent
 property, watercourses, lakes, ponds, or other areas of water impoundment.
 Incorporate all permanent erosion control features into the project at the earliest
 practical time as outlined in the accepted schedule. Provide inlet and outlet protection at
 existing drainage structures. Install temporary controls as needed through the duration of
 the project. Coordinate the temporary pollution control measures with the permanent
 erosion control features to the extent deemed practical by the Engineer to ensure effective
 and continuous erosion control throughout the construction and post-construction periods.
 Temporary pollution controls may include construction work outside the right-of-way
 where such work is necessary as a result of roadway construction such as borrow pit
 operations, haul roads, and equipment storage sites.
 A) Sedimentation Basins. As the first grading operation in the drainage area,
 construct an earth, or rock and earth, dam with designated spillways according to
 the Plans. When a sedimentation basin is to be used and plans are not included
 in the Contract, submit plans designed according to Chapter 10 of the
 Department’s Drainage Guidance Manual to the Engineer for approval before
 construction.
 Either clean out and dress or remove the sedimentation basin, as the
 Engineer directs, upon completion of the project.
 
 213—3
 
 B) Silt Traps. Use one of the following types:
 1)
 
 2)
 
 3)
 
 Type A. Construct silt traps by excavating basins in natural or excavated
 channels. Traps may consist of a pit, a berm, or both. Excavate pits, from 2
 to 4 feet deep, 20 to 30 feet in length, and 5 to 10 feet in width. Do not
 construct berms greater than 3 feet in height without the Engineer’s
 approval.
 Type B - Construct silt traps in roadway ditches or excavated channels. Use
 Type II geotextile fabric; clean No. 2 aggregate or shot rock of similar size,
 quality, and gradation approved by the Engineer; and crushed aggregate.
 Construct according to the Plans and Standard Drawings.
 Type C – Place interlocking layers of bagged aggregate around curb inlets,
 drop box inlets, and culvert inlets according to the Standard Drawings.
 
 Remove sediment deposited in silt traps when they are greater than half full.
 When no longer needed, remove the silt traps and dispose of surplus materials
 according to Subsection 204.03.08. Seed and protect, or sod, the entire area
 disturbed, as the Engineer directs. Do not leave silt traps in place after
 completion of the project unless allowed by the Engineer or specified in the
 Plans.
 C) Temporary Silt Fence. Furnish, install according to the Standard Drawings,
 maintain, and remove temporary silt fence. The temporary silt fence works as a
 water permeable filter to remove suspended particles from the water passing
 through it.
 Construct as shown in the Contract continuous and transverse to the flow.
 Limit the equivalent runoff area to 1,000 square feet per 10 feet of temporary silt
 fence. Leave gaps and install Type A Silt Traps in low areas or drainways.
 Maintain the temporary silt fence after installation.
 Remove silt
 accumulations by tapping the dry fabric from the downstream side and dispose
 of it as excavated materials. Replace the geotextile fabric when clogging,
 damage, or deterioration prevents it from functioning properly.
 When no longer needed, remove and dispose of the fence off the right-ofway. Dispose of the accumulated silt or dress in place, and seed and protect the
 area.
 D) Temporary Ditch. As erodible areas are exposed, construct temporary ditches
 where needed to divert runoff from erosive soil areas to the silt traps or checks or
 silt ditches. Construct interceptor ditches or silt fences at the top of cut slopes
 when beginning excavation. Construct ditches adjacent and parallel to the rightof-way in relatively rolling areas where, in the judgment of the Engineer,
 adjacent property may be damaged from sheet-type soil erosion. Construct silt
 checks within the ditch or at the outlet. Construct surface ditches, roadside
 ditches, and flumes to carry runoff from the roadway at the earliest possible time
 during the grading work. Construct the ditches according to the Plans and
 Standard Drawings at the locations designated by the Engineer.
 When needed, use pipe as liners for these temporary ditches. The Engineer
 will approve the type and location of the ditches as well as the need for a liner.
 Install the pipe liner according to the Plans and Standard Drawings. Use pipe of
 any substantial type or material for overflow pipe in the construction of
 temporary silt basins and for flumes.
 When fill slopes have been constructed to such a stage that protection of the
 face of the slope from roadway runoff is necessary, construct a temporary earth
 mound ditch or silt fence at the outer edge of the shoulder along the top of the
 embankment as directed by the Engineer. Construct the ditch to form an earth
 mound on the embankment side of the ditch and carry runoff from the roadway
 along the shoulder to the flumes and roadside ditches. Use temporary berm
 ditches at the top of fill slopes after completing the permanent seeding and
 
 213—4
 
 protection work and until beginning the surfacing operations. Stabilize the ditch
 and mound by spraying with asphaltic material when deemed necessary.
 E) Temporary Seeding and Protection. Apply an Annual Rye seed mix at a rate
 of 100 pounds per acre during the months of March through August. In addition
 to the Annual Rye, add 10 pounds of German Foxtail-Millet (Setaria italica),
 when performing temporary seeding during the months of June through August.
 During the months of September through February, apply Winter Wheat or Rye
 Grain at a rate of 100 pounds per acre. Obtain the Engineer’s approval prior to
 the application of the seed mixture.
 Promptly perform the work of temporary seeding and protection to prevent
 visible erosion. Protect all seeded areas with a mulch that precludes siltation.
 Perform temporary seeding and protection under the following conditions:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 When it is impractical to bring an area to final line, grade, and finish so that
 permanent seeding and protection work can be performed without
 subsequent serious disturbance by additional grading.
 When soil erosion occurs, or is considered to be a potential problem, on
 areas where construction operations are temporarily suspended.
 When an immediate cover would be desirable to minimize erosion, siltation,
 or pollution.
 On temporary roadways that are expected to remain in place for longer than
 30 days and that are constructed of erodible materials.
 
 F) Temporary Mulch. Obtain the Engineer’s approval for the mulch before use.
 When Temporary Seeding and Protection would be required, but the time of
 exposure is 30 days or less, perform the work of temporary mulching to prevent
 visible erosion. Place temporary mulch to an approximate 2-inch loose depth (2
 tons per acre) and anchor it into the soil by mechanically crimping it into the soil
 surface or applying tackifier to provide a protective cover. Regardless of the
 anchoring method used, ensure the protective cover holds until disturbance is
 required or permanent controls are in installed.
 213.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will consider the various materials and
 labor used to construct, maintain, and, when no longer needed, remove the erosion control
 devices incidental to the initial construction.
 The Department will not measure maintenance or corrective work for payment when
 it is due to a failure in following the BMP.
 213.04.01 Roadway Excavation.
 according to Subsection 204.04.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity
 
 213.04.02 Embankment-in-Place. The Department will measure the quantity
 according to Subsection 206.04.
 213.04.03 Temporary Seeding and Protection. The Department will measure the
 quantity in square yards. The Department will not measure temporary erosion and
 pollution control measures required due to negligence, carelessness, or failure to install
 permanent controls as a part of the work as scheduled. When construction of a temporary
 roadway is required by the Contract, the Department will measure the associated
 temporary seeding and protection. The Department will not measure temporary seeding
 and protection of temporary roadways constructed for the convenience of the Contractor.
 213.04.04 Temporary Mulch. The Department will measure the quantity in square
 yards. The Department will not measure temporary erosion and pollution control
 measures required due to negligence, carelessness, or failure to install permanent controls
 as a part of the work as scheduled. When construction of a temporary roadway is required
 
 213—5
 
 by the Contract, the Department will measure the associated temporary mulch. The
 Department will not measure temporary mulch for temporary roadways constructed for the
 convenience of the Contractor.
 213.04.05 Pipe for Flumes. The Department will measure the quantity in linear
 feet.
 213.04.06 Sedimentation Basin. The Department will measure the quantity in cubic
 yards. The Department will not measure filter pipe, drain pipe, and spillway paving on
 sedimentation basins for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 213.04.07 Clean Sedimentation Basin. The Department will measure the quantity
 of sediment removed in cubic yards.
 213.04.08 Silt Trap, Type. The Department will measure the quantity by each
 individual unit.
 213.04.09 Clean Silt Trap, Type. The Department will measure the quantity by
 each individual unit.
 213.04.10 Temporary Silt Fence. The Department will measure the quantity in
 linear feet from end post to end post of each installation.
 213.04.11 Clean Temporary Silt Fence. The Department will measure quantity in
 linear feet along the fence.
 213.04.12 Temporary Ditch. The Department will measure the quantity in linear
 feet. The Department will measure pipe used in temporary ditches according to
 Subsection 213.04.06. The Department will not measure materials used to construct silt
 checks within the temporary ditch and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 213.04.13 Channel Lining, Classes IA, II, III, and IV. The Department will
 measure the quantity according to Subsection 703.04.
 213.04.14 Plants, Trees, Vines, and Shrubs. The Department will measure the
 quantity by each individual unit.
 213.04.15 Deflector, Gabion. The Department will measure the quantity by each
 individual unit.
 213.04.16 Deflector, Dumped Stone. The Department will measure the quantity by
 each individual unit.
 213.04.17 Riffle Structure, Dumped Stone. The Department will measure the
 quantity by each individual unit.
 213.04.18 Riffle Structure, Gabion. The Department will measure the quantity by
 each individual unit.
 213.04.19 Boulder. The Department will measure the quantity by each individual
 unit.
 213.04.20 Clean Temporary Ditch. The Department will measure the quantity in
 linear feet along the ditch line.
 213.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 
 213—6
 
 Code
 05985
 02200
 02210
 02230
 05953
 05952
 ----02711
 02712
 02703, 02704, 02705
 02706, 02707, 02708
 02701
 02709
 02482-02484,
 02488
 --------02618
 02617
 02738
 02622
 02713
 02159
 02160
 
 Pay Item
 Seeding and Protection
 Roadway Excavation
 Borrow Excavation
 Embankment-in-Place
 Temporary Seeding and Protection
 Temporary Mulch
 Pipe for Flumes
 Sedimentation Basin
 Clean Sedimentation Basin
 Silt Trap, Type
 Clean Silt Trap, Type
 Temporary Silt Fence
 Clean Temporary Silt Fence
 Channel Lining, Classes IA, II, III, and IV
 
 Pay Unit
 See Subsection 212.05
 See Subsection 204.05
 See Subsection 205.05
 See Subsection 206.05
 Square Yard
 Square Yard
 Linear Foot
 Cubic Yard
 Cubic Yard
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 See Subsection 703.05
 
 Plants, Vines, and Shrubs
 Trees
 Deflector, Gabion
 Deflector, Dumped Stone
 Riffle Structure, Dumped Stone
 Riffle Structure, Gabion
 Boulder
 Temporary Ditch
 Clean Temporary Ditch
 
 See Subsection 724.05
 See Subsection 724.05
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 213—7
 
 SECTION 214  GEOTEXTILE CONSTRUCTION
 214.01 DESCRIPTION. Install geotextile fabric, when required in the Contract, for
 slope protection and channel lining, underdrains and drainage blankets, and subgrade or
 embankment foundation stabilization.
 214.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 214.02.01 Geotextile Fabric. Conform to Section 843.
 214.02.02 Steel Pins. Conform to Section 843.
 214.03 CONSTRUCTION. The Engineer will reject the fabric if it has defects, rips,
 holes, flaws, deterioration, or damage.
 Prepare the surface to receive the fabric to a smooth condition, free of obstructions,
 debris, or sharp objects that may puncture the fabric. Place the fabric smooth and free of
 tension, stress, folds, wrinkles, or creases. Do not operate equipment directly on the
 fabric. Protect the fabric at all times from contamination. Remove and replace any
 contaminated fabric with uncontaminated fabric.
 Repair or replace any fabric damaged. Repair individual isolated cuts, tears, or
 punctures by placing a patch of geotextile fabric that extends at least 3 feet beyond the
 damage in all directions or by field splicing the patch.
 Cover the fabric with a layer of the specified material within 14 calendar days.
 Remove and replace fabric not covered within the 14 days.
 214.03.01 Laps. When more than one strip is necessary, place an overlap of at least
 18 inches. Place transverse laps so the upstream strip laps over the downstream strip.
 Place horizontal laps so the upper strip laps over the lower strip.
 Install fastener pins through both strips of overlapped fabric at no less than 5-foot
 intervals along a line through the midpoint of the overlap, and at any other locations as
 necessary to prevent any slippage of the fabric.
 The Department will allow field splices in place of laps.
 214.03.02 Field Splices. Sew the full length of the boundary between adjacent
 sheets of fabric. Ensure that the seam strength conforms to the requirements of Section
 843.
 214.03.03 Slope Protection and Channel Lining. Place Type I fabric with the long
 dimension parallel to the channel or toe of slope.
 Protect the fabric from damage due to the placement of the slope protection or
 channel lining either by limiting the height of drop of the material to no greater than 3 feet
 or by placing a cushioning layer of sand on top of the fabric before dumping the material.
 Demonstrate to the Engineer that the placement technique prevents damage to the fabric.
 Begin placement of material at the toe and proceed up the slope.
 214.03.04 Underdrains. Place and shape Type II fabric to the sides and bottom of
 the trench without stretching the fabric. Place filter aggregate so as not to damage,
 displace, or dislodge the fabric according to Subsection 704.03. Fold the fabric over the
 backfilled trench and secured it with steel pins at intervals of 5 feet to produce a double
 thickness of fabric over the top of the trench.
 214.03.05 Subgrade or Embankment Foundation Stabilization. Place Type III
 fabric with the long dimension parallel to the long dimension of the area to be covered.
 Leave surface vegetation in place.
 During back dumping and spreading, do not allow the wheels of trucks, dozer blades,
 and other equipment to come into direct contact with the fabric. Spread the material in the
 direction of the fabric overlap. If large fabric wrinkles develop during spreading
 
 214—1
 
 operations, fold and flatten the wrinkles in the direction of spreading. Avoid large folds
 which reduce the fabric overlap width.
 214.03.06 Drainage Blankets. Place Type IV fabric with the long dimension
 parallel to the long dimension of the area to be covered.
 Place the drainage blanket material to present a reasonably even surface free from
 mounds or depressions. After the material is placed, fold the fabric over the ends and
 sides of the material, and place additional fabric over the material so that the material is
 completely encased within the fabric. Install additional pins, regardless of the location, as
 necessary to prevent any slippage of the fabric. Place the fabric so that laps do not occur
 at the edges or ends of the drainage blanket. Place embankment in a manner to avoid
 damage or displacement of the completed drainage blanket.
 214.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure the quantity in square yards.
 The Department will not measure fabric when the Contract indicates the fabric is
 incidental to the work or when the specification for another item requires incidental
 installation of geotextile fabric.
 The Department will not measure material in laps or seams.
 When fabric is used for underdrains, either to wrap perforated pipe or to wrap
 aggregate, the Department will measure the quantity according to Subsection 704.04.
 When the fabric is used to completely enclose an aggregate drainage blanket, the
 Department will measure the quantity as the sum of (1) the area of the lower surface of the
 aggregate layer, (2) the area of the upper surface of the aggregate layer, and (3) the area of
 the sides and ends of the aggregate layer; using the dimensions specified in the Plans.
 The Department will not measure for payment the repair or replacement of damaged
 fabric or replacement of fabric not covered within 14 days.
 214.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02596-02599
 
 Pay Item
 Fabric-Geotextile, Type
 
 Pay Unit
 Square Yard
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 214—2
 
 SECTION 215  TREATMENT OF OPEN SINKHOLES
 215.01 DESCRIPTION. Clean and fill open sinkholes and cap open sinkholes not used
 for drainage. Protect sinkholes not being filled and capped.
 215.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 215.02.01 Geotextile Fabric. Conform to Section 843, Type IV.
 215.02.02 Concrete. Use Class B concrete conforming to Subsection 601.02 and
 601.03.
 215.02.03 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 215.03 CONSTRUCTION. Locate and flag all open sinkholes before starting clearing
 and grubbing operations. Clear the sinkhole area according to Section 202. Remove the
 soil overburden, organic material, and debris from the sinkhole as specified in the Plans or
 as directed by the Engineer.
 Place geotextile fabric between any soil and the Granular Embankment Refill. Refill
 the sinkhole with Granular Embankment, and compact it as the Engineer directs. Furnish
 Granular Embankment refill conforming to the following requirements:
 A) Roadway Excavation. When obtaining granular embankment from roadway
 excavation, the Engineer will accept it by visual inspection. Use granular
 embankment that is free of shale or other deleterious materials.
 B) Off-Site Materials. Use granular embankment having no more than 10 percent
 passing the No. 200 sieve when tested according to KM 64-606. The Engineer will
 inspect the quality of all granular embankments. The Engineer will accept the
 processed material by visual inspection when the material includes a significant
 amount of fragments greater than 1 1/2 inches. Do not use natural sand and other fine
 aggregates. The Engineer will approve the size and type of refill.
 C) Clay. For clay soil cap, use an impervious clay the Engineer approves. Compact
 according to Section 206.03.03.
 D) Concrete. Use a cap of reinforced concrete, precast or cast-in-place, with a
 minimum thickness of one foot as specified in the Contract or as the Engineer directs.
 Use Class B concrete according to Subsection 601.03. Furnish precast concrete
 according to Section 605. Reinforce the concrete with No. 8 bars placed on one-foot
 centers in both directions, and located 3 inches from the bottom surface of the
 concrete. Interlock the concrete cap with bedrock.
 Protect sinkholes not to be filled and capped when runoff may reach its location.
 Place a protective ring using Type II geotextile fabric; clean No. 2 aggregate or shot rock
 of similar size, quality, and gradation approved by the Engineer; and crushed aggregate.
 215.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 215.04.01 Granular Embankment. When the material is available within the rightof-way, the Department will consider granular embankment used for refill incidental to
 roadway excavation or embankment-in-place. When material within the right-of-way is
 unacceptable for refill, the Department will measure the quantity in cubic yards as
 Granular Embankment.
 215.04.02 Clay Soil Cap. The Department will not measure the clay soil cap as a
 separate item of work and will consider it incidental to roadway excavation or
 embankment-in place.
 215.04.03 Geotextile Fabric. The Department will measure the quantity according
 
 215—1
 
 to Subsection 214.04.
 215.04.04 Concrete, Class B. The Department will measure the quantity according
 to Subsection 601.04.
 215.04.05 Cleaning Sinkhole. The Department will measure the quantity by each
 individual unit cleaned.
 215.04.06 Steel Reinforcement. The Department will measure the quantity
 according to Subsection 602.04.
 215.04.07 Crushed Aggregate. The Department will measure the quantity in tons
 according to Section 109.
 215.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02223
 02596-02599
 02555
 02469
 08150
 -----
 
 Pay Item
 Granular Embankment
 Geotextile Fabric, Type
 Concrete, Class B
 Clean Sinkhole
 Steel Reinforcement
 Crushed Aggregate, Size
 
 Pay Unit
 Cubic Yard
 See Subsection 214.05
 See Subsection 601.05
 Each
 See Section 602.05
 Ton
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 215—2
 
 SECTION 216  SETTLEMENT PLATFORMS
 216.01 DESCRIPTION.
 Furnish all materials, construction, installation, and
 maintenance of settlement platforms as the Engineer directs.
 216.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 216.02.01 Miscellaneous Metals. Conform to Section 813.
 216.02.02 Fine Aggregate. Conform to Section 804.
 216.02.03 Steel Pipe. The Engineer will visually inspect for acceptance.
 216.03 CONSTRUCTION. Fabricate from the materials and to the dimensions
 specified in the Plans or Standard Drawing for settlement platforms.
 Level the ground surface to an elevation 2 inches below the desired elevation of the
 base plate of the settlement platform. Level over a sufficient area to accommodate the
 bottom plate and at the location shown or directed. Place, lightly tamp, and level a 2-inch
 layer of fine aggregate at the proposed location of the bottom plate. Set and level the
 bottom plate on the fine aggregate. Place loose soil to an elevation corresponding to that
 of the top plate of the settlement platform. Ensure that the loose soil does not disturb the
 platform and that it extends laterally from the perimeter of the top plate to a slope of 1:1 or
 flatter. After placing and leveling the top plate, complete the embankment as specified for
 the project, and ensure that the settlement platform is not damaged or disturbed.
 The Engineer will measure and record settlement, to the nearest 0.01 foot, and
 elevation of the embankment at weekly intervals or more frequently in order that no more
 than 10 percent of the expected settlement occurs between readings. The Engineer will
 submit the data to the Division of Materials weekly.
 Stop work at any location where settlement platforms are disturbed or damaged, and
 make necessary repairs or replacement. As the embankment is constructed, add sections
 of 2 1/2-inch and 4-inch pipe to the assembly (tighten each new section of 2 1/2-inch pipe
 with a pipe wrench before taking a reading to ensure that the next added section does not
 affect future readings). Keep the top of the outer pipe closed as work progresses with a 4inch standard cap. When work is complete, secure the cap to the final outer pipe section.
 216.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 216.04.01 Settlement Platforms. The Department will measure the quantity by
 each individual unit.
 216.04.02 Steel Pipe. The Department will measure each size in linear feet.
 216.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02692
 03340
 03343
 
 Pay Item
 Settlement Platform
 Steel Pipe, 2 1/2-inch
 Steel Pipe, 4-inch
 
 Pay Unit
 Each
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 216—1
 
 DIVISION 300
 AGGREGATE BASE COURSES
 
 SECTION 301  TRAFFIC-BOUND BASE
 301.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct traffic-bound base courses with one or more
 courses of coarse aggregate on a prepared subgrade.
 When the Contract provides for traffic-bound surfacing of road approaches, private
 entrances, and turnouts in conjunction with other highway surfacing or paving operations,
 perform such work according to Section 112.
 301.02
 
 MATERIALS. Furnish aggregate conforming to Section 805.
 
 301.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 301.03.01 Preparation of Subgrade. Prepare and maintain the subgrade according
 to Section 207.
 301.03.02 Placing Aggregates. Spread the aggregate in the number of courses and
 at the rate of application indicated in the Contract to the width and depth specified. Place
 additional aggregate to strengthen weakened areas as the Engineer directs.
 When practical, route hauling equipment uniformly over all portions of the previously
 laid courses of the base. The Department will not require any additional compaction.
 Obtain the Engineer’s permission prior to revising this procedure for distribution of
 aggregate into the Dense Grade Aggregate or Crush Stone Base lift.
 When plans require the removal and replacement of traffic bound base, any new
 aggregate used will be paid as traffic bound base. When the Engineer deems the traffic
 bound base has been contaminated by the Contractor or their vendors with foreign
 materials to such an extent that it no longer provides the required riding surface, replace
 the traffic bound base at no cost to the Cabinet. All traffic bound base used for mailbox
 turn outs and entrances is to be paid as part of the bid item.
 301.04 MEASUREMENT.
 according to Section 109.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity in tons
 
 301.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 00020
 
 Pay Item
 Traffic-Bound Base
 
 Pay Unit
 Ton
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 301—1
 
 SECTION 302 — DENSE GRADED AGGREGATE BASE (DGA)
 AND CRUSHED STONE BASE (CSB)
 302.01
 
 DESCRIPTION. Construct the base on a prepared subgrade.
 
 302.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 302.02.01 Aggregate. Conform to Section 805.
 302.02.02 Water. Conform to Section 803.
 302.02.03 Mixer. Equip the mixer with a water flow system with a positive cut-off
 control that will stop the flow of water simultaneously with any stoppage in the flow of
 aggregate and with valves or other devices that can be easily reset when a change in the
 rate of flow is desired.
 302.03 CONSTRUCTION. Prepare the subgrade according to Section 207, and keep it
 free from irregularities.
 When reshaping and compacting or scarifying and reshaping is not specified for
 existing traffic-bound surfaces, grade and shape to the grade and cross section required.
 Construct shoulders according to Section 209.
 302.03.01 Mixing. Thoroughly mix the aggregate and water in a pugmill type
 mixer, unless another type mixer is approved. Add water as needed to compact to the
 specified in-place density.
 302.03.02 Transporting. Transport the plant-mixed material to the project without
 loss or segregation. Cover each truck load with a heavy canvas sheet to reduce the loss of
 moisture during transit.
 302.03.03 Placing and Spreading. Place and shape the mixture by use of approved
 power equipment, to the specified lines, grades, cross sections, and depths, without
 segregation. Equipment used should provide a uniform depth and cross section unless
 special circumstances prevent the use of the equipment. In these cases, written approval by
 the Engineer must be obtained prior to placement of the material..
 Place, spread, shape, and compact in a manner that is as continuous as practical
 during each day’s run. Wet the base as directed during shaping and compaction
 operations to maintain the moisture content at the level necessary to ensure proper
 compaction. Placement of aggregate base courses is not allowed from December 15th to
 March 31st without the permission of the Engineer.
 When the required thickness of base is no more than 8 inches for CSB and 6 1/2
 inches for DGA and the Engineer is satisfied that acceptable compaction can be achieved
 throughout the full depth, place the material in one layer. Otherwise, place the material in
 2 or more layers of no less than 3 inches.
 Wet the subgrade or previous base layer as directed before placing the base material.
 302.03.04 Compacting.
 A) Control Strips. Before constructing the base, complete a control strip to
 determine the level of compaction necessary to achieve the target density for the
 remaining base course. Construct additional control strips whenever a change is
 made in the source, gradation, type of subgrade, type of base aggregate, layer
 thickness, or as the Engineer requires.
 
 302—1
 
 B)
 
 C)
 
 D)
 
 E)
 
 Compact with an effort greater than or equal to that produced by a 16-ton
 pneumatic roller, or an 8-ton steel-wheel vibratory roller. Operate vibratory
 rollers according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
 Leave each control strip in place to become part of the project. Complete at
 least one control strip for each layer of base material. Unless the Engineer
 approves otherwise, construct the control strip to a minimum length of 500 feet
 and to the full lane width of the aggregate base course being placed at that time.
 Use the same equipment and procedures intended for the construction of the
 remainder of the base course. After 2 passes of the compaction equipment the
 Department will mark and take 3 density measurements at randomly selected
 sites, at least 2 feet from the edge of the base. The Department will take density
 measurements at the same 3 locations after subsequent passes of the compaction
 equipment. Compact the control strip until no further increase in density can be
 obtained from additional passes.
 The Engineer will visually inspect the base material after each pass to
 determine if the aggregate is being crushed into fine material. If the aggregate
 is being crushed, cracked, shoved, or shows other signs of distress, cease
 compaction efforts. If compaction of the base is not satisfactory, use other
 methods to achieve satisfactory results.
 Regardless of lift thickness, the Department will require a control strip to
 establish a roller pattern.
 Target Density. After completing compaction of the control strip, the Engineer
 will conduct 10 field density measurements at random locations in the control
 strip and average the 10 measurements to obtain the target density for the
 compaction of the base.
 Field Density Measurement. When the total compacted thickness is 4 inches or
 more, the Engineer will determine the field density with nuclear gauges. When
 the total compacted thickness is less than 4 inches, the Engineer will determine
 compaction by nuclear gauge or make acceptance by visual inspection.
 Test Sections. The Engineer will divide the remaining tonnage of base after the
 control strip into lots of 500 tons of material. Each lot will be tested at five
 random locations determined by random number generator. The average of the 5
 tests must be at least 98 percent of the target density with no individual
 measurement less than 95 percent of the target density.
 When the average density of a test section does not meet the density
 required above, cease laydown operations, and either provide additional
 compaction effort or rework the entire test section to obtain the required average
 density. When an individual density measurement does not meet the required
 density, provide additional compaction efforts or rework the area represented by
 that measurement to meet the required density.
 General. Maintain the initial layers of base to a uniform grade and cross section
 during compaction. Shape the final layer with additional material when
 necessary.
 When trimming the final layer to the final grade with an automatic grading
 machine, provide a layer approximately 1/2 to one inch above grade for
 continuous cutting. After making the final pass with the grading machine, wet
 and roll the base with a static roller. The Engineer will recheck density to ensure
 the material still conforms to the density requirements. Reuse excess material
 removed by the grading machine in shoulders, islands, or other areas where
 aggregate stone base is specified, but not under roadway pavement.
 Use manually operated mechanical tampers in areas inaccessible to power
 equipment.
 Do not add fines to meet target density.
 
 302.03.05 Maintenance and Protection. Restrict traffic on the completed base to
 the minimum necessary to complete the work, and maintain public traffic. Moisten areas
 subjected to traffic, as directed, to avoid the loss of fine materials. If desired, use a diluted
 
 302—2
 
 emulsified asphalt for dust control. Placement of materials on the aggregate base is to be
 limited until the base has cured to proper strength.
 Before constructing succeeding courses, check for damage, such as raveling and lost
 density, and recheck the grade and cross section. Make corrections as necessary.
 Make every reasonable effort to completely cover the aggregate base course with a
 minimum of 1 course of pavement before suspending work for the winter months. When
 the aggregate base course is not completely covered with the specified pavement courses,
 determine and perform all work necessary to protect and maintain the uncompleted work
 during the winter months. Perform all work necessary to acceptably repair or restore the
 uncompleted work before the beginning of spring paving operations. Obtain the
 Engineer’s approval for all work necessary to protect, maintain, and repair the base.
 302.03.06 Surface Tolerances. Ensure that the surface of the top course of the base
 is smooth and uniform. When performing final grading, trim the base to within ± 1/2 inch
 of the specified cross section and ± 3/8 inch in 10 feet from the specified longitudinal
 grade at any location or to an accuracy allowing the succeeding courses to meet their
 specified surface and thickness tolerances, whichever is stricter.
 Furnish all devices and labor necessary to check the surface.
 302.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will not measure water used to moisten
 the subgrade, for mixing the base material, and to maintain moisture during compaction
 and maintenance of the base for payment.
 The Department will measure the quantity of plant-mixed materials according to
 Section 109. The Department will not make deductions for water in the mixture.
 The Department will not measure construction of control strips, any necessary
 reworking of control strips, or test sections for additional payment.
 The Department will not measure dust control for payment.
 The Department will not measure any work necessary to check the final surface
 tolerances for payment.
 The Department will not measure for payment any extra materials, methods, or
 construction techniques, the Engineer determines not to be a part of the specified
 construction, to protect, maintain, or repair any portion of the uncompleted work during
 the winter months.
 The Department will measure and deduct material wasted from trimming the final
 grade.
 302.04.01 Dense Aggregate Base. The Department will measure the quantity in
 tons.
 302.04.02 Crushed Stone Base. The Department will measure the quantity in tons.
 302.05 PAYMENT. The Department will pay for the completed and accepted
 quantities under the following:
 Code
 00001
 00003
 
 Pay Item
 DGA Base
 Crushed Stone Base
 
 Pay Unit
 Ton
 Ton
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 302—3
 
 SECTION 303  PAVEMENT DRAINAGE BLANKET
 303.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers pavement drainage blankets. For JPC
 pavements, construct either an asphalt-treated or cement-treated drainage blanket. For
 asphalt pavements, construct an asphalt-treated or cement-treated drainage blanket as the
 Contract specifies.
 303.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 303.02.01 Aggregate. Use crushed stone conforming to Sections 804 and 805.
 303.02.02 Asphalt Binder. Conform to Section 806, PG 64-22.
 303.02.03 Cement. Conform to Section 801, Type I or III.
 303.02.04 Water-Reducing Admixture. Conform to Subsection 802.01, Type A,
 D, F, or G.
 303.02.05 Water. Conform to Section 803.
 303.02.06 Curing Compound. Conform to Subsection 823.02.
 303.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 303.03.01 Composition.
 A) Asphalt-Treated Drainage Blanket (ATDB). Use No. 57 aggregate or a
 gradation within the master range in the following table:
 Sieve Size
 1 1/2 inch
 3/4 inch
 1/2 inch
 No. 4
 No. 8
 No. 200
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 85-100
 35-65
 0-20
 0-10
 0-4
 
 Test gradation according to KM 64-407, KM 64-433, or KM 64-620.
 Use an asphalt binder content of 1.5 to 2.5 percent by weight of the mixture.
 When using a porous aggregate, increase the asphalt binder content as needed to
 compensate for asphalt absorption by the aggregate. Submit aggregate samples
 and a proposed JMF for approval according to KM 64-421. Maintain the JMF
 asphalt binder content within ± 0.5 percentage points as determined according to
 KM 64-405, KM 64-436, or AASHTO T 308.
 Asphalt binder content will be based on visual inspection of the extent the
 aggregate is coated. The Department will not adjust payment due to adjustment
 of the asphalt binder content.
 Request adjustments in the JMF gradation if deemed necessary to increase
 stability of the drainage blanket, providing the revised JMF gradation and asphalt
 binder content are maintained within the specified limits.
 B) Cement Treated Mixture. Provide Size No. 57 aggregate. Submit aggregate
 samples and proposed cement content, and the Engineer will perform testing as
 necessary to determine if the proposed mix design is acceptable.
 Ensure the mix design conforms to the following:
 1)
 
 Minimum compressive strength of 400 psi shall be attained in 72 hours ± 6
 
 303—1
 
 2)
 3)
 
 hours. Determine the compressive strength according to KM 64-305, except
 the specimen shall remain in the mold until the time of the test.
 Maximum water/cement ratio of 0.37.
 Use a water-reducing admixture.
 
 303.03.02 Placement of Drainage Blanket.
 A) ATDB. All requirements of Section 403 for asphalt mixtures apply, except as
 follows:
 1)
 
 Maintain the temperatures of the materials and the mixture, in degrees
 Fahrenheit, within the following ranges:
 Aggregate
 Asphalt Binder
 Mixture at Plant
 Mixture When Placed
 
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 5)
 
 Minimum
 200
 200
 200
 180
 
 Maximum
 260
 260
 260
 260
 
 Avoid excess drainage of the asphalt binder while being stored.
 Compact the ATDB using a smooth-wheel roller. Do not use vibrating
 rollers. Avoid over rolling to the extent that aggregate particles are broken.
 The surface of the ATDB shall be smooth and uniform, and shall reasonably
 conform to the specified lines, grades, and typical section. The completed
 ATDB shall meet the surface tolerances specified in Subsection 403.03.11
 for base courses. Perform any corrective work necessary using asphalt
 mixtures the Engineer approves. The Department will not allow procedures
 or mixtures that might produce fine material that would tend to clog or
 reduce drainage.
 Allow the ATDB to cure at least 10 hours, or as the Engineer directs, before
 placing subsequent courses.
 
 B) Cement-Treated Drainage Blanket.
 1)
 2)
 
 3)
 
 4)
 
 Plant, Mixing, and Hauling. Conform to the applicable batch plant, mixing
 procedures, and hauling equipment requirements of Section 501 for JPC
 pavement.
 Placing and Spreading. Use spreading, consolidation, and finishing
 equipment that conforms to the requirements of Section 501, or is approved
 by the Engineer upon demonstration of satisfactory performance on a test
 strip of approximately 3,000 square yards.
 Compaction. Compact the material with a steel-wheeled, tandem roller
 weighing approximately 10 tons, unless the drainage blanket is placed by a
 slip-form paver and the Engineer determines consolidation is acceptable
 without rolling. Compact within 30 minutes after spreading by completing
 at least 2 complete coverages of the drainage blanket with the roller. Provide
 sufficient equipment and rollers to ensure that no more than 1.25 hours
 elapse between the time that water is added to the combined aggregate and
 cement and the time the final compaction is completed.
 Curing. Cure by one of the following methods immediately after spreading
 and compacting the drainage blanket:
 a)
 
 Cover the entire surface and exposed edges of the drainage blanket with
 transparent or white plastic of at least 4 mils thickness. For asphalt
 pavements, hold the plastic in place with aggregate or other acceptable
 means for at least 3 days. Immediately repair any damage occurring to
 the plastic during the curing period.
 
 303—2
 
 b)
 5)
 
 6)
 7)
 
 Membrane-cure according to Subsection 601.03.17 B). For JPC
 pavements, the Department will waive the curing time requirements.
 
 Surface Finish. The surface of the drainage blanket shall be smooth and
 uniform, and shall reasonably conform to the specified lines, grades, and
 cross section. Ensure the completed drainage blanket does not show a
 deviation greater than 1/4 inch from a 10-foot straightedge, and the cross
 slope does not deviate more than 1/4 inch in 5 feet from the specified cross
 slope.
 Perform any corrective work necessary using mixtures the Engineer
 approves. The Department will not allow procedures or mixtures that might
 produce fine material that would tend to clog or reduce drainage.
 Weather Limitations and Protection. Mix and place the cement treated
 material when the air temperature in the shade, away from artificial heat, is
 45 °F and rising. Unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Engineer,
 discontinue mixing and placing the cement-treated material when a
 descending air temperature in the shade, and away from artificial heat,
 reaches 50 °F.
 
 303.03.03 Maintenance and Protection. Limit traffic over the drainage blanket to
 the minimum necessary for succeeding or adjacent work. Prevent contamination of the
 drainage blanket by dust, dirt, or mud. Remove and replace portions of the blanket that is
 contaminated to the extent that the drainage is clogged or reduced at no additional cost to
 the Department.
 Preserve the integrity of the subgrade, base courses, perforated pipe, pavement
 drainage blanket, and the subsequent paving courses. Control the gross weights and types
 of hauling vehicles so no component is damaged by hauling for construction of the next
 component.
 Do not operate trucks or other equipment longitudinally directly over the perforated
 pipe.
 Repair damage to any of the various items, except damage caused by public traffic, at
 no cost to the Department.
 303.03.04 Overlaying of Drainage Blankets. Exercise extreme caution when
 placing asphalt mixtures near or over underdrains to avoid displacing or damaging the
 drain. Repair any damage at no cost to the Department.
 A) Asphalt Mixture Overlay. When asphalt pavement is constructed on a treated
 drainage blanket, place the first course using a paver mounted on tracks.
 Compact asphalt base according to Subsection 403.03.10.
 Allow the first course of asphalt mixture to cure overnight before placing
 the succeeding course. The temperature of the asphalt must not be less than 125
 degrees before proceeding with the next course.
 Place the thickness of asphalt base on treated drainage blankets according to
 Subsection 403.03.06.
 B) JPC Pavement Overlay. Place without damaging the drainage blanket or
 underdrain system. Use anchor hooks of sufficient length to extend through the
 drainage blanket and hold the load-transfer assemblies securely in place.
 303.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 303.04.01 Drainage Blanket-Type II (ATDB). The Department will measure the
 quantity in tons according to Subsection 402.04
 303.04.02 Drainage Blanket-Type III (Cement-Treated). The Department will
 measure the quantity in square yards according to Section 109.
 
 303—3
 
 303.04.03 JPC Pavement Drainage Blanket. The Department will measure the
 quantity in tons according to Subsection 303.04.01 or 303.04.02 as appropriate.
 303.05 PAYMENT. The Department will pay for the completed and accepted
 quantities under the following:
 Code
 00018
 00019
 00022
 
 Pay Item
 Drainage Blanket-Type II - Asphalt Treated
 Drainage Blanket-Type III - Cement Treated
 JPC Pavement Drainage Blanket
 
 Pay Unit
 Ton
 Square Yard
 Ton
 
 The Department will make payment for Drainage Blanket-Type II (ATDB) according
 The
 to the Lot Pay Adjustment Schedule for Specialty Mixtures in Section 402.
 Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this
 section.
 
 303—4
 
 SECTION 304  GEOGRID REINFORCEMENT FOR
 SUBGRADE AND AGGREGATE BASE COURSES
 304.01 DESCRIPTION. This specification covers geogrid used for the reinforcement
 of subgrade and aggregate bases.
 304.02 MATERIALS. Furnish geogrid composed of polypropylene or high-density
 polyethylene resins.
 304.02.01 Physical Requirements. Furnish the specified geogrid type conforming
 to the Required Geogrid Properties Table.
 Required Geogrid Properties1, 2, 3
 Property
 
 Test Method
 
 Strength at 2% Strain
 Strength at 5% Strain
 Ultimate Tensile Strength
 Minimum Opening Size4
 Maximum Opening Size5
 Junction Strength
 Ultraviolet Stability
 
 ASTM D 6637
 ASTM D 6637
 ASTM D 6637
 Direct Measure
 Direct Measure
 GRI-GG2-87
 ASTM D 4355
 
 Separation
 
 ASTM D 422
 
 Required Value
 English
 Metric
 400 lb/ft
 5.8 kN/m
 800 lb/ft 11.7 kN/m
 1230 lb/ft 18.0 kN/m
 0.5 in
 12.7 mm
 3.0 in
 76.2 mm
 90% Ultimate tensile strength
 70% at 500 hrs
 D85 of aggregate above
 geogrid < 5 x D85 subgrade.
 Otherwise use a separation
 geotextile with geogrid
 
 NOTES:
 1. Acceptance of geogrid material shall be based on ASTM D 4759.
 2. Acceptance shall be based upon testing of either conformance sample obtained using
 Procedure A of ASTM D 4354, or based on manufacturer's certifications and testing of
 quality assurance sample obtained using Procedure B of ASTM D 4354.
 3. Minimum use value in weaker principal direction. All numerical values represent
 minimum average roll value (i.e., test results from any sampled roll in a lot shall meet or
 exceed the minimum values in the table). Lot samples according to ASTM D 4354.
 4. Minimum opening size must be ≥ D50 of aggregate above geogrid to provide
 interlock.
 5. Maximum opening size must be ≤ 2 x D85 of aggregate above geogrid to prevent
 aggregate from penetrating into the subgrade
 304.02.02 Packaging, Shipment, and Storage. Ensure each geogrid shipment is
 accompanied by a manufacturer’s certification listing minimum average roll specification
 values of each lot number for those properties specified. Ensure that each roll is labeled
 with the manufacturer’s name, product type, lot number, roll number, manufactured date,
 and roll dimension. Protect the geogrid from direct sunlight, ultraviolet rays, temperatures
 greater than 120 °F, mud, dirt, dust, and debris during all periods of shipment and storage.
 Keep geogrids dry until installation, and do not store directly on the ground.
 
 304—1
 
 304.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 304.03.01 Geogrid Representative. Ensure that a representative of the geogrid
 manufacturer is on the project when work begins, and remains on call as the project
 progresses, to advise the Engineer.
 304.03.02 Surface Preparation. Prepare the surface according to Section 207 or
 Section 302.
 304.03.03 Geogrid Placement. Place geogrids at the proper elevation and
 alignment, in continuous strips without joints, seams, or connections according to the
 manufacturer’s recommendations. Verify the geogrid orientation (roll direction). Geogrid
 strips are to be overlapped according to the manufactures recommendations or a minimum
 of one (1) foot.
 Geogrid may be temporarily secured in place with staples, pins, sand bags or backfill
 as required by fill properties, fill placement procedures, or weather conditions as the
 Engineer directs.
 304.03.04 Aggregate Placement. Place aggregate over the geogrid according to the
 Contract. Place, spread, and compact the aggregate in such a manner that minimizes the
 development of wrinkles and movement in the geogrid. Aggregate is to be placed by back
 dumping the material from trucks and spread using rubber tired equipment. The
 Department will require a minimum loose fill thickness of 6 inches prior to operation of
 tracked vehicles over the geogrid. Keep the turning of tracked vehicles to a minimum to
 prevent displacement of the fill and damage to the geogrid. Rubber tired equipment may
 pass over the geogrid reinforcement at slow speeds (less than 10 mph) when integrallyformed geogrid is used. Avoid sudden braking and sharp turning movements. Repair any
 damage caused during placement or by vehicles.
 304.03.05 Sampling and Testing. The Department will sample the geogrid at the
 project site according to KM 64-113. The Department will test the geogrid for all
 properties possible given the testing equipment availability. When the Department
 determines that an individual sample fails to meet any specification requirement, the
 Department will reject that roll and sample 2 additional rolls from the same lot. When the
 Department determines that either of these 2 additional samples fails to comply with any
 part of the specification, the Department will reject the entire quantity of rolls represented
 by that sample.
 304.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure the quantity of geogrid in
 square yards. The Department will not measure geogrid when the contract indicates that
 the geogrid are incidental to the work being performed or when no separate bid item for
 geogrid is listed in the proposal. The Department will not measure providing the geogrid
 manufacturer’s representative for payment and will consider it incidental to the geogrid.
 304.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 00005
 
 Pay Item
 Geogrid Reinforcement for Subgrade
 
 Pay Unit
 Square Yard
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 304—2
 
 DIVISION 400
 ASPHALT PAVEMENTS
 
 SECTION 401  ASPHALT MIXING PLANT REQUIREMENTS
 401.01 DESCRIPTION. Provide and maintain a plant and all equipment necessary to
 produce and test asphalt mixtures.
 401.02
 
 EQUIPMENT.
 
 401.02.01 All Asphalt Mixing Plants. Ensure that all asphalt mixing plants are
 inspected and approved by the Department before initial use and a minimum of once
 annually thereafter. For initial approval, submit a “Contractor’s Master Certification of
 Asphalt Mixing Plant and Related Equipment” form for each plant to the Engineer. For
 previously approved plants, submit an “Annual Renewal Certification for Previously
 Approved Plants and Related Equipment” form to the Engineer before beginning each
 season. When significant changes are made in the plant equipment or in the method of
 operation at an approved plant, reapply for approval.
 Ensure the manufacturer’s plate, listing the maximum capacity of the plant, is
 attached to the plant. Do not operate the plant at a production rate greater than the
 operational capacity of any plant component. Operate the plant so that it produces a fully
 coated mixture within the specified properties, gradation tolerances, and asphalt binder
 tolerances.
 When plants are in operation, the Department will require one computer with a
 printer attached on the site of operations for the purpose of recording and submitting test
 data. Ensure the computer is installed with and utilizes the following minimum system
 requirements: Microsoft Office 2003 Professional (full installation). Additionally, the
 Department will require that each Company provide at least one Internet access site for
 sending and receiving electronic mail.
 A) Field Laboratory. Furnish and maintain a field laboratory facility according to
 Subsection 106.03.02. A field laboratory may be a building, trailer, or space
 within a building, provided the space is completely closed to the remainder of
 the building. Provide means for visually monitoring mixing plant operations.
 Do not use laboratories for storage.
 Provide a laboratory inspected and qualified according to the Department’s
 Quality Assurance Program for Materials Testing and Acceptance and
 conforming to the following minimum requirements:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 a floor space of 250 square feet with a minimum width of 7 feet;
 provisions for heating and cooling within the range of 65 to 80 °F;
 adequate lighting; and
 a sufficient number of electric wall outlets (110-120v) to accommodate all
 equipment.
 
 In addition to the equipment required to perform testing according to the
 AASHTO standards and Kentucky Methods (KM), equip each laboratory with
 the following minimum furnishings and equipment, conforming to the applicable
 specifications, as required for the type of construction specified in the Contract:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 one workbench, at least 2.5 feet wide by 6 feet long;
 one desk or table and 2 chairs;
 a fire extinguisher located near the door; and
 a first-aid kit.
 
 When using solvent extractions for asphalt binder content determination,
 provide equipment and solvent for either the centrifuge (Method A) or the
 vacuum extractor (Method B) according to KM 64-405. Ensure that the extractor
 stand is fully enclosed and equipped with fans capable of exhausting at least
 
 401—1
 
 B)
 
 C)
 
 D)
 
 E)
 
 F)
 G)
 
 1,450 cubic feet per minute. Build duct-work across the entire backside of the
 workbench with an access port into an enclosed cabinet, so as to direct any
 fumes or dust from the top of the workbench into the enclosed cabinet. The
 Engineer will furnish a sketch of an acceptable exhaust system upon request.
 The Engineer will approve other configurations if he determines that they meet
 the intended purpose. Mount all control switches outside the cabinet and in
 accordance with all applicable safety standards.
 Aggregate Storage. Provide sufficient storage for separate stockpiles, bins, or
 stalls for each size of aggregate. Keep different sizes separated until delivery
 through the cold feed proportioning devices. Maintain the storage area in an
 orderly condition with walkways between any stockpiles that are not separated
 by bins or stalls. Provide adequate provisions for sampling aggregates from the
 stockpiles.
 Asphalt Binder Equipment. Provide tanks for storage of asphalt binders
 equipped for heating the material to the temperature required in Subsection
 401.03.01. When direct-fire heating systems are utilized, heat the tank without
 letting the flames contact it.
 Provide a circulating system for the asphalt binder of a capacity that ensures
 continuous circulation between the storage tank and proportioning unit during
 the entire operating period.
 Place the discharge end of the asphalt binder circulating pipe at the opposite
 end of the circulating pump, near the bottom of the storage tank.
 Heat and insulate all pipelines and fittings to prevent heat loss.
 Provide a storage tank with a capacity that ensures continuous plant
 operation and uniform temperature of the asphalt binder when it is introduced
 into the mixture. Provide means for accurately measuring the volume of asphalt
 binder in the storage tank at any time. Provide separate storage for each type and
 grade of asphalt binder stored at each plant site.
 Provide a sampling outlet that is readily accessible and free from obstruction
 in each storage tank or in the asphalt binder feed lines connecting the plant
 storage tanks to the asphalt plant. When the sampling valve is located in the feed
 line, provide it between the pump and the return line discharge in a location that
 is readily accessible and free from obstruction. Provide a drainage receptacle for
 flushing the outlet before sampling.
 Feeder for Drier. Provide a mechanical feeder that is an apron, belt,
 reciprocating plate, or vibrating type with accurate and separate adjustments for
 total and proportional feed. Install total and proportional feed adjustments that
 are continuously variable and capable of being fixed in any position.
 Drier. Provide a drier capable of drying and heating the aggregate to the
 moisture content and temperature requirements set forth in the applicable
 mixture specifications without leaving any visible unburned residue on the
 aggregate when discharged from the drier.
 Screens. Provide plant screens to prevent oversized material and to separate all
 aggregates so they may be recombined consistently within the specification
 limits for the asphalt mixture being produced.
 Bins. Except for drum-mix plants, provide the plant with a hot-bin storage of a
 sufficient capacity to ensure uniform and continuous operation.
 Use bins that are divided into at least 3 compartments and arranged to
 ensure storage of appropriate fractions of the aggregates. Use bins that are
 designed such that samples of dry, screened aggregates may be readily sampled
 from each compartment.
 Provide each compartment with an overflow pipe that prevents material
 from backing up into other bins or into contact with the screen.
 Provide dry storage for mineral filler and provisions for accurate
 proportioning.
 Equip each compartment with an alarm to indicate when there is a low
 
 401—2
 
 H)
 
 I)
 J)
 
 K)
 L)
 M)
 N)
 
 O)
 
 P)
 
 supply of material. Equip batch plants with an actuating device that prevents
 material from being drawn from other compartments when material is low in the
 compartment being used.
 Asphalt Binder Control Unit. Provide a means, either by weighing or
 metering, to obtain the proper quantity of asphalt binder. Ensure that metering
 devices are accurate to within ± 1.0 percent when tested for accuracy. Provide a
 calibration tank with a minimum capacity of 250 gallons that is mounted on load
 cells for checking the accuracy of the metering system. Use asphalt binder
 scales that conform to Subsection 401.02.02 B).
 When metering the quantity of asphalt binder, check the delivery of the
 meter by actual weight.
 For drum mixing plants, calibrate the asphalt binder delivery system and
 metering device in the presence of the Engineer before starting production at the
 beginning of each construction season, each time the plant is relocated, after
 making significant changes in the plant equipment, after revising the method of
 operation, and whenever the Engineer deems it necessary.
 Maintain the specified temperatures of asphalt binder in the pipelines,
 meters, buckets, spray bars, and other containers or flow lines.
 Recordation. Provide an automatic graphic or digital record of the production
 quantities according to AASHTO M 156.
 Thermometers. Provide a non-recording thermometer in the asphalt binder feed
 line between the storage tank and the charging valve. When a non-recording
 thermometer is installed in the asphalt binder storage tank(s), the Department
 will not require a non-recording thermometer in the feed line.
 Provide a non-recording thermometer near the discharge of the aggregate
 bin, unless the aggregate dryer is equipped with an automatic burner control
 system capable of heating the aggregate and consistently maintaining the
 temperature of the asphalt mixture within ± 15 °F.
 Control of Mixing Time. Use a plant equipped with means for governing
 mixing time.
 Dust Collectors. Equip the plant with an effective dust collector capable of
 either wasting the collected dust or using it in the mixture.
 Power Sprayer. Furnish a power sprayer to apply a fine uniform spray or mist
 of material conforming to Subsection 403.02.05 in truck beds to prevent the
 adherence of asphalt mixtures during hauling.
 Signs. Place a sign on or near the plant visible to all asphalt mixture haulers
 prior to loading, stating “TRUCKS HAULING STATE MATERIAL WILL
 NOT BE LOADED WHEN BEDS CONTAIN CONTAMINATING
 MATERIAL AND MUST BE TARPED PRIOR TO LEAVING PLANT.”
 Other Requirements. Provide adequate and safe stairways to the mixer
 platform and guarded ladders for other plant units at all locations necessary to
 provide access to all plant operations. Provide a sturdy platform of sufficient
 height to inspect and sample the mixture after discharge into the haul units.
 Safety Requirements. Ensure that all plants and plant sites conform to the
 safety, health, and sanitation requirements of Subsection 107.01.01.
 
 401.02.02 Special Requirements for Batch Plants.
 A) Weigh Box or Hopper. Provide equipment that weighs each bin size of
 aggregate into a weigh box or hopper that is suspended on scales and holds a full
 batch size of aggregate. Provide gates that prevent leakage when closed.
 B) Scales. Provide springless, dial type, or another approved type of scales for any
 aggregate weigh box or hopper, and for weighing asphalt material. Provide
 scales of standard make and design having tolerances on overregistration and
 underregistration not exceeding 0.5 percent of the indicated weight when tested
 for accuracy.
 Ensure that the change in load required to noticeably alter the position of
 
 401—3
 
 rest of the indicating element(s) of a non-automatic indicating scale is not greater
 than 0.1 percent of the nominal scale capacity.
 Ensure that graduation intervals for scales are less than 0.1 percent of the
 nominal scale capacity and are plainly visible.
 On dial scales, reduce parallax effects to the practical minimum with
 clearance between the indicator index and scale graduations not exceeding 0.06
 inches.
 Provide scales equipped with adjustable set points or pointers for marking
 the weight of each material to be weighed into the batch.
 Ensure the component batching scales are inspected and certified as
 specified in Subsection 109.01.02.
 Provide no fewer than 10 test weights, each of at least 50 pounds nominal
 weight and stamped with its actual weight, for the purpose of testing and
 calibrating the scales. For each scale, provide a suitable cradle or platform for
 applying test loads. Keep test weights clean and conveniently located for
 calibration of the scale or provide means for testing and calibrating the scales by
 a commercial scale company when the Engineer requests.
 The Department will allow batch plants to operate with no screens, other
 than a scalper screen, provided:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 
 The plant is equipped with an aggregate weighing device (belt scales)
 that provides positive weight control;
 The system controls aggregate flow from each bin;
 The system controls the proportion from each bin in relation to the total
 aggregate flow;
 The system provides the plant operator with a continuous digital
 display of the flow rate from each bin and the total aggregate flow rate;
 and
 The system provides an alarm or automatic shut-off on the aggregate
 feed that operates when the flow from any individual feeder is
 interrupted.
 
 Calibrate each cold feeder, along with the aggregate weighing devices,
 according to Subsection 401.02.04 A) and B).
 C) Bins. For batch plants equipped with the aggregate weighing devices that
 Subsection 401.02.02 B) specifies, the Department will not require 3 separate hot
 aggregate bin compartments.
 D) Asphalt Materials Bucket. If using a bucket, provide one large enough to
 handle a batch in a single weighing.
 Provide a filling system that prevents asphalt binder material from
 overflowing, splashing, or spilling outside the bucket during filling and
 weighing.
 Use a steam or oil-jacketed bucket or a bucket with properly insulated
 electric heating units. Arrange the bucket so it delivers the asphalt binder in a
 thin uniform sheet or in multiple sprays over the full length of the mixer.
 E) Mixer Unit for Batch Method. Include at the plant a batch mixer of an
 approved twin pugmill type. Ensure that the mixer does not leak or cause
 segregation during discharge.
 Provide a blade clearance from all fixed and moving parts that does not
 exceed 1 1/2 inches.
 Provide a mixer with an accurate time lock. Control the operation of a
 complete mixer cycle by locking the weigh-box gate after charging the mixer
 until closing of the mixer gates at the completion of the cycle. Ensure that the
 asphalt materials bucket remains locked throughout the dry-mixing period and
 that the mixer gates remain locked throughout the dry and wet mixing periods.
 (The dry-mixing period is the interval of time between the opening of the weigh-
 
 401—4
 
 box gate and the application of asphalt binder. The wet-mixing period is the
 interval of time between the start of the introduction of asphalt binder and the
 opening of the mixer gate.)
 401.02.03 Special Requirements for Automatic Batching. Provide a system with
 equipment for accurately proportioning batches of the various components of the mixture
 by weight in the proper sequence and for controlling the sequence and timing of mixing
 operations. Equip the plant with adjustable timing devices and other time-delay circuits
 that integrate the individual components of batching and mixing operations with the
 auxiliary interlock cut-off circuits necessary to stop the automatic cycling of the batching
 operations whenever the quantity of any ingredient falls outside the tolerance specified
 below:
 BATCH TOLERANCES
 Material
 Batch Aggregate Component
 Mineral Filler
 Asphalt Binder
 Zero Return (Aggregate)
 Zero Return (Asphalt Binder)
 
 Percent of Total
 Batch Weights
 ± 1.5
 ± 0.5
 ± 0.1
 ± 0.5
 ± 0.1
 
 Ensure that the accumulated weight of the batches is within 2.0 percent of the total
 batch weight. Record batch quantities according to AASHTO M 156.
 401.02.04 Special Requirements for Dryer Drum Plants.
 A) Aggregate Weighing Device. Provide an aggregate weighing device that
 includes a compensating adjustment for aggregate weight changes due to such
 factors as moisture content, wasting collected fines, and adding mineral filler.
 Provide a device that is capable of being set to the nearest 0.1 percent. Ensure
 that the weighing devices (belt scales) are accurate within ± 0.5 percent.
 B) Feeder for Drier. Provide a scalping screen of appropriate size in advance of
 the weighing device.
 Control aggregate flow from each bin. Control the proportion from each bin
 in relation to the total aggregate flow. Provide the plant operator with a
 continuous digital display of the flow rate from each bin and the total aggregate
 flow rate. When devices other than belt scales are used to control individual
 aggregate proportions or when belt scales do not have the capability to control
 the proportioning from each bin in relation to the total aggregate flow, provide
 an alarm that operates when the sum of the individual cold feeds differs by more
 than 3 percent from the measured weight of the total aggregate feed.
 Provide an aggregate feed system with belt scales or other devices to
 provide positive weight control of the total aggregate feed. Ensure that the total
 aggregate flow is automatically coupled with the asphalt binder proportioning
 device. Calibrate each cold feeder using the gate openings and aggregate sizes
 specific to each mix type.
 Provide an alarm or automatic shut-off on the total aggregate feed that
 operates when the flow from any individual feeder or the flow of asphalt binder
 to the drum is interrupted.
 Provide means for obtaining representative samples of individual and
 combined aggregate from belts or feeders before their introduction into the dryer.
 Calibrate the aggregate weigh bridge(s), in the presence of the Engineer
 before starting production at the beginning of each construction season, each
 
 401—5
 
 C)
 
 D)
 E)
 F)
 
 G)
 
 401.03
 
 time the plant is relocated, after making significant changes in the plant
 equipment, after revising the method of operation, and whenever the Engineer
 deems necessary.
 Drier. Use a dryer drum mixer capable of simultaneously heating, mixing, and
 thoroughly coating the aggregate with a controlled amount of asphalt binder in a
 rotating cylindrical drum. The Department may allow coating of the aggregate
 with asphalt binder in a separate chamber with an approved design.
 Equip the dryer drum plant with approved thermometric instruments at the
 discharge chute of the drum mixer. Equip the system with automatic burner
 controls regulated by approved temperature-sensing devices.
 Surge and/or Storage Bin. Provide a surge and/or storage bin conforming to
 Subsection 401.03.02 C).
 Dust Collector. Use a dust collector capable of proportioning collected dust in
 the vicinity of the asphalt injection device.
 Production Quality Control. Stop mixing operations immediately if, at any
 time, a failure of the automatic electronic weighing system of the aggregate feed,
 asphalt binder feed, or water injection system control occurs. Do not manually
 operate the proportioning controls.
 Water Injection System. Provided each system has prior approval as specified
 in Subsection 402.01.01, the Department will allow the use of water injection
 systems for the purpose of foaming the asphalt binder for production of Warm
 Mix Asphalt (WMA).
 Ensure the equipment for water injection meets the following requirements:
 1) Injection equipment computer controls are automatically coupled
 to the plants controls (manual operation is not permitted);
 2) Injection equipment has variable controls that introduce water
 ratios based on production rates of mixtures;
 3) Injects water into the flow of asphalt binder prior to contacting the
 aggregate;
 4) Provides alarms on the water injection system that operate when
 the flow of water is interrupted or deviates from the prescribed
 water rate.
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 401.03.01 Preparation of Mixtures. Deposit the coarse and fine aggregates in the
 cold elevator(s) at a rate to ensure correct and uniform temperature control of the heating
 and drying operations.
 If the supplier heats the asphalt binder outside the specified range, let it reach a
 temperature within the specified range before mixing it with the aggregates. The Engineer
 may retest or reject asphalt mixture, in storage at the plant, that has been heated by the
 Contractor outside the specified range. Do not use asphalt binder while it is foaming in a
 storage tank.
 Maintain the temperature of the component materials and asphalt mixture within the
 ranges listed in the following table:
 
 401—6
 
 MIXING AND LAYING TEMPERATURES (°F)
 Material
 Aggregates
 Aggregates used with Recycled Asphalt Pavement
 (Reclaimed Materials)
 Asphalt Binders
 PG 58-28*
 PG 64-22
 PG 76-22
 Asphalt Mixtures at Plant
 PG 64-22 HMA
 (Measured in Truck)
 PG 76-22 HMA
 PG 64-22 WMA
 PG 76-22 WMA
 Asphalt Mixtures at Project
 PG 64-22 HMA
 (Measured in Truck
 PG 76-22 HMA
 When Discharging)
 PG 64-22 WMA
 PG 76-22 WMA
 
 Minimum
 
 Maximum
 
 240
 240
 
 330
 
 
 230
 230
 285
 250
 310
 230
 250
 230
 300
 210
 240
 
 330
 330
 350
 330
 350
 330
 350
 330
 350
 330
 350
 
 * See Section 409 – Asphalt Mixtures Using Reclaimed Materials.
 401.03.02 Mixing and Holding. Measure each size of aggregate and the asphalt
 binder separately. Regulate the proportion for each component to produce a mixture
 within the limits of the job-mix formula (JMF) and having all particles coated with asphalt
 binder.
 Thoroughly mix the hot aggregates at the temperatures specified, and proportion them
 by weight.
 The Engineer may establish maximum mixing times when deemed necessary.
 A) Batch Plants. Use the following mixing times, unless the Engineer determines
 that longer times are necessary, to produce acceptable mixtures:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 
 Three seconds minimum for mixing the dry aggregates, beginning at the
 time of the opening of the aggregate weigh hopper discharge gate;
 Fifteen seconds maximum for introducing asphalt binder in an even
 distribution throughout the full length of the mixer, beginning at the end of
 the dry-mixing interval;
 Twenty-five seconds minimum for mixing the aggregates and asphalt
 binder, beginning with the start of flow of the asphalt binder to the mixer;
 When the time for introducing the asphalt binder exceeds 10 seconds, mix
 the asphalt binder and aggregates, after all asphalt binder has been
 introduced, a minimum of 15 seconds; and
 Thirty seconds minimum for the total mixing time from the time of the
 opening of the aggregate weigh hopper discharge gate until the time of the
 opening of the mixer discharge gate.
 
 When the Engineer extends either the time for dry-mixing or the time for
 introducing the asphalt binder into the mixer, or both, extend the minimum total
 mixing time to the same time as the sum of the dry-mixing and asphalt binder
 introduction time.
 B) Dryer Drum. For a dryer drum mixing plant, the Engineer will not establish the
 mixing time. However, maintain production at the rate required to obtain a
 satisfactory aggregate coating and a uniform mixture conforming to the mixture
 specifications.
 C) Surge or Storage Systems. Provided each system has prior approval, the
 Department will allow surge or storage systems for hot asphalt mixtures. The
 Engineer will approve the surge or storage system if tests indicate the system is
 
 401—7
 
 capable of conveying, retaining, and delivering the asphalt mixture without
 balling or hardening, appreciable loss of mixture temperature, segregation of the
 aggregates, or excessive oxidation of the asphalt binder. Add a silicone additive
 to the asphalt binder for mixtures to be stored beyond the day of mixing. The
 Engineer may withdraw approval of a surge or storage system when tests or
 inspections indicate the system is having a detrimental effect on the asphalt
 mixture.
 Insulate bins intended for storage, and seal the top and bottom of the bins to
 prevent infiltration of outside air. When using bins for storage, ensure they are
 nearly full in order to provide a non-oxidizing condition. Maintain mixture
 temperatures within those specified for Asphalt Mixtures at Plant according to
 Subsection 401.03.
 Completely empty surge bins by the end of each working day. When the
 bins cannot be emptied, store the asphalt mixtures overnight in a manner that
 prevents damage. Obtain the Engineer’s approval for storage longer than
 overnight, up to 72 hours.
 The Engineer will reject any asphalt mixture damaged in any way by use of
 a surge or storage system.
 401.04
 
 MEASUREMENT. Reserved.
 
 401.05
 
 PAYMENT. Reserved.
 
 401—8
 
 SECTION 402  CONTROL AND ACCEPTANCE OF
 ASPHALT MIXTURES
 402.01 DESCRIPTION. Provide the process control and quality control testing for the
 Department’s acceptance determination of all classes and types of asphalt mixtures which
 may be furnished either as hot mix asphalt (HMA) or warm mix asphalt (WMA) produced
 with water injection systems.
 402.01.01 Warm Mix Asphalt (WMA) Evaluation and Approval. The
 Department will evaluate trial production of WMA by use of a water injection system
 provided the system is installed according to the manufacturer’s requirements and satisfies
 the requirements of Section 401. Evaluation will include production and placement of
 WMA to demonstrate adequate mixture quality including volumetric properties and
 density by Option A as specified in Subsection 402.03.02 D). Do not place WMA for
 evaluation on Department projects. Provided production and placement operations satisfy
 the applicable quality levels, the Department will approve WMA production on
 Department projects using the water injection system as installed on the specific asphalt
 mixing plant evaluated.
 402.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 402.02.01 Personnel. Provide a qualified Superpave Mix Design Technologist
 (SMDT) to be responsible for the submission and adjustment of the mix designs. Provide
 a qualified Superpave Plant Technologist (SPT) to be present during production and to
 perform the daily inspection, process-control, adjustments of the job mix formula, and
 quality control testing at the plant site for the Department’s acceptance determination.
 The Department will use a qualified SMDT for approval of all mix designs and a
 qualified SPT for verification testing.
 402.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 402.03.01 Responsibilities.
 A) Composition of Mixtures. A JMF is defined as a single percentage for each
 specified sieve size for aggregate gradations and a specified asphalt binder
 content (AC) expressed to the nearest 0.1 percent. The Department will require
 an approved JMF within the specified gradation requirements for each mixture
 required on the project. Submit the JMF for the Engineer’s approval according
 to KM 64-421.
 B) Setup. Notify the District Materials Engineer of the intent to start a minimum
 of 24 hours before beginning production of each type of mixture. Furnish the
 facilities, equipment, personnel, and all other resources needed to comply with
 KM 64-426 and KM 64-435. Provide a Quality Control Plan (QCP), and
 complete the setup duties of KM 64-421. Upon completing setup, prepare 2
 duplicate, hand-mixed, maximum specific gravity (Gmm) samples according to
 KM 64-411, and furnish them to the Engineer before the start of the second day
 of production. Complete the process control operations of KM 64-426. When
 the Engineer directs, obtain samples for Department use.
 C) Process Control. After the setup period, perform the process control operations
 of KM 64-426.
 402.03.02 Contractor Quality Control and Department Acceptance.
 A) General. The Department will accept asphalt mixtures from the plant on a lot
 basis. A lot is 4,000 tons. A sublot is 1,000 tons. Monitor and evaluate the AC,
 air voids (AV), voids-in-mineral aggregate (VMA), density, and gradation.
 
 402—1
 
 Document and report all quality control tests for the Department’s acceptance
 determination on the Asphalt Mixtures Acceptance Workbook (AMAW).
 Submit the completed AMAW for each lot to the Department within 5 working
 days after the completion of the lot.
 B) Sampling. Obtain all samples from the truck bed at the asphalt mixing plant.
 The Department will randomly determine when to obtain the quality control
 samples according to KM64-113. Take one sample for each sublot. At the
 beginning of each production day, do not take any quality control samples before
 the production of 50 tons. If the random number falls within the first 50 tons,
 take the sample from the first loaded truck following the truck containing the
 50th ton produced.
 C) Setup. The setup period is the first sublot of production. Perform volumetric
 testing for AC, AV, and VMA within the first 2 hours of project production. By
 the end of the first sublot, test to document that the mixture meets a 0.90
 minimum pay value for each of these properties. For mixtures with a totalproject quantity between 500 and 1,000 tons, perform a minimum of one process
 control test for AC, AV, and VMA, and report the results to the Engineer. The
 Department will monitor the setup duties and testing and may test to confirm the
 setup results. When any of the mixture properties do not meet the minimum pay
 value, cease all shipments to the project and adjust procedures or mixture
 properties until they are acceptable. Provide the Engineer with documentation of
 the acceptable test results. Provide the Engineer with a copy of the random
 number chart established for the total tonnage for the mixture specified. Develop
 the rolling pattern during the first sublot. When necessary during setup, adjust
 the AC up to ± 0.3 percent provided all other properties stay within their
 specified acceptance limits. Ensure the adjusted AC remains above the
 minimums specified in Subsection 403.03.03 C) 2). Obtain the Engineer’s
 approval to make this adjustment on all Specialty Mixtures.
 D) Testing Responsibilities. Beginning with the second sublot, complete the
 following tests:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 AC. Perform one evaluation corresponding to each AV/VMA analysis per
 sublot. Test according to KM 64-405, KM 64-436, KM 64-437, KM 64438, or AASHTO T 308.
 AV. Prepare and analyze one set of 2 specimens per sublot. Test according
 to KM 64-435.
 VMA. Analyze the set of 2 specimens corresponding to each AV analysis
 per sublot. Test according to KM 64-435.
 Density. The Contract will state the compaction option to be used.
 Option A. The Department will randomly locate and mark core locations
 after compaction is complete. Perform coring by the end of the work day.
 Immediately provide the cores to the Engineer at the coring site. Replace all
 cores the Engineer deems damaged. When directed by the Engineer, saw
 cores at the project site to the thickness actually placed. Fill each core hole
 with compacted asphalt mixture or non-shrink grout within 3 working days.
 The Department will perform acceptance testing for density from the
 furnished cores according to KM 64-442. The Department will base values
 on the percent of solid density for the sublot’s Gmm value.
 Mainline - Furnish 4 cores per sublot to the Engineer for density
 determination. Under inspection by Department personnel, core the finished
 course at locations randomly selected by the Engineer according to KM 64113. For random locations falling near the pavement driving lane joints,
 obtain the core as close to the location as possible without having any part
 of the core circumference coming closer than 6 inches to the pavement edge
 or joint.
 Joint - For surface mixtures placed on driving lanes and ramps, furnish
 
 402—2
 
 2 cores per sublot to the Engineer for density determination. Under
 inspection by Department personnel, core the finished course at locations
 randomly selected in the longitudinal direction by the Engineer according to
 KM 64-113. Select the transverse direction such that some part of the core
 circumference is within 3.0 ± 0.5 inches of the longitudinal joint.
 Option B. The Department will not require any cores.
 5)
 
 Gradation. Control according to KM 64-407, KM 64-433, or KM 64-620 as
 needed.
 Use the same field sample as taken for Tests 1) through 3). Use the
 same specimens as produced for Tests 2) and 3). Retain the AV/VMA
 specimens and one additional corresponding Gmm sample for 5 working days
 for verification testing by the Department. For Specialty Mixtures, retain a
 mixture sample for 5 working days for verification testing by the
 Department.
 
 E) Shoulder Mixtures. The Department will accept shoulder mixtures as follows:
 1)
 2)
 
 Placed Monolithically With the Mainline. Perform Tests 1), 2), and 3) of
 Part D) above as part of the mainline mixture. Do not take cores from the
 shoulder for quality control testing.
 Placed Separately. Perform Tests 1), 2), and 3) of Part D) above. Do not
 take cores from the shoulders for quality control testing.
 
 F) Specialty Mixtures. The Department will accept Open-Graded Friction Course
 (OGFC), Asphalt-Treated Drainage Blanket (ATDB), Asphalt Mixture for
 Pavement Wedge, Leveling and Wedging, Scratch Course, asphalt mixtures for
 temporary applications, and asphalt mixtures for Base Failure Repair as follows.
 Perform one AC and one gradation determination per sublot. Determine the
 gradation from samples corresponding to the same production time period as the
 AC determination. Obtain and test the gradation samples according to KM 64407, KM 64-433, or KM 64-620.
 G) Mixtures with Reclaimed Materials. Furnish the grade of asphalt binder
 determined according to KM 64-427. Furnish a reclaimed material sample and a
 minimum of 3 representative AC and extracted gradation determinations with the
 mixture design submittal. For the reclaimed material perform AC and extracted
 gradation determination according to KM64-426.
 H) Unsatisfactory Work.
 1)
 
 2)
 
 Based on Lab Data. After the setup period, when the Contractor or
 Department determines any individual sublot pay value would be below
 0.90 for AC, AV, or VMA in any QC or QA test, make adjustments as
 necessary and immediately perform the tests again. If the second round of
 tests determines any individual sublot pay value would have been below
 0.90 for AC, AV, or VMA, cease all shipments to the project and adjust
 procedures or mixture composition until they are acceptable. Document
 acceptable materials and work before restarting operations. When a second
 round of tests are required, report the actual random number acceptance test
 results on the AMAW for the sublot.
 When the Engineer determines that safety concerns or other
 considerations prohibit an immediate shutdown, continue work and the
 Department will make an evaluation of acceptability according to
 Subsection 402.03.04.
 Based on Field Review. If the Department determines that a portion of inplace material is unsatisfactory, the Department may require that the
 location be cored. The Department will then test the material for AC and
 
 402—3
 
 Density. The Department will consider the work unsatisfactory and require
 corrective work to the affected area when a property met or exceeded a 1.00
 pay value in the sublot acceptance test and the core shows the property
 having a pay value of below 0.90. Additionally, the Department will
 consider the work unsatisfactory and require corrective work to the affected
 area when the property of the core falls outside the following thresholds,
 regardless of the sublot quality control test results:
 PROPERTY
 
 THRESHOLD
 
 AC
 Density
 
 ≥ ± 0.9% deviation from JMF
 ≤ 89.0% or ≥ 97.5%
 
 402.03.03 Verification. For volumetric properties, the Department will perform a
 minimum of one verification test for AC, AV, and VMA for each randomly selected lot
 according to the corresponding procedures as given in Subsection 402.03.02. For
 specialty mixtures, the Department will perform one AC and one gradation determination
 per lot according to the corresponding procedures as given in Subsection 402.03.02.
 However, Department personnel will not perform AC determinations according to KM 64405. The Department will obtain an independent sample at the same time the Contractor
 is obtaining the random sample. The Department may perform the verification test on the
 Contractor’s equipment or on the Department’s equipment.
 A) Evaluation of Sublot(s) Verified by Department. Provided the differences are
 within the tolerances listed below, the Department will use the Contractor’s test
 values to compute the appropriate lot pay value. When differences between test
 results are not within the tolerances listed below, the Department will retest the
 Contractor’s retained samples for the affected sublots. The Department’s results
 will be used in the computation of the appropriate Lot Pay Adjustment.
 
 COMPARISON OF DEPARTMENT AND CONTRACTOR TESTING
 (applied when evaluating sublot(s) that Department verified)
 Test
 Tolerance (%)
 AC
 ± 0.5
 AV and VMA
 ± 1.0 (same equipment)
 ± 1.5 (different equipment)
 1/2 inch and larger
 ±5
 3/8 inch, No. 4, No. 8, and No. 16
 ±4
 No. 30, No. 50, and No. 100
 ±3
 No. 200
 ±2
 For volumetric properties, the Department will perform a statistical
 comparison between the Department’s test results and the Contractor’s test
 results for AC, AV, and VMA for the sublot(s) verified by the Department. The
 Department will perform this comparison using the paired t-test (with a level of
 significance of 0.025) as provided in the AMAW. When the paired t-test
 indicates that the Contractor’s data and Department’s data are possibly not from
 the same population, the Department will investigate the cause for the difference
 according to Subsection 402.03.04 and implement corrective measures as the
 Engineer deems appropriate.
 B) Evaluation of Sublots Not Verified by Department.
 For volumetric
 properties, the Department will perform a comparison between the Department’s
 test results and the average of the Contractor’s test results for AC, AV, and
 
 402—4
 
 VMA for the sublots not verified by the Department. Provided the differences
 are within the tolerances listed below, the Department will use the Contractor’s
 test values to compute the appropriate lot pay value. When differences between
 test results are not within the tolerances listed below, the Department will resolve
 the discrepancy according to Subsection 402.03.04. When the Department’s test
 results are ultimately determined to be correct, the Department’s results will be
 used in the computation of the appropriate Lot Pay Adjustment.
 COMPARISON OF DEPARTMENT AND CONTRACTOR TESTING
 (applied when evaluating sublots that Department did not verify)
 Test
 Tolerance (%)
 AC
 ± 0.6
 AV
 ± 1.5
 VMA
 ± 1.2
 For volumetric properties, the Department will perform a statistical
 comparison between the Department’s test results and the Contractor’s test
 results for AC, AV, and VMA for the sublots not verified by the Department.
 The Department will perform this comparison using the F-test and t-test (with a
 level of significance of 0.025) as provided in the AMAW. When the F-test or ttest indicates that the Contractor’s data and Department’s data are possibly not
 from the same population, the Department will investigate the cause for the
 difference according to Subsection 402.03.04 and implement corrective
 measures as the Engineer deems appropriate.
 C) Test Data Patterns. Primarily by the use of control charts generated from the
 AMAW and as required by KM 64-426, the Department will monitor the test
 results of the acceptance testing for each sublot to identify patterns within the
 data. When patterns indicate substantial differences between the verified and
 non-verified sublots, the Department will perform further comparative testing
 according to Subsection 402.03.04.
 D) Independent Assurance Testing. The Department will perform independentassurance testing (IAST) at the frequency prescribed by the Department’s
 Materials Field Sampling and Testing Manual.
 402.03.04 Dispute Resolution. When differences between the Department and
 Contractor continue to exist and impact acceptability or payment, resolve the dispute
 according to Subsection 113.07.
 402.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure asphalt mixtures by the ton.
 On initial treatment and resurfacing jobs, the Department will not measure material placed
 in excess of the 5-percent tolerance specified in Subsection 403.03.06.
 The Department will not measure for payment any extra materials, methods, or
 construction techniques, determined by the Engineer not to be a part of the specified
 construction, used to protect, maintain, or repair any portion of the uncompleted work
 during the winter months.
 The Department will not measure the filling of core sample holes of asphalt mixtures
 for payment and will consider them incidental to the asphalt mixture.
 When Reshape and Compact is not listed as a bid item, the Department will not
 measure the preparation of the foundation for the mixture courses.
 The Department will not measure anti-strip additive for payment and will consider it
 incidental to the asphalt mixture.
 For initial treatment, the Department will not measure excavation at bridge ends and
 related disposal of materials for payment and will consider it incidental to the asphalt
 mixture.
 The Department will not measure construction of rolled rumble strips or pavement
 
 402—5
 
 wedge texturing for payment and will consider them incidental to the asphalt mixture.
 402.04.01 Weight. The Department will weigh asphalt mixtures according to
 Section 109. The actual weight equals the pay weight except when the aggregates used
 have a combined bulk specific gravity in excess of 2.75. When the combined bulk
 specific gravity is greater than 2.75, the Department will determine the pay weight
 according to the following formula:
 T = W [%AC + %MF + (%Aggregate x 2.75)/G] / 100
 •
 •
 •
 •
 •
 •
 
 Where:
 T = Pay weight.
 W = Actual weight.
 %AC = Percent, by weight, of asphalt binder in the total mixture.
 %Aggregate = Percent, by weight of total mixture, of mineral aggregates
 excluding mineral filler.
 G = Calculated combined, bulk, oven-dry, specific gravity of aggregates
 used in the mixture, excluding mineral filler.
 %MF = Percent, by weight, of mineral filler.
 
 The Department will determine the bulk, oven-dry specific gravity for the fine and
 coarse aggregates according to KM 64-605 and AASHTO T 85, respectively. The
 Department will determine the frequency of testing for specific gravity of the actual
 project aggregates to determine the pay weight.
 402.04.02 Thickness on New Construction. When the core thickness exceeds the
 compacted plan thickness by more than 1/2 inch, the Department will deduct the thickness
 exceeding the 1/2-inch tolerance. When calculating the deduction for excess thickness,
 the Department will not include in the thickness measurements any leveling course placed
 at the Contractor’s expense or any materials placed on top of the completed base at the
 direction of the Engineer.
 When the Engineer determines the asphalt base is deficient in thickness by more than
 1/2 inch from the compacted plan thickness, the Department will measure material
 required according to Subsection 403.03.06 B) for the overlay as asphalt base. The
 Department will only measure the calculated quantity necessary to bring the deficient area
 to the plan thickness. The Department will not measure material placed in excess of the
 plan thickness to achieve smooth transitions or to match grades.
 When the Engineer waives the overlaying requirement, he will make a reduction in
 payment for the theoretical quantity of asphalt base as determined deficient.
 The Department will not measure initial thickness check coring or coring of
 corrective work for payment and will consider it incidental to the asphalt mixture.
 402.05
 
 PAYMENT.
 
 402.05.01 Specialty Mixtures. The Department will calculate pay for OGFC,
 ATDB, Asphalt Mixture for Pavement Wedge, Leveling and Wedging, Scratch Course,
 asphalt mixtures for temporary applications, and asphalt mixtures for Base Failure Repair
 according to the Lot Pay Adjustment Schedule for Specialty Mixtures. The Department
 will assign a pay value for AC and gradation within each sublot and average the sublot pay
 values to determine the pay value for each lot.
 402.05.02 Asphalt Mixtures, HMA and WMA, Including Mixtures With
 Reclaimed Material. The Department will pay for the mixture at the Contract unit bid
 price and apply a Lot Pay Adjustment for each lot placed based on the degree of
 compliance with the specified tolerances. Using the appropriate Lot Pay Adjustment
 Schedule, the Department will assign a pay value for the applicable properties within each
 
 402—6
 
 sublot and average the sublot pay values to determine the pay value for a given property
 for each lot. The Department will apply the Lot Pay Adjustment for each lot to a defined
 unit price of $50.00 per ton. The Department will calculate the Lot Pay Adjustment using
 all possible incentives and disincentives. Final payment will be made for each mixture bid
 item for a project, using the cumulative lot pay values. Each lots pay value will be
 averaged to determine the final overall bid item pay value but will not allow the bid item
 pay value to exceed 1.00.
 A) First Sublot (Setup). When the Engineer determines the first sublot’s
 individual pay values are 0.90 or greater, the Department will use 1.00 pay
 values for all properties in the sublot. When the Engineer determines any of the
 first sublot’s individual pay values are less than 0.90, the Department will apply
 a pay value of 0.85 or less for that property and may require corrective work.
 B) After the First Sublot (Setup). The Department will use the Contractor’s test
 results for each sublot to determine the pay values for the applicable properties
 provided the mixture’s values are acceptable according to Subsection 402.03.03.
 When the Contract specifies compaction Option A, the Department will use the
 Department’s test results for each sublot to determine the pay value for Lane and
 Joint Density.
 When the randomly determined samples for AC, AV, VMA, and gradation
 (when applicable) fall outside the final sublot, the Department will calculate
 payment for these properties using the test results from the previous sublot.
 When the final sublot contains a tonnage amount resulting in less than the
 full amount of randomly selected cores, the Department will calculate payment
 for Lane and Joint Density using the available test results for the final sublot.
 C) HMA, WMA and Reclaimed Material Mixtures Placed on Shoulders or
 Placed as Asphalt Pavement Wedge.
 1) Placed monolithically with the Mainline – Width of 4 feet or less. The
 Department will pay as mainline mixture.
 2) Placed monolithically with the Mainline – Width of greater than 4 feet. The
 Department will pay as mainline mixture but use 1.00 for the Lane and Joint
 Density Pay Value for shoulder or Asphalt Pavement Wedge quantities.
 3) Placed Separately. The Department will use 1.00 for the Lane and Joint
 Density Pay Value.
 D) Asphalt Mixtures for Temporary Pavement. When the Engineer determines
 the individual pay values are 0.90 or greater, the Department will use a 1.00 pay
 value for all properties. When the Engineer determines any of the individual pay
 values are less than 0.90, the Department will apply a pay value of 0.85 or less
 for that property and may require corrective work.
 
 402—7
 
 402—8
 
 LOT PAY ADJUSTMENT SCHEDULE
 COMPACTION OPTION A
 BASE AND BINDER MIXTURES
 
 Lot Pay Adjustment = ($50.00) (Quantity) {[0.10 (AC Pay Value) + 0.25 (AV Pay
 Value) + 0.25 (VMA Pay Value) + 0.40 (Lane Density Pay
 Value)] - 1.00}
 WEIGHTED VALUES
 AC
 
 AV
 
 VMA
 
 Lane Density
 
 10
 
 25
 
 25
 
 40
 
 Weight (%)
 
 AC
 Pay Value
 
 VMA
 
 Deviation
 From JMF (%)
 
 1.00
 
 ≤ ± 0.5
 
 0.95
 
 ± 0.
 
 0.90
 
 ± 0.7
 
 (1)
 
 ≥ ± 0.8
 
 Pay Value
 
 Deviation
 From Minimum
 
 1.00
 0.95
 0.90
 
 ≥ min. VMA
 0.1-0.5 below min.
 0.6-1.0 below min.
 > 1.0 below min.
 
 (1)
 
 AV
 Pay Value
 
 1.05
 
 LANE DENSITY
 
 Test Result
 (%)
 ESAL
 ESAL
 Class 2 Class 3
 or 4
 3.5-4.5 3.5-4.5
 
 Pay Value
 
 Test Result
 (%)
 ESAL
 ESAL
 Class 2 Class 3 or 4
 
 1.05
 
 94.0-96.0
 
 94.0-96.0
 
 1.00 + 0.1 (AV-3.0) 1.5-3.4
 
 2.0-3.4
 
 1.00
 
 1.00 + 0.1 (5.0-AV) 4.6-6.0
 
 92.0-93.9
 or
 96.1-96.5
 91.0-91.9
 
 92.0-93.9
 or
 96.1-96.5
 91.0-91.9
 90.0-90.9
 or
 96.6-97.0
 ----
 
 4.6-6.0
 
 0.95
 
 0.75
 
 6.1-6.5
 
 ----
 
 0.90
 
 (1)
 
 < 1.5 or
 > 6.5
 
 < 2.0 or
 > 6.0
 
 0.85
 
 90.0-90.9
 or
 96.6-97.0
 97.1-98.5
 
 0.75
 
 89.0-89.9
 
 ----
 
 (1)
 
 < 89.0 or
 > 98.5
 
 < 90.0 or
 > 97.0
 
 402—9
 
 LOT PAY ADJUSTMENT SCHEDULE
 COMPACTION OPTION A SURFACE MIXTURES
 
 Lot Pay Adjustment = ($50.00) (Quantity) {[0.05 (AC Pay Value) + 0.25
 (AV Pay Value) + 0.25 (VMA Pay Value) + 0.30 (Lane Density Pay Value)
 + 0.15 (Joint Density Pay Value)] - 1.00}
 WEIGHTED VALUES
 Weight (%)
 
 AC
 
 AV
 
 VMA
 
 Lane Density
 
 Joint Density
 
 5
 
 25
 
 25
 
 30
 
 15
 
 AC
 
 VMA
 
 Pay Value
 
 Deviation
 From JMF (%)
 
 Pay Value
 
 1.00
 
 ≤ ± 0.5
 ± 0.6
 
 1.00
 
 ≥ min. VMA
 
 0.95
 
 0.1-0.5 below min.
 
 0.90
 
 ± 0.7
 
 0.90
 
 0.6-1.0 below min.
 
 (1)
 
 ≥ ± 0.8
 
 (1)
 
 >1.0 below min
 
 0.95
 
 AV
 Pay Value
 
 1.05
 
 Deviation
 From Minimum
 
 LANE DENSITY
 
 Test Result
 (%)
 ESAL
 ESAL
 Class 2 Class 3
 or 4
 3.5-4.5 3.5-4.5
 
 Pay Value
 
 Test Result
 (%)
 ESAL
 ESAL
 Class 2 Class 3 or 4
 
 1.05
 
 94.0-96.0
 
 94.0-96.0
 
 1.00 + 0.1 (AV-3.0) 1.5-3.4
 
 2.0-3.4
 
 1.00
 
 1.00 + 0.1 (5.0-AV) 4.6-6.0
 
 92.0-93.9
 or
 96.1-96.5
 91.0-91.9
 
 92.0-93.9
 or
 96.1-96.5
 91.0-91.9
 90.0-90.9
 or
 96.6-97.0
 ----
 
 4.6-6.0
 
 0.95
 
 0.75
 
 6.1-6.5
 
 ----
 
 0.90
 
 (1)
 
 < 1.5 or
 > 6.5
 
 < 2.0 or
 > 6.0
 
 0.85
 
 90.0-90.9
 or
 96.6-97.0
 97.1-98.5
 
 0.75
 
 89.0-89.9
 
 ----
 
 (1)
 
 < 89.0 or
 > 98.5
 
 < 90.0 or
 > 97.0
 
 JOINT DENSITY
 Pay Value
 
 Test Result
 (%)
 
 1.05
 
 91.0-96.0
 
 1.00
 
 89.0-90.9 or
 96.1-96.5
 88.0-88.9
 
 0.95
 0.90
 0.75
 
 87.0-87.9 or
 96.6-97.0
 < 87.0 or > 97.0
 
 402—10
 
 (1)
 
 Considering the guidance given in KM 64-448, the Department will evaluate the
 acceptability of the material to determine if it will remain in place at a reduced pay
 factor or be removed and replaced at no expense to the Department.
 At the Contractor’s option and at no expense to the Department, the Department
 will allow the Contractor to core the pavement in question, up to a maximum of 4
 cores per sublot, for the investigation of AC and Lane Density values corresponding
 to pay factors potentially necessitating removal and replacement. Under inspection
 by Department personnel, core the pavement in question and submit the samples to
 the Department for further investigative testing. The Department may not permit
 coring to investigate density results when the pavement in question has been
 subjected to significant traffic loading.
 Any decision to remove and replace material must receive the concurrence of the
 Divisions of Construction and Materials. When the Department decides to require
 removal and replacement, the Department will determine the quantity of material to
 be removed and replaced in the following manner.
 For AC, AV, and VMA, the Department will identify the most recent preceding
 test (process control, quality control, or verification) of minimum acceptable quality
 and determine the tonnage at which that sample was obtained. The Department will
 define this level of quality as test results for AC, AV, and VMA corresponding to the
 following pay values:
 •
 •
 •
 
 0.90 or greater for AC and VMA for all mixtures;
 0.75 or greater for AV for ESAL Class 2 mixtures; and
 0.90 or greater for AV for ESAL Class 3 or 4 mixtures.
 
 The Department will also identify the most recent succeeding test (process
 control, quality control, or verification) of minimum acceptable quality and determine
 the tonnage at which that sample was obtained. The Department will define this level
 of quality as described above. The material to be removed and replaced will be that
 quantity from (a) halfway between the acceptable preceding test and the test
 corresponding to this footnote to (b) halfway between the test corresponding to this
 footnote and the acceptable succeeding test.
 For Lane Density, the Department will require removal and replacement only
 when the results for all 4 cores in a sublot (or all available cores in a partial sublot)
 are as follows:
 
 •
 •
 
 less than 89.0 percent, or greater than 98.5 percent, of solid density for
 ESAL Class 2; or
 less than 90.0 percent, or greater than 97.0 percent, of solid density for
 ESAL Class 3 or 4.
 
 The Department will require removal and replacement of the entire sublot of
 material in this case. The Department will apply a 0.65 pay factor to individual cores
 with these results for sublots allowed to remain in place.
 Aside from the preceding guidelines, the Engineer may adjust the quantity to be
 removed and replaced depending on the investigative test results or specific project
 conditions. For any material allowed to remain in place, the Department will apply a
 0.65 pay factor to the Contract unit bid price for the asphalt mixture in question. The
 Department will apply the 0.65 pay factor to the quantity of asphalt mixture
 represented by the test result indicating substandard properties (one sublot when the
 result originated from an acceptance test).
 
 402—11
 
 LOT PAY ADJUSTMENT SCHEDULE
 COMPACTION OPTION B MIXTURES
 Lot Pay Adjustment = ($50.00) (Quantity) {[0.35 (AC Pay Value) + 0.40 (AV Pay Value)
 + 0.25 (VMA Pay Value)] - 1.00}
 WEIGHTED VALUES
 Weight (%)
 
 AC
 
 AV
 
 VMA
 
 35
 
 40
 
 25
 
 AC
 
 VMA
 
 Pay Value
 
 Deviation
 From JMF (%)
 
 Pay Value
 
 Deviation
 From Minimum
 
 1.00
 
 ≤ ± 0.5
 
 1.00
 
 ≥min. VMA
 
 0.95
 
 ± 0.6
 
 0.95
 
 0.1-0.5 below min.
 
 0.90
 
 ± 0.7
 
 0.90
 
 0.6-1.0 below min.
 
 (2)
 
 ≥ ± 0.8
 
 (2)
 
 > 1.0 below min.
 
 AV
 Pay Value
 
 1.05
 
 Test Result
 (%)
 ESAL
 ESAL
 Class 2 Class 3
 or 4
 3.5-4.5 3.5-4.5
 
 1.00 + 0.1 (AV-3.0) 1.5-3.4
 
 2.0-3.4
 
 1.00 + 0.1 (5.0-AV) 4.6-6.0
 
 4.6-6.0
 
 (2)
 
 0.75
 
 6.1-6.5
 
 ----
 
 (2)
 
 < 1.5 or
 > 6.5
 
 < 2.0 or
 > 6.0
 
 Considering the guidance given in KM 64-448, the Department will evaluate the
 acceptability of the material to determine if it will remain in place at a reduced pay
 factor or be removed and replaced at no expense to the Department.
 At the Contractor’s option and at no expense to the Department, the Department
 will allow the Contractor to core the pavement in question, up to a maximum of 4
 cores per sublot, for the investigation of AC values corresponding to pay factors
 potentially necessitating removal and replacement. Under inspection by Department
 personnel, core the pavement in question and submit the samples to the Department
 for further investigative testing.
 Any decision to remove and replace material must receive the concurrence of the
 Divisions of Construction and Materials. When the Department decides to require
 removal and replacement, the Department will determine the quantity of material to
 be removed and replaced in the following manner.
 The Department will identify the most recent preceding test (process control,
 quality control, or verification) of minimum acceptable quality and determine the
 tonnage at which that sample was obtained. The Department will define this level of
 quality as test results corresponding to the following pay values:
 
 402—12
 
 •
 •
 •
 
 0.90 or greater for AC and VMA for all mixtures;
 0.75 or greater for AV for ESAL Class 2 mixtures; and
 0.90 or greater for AV for ESAL Class 3 or 4 mixtures.
 
 The Department will also identify the most recent succeeding test (process
 control, quality control, or verification) of minimum acceptable quality and
 determine the tonnage at which that sample was obtained. The Department will
 define this level of quality as described above. The material to be removed and
 replaced will be that quantity from (a) halfway between the acceptable preceding
 test and the test corresponding to this footnote to (b) halfway between the test
 corresponding to this footnote and the acceptable succeeding test.
 Aside from the preceding guidelines, the Engineer may adjust the quantity to be
 removed and replaced depending on the investigative test results or specific project
 conditions. For any material allowed to remain in place, the Department will apply a
 0.65 pay factor to the Contract unit bid price for the asphalt mixture in question. The
 Department will apply the 0.65 pay factor to the quantity of asphalt mixture
 represented by the test result indicating substandard properties (one sublot when the
 result originated from an acceptance test).
 
 402—13
 
 SECTION 403  PRODUCTION AND PLACEMENT OF
 ASPHALT MIXTURES
 403.01 DESCRIPTION. This section includes general requirements that are applicable
 to all types of asphalt mixtures. Deviations from these general requirements are indicated
 in the specific requirements for each type mixture. Designate the qualified Asphalt Field
 Technician for the project at the preconstruction conference or pre-paving meeting. Ensure
 an Asphalt Field Technician is present on site when any paving operation is in progress.
 Construct one or more courses of asphalt mixture on the prepared foundation
 according to these Specifications and the requirements of the type specified in the
 Contract.
 403.02 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 403.02.01 Fine Aggregate. Conform to Section 804.
 403.02.02 Coarse Aggregate. Conform to Section 805.
 403.02.03 Asphalt Binder. Conform to Section 806.
 403.02.04 Self-Leveling Silicone Rubber Sealant. Conform to Section 807.
 403.02.05 Asphalt Release Agent. Provide materials conforming to KM 64-422.
 Ensure each shipment is accompanied by a certification of conformance.
 403.02.06 Transport Equipment. Provide trucks for transporting asphalt mixtures
 that have tight, clean, and smooth metal beds that have been sprayed with a minimum
 amount of release agent. Drain excess release agents from truck beds. Do not load trucks
 that are contaminated with an unapproved release agent. When such contamination is
 identified after loading, reject the load. In either case, remove the truck and respective
 driver from the project for the duration of the project. Equip all trucks with covers made
 of heavy canvas, or similar material suitable for protecting the mixture from the weather,
 that completely cover the loaded material.
 403.02.07 Asphalt Pavers. Use asphalt pavers that are self-propelled and capable of
 spreading and finishing all courses to the indicated widths and depths, line, grade, and
 cross section, with a smooth finish, uniform in density and texture, without requiring an
 undue amount of back-dressing for correcting irregularities. Equip the paver with the
 following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 5)
 6)
 
 a screed or strike-off assembly that easily adjusts to the required crown and will
 place the asphalt mixture in variable widths;
 an auger and vibrator that operates along the full width of the screed;
 a level that is attached to the screed and in full view of the operator;
 automatic screed controls, with sensors for both sides of the paver, capable of
 sensing grade from an outside reference, sensing the transverse slope of the
 screed, and providing the automatic signals that operate the screed to maintain
 the desired grade and transverse slope;
 a transverse slope controller that is capable of maintaining the screed at the
 desired slope within ± 0.1 percent; and
 automatic feeder controls that properly adjust to maintain a uniform depth of
 material ahead of the screed.
 
 403.02.08 Rollers. Provide self-propelled rollers that are capable of reversing
 smoothly. Equip steel-wheel rollers with adjustable scrapers, spray bars, and wetting pads
 to keep the wheels clean at all times.
 403.02.09 Small Tools and Portable Equipment. Provide all necessary small tools
 403—1
 
 and portable equipment required for satisfactory execution of the work and devices
 necessary for routine checks of finishing requirements. Do not use an unapproved release
 agent on any small tools or equipment incidental to the paving operation.
 Provide standard 10-foot long straightedges. Have straightedges available on the
 project before the work is started and all times thereafter until completion of the work.
 403.02.10 Material Transfer Vehicle (MTV). In addition to the equipment
 specified above, provide a MTV with the following minimum characteristics when
 specified in the Contract:
 1)
 
 403.03
 
 A system to independently deliver asphalt mixtures from the hauling
 equipment to the paving equipment;
 2) A high capacity truck unloading system, capable of 600 tons per hour, that
 will receive asphalt mixtures from the hauling equipment;
 3) A minimum combined capacity, including the MTV storage bin and paver
 hopper, of 25 tons of asphalt mixture;
 4) An auger system in the storage bin to continuously blend the asphalt
 mixture prior to discharge to the conveyor system; and
 5) A discharge conveyor, with the ability to swivel, to deliver the mixture to
 the paving spreader while allowing the MTV to operate from an adjacent
 lane.
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 403.03.01 Seasonal and Weather Limitations. Do not load trucks with asphalt
 mixtures when the ambient air temperature is below 35 °F. Do not place asphalt mixtures
 on any wet surface, when the ambient air and existing surface temperatures on the project
 are less than those specified in the table below, or when weather conditions otherwise
 prevent the proper handling or finishing of the asphalt mixtures.
 Between November 30 and April 1, do not place asphalt mixture courses that will
 become a permanent part of the work without obtaining the approval from the Engineer.
 Make every effort to have all asphalt base and binder courses covered before November
 30.
 If all asphalt mixture courses are not completed before November 30, perform all
 further work necessary to protect and maintain the uncompleted work during the winter
 months. Perform any work necessary to repair or restore the uncompleted work before the
 beginning of spring paving operations. Perform all work necessary to protect, maintain, or
 repair the base subject to the Engineer’s approval.
 TEMPERATURE LIMITATIONS
 Minimum Ambient Air Temperature and Minimum Temperature of the
 Existing Surface for Placing Asphalt Mixtures (°F)
 Open-Graded Friction Course (OGFC)
 SMA Base and Surface
 Asphalt Mixture, Surface (one inch thick or less)
 Leveling and Wedging and Scratch Course
 Asphalt Mixture, Surface (thicker than one inch)
 Asphalt Mixture for Pavement Wedge
 Asphalt Mixture, Base and Binder
 Asphalt-Treated Drainage Blanket
 
 60
 50
 45
 45
 40
 40
 35
 35
 
 403.03.02 Preparation of Base. Prepare the foundation before placing the asphalt
 mixture courses. The preparation may include fine grading and recompaction of earth or
 blasted rock subgrades, or crushed or natural aggregate bases.
 Maintain prepared subgrades and/or granular bases until placing the initial course of
 asphalt mixture to ensure that the foundation is true to the required grade and cross
 section.
 403—2
 
 Grade and shape existing traffic bound base to the required grade and cross section
 before applying any asphalt mixture course. Wet and roll any salvable floater material
 into the existing traffic bound base.
 When required, apply curing seal, prime, or tack coat, or a combination, according to
 Section 406.
 When applying the initial asphalt mixture surfacing on the traffic bound base,
 excavate as necessary at both ends of all bridges within the limits of the project. Excavate
 deep enough to apply the total thickness of the asphalt mixture courses being constructed.
 The excavation should be wide enough to accommodate the width of the course, or wider
 when directed, and as long as necessary, up to 100 feet, for smooth transitions from the
 top surface course to the bridge deck.
 Sweep existing or previously placed asphalt mixture or concrete courses clean of all
 foreign material. Apply tack coat according to Section 406.
 Remove existing markers installed in grooves, and fill the recess with the compacted
 asphalt mixture. The Department will not require filling of the grooves when milling of
 the existing pavement is included in the Contract and the milling operation removes the
 grooves.
 Remove and dispose of the existing Type V markers off of the right-of-way. Fill the
 recess and any additional damaged area with compacted asphalt mixture within 24 hours
 of removal. Fill the damaged areas, even when the Contract includes milling, unless the
 Engineer determines the damaged areas are not hazardous to public traffic.
 Adjust small drainage structures such as catch basins as required to match the
 finished pavement, or to provide proper drainage, according to Subsection 710.03.
 Only when the Engineer directs, adjust manholes according to Subsection 710.03.
 Return manhole adjusting rings that are removed and not reused to the utility owner.
 403.03.03 Preparation of Mixture.
 A) Mixture Composition. Provide the appropriate mixture composition for the
 specified asphalt mixture, or substitute a higher aggregate type. When
 substituting a mixture of a higher ESAL class, provide a mixture of no more than
 one ESAL class higher than the specified asphalt mixture. Conform to the
 gradation requirements (control points) of AASHTO M 323 for the Superpave
 mixture. Unless the Engineer authorizes otherwise in writing, use the same type
 and source of ingredient aggregates and asphalt binder throughout the entire
 project for each type of mixture. For asphalt surface courses containing 100
 percent polish-resistant coarse aggregate, limit the portion of non-polish-resistant
 fine aggregate retained on the No. 4 sieve to 5 percent of the total combined
 aggregates.
 When using a porous aggregate, increase the asphalt binder content (AC) as
 needed for asphalt binder absorption by the aggregate.
 The following aggregate requirements are listed in order of the highest,
 Type A, to the lowest, Type D:
 1)
 2)
 
 Type A. Provide 100 percent of the coarse aggregate from Class A sources.
 Ensure that 20 percent of the total combined aggregate is Class A polishresistant fine aggregate.
 Type B. Select either of the 2 following options:
 a)
 b)
 
 Provide 100 percent of the coarse aggregate from Class B sources.
 Provide a combined aggregate, retained on the No. 4 sieve, that is a
 minimum of 50 percent from any Class A polish-resistant aggregate
 source except those identified as “Not permitted as the polish-resistant
 portion of Class B blends.” Submit all Class B blends to the
 Department for review.
 For Option a) or b) above, ensure one of the following:
 403—3
 
 • 20 percent or more of the total combined aggregate is Class A
 polish-resistant fine aggregate.
 • 30 percent or more of the total combined aggregate is Class B
 polish-resistant fine aggregate.
 3)
 
 Type D. No restriction on aggregate type.
 
 B) Moisture Content of Mix. Determine the moisture content of the coated mixture
 according to AASHTO T 329 each time an asphalt content determination is
 performed. When moisture contents are greater than 0.25 percent, take corrective
 action to lower the moisture content. When moisture contents are 0.10 percent or
 greater, adjust the AC determination made on plant-produced mixture to reflect the
 actual AC as KM 64-434 directs.
 C) Mix Design Criteria. Conform to the gradation requirements (control points) of
 AASHTO M 323 for the Superpave mixture type the Contract specifies.
 1)
 
 Preliminary Mix Design. Perform the volumetric mix design according to
 AASHTO R 35 and conforming to AASHTO M 323. The Department will
 require a dust-to-binder ratio range of 0.8 to 1.6. Complete the volumetric mix
 design at the appropriate number of gyrations as given in the table below for the
 number of 20-year ESAL’s. The Department will define the relationship
 between ESAL classes, as given in the bid items for Superpave mixtures, and 20year ESAL ranges as follows:
 
 Class
 2
 3
 4
 2)
 
 3)
 
 ESAL’s (millions)
 < 3.0
 3.0 to < 30.0
 > 30.0
 
 Number of Gyrations
 Ninitial
 Ndesign
 Nmax
 6
 50
 75
 7
 75
 115
 8
 100
 160
 
 Selection of Optimum AC. Normally, the Department will approve the AC
 at an air-void content of 4.0 percent. The Engineer may assign an AC
 corresponding to other air-void levels as deemed appropriate. Ensure the
 optimum AC is a minimum of 5.0 percent by weight of the total mixture for
 all 0.5-inch nominal surface mixtures and 5.3 percent by weight of the total
 mixture for all 0.38-inch nominal surface mixtures.
 Tensile Strength Ratio (TSR). Analyze the mixture for TSR according to
 ASTM D 4867 with one freeze/thaw cycle, 150-mm specimens compacted
 with a Superpave gyratory compactor, and a target degree of saturation of
 the conditioned specimens of 65 ± 5 percent.
 
 403.03.04 Transporting Material. For all types of sizes of HMA and WMA, load
 all tri-axle or larger trucks with a minimum of three drops, utilizing the three drop method
 to prevent segregation of the asphalt mixture. Securely fasten all covers in place on the
 truck before leaving the plant. During cool weather, or when an unexpected delay occurs,
 keep the loads covered until just before unloading. Insulate truck beds, when necessary, to
 maintain the specified temperature to the point of delivery. Do not use any truck that
 causes excessive segregation of mixture or that leaks.
 403.03.05 Spreading and Finishing. Prevent segregation of the fine and coarse
 aggregates during all phases of construction. Spread the mixtures with a paver. Heat the
 screed uniformly throughout its length. Do not allow flames to directly contact the
 mixture. Adjust the paver speed to provide the best results for the mixture being used and
 to coordinate with the rate of delivery of the mixture to the paver to provide a uniform
 403—4
 
 placement rate without intermittent operation. Operate the screed or strike-off assembly
 without tearing, shoving, or gouging the mixture when laying the mixture. Operate
 vibrating screeds or other compacting features of the paver according to the
 manufacturer’s recommendations during the placement of the pavement.
 Use automatic screed and slope controls. However, if the Engineer determines that
 under certain conditions better results may be obtained without using the controls, then the
 Engineer may waive using either the grade control or slope control requirements, or both.
 Notify the plant to stop shipment whenever the automatic screed controls break down
 or malfunction. Obtain the Engineer’s approval to manually operate the equipment, or
 operate it by other methods, to place the remainder of material already in transit, provided
 the method of operation produces results otherwise conforming to this section.
 Obtain vertical control for the outer edges of each mainline roadway from reference
 lines or by using a ski arrangement. The Department will allow obtaining horizontal
 control from the reference line. Automatically control the grade and slope for
 intermediate lines using reference lines, or a ski and a slope control device, or a dual ski
 arrangement.
 Immediately after striking off and before rolling, visually inspect each course for
 irregularities, and correct if necessary. Keep hand raking of the mixtures to the absolute
 minimum. Ensure that the finished surface has a uniform appearance, free from
 segregated areas. Immediately remove and replace, as directed, all portions of a pavement
 course that are defective in mixture composition, show excessive segregation, or do not
 otherwise comply with the Contract.
 Correct irregularities in alignment of the outside edge or edges of longitudinal joints
 by adding or removing material before compacting the edges.
 Over uniform, narrow areas, such as widening or narrow, paved shoulders where the
 use of pavers would be impractical, spread by a mechanical spreader. Ensure that the
 material is placed to the required lines, grades, and cross section without segregation of
 the mixture.
 Over areas where machine spreading is impractical due to irregularities or
 obstructions, spread the mixture by approved methods. Place the material to avoid
 segregation and to reduce to a minimum the amount of patching required during
 compaction. Discard all coarse aggregate particles brought to the surface by raking. Do
 not scatter or broadcast excess mixture or particles across the surface of the uncompacted
 mat.
 Spread all surface courses with allowances made for compacting to finish
 approximately 3/8 inch above forms, gutters, or similar construction.
 The Department may allow shoulders and Asphalt Mixture for Pavement Wedge to
 be paved monolithically with the mainline if it is in the best interest of the Department.
 Obtain the Engineer’s approval before doing so.
 Do not place or compact asphalt mixture when the natural light is insufficient without
 providing artificial lighting satisfactory to the Engineer. Unless the Contract specifies
 nighttime paving, do not place binder, surface, or other asphalt mixture wearing courses at
 night, without first obtaining the Engineer’s permission. The Engineer may require
 daytime paving if the Engineer deems the nighttime work unsatisfactory.
 A) Use a MTV to place the asphalt mixture for all layers of pavement excluding
 drainage blanket in the driving lanes for all interstates and parkways. Use a MTV
 on other routes when required by the contract or proposal. The MTV is not
 required on ramps and/or shoulders unless specified in the contract. When the
 Engineer determines the use of the MTV is not practical for a portion of the
 project, the Engineer may waive its requirement for that portion of pavement.
 403.03.06 Thickness Tolerances. Place asphalt mixtures at the lift thickness
 specified in the Contract. When lift thickness is not specified in the contract or when
 deviations to the pavement thickness is approved by the Engineer, use the following table
 for application of asphalt mixture thickness.
 403—5
 
 Nominal Maximum Aggregate Size (Inches)
 1.50
 1.00
 0.75
 
 Lift Thickness (Inches)
 4.50 – 5.00
 3.00 – 4.50
 2.25 – 3.50
 
 A) Initial Treatment and Resurfacing Projects. Ensure that the total combined
 thickness of each class of asphalt base conforms to the Contract. Control the
 thickness by the rate of application. Place the mixture at the Contract-specified
 weight per square yard. Do not exceed the rate of application by more than 5
 percent.
 B) New Construction. Under the Engineer’s supervision, perform coring for
 thickness checks according to KM 64-420, as soon as practical after completion
 of all, or a major portion, of the asphalt base. The Engineer will measure the
 cores. Fill all core holes either with compacted asphalt mixture or non-shrink
 grout. Complete all remedial overlay work before placing the final course.
 When constructing an overlay, match the grades of the adjacent work such
 as storage lanes, approaches, entrances, etc., to the overlay section, whether these
 adjacent areas are deficient in thickness or not.
 Ensure the total combined thickness of all layers is within ± 1/2 inch of the
 compacted plan thickness.
 When there is an asphalt binder course, consider it as asphalt base for the
 purpose of determining compliance with thickness tolerances.
 When the top layer of a new pavement is OGFC, sand seal surface, or sand
 asphalt surface, consider all asphalt mixtures beneath that course as asphalt base
 for the purpose of determining compliance with thickness tolerances.
 When the Engineer determines the asphalt base is deficient in total thickness
 by more than 1/2 inch from the compacted plan thickness, overlay the full width
 of the pavement to bring the pavement to the required plan thickness. When
 placing additional material is not feasible due to structures, drainage, or other
 engineering reasons, the Engineer may waive the requirement for overlaying.
 403.03.07 Joints. When curbs, gutters, pavement, and other structures adjoin the
 new construction, coat all contact surfaces of the existing construction and joints of
 previously placed new construction, both longitudinal and transverse, with tack.
 When the pavement construction consists of 2 or more courses, offset the longitudinal
 joint a minimum of 6 inches. Place the longitudinal joint in the final surface course along
 the dividing line between the lanes. Clean adjacent surfaces of all loose materials so the
 joint shall receive full compaction from the rollers.
 Place and spread all courses as continuously as possible, keeping the number of joints
 to a minimum. When a transverse joint is necessary, complete the spreading of the
 material by the finishing machine, and adjust the course to a straight line, square with the
 pavement. Before work is resumed, cut back the joint on the previous run, exposing the
 full depth of the course. Remove all excess material. Check the joint with a 10-foot
 straightedge at intervals of 2 feet or less immediately after initial rolling. Immediately
 correct any irregularities not conforming to Subsection 403.03.11 either by additional
 raking or adding hot material, or both. Discard all coarse aggregate particles brought to the
 surface by raking. Do not scatter or broadcast excess mixture or particles across the
 surface of the uncompacted mat. Roll joints to compress the material and to produce as
 tight a joint as possible.
 Avoid cold longitudinal joints when practical by either placing the full width of the
 course in one pass, operating pavers in echelon, or moving pavers back each day after
 placing sufficient tonnage in each traffic lane so the course placed will be the full width of
 the pavement at the end of each day. Obtain the Engineer’s approval for the method of
 paving.
 403—6
 
 Comply with Subsection 402.03.02 D) for density of joint cores obtained from
 surface mixtures when Option A applies.
 403.03.08 Shoulder Rumble Strips and Pavement Texturing.
 A) Shoulder Rumble Strips.
 1)
 
 Interstates and Parkways. Construct sawed rumble strips on all mainline and
 ramp shoulders to the dimensions shown below. Place sawed rumble strips
 one foot out from the mainline pavement and to a length of 16 inches.
 2) Other Roads. Construct sawed rumble strips on shoulders of facilities with
 posted speed limits greater than 45 MPH and shoulder widths 4 feet or
 greater. Unless specified in the plans or directed by the Engineer, do not
 construct rumble strips on facilities with posted speed limits of 45 MPH or
 less. Construct sawed rumble strips on all mainline shoulders to the
 dimensions shown below. Place sawed rumble strips one foot out from the
 mainline pavement and to a length of 16 inches.
 B) Shoulder Pavement Texturing. Perform texturing on all paved shoulder widths
 less than 4 feet and constructed monolithically with the mainline or constructed
 using a surface mixture. When furnishing Asphalt Mixture for Pavement Wedge,
 binder, or a base mixture for the wedge, the Department will not require
 texturing.
 Texture to the dimensions shown below. Place 1 foot out from the mainline
 pavement and to a length of 2 feet. On paved shoulders less than 3 feet, shorten
 the length and distance of the texturing as the Engineer directs. Time the rolling
 operation so indentations are at the specified size and depth without causing
 unacceptable displacement of the asphalt mat.
 The Department may require a sawed rumble strip when texturing is
 required but omitted or not in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions
 shown.
 
 403.03.09 Leveling and Wedging, and Scratch Course.
 A) Leveling and Wedging.
 Conform to the gradation requirements (control
 points) of AASHTO M 323 for base, binder, or surface as the Engineer directs.
 Submit a JMF to the engineer for AC approval according to KM 64-421. The
 Engineer may adjust the gradation requirements of the asphalt mixture being
 used for leveling and wedging in order to provide smooth transitions.
 Upon completing each course of asphalt mixture and before spreading the
 403—7
 
 next course, check the surface of that course by a stringline for deviations from a
 uniform grade. Correct any such deviations from the required uniformity by
 applying additional material, spreading, and rolling as directed.
 When construction of the previous course is included in the same Contract,
 mill any high joints or other high areas as required in addition to leveling and
 wedging.
 When leveling and wedging is included on resurfacing projects, check the
 existing surface by stringline for deviations from a uniform grade. Correct the
 courses in the same manner with an application of the type mixture specified by
 the Engineer.
 When an asphalt mixture has been included in the proposal for leveling and
 wedging, perform this work at the locations designated before starting the
 normal paving operations. Thoroughly clean the areas to receive the corrective
 work, and apply the same tack material as specified for the courses being
 constructed. Do not apply the material as a scratch course over the entire area of
 the existing pavement. Do not apply the material monolithically with the surface
 course.
 Spread the asphalt mixture for leveling and wedging with a motor-patrol
 grader or paver. After spreading, thoroughly compact the mixture.
 B) Scratch Course. When required by the Contract, place an asphalt mixture as a
 scratch course. Conform to the gradation requirements (control points) of
 AASHTO M 323 for base, binder, or surface as the Engineer directs. Submit a
 JMF to the Engineer for AC approval according to KM 64-421. Apply the
 mixture over the entire area of the existing pavement before constructing the
 final surface course; do not apply material monolithically with the surface
 course. Set the paver to a minimum thickness as directed to correct rutting,
 adverse warping, dipping, and other imperfections in the existing pavement and
 to provide a smooth, level surface for the final surface course.
 Compact with a pneumatic-tired roller to ensure proper compaction in rutted
 and warped areas in the existing pavement.
 When required by conditions on the project, the Engineer may adjust the
 gradation requirements of the specified mixture.
 403.03.10 Compaction. Compact asphalt mixtures by Option A or B, as specified in
 the Contract.
 Operate the rollers to eliminate all roller marks and obtain the specified compaction.
 Operate vibratory rollers of a design, weight, and frequency that produces the specified
 compaction without damaging the mat.
 During the initial rolling of each course, visually inspect its surface for any
 irregularities that may develop. Remove and replace areas in which the material is not in
 compliance as specified in Subsection 403.03.05.
 Do not allow the rollers at any time to stand on the material being placed immediately
 behind the paver. When rolling is temporarily suspended, stop the rollers as far behind the
 paver as practical.
 Move the rollers at a slow but uniform speed with the drive roll or wheels nearest the
 paver. Immediately correct any displacement due to reversing the direction of a roller, or
 from other causes, using rakes and adding fresh mixture when required. While rolling, do
 not displace the line and grade of the edges of the asphalt mixture. When the Engineer
 allows, use a pneumatic-tired roller for final rolling on base courses.
 To prevent adhesion of the material to the wheels of steel-wheeled rollers, keep the
 wheels moistened with water, but do not use excess water. Do not use kerosene, oil, or
 other harmful liquids. The Department will allow a small quantity of detergent to be
 mixed with the water.
 Compact areas adjacent to manholes, curbs, narrow widening, and other small areas
 inaccessible to a roller, by mechanical tampers.
 
 403—8
 
 A) Compaction Under Option A. Develop the rolling pattern during the first
 sublot.
 B) Compaction Under Option B. Provide initial or breakdown rolling consisting
 of one complete coverage by a 3-wheel roller or tandem roller weighing at least
 10 tons and having a compressive capability on the rear wheels of at least 325
 pounds per linear inch of wheel width. Ensure that 3-axle, steel-wheeled rollers
 weigh at least 12 tons. Ensure that 2-axle, steel-wheeled, tandem rollers weigh
 at least 10 tons. For initial or breakdown rolling, provide rollers that are
 equipped with wheels having a diameter of 40 inches or more. Perform the
 rolling immediately after spreading and finishing the mixture.
 Provide intermediate rolling consisting of at least 3 complete coverages with
 a tandem roller weighing at least 10 tons. Start intermediate rolling after
 completing the breakdown rolling as closely as possible without causing undue
 displacement, cracking, or shoving of the material.
 For intermediate rolling of 1 1/2-inch and 1-inch nominal size mixes, a
 pneumatic-tired roller may be used. Use pneumatic-tired rollers that weigh at
 least 12 tons and have 7 to 9 tires capable of inflation pressures up to 125 psi.
 Maintain an inflation pressure in all tires within ± 5 psi of the manufacturer’s
 recommended pressure. Arrange the tires so that the gap between the tires of the
 front axle is covered by the tires of the rear axle. Mount wheels to provide equal
 contact pressure under each wheel. Use a tire tread that is satisfactory to the
 Engineer. Maintain tire size and inflation pressure such that the contact pressure
 is at least 80 psi.
 Perform final rolling of the uppermost layer or surface course with a tandem
 roller. Operate the roller, at all times, parallel to the centerline. When the
 Engineer allows, use a pneumatic-tired roller for final rolling on base courses.
 Begin rolling at the sides and progress to the center on crowned surfaces.
 Begin rolling at the low side and progress to the high side on superelevated
 sections. Operate the rollers parallel to the centerline, and lap successive trips of
 each roller uniformly to the previous trip. During breakdown rolling, the
 Engineer may allow the course to be rolled without the required lap of the
 wheels on successive trips. End alternate trips of the rollers on transverse lines
 at least 3 feet apart. Regulate starting and stopping of the rollers to avoid
 distorting the surface.
 403.03.11 Surface Tolerances. Check the surface of each course with templates,
 straightedges, or stringlines. Check the surfaces of the finished courses longitudinally
 with a 10-foot straightedge placed parallel to the centerline over the width of the surface.
 Ensure the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 The finished surfaces of the base and binder courses do not deviate more than
 1/4 inch from the 10-foot straightedge.
 The finished surface of the final surface course does not deviate more than 1/8
 inch from the 10-foot straightedge.
 The cross slope of all courses does not deviate more than 1/4 inch in 5 feet from
 the required cross slope.
 The asphalt surface conforms to all requirements for a final surface course when
 the top portion of a new pavement consists of a wearing course underlain by
 asphalt surface.
 
 Correct all irregularities exceeding the allowable tolerances. Correct surface course
 irregularities by removing and replacing the entire lift thickness or by overlaying. Do not
 remove the irregular areas of the surface course by surface grinders.
 On resurfacing projects, when no provisions are made for constructing leveling and
 wedging courses, scratch courses, or milling, the Engineer will waive the specified
 requirements for surface tolerances.
 
 403—9
 
 403.03.12 Transverse Joints. When specified in the Contract, cut transverse joints
 in overlays of JPC pavement, base, and shoulders. Seal with self-leveling silicone rubber
 sealant.
 403.03.13 Pavement Marking. Apply and maintain pavement marking as specified
 in Section 112.
 403.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 403.04.01 Removing Type V Pavement Markers. The Department will measure
 the quantity by each individual unit. The Department will determine the quantity by
 dividing the length of each run of markers by the markers’ average spacing, plus one.
 The Department will not measure other marker types for removal, disposal, or filling
 of their grooves for payment. The Department will consider all of this work incidental to
 the surfacing items in the Contract.
 403.04.02 Adjust Manhole. The Department will measure the quantity by each
 individual unit.
 403.04.03 Asphalt Mixtures. The Department will measure the quantity according
 to Subsection 402.04. The Department will not measure rolled rumble strips or pavement
 wedge texturing for payment and will consider them incidental to this bid item.
 403.04.04 Leveling and Wedging. For resurfacing projects, when leveling and
 wedging is listed as a bid item, the Department will measure the quantity in tons according
 to Subsection 402.04. For reconstruction and new construction, the Department will
 measure the quantity of leveling and wedging placed on the first base course in tons as
 base material. The Department will not measure leveling and wedging used to correct
 irregularities in subsequent courses for payment and will consider it incidental to placing
 the course.
 403.04.05 Asphalt Scratch Course. The Department will measure the quantity
 according to Section 402.04.
 403.04.06 Protective and Restorative Work. The Department will not measure for
 payment any extra materials, methods, or construction techniques, determined by the
 Engineer not to be a part of the specified construction, used to protect, maintain, or repair
 any portion of the uncompleted work during the winter months.
 403.04.07 Rumble Strips. The Department will measure the quantity of sawed
 rumble strip in linear feet along the length of the roadway. When pavement shoulder
 texturing is required or utilized, the Department will not measure the quantity for payment
 and will consider them incidental to the asphalt mixture.
 403.04.08 Asphalt Placement with MTV. The Department will not measure the
 MTV for payment and will consider its use incidental to the asphalt mixture.
 403.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 403.05.01 Adjust Manhole. The Department will make payment for the completed
 and accepted quantities according to Subsection 408.05.02.
 403.05.02 Asphalt Mixtures. The Department will make payment for the completed
 and accepted quantities according to Section 402.
 403.05.03 Leveling and Wedging. The Department will make payment for the
 403—10
 
 completed and accepted quantities according to the Lot Pay Adjustment Schedule for
 Specialty Mixtures in Section 402.
 403.05.04 Asphalt Scratch Course. The Department will make payment for the
 completed and accepted quantities according to the Lot Pay Adjustment Schedule for
 Specialty Mixtures in Section 402.
 403.05.05 Adjust Manhole Frame to Grade. The Department will make payment
 for the completed and accepted quantities according to Subsection 408.05.02.
 Code
 06600
 01791
 02696
 -----
 
 Pay Item
 Remove Pavement Marker Type V
 Adjust Manhole Frame to Grade
 Shoulder Rumble Strips – Sawed
 Asphalt Mixture, Type
 
 Pay Unit
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot
 Ton
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 403—11
 
 SECTION 404  OPEN-GRADED FRICTION COURSE (OGFC)
 404.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct one course of hot-mixed, hot-placed, OGFC
 approximately 3/4-inch thick on a foundation provided by either new or existing
 pavements.
 404.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 404.02.01 Aggregates. Conform to Subsection 403.02 and the following:
 A) Fine Aggregate. Limit sands from sources other than Class A polish-resistant
 fine aggregate sources to 20 percent of the total aggregate in the mixture.
 B) Coarse Aggregate. Provide 100 percent Class A polish-resistant aggregate.
 404.02.02 Asphalt Binder.
 conforming to Section 806.
 
 Provide the PG binder specified in the Contract
 
 404.02.03 Anti-stripping Additive. Select from the Department’s List of Approved
 Materials.
 404.02.04 Tack. Conform to Section 406.
 404.02.05 Reclaimed Materials.
 maximum of ten percent in the mixture.
 
 Limit the use of reclaimed materials to a
 
 404.03 CONSTRUCTION. Conform to Section 403, except as provided in this section
 and in the Contract. The OGFC is intended to provide a coarse-textured, well-draining,
 skid-resistant wearing surface. Construct this course at a higher elevation than adjacent
 gutters to provide proper lateral drainage of water through the course.
 For multiple lanes in the same direction, place the material continuously in one lane
 each day. Protect it from traffic until it has cured overnight.
 When placing OGFC on two-lane, two-way pavements, operate the paver according
 to Subsection 403.03.05.
 404.03.01 Weather Limitations. Follow weather limitations outlined in Subsection
 403.03.01.
 404.03.02 Leveling and Wedging. Perform the necessary leveling, wedging, and
 patching to repair an existing pavement before beginning construction of this surface
 course.
 404.03.03 Tack Coat. Apply according to Section 406, except as follows. When
 furnishing emulsions for the tack coat, do not dilute the emulsions. Apply undiluted SS-1,
 SS-1h, or RS-2 at an approximate rate of 0.8 pounds (0.1 gallons) per square yard.
 404.03.04 Preparation of Mixtures. Submit the JMF for OGFC for approval
 according to Subsection 402.03. Conform to the gradation requirements specified. The
 Department will perform a mix design according to KM 64-424.
 Test the approved JMF of the mixture according to KM 64-433 or KM 64-620, and
 ensure that it conforms to the requirements shown in the table below.
 During the operation of the plant, conform to the following tolerances from the
 approved JMF, and also maintain the master gradation ranges below at all times.
 
 404—1
 
 SIEVE
 SIZE
 
 MASTER GRADATION RANGE
 (Percent Passing by Weight)
 
 JMF
 TOLERANCES
 
 1/2 inch
 3/8 inch
 No. 4
 No. 8
 No. 16
 No. 200
 
 100
 90-100
 25-50
 5-15
 2.0-5.0
 
 ± 6%
 ± 4%
 
 Obtain the Engineer’s approval for the percent by weight of asphalt binder in the
 mixture. Do not deviate from the established AC by more than 0.4 percent. Test the
 mixture according to KM 64-405, KM 64-436, KM 64-437, KM 64-438, or AASHTO T
 308.
 Use the anti-stripping additive at the rate of 0.5 percent by weight of asphalt binder.
 Maintain temperatures of the ingredient materials and the mixture within the
 following ranges:
 MIXING AND LAYING TEMPERATURES (°F)
 Material
 Aggregates
 Asphalt Binders
 Asphalt Mixtures at Plant
 (Measured in Truck)
 Asphalt Mixtures at Project
 (Measured in Truck
 When Discharging)
 
 PG 64-22
 PG 76-22
 PG 64-22
 PG 76-22
 PG 64-22
 PG 76-22
 
 Minimum
 240
 230
 285
 230
 275
 175
 260
 
 Maximum
 330
 330
 350
 265
 320
 265
 320
 
 Spread the OGFC at an approximate rate of 65 pounds per square yard to provide an
 approximate thickness of 3/4 inch.
 Roll in the static mode with a steel-wheeled, tandem roller weighing between 5 and 8
 tons. Begin rolling immediately after placing the course. Limit rolling to the minimum
 necessary for consolidating the mixture and bonding it to the underlying surface. Avoid
 excessive rolling and breakage of the aggregate.
 404.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure the quantity in tons
 according to Subsection 402.04. The Department will not measure asphalt tack coat and
 anti-strip additives for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 404.05 PAYMENT. The Department will calculate payment by the Lot Pay
 Adjustment Schedule for Specialty Mixtures in Section 402.
 The Department will apply the schedule’s tolerances to the average of the absolute
 values of deviations from the JMF.
 When the deviation is on the fine side of the JMF, the Engineer will evaluate each
 occurrence and determine if it is detrimental to the pavement performance. The
 Department will evaluate the acceptability of the material to determine if it will remain in
 place at a reduced pay factor or be removed and replaced at no expense to the Department.
 When a pay factor less than 1.00 is determined for gradation on more than one sieve,
 the Department will use the lowest single pay factor determined.
 When a pay factor less than 1.00 is determined for both AC and gradation on one or
 more sieves, the Engineer will evaluate and determine if the deficiencies will have a
 cumulative negative influence on the mixture. If so, the Engineer will apply both the
 reduced pay factor for the AC and the largest deduction for the gradation failures. If not,
 404—2
 
 the Engineer will apply the larger single deduction.
 The Department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under
 the following:
 Code
 00266-00268
 
 Pay Item
 Asphalt Surface, Open-Graded, Grade
 
 Pay Unit
 Ton
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 404—3
 
 SECTION 405  ASPHALT SEAL COAT
 405.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct an asphalt seal coat consisting of one or more
 applications each of asphalt material and cover aggregate.
 405.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 405.02.01 Asphalt Material. Furnish RS-2 or HFRS-2 conforming to Section 806.
 405.02.02 Aggregate. Conform to Section 804 or 805, as applicable.
 405.02.03 Equipment. Provide, and keep on the project at all times, an accurate
 thermometer, hand brooms, and other small tools and equipment essential for completion
 of the work.
 Provide equipment for heating the asphalt material and pressure distributors
 conforming to Subsection 406.02.05.
 Provide a mechanical broom or sweeper for cleaning the existing surface and for
 sweeping the completed seal coat.
 Provide an aggregate spreader equipped with a mechanical feed. Ensure that the
 spreader is capable of depositing aggregate from the transporting vehicle directly onto the
 fresh asphalt material at the rate specified, in smooth, uniform layers, independent of the
 forward speed. Ensure that the spreader is capable of being filled and moved without
 discharging aggregate.
 Provide a pneumatic-tired roller for roadway surfaces. On slopes, the Department
 will allow a steel-wheel roller.
 405.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 405.03.01 Weather Limitations. Do not construct any seal coat when the ambient
 temperature is below 45 °F, nor when the ambient temperature within the preceding 24
 hours has been 35 °F or lower, except with the Engineer’s written permission.
 405.03.02 Preparation of Surface. Sweep the road with a mechanical sweeper and
 with wire hand brooms, when necessary. Clean the edges of the surface so that the full
 width of the roadway to be treated is uniformly clean. Where any mud or earth exists,
 remove it in advance of the application of the asphalt material, and allow the surface to
 thoroughly dry.
 If cracks cannot be adequately filled by the seal coat, fill them with asphalt material
 and apply cover aggregate before applying the seal coat.
 405.03.03 Heating and Applying Asphalt Material. Heat and maintain the asphalt
 material between 125 and 175°F during application.
 Apply asphalt material by means of a pressure distributor in a uniform, continuous
 spread over the section to be treated in the quantity per square yard specified in the
 Contract or as the Engineer directs.
 Keep the nozzles of the spray bar clean at all times. Immediately make any streaked
 areas uniform by use of a hand hose equipped with a nozzle.
 Treat areas over which it is impractical to operate a distributor by means of a hand
 hose equipped with a nozzle or by means of a pouring pot.
 Do not apply the asphalt material farther in advance of the spreading of the aggregate
 than can be covered directly by the aggregate immediately available at the site of work.
 When the seal coat treatment is constructed in half-widths, provide complete
 coverage by overlapping the 2 applications approximately 4 inches along the centerline.
 Prevent spotting or discoloring curbs, headwalls, and other structures. When such
 discolorations occur, remove them at no expense to the Department.
 Make joints utilizing an approved method.
 405—1
 
 405.03.04 Application of Cover Material. Provide the gradation specified in the
 Contract. Ensure that the aggregate for cover material is surface-dry when applied, unless
 damp aggregate is allowed or required due to the type of asphalt material being used.
 Spread the aggregate immediately following the application of the asphalt material. Spread
 the aggregate before the asphalt material breaks. Ensure that the spreading equipment
 does not contact the asphalt material before it is covered with aggregate. Apply the cover
 material at the rate designated in the Contract, with precautions taken not to exceed the
 designated rate by more than 5 percent. Use hand brooms to correct any irregularities.
 When applied on the roadway lanes and shoulders, roll the entire surface width with
 pneumatic-tired rollers immediately following the spreading of the aggregate. Do not use
 steel-wheel rollers except as specified in Subsection 405.02.03. Operate the rollers
 parallel to the centerline, and cover the entire surface with at least 3 passes of the rollers,
 or more when the Engineer directs.
 When applied on the roadway lanes and shoulders, after rolling, mechanically sweep
 the completed seal coat to remove all excess cover aggregate after the asphalt material has
 cured sufficiently to allow sweeping without dislodging the imbedded aggregate, when
 deemed necessary. If an asphalt surface course is to be applied over the seal coat, do not
 allow traffic on the seal coat before applying the surface course unless required by the
 traffic control plan or the Engineer.
 405.04 MEASUREMENT. When an authorized adjustment is made, the Department
 will measure quantities up to 5 percent in excess of the designated application rate for
 payment. The Department will not measure quantities exceeding the designated
 application rate by more than 5 percent for payment.
 405.04.01 Asphalt Material for Asphalt Seal Coat. The Department will measure
 the quantity in tons according to Section 109.
 405.04.02 Asphalt Seal Aggregate. The Department will measure the quantity in
 tons according to Section 109.
 405.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 00103
 00100
 
 Pay Item
 Asphalt Seal Coat
 Asphalt Seal Aggregate
 
 Pay Unit
 Ton
 Ton
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 405—2
 
 SECTION 406  ASPHALT CURING SEAL AND ASPHALT
 PRIME AND TACK COATS
 406.01 DESCRIPTION. Prepare existing bases or surfaces, and apply asphalt material
 before placing covering courses of asphalt mixtures or treatments.
 406.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 406.02.01 Tack Coat. Furnish SS-1 or SS-1h conforming to Section 806.
 406.02.02 Prime Coat. Furnish SS-1h conforming to Section 806 unless the
 Contract allows another material.
 406.02.03 Curing Seal. Furnish RS-2, SS-1, or SS-1h conforming to Section 806.
 406.02.04 Water. Conform to Section 803.
 406.02.05 Equipment. Provide hand brooms and other small tools and equipment
 essential to completing the work in addition to a mechanical broom or sweeper, asphalt
 heating equipment, and a pressure distributor. Provide a mechanical broom or sweeper
 that is adjustable to make uniform contact with the surface and that thoroughly cleans
 without cutting into the surface being swept.
 Provide equipment for heating the asphalt material in tanks, railroad cars, trucks, and
 distributors that is capable of heating the material to the required temperature without
 introducing moisture, localized overheating, or otherwise changing the characteristics of
 the material.
 Mount the pressure distributor on a self-propelled, motor vehicle equipped with
 pneumatic tires, and ensure that it has sufficient power to maintain a constant and uniform
 speed under all operating conditions. Use a distributor designed to apply the material
 uniformly at the rate required for the type of construction. Use a distributor conforming to
 the following requirements:
 A) Tank. Use a tank with a capacity of at least 600 gallons and equipped with a
 removable manhole cover, an overflow pipe, and a dial gage for indicating the
 contents (mounted so as to be plainly visible to the operator). Carry an accurate
 measuring stick on the distributor at all times.
 B) Heating System. Ensure that the heating system evenly heats and maintains the
 asphalt material within the required temperature range at all times. Provide a
 temperature measuring device that will quickly and accurately determine the
 temperature of the material.
 C) Distributing System. Ensure that the pressure distributing system contains a
 separate power and pump unit of sufficient capacity to distribute the required
 quantity of asphalt material at a constant flow and uniform pressure. Mount a
 dial pressure gage plainly visible to the operator.
 D) Spray Bar and Nozzles. Use a full-circulating spray bar that adjusts in length to
 conform to the width of the application being made without overlapping. Use a
 spray bar that swings laterally over a distance of 9 inches or more. Provide a
 positive and immediate cut-off and means to prevent material from dripping onto
 the road surface when the flow is shut off. Use individual nozzles that maintain
 an equal flow from all nozzles at the same time. To prevent clogging of the
 nozzles, provide screens for the circulating system, and keep the screens clean.
 Also, provide a hand spray bar and nozzle having an adequate length of flexible
 steel hose with packed couplings.
 E) Tachometer or Synchronizer. Provide a tachometer visible to the truck
 operator to enable him to maintain the constant speed necessary for the
 application of the specified quantity of material. Furnish suitable charts showing
 the truck speeds necessary for the correct application.
 406—1
 
 When using a synchronizer, the tachometer may be omitted. Use a
 synchronizer that delivers a specified quantity of asphalt material onto the road
 surface independent of the truck speed.
 406.03 CONSTRUCTION. For the asphalt prime coat, apply liquid asphalt material to
 granular-type bases.
 For the asphalt tack coat, apply liquid asphalt material to the surface of concrete or
 bases, and to existing asphalt surfaces and, when necessary, to newly constructed asphalt
 courses.
 406.03.01 Weather Limitations. Conform to the temperature limitations specified
 for the asphalt mixture to be placed. Do not apply prime and tack coats to wet surfaces.
 406.03.02 Preparation of Surface. Obtain the Engineer’s approval of the prepared
 surface before applying the prime or tack coat.
 A) Asphalt Prime Coat. Grade and shape the existing traffic bound base to the
 required grade and cross section before applying any asphalt material. Wet and
 roll salvable floater material into the existing traffic bound base.
 B) Asphalt Tack Coat. Use mechanical sweepers to clean the application surfaces
 of all dirt and other foreign matter. Use wire hand brooms when necessary.
 Extend sweeping beyond the edges of the surface to ensure a thorough cleaning
 of the full width to be treated.
 C) Asphalt Curing Seal. Ensure the roadbed surface is dense, free from loose
 
 extraneous material, and contains sufficient moisture to prevent penetration
 of the asphalt material.
 406.03.03 Application. Provide necessary barricades, warning signs, and flaggers to
 prevent traffic from traveling over a freshly applied prime or tack coat. Also, provide for
 public convenience and safety as specified in Sections 104 and 107.
 Prevent spotting or discoloring curbs, headwalls, and other structures. When
 discolorations occur, remove them at no expense to the Department.
 Protect the exposed, treated surfaces from damage. Repair all damaged areas.
 Maintain the material within the following temperature ranges during application:
 70-160 °F
 70-140 °F
 
 SS-1, SS-1h
 RS-2
 
 A) Asphalt Prime Coat. Apply prime coats at the rate specified in the Contract, or
 as directed when conditions justify variations in the rates of application.
 Apply the number of applications of the prime coat as directed. Apply the
 material under pressure. Do not use hand-pouring except for special conditions,
 and then only with the Engineer’s approval.
 Allow the prime coat to cure before placing the asphalt mixture course
 unless the Engineer approves otherwise.
 B) Asphalt Tack Coat. Apply the tack coat with a spray bar that can be raised to a
 sufficient height so as to uniformly and completely coat the entire surface. When
 a uniform application, at the rate required, cannot be obtained from a spray bar,
 then apply the tack coat by fogging with a hand spray attachment. The Engineer
 will only accept complete and uniform coverage. Unless otherwise specified in
 the requirements for the asphalt mixture being placed, apply tack at a rate to
 achieve an undiluted residue of 0.4 pounds (0.05 gallons) per square yard.
 When furnishing SS-1 or SS-1h for tack, the Department will allow diluted
 or undiluted application provided uniform and complete coverage is achieved.
 When applying tack in a diluted form, apply it a sufficient time in advance to
 ensure that all water has evaporated before placing the asphalt mixture.
 On newly constructed base and binder courses, adjust the application rate as
 406—2
 
 the Engineer directs.
 When placing asphalt material adjacent to curbs, existing pavements, or
 other structures, first coat the contact surface of the existing structure with tack
 material.
 If the initial application of any tack material is not uniform, apply additional
 material as directed at no additional expense to the Department.
 Remove asphalt material applied in excess of the requirements, or cover it
 with a blotter course of dry sand or stone chips as the Engineer directs.
 On projects over which public traffic is being maintained, apply the tack
 coat over one-half of the pavement width, not to exceed one-half of the day’s
 work, in advance of the construction of the asphalt cover course. Do not end the
 tack coat application at a location hazardous to traffic. Do not apply tack coat to
 a lane that requires overnight closure, unless the Engineer approves it in writing.
 Schedule the work so that, at the end of the day’s production, all tack is covered
 with the asphalt mixture or a sand blotter course. At road intersections or other
 traffic crossings, the Engineer may require the application of a sand blotter
 course over the tack coat.
 When Sand for Blotter is included in the Contract as a bid item, cover the
 tack coat with surface-dry, natural sand in a minimum quantity sufficient to
 prevent the tack coat from being picked up by traffic. Apply the sand uniformly
 at the rate the Engineer directs but not exceeding 5 pounds per square yard. The
 normal rate is 2 to 3 pounds per square yard.
 C) Asphalt Curing Seal. Uniformly apply the curing seal at the rate of
 approximately 2 pounds per square yard. The Engineer will determine the actual
 rate and application temperature of asphalt material. Apply the curing seal in
 sufficient quantity to provide a continuous membrane over the roadbed. To
 avoid excessive runoff, apply the seal in 2 or more applications when directed or
 allowed, making each application as soon as possible after the previous
 application. If any damage occurs, immediately reseal the damaged area.
 If the asphalt material is sticky, apply a sand blotter material at a rate of
 approximately 5 pounds per square yard, when the Engineer directs, to avoid
 damage to the seal or to avoid tracking material onto other facilities.
 406.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will not measure for payment the removal
 of discolorations, maintenance, and repair of the applied coating, or removal of excess
 material.
 406.04.01 Asphalt Prime Coat. The Department will measure the quantity
 according to Section 109. The Department will not measure water used to prepare dry
 surfaces for payment.
 406.04.02 Asphalt Material for Tack. The Department will not measure tack for
 payment and will consider it incidental to the asphalt courses.
 406.04.03 Asphalt Curing Seal. The Department will measure the quantity
 according to Section 109. The Department will not measure water used to prepare dry
 surfaces for payment.
 406.04.04 Sand for Blotter. When listed as a bid item, the Department will measure
 the quantity in tons according to Section 109. The Department will not measure sand for
 payment when used to treat excessive asphalt material application.
 406.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 00296
 
 Pay Item
 Asphalt Prime Coat
 
 Pay Unit
 Ton
 406—3
 
 00358
 02702
 
 Asphalt Curing Seal
 Sand for Blotter
 
 Ton
 Ton
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 406—4
 
 SECTION 407  ASPHALT MIXTURE FOR PAVEMENT
 WEDGE
 407.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct a pavement wedge composed of a hot-mixed or
 warm-mixed asphalt mixture. Prepare the area to be covered by the mixture when
 necessary.
 407.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 407.02.01 Asphalt Binder. Furnish PG 64-22 conforming to Section 806.
 407.02.02 Aggregate. Conform to Sections 804 and 805. Use a gradation within the
 requirements in the following table:
 Sieve Size
 1 1/2 inch
 3/4 inch
 3/8 inch
 No. 4
 No. 8
 No. 16
 No. 50
 No. 100
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 70-100
 45-80
 30-60
 20-45
 15-35
 5-20
 3-10
 
 Test gradation according to KM 64-433 or KM 64-620.
 Use an asphalt binder content (AC) between 4.5 and 6.0 percent by weight of the
 mixture. When using a porous aggregate, increase the AC as needed to compensate for
 asphalt absorption by the aggregate. Submit a JMF to the Engineer for approval according
 to KM 64-421. Maintain the approved AC within ± 0.5 percentage points as determined
 according to KM 64-405, KM 64-436, KM 64-437, KM 64-438, or AASHTO T 308.
 407.03 CONSTRUCTION. Conform to Section 403 except as specified in this section
 and in the Contract.
 Construct the wedge to the depth, width, and slope the Contract specifies where
 existing conditions permit. Remove the sod or perform trench excavation only when
 necessary to obtain the specified depth and width. Do not remove solid rock.
 Compact the mixture with a roller weighing at least one ton.
 407.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure the quantity according to
 Subsection 402.04.
 The Department will not measure trench excavation or sod removal performed as
 specified in this section for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of
 work.
 407.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities according to the Lot Pay Adjustment Schedule for Specialty Mixtures
 in Section 402 under the following:
 Code
 00263
 
 Pay Item
 Asphalt Mixture for Pavement Wedge
 
 Pay Unit
 Ton
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 407—1
 
 SECTION 408  ASPHALT PAVEMENT MILLING AND
 TEXTURING
 408.01
 
 DESCRIPTION. Remove existing pavement by milling and texturing.
 
 408.02 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT. Provide a power-operated, self-propelled
 milling machine capable of:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 
 removing asphalt pavement to the required depth, profile, cross slope, and surface
 texture;
 accurately establishing profile grades by referencing from either the existing
 pavement or from an independent grade control;
 controlling cross slope;
 applying sufficient down-pressure to plane the milled surface; and
 effectively removing cuttings from the pavement and preventing dust from escaping
 into the air.
 
 Provide supplemental equipment as necessary to remove material adjacent to curbs,
 railroad crossings, and other areas that cannot be removed by the milling machine.
 Additionally, provide a mechanical sweeper and, when the Engineer deems necessary, a
 water truck to control dust.
 408.03 CONSTRUCTION. The depth of cut indicated in the Contract is approximate
 only. The Engineer will specify the actual depth of cut.
 When the Contract requires a bottom-of-rut cut, remove only the amount of material
 necessary to acceptably texture the bottom of the rut. Where there are no ruts, remove
 only the amount of material necessary to obtain an acceptable texture.
 Remove the material in successive cuts of approximately 1 to 1 1/2 inches, measured
 at the edge of the cutting drum. Complete each cut over the entire length and width of the
 area. Do not begin the next cut until the Engineer examines the area and determines that
 additional cutting is necessary.
 When maintaining public traffic is not necessary, the Department may allow deeper
 cuts, provided the final cut does not exceed 1 1/2 inches and satisfactory results are
 obtained.
 Provide an average depth of 0.20 inch between the high and low points on the milled
 pavement.
 After milling and texturing, ensure that the finished surface conforms to the required
 grade and cross section and provides a smooth riding surface free from gouges, ridges, oil
 film, and other imperfections of workmanship. Do not allow the elevation of the
 longitudinal edges of adjacent cuts to differ more than 1/8 inch. Unless the Engineer
 allows, do not leave vertical longitudinal faces during non-working hours in areas exposed
 to public traffic. Limit the vertical longitudinal faces to 1 1/2 inches in height, and taper
 them in a manner the Engineer approves to avoid creating a hazard for traffic.
 When the Engineer deems necessary, apply water to control dust.
 Remove excess millings and fines that have collected at the vertical longitudinal faces
 and thoroughly sweep up all millings. Load and haul away all materials swept up.
 Repair pavement that is gouged, torn, or otherwise damaged during milling
 operations, and repair damage done to any other property of any kind including utility
 frames, grates, and covers.
 408.03.01 Surface Tolerance. Ensure that the finished surface after the final cut
 does not deviate more than 1/8 inch from a 10-foot straightedge and that the cross slope
 does not deviate more than 3/8 inch in 10 feet. Correct all irregularities exceeding these
 limits.
 408.03.02 Approaches and Tapers. Mill approaches and tapers as required by, and
 to the satisfaction of, the Engineer. The Engineer will determine the length, width, and
 408—1
 
 depth of cut on approaches and tapers. Match the approaches and tapers to the finished
 cut on the mainline, and transition them to the existing surface within 1/8 inch.
 When the Engineer deems necessary, transition private entrances to provide a smooth
 approach to the roadway.
 408.03.03 Pavement Marking. Apply and maintain pavement markings according
 to Section 112.
 408.03.04 Adjusting Small Drainage Structures. Adjust small drainage structures,
 such as catch basins, as required to match the finished pavement, or to provide proper
 drainage, according to Subsection 710.03.03. When existing catch basin grates are below
 the finished grade, the Department will require no adjustments.
 Keep all small drainage structures, utility valves, etc. free of cuttings and other debris
 during the milling operation.
 408.03.05 Adjusting Manholes. Only when the Engineer directs, adjust manholes
 according to Subsection 710.03.03. Return manhole adjusting rings that are removed and
 not reused to the utility owner.
 408.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 408.04.01 Asphalt Pavement Milling and Texturing. The Department will
 measure the quantity of material removed from the areas milled and textured in tons.
 When the original Contract quantity is 2,000 tons or more, weigh the material
 according to Section 109, except that the Department will accept commercial or portable
 scales, certified by the Kentucky Department of Agriculture, Division of Weights and
 Measures, and approved by the Engineer.
 When the original Contract quantity is less than 2,000 tons, arrange for 3 trucks of
 each capacity to be weighed to determine the average net weight per load. The
 Department will calculate the total quantity using the average weight per load and the load
 count for each size of truck. The Engineer may require additional weighing if excessive
 variation in loading is apparent. The Engineer may perform check-weighing.
 The Department will not measure additional milling performed to correct deficiencies
 in the finished grade, cross section, or texture for material removed when the deficiencies
 are due to unsatisfactory workmanship.
 The Department will not measure work to repair damage caused by the milling
 operations.
 The Department will not measure water used to control dust for payment and will
 consider it incidental to this item of work.
 408.04.02 Mobilization for Asphalt Pavement Milling and Texturing. The
 Department will measure the quantity by the lump sum. The Department will measure
 Mobilization for Asphalt Pavement Milling and Texturing for payment only once per
 Contract and will consider any additional mobilization operations for milling and texturing
 incidental to this item of work.
 The Department will not measure Mobilization for Asphalt Pavement Milling and
 Texturing for payment when milling is performed to correct deficiencies in the finished
 grade, cross section, or texture for material removed when the deficiencies are due to
 unsatisfactory workmanship.
 For group contracts, the Department will measure the quantity for each project
 (subsection) that has a bid item for Mobilization for Asphalt Pavement Milling and
 Texturing.
 408.04.03 Adjusting Small Drainage Structures. The Department will measure
 the quantity according to Subsection 710.04.
 408.04.04 Adjust Manhole. The Department will measure the quantity by each
 408—2
 
 individual unit.
 408.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 408.05.01 Asphalt Pavement Milling and Texturing. When Asphalt Pavement
 Milling and Texturing is a major item, the Department will use the supplemental formulas
 established in Subsection 104.02.02 for determining adjusted unit prices when either an
 underrun or an overrun of 25 percent occurs in the quantity of milling and texturing
 actually performed.
 408.05.02 Adjust Manhole. In the event the Engineer directs the Contractor to
 adjust existing manholes and the Contract does not include a bid item for this work, the
 Department will make payment at an agreed unit price of $250.00 for each manhole
 acceptably adjusted by using the adjusting ring method, or an agreed unit price of $350.00
 for each manhole acceptably adjusted by removing or adding masonry.
 Code
 Pay Item
 02677
 Asphalt Pavement Milling and Texturing
 02676
 Mobilization for Milling and Texturing
 01709, 01719 Adjusting Small Drainage Structures, Type, Size
 01791, 01792
 01791
 Adjust Manhole Frame to Grade
 
 Pay Unit
 Ton
 Lump Sum
 See Subsection 710.05
 Each
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 408—3
 
 SECTION 409  ASPHALT MIXTURES USING RECLAIMED
 MATERIALS
 409.01 DESCRIPTION. Use reclaimed asphalt pavement (RAP) from Department
 projects or other approved sources in hot mix asphalt (HMA) or warm mix asphalt
 (WMA) provided mixture requirements are satisfied. For other sources to be approved,
 satisfactorily establish to the Engineer that the quality of the material is acceptable.
 Use either pre-consumer (manufacturer waste or new) or post-consumer reclaimed
 asphalt shingles (RAS) that are processed such that all the material passes the 3/8-in.
 sieve. Ensure pre-consumer RAS is free of deleterious materials. Ensure post-consumer
 RAS does not contain more than 1.5 percent wood by mass or more than 3.0 percent
 deleterious materials by mass.
 409.02 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT. Conform to the guidelines in Subsection
 409.03.03 for the required grade of asphalt binder which is based on the percentage of
 effective binder content of the mixture.
 409.03 CONSTRUCTION. Keep reclaimed material of different gradation, asphalt
 binder content, asphalt binder properties, and aggregate properties separate at all times,
 including when stockpiling and feeding. The Department may approve other methods and
 procedures provided that all characteristics of the reclaimed material remain uniform.
 409.03.01 Polish-Resistant Aggregate. When electing to utilize polish-resistant
 aggregate in reclaimed material to satisfy a portion of the polish-resistant aggregate
 requirements for the mix, provide documentation to the Engineer’s satisfaction that the
 reclaimed material consists of the specified amount of polish-resistant aggregate. Provide
 samples of the reclaimed material to the Engineer for verification testing.
 409.03.02 Asphalt Binder Content Adjustment for RAS. Recognizing that not all
 asphalt binder in RAS is activated during the mixing operation to fully blend with the
 virgin materials, the Department will reduce the asphalt binder content determined by
 Kentucky Method 64-405 for RAS by 25 percent.
 409.03.03
 
 Preparation of Mixture.
 
 A) Mix Requirements. Conform to the Contract requirements for each
 mixture produced using reclaimed material consisting of RAP, RAS, or a
 combination of RAP and RAS. Conform to the following table to select the
 appropriate grade of virgin asphalt binder to blend with the reclaimed material.
 Calculate the percentage of effective binder content as follows:
 Percentage of effective binder content = [(A*B) + (0.75*C*D)]/E, where
 A = Asphalt binder content of the RAP (%);
 B = Percentage of RAP in the mix (%);
 C = Asphalt binder content of the RAS (%);
 D = Percentage of RAS in the mix (%); and
 E = Effective binder content of the mix (%).
 
 409—1
 
 ASPHALT MIXTURES WITH NOMINAL-MAXIMUM AGGREGATE SIZE
 OF 0.5 in., 0.38 in., and No. 4
 ASPHALT BINDER
 VIRGIN ASPHALT BINDER
 SPECIFIED IN
 RAP
 MIXTURE
 < 20 % Effective Binder
 21-30 % Effective
 BID ITEM
 Content
 Binder Content
 PG 64-22
 PG 64-22
 PG 58-28
 PG 76-22
 PG 76-22
 ----RAS
 
 PG 64-22
 PG 76-22
 
 PG 64-22
 PG 76-22
 
 < 13 % Effective Binder
 14-20 % Effective
 Content
 Binder Content
 PG 64-22
 PG 58-28
 --------RAP and RAS
 < 15 % Effective Binder
 16-25 % Effective
 Content
 Binder Content
 PG 64-22
 PG 58-28
 ---------
 
 ASPHALT MIXTURES WITH NOMINAL-MAXIMUM AGGREGATE SIZE
 OF 1.50 in., 1.00 in., and 0.75 in.
 ASPHALT BINDER
 VIRGIN ASPHALT BINDER
 SPECIFIED IN
 RAP
 MIXTURE
 < 25 % Effective Binder
 26-35 % Effective
 BID ITEM
 Content
 Binder Content
 PG 64-22
 PG 64-22
 PG 58-28
 PG 76-22
 PG 76-22
 ----RAS
 < 16 % Effective Binder
 17-24 % Effective
 Content
 Binder Content
 PG 64-22
 PG 64-22
 PG 58-28
 PG 76-22
 --------RAP and RAS
 < 18 % Effective Binder
 19-30 % Effective
 Content
 Binder Content
 PG 64-22
 PG 64-22
 PG 58-28
 PG 76-22
 --------B) Mixing. Obtain the Engineer’s approval for the method of incorporating the
 reclaimed material into the mixture. Thoroughly mix the new and reclaimed
 materials into a uniform mass. Ensure that the final mixture conforms to all
 requirements of the Contract. Ensure that the moisture content of the final
 mixture is not detrimental to the handling, hauling, placing, or compacting of the
 mixture.
 409.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will not measure reclaimed material
 separately but will include it in the measured quantities of asphalt mixture produced.
 
 409—2
 
 409.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the appropriate pay item for the asphalt mixture being produced.
 The Department will not make separate payment for incorporating reclaimed
 material. The Department will not increase or decrease the Contract unit prices for any
 asphalt mixture on the project as a result of using, or not using, reclaimed material in the
 asphalt mixtures.
 
 409—3
 
 SECTION 410  ASPHALT PAVEMENT RIDE QUALITY
 410.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers the requirements for the ride quality of
 completed asphalt pavements. Ride quality is a measurement of surface tolerance in terms
 of an International Roughness Index (IRI). The IRI is an index derived from controlled
 measurements of the longitudinal profile in the wheel tracks and correlated with panel
 ratings of ride quality. The Contract will specify when ride quality requirements apply.
 410.02 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT. The Department will measure the
 longitudinal profile of the surface with an ASTM E 950, Class 1 device.
 410.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 410.03.01 Corrective Work. Submit corrective work procedure plans to the
 Engineer for approval before performing the work. Provide a final, corrected surface
 comparable to adjacent, acceptable pavement placed within the project limits with respect
 to texture, appearance and skid resistance.
 410.03.02 Ride Quality.
 A) Acceptance Testing. The Department will test the ride quality of the pavement
 for acceptance after the Contractor:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 makes a request at least 2 weeks in advance; and
 partially completes the paving and the Department deems it necessary; or
 completes all mainline paving.
 
 The Department will determine the IRI by applying a linear transform,
 determined by correlation, to the values (average of 2 wheel paths) determined
 by ASTM E 1926. Thoroughly clean the surface of all dirt and other foreign
 matter immediately before the Department performs the testing.
 The Department will divide and test each traffic lane using 0.1-mile test
 sections starting at the beginning of the lane and proceeding in the direction of
 traffic. The Department will exclude discontinuities, such as bridges, in the
 pavement. When a test section at the end of a lane is less than 0.1 mile long, the
 Department will include that section with the adjacent section. When deemed
 necessary, the Department will retest the pavement after any corrective work is
 completed.
 When the final riding surface is an open-graded friction course (OGFC), the
 Department will test the underlying pavement before the OGFC is placed and,
 when deemed necessary, test the OGFC after it is placed.
 B) Requirements. The Department will specify if the ride quality requirements are
 Category A or Category B when ride quality is specified in the Contract.
 Categories B ride quality requirements shall apply when the Department fails to
 classify which ride quality requirement will apply to a Contract.
 1)
 
 2)
 
 Category A. Achieve an IRI of 70 or lower for each 0.1-mile section. When
 the IRI is greater than 80 for a 0.1-mile section, perform corrective work, or
 remove and replace the pavement to achieve the specified IRI. At the
 Department’s discretion, a pay deduction of $1200 per 0.1-lane-mile section
 may be applied in lieu of corrective work.
 The Department’s testing generates a computer file containing the
 measured longitudinal profile in terms of elevation values of each wheel
 track at 3-inch intervals. The Department will create a strip chart from the
 file showing the elevation and distance traveled when the IRI is greater than
 70 or upon request for lower IRI values.
 Category B. Achieve an IRI of 80 or lower for each 0.1-mile section. When
 410—1
 
 the IRI is greater than 90 for a 0.1-mile section, perform corrective work, or
 remove and replace the pavement to achieve the specified IRI. At the
 Department’s discretion, a pay deduction of $750 per 0.1-lane-mile section
 may be applied in lieu of corrective work.
 The Department’s testing generates a computer file containing the
 measured longitudinal profile in terms of elevation values of each wheel
 track at 3-inch intervals. The Department will create a strip chart from the
 file showing the elevation and distance traveled when the IRI is greater than
 80 or upon request for lower IRI values.
 410.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure the ride quality in terms of
 the IRI according to Subsection 410.03. The Department will not measure the IRI as a
 separate pay unit but will use the IRI to calculate a Ride Quality Adjustment payment.
 410.05 PAYMENT. The Department will apply a Ride Quality Adjustment for each
 0.1-lane-mile section tested.
 The Department will determine the Ride Quality
 Adjustments for each 0.1-lane-mile section using the Ride Quality Adjustment Schedule
 below. The Department will not apply positive ride quality adjustments to 0.1-lane-mile
 sections when their associated sublot’s density value is less than 0.95. The sum of the pay
 value adjustments for ride quality shall not exceed $0 for the project as a whole.
 When requesting tests on partially completed pavement, the Department will perform
 one test at no charge. The Department will perform additional requested testing and
 retesting for corrective work or pavement replacement at a cost of $300.00 per lane-mile.
 The Department will deduct charges for additional requested testing and retesting for
 corrective work from monies due on the Contract.
 RIDE QUALITY ADJUSTMENT SCHEDULES
 CATEGORY “A” PROJECTS
 IRI
 30 or less
 31
 32
 33
 34
 35
 36
 37
 38
 39
 40 to 70
 71
 72
 73
 74
 75
 76
 77
 78
 79
 80
 81 or higher
 (1)
 
 CATEGORY “B” PROJECTS
 
 Pay Value
 Adjustment(1)
 $750
 $630
 $520
 $420
 $330
 $250
 $180
 $120
 $70
 $30
 0
 -$30
 -$70
 -$120
 -$180
 -$250
 -$330
 -$420
 -$520
 -$630
 -$750
 corrective work(2)
 
 IRI
 36 or less
 37
 38
 39
 40
 41
 42
 43
 44
 45
 46 to 80
 81
 82
 83
 84
 85
 86
 87
 88
 89
 90
 91 or higher
 
 Pay Value
 Adjustment(1)
 $500
 $420
 $350
 $280
 $220
 $170
 $120
 $80
 $45
 $20
 0
 -$20
 -$45
 -$80
 -$120
 -$170
 -$220
 -$280
 -$350
 -$420
 -$500
 corrective work(3)
 
 The Department will not apply a positive pay value for corrective work other
 than removal and replacement to achieve the IRI.
 410—2
 
 (2)
 
 (3)
 
 When it is in the best interest of the Department, a minimum pay value deduction
 of $1200 per 0.1-lane-mile section may be applied in lieu of corrective work.
 When it is in the best interest of the Department, a minimum pay value deduction
 of $750 per 0.1-lane-mile section may be applied in lieu of corrective work.
 
 410—3
 
 SECTION 411  ASPHALT WEDGE CURBS AND
 MOUNTABLE MEDIANS
 411.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct extruded asphalt sections of constant width with an
 extrusion-type machine. Construct asphalt sections of variable width by machine or hand.
 411.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 411.02.01 Asphalt Materials. Conform to Section 806. For tack and paint coats,
 use SS-1 or SS-1h. For the asphalt mixture, use PG 64-22.
 411.02.02 Aggregate. Conform to Sections 804 and 805. Use a gradation that
 conforms to the following table:
 Sieve Size
 1/2 inch
 No. 4
 No. 8
 No. 16
 No. 200
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 60-80
 45-65
 13-25
 6.0-12.0
 
 Test gradation according to KM 64-433 or KM 64-620.
 Use an asphalt binder content (AC) between 6 and 8 percent by weight of the
 mixture. When using a porous aggregate, increase the AC as needed to compensate for
 asphalt absorption by the aggregate. Submit a JMF to the Engineer for approval according
 to KM 64-421. Maintain the approved AC within ± 0.5 percentage points as determined
 according to KM 64-405, KM 64-436, KM 64-437, KM 64-438, or AASHTO T 308.
 The Department may allow an alternate JMF. Submit alternates for the Engineer’s
 approval. When the Engineer determines that the results from an alternate JMF are not
 satisfactory, repair or replace the defective work, and complete the remainder of the work
 using the JMF specified in this section.
 411.02.03 Extrusion Equipment. Furnish a self-propelled machine for placing
 extruded asphalt sections. Ensure that it is equipped with a material hopper, a distributing
 screw, and adjustable forming devices; and capable of placing and compacting the asphalt
 mixture to the lines, grades, and cross section specified in a smooth, homogenous section
 free of honeycomb areas.
 411.03 CONSTRUCTION. Conform to Section 403 except as specified in this section
 and in the Contract.
 Thoroughly clean the surface where the extruded asphalt sections are to be placed,
 and apply tack at a rate to achieve an undiluted asphalt residue of 0.4 pounds (0.05
 gallons) per square yard. Allow the tack material to cure before covering it.
 For curbs and medians of constant width, extrude the asphalt sections at the locations
 and to the dimensions specified in the Contract.
 In areas inaccessible to the machine and on variable-width medians, the Department
 will allow hand-placing. Ensure that the mixture is compacted and finished to a dense,
 uniform section comparable to the machine-placed mixture.
 Apply an asphalt paint coat to the sections after construction. Prevent spotting or
 discoloring of concrete curbs, headwalls, and other structures, and remove any
 discolorations that occur.
 411.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 411.04.01 Asphalt Wedge Curb. The Department will measure the quantity in
 linear feet along the top of the curb. The Department will not measure tack and paint
 coats for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 411—1
 
 411.04.02 Mountable Medians. The Department will measure the quantity of each
 type in square yards. The Department will not measure tack and paint coats for payment
 and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 411.05 PAYMENT. When an alternate JMF is approved for use, the Department will
 not make any change to the Contract unit price for this item. The Department will make
 payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 01897
 01935-01950
 
 Pay Item
 Asphalt Wedge Curb
 Mountable Median, Type
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Square Yard
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 411—2
 
 SECTION 412  STONE-MATRIX ASPHALT (SMA)
 412.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct one or more courses of a stone-matrix asphalt
 (SMA) upon the prepared foundation according to these specifications.
 AASHTO R46 offers guidance for the design of SMA mixtures using the Superpave
 gyratory compactor (SGC).
 For CL4 SMA BASE 1.00D PG76-22, conform to all requirements for CL4 ASPH
 BASE 1.00D PG76-22 unless specifically modified herein. For CL4 SMA SURF 0.50A
 PG76-22, conform to all requirements for CL4 ASPH SURF 0.50A PG76-22 unless
 specifically modified herein. For CL4 SMA SURF 0.38A PG76-22, conform to all
 requirements for CL4 ASPH SURF 0.38A PG76-22 unless specifically modified herein.
 412.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 412.02.01 Fine Aggregate.
 A) Polish Resistance. Contrary to Subsection 403.03.03, the Department will not
 require any of the fine aggregate to be polish-resistant.
 B) Sand. Conform to the quality requirements of AASHTO M325. Contrary to
 AASHTO M325, conform to Subsection 804.04 for soundness.
 C) Mineral Filler. Conform to the quality requirements of AASHTO M325. Do
 not use fly ash as the mineral filler component. Do not use collected baghouse
 fines or other airborne aggregate particles in lieu of mineral filler.
 412.02.02 Coarse Aggregate.
 A) All Aggregate Types Except Slag. Conform to the quality requirements of
 AASHTO M325. Contrary to AASHTO M325, conform to Subsection 805.03
 for soundness.
 B) Slag. Conform to AASHTO M325 for flat-and-elongated particles and crushed
 content. Conform to Section 805 for wear, absorption, and soundness.
 412.02.03 Asphalt Binder.
 binder conforming to Section 806.
 
 Provide a performance-graded (PG) 76-22 asphalt
 
 412.02.04 Reclaimed Materials.
 maximum of ten percent in the mixture.
 
 Limit the use of reclaimed materials to a
 
 412.02.05 Stabilizing Additive. Select and utilize either cellulose or mineral fiber
 in the SMA mixture. Conform to the dosage rates and quality requirements of AASHTO
 M325. Furnish the fiber manufacturer’s certification to the Engineer stating that the
 material conforms to all requirements therein.
 412.02.06 Fiber-Supply System. Use a separate feed system to accurately
 proportion the required quantity of fibers into the mixture in a manner that ensures
 uniform distribution. Interlock this proportioning device with the aggregate feed or weigh
 system to maintain the correct proportions for all rates of production and batch sizes. Add
 the fiber in such a manner to prevent the material from becoming entrained in the exhaust
 system of the drier or plant. Control the proportion of fibers to within ± 10 percent of the
 amount required. Provide flow indicators or sensing devices for the fiber system,
 interlocked with the plant controls, to interrupt mixture production if the introduction of
 fiber fails.
 Prior to performing the trial demonstration specified in Subsection 412.03.04,
 calibrate the fiber-supply system. Provide the Engineer at least 2 days notice of the
 calibration date so that a Department representative may inspect the calibration process
 and verify that the system operates correctly.
 412—1
 
 For batch plants, add the fiber to the aggregate in the weigh hopper or as the Engineer
 directs. Increase the dry mixing time by 8 to 12 seconds, or as the Engineer directs, from
 the time the aggregate is completely emptied into the mixer. Ensure the fibers are
 uniformly distributed prior to the injection of asphalt binder into the mixer.
 For continuous or drum plants, add the fiber to the aggregate, and ensure the fibers
 are uniformly dispersed, prior to the injection of asphalt binder.
 412.02.07 Mineral Filler-Supply System. Use a totally enclosed, separate feed
 system to accurately proportion the mineral filler into the mixture in a manner that ensures
 uniform distribution. Do not introduce the mineral filler through the cold-feed system.
 Prior to performing the trial demonstration specified in Subsection 412.03.04 of this
 note, calibrate the mineral filler-supply system to within 10 percent of the desired amount.
 Provide the Engineer at least 2 days notice of the calibration date so that a Department
 representative may inspect the calibration process and verify that the system operates
 correctly.
 412.02.08 Rollers. Do not use pneumatic-tired rollers. Use vibratory rollers for
 breakdown rolling only.
 412.02.09 Material Transfer Vehicle (MTV).
 specified in Section 403.
 
 Provide and utilize a MTV as
 
 412.03. CONSTRUCTION.
 412.03.01 Seasonal and Weather Limitations.
 weather limitations outlined in 403.03.01.
 
 Conform to the seasonal and
 
 412.03.02 Preparation of Mixture. Conform to the following aggregate
 composition limits for the respective nominal-maximum size of SMA.
 
 Sieve Size
 1 1/2 inch
 1 inch
 3/4 inch
 1/2 inch
 No. 4
 No. 8
 No. 200
 
 AGGREGATE COMPOSITION LIMITS
 1.00-in. Base
 0.50-in. Surface
 0.38-in. Surface
 % Passing by Mass
 % Passing by Mass
 % Passing by Mass
 100
 100
 100
 85-100
 100
 100
 ---100
 100
 50-70
 85-100
 100
 20-36
 20-36
 30-50
 15-25
 12-25
 20-30
 7.0-11.0
 7.0-11.0
 8.0-12.0
 
 412.03.03 Mix Design Criteria. Using a compaction effort of Ndes = 100 gyrations,
 submit a preliminary mix design conforming to the following mixture specifications.
 
 412—2
 
 MIX DESIGN CRITERIA
 Property
 Requirement
 % Air Voids (AV)
 4.0
 % Voids-in-Mineral Aggregate (VMA)
 CL4 SMA BASE 1.00D PG76-22
 16.0 (minimum)
 CL4 SMA SURF 0.50A PG76-22
 17.0 (minimum)
 CL4 SMA SURF 0.38A PG76-22
 17.0 (minimum)
 % Voids-in-Coarse Aggregate
 (VCAmix) of Compacted Mixture1
 < VCA of Dry Aggregate (VCADRC)1
 % Retained Tensile Strength (TSR)
 80 (minimum)
 % Draindown at Production Temperature2
 0.30 (maximum)
 % Asphalt Binder Content
 CL4 SMA SURF 0.50A PG76-22
 6.0 (minimum)
 CL4 SMA SURF 0.38A PG76-22
 6.3 (minimum)
 1
 Determine according to AASHTO R46.
 2
 Determine according to AASHTO T305.
 412.03.04 Trial Demonstrations. At least two days prior to beginning mainline
 paving, demonstrate that satisfactory production and placement of the SMA mixture is
 possible. Furnish at least 200 tons each of two or more different asphalt binder contents
 (AC’s) for the trial demonstration. The Engineer will determine the site, outside of the
 driving lanes, and exact quantity of the trial placement and trial AC’s. Perform a
 minimum of one volumetric analysis (two SGC specimens and two maximum-specificgravity tests), one AC determination, and one gradation determination for each of the
 different AC’s demonstrated. Document that the SMA mixture meets a 1.00 minimum
 pay value for AC, AV, and VMA prior to beginning mainline paving.
 412.03.05 Optimum AC Selection. The Engineer will select the optimum AC based
 on the results of the trial demonstration(s). Contrary to Subsection 402.03.02, obtain the
 Engineer’s approval prior to adjusting the AC during the setup period or thereafter.
 412.03.06 Mixture Handling.
 A) Mixing Temperatures. Maintain the temperature of the component materials
 for the SMA mixture according to the instructions of the respective
 manufacturer(s). However, do not exceed the maximum temperatures indicated
 in Subsection 401.03.01 for the PG binder specified.
 B) Mixture Storage. Due to the possibility of binder draindown, do not store the
 SMA mixture overnight.
 412.03.07 Placement and Compaction. When constructing driving lanes, use a
 MTV to place the SMA mixtures.
 Compact the SMA mixtures by Option A. Do not allow traffic on the compacted
 mixture until it has cooled sufficiently to withstand traffic without damage (normally
 about 140 oF). To expedite opening the pavement to construction equipment or traffic, the
 Department will allow the mat to be cooled by dousing it with water after compaction is
 complete.
 412.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 412.04.01 Trial Demonstrations. The Department will measure up to 400 tons of
 mixture used in the Trial Demonstration. The Department will measure the quantity as
 CL4 SMA BASE 1.00D PG76-22, CL4 SMA SURF 0.50A PG76-22, or CL4 SMA SURF
 0.38A PG76-22, as appropriate. The Department will not measure quantities exceeding
 400 tons for payment and will consider them incidental to the CL4 SMA BASE 1.00D
 PG76-22, CL4 SMA SURF 0.50A PG76-22, or CL4 SMA SURF 0.38A PG76-22.
 412—3
 
 412.04.02
 SMA Mixtures for Driving Lanes. The Department will measure
 CL4 SMA BASE 1.00D PG76-22, CL4 SMA SURF 0.50A PG76-22, and CL4 SMA
 SURF 0.38A PG76-22 by the ton.
 412.05
 
 PAYMENT.
 
 412.05.01 Trial Demonstrations. The Department will pay for the measured
 quantities at the Contract unit bid price for CL4 SMA BASE 1.00D PG76-22, CL4 SMA
 SURF 0.50A PG76-22, or CL4 SMA SURF 0.38A PG76-22, as appropriate, with no
 adjustments.
 412.05.02 CL4 SMA BASE 1.00D PG76-22. The Department will calculate
 payment by the Lot Pay Adjustment Schedule for Compaction Option A Base and Binder
 Mixtures in Subsection 402.05 except for the Lane Density schedule. The Department
 will apply the following schedule for Lane Density.
 LANE DENSITY
 Pay Value
 Test Result (%)
 1.05
 1.00
 0.95
 0.90
 (1)
 
 (1)
 
 95.0-96.5
 93.0-94.9
 92.0-92.9 or 96.6-97.0
 91.0-91.9 or 97.1-97.5
 < 91.0 or > 97.5
 
 The Department will require removal and replacement only when the results for
 all 4 cores in a sublot are less than 91.0 percent, or greater than 97.5 percent, of
 solid density. The Department will require removal and replacement of the
 entire sublot of material in this case. The Department will apply a 0.65 pay
 factor to individual cores with these results for sublots allowed to remain in
 place.
 
 412.05.03 CL4 SMA SURF 0.50A PG76-22 and CL4 SMA SURF 0.38A PG76-22.
 The Department will calculate payment by the Lot Pay Adjustment Schedule for
 Compaction Option A Surface Mixtures in Subsection 402.05 except for the Lane Density
 and Joint Density schedules. The Department will calculate the Lot Pay Adjustment using
 all possible incentives and disincentives but will not allow the overall pay value for a lot
 to exceed 1.00. The Department will apply the following schedules for Lane Density and
 Joint Density.
 
 DENSITY
 Pay Value
 1.05
 1.00
 0.95
 0.90
 0.75
 (1)
 
 Lane Density
 Joint Density
 Test Result (%)
 Test Result (%)
 95.0-96.5
 92.0-96.0
 93.0-94.9
 90.0-91.9
 92.0-92.9 or 96.6-97.0 89.0-89.9 or 96.1-96.5
 91.0-91.9 or 97.1-97.5 88.0-88.9 or 96.6-97.0
 ---< 88.0 or > 97.0
 < 91.0 or > 97.5
 ----
 
 412—4
 
 (1)
 
 The Department will require removal and replacement only when the results for
 all 4 cores in a sublot are less than 91.0 percent, or greater than 97.5 percent, of
 solid density. The Department will require removal and replacement of the
 entire sublot of material in this case. The Department will apply a 0.65 pay
 factor to individual cores with these results for sublots allowed to remain in
 place.
 
 412.05.04 Pay Items and Units. The Department will make payment for the
 completed and accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 00395
 00396
 00397
 
 Pay Item
 CL4 SMA BASE 1.00D PG76-22
 CL4 SMA SURF 0.50A PG76-22
 CL4 SMA SURF 0.38A PG76-22
 
 412—5
 
 Pay Unit
 Ton
 Ton
 Ton
 
 DIVISION 500
 JPC PAVEMENT AND
 NON-STRUCTURAL
 CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION
 
 SECTION 501  JPC PAVEMENT, PCC BASE, AND JPC
 SHOULDERS
 501.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct a single course of JPC pavement, PCC base, or JPC
 shoulders. Construct longitudinal and transverse joints when required. Construct
 pavement, base, and shoulders on a prepared subgrade or an aggregate base course.
 501.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 501.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 501.02.02 Joint Materials. Conform to Section 807.
 A) Sealers. Use hot-poured elastic, preformed, or silicone.
 B) Filler. Use preformed sponge rubber, preformed cork, or preformed asphalt.
 501.02.03 Tie Bars. Conform to Section 811 for steel reinforcement, No. 5 epoxy,
 Grade 60.
 501.02.04 Reinforcing Bar Adhesive.
 conforming to Section 826.
 
 Use Type IV epoxy or grout adhesive
 
 501.02.05 Miscellaneous Steel. Conform to Section 811 for chairs, hook tie-bolts,
 spacers, aligning bars, and upper tie bars used in joint assemblies.
 501.02.06 Epoxy Coating Material. Conform to Section 811.
 501.02.07 Dowel Bars and Sleeves. Conform to Section 811.
 501.02.08 Curing Materials. Conform to Section 823.
 501.02.09 Batching Plant Equipment. Conform to Subsection 601.02, except do
 not use continuous mixers.
 501.02.10 Mixers. Conform to Subsection 601.02.
 501.02.11 Slip Form Pavers. Provide slip form pavers of an approved selfpropelled type designed to spread, consolidate, and finish the concrete in one complete
 pass of the paver, and in such a manner that minimizes hand finishing. Ensure that the
 paver consolidates the concrete without damaging or displacing the load transfer devices
 and finishes the concrete to produce a smooth, uniformly textured surface having the
 specified crown and slope ready for final finishing. Use an automatic sensing device in
 continuous contact with a sensing guide to control the alignment. Maintain pavers
 according to the manufacturer’s specifications.
 501.02.12 Auxiliary Equipment for Slip Form Paving. Provide auxiliary
 equipment used in placing and finishing slip formed concrete, that is self-propelled and
 designed to operate without unnecessary contact with the newly placed concrete.
 501.02.13 Forms. Provide form sections 10 feet long or longer and with a base
 width sufficient to ensure form stability. Use steel forms with self-aligning joints,
 designed to withstand the lateral and vertical loads imposed by spreaders, finishing
 machines, or other types of form-riding equipment. Use form sections that have the base
 of one end of each form section cut on a diagonal so the forms can be assembled to
 negotiate the inside and outside curves of roadways.
 Ensure that each 10-foot length of form has at least 3 stake pockets securely riveted
 
 501—1
 
 or welded to the web and base to act as diagonal braces. Equip each stake pocket with at
 least one steel wedge to securely key the form to the stake.
 Provide each form section with one lock-joint plate made of metal of a thickness
 equal to the form and of sufficient length to ensure stability, located on one end of the
 form in such a manner as to connect to the adjoining form. Construct the joints so that
 there will be no difference in the elevation of the end of each form, providing a smooth
 level track surface. Use plates formed or reinforced to allow hammering or driving
 without distortion or breakage.
 Use approved flexible forms for construction of circular pavement edges where the
 radius is 100 feet or less.
 501.02.14 Fine Grading Machines. Provide fine grading machines that are capable
 of preparing the grade for the paving equipment to the specified base tolerance and to
 ensure that the finished pavement conforms to the specified surface tolerances.
 501.02.15 Spreaders. Provide spreaders that distribute the concrete uniformly
 without segregation and strike off the concrete to a uniform depth. Use spreaders
 equipped with scraping devices designed to clean the top of the forms when traveling in
 either direction.
 501.02.16 Finishing Machines and Floats. Provide transverse finishing machines,
 longitudinal floats, and combination float finishers that are power driven and designed to
 operate without slipping on the forms or displacing the forms. Use finishing machines and
 floats that screed and finish the pavement within the specified tolerances.
 501.02.17 Vibrators. Use vibrators for full width vibration of concrete paving slabs
 of either the surface pan type or the internal type. When using the internal type, provide
 vibrators having immersed tube or multiple spuds. When only spuds are used, space the
 spuds no more than 2 feet apart. Either attach the spuds to the spreader or the finishing
 machine or mount the spuds on a separate carriage. Make the frequency of the vibrators
 such as to satisfactorily vibrate and consolidate the concrete throughout its full width and
 depth. Achieve consolidation using industry standards according to the guidelines in ACI
 309R including frequency recommendations, performance, and application of internal
 vibrators. Do not use electrical, multiple speed, internal vibrators.
 Operate all consolidating devices so that when the forward movement of their mount
 stops the consolidating devices immediately stop.
 Ensure that all slip form pavers are equipped and using vibrator frequency recorders.
 The recorder must be able to continuously monitor each vibrator’s operating frequency
 and provide an immediate visual or auditory warning when the frequency goes outside the
 acceptable range.
 501.02.18 Miscellaneous Equipment.
 A) Straightedges. Provide straightedges required for testing the surface of the
 plastic concrete that are accurate 10-foot square-edged straightedges with a
 handle that is at least 3 feet longer than half the width of the slab.
 B) Bulkheads. Construct bulkheads for construction joints of lumber of at least 2inch nominal thickness or use an approved metal type. Shape bulkheads to
 conform to the cross section of the pavement. Design bulkheads to provide for
 correct installation of tie bars.
 C) Footbridges. Design and construct the bridges so they will not come in contact
 with the concrete.
 D) Hand Screeds. Provide hand screeds that are a minimum of 2 feet longer than
 the maximum width of the pavement to be struck off, so shaped and sufficiently
 rigid to strike off the pavement true to the required cross section.
 E) Hand Vibrators. Use spud type internal vibrators for hand finishing.
 F) Transverse Floats. Provide transverse floats for hand finishing that are of
 
 501—2
 
 lightweight, rigid construction, free of warps, and with handles of sufficient
 length to allow operation from off the pavement. Use floats with finishing faces
 that are at least 10 feet long and 3 inches in width. Use metal floats that are
 formed to a channel cross section so as to provide sides one inch high and
 perpendicular to the finishing face.
 G) Longitudinal Floats. Provide longitudinal floats for hand finishing that are at
 least 10 feet long, 6 inches wide, rigidly constructed, and equipped with handles.
 H) Small Tools. Provide straightedges and templates for testing hardened pavement
 and forms, and all other small tools necessary to completely and satisfactorily
 finish the work.
 501.02.19 Water Supply Equipment. Provide approved truck tanks or pumps and
 pipe lines that are of such capacity and efficiency to ensure an ample supply and an
 adequate pressure of water simultaneously for all requirements of the work, including
 mixing, curing, sprinkling the subgrade, and cleaning hauling equipment as necessary.
 501.02.20 Concrete Saws. Provide concrete saws for sawing joints that are powerdriven, having diamond-edge or abrasive saw blades, capable of cutting to the alignment,
 depth, and width specified for the joints, and in sufficient numbers to ensure all joints are
 sawed within the specified time limits.
 501.02.21 Equipment for Applying Membrane Curing Compound. Conform to
 Subsection 601.02.
 501.02.22 Air Compressors. Furnish air compressors having separators and traps.
 501.02.23 Profiler. The Department will measure the longitudinal profile of the
 surface with an ASTM E 950, Class 1 device.
 501.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 501.03.01 Care, Storage, and Handling of Aggregates, Cement, and Fly Ash.
 Furnish, store, and handle aggregates, cement, and fly ash according to Subsection 601.03.
 501.03.02 Admixtures. Furnish admixtures according to Subsection 601.03, except
 the Department will not require a water-reducing admixture.
 501.03.03 Concrete Producer Responsibilities. Design concrete mixtures and
 perform quality control and process control according to Subsection 601.03.
 501.03.04 Proportioning and Requirements. Furnish Class P concrete according
 to Subsection 601.03.
 501.03.05 Weather Limitations and Protection. Mix, place, and finish concrete
 when the lighting is sufficient.
 Discontinue mixing and concreting operations when a falling air temperature in the
 shade and away from artificial heat reaches 40 °F. Do not resume mixing and concreting
 operations until rising air temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat reaches
 35 °F.
 In cold weather, when the Engineer authorizes concreting of small or irregular areas
 such as crossovers, temporary openings, turnouts, narrow or irregular widening, and other
 areas where hand finishing is allowed, the Engineer may require the water and aggregates
 to be heated to no more than 150 °F. Heat the aggregates prior to being placed in the
 mixer. Use an apparatus that heats the mass uniformly and is arranged to preclude the
 possible occurrence of overheated areas. Ensure that the temperature of the heated
 mixture is no less than 50 °F and no more than 90 °F at the time of placing.
 Do not place concrete on a frozen base. Do not use frozen aggregates in the concrete.
 
 501—3
 
 When deemed necessary, install and maintain protective coverings and heating
 devices to protect the concrete in place and to prevent its temperature from falling below
 45 °F until the concrete is 7 calendar days old or has attained the required strength
 according to Subsection 501.03.19. Do not use admixtures to prevent freezing.
 Maintain the temperature of the mixture at or below 90 °F during placement. Unless
 the Engineer determines that safety concerns or other considerations prohibit a shutdown,
 cease concrete production when the mixture exceeds 90 °F until adequate methods are in
 place to reduce or maintain the mixture temperature. Do not place concrete in areas where
 hand finishing will be used if the ambient temperature is above 100 °F.
 Protect newly placed pavement that is threatened with damage by rain. If the texture
 is damaged so the specified groove dimensions are not met, restore acceptable texture to
 the damaged areas by sawing to conform to groove requirements.
 501.03.06 Slump. Conform to Subsection 601.03.06.
 501.03.07 Preparation of Aggregate Base Course. When placing the concrete by
 the slip form process, prepare the grade for the paving equipment to the accuracy
 necessary to ensure that the finished concrete conforms to all surface tolerance
 requirements.
 When placing the concrete using fixed forms, prepare the aggregate base course to
 the required lines, grades, and cross section. Backfill low places and cavities in the base
 course detected during the final shaping with concrete placed in conjunction with the
 pavement, base, or shoulders.
 Maintain the finished aggregate base course in a smooth, compacted condition.
 Ensure that the base course is moist when placing the concrete. When required, wet the
 base course prior to placing the concrete. Avoid creating mud or pools of water.
 501.03.08 Forming. Stake and brace the forms to resist concrete pressure and the
 lateral thrust of form-riding equipment. Set the forms so that they uniformly bear on the
 base course throughout their entire length and width. Set the forms directly in contact
 with the finished aggregate base course.
 When the aggregate base is disturbed or loosened, thoroughly tamp the material
 supporting the forms either mechanically or by hand at both the inside and outside edges
 of the base of the forms.
 Join all forms neatly and tightly, and thoroughly clean and oil all forms before
 placing concrete against them.
 After setting the forms in place, check their top surfaces for grade and alignment.
 Reset, or remove and replace, any forms showing a top surface variation greater than 1/8
 inch in 10 feet.
 501.03.09 Mixing. Produce concrete by mixing according to Subsection 601.03.08.
 The Department reserves the right to stop the use of the mixing method in the construction
 of concrete pavements, bases, and shoulders when the concrete fails to conform to the
 specified requirements for proportioning, consistency, slump, or expected strength.
 501.03.10 Delivery. Deliver according to Subsection 601.03.07 except when
 concrete produced by central mixing is delivered by approved truck mixers, the Engineer
 will allow maximum slump applicable to truck-mixed concrete.
 501.03.11 Placing Concrete. Obtain the Engineer’s approval of the condition of the
 base course before placing any concrete. Deposit the concrete on the grade to require as
 little rehandling as possible. Unless hauling equipment is equipped with means for
 discharge of concrete without segregation of the materials, unload the concrete into an
 approved spreading device and mechanically spread it on the grade in a manner to prevent
 segregation of the materials. The Department will not require a mechanical spreader for
 PCC Base. Perform necessary hand spreading with shovels, not rakes.
 During any temporary shutdown of less than 30 minutes, cover the concrete at the
 
 501—4
 
 unfinished end of the slab with wet burlap. When an interruption of the work exceeds
 30 minutes duration, the Engineer may require that a construction joint be installed.
 Consolidate all concrete with mechanical vibratory equipment throughout its full
 width and depth. The Engineer will allow small manually operated vibrators for variable
 width areas such as tapers, transitions, blockouts, parking areas, and other similar
 construction where hand finishing may be necessary. On mainline construction, vibrate
 the concrete by equipment specifically used for that purpose, in addition to vibration
 resulting from the operation of other placing or finishing equipment.
 Thoroughly consolidate concrete against and along the faces of all forms and headers
 and along the full length and on both sides of all joint assemblies. When vibrating, do not
 disturb load transfer devices, tie bars, hook bolts, side forms, or the aggregate base course.
 When slip form pavers are used, spread or distribute the concrete in front of the paver
 in a manner that will allow the paver to proceed uniformly without bulldozing large piles
 of concrete. Maintain the head of concrete at a uniform height and not so great as to cause
 erratic movements of the paver.
 If placing concrete adjacent to a previously constructed lane of pavement, base, or
 shoulder and mechanical equipment is to be operated upon the previously constructed
 lane, conform to the strength requirements of Subsection 501.03.20 for that lane and place
 temporary seals according to Subsection 501.03.18 before placing equipment in that lane.
 When constructing the pavement using fixed forms, provide at least 2 movable
 bridges from which finishers may satisfactorily finish the pavement.
 501.03.12 Final Strike-Off. Perform operations in the following sequence:
 consolidation, strike off, machine finishing, straight edging, minor hand finishing, and
 texturing.
 Do not add water to the surface of the concrete to aid finishing operations unless hand
 finishing. When hand finishing, the Engineer may allow application of water or a
 finishing aid to the surface to aid finishing. When the Engineer allows water or a finishing
 aid, apply it as a fog spray by means of approved spray equipment.
 501.03.13 Finishing.
 A) Finishing for Slip Form Paver. Ensure that slip form pavers consolidate and
 finish the concrete, in one pass of the paver, in such a manner that a minimum of
 hand finishing is necessary, producing a smooth, uniformly textured surface with
 the specified cross section ready for final straight edging and texturing. The
 Department will not allow tube float finishing machines.
 B) Machine Finishing. Finish all concrete, except that placed by the slip form
 process or in areas where hand finishing is allowed, by machine methods.
 Distribute or spread the concrete while placing it. Immediately after placing the
 concrete, consolidate it by vibration, strike it off, and screed it using approved
 finishing machines. Pass the machines over each area of pavement, base, or
 shoulder as many times and at such intervals to produce a surface of uniform
 texture. The Department will allow an approved manually operated strike-off
 screed in lieu of a finishing machine for PCC base. Avoid excessive operation
 over a given area. Keep the tops of the forms clean by an effective device
 attached to the machine. Maintain the travel of the machine on the forms true
 without lift, wobbling, or other variation tending to affect the precision finish.
 During the first pass of the finishing machine, maintain a uniform ridge of
 concrete ahead of the front screed for its entire length.
 C) Hand Finishing. The Engineer may allow hand finishing methods when the
 following occurs:
 1)
 2)
 
 Mechanical equipment breaks down after concrete has already been
 deposited on the grade;
 Narrow widths or other small, irregular dimensions where operation of
 mechanical equipment is impractical; and
 
 501—5
 
 3)
 
 D)
 
 E)
 
 F)
 G)
 
 Lengths less than 2 feet.
 
 Consolidate the concrete using a vibrator immediately after placing, then
 strike-off and screed the pavement with a Department approved portable screed.
 In operation, move the screed forward on the forms with a combined
 longitudinal and transverse shearing motion, moving always in the direction in
 which the work is progressing and manipulated so that neither end is raised from
 the side forms during the striking and screeding process. When necessary, repeat
 this until the surface is of uniform texture, true to grade and cross section, and
 free from porous areas.
 Floating. Immediately after completing the transverse screeding operation, float
 the surface smooth using a longitudinal float or a pan float. The Department will
 not require floating on PCC base. Use transverse hand floats only when the
 Engineer allows. The Department will allow the use of straightedges in lieu of
 hand floats for minor hand finishing done in connection with machine finishing.
 Use a mechanical float behind slip form pavers.
 Operate the longitudinal float transversely across the concrete with a sawing
 motion, always maintaining the float parallel to the centerline of the work.
 Remove all variations in the surface. Remove all surplus water, laitance, and
 inert material. Float until the concrete shows no variation from straightedge
 requirements.
 Add additional concrete to fill depressions during the longitudinal floating
 operation. Do not move the longitudinal float ahead more than half its length at
 one time. Use care to preserve the cross section of the pavement, base, and
 shoulders including the crown.
 When using the pan type float finisher, adjust the suspended screeds and
 float pans to conform to the required grade and cross section and operate it to
 produce a smooth, dense surface free of irregularities or porous areas. When the
 float finisher is attached to a finishing machine equipped with approved screeds,
 the Engineer may allow the float finishing at the same time as the last pass of the
 screeding operation.
 Surface Correction. While the concrete is still plastic, scrape the pavement and
 shoulder surface to remove all laitance, excess water, and inert material, and test
 the surface for trueness with a straightedge. Hold the straightedge in successive
 positions parallel to the road centerline in contact with the surface, and swing it
 across the entire area from one side of the slab to the other until the entire
 surface is free from visual departures. Advance along the road in successive
 stages of no more than half the length of the straightedge. Immediately fill any
 depressions found with freshly mixed concrete, strike-off, consolidate, and
 refinish them. Continue the straightedge testing and refloating until the entire
 surface is free from observable departures from the straightedge and the slab has
 the required grade and cross section. Ensure that at the time of testing, the
 surface is free from soft mortar or excess water.
 Edging. Finish the outside edges of the slab when using fixed forms and the
 edges of all expansion joints with an edging tool to a radius of 1/8 inch.
 Burlap Drag. Finish the pavement using a burlap drag having a double
 thickness of burlap at least 4 feet wide. Attach the burlap to a bridge and keep it
 saturated while in use. Lay the burlap on the pavement surface and drag it in the
 direction that the pavement is being placed with approximately 2 feet of width in
 contact with the pavement surface. The Engineer will allow hand finishing of
 the outer edges with smaller pieces of burlap when necessary to avoid rounding
 or slumping of the edges of slip formed pavement. In all other instances, use
 burlap of sufficient width such that the full width of the pavement receives the
 burlap finish. When allowing hand finishing on areas, the Engineer will allow
 manual means for the entire surface. Maintain drags clean and free from
 encrusted mortar. Discard drags that cannot be cleaned, and replace them with
 new drags.
 
 501—6
 
 H) Texturing. Immediately after finishing the concrete with the burlap drag,
 texture the surface by forming transverse grooves. The Department will waive
 the requirement for transverse grooves when the pavement is to be diamond
 ground before opening to traffic.
 Form the transverse grooves by mechanical equipment using a comb made
 with steel tines. When allowing hand finishing on areas, the Department will
 allow the use of manual tools such as rakes with spring steel tines.
 Form transverse grooves in the concrete with a width between 0.09 inch and
 0.13 inch and a depth between 0.12 inch and 0.19 inch. Space the grooves at
 random intervals between 0.4 inch to 1.5 inches with no more than 50 percent of
 the spacing being one inch or greater.
 Regardless of the method used to form the grooves, ensure that the grooves
 are relatively smooth and uniform, and form the grooves without tearing the
 surface or bringing pieces of the coarse aggregate to the top of the surface.
 Correct any individual areas of 50 square yards or larger of the hardened
 grooved concrete that do not conform to the above requirements. Correct by
 cutting acceptable grooves in the hardened surface with an approved cutting
 machine or by other methods approved by the Engineer.
 The Department will not require texturing on PCC base.
 I) Station Numbers. Stencil station numbers into the pavement before it takes its
 final set. Mark the complete station number every 500 feet. Mark equations in
 the alignment, when they occur, in the pavement in the same manner and at the
 same locations as specified in the Contract.
 Size and place the stencils according to the Standard Drawings.
 J) Rumble Strips In Shoulders. After finishing the shoulders, form rumble strips
 according to the Standard Drawings. When the shoulder is used to maintain
 traffic during construction, do not form rumble strips until the mainline is opened
 to traffic. When the mainline is open to traffic saw cut Type 3 rumble strips
 according to the Standard Drawings.
 501.03.14 Removing Forms. Remove forms as soon as the concrete has hardened
 sufficiently to allow sawing the transverse joints. Immediately fill all honeycombed areas
 appearing in the edges of the pavement, base, or shoulders with mortar composed of one
 part cement and 2 parts fine aggregate by loose volume. Then, cure the edges of the
 pavement, base, or shoulders.
 501.03.15 Curing. Immediately after completing finishing operations and the
 concrete has set sufficiently to prevent marring the surface, cover and cure the entire
 surface of the newly placed concrete, including the face of all construction joints. In all
 cases in which curing requires the use of water, ensure that water is available. The
 Department may suspend the placement of concrete when failure to provide sufficient
 cover or adequate water for curing occurs.
 When it becomes necessary to uncover an area of the pavement before the end of the
 curing period, do not expose the pavement for more than 30 minutes.
 Cure according to one of the following methods:
 A) White Membrane Curing. After completely finishing the concrete and
 immediately after any free water has disappeared, completely and uniformly coat
 the entire pavement surface with Type 2 (white pigmented) liquid membraneforming curing compound. Apply the compound in one or 2 applications. When
 2 applications are necessary to meet the required rate, apply the second
 application within 30 minutes of the first. If there is a delay in applying the first
 application of the curing compound, cover the pavement surface with wetted
 burlap.
 Apply the curing compound through a pressure sprayer at the rate of one
 gallon to no more than 120 square feet total application, whether applied in one
 or 2 applications. When desired, decrease the application rate to one gallon to no
 
 501—7
 
 more than 150 square feet when texturing is not required. During its application,
 ensure that the compound is in a thoroughly mixed condition with the pigment
 dispersed throughout the vehicle. Continuously stir the compound by effective
 mechanical means while applying it. The Engineer will allow hand sprayers for
 coating odd widths or shapes and for coating areas exposed by the removal of
 forms. Correct honeycomb areas, then coat the sides of the slab within 30
 minutes following removal of the forms.
 The Department will not require removal of curing compound overspray
 from tie bars when the deformations are still visible.
 When the compound is too thick to satisfactorily apply during cold weather,
 warm it in a water bath at a temperature no greater than 100 °F. Do not thin the
 compound with solvents.
 When rain falls on the newly coated pavement before the film has dried
 sufficiently to resist damage, or when the film is damaged or is noticeably faulty,
 apply a new coat of the compound to the affected areas.
 Protect the treated surface against damage for a period of at least 72 hours
 or until attaining the required strength. The Engineer will consider all traffic,
 pedestrian or otherwise, as injurious to the film of the applied compound. The
 Engineer will allow a minimum of traffic on the dried film as necessary to carry
 on the work, such as joint sawing and sealing equipment. When putting
 minimum traffic on the dried film, immediately repair any damage to the film by
 an additional application to the affected areas.
 Take precautions to ensure proper curing at joints, and to prevent any of the
 curing compound from entering the joints. Protect sawed joints by closing the
 opening with a moistened rope of paper or other approved fiber, by covering the
 opening with a one-foot strip of curing paper or 4-mil white polyethylene film,
 or by other approved methods before repairing the damaged areas adjacent to the
 joints with an additional application of the compound.
 Provide approved standby facilities or approved alternate methods for
 curing concrete pavements at a readily accessible location at the site of the work
 for use in the event of mechanical failure of the spraying equipment or other
 conditions which may prevent the proper application of the curing compound.
 The Engineer may stop this method of curing when unsatisfactory results
 are obtained and may require the remainder of the concrete to be cured with wet
 burlap or curing blankets.
 Do not use white membrane curing on PCC base that is to be surfaced with
 an asphalt mixture.
 B) Wet Burlap. Thoroughly wet the burlap before placing. Carefully place the
 burlap over the finished surface to completely cover the surface and sides of the
 slab. Clean the burlap of all coating of earth or other deleterious substances
 before using it. Soak new burlap in water for 12 hours before use.
 During the first 6 hours, the Engineer will require a single thickness of
 burlap. After the first 6 hours, use a double thickness. Overlap adjacent burlap
 strips at least 3 inches.
 Keep the burlap thoroughly saturated and in place for at least 72 hours even
 when required strength is attained.
 C) Curing Blankets. Cure according to Subsection 601.03.17 C). Place curing
 blankets to completely cover the surface and the sides of the slab for 72 hours or
 until attaining the required strength.
 501.03.16 Diamond Grinding. When electing to or when the Contract specifies to
 diamond grind the pavement to achieve texture or ride quality, conform to Subsections
 503.02 and 503.03 excluding 503.03.09. The Department will determine pavement
 thickness according to Subsection 501.03.21 after diamond grinding.
 501.03.17 Joints. Construct all joints, longitudinal and transverse, according to the
 Plans and Standard Drawings. Use epoxy coated or other approved corrosion resistant tie
 
 501—8
 
 bars and hook bolts. Construct all joints perpendicular to the surface of the pavement and
 to true alignment.
 Ensure that sawed joints are of uniform width throughout. Use sawing equipment to
 cut the joint in strict conformity with the required alignment and depth. The Engineer will
 allow spraying of water on the saw blades during the cutting. Do not saw the joints until
 the concrete has hardened to the extent that tearing and raveling will not occur, but as soon
 as necessary to preclude random cracking. Do not allow any traffic on the pavement until
 the joints are sawed. The Engineer may require the construction of sawed joints at the
 time, day or night, and in the order or sequence that will most effectively hold random
 cracking to a minimum. Provide a standby machine and a sufficient supply of saw blades
 available at all times.
 Cut transverse saw cuts for joints that are to be sealed with preformed compression
 joint seals in one continuous cut across the pavement.
 When curbs or concrete medians are constructed integral with the pavement,
 construct all transverse joints continuous through the curb or median.
 When constructing PCC Base, for adjacent slabs with approximately 50-foot joint
 spacing, match joints and construct additional joints at third points. For adjacent slabs
 with 25-foot joint spacing, match joint and construct additional joints at midpoints.
 The Department will allow a transverse construction joint at a transverse joint,
 provided a dowel bar basket is used.
 Thoroughly flush all sawed joints with clean water or clean with compressed air
 immediately after sawing so the vertical surfaces of the joint will be clean and will allow
 proper adherence of joint sealer to the surfaces.
 Protect all joints from intrusion of injurious foreign material, including mortar or
 cuttings from adjacent sawing operations, until sealed.
 A) Longitudinal Joints. Install longitudinal joints on the centerline, or parallel to
 the centerline within 1/2 inch from the true theoretical position. Construct
 longitudinal sawed joints with tie bars when the width of the pavement, base, or
 shoulder is more than 16 feet.
 Cut longitudinal joints to true alignment within the tolerances specified in
 Appendix A, Table of Construction Tolerances, and to the depth specified in the
 Contract, and fill them with joint sealer according to Subsection 501.03.18.
 Place deformed steel tie bars of the dimensions shown on the Standard
 Drawings transversely through the longitudinal joint. Space the tie bars as
 indicated, and rigidly secure them at both ends by Department approved
 supports. After the Contractor places and strikes off the concrete, the
 Department may allow him to install tie bars using a mechanical device designed
 to install the bars true to position and alignment.
 Construct longitudinal saw construction joints between adjacent lanes or
 widths that are constructed separately according to the Standard Drawings.
 Install the tie bars as required by the plans and standard drawings by
 inserting the bars in the plastic concrete, drilling and gluing the bars in place,
 using secured tie bar assemblies, or using a proposed alternative method
 approved by the Engineer. When installing by drilling and gluing in place, drill
 a dowel hole that is no more than 1/8 inch larger in diameter than the bar. Ensure
 the dowel hole is dry and free of all drill and coring dust. Place the adhesive in
 the dowel hole according to the manufacturer's instructions. Insert the bar to the
 bottom of the hole and twist 1/4 turn. An excess amount of adhesive must be
 clearly visible as an extruded ring of material surrounding the reinforcing bar at
 the surface of the concrete.
 The Department will allow bending tie bars back, when necessary, while
 constructing the initial width, and straighten them to the correct position before
 constructing the adjoining width. When desired, use approved epoxy coated
 hook tie bolts in lieu of tie bars. When used, install hook tie bolts so the length
 is equally divided between the 2 slabs.
 The Engineer may stop the use of any method that fails to provide secure
 
 501—9
 
 placement of the bars until satisfactory results can be achieved.
 B) Transverse Expansion Joints. Place transverse expansion joints at all bridge
 approaches according to the Standard Drawings.
 Install the joints so the plane of the finished joint will be perpendicular to
 both the centerline and the surface of the pavement within 1/4 inch of true
 alignment in one lane width.
 Provide a continuous joint through the full width of the pavement, with the
 length of individual pieces of joint filler no less than the width of one traffic
 lane. Securely connect adjoining sections to avoid an offset at their juncture.
 Install the joint filler for the full pavement width and from the bottom of the
 pavement to the bottom of the joint sealer, as shown on the Standard Drawings.
 Place dowel bars, or other approved load transfer devices, when required,
 through transverse joints according to the Contract. When used, secure the
 dowels in position parallel to the surface and the centerline of the slab by a metal
 device that remains in the pavement.
 Securely stake the load transfer device to the subgrade with anchor hooks
 according to the Standard Drawings. The Engineer may allow hooks less than
 18 inches in length when used in conjunction with rock subgrade or cement
 stabilized base, however, the Engineer may require additional hooks to securely
 hold the assembly in place.
 Place a No. 10 gage, 0.135-inch thick metal removable finishing cap over
 the expansion joint material during construction operations to provide protection
 and support to the material.
 After the Engineer checks the joint for proper installation, deposit the
 concrete on the base course as near the expansion joint as possible without
 touching it. Then, shovel it against both sides of the joint simultaneously,
 maintaining equal pressures. Deposit concrete to a height of approximately 2
 inches more than the depth of the joint, and carefully work the concrete under the
 load-transfer devices. Do not dump concrete directly upon or against the
 load-transfer devices. Prevent displacement of the dowel bars during placing
 and finishing operations.
 Work concrete around load-transfer devices and against the body of the
 joints at all points. Reset and realign any displaced dowels before passing the
 finishing machine over them. When necessary, remove concrete to reset and
 realign any displaced dowels.
 Move the finishing machine forward during finishing operations and operate
 it in a manner that will avoid damage or misalignment of joints.
 Immediately after completing all finishing operations and before the
 concrete has taken its initial set, finish the edge of the slab to the required radius
 adjacent to all expansion joints. Manipulate the edging tool to produce a
 well-defined continuous radius and a smooth, dense mortar finish. Do not tilt the
 edging tool while manipulating it. Remove the edging tool marks from the
 surface so the texture blends with the final finish.
 Place 1/2-inch expansion joint material against all box inlets, manholes,
 concrete barriers, retaining walls, bridge abutments, concrete gutter, and similar
 structures that project through, into, or against the pavement.
 C) Longitudinal Expansion Joints. Construct longitudinal expansion joints
 according to Subsection 501.03.17 B) at locations specified in the Contract.
 D) Transverse Contraction Joints. Construct transverse contraction joints in ramp
 tapers, intersections, and similar areas at locations specified in the Plans and
 Standard Drawings. On uniform width roadway construction, install transverse
 contraction joints at the spacing specified in the Plans and Standard Drawings.
 Form transverse contraction joints by sawing, perpendicular to the surface
 of the pavement, within the tolerances specified in Appendix A, Tabulation of
 Construction Tolerances. Fill the joints with joint sealer as specified in
 Subsection 501.03.18.
 Install load transfer assemblies, when specified in the Contract, according to
 
 501—10
 
 Subsection 501.03.17 B) for transverse expansion joints. The Department will
 not require dowel bar sleeves, finishing caps, expansion joint fillers, or hand
 placement of concrete around the assemblies. The Department will not require
 load transfer assemblies for contraction joints in PCC base.
 E) Transverse Construction Joints. Form the joints with a Department approved
 metal or wooden bulkhead, shaped to the cross section of the pavement, and
 designed to allow correct installation of tie bars according to the Standard
 Drawings. Rigidly secure the bulkhead to the subgrade so the finished joint will
 conform to all requirements for position and alignment. After removing the
 bulkhead and constructing the adjacent slab, saw the joint as specified in the
 Plans, and subsequently fill with joint sealer.
 When using a construction joint, construct the joint no closer than 5 feet or
 one-half the spacing between adjacent joints, whichever is less, to any transverse
 contraction joint or transverse expansion joint. When the need for a construction
 joint occurs within the above distance from the preceding joint, remove the
 concrete to the specified distance behind the preceding joint and install the
 bulkhead at that location.
 501.03.18 Sealing Joints.
 A) Requirements for Sealing All Joints. Seal all joints as soon as practical and
 before opening the pavement, base, shoulders or any section of the pavement,
 base or shoulders to any traffic. Configure joint sealant according to the
 Standard Drawings.
 Do not seal any joints until the Engineer inspects and approves them for
 sealing. Before applying the sealer, completely clean all joints of all loose scale,
 laitance, oils, greases, dirt, and other foreign substances, and remove all free
 water and loose particles by jetting with compressed air.
 B) Uses of Sealant Types. Use any of the following sealant types for the indicated
 types of joints for JPC Pavement and Shoulders (For PCC base, use hot-poured
 elastic):
 1)
 
 Preformed Neoprene Seals.
 a)
 b)
 
 2)
 
 Silicone Rubber Seals.
 a)
 b)
 c)
 d)
 
 3)
 
 transverse and longitudinal sawed joints
 transverse and longitudinal expansion joints
 longitudinal and transverse construction joints
 joints between pavement and shoulders and fixed objects such as box
 inlets, manholes, retaining walls, and concrete barriers
 
 Self-Leveling Silicone Rubber Sealant.
 a)
 b)
 c)
 d)
 
 4)
 
 transverse and longitudinal sawed joints
 expansion joints
 
 resealing random cracks in JPC pavement, base, and shoulders
 sealing joints between JPC pavement, base, and shoulders and asphalt
 pavement or shoulders
 longitudinal and transverse construction joints
 joints between pavement and shoulders and fixed objects such as box
 inlets, manholes, retaining walls, and concrete barriers; and sealing
 joints cut in asphalt overlays of JPC pavement, base, and shoulders for
 control of reflective cracking
 
 Hot-Poured Elastic.
 
 501—11
 
 a)
 b)
 c)
 
 longitudinal and transverse construction joints
 joints between pavement, base, and shoulders and fixed objects such as
 box inlets, manholes, retaining walls, and concrete barriers
 for applications where the Department allows self-leveling silicone
 joint sealant
 
 C) Preformed Neoprene Seals. Seal and repair damaged seals according to
 Subsection 609.03.04 for preformed neoprene seals. Remove and replace all
 seals that are damaged, twisted, curled, improperly positioned, or stretched more
 than 5 percent.
 Do not seal transverse joints in the pavement until all adjacent sawed
 longitudinal joints have been sealed. Install each transverse seal in one piece,
 without field or factory splicing, for the full length of the transverse joints.
 Install continuous longitudinal joint seals for lengths no less than 50 feet
 except where intersected by transverse joint seals. Where the longitudinal joints
 intersect the transverse joints, either sever the longitudinal seal after installation
 or insert it deeper at junctions with transverse joints. Thoroughly coat all
 intersections between longitudinal and transverse seals with an additional
 application of Department approved lubricant adhesive so that the openings in
 the longitudinal seal are completely closed. Install continuous longitudinal seals
 through transverse construction joints sealed with hot-poured sealer.
 When the Department requires partial width construction, the Department
 will allow cutting the transverse seal at the longitudinal construction joint, and
 installing it in part width. Thoroughly coat all intersections between the
 transverse and longitudinal seal with an additional application of approved
 lubricant adhesive so that the opening in the transverse seals is completely closed
 and sealed.
 Trim all transverse seals flush with the edge of the pavement, base, or
 shoulder after installation.
 D) Silicone Rubber Sealant. Seal joints according to the Contract and the written
 recommendations of the manufacturer.
 Place seals when the ambient
 temperature and the pavement temperature is 40 °F or higher.
 Completely clean and dry joints, and ensure that they are frost free.
 Immediately after sawing, flush with a jet of water and use other tools as
 necessary to remove all cuttings. After flushing, blow the joint out with
 compressed air. When the surfaces are thoroughly dry and within 24 hours prior
 to sealing the joint, clean the joints by sandblasting followed by blowing out
 with compressed air. Sandblast in 2 passes, one for each joint face, with the
 nozzle held at an angle to the joint face and within one to 2 inches of the
 pavement. Direct the air blast following the sandblast in one direction to prevent
 recontamination of the joint. If cleaned joints are not sealed within 24 hours
 after sandblasting, reclean them by lightly sandblasting and blowing out again
 using compressed air.
 Supply compressed air free of water, oil, or any other injurious substances.
 Install foam back-up rods according to the Standard Drawings. When
 sealing 2 intersecting joints, first place a continuous foam back-up rod through
 the intersection. Either place this rod low at the intersection, and place the
 intersecting rod over it at the specified depth; or cut the intersecting rod, and
 place it against the first rod at the intersection.
 When necessary, use additional air blasting to completely remove all
 moisture, dust, or debris that has accumulated in the joint after placing the backup rod. Ensure that the joint is completely clean, dry, and frost-free immediately
 prior to placement of the sealant.
 Install silicone rubber seals with an applicator having a built-in grooving
 tool. Install the seals by pushing, not pulling, the sealant ahead to form a
 uniform head. This pushing of the sealant will ensure that the joint is filled from
 
 501—12
 
 the top of the backer rod to at least 3/8 inch below the pavement surface. Tool
 the sealant so that it is forced against the joint faces and recessed below the
 pavement surface. Use the same tool for both application and grooving.
 Demonstrate satisfactory results during production and the Engineer may allow
 separate tools for application and grooving.
 Seal joints as soon as practical after sawing and before allowing traffic,
 except construction traffic, on the pavement. Do not allow any traffic over the
 sealed joints for the period of time recommended by the manufacturer for proper
 adhesion or curing or for a longer period if the seals have not completely adhered
 or cured.
 For each working day, the Engineer will remove 5 sample plugs at locations
 determined by the Engineer. The Engineer will test each plug for conformity to
 the geometry specified for the joint seals. If the test plugs do not conform, the
 Engineer will remove additional plugs and will identify the location of the joint
 from which each plug was removed. The Engineer will test each plug to
 determine if any joints are deficient. When joints are determined to be deficient,
 remove and rework those joints. After deficient joints have been reworked, the
 Engineer will remove sample plugs at locations determined by the Engineer.
 The Engineer will repeat the sampling and testing. Repair holes from sample
 plugs no later than the next working day.
 E) Self-Leveling Silicone Rubber Sealant. Install the self-leveling rubber sealant
 according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
 F) Resealing Joints. Saw cut, and clean all joints to minimum widths or greater
 according to the specifications for each joint type. The minimum width for
 joints before resealing is 1/8 inch wider than the existing joint. If the saw cut of
 an existing joint is not of sufficient width to clean the joint faces, resaw the joint
 to a width that will expose clean vertical faces of the joint. Perform all
 additional resawing of an existing joint to clean the faces of the joint and install
 seals appropriate for the resawed width. Clean joints before resealing according
 to the requirements for new seals. Install additional silicone rubber sealant
 following additional resawing of joints to clean faces, or install wider preformed
 neoprene seals following additional resawing of an existing joint to clean faces.
 Remove all debris and old joint sealer resulting from the sawing operation from
 the pavement before opening to public traffic.
 When necessary, saw the pavement to the required depth at the pavement
 edge, extend the saw cut into existing asphalt shoulders. When edge drain
 construction is included in the Contract and edge drains are to be placed in the
 asphalt shoulder adjacent to the JPC pavement being saw cut and resealed,
 perform edge drain construction after sawing and sealing of the pavement so that
 sealing of cuts in the asphalt shoulder will not be necessary. When edge drain
 construction is not included in the Contract or an alternate construction sequence
 is specified, seal all saw cuts in the asphalt shoulders that will remain in the
 finished work using hot-poured elastic joint sealer or self-leveling silicone
 rubber sealant. Perform sealing of cuts in the asphalt shoulder as soon as
 practical after completing pavement sealing in the adjacent lane.
 G) Temporary Seals. When using temporary seals, firmly embed them in the joint.
 Place the material 1/4 inch below the pavement surface. Provide a material that
 is sufficiently strong and durable to resist intrusion of incompressible materials,
 and to allow complete removal after its usefulness has ended.
 501.03.19 Surface Tolerances and Testing Surface.
 A) Edge Slump. Prevent and correct the slumping of the pavement, base, or
 shoulder edges. Ensure that edge slump does not exceed 1/8 inch when the Plans
 indicate the edge of the pavement, base, or shoulder being constructed is to be
 abutted by subsequently constructed pavement, base, or shoulders, either by this
 Contract or future contracts. Ensure that edge slump does not exceed 1/4 inch
 
 501—13
 
 where the edge is not to be abutted by subsequent pavement, base, or shoulder.
 Measure the edge slump with a straightedge laid on the pavement, base, or
 shoulder perpendicular to the edge.
 Use a planing device or a device consisting of multiple saws to perform
 corrective work. Use rotary grinders only on isolated irregularities less than
 50 square feet. Prohibit the use of bush hammers or other impact devices.
 Texture all areas of the concrete corrected by grinding in the same manner as the
 undisturbed pavement, base, or shoulder. When the specified texture is the
 transverse grooves, texture the ground areas by sawing the transverse grooves.
 Provide a final surface comparable to the adjacent pavement that does not
 require corrective work for texture, appearance, or skid resistance. Complete all
 corrective work within a section before the Department checks the thickness
 tolerance of that section. The Department will allow corrective work by
 diamond grinding according to Subsection 503.03.
 B) Ride Quality. When the Contract specifies that rideability applies, the
 Department will measure the ride quality in terms of the IRI and will use the IRI
 to determine acceptability and to calculate Ride Quality Adjustments.
 1)
 
 Acceptance Testing. The Department will test the ride quality of the
 pavement for acceptance after the Contractor:
 a)
 b)
 c)
 
 2)
 
 3)
 
 makes a request at least 2 weeks in advance;
 partially completes the paving and the Department deems it
 necessary; or
 completes all mainline paving.
 
 The Department will determine the IRI by applying a linear transform,
 determined by correlation, to the values (average of 2 wheel paths)
 determined by ASTM E 1926. Thoroughly clean the surface of all dirt and
 other foreign matter immediately before the Department performs the
 testing.
 The Department will divide and test each traffic lane using 0.1-mile test
 sections starting at the beginning of the lane and proceeding in the direction
 of traffic. The Department will exclude discontinuities, such as bridges, in
 the pavement. When a test section at the end of a lane is less than 0.1 mile
 long, the Department will include that section with the adjacent section.
 When deemed necessary, the Department will retest the pavement after any
 corrective work is completed.
 Category A Requirements. Achieve an IRI of 80 or lower for each 0.1-mile
 section. When the IRI is greater than 90 for a 0.1-mile section, perform
 corrective work, or remove and replace the pavement to achieve the
 specified IRI. At the Department’s discretion, a pay deduction of $1200 per
 lane mile may be applied in lieu of corrective work.
 The Department’s testing generates a computer file containing the
 measured longitudinal profile in terms of elevation values of each wheel
 track at 3-inch intervals. The Department will create a strip chart from the
 file showing the elevation and distance traveled when the IRI is greater than
 70 or upon request for lower IRI values.
 Category B Requirements. Achieve an IRI of 85 or lower for each 0.1-mile
 section. When the IRI is greater than 95 for a 0.1-mile section, perform
 corrective work, or remove and replace the pavement to achieve the
 specified IRI. At the Department’s discretion, a pay deduction of $750 per
 lane mile may be applied in lieu of corrective work.
 The Department’s testing generates a computer file containing the
 measured longitudinal profile in terms of elevation values of each wheel
 track at 3-inch intervals. The Department will create a strip chart from the
 
 501—14
 
 file showing the elevation and distance traveled when the IRI is greater than
 85 or upon request for lower IRI values.
 When the Contract does not specify that ride quality requirements apply,
 straightedge the pavement or shoulder in the presence of the Engineer. Place a
 10-foot straightedge parallel to the centerline to bridge all depressions and touch
 all high spots. Perform straight edging as soon as the concrete has hardened
 sufficiently to support walking, but not later than 10:00 AM of the day following
 the placing of the concrete. Plainly mark all high spots, indicated by a variation
 exceeding 1/8 inch from the straightedge, that are 6 inches or more from the
 pavement, base, or shoulder edge.
 C) Corrective Work. Submit corrective work procedure plans to the Engineer for
 approval before performing the work. Provide a final surface comparable to
 adjacent pavement that does not require corrective work in respect to texture,
 appearance, and skid resistance.
 501.03.20 Opening to Public Traffic. Open the pavement, base, or shoulders to
 traffic anytime 3,000-psi strength is attained, except when curing with wet burlap. When
 curing with wet burlap, wait at least 72 hours before opening the pavement to traffic.
 Complete the construction of shoulders and thoroughly clean the pavement, base, or
 shoulders and seal all joints, as required, before opening the pavement to traffic other than
 construction equipment.
 Prior to opening the pavement to traffic, other than the construction equipment,
 complete the construction of shoulders in a satisfactory manner.
 When operating any equipment entirely or partially on the pavement, provide means
 to protect the pavement from damage regardless of its age. Either provide the equipment
 with rubber-tired wheels or operate the equipment over protective mats designed and
 constructed to prevent damage to the pavement surface and joints. Use mats consisting of
 wooden strips having a nominal thickness of 2 inches and a width of at least that of the
 treads. The Engineer may allow mats made of other suitable material. Sweep the
 pavement surface free of debris prior to placing the protective matting.
 Construct a ramp of compacted earth, or other material of sufficient strength, to
 prevent undue stress in the pavement slab from equipment moving on and off the
 pavement.
 Open residential entrances to traffic, on which only automobile traffic is expected,
 only at the end of the 72-hour curing period, or at an attained strength of 3,000 psi. Clean
 the pavement and seal all joints before opening the residential entrances to traffic.
 501.03.21 Tolerance in Pavement Thickness. Core the pavement as the Engineer
 directs. The Engineer will determine the thickness of the pavement and concrete
 shoulders according to KM 64-309. The Engineer will evaluate areas of the pavement and
 shoulders found deficient in thickness by more than one inch. When the Engineer deems
 the areas warrant removal, remove and replace the areas with concrete of the thickness
 specified in the Plans.
 501.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 501.04.01 JPC Pavement. The Department will measure the quantity in square
 yards according to the Plan dimensions as shown in the Record Plans. The Department
 will determine the final quantity based on the design quantity with increases or decreases
 by authorized adjustments. Authorized adjustments include changes in the Record Plan
 dimensions, additional areas not shown in the Record Plans, and errors and omissions in
 the design quantity in excess of one percent.
 The Department will not measure reinforcing steel, load transfer assemblies, dowels,
 joint construction (including removal of concrete to accommodate a construction joint
 bulkhead), joint sealing, joint repair, form pins, texturing, additional work for drilling
 
 501—15
 
 holes for form pins, texturing areas of the pavement that have been corrected by grinding,
 fly ash, Type IP cement, Type III cement, additional Type I cement for high early
 strength, formed rumbles strips, and all other items necessary to construct the pavement
 according to the Contract for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of
 work.
 501.04.02 PCC Base. The Department will measure the quantity in square yards
 according to Subsection 501.04.01.
 501.04.03 JPC Shoulders. The Department will measure the quantity in square
 yards according to Subsection 501.04.01. The Department will not measure rumble strips
 for payment, unless they are constructed in a separate operation because the shoulder was
 used to maintain traffic, and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 501.04.04 Rumble Strips, Type 3. The Department will measure the quantity in
 linear feet. The Department will not measure Type 3 rumble strips for payment unless
 they are constructed in a separate operation because the shoulder was used to maintain
 traffic.
 501.04.05 Diamond Grinding. When listed as a bid item, the Department will
 measure the quantity according to Subsection 503.04. The Department will not measure
 diamond grinding for payment when it is performed at the Contractor’s option or for
 corrective work and will consider it incidental to JPC Pavement.
 501.04.06 Thickness. The Department will measure the pavement thickness
 tolerance according to KM 64-309. The Department will not measure the pavement
 thickness tolerance as a separate pay unit, but will use the pavement thickness tolerance to
 calculate an adjusted Contract unit price for JPC Pavement, PCC Base, or JPC Shoulders.
 The Department will not measure coring for payment and will consider it incidental to the
 concrete pay items.
 501.04.07 Ride Quality. When the Contract specifies that rideability applies, the
 Department will measure the ride quality in terms of the IRI. The Department will not
 measure the IRI as a separate pay unit but will use the IRI to calculate a Ride Quality
 Adjustment payment.
 501.05 PAYMENT. Department will make payment for the completed and accepted
 quantities under the following:
 501.05.01 Thickness. The Department will adjust the Contract unit price for JPC
 Pavement, PCC Base, and JPC Shoulders by the Schedule for Adjusted Payment for
 Thickness Deficiency. The adjusted quantity is equal to the area of JPC Pavement, PCC
 Base, or JPC Shoulder specified in the Kentucky Method, multiplied by the Contract unit
 price for the item and the Price Adjustment. The Department will not make additional
 payment for average thicknesses of pavement, base, or shoulders in excess of the specified
 thickness.
 501.05.02 Ride Quality. The Department will apply a Ride Quality Adjustment for
 each 0.1-lane-mile section tested. The Department will determine the Ride Quality
 Adjustments for each 0.1-lane-mile section using the Ride Quality Adjustment Schedule
 below. The Department will not apply positive ride quality adjustments to 0.1-lane-mile
 sections where thickness deductions have been applied. The sum of the pay value
 adjustments for the ride quality shall not exceed $0 for the project as a whole.
 When requesting tests on partially completed pavement, the Department will perform
 one test at no charge. The Department will perform additional requested testing and
 retesting for corrective work or pavement replacement at a cost of $300.00 per lane-mile.
 The Department will deduct charges for additional requested testing and retesting for
 
 501—16
 
 corrective work from monies due on the Contract.
 Code
 Pay Item
 02069-02071, 02073, JPC Pavement Non-Reinforced,
 02075, 02084,
 thickness
 02086, 02088
 02072, 02077, 02078, JPC Pavement Non-Reinforced Shoulder,
 02081-02083,
 thickness
 02087, 02089
 02061, 02064, 02065 PCC Base, thickness
 02695
 Rumble Strips, Type 3
 ---Rideability Testing
 10060
 Ride Quality Adjustment, JPC
 02060
 JPC Pavement Diamond Grinding
 
 Pay Unit
 Square Yard
 Square Yard
 Square Yard
 Linear Foot
 Each
 Each
 See Subsection 503.05
 
 Schedule for Adjusted Payment for
 Thickness Deficiency
 Thickness Deficiency
 (inches)
 0.00 to 0.20
 0.21 to 0.30
 0.31 to 0.40
 0.41 to 0.50
 0.51 to 0.75
 0.76 to 1.00
 Greater than 1.00
 (1)
 
 Price Adjustment
 (Percent of Contract Unit Bid Price)
 100
 80
 72
 68
 57
 50
 (1)
 
 Remove and replace these areas with concrete of the specified thickness at
 no expense to the Department when the Engineer directs.
 
 501—17
 
 RIDE QUALITY ADJUSTMENT SCHEDULES
 CATEGORY A PROJECTS
 IRI
 50 or less
 51
 52
 53
 54
 55
 56
 57
 58
 59
 60 to 80
 81
 82
 83
 84
 85
 86
 87
 88
 89
 90
 91 or higher
 (1)
 (2)
 
 (3)
 
 CATEGORY B PROJECTS
 
 Pay Value
 Adjustment(1)
 $750
 $630
 $520
 $420
 $330
 $250
 $180
 $120
 $70
 $30
 0
 -$30
 -$70
 -$120
 -$180
 -$250
 -$330
 -$420
 -$520
 -$630
 -$750
 corrective work(2)
 
 IRI
 56 or less
 57
 58
 59
 60
 61
 62
 63
 64
 65
 66 to 85
 86
 87
 88
 89
 90
 91
 92
 93
 94
 95
 96 or higher
 
 Pay Value
 Adjustment(1)
 $500
 $420
 $350
 $280
 $220
 $170
 $120
 $80
 $45
 $20
 0
 -$20
 -$45
 -$80
 -$120
 -$170
 -$220
 -$280
 -$350
 -$420
 -$500
 corrective work(3)
 
 Contractor may correct areas to achieve a positive adjustment.
 When it is in the best interest of the Department, a minimum pay value deduction
 of $1200 per 0.1-lane-mile section may be applied in lieu of corrective work.
 When it is in the best interest of the Department, a minimum pay value deduction
 of $750 per 0.1-lane-mile section may be applied in lieu of corrective work.
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 501—18
 
 SECTION 502  JPC PAVEMENT 24/48/72
 502.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct a single course of JPC pavement capable of
 attaining a 3,500 psi compressive strength within 24 hours, 48 hours, or 72 hours.
 502.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT. Conform to Subsection 501.02.
 
 502.03 CONSTRUCTION.
 exceptions and additions:
 
 Conform to Subsection 501.03 with the following
 
 A) Proportioning and Requirements.
 MODIFIED INGREDIENT PROPORTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR
 CLASS P CONCRETE FOR EARLY STRENGTH PAVEMENTS
 Class P
 Modified
 Mixture
 
 Maximum
 Free Water
 by W/C
 Ratio
 (lb/lb)
 
 Maximum
 Slump(1)
 
 Minimum
 Cement
 Factor(2)
 
 (inches)
 
 (lb/yd3)
 
 Required Time
 to Attain 3,500 psi
 Compressive
 Strength
 (Hours)
 
 JPCP/24
 0.33
 --799
 24
 JPCP/48
 0.34
 --729
 48
 JPCP/72
 0.35
 --658
 72
 (1)
 The Department does not have slump requirements for class P concrete mixes
 except for the edge slump requirements of Section 501.03.19.
 (2)
 The Department will allow a 94-lb reduction in the cement factor when using
 Type III cement.
 B) Placing. When water is permitted, apply to the surface as a fog spray using
 equipment that the Engineer approves. Place concrete within the mixture temperature
 range of 50 to 90 °F.
 C) Curing and Protecting Pavement.
 1)
 
 When overnight ambient temperatures are expected to be below 50 °F, cover the
 concrete with one of the following:
 a)
 b)
 c)
 d)
 
 2)
 
 When overnight ambient temperatures are expected to be below 40 °F, cover the
 concrete with one of the following:
 a)
 b)
 c)
 d)
 
 3)
 
 one layer of closed-cell polystyrene foam protected by at least one layer of
 plastic film;
 2 layers of burlap covered with one layer of 4-mil plastic;
 3 inches of hay or straw covered with one layer of 4-mil plastic;
 a Department approved alternate.
 
 2 layers of closed-cell polystyrene foam protected by at least one layer of
 plastic film;
 4 layers of burlap covered with one layer of 4-mil plastic;
 6 inches of hay or straw covered with 4-mil plastic;
 a Department approved alternative.
 
 The Department will allow placement of the insulating cover to be delayed for
 up to 4 hours to accommodate sawing joints. The Department will allow
 temporary removal of the cover to accommodate sawing and sealing joints. The
 
 502—1
 
 Department will allow permanent removal of the cover when the concrete attains
 the required opening strength of 3,000 psi.
 D) Strength Testing and Opening to Traffic.
 1)
 
 2)
 
 502.04
 
 Testing. The Department will test one set of cylinders no later than 24 hours for
 JPC pavement/24; 48 hours for JPC pavement/48; and 72 hours for JPC
 pavement/72; ± one hour from time of molding.
 When the average compressive strength is 3,000 psi, the Department will
 allow the pavement to be opened to traffic and will test the remaining sets of
 cylinders at the required age. When the average compressive strength is less than
 3,000 psi at the required age, do not open the pavement to traffic until the
 pavement has been in place for 7 days. The Engineer may accept the pavement
 based on additional testing.
 When 2 consecutive first sets of cylinders or when 2 sets of any 4 sets do
 not reach 3,000 psi, suspend work and propose a satisfactory mix design
 adjustment. Make the adjustment in the subsequent mixture. The Department
 will not require additional trial batches.
 Coordinate work so that all joint sawing, joint sealing, shoulder or curb
 construction, sweeping, cleaning and other activities are complete when the
 pavement has attained the required strength to be open to traffic.
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 502.04.01 JPC Pavement/24. The Department will measure the quantity according
 to Subsection 501.04.01.
 502.04.02 JPC Pavement/48. The Department will measure the quantity according
 to Subsection 501.04.01.
 502.04.03 JPC Pavement/72. The Department will measure the quantity according
 to Subsection 501.04.01.
 502.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02020-02028
 02029-02037
 02038-02046
 -----
 
 Pay Item
 JPC Pavement/24(1)
 JPC Pavement/48(1)
 JPC Pavement/72(1)
 Rideability Testing
 
 (1)
 
 Pay Unit
 See Subsection 501.05
 See Subsection 501.05
 See Subsection 501.05
 See Subsection 501.05
 
 When the Contract designates areas as “Must be opened on schedule” and
 those areas do not attain the required compressive strength within the specified
 time period, the Department will adjust the Contract unit price by the Schedule
 of Adjusted Payment for Delay of Opening.
 
 502—2
 
 Schedule for Adjusted Payment for
 Delay of Opening
 Delay of Opening (Hours)
 JPCP/24
 JPCP/48
 JPCP/72
 4
 8
 12
 8
 16
 24
 12
 24
 36
 16
 32
 48
 20
 40
 60
 
 Price Adjustment
 (Percent of Contract Unit Bid Price)
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 502—3
 
 SECTION 503  DIAMOND GRINDING JPC PAVEMENT
 503.01 DESCRIPTION. Diamond grind existing JPC pavements. Eliminate faulting at
 joints and cracks, restore the ride quality to meet or exceed limits specified, and restore
 texture to the entire pavement surface.
 503.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 503.02.01 Grinding Machine. Furnish a self-propelled grinding machine with
 diamond blades that is specifically designed to smooth and texture JPC pavement.
 Furnish a machine that is capable of cutting or planing at least 3 feet wide on each pass
 and that does not encroach on traffic movement outside the work area.
 503.02.02 Joint Sealer. Conform to Section 807. Use preformed or silicone rubber.
 503.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 503.03.01 Test Section. At the beginning of work, grind an initial test section at
 least 3 feet wide and 100 feet long. The Engineer will evaluate the initial test section to
 determine if the texture meets the requirements of this section. Modify the blade spacing
 or other features as necessary to produce the specified texture. Make similar
 modifications throughout the project to ensure acceptable surface texture.
 503.03.02 Diamond Grinding. Grind the entire surface of the JPC pavement
 mainline. Grind ramps, tapers, acceleration and deceleration lanes, turn lanes, median
 crossovers, and bridge decks as the Contract specifies. Grind shoulders or gutters when
 necessary for proper pavement drainage.
 Grind in a longitudinal direction and parallel to the pavement centerline. Begin and
 end at lines normal to the pavement centerline. When the end of the cut is subject to
 public traffic, grind a smooth transition from the smooth pavement to the non-ground
 pavement. Maintain a constant cross-slope between grinding extremities in each lane to
 ensure positive lateral drainage. Overlap the edge of grinding passes by less than 2 inches.
 503.03.03 Cleaning. Remove solid residue from the pavement surface before traffic
 or wind blows it. Perform a separate washing operation to remove residue that may cause
 dust after the completion of grinding when the Engineer directs. Ensure that waste water
 and residue do not flow across the pavement, into gutters, or into drainage structures.
 Dispose of waste water and residue as the Engineer approves.
 503.03.04 Lighting. Provide lighting, as the Engineer approves, when grinding
 between dusk and dawn.
 503.03.05 Joint Seals.
 A) Resealing Existing Joints. After grinding is complete on areas adjacent to the
 joints and after conforming to the ride quality requirements, clean and reseal the
 joints according to Subsection 501.03.
 B) Preserving Existing Joints Seals. After grinding is complete and when the
 Engineer directs, remove and replace any damaged seals with new seals. The
 Engineer may require replacement of preformed compression joint seals when
 damage penetrates the top void of the seal and replacement of silicone joint seals
 when the seal shows loss of bond with the sides of the joint or significant loss of
 the profile of the seal. Remove damaged seals for the full traffic lane width,
 thoroughly clean the joint, and install new seals according to Subsection
 501.03.18.
 503.03.06 Pavement Marking. Remove existing pavement marking and provide
 
 503—1
 
 temporary pavement markings according to Section 112 where the Contract specifies.
 503.03.07 Texture. The Department will measure the dimensions of the longitudinal
 grooves. If the dimensions are not within the following limits, make adjustments to the
 grinding equipment to achieve the required texture:
 Groove Dimension
 Width of grooves
 Width between grooves
 Height of groove (Peak to bottom)
 
 Value (inch)
 Between 0.09 and 0.130
 Between 0.08 and 0.125
 Between 0.031 and 0.063
 
 503.03.08 Alignment Tolerances. The Department will measure the transverse
 slope of ground pavement with a straightedge placed normal to the centerline. If a
 depression or misalignment of slope greater than 0.25 inch in 12 feet occurs, adjust the
 grinding equipment to correct the misalignment.
 The Engineer will measure the alignment of the top of the pavement surface across
 the joint and cracks. Correct all misalignments that exceed 0.063 inch by additional
 grinding.
 503.03.09 Ride Quality. Conform to Section 501 with the following exceptions:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 503.04
 
 All references are to diamond grinding in lieu of paving.
 Achieve an IRI equal to or lower than the target IRI listed in the proposal for
 each 0.1-mile section. When no target is listed in the proposal, achieve an IRI of
 70 or lower for each 0.1-mile section.
 Perform corrective work to achieve the required IRI by regrinding the entire
 width of the traffic lane at areas having a high IRI. The Engineer may exclude
 pavement areas where grinding alone will not correct deficiency.
 The Department will create a strip chart when the test results show that the IRI is
 greater than 70 or upon request for lower IRI values.
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 503.04.01 JPC Diamond Grinding. The Department will measure the quantity in
 square yards. The Department will measure the width as the width shown on the typical
 cross section of the Plans and the length horizontally along the centerline of each lane or
 ramp. The Department will not measure corrective work for payment. The Department
 will not measure the ride quality to calculate an adjusted unit price for this item of work.
 503.04.02 Joint Sealing. The Department will measure Joint Sealing by linear feet.
 The Department will not measure removing existing joint material or cleaning joints for
 payment but will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 503.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02060
 08540
 
 Pay Item
 JPC Pavement Diamond Grinding
 Joint Sealing
 
 Pay Unit
 Square Yard
 Linear Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 503—2
 
 SECTION 504  BREAKING AND SEATING JPC PAVEMENT
 504.01 DESCRIPTION. Break and seat existing JPC pavement for full depth and full
 panel width.
 504.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPEMENT.
 
 504.02.01 Asphalt Material. Conform to Subsection 403.02.
 504.02.02 Impact Hammer. Break the pavement with an impact hammer capable
 of delivering sufficient energy to break the pavement. Furnish a hammer having a breaker
 equipped with a plate-type shoe designed to prevent penetration into the existing surface.
 The Department may approve other equipment according to Subsection 108.06. When
 necessary, provide a screen for the hammer to protect vehicles in the adjacent lane from
 flying concrete chips during the breaking process.
 504.02.03 Pneumatic-Tire Proof Roller. Furnish a pneumatic-tire proof roller,
 weighing a minimum of 35 tons, of one of the following types.
 A roller having the following:
 1)
 2)
 
 3)
 
 4 rubber-tired wheels equally spaced across the full width and mounted in line on
 a rigid steel frame in such manner that all wheels carry equal loads, regardless of
 surface irregularities.
 Roller tires capable of satisfactory operation at a minimum inflation pressure of
 100 psi when inflated to the pressure necessary to obtain proper surface contact
 pressure to satisfactorily seat pavement slabs. The Department will allow tires to
 contain liquid.
 A rubber-tired prime mover for towing.
 or
 
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Two-axles.
 Self-propelled.
 No more than 7 tires.
 Tires capable of meeting inflation pressure and surface contact pressure
 requirements in 2) above.
 
 504.03 CONSTRUCTION. Break and seat the existing pavement. Place specified
 succeeding leveling, asphalt base, and asphalt binder courses one lane at a time. Furnish
 and place asphalt mixtures according to Division 400 for the appropriate mixture.
 Exercise care during breaking and seating to prevent damage to underground utilities
 and drainage facilities.
 504.03.01 Breaking of JPC Pavement.
 A) Size Requirements. Break the existing JPC pavement to the extent that no more
 than 20 percent of the broken fragments are larger than 2 feet, and no individual
 fragments are larger than 30 inches. Determine the extent of the breakage based
 on cracks visible to unaided normal vision when the pavement surface is dry. Do
 not use water to detect additional cracks.
 Accomplish breaking uniformly to produce the desired size without
 displacing the concrete more than 1/2 inch vertically above the original JPC
 pavement surface elevation.
 Continuously monitor the breaking operation. Make adjustments in the
 striking pattern, striking energy, number of passes, or other factors to continually
 achieve acceptable breaking throughout the project.
 B) Test Section. Before breaking operations begin, the Engineer will designate a
 
 504—1
 
 test section. Break the test section using varying energy and striking patterns.
 When necessary, repeat passes of the equipment over the pavement until the test
 section is acceptably broken according to A) above. Use the extent of breakage
 of the test section as a guide for breaking the pavement on the remainder of the
 project. The Engineer may require additional test sections at any time during the
 course of the work when sizes do not conform to the size requirements of A)
 above.
 504.03.02 Seating of Broken JPC Pavement. After breaking, seat the broken
 concrete by rolling with a pneumatic-tire proof roller. Make at least 5 one-way passes
 with a minimum 50-ton roller, or 7 one-way passes with a minimum 35-ton roller. Use a
 rolling pattern that will ensure that the entire area of the broken pavement is well seated
 and is thoroughly and uniformly compacted. Remove any large rocking fragments and
 fragments that are displaced more than 1/2 inch above the original pavement surface
 elevation after seating and fill the resulting void with asphalt and compact or tamp.
 504.03.03 Placement of Edge Drains. When the Contract includes installation of
 pavement edge drains, install the edge drains at least 2 weeks before breaking and seating
 operations.
 504.03.04 Placement of Asphalt. Sweep the broken and seated pavement clean of
 foreign material using mechanical sweepers and hand brooms.
 Place the asphalt base following the breaking and seating operation as closely as
 practical according to Subsection 403.03. Do not allow the broken pavement to remain
 exposed more than 24 hours. If the broken pavement is exposed more than 24 hours,
 suspend the breaking operations until all broken existing pavement has been covered by at
 least one course of asphalt base.
 Make any required changes to the cross slope with the paving of the base courses.
 Cure the fist course of base at least 8 hours before placing the second course. Do not open
 a lane to public traffic until 2 courses of asphalt (not including leveling courses) are in
 place. Offset the longitudinal joints in the asphalt 6 inches according to Subsection
 403.03.07.
 Perform leveling and wedging according to Subsection 403.03.09 on top of the first
 course of asphalt, and not on the existing pavement. However, at specific locations where
 the Engineer deems a substantial amount of leveling is necessary, level and wedge directly
 on the broken and seated pavement. Correct deviations in the surface by leveling and
 wedging on each succeeding course unless the Engineer directs or approves in writing that
 the leveling and wedging be delayed until after placing the succeeding courses. Construct
 asphalt courses succeeding the first 2 courses according to the Contract.
 504.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 504.04.01 Breaking and Seating Pavement. The Department will measure the
 quantity in square yards. The Department will measure the width as the actual width of
 the original JPC pavement, and the length as the horizontal length along the centerline of
 each roadway or ramp.
 504.04.02 Leveling and Wedging.
 according to Subsection 403.04.
 
 The Department will measure quantity
 
 504.04.03 Asphalt Mixtures. The Department will measure quantity according to
 Subsection 403.04 for the appropriate mixture.
 504.05
 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 
 504—2
 
 Code
 02107
 00190
 ----
 
 Pay Item
 Breaking and Seating Pavement
 Leveling and Wedging, PG 64-22
 Asphalt Mixtures
 
 Pay Unit
 Square Yard
 See Subsection 403.05
 See Subsection 403.05
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 504—3
 
 SECTION 505  CONCRETE SIDEWALKS, STEPS, AND
 ENTRANCE PAVEMENTS
 505.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct concrete sidewalks, steps, and entrance pavements,
 with or without reinforcement, on a prepared subgrade, in one course, to the dimensions
 and design specified in the Plans and Standard Drawings. This work does not include
 sidewalks constructed integral with bridges or culverts.
 505.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT
 
 505.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 505.02.02 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 505.02.03 Joint Materials. Conform to Section 807, preformed fillers.
 505.02.04 Aggregate. Conform to Section 804 and 805.
 505.02.05 Forms. Conform to Subsection 601.02.
 505.02.06 Pavers. Conform to ASTM C 936, ASTM C 902 Class SX – Type I, or
 ASTM C 1272 – Type R or F. Ensure the concrete pavers have a minimum thickness of 2
 inches and truncated domes as shown in the Standard Drawings. Ensure their color is
 homogeneous throughout the paver and contrasts visually with adjoining surfaces, either
 light-on-dark or dark-on-light. The Department will allow either yellow or red as colors.
 505.02.07 Mortar. Conform to Subsection 601.03.03.
 505.03 CONSTRUCTION. Construct sidewalks, steps, and entrance pavements on a
 prepared, compacted, smooth subgrade of uniform density formed by trenching or filling
 to the required elevation. Use Class A concrete according to Subsection 601.03. When
 desired, use Class P concrete according to Subsection 501.03 for the construction of
 entrance pavements. Remove large boulders and ledge rock found in the subgrade to a
 minimum depth of 6 inches below the finished subgrade elevation, backfill the space with
 material that the Engineer approves, and thoroughly compact by rolling or tamping.
 Furnish a template, and check the subgrade before depositing concrete. Moisten the
 subgrade immediately before placing concrete.
 Place a 2-inch thick course of No. 610 coarse aggregate on the prepared subgrade
 before placing concrete for steps. Form all steps and cast them to the dimensions
 specified in the Contract. Reinforce all steps according to the Standard Drawings. Round
 all exposed edges and corners to a 1/4 inch radius. When there are 3 or more steps, install
 handrail of the type specified in the Contract according to Section 720.
 505.03.01 Forming. Place sidewalks and entrance pavements by use of side forms
 or an approved slip form method according to Subsection 601.03.12.
 A) Side Form Method. Deposit concrete on the moistened subgrade strike, and
 compact to the required thickness, and tamp sufficiently to bring mortar to the
 surface. Then, finish the surface smooth and even with wooden floats and
 brushes and broom for texturing.
 B) Slip Forming. Correct any excess slumping or irregularities immediately after
 passage of the slip form machine, and finish and broom to blend with the general
 appearance of the adjacent concrete.
 505.03.02 Straight edging and Edging. Before giving the concrete sidewalk and
 entrance pavement the final finish and brooming, check the surfaces with a 10-foot
 
 505—1
 
 straightedge and eliminate all irregularities of more than 1/4 inch.
 505.03.03 Joints.
 A) Joints for Sidewalks. Either divide the surfaces of sidewalks into rectangular
 areas by means of a jointer having a radius of 1/4 inch and forming a groove no
 less than one inch in depth for the full width of the walk or saw the joints
 according to Subsection 501.03.17 and the Contract. Ensure that the length of
 the rectangles formed does not exceed the width of the sidewalk being
 constructed.
 When the sidewalk is constructed integral with the curb, ensure that the
 width and spacing of the joints conform to that in the curb. Round the edges of
 the sidewalk at all expansion joints with an approved edging tool to a 1/4 inch
 radius. Install 1/2-inch premolded expansion joint material to the full depth of
 the sidewalk where the sidewalk abuts any rigid structure or fixture, such as
 curbs, columns, castings, buildings, and light standards.
 B) Joints for Entrance Pavements. Construct 1/4-inch wide sawed contraction
 joints in entrance pavements according to Subsection 501.03.17. Construct these
 joints at locations shown on the Standard Drawings. The Department will not
 require steel reinforcement in contraction joints. Saw the joints to a minimum
 depth of 2 inches. Install 1/2-inch wide expansion joints where shown on the
 Standard Drawings. Seal both expansion joints and contraction joints according
 to Subsection 501.03.18 and the Standard Drawings.
 505.03.04 Detectable Warnings. Install detectable warning pavers at all sidewalk
 ramps and on all commercial entrances with traffic control devices according to the
 Standard Drawings. Mortar all pavers in place. Ensure the detectable warnings extend the
 full surface width and a minimum length of 2 feet up the ramp. If a walkway crosses or
 adjoins a vehicular way, and the pedestrian walking surface is not separated by curbs,
 railings, or other elements, define the boundary between the areas with a continuous 2-foot
 minimum width detectable warning.
 505.03.05 Curing and Backfilling. Cure concrete sidewalks, steps, and entrance
 pavements according to Subsection 601.03.17.
 After the concrete has set sufficiently, remove forms and backfill areas adjacent to the
 concrete. Compact and grade the backfill.
 505.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 505.04.01 Concrete Sidewalk. The Department will measure the quantity in square
 yards.
 505.04.02 Concrete Entrance Pavement. The Department will measure the quantity
 in square yards.
 505.04.03 Class A Concrete for Steps. The Department will measure the quantity
 according to Subsection 601.04. The Department will not measure excavation, steel
 reinforcement, or crushed aggregate for steps for payment and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work.
 505.04.04 Detectable Warnings. The Department will measure the quantity in
 square feet. All retrofit applications for maintenance projects will require the removal of
 existing sidewalks to meet the requirements of the standard drawings applicable to the
 project. The cost associated with the removal of the existing sidewalk will be incidental to
 the detectable warnings bid item or incidental to the bid item for the construction of the
 concrete sidewalk unless otherwise noted.
 
 505—2
 
 505.04.05 Roadway Excavation.
 according to Subsection 204.04.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity
 
 505.04.06 Embankment-In-Place.
 according to Subsection 206.04.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity
 
 505.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02719, 02720, 02723
 02101, 02099
 
 Pay Item
 Pay Unit
 Sidewalk, Thickness, Concrete
 Square Yard
 Cement Concrete Entrance
 Square Yard
 Pavement, Thickness
 02551
 Concrete, Class A for Steps
 See Subsection 601.05
 02200
 Roadway Excavation
 See Subsection 204.05
 02230
 Embankment-In-Place
 See Subsection 206.05
 23158ES505
 Detectable Warnings
 Square Foot
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 505—3
 
 SECTION 506  CONCRETE CURBS AND GUTTERS
 506.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct, on a prepared subgrade according to the Standard
 Drawings, concrete curb and gutter, concrete valley gutter, concrete header curb, and
 concrete integral curb.
 506.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 506.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 506.02.02 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 506.02.03 Joint Fillers. Conform to Section 807, preformed fillers.
 506.02.04 Forms. Conform to Subsections 501.02. and 601.02.
 506.02.05 Fine Aggregate. Conform to Section 804.
 506.02.06 Coarse Aggregate. Conform to Section 805.
 506.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 506.03.01 Header Curb, Valley Gutter, and Curb and Gutter (Combination).
 Use combination curb and gutter in conjunction with asphalt pavements. Construct
 combination curb and gutter according to the typical section in the Plans. Use header curb
 in conjunction with either asphalt or JPC pavement where the depth of pavement is a
 minimum of one foot or where the thickness of asphalt pavement is variable. Construct
 header curb before placing pavement. Construct valley gutter according to the Plans and
 Standard Drawings.
 Prepare the foundation by excavating or constructing the embankment to the required
 subgrade elevation on which the curb, gutter, or combination curb and gutter is to be
 placed. Remove all soft, yielding, or otherwise unsuitable material, and replace it with
 stable materials according to Section 207, and compact and finish the subgrade to a firm
 even surface.
 Use Class A concrete according to Subsection 601.03. Place concrete either by use of
 side forms or by an approved slip forming method according to Subsection 501.02.11.
 When indicated or directed, form entrance and drainage openings of the required
 dimensions through the curbs at the designated location.
 Prepare the subgrade as required and moisten before placing concrete. During
 placement, thoroughly spade the concrete and vibrate or tamp it until the mortar entirely
 covers the surface and eliminate all honeycomb and voids. Place concrete so that no
 concrete reaches initial set before placing the following lift. Strike off and float surfaces
 so all coarse aggregate is well below the surface.
 Place reinforcing steel according to the details specified in the Contract. Construct
 contraction joints as specified in Subsection 501.03.17 D).
 Construct expansion joints at all breaks in alignment, at all drainage boxes and other
 fixed objects, at the beginning and ending points of curves, and at the beginning, quarter,
 middle, and ending points of semicircular curves, except the Engineer will not require
 joints at the quarter points for semicircles having radii of 5 feet or less.
 Give the top surfaces of curbs a uniform float finish and round edges according to the
 Standard Drawings. Correct all honeycombed areas by filling with mortar. Do not
 plaster. Finish the top and face of all curbs while the concrete is plastic by wetting and
 rubbing with a carborundum brick or wooden block. Finish the face of header curbs to 2
 inches below the gutter line or the finished groundline. Before giving the concrete the
 final finish, check surfaces with a 10-foot straightedge and eliminate all irregularities of
 more than 1/4 inch. Finish concrete to a smooth surface, presenting a uniform texture and
 color.
 
 506—1
 
 Cure the concrete according to Subsection 501.03.15.
 Construct precast curbs to the length and shape, and reinforce according to the
 Standard Drawings. Cast, finish, and cure precast curbs according to Section 605.03. Set
 precast curbs to conform to the line and grade specified in the Plans with tight joints. Fill
 all joints except expansion joints with mortar. When the precast curb is set, fill all
 remaining excavated areas with material that the Engineer approves in lifts not exceeding
 6 inches in depth and tamp.
 506.03.02 Integral Curb. Use integral curb in conjunction with JPC pavements
 where a portion of the JPC pavement is the gutter. Construct according to Subsection
 506.03.01 except for the following:
 1)
 2)
 
 3)
 4)
 
 Use either Class A concrete according to Subsection 601.03, or Class P concrete
 according to Subsection 501.03.
 Construct integral curbs monolithic with the pavement or as a separate operation
 by anchoring to the pavement.
 For integral curbs constructed monolithic with the pavement in a separate
 operation from placement of the pavement concrete, place the curbs immediately
 following completion of the pavement finishing operations and before the
 concrete has taken its initial set. Do not exceed an elapsed time between placing
 concrete in the pavement and in the curb of one hour. Obtain a thorough bond
 between the pavement and curb by roughening the surface of the pavement
 covered by the curb by means of a trowel or wire brush. Place stirrups according
 to the Standard Drawings in the freshly finished concrete at intervals of 2 1/2
 feet before placing the curb. Do not place stirrups closer than 3 inches to the
 center of sawed construction joints.
 When the curb is constructed as a separate operation, clean the surface of
 the concrete in the pavement of all foreign material before placing concrete in
 the curbs. Should it be necessary for stirrups to be bent in order to allow
 equipment to pass over the bars at the beginning of a days run, bend the bars
 before installation.
 Insert preformed joint filler, and cut it to conform to the cross section of the curb,
 in the curb directly over the expansion joint in the pavement while placing the
 curb. Construct contraction joints at the same locations as those in the pavement.
 Use side forms with a depth equal to that of the curb. Ensure that the forms are
 joined neatly, fastened securely, and held rigidly in place by adequate
 connections and bracing. Check curb forms for grade and alignment to the same
 degree of accuracy required for pavement forms. After the concrete in the curb
 has hardened sufficiently, but in no less than 6 hours after placement, remove the
 inside forms and finish the inside face of the curb to a uniform color and texture
 by rubbing with a wooden block or a carborundum brick. Correct any
 honeycomb or other surface defects by pointing with mortar of the same
 proportions of cement and sand used in the concrete.
 
 To obtain a neat line on the thin edge of the integral curb lip, construct by placing a
 one-inch by 4-inch board, at least 10 feet long and surfaced on all 4 sides, on the concrete
 slab to act as a guide when forming the curb, or use other approved methods.
 Seal all pavement joints according to Subsection 501.03.17 before integral curb is
 constructed. If the integral curb is constructed monolithically with the pavement, seal the
 curb in the same manner as the pavement.
 506.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 506.04.01 Header Curb. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet
 along the face of the curb.
 506.04.02 Valley Gutter. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet
 
 506—2
 
 along the flowline of the gutter.
 506.04.03 Curb and Gutter (combination). The Department will measure the
 quantity in linear feet along the flowline of the gutter.
 506.04.04 Integral Curb. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet
 along the top of the curb.
 506.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 01875-01877, 01880, 01885, 01890, 01891
 01895
 01810, 01811, 01815, 01820, 01821, 01825
 01830, 01831, 01840, 01841, 01845, 01847
 
 Pay Item
 Type, Header Curb
 Valley Gutter
 Type, Curb and Gutter
 Type, Integral Curb
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 506—3
 
 SECTION 507  CONCRETE MOUNTABLE MEDIAN AND
 STANDARD BARRIER MEDIAN
 507.01 DESCRIPTION. Prepare the foundation for the mountable median or standard
 barrier median, furnish, place, consolidate, finish, and cure concrete, and construct all
 joints necessary for completing the work.
 507.02 MATERIALS.
 507.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 507.02.02 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 507.02.03 Joint Material. Conform to Section 807, preformed fillers.
 507.02.04 Forms. Conform to Subsection 601.02.
 507.03 CONSTRUCTION. Construct concrete mountable medians or standard barrier
 medians on the accepted prepared subgrade, or the completed and accepted base course or
 old pavement. Use Class A concrete according to Subsection 601.03 or Class P concrete
 according to Subsection 501.03. When required, place dowel bars according to the
 Contract. Place concrete either by use of side forms or by an approved slip forming
 method according to Subsection 601.03.12.
 When constructing medians in conjunction with JPC pavement, construct transverse
 joints at the same intervals and locations as joints in the adjacent pavement. When
 constructing medians in conjunction with asphalt pavement, space transverse joints at
 intervals of 30 feet or less to provide uniform spacing. Construct all median joints as
 either 1/2-inch expansion joints filled with preformed joint filler or 1/8-inch sawed joints.
 When sawing, construct median joints according to Subsection 501.03.17. The Engineer
 will not require steel dowels in either type of joint.
 Cure concrete placed in the median according to Subsection 501.03.15.
 507.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 507.04.01 Standard Barrier Median. The Department will measure the quantity in
 square yards.
 507.04.02 Mountable Median. The Department will measure the quantity in square
 yards.
 507.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 01915-01923
 01935-01950
 
 Pay Item
 Standard Barrier Median, Type
 Mountable Median, Type
 
 Pay Unit
 Square Yard
 Square Yard
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 507—1
 
 SECTION 508  PERMANENT CONCRETE MEDIAN
 BARRIERS
 508.01 DESCRIPTION. Prepare the foundation for the median barrier; furnish, place,
 consolidate, finish, and cure the barrier; construct all transverse joints; construct other
 incidentals necessary to complete the work; and attach delineators and other
 appurtenances when specified in the Contract.
 508.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 508.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 508.02.02 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 508.02.03 Joint Material. Conform to Section 807, preformed fillers.
 508.02.04 Dowel Bars. Conform to Section 811.
 508.02.05 Tie Bars for Precast Sections. Conform to Section 811.
 508.02.06 Mortar Sand. Conform to Section 804.
 508.02.07 Cement. Conform to Section 801.
 508.02.08 Water. Conform to Section 803.
 508.02.09 Masonry Coating. Conform to Section 828.
 508.02.10 Delineators for Barriers. Use Stimsonite Marker 962, AKT Corporation
 Marker No. 181, or a Department approved equal.
 508.02.11 Forms. Conform to Subsection 601.02. In addition to the requirements
 for slip forms, use a slip form or extrusion machine that is equipped with automatic
 guidance controls capable of sensing grade and alignment from an outside reference
 consisting of a taut line or wire.
 508.03 CONSTRUCTION. Construct concrete median barriers of each type to the
 lines, grades, cross section, and details specified in the Plans and Standard Drawings. Use
 Class A concrete according to Subsection 601.03. When it is necessary to transition the
 concrete median barrier into a section different from the uniform section specified in the
 Plans, such as at a bridge pier, sign pedestal, or bridge end wall, do so in a smooth,
 uniform manner as shown on the Standard Drawings. Provide concrete median barrier
 that are precast, cast-in-place using fixed forms, or slip formed according to Subsection
 601.03.12.
 Bevel the upper longitudinal edge of the barrier 7/8 inch, or construct it to a radius
 satisfactory to the Engineer.
 When required, construct items such as delineators and conduit according to the
 Contract. Secure conduit to prevent movement.
 Cure cast-in-place concrete median barriers according to Subsection 501.03.15. Use
 the same method of curing on each continuous section of the barrier. Cure precast
 concrete median barriers according to Subsection 605.03.05.
 508.03.01 Fixed Form Construction. Construct 1/2-inch transverse expansion
 joints throughout the entire cross section at uniform intervals of no less than 15 feet or
 greater than 25 feet. For construction in conjunction with JPC pavements, locate
 transverse expansion joints so that a joint occurs at the same stations as that of the rigid
 pavement transverse joints. Construct additional transverse contraction joints in the barrier
 
 508—1
 
 if necessary to maintain the 15 to 25-foot interval. Fill all transverse and longitudinal
 joints with preformed joint filler. Construct one-inch expansion joints over expansion
 joints in rigid pavement or base. Construct 1/2-inch expansion joints when the barrier
 abuts a bridge and at all box inlets, lamp posts, sign posts, and similar structures that
 project through, into, or against the concrete median barrier.
 The Department will allow construction of joints according to Subsection 508.03.02.
 Conform to the tolerance requirements of Appendix A, Tabulation of Construction
 Tolerances. Uniformly coat the median barriers with masonry coating.
 508.03.02 Slip Form Construction. Suspend reference lines from supports set at
 intervals no greater than 10 feet on vertical and horizontal curves or 25 feet on uniform
 grades or tangents. Do not use ski or shoe sensors to reflect the grade of the subgrade
 unless the ski or shoe can ride on the completed pavement surface.
 Provide a construction joint between the base and the barrier. Construct a 2 by 4-inch
 key, either depressed or raised, in the base. Insert steel dowels in the plastic concrete
 immediately behind the slip form machine at the locations shown on the Standard
 Drawing. Place the base using slip form or extrusion methods.
 Immediately repair all surface pits larger than 1/2 inch in diameter and all gouges
 behind the slip form machine. The Engineer will not require further finishing, other than a
 light longitudinal brushing or brooming.
 Provide short sections, such as sections adjacent to structures, terminal sections, etc.
 that are cast using fixed forms.
 Construct one-inch transverse expansion joints at intervals no greater than 500 feet.
 Construct one-inch transverse expansion joints over all transverse expansion joints in rigid
 pavement or base. Construct 1/2-inch expansion joints when the barrier abuts a bridge and
 at all box inlets, lamp posts, and similar structures that project through, into, or against the
 concrete median barrier. Fill all transverse and longitudinal joints with preformed joint
 filler.
 Construct 1/8-inch transverse contraction joints 2 inches deep at uniform intervals of
 20 to 30 feet. Make contraction joints by cutting into the plastic concrete using an edging
 tool and trowel, using removable inserts, or sawing. When sawing contraction joints, saw
 as soon as practical after the concrete has set sufficiently to preclude raveling, and before
 any shrinkage cracking occurs in the concrete. The Engineer will not require sealing of
 contraction joints.
 Construct construction joints as one-inch expansion joints. When constructing a
 concrete median barrier over JPC pavement or base, locate transverse joints in the barrier
 to match transverse joints in the pavement or base. Construct additional transverse
 contraction joints in the barrier if necessary to maintain the 20 to 30-foot interval specified
 above. When constructing transverse joints in the JPC pavement or base at variable
 intervals, adjust the joint interval in the wall to match the joint interval in the pavement or
 base and construct additional joints as necessary to avoid exceeding the 30-foot maximum
 interval.
 Conform to the tolerance requirements of Appendix A, Tabulation of Construction
 Tolerances
 508.03.03 Precast Construction. Construct precast units according to Section 605
 and approved drawings. Place the precast units on a bed of mortar, and trim and discard
 excess mortar. Uniformly coat the median barriers with masonry coating.
 When precast concrete median barriers are specified or allowed for installation on an
 existing facility, anchor them as the Plans specify.
 When using precast units, cast short sections, transitions, terminal sections, and other
 supplemental sections using fixed forms.
 When casting threaded inserts into the barrier for use in lifting, protect the inserts by
 installing a solid, full-length, threaded, plastic bolt, coated with waterproof grease. Install
 the bolt immediately after manufacturing the barrier section. Leave the bolt in place at all
 times while the barrier is in storage or in service, except when using the insert for lifting.
 Entirely fill joints between units, including the 2 by 10-inch groove, with grout
 
 508—2
 
 composed of one part mortar sand and 2 parts cement with enough water to make the
 mixture plastic.
 When the barrier abuts a bridge or other rigid structure, cut off the tie bars or fill the
 groove with grout, as applicable, and install 1/2-inch preformed joint filler in the joints.
 Install 1/2-inch preformed joint filler at all box inlets, lamp posts, sign posts, and
 similar structures that project through, into, or against the concrete median barrier.
 Conform to the tolerance requirements for cast-in-place construction of Appendix A,
 Tabulation of Construction Tolerances.
 Ensure that all concrete median barrier are uniform in appearance, and true to line and
 grade. Repair or remove and replace all portions of the barrier that are not within the
 specified tolerances, or precast units that cannot be correctly installed.
 508.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 508.04.01 Concrete Median Barrier. The Department will measure the quantity in
 linear feet along the top centerline of the barrier. The Department will not measure
 furnishing, installing, or maintaining lifting devices in precast median barriers for payment
 and will consider them incidental to this item of work. The Department will not measure
 portions of the barrier that are not within the specified tolerances, precast units that are not
 correctly installed, or damaged units.
 508.04.02 Concrete Terminal Sections. The Department will measure the quantity
 by each individual unit.
 508.04.03 Delineators for Barriers. The Department will measure the quantity by
 each individual unit.
 508.04.04 Masonry Coating. The Department will measure the quantity according
 to Subsection 601.04.
 508.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Pay Item
 Code
 01953, 01955, 01967,
 Concrete Median Barrier, Type
 01988, 01989, 01992, 01999
 01956-01957
 Concrete Terminal Section, Type
 01984, 01985
 Delineator for Barrier, Color
 02998
 Masonry Coating
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Each
 Each
 See Subsection 601.05
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 508—3
 
 SECTION 509  TEMPORARY CONCRETE MEDIAN
 BARRIERS
 509.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish, install, maintain, and remove temporary precast
 concrete median barriers. The Department will furnish the concrete median barriers when
 specified in the Contract.
 The Department may allow the use of similar units that conform to the National
 Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) 350 Test Level 3 (TL-3) requirements
 and the typical features depicted by the Standard Drawings. Obtain the Engineers
 approval prior to use. Ensure the barrier wall shape, length, material, drain slot
 dimensions and locations typical features are met and the reported maximum deflection is
 3 feet or less from the NCHRP 350 TL-3 for Test 3 – 11 (pickup truck impacting at 60
 mph at a 25-degree angle.)
 509.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 509.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 509.02.02 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 509.02.03 Connector Bar Pins. Conform to ASTM A 36. Galvanize after forming
 according to AASHTO M 111.
 509.02.04 Top Connectors. Conform to ASTM A 36. Galvanize after forming
 according to AASHTO M 111.
 509.02.05 Bottom Connectors. Conform to ASTM A 36. Galvanize according to
 AASHTO M 111 after forming.
 509.02.06 Tack Welding. Conform to Subsection 605.03.04.
 509.02.07 Delineators for Barriers. Use either Stimsonite Marker 962, AKT
 Corporation Marker No. 181, or a Department approved equal.
 509.02.08 Connector Pins. Conform to ASTM A 307, bolt grade A, national coarse
 thread 7 threads per inch.
 509.03 CONSTRUCTION. Construct concrete median barriers according to Section
 605 and the Standard Drawings. Use Class A concrete and provide all concrete with an
 ordinary surface finish according to Subsection 601.03.18. Place delineators according to
 the Standard Drawings.
 Lift and place the barrier units using a 2 point pickup, or another approved method.
 Do not lift units by the connectors. When casting threaded inserts into the barrier for use
 in lifting, protect the inserts by installing a solid, full-length, threaded, plastic bolt, coated
 with waterproof grease. Install the bolt immediately after manufacturing the barrier
 section. Leave the bolt in place at all times while the barrier is in storage or in service,
 except when using the insert for lifting.
 Do not use any unit which has been cracked, chipped, scarred, or otherwise damaged
 or disfigured unless the Engineer approves.
 Install the units at the locations specified in the Plans, and connect them in the
 manner detailed on the Plans and Standard Drawings. Keep delineators clean and provide
 replacement delineators when necessary. For all units in a continuous run, use units of the
 same type and height, and provide a smooth transition. Replace all units damaged after
 installation with an undamaged unit. When the units are no longer needed, remove the
 units from the project. Take ownership of all units except Department furnished units.
 Transport Department furnished units to the location specified in the Contract.
 
 509—1
 
 509.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 509.04.01 Temporary Concrete Median Barrier. The Department will measure
 the quantity furnished, installed, maintained, and removed by multiplying the nominal
 length of each unit in linear feet by the number of units. The Department will measure
 units installed to replace units damaged by traffic. The Department will not measure the
 disposal of units or units installed to replace units damaged by construction operations for
 payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work. The Department will not
 measure furnishing, installing, or maintaining lifting devices for payment and will
 consider them incidental to this item of work.
 509.04.02 Install Temporary Concrete Median Barrier. The Department will
 measure the quantity, installed, maintained, and removed by multiplying the nominal
 length of each unit in linear feet by the number of units. The Department will furnish the
 barrier. The Department will measure units installed to replace units damaged by traffic.
 The Department will not measure the disposal of units or units installed to replace units
 damaged by construction operations for payment and will consider them incidental to this
 item of work. The Department will not measure furnishing, installing, or maintaining
 lifting devices for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 509.04.03 Relocate Temporary Concrete Median Barrier. The Department will
 measure the quantity relocated by multiplying the nominal length of each unit in linear
 feet by the number of units.
 509.04.04 Delineator for Barrier. The Department will measure the quantity by the
 individual unit, including replacement units.
 509.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 03171
 01992
 02003
 01984, 01985
 
 Pay Item
 Concrete Barrier Wall Type, 9T(1)
 Install Temporary Concrete Median Barrier (2)
 Relocate Temporary Concrete Median Barrier
 Delineator for Barrier, Color
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Each
 
 (1)
 
 The Department will pay 90 percent of the quantity upon satisfactory installation
 of the units. The Department will pay the remaining 10 percent upon removal
 of the units from the project or upon placement to their final location.
 (2)
 The Department will pay 75 percent of the quantity upon satisfactory installation
 of the units. The Department will pay the remaining 25 percent upon removal
 of the units from the project or upon placement to their final location.
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 509—2
 
 SECTION 510  SEALING AND PATCHING CONCRETE
 WITH EPOXY RESIN
 510.01 DESCRIPTION. Seal concrete surfaces, except JPC pavement, with an epoxy
 resin seal, and patch concrete surfaces, except JPC pavement, with an epoxy resin mortar
 patch. Fill low areas with the patch material.
 510.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 510.02.01 Epoxy Resin. Conform to Section 826.
 510.02.02 Mortar Sand. Conform to Section 804.
 510.02.03 Sand for Epoxy Seal Coats. Conform to Section 804.
 510.02.04 Sandblasters. Provide sandblasters that are equipped with traps to
 prevent water or oil from being deposited on the surface.
 510.02.05 Drills. Provide rotary, electric, 1/2-inch drills with a paddle or other
 mixing devices approved by the Engineer.
 510.03 CONSTRUCTION. Allow new concrete to cure at least 14 calendar days
 before applying any epoxy sealant or epoxy mortar patch. Do not apply to JPC pavement.
 Seal and patch JPC pavement as specified in the Contract. Ensure that the surface
 temperature of concrete surfaces to be sealed or patched is at least 60 °F. In cool weather,
 provide artificial heat using space heaters or infrared heaters. When providing artificial
 heat, maintain a surface temperature between 60 and 90 °F until the epoxy seal or epoxy
 mortar patch has cured.
 510.03.01 Preparation of Concrete Surface for Sealing or Patching. Prepare
 concrete surfaces to be epoxy sealed or epoxy mortar patched by removing all laitance,
 deteriorated concrete, and deposits of oil, grease, and other adherent foreign materials.
 Remove oil, grease, and other adherent foreign materials using solvents, heavy detergents,
 or mechanical means such as scraping. Then, prepare the surfaces by grinding,
 sandblasting, retexturing, or chipping to remove all laitance and unsound concrete.
 Immediately before applying the epoxy seal or epoxy mortar patch, remove all dust, grit,
 and debris from the surface.
 510.03.02 Mixing Epoxy Resin. Thoroughly stir the contents of the separate
 packages containing component A and component B before combining the 2 components.
 Do not use the same mixer or paddle to mix component A as is used to mix component B.
 Combine the 2 components in a clean metal or polyethylene vessel. Combine the
 components in the proportions and mix them according to the manufacturer’s
 recommendations. Only mix the material in quantities that can be used within the pot life
 of the mixture.
 510.03.03 Mixing Epoxy Mortar for Patching. Establish the proportions of epoxy
 resin and mortar sand for the epoxy mortar mixture according to the manufacturer’s
 instructions. Mix the epoxy mortar with a drill equipped for mixing. Gradually add
 mortar sand to the epoxy resin, and continue mixing the materials to obtain a uniform
 mixture.
 510.03.04 Application of Epoxy Mortar for Patching. Prime areas to be patched
 immediately before placing the epoxy mortar. Thoroughly brush or scrub the epoxy resin
 for the prime onto the prepared surface to be patched. Then place the epoxy mortar over
 the primed area. Tamp, rod, and consolidate the epoxy mortar into place to exclude
 internal voids within the mortar mixture. Level or finish the mortar surface to the
 
 510—1
 
 specified surface. Finish or treat the surface to conform to the surface texture of the
 concrete surrounding the patched area.
 After the patch has cured, broom, vacuum, or blow away all loose material from the
 area, and remove it from the pavement or deck. Do not allow traffic on the patched areas
 until the resinous material has hardened for the amount of time specified in the
 manufacturer’s specifications.
 510.03.05 Epoxy Seal Coat. Place the epoxy seal coat and the sand for the epoxy
 seal coat according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
 510.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will not measure concrete sealing or
 patching for payment and will consider them incidental to the bid item being patched or
 sealed.
 510.05 PAYMENT. The Department will not make payment for concrete sealing or
 patching.
 
 510—2
 
 SECTION 511  GROUTING AND EPOXY BOND COAT
 511.01 DESCRIPTION. Install steel dowel bars or deformed reinforcement steel bars
 into existing concrete using grout that provides a bond between the steel and concrete, and
 bond plastic concrete to hardened concrete using an epoxy bond coat.
 511.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 511.02.01 Epoxy Resin. Conform to Section 826.
 511.02.02 Cement. Conform to Section 801.
 511.02.03 Water. Conform to Section 803.
 511.02.04 Mortar Sand. Conform to Section 804.
 511.02.05 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 511.02.06 Dowel Bars. Conform to Section 811.
 511.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 511.03.01 Grouting. Drill holes of the size recommended by the manufacturer for
 the insertion of bars using masonry bits to the depth specified in the Contract or the
 manufacturer’s specifications and to the tolerances in Appendix A, Tabulation of
 Construction Tolerances. Keep holes clean and dry at all times. Blow holes clean before
 grouting. Use bars that are free of rust, mill scale, oil, grease, and other foreign
 substances. Grout with epoxy grout, expanding grout, or other grout on the Department’s
 List of Approved Materials. For epoxy grout, mix the epoxy resin according to
 Subsection 510.03.02. For expanding grout, mix it according to the manufacturer’s
 instructions. Pour or force the grout into the drilled holes, and apply a coating of at least
 0.02 inch of grout to the portions of the bars being inserted into the holes. Slowly insert
 the coated bars into the full depth of the holes with a twisting motion.
 After insertion, look for a light overflow of grout, which indicates complete filling of
 the drill holes. When this overflow does not occur, immediately remove the bars, place
 additional grout in the holes, and reinsert the bars. Wipe away all excess grout. After
 placement and during the hardening of the grout, do not disturb the bars.
 511.03.02 Epoxy Bond Coat. Mix the epoxy resin according to Subsection
 510.03.02. Mix and apply the epoxy bond coat mixture according to the manufacturer’s
 instructions. Apply the epoxy bond coat only to clean, dry, structurally sound concrete
 surfaces. Clean surfaces as specified in the Plans or as directed by the Engineer before
 applying the epoxy mixture.
 511.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will not measure grouting or epoxy bond
 coat for payment and will consider them incidental to the bid item being grouted or epoxy
 bond coated.
 511.05 PAYMENT. The Department will not make payment for grouting or epoxy
 bond coat.
 
 511—1
 
 SECTION 512  HOOK BOLTS WITH EXPANSION
 ANCHORS
 512.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and install epoxy coated hook bolts with expansion
 anchors for use in JPC pavement widening or concrete culvert extensions.
 512.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 512.02.01 Hook Bolts with Expansion Anchors. Conform to Section 811. In
 addition, ensure that the installed bolts, when tested just before placement of the adjoining
 concrete, can resist a pull-out load of 9,000 pounds.
 512.02.02 Epoxy Coating Material. Conform to Section 811.
 512.03 CONSTRUCTION. Epoxy coat and install hook bolts according to the
 installation requirements for epoxy coated steel reinforcement bars in Subsection 602.03
 and the Standard Drawings. Install hook bolts with expansion anchors at the location
 specified in the Plans or directed by the Engineer according to the manufacturer’s
 instructions.
 512.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 512.04.01 Hook Bolts with Expansion Anchors. The Department will measure the
 quantity by each individual unit. The Department will not measure epoxy coating for
 payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 512.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02587
 
 Pay Item
 Hook Bolt with Expansion Anchor
 
 Pay Unit
 Each
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 512—1
 
 DIVISION 600
 STRUCTURES AND
 CONCRETE
 
 SECTION 601  CONCRETE
 601.01 DESCRIPTION. Use concrete consisting of a mixture of cement, fine
 aggregate, coarse aggregate, and water, with admixtures as specified, combined in the
 proportions and mixed to the consistency specified, when forming or casting to
 dimensions specified in the Plans or as the Engineer directs. Provide the materials,
 material proportions, equipment, and construction methods necessary to ensure that the
 concrete produced conforms to the Contract. Structural concrete is concrete for structures
 such as bridges, culverts, and retaining walls and other items detailed as structures in
 contract documents. Non-structural concrete is all other concrete.
 601.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 601.02.01 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 601.02.02 Cement. Conform to Section 801. Use Type I cement. The Department
 will allow the use of Type IA, Type IP, Type IPA, Type IS, Type I(SM), Type II, Type
 IIA, and Type III when the Engineer approves. The Engineer will condition his approval
 upon satisfactory means of storage and handling to ensure the ready identification of these
 cements when used in portions of the work. If unsatisfactory test results are obtained
 using Types IA, IP, IPA, IS, I(SM), II, IIA, or III cement, complete the work using Type I
 cement. Do not intermix cement types in any structural unit except when finishing with
 Type I.
 601.02.03 Admixtures. Conform to Section 802. Use air-entraining and water
 reducing admixtures in all classes of concrete. Water reducing admixtures are not
 required when slip forming is used for concrete placement. Use other admixtures when
 the Engineer directs or approves.
 601.02.04 Water. Conform to Section 803.
 601.02.05 Fine Aggregate. Conform to Section 804.
 601.02.06 Coarse Aggregate. Conform to Section 805.
 601.02.07 Joint Materials. Conform to Section 807.
 601.02.08 Structural Steel. Conform to Section 812.
 601.02.09 Miscellaneous Metals. Conform to Section 813.
 601.02.10 Concrete Curing Materials. Conform to Section 823.
 601.02.11 Masonry Coating. Conform to Section 828.
 601.02.12 Mineral Admixtures. Conform to Section 844.
 601.02.13 Forms. Provide forms that are mortar tight, true to the dimensions, lines,
 and grades of the structure, and of sufficient strength to prevent appreciable deflection
 during placing concrete.
 A) Form Panels. Form panels are continuous sections of form facing material
 unbroken by joint marks, against which concrete is placed. For exposed
 surfaces, use form panels of plywood conforming to U.S. Product Standard PS-1
 for Exterior B-B (Concrete Form) Class I plywood or any material other than
 plywood that will produce an equivalent smooth uniform concrete surface.
 B) Plywood Forms. Ensure that plywood forms are at least 3/4 inch thick.
 
 601—1
 
 C) Plastic Forms. Conform to the manufacturer’s specifications.
 D) Plastic Lined Forms. Conform to the manufacturer’s specifications.
 E) Metal Forms. Use metal forms of such thickness that the forms will remain true
 to shape. Do not use metal forms that do not present a smooth surface or line up
 properly.
 F) Stay-In-Place Metal Forms. Conform to the following requirements:
 1)
 
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 
 Forms and Supports. Fabricate permanent steel bridge deck forms and
 supports from steel conforming to ASTM A 653, Grades A through E, and
 having a zinc coating class of G 165 according to ASTM A 924. Use forms
 having a minimum thickness of 22 gage.
 Fastener Hardware. For miscellaneous fastener hardware (bolts, nuts, metal
 screws, and washers), provide common stock hardware items with a zinc
 coating equal to or better than that required by ASTM A 153.
 Coarse Aggregate. Conform to the requirements of Section 805.04.01 for
 all coarse aggregate used in concrete for bridge decks and barrier walls
 when using permanent steel bridge deck forms.
 Precast Beam Hardware. Provide all deck and overhang support hardware
 that is cast into precast beam tops with a zinc or epoxy coating of a
 commercial quality grade.
 Anchor Legs. To anchor angle weld tabs, use straight anchor legs
 containing a hole having a 1 1/8-inch minimum diameter. If necessary,
 incline the anchor leg to vertical.
 Tack Welding. Certified welders are not required for installation of stay-inplace metal forms.
 
 G) Plank Forms. Use plank forms having a minimum nominal thickness of 1 1/2
 inches.
 H) Form Oil. Provide a commercial quality form oil or other equivalent coating
 that allows ready release of the forms and does not discolor the concrete or is
 detrimental to masonry coating.
 I) Chamfer Strips. Only use chamfer strips that are no less than 3/4 by 3/4 inch.
 601.02.14 Scales. For weighing water, aggregates, cement, and mineral admixtures,
 provide either beam, springless dial, or electronic load cell type scales, designed as an
 integral unit of the batching plant. When checked under static loads, maintain the
 accuracy of the scales to within 0.5 percent of the net load on the scales. The net load on
 the scales is the total weight of the actual test weights used in the accuracy determination.
 Use enough actual test weights to at least equal the weight necessary to check the cement
 scales to the net load required for a normal size batch. The Department will allow the use
 of aggregates in combination with test weights to obtain the accuracy determination of
 aggregate scales in the higher ranges.
 Provide dial scales having a minimum of 1,000 graduations with a clear interval
 between graduation marks of 0.03 inch or more.
 Provide beam scales having a graduation interval not greater than 0.1 percent of the
 scale capacity with a clear interval of 0.03 inch or more.
 Provide scales that are sensitive enough to discern movement due to the addition to
 the scales of a weight equal to 0.1 percent of the scale capacity under load when the scales
 are not connected for automatic operation, or equal to 0.2 percent when the scales are
 connected for automatic operation.
 Equip each beam scale with an auxiliary dial or “telltale” that will indicate to the
 operator that the required load in the hopper is being approached. The device shall show a
 minimum of 4 percent of the net rated capacity of the largest beam for underweight and
 3 percent for overweight. Ensure that the indicator registers any movement of the beam.
 Provide dial scales with suitable markers capable of being set to indicate the correct
 position of the dial indicator for predetermined loads. Enclose the dial in a glass-faced
 case for protection against dust.
 
 601—2
 
 Ensure that all weighing and indicating devices are in full view of and readable by the
 operator while charging the hopper, and provide the operator with convenient access to all
 controls.
 Have all scales inspected and certified before use and whenever the Engineer may
 deem necessary to confirm the accuracy of the scales. Ensure that an inspection of the
 scales has been made within the preceding 6 months at any time a plant is supplying
 concrete to a Department construction project. Have a representative of a commercial
 scales company certified by the Division of Weights and Measures inspect and certify the
 scales. After the inspection and certification, only make adjustments or changes in the
 weighing mechanism at the direction of the Engineer. Keep all exposed fulcrums,
 clevises, and similar working parts of the scales clean at all times.
 Furnish all weights and other equipment necessary for testing and calibrating the
 scales.
 601.02.15 Batching Plant Equipment. Ensure that the plant conforms to all safety,
 health, and sanitation requirements specified in Subsection 107.01.01. Supply the
 batching plant with bins, weighing hoppers, and scales for the fine aggregate, each size of
 coarse aggregate, bulk cement, and mineral admixtures. The Department will allow
 weighing of cementitious material cumulatively. For the bulk cement, provide scales
 separate and distinct from those used for aggregate. Install and maintain the batching
 plant in a manner to provide accurate operations at all times. Only use weatherproof
 equipment for unloading cement, and protect the storage, weighing, and batching
 equipment for cement from the weather at all times.
 Provide bins with separate compartments of sufficient capacity for each size of fine
 and coarse aggregate, and for bulk cement. Design each compartment to discharge
 efficiently and freely into the weighing hopper.
 Provide a means of control so that when the quantity desired is being approached, the
 material may be added slowly and shut off with precision.
 Use freely suspended weighing hoppers that do not affect the free movement of the
 weighing mechanism. Enclose the cement weigh hopper to prevent the loss of cement
 during weighing, and provide it with an approved device to transfer the cement to the
 batch trucks or the mixer. Construct all hoppers to eliminate leakage and the
 accumulation of tare materials, and to discharge completely. Provide any hopper that does
 not discharge satisfactorily with a vibrator having the frequency and power necessary to
 affect complete discharge.
 601.02.16 Mixers.
 A) Batch Mixer. Furnish a batch mixer of an approved size and type specified to
 positively ensure uniform distribution of materials throughout the mass, and to
 ensure discharge of the entire batch without segregation. Do not use any mixers
 having a rated capacity of less than one bag batch. Equip the mixer with
 adequate water storage and a device for accurately measuring and automatically
 controlling water discharge into each batch. Provide a mechanical device to
 control time of mixing for each batch and to automatically prevent discharge of
 the mixture until materials have been mixed for the specified time. Equip the
 mixer with a mechanical means for preventing addition of aggregates after
 mixing has started.
 B) Continuous Mixer. Furnish a continuous mixer of an approved size and type
 specified to ensure uniform distribution of materials throughout the mass and to
 ensure discharge of the entire batch without segregation. Equip continuous type
 mixers to fix the proportions of admixture, cement, and fine and coarse
 aggregates by calibration according to KM 64-312. Provide devices to indicate
 the proportions of all components being incorporated into the mixture. Equip the
 water supply portion of the mixer with a readily accessible cumulative type
 meter which can be read to the nearest 0.1 gallon. Ensure that the meter is of
 sufficient size to allow for easy reading. Calibrate the continuous type mixer to
 
 601—3
 
 the satisfaction of the Engineer before starting work. Recalibrate the mixer
 thereafter at least once during each 50 cubic yards of production when yield
 checks indicate recalibration is necessary, and at any other times the Engineer
 deems necessary.
 C) Truck Mixer. Furnish a truck mixer of an approved revolving drum or
 revolving blade type, constructed to produce a thoroughly mixed concrete mass
 with a uniform distribution of materials throughout. Keep the interior of the
 mixer drums free from hardened concrete.
 Equip the truck mixer with a discharge mechanism which will ensure
 discharging of the mixed concrete without segregation. When the Engineer
 deems it necessary, provide baffle plates in the chute to avoid segregation in the
 concrete placed in the work. Make satisfactory repairs to any truck mixers that
 will not discharge concrete within the specified slump and air content ranges
 before using them.
 Attach to each truck mixer a metal plate stating the manufacturer’s
 capacities in terms of volume of mixed concrete for the various uses the
 equipment is applicable and the manufacturer’s recommended speeds of rotation
 for mixing and agitation. For the mixer drum, apply the rates of rotation used for
 mixing and agitation as designated on the metal plate by the manufacturer of the
 equipment.
 Do not allow the mixer drum to lose any water or concrete during charging,
 mixing, and agitation, or during transportation.
 Equip the truck mixer with an automatic revolution counter that allows
 reading of the count at the plant and at the destination. Do not use trucks
 equipped with defective revolution counters. Keep the interior of the mixer
 drums free from hardened concrete. Equip tanks containing mixing water on all
 trucks with a device for accurately determining the quantity of water added at the
 job site.
 Conduct annual tests to evaluate capability of the truck mixer to produce a
 uniform mixture according to KM 64-311. The Department will perform
 random checks of the tests.
 D) Central Mixer.
 1)
 2)
 
 Drum Type Mixer. Equip each drum type mixer with a batch counter and
 an approved timing device that automatically locks the discharge
 mechanism during the mixing period.
 Pan Type Mixer. Equip each pan type mixer with a batch counter and an
 approved timing device that automatically locks the discharge mechanism
 during the mixing period.
 
 601.02.17 Concrete Transfer Equipment. To transfer concrete from truck mixers
 or agitators, only use equipment of adequate design and dimension to deposit concrete of
 the specified slump at the point of placement.
 601.02.18 Vibrators. Use a type and design approved by the Engineer that is
 capable of transmitting vibration to the concrete at frequencies to adequately consolidate
 the concrete and, when applicable, not damage the epoxy coating on reinforcing steel.
 601.02.19 Tremies. Use tremies consisting of a tube having a diameter of 10 inches
 or more, constructed in sections having flanged couplings fitted with water tight gaskets.
 601.02.20 Wire Brooms. Use Department approved wire brooms.
 601.02.21 Slip Form Machine (Extrusion Machine). Use a self-propelled slip
 form machine designed to consolidate and finish the concrete in one pass without
 damaging or displacing any steel reinforcement, and that finishes the concrete to a smooth,
 
 601—4
 
 uniformly textured surface conforming to the required cross section with a minimum of
 hand finishing.
 601.02.22 Curing Compound Sprayer. To apply the membrane forming curing
 compound, use a sprayer consisting of a container having a capacity of no less than 5
 gallons in which a consistent pressure can be maintained by mechanical means or by a
 suitable pumping arrangement in order to maintain a consistent pressure at the spray
 nozzle or nozzles, and to uniformly apply the membrane forming curing compound at the
 specified rate. Use nozzles designed to deliver a uniform, fine spray and that allow for
 easy cleaning. Provide a shield or apron to protect the spray from wind. Provide means
 for cleaning the nozzles as part of the spraying equipment.
 601.03 CONSTRUCTION. Conduct a prepour meeting whenever the work will
 involve placing bridge slab concrete, concrete pumping, or trial batches. The Engineer
 will facilitate the meeting to discuss items such as timing of truck delivery, target air
 content and slump of delivered concrete, minimizing air content and slump loss through
 the pump, sampling location and procedures, and other items as appropriate. Attendance
 is required by the Contractor, concrete supplier, pump contractor (when pumping is
 involved), and jobsite inspector.
 When the plans call for the bridge deck to be placed in phases and a change in
 sequence is desired, submit a request in writing to the Engineer. Include in the request the
 proposed sequence, supply rate of concrete delivery, retarder schedule, means of delivery
 (bucket/pump), and any other details which the Engineer may request. The Department
 will have the designer evaluate the requested change and determine feasibility. Make no
 changes without the Engineer’s approval.
 601.03.01 Care, Storage, and Handling of Aggregates, Cement, and Mineral
 Admixtures. Furnish, stock, and handle the fine and coarse aggregates at the job site or at
 the plant site to maintain uniformity of grading and free moisture contents at the time of
 batching. The Engineer may direct saturation to continue if necessary. Obtain the
 Engineer’s permission prior to using materials stockpiled at areas remote from the plant
 site. The Engineer may revoke permission to use materials remote from the plant site any
 time it is apparent there is not uniformity of grading and free moisture content.
 When storing in stockpiles, place each size aggregate in separate stockpiles
 sufficiently removed from each other to prevent the intermixing of material at edges of
 piles. Do not use materials which have become mixed with foreign matter, or fine and
 coarse aggregates which have become mixed with each other. Build stockpiles in layers
 not exceeding 3 feet in height. Complete each layer before beginning the next layer.
 Handle aggregates in a manner that ensures the uniformity of the moisture content for each
 pour. Do not batch directly from washing plants. When handling by hydraulic methods or
 when washing is involved, stockpile or use bins to drain all aggregates at least 12 hours
 before batching. Do not remove aggregates from stockpiles within one foot of the ground
 line until final cleanup of the work.
 Protect stored cement from dampness at all times. For cement storage, use
 weatherproof buildings that have ample space for storing separate shipments readily
 identified and accessible for sampling. Remove the cement from storage in the order
 received, as practical, to avoid long storage periods.
 Handle cement in a manner to prevent loss, wetting, or contamination.
 When using bulk cement, maintain a clean and clear cement feed to the cement
 batching bin to maintain the correct batch weight at all times. Furnish to the Engineer
 daily records of the cement shipments to the job batch plant. The Engineer may not
 require daily records of cement shipments when using commercial concrete plants.
 Do not allow the temperature of the cement at the time of its incorporation into the
 mixture to exceed 170 °F.
 Store and handle fly ash and GGBF slag as specified for cement. Provide means,
 such as double wall separation, to prevent the intermixing of cement with fly ash or GGBF
 slag.
 
 601—5
 
 601.03.02 Concrete Producer Responsibilities.
 Obtain the concrete from
 producers that are in compliance with KM 64-323 and on the Department’s List of
 Approved Materials. If a concrete plant becomes unqualified during a project and there
 are no other qualified plants in the region, the Department will provide qualified personnel
 to witness and ensure the producer follows the required specifications. The Department
 will assess the Contractor a $100 per hour charge for this service.
 Regardless of quantity, ensure that the all concrete producers comply with the
 following requirements:
 A) General. Design concrete mixtures, and perform quality control and process
 control testing as needed.
 B) Certified Personnel. Employ concrete technicians responsible for the design of
 the concrete mixtures and for performing quality control and process control
 testing as necessary. Ensure that the concrete technicians are certified as ACI
 Level I (Level I) and KRMCA Level II (Level II).
 C) Quality Control. Take full responsibility for the batch weight calculations and
 quality control of concrete mixtures at the plant. Ensure that the Level II
 concrete technician is present when work is in progress and is responsible for
 inspecting trucks, batch weight calculations, monitoring batching, making
 mixture adjustments, reviewing the slump, air content, unit weight, temperature,
 and aggregate tests, all to provide conforming concrete to the project. A Level I
 concrete technician is responsible for testing production material for slump,
 entrained air, unit weight and temperature of the mixture. Ensure the technician
 performs all sampling and testing according to the appropriate Kentucky
 Methods.
 Ensure that Level II concrete technicians cooperate with the Engineer in
 making minor adjustments to the mixture proportions within the limits of the
 specifications that may be desirable due to conditions at the job site.
 D) Producer Testing. When producing for state work, have a Qualified Concrete
 Aggregate Technician or KYTC Qualified Aggregate Technician perform, at a
 minimum, weekly gradations and minus 200 wash tests and daily moisture
 contents of coarse and fine aggregate (Fine aggregates will not require a minus
 200 wash test). Using the daily moisture contents, adjust the approved mix
 design accordingly prior to production. Ensure that the Level II concrete
 technician is present when work is in progress and is responsible for inspecting
 trucks, batch weight calculations, monitoring batching, making mixture
 adjustments, reviewing the slump, air content, unit weight, temperature, and
 aggregate tests, all to provide conforming concrete to the project.
 E) Trip Tickets. Furnish a trip ticket form TC 63-9 or equivalent for each load of
 concrete. Include on the trip ticket the Sample ID for the approved mix design
 and a statement certifying that the data on the ticket is correct and that the
 mixture conforms to the mix design. The Inspector will insert the required job
 site information in the spaces provided. Ensure that the plant manager or a Level
 II concrete technician signs the ticket.
 F) Records. Retain all concrete technician records, test results and batch tickets
 pertaining to concrete produced for a Department project for at least 3 years after
 formal acceptance of the project. Make all records available to the Engineer and
 the Contractor on the project for review upon request.
 G) Mix Designs. Design the mixture for each class of concrete specified.
 Determine the proportions of materials to be used on an absolute volume basis.
 Establish quantities to yield as nearly practical, the design volume. Before
 producing any concrete for the project, submit a proposed mixture design to the
 Engineer and obtain the District Materials Engineer’s or the Central Office
 Material’s approval. Submit the mix design electronically using the Concrete
 
 601—6
 
 Mix Design Spreadsheet located on the Division of Materials Website.
 Spreadsheets require the minimum system requirements: Microsoft Office 2003
 Professional (full installation).
 Consider any load of concrete delivered to the job site that fails to conform
 to specification requirements to be subject to rejection. The Engineer may allow
 the addition of water and admixtures at the job site. When the Engineer allows
 the addition of water or admixtures at the job site, take responsibility for the
 quantity to be added. Water may only be added to the load as a onetime addition
 prior to depositing any concrete into the structure or pavement. Do not allow the
 total water/cement ratio to exceed that listed in the Ingredient Proportions and
 Requirements for Various Classes of Concrete table. The Engineer may test
 remixed loads having additional water added to the mix at the job site. The
 Engineer will retest all loads when air entrainment admixtures are added at the
 jobsite. All acceptance testing will be performed after all permitted additions
 have been added and remixed.
 1)
 
 New Mixture Designs. Base the proposed mix design on standard
 Department methods unless the District Materials Engineer or Central
 Office Materials approves otherwise. Include the following with the
 submitted design:
 a)
 b)
 
 c)
 d)
 e)
 f)
 g)
 
 2)
 
 The class of concrete and 28-day compressive strength.
 The source, specific gravity, percentage, and quantity of fine and coarse
 aggregate. The District Materials Engineer or Central Office Materials
 will provide an average value of the specific gravity and aggregate
 absorption.
 The cement producer, type, and pounds of cement per cubic yard.
 The mineral admixture supplier, type, class, percentage of cement
 reduction and replacement ratio, and total pounds per cubic yard.
 The source of water, predicted amount of total water per cubic yard,
 and the maximum allowable water per cubic yard.
 The brands and predicted dosages of admixtures per cubic yard.
 If the concrete mixture is a class that the producer has not previously
 furnished to a Department project, have the producer provide trial
 batches of at least 4 cubic yards to demonstrate that the mixture will
 conform to the requirements for slump, air content, water/cement ratio,
 and compressive strength. Have the producer make the trial batches
 using the ingredients, proportions, and equipment (including batching,
 mixing and delivery time) to be used on this project. Have the
 producer make at least 2 consecutive trial batches conforming to all
 specified requirements. Central Office Materials will observe all
 phases of the trial batches. Have the producer submit a report
 containing mix proportions and test results for slump, air content,
 water/cement ratio, unit weight, and compressive strength for each trial
 batch to the Engineer for Central Office Materials review and approval.
 
 Approval. The District Materials Engineer or Central Office Materials will
 base approval of the mixture design on the following criteria:
 a)
 b)
 c)
 
 Provide concrete cylinders molded at the project site to verify that the
 specified compressive strength will be attained.
 The quantities of components given for a one cubic yard batch will, on
 the basis of absolute volumes, produce one cubic yard of concrete mix.
 Include the volume occupied by entrained air.
 The cement factor is at least the minimum specified in the Ingredient
 Proportions and Requirements for Various Classes of Concrete table in
 Subsection 601.03.03.
 
 601—7
 
 d)
 e)
 f)
 
 3)
 
 The water/cement ratio does not exceed the maximum specified in the
 Ingredient Proportions and Requirements for Various Classes of
 Concrete table in Subsection 601.03.03.
 The aggregate sources, the cement supplier, the mineral admixture
 supplier or producer, and the admixture brands are on the Department’s
 List of Approved Materials.
 The trial batches, when required, produce acceptable results. The
 Engineer or District Materials Engineer may request trial batches at any
 time before or during a project.
 
 Changes in Approved Mixture Designs. Do not change the source of supply
 of the mixture ingredients without the District Materials Engineer’s or
 Central Office Materials written permission. If it is necessary to change the
 source of aggregates, submit a new design reflecting the new source of
 aggregate to the Engineer. Upon the District Materials Engineer’s or
 Central Office Materials written approval, the Department will allow the use
 of aggregate from the new source.
 
 601.03.03 Proportioning and Requirements.
 A) Concrete.
 INGREDIENT PROPORTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR VARIOUS
 CLASSES OF CONCRETE
 Class of
 Concrete
 
 A(5)
 A Mod
 AA(2)
 AAA(8)
 B
 D(3)
 D Mod(3)
 M1(8)
 w/ Type 1
 Cement
 M2(8)
 w/ Type III
 Cement
 P(5)
 (1)
 
 (2)
 
 Approximate
 Percent Fine
 to Total
 Aggregate
 
 Maximum
 28-Day
 Slump (4)
 Free Water Compressive
 Strength (1)
 by W/C
 Ratio
 (lb/lb)
 (psi)
 (inches)
 
 Minimum
 Air
 Cement Content
 Factor
 (lb/yd3)
 
 (%)
 
 Gravel
 
 Stone
 
 36
 36
 36
 36
 40
 35
 35
 36
 
 40
 40
 40
 40
 44
 39
 39
 40
 
 0.49
 0.47
 0.42
 0.40
 0.66
 0.44
 0.42
 0.33
 
 3,500
 3,500
 4,000
 5,500
 2,500
 4,000
 5,000
 4,000(9)
 
 2-4(7)
 4-7
 2-4(12)
 3-7
 3-5
 3-5(6)
 3-5(6)
 7 max.
 
 564
 658
 620
 686
 451
 639
 733
 800
 
 6±2
 6±2
 6 ± 2 (11)
 6 ± 2 (11)
 6±2
 6±2
 6±2
 6±2
 
 36
 
 40
 
 0.38
 
 4,000(9)
 
 7 max.
 
 705
 
 6±2
 
 35
 
 38
 
 0.49
 
 3,500
 
 ---(13)
 
 564(10)
 
 6 ± 2 (11)
 
 The Department may direct non-payment, additional construction, or removal and
 replacement for concrete for which test cylinders indicate low compressive strength
 and follow-up investigations indicate inadequate strength. The Department may
 require some classes to attain the required compressive strength in less than 28 days.
 When the ambient air temperature while placing slab concrete is 71°F or more, add
 to the concrete a water-reducing and retarding admixture. The Engineer may require
 or allow, water-reducing and retarding admixture in slab concrete for ambient air
 temperatures of less than 71°F. Only use one type of admixture for concrete placed
 
 601—8
 
 (3)
 
 (4)
 (5)
 
 (6)
 
 (7)
 
 (8)
 (9)
 (10)
 (11)
 (12)
 
 (13)
 
 during any individual contiguous pour.
 The Department will require a compressive strength of 5,000 psi, or greater when
 specified in the Contract, at or before 28 days for prestressed members.
 The Engineer will allow slumps less than the minimum provided concrete is workable.
 The Department will allow the use of JPC pavement mixture for non-structural
 construction.
 At the option of the prestressed product fabricator, the Department will allow the
 slump of Class D or Class D Modified concrete to be increased to a maximum of 8
 inches for all items, except products with voids. For products with voids, the slump
 may be increased to 7 inches. Provide a high range water reducer (Type F or G) in
 an amount not to exceed the following water/cement ratios:
 Summer mix designs - 0.39
 Spring & Fall mix designs - 0.37
 Winter mix designs - 0.34
 The precast fabricator may increase the slump of Class A concrete to a maximum of 7
 inches provided the fabricator uses a high range water reducer (Type F or G) and
 maximum water/cement ratio of 0.46.
 Use a high range water reducer (Type F or G)
 The Department will require 3,000 psi compressive strength before opening to traffic
 and 4,000 psi at 28 days.
 611 lb/yd3 when using coarse aggregate sizes No. 8, 78, or 9-M.
 7 ± 2% when using coarse aggregate sizes No. 8, 78, or 9-M.
 The Department may allow the slump of AA concrete to be increased up to a 6-inch
 maximum, provided the w/c ratio does not exceed 0.40 and a high range water
 reducer (Type F or G) is used. Trial Batches will be required if producer has not
 previously supplied.
 The Department does not have slump requirements for class P concrete mixes except
 for the edge slump requirements of Section 501.03.19.
 B) Mortar, Grout, Flowable Fill, and Self-Consolidating Concrete. When
 required, ensure that the air content of mortar or grout is 8 percent ± 2 percent by
 volume. Do not allow the quantity of fly ash in mortar or grout to exceed 20
 percent of the cement quantity.
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 Mortar. Proportion mortar mix with one part cement or cement with fly ash
 to 2 parts mortar sand, by volume. Add water in an amount not to exceed a
 water/cement ratio of 0.48.
 Grout. Proportion grout with water and one part cement or cement with fly
 ash to 2 parts mortar sand, by volume. Adjust the water to produce a
 mixture of a consistency suitable for job conditions.
 Non-Shrink Grout. Use the non-shrink grout on the Department’s List of
 Approved Materials. Use an approved non-shrink, non-staining grout
 consisting of either a mixture of hydraulic cement, water, fine aggregate,
 and an approved non-ferrous expansive admixture, or a packaged
 commercial product. To be placed on the Department’s List of Approved
 Materials, non-shrink, non-staining grout, must conform to the following
 requirements:
 a)
 b)
 
 c)
 
 Use an initial set time of at least 45 minutes when tested according to
 ASTM C 191 or ASTM C 403. The Department will allow the use of a
 set-retarding admixture compatible with the expansive admixture.
 Ensure that the grout exhibits expansion of no less than 0.02 percent
 and no more than 1.50 percent upon setting, when tested according to
 ASTM C 1090 with the exception that the glass plate shall remain in
 place during the test period.
 Use grout that has a minimum 7 day compressive strength of 4,500 psi
 when tested using applicable portions of ASTM C 109.
 
 601—9
 
 d)
 e)
 
 f)
 g)
 
 h)
 i)
 j)
 
 4)
 5)
 
 Use grout that has a minimum durability factor of 85 percent and a
 maximum expansion of 0.06 percent when tested according to KM 64626.
 Keep the water content of the grout as low as possible for proper
 grouting and do not exceed a water/cement ratio of 0.44. Do not
 exceed the manufacturer’s recommendations for water added to
 commercial products.
 Ensure that the grout does not contain chlorides or nitrates.
 Cure grout mixtures by covering with 2 layers of wet burlap or other
 approved covering so as to keep the grout continuously moist for at
 least 3 calendar days, except cure commercial mixtures as
 recommended by the manufacturer.
 Ensure that commercial products are non-ferrous and approximately
 match the color of hardened concrete.
 When preparing non-commercial grout mixture, submit a proposed mix
 design and a sample of the expansive admixture to the Engineer for
 testing and approval before use.
 When using packaged commercial grout, provide certified test results
 from the manufacturer showing the material conforms to Subsection
 601.02. When the Engineer requests, provide samples of the grout
 mixture for testing and approval.
 
 Latex Grout. Use latex and cement mixture of a paste consistency.
 Flowable Fill. Use flowable fill consisting of a mixture of cement, sand, fly
 ash, water, and other materials the Engineer approves. Contrary to
 Section 844, do not allow the loss on ignition for Class F fly ash to exceed
 12 percent. Ensure that the concrete producer certifies mix proportions for
 flowable fill as follows:
 a)
 
 Flowable Fill for Pipe Backfill. Proportion as follows, per cubic yard
 batch:
 Cement
 Fly Ash, Class F
 Natural Sand (S.S.D.)
 Water (Maximum)
 
 b)
 
 30 pounds
 300 pounds
 3,000 pounds
 550 pounds
 
 Flowable Fill for Bridge End Bent Backfill. Proportion as follows, per
 cubic yard batch:
 Cement
 Fly Ash, Class F or Class C
 Natural or Crushed Sand (S.S.D.)
 Water (Maximum)
 
 100 pounds
 300 pounds
 2,950 pounds
 550 pounds
 
 Alternate Mixtures for Flowable Fill. The Department may approve
 other mixtures. The mixtures may include other proportions of the above
 materials, Class C fly ash, chemical admixtures, or aggregate not
 conforming to the Standard Specifications. When deviating from the above
 specified proportions and materials, make and test a trial batch of at least 4
 cubic yards to ensure that the mix will have flow and density characteristics
 suited for the intended use. Use the ingredients, proportions, and equipment
 intended for the project, including batching, mixing, and delivery.
 The Department will observe all phases of the trial batching for
 approval. Ensure the proposed mixture is proportioned to obtain a
 minimum flow of 8 inches when tested with a 3 by 6 inch open ended
 cylinder modified flow test and meets applicable strength requirements.
 
 601—10
 
 Ensure additional requirements, as stated below, for time of bleeding and
 time to achieve firmness are met when appropriate for application. Submit
 the proposed mixture proportions and appropriate test results to the
 Engineer for review and approval. When the mixture is proprietary, comply
 with Subsection 107.05.
 The Department will cast, cure, and break test cylinders from the
 flowable fill trial batch according to ASTM D 4832. Prior to completion of
 the 28 day curing period, transport the test cylinders to the MCL for
 compressive strength testing. Obtain an average compressive strength of 50
 to 100 psi at 28 days for application as pipe backfill or minimum
 compressive strength of 250 psi at 28 days for application as bridge end bent
 backfill. For applications requiring early opening to traffic or placement of
 pavement as soon as possible, provide a mixture that conforms to the
 following general guidelines:
 1)
 2)
 
 6)
 
 Mixture bleeds freely within 10 minutes.
 Require the mixture to support a 150-pound person within 3 hours.
 
 The Engineer will approve flowable fill, delivered to the project, based
 on certifications indicating proper proportions for the intended use.
 Self Consolidating Concrete (SCC). Conform to KM 64-320 with
 application limited to precast plants.
 
 C) Mixtures Using Type IP, IS, and I(SM) Cement or Mineral Admixtures.
 The Engineer will not consider any Contract time extension requests for delays
 due to additional time necessary to attain specified strengths. Seasonal
 limitations on the use of Type IP cement and fly ash in bridge decks are specified
 in Subsection 601.03.09 D).
 1)
 
 2)
 
 Type IP, IS, I(SM), Cement. The Department will allow the use when
 substituted for Type I cement, pound for pound.
 To produce the necessary workability, strength properties, and expected
 durability of the concrete, the Department will allow adjustment of the
 proportioning, air entraining agent, and finishing requirements; and
 acceptance procedures. Obtain the Engineer’s approval for all such
 adjustments.
 Conform to all strength requirements for loading structures or removing
 falsework before applying loads or removing falsework. If strength
 requirements are not met, increase the minimum times specified in the
 Required Time in Calendar Days before Removing Forms and Falsework
 table in Subsection 601.03.14 and the Required Time in Calendar Days
 before Applying Significant Loads on Concrete Structures table in
 Subsection 601.03.15 by 33 percent.
 Ensure that the mixture contains the specified amount of entrained air.
 Mineral Admixtures. The use of fly ash, Ground Granulated Blast Furnace
 (GGBF) slag, or microsilica in concrete is the Contractor’s option.
 Reduction of the total cement content by a combination of mineral
 admixtures will be allowed, up to a maximum of 40 percent.
 When the ability to use GGBF slag or microsilica has not been
 demonstrated have the concrete producer provide trial batches in accordance
 with Subsection 601.03.02 G) 1). Have the producer make the trial batches
 using the ingredients, proportions, and equipment (including batching,
 mixing and delivery time) to be used on the project. Furnish all required
 materials and samples at no cost to the Department.
 a)
 
 Fly Ash. When added as a separate ingredient, the Department will
 allow the use of fly ash to reduce the quantity of cement, except do not
 
 601—11
 
 b)
 
 c)
 
 use fly ash to reduce the quantity of Type IP cement. The Department
 will allow the use of Class F fly ash to reduce the quantity of cement up
 to a maximum of 20 percent of the minimum cement content. For each
 1.0 pound of cement reduced, add at least 1.0 pound, but no more than
 1.25 pounds, of Class F fly ash.
 The Department will allow the use of Class C fly ash to reduce the
 quantity of cement up to a maximum of 30 percent of the minimum
 cement content. For each 1.0 pound of cement reduced, add 1.0 pound
 of Class C fly ash.
 Incorporate and uniformly distribute the fly ash into the mixture
 using methods and equipment that the Engineer approves. The
 Department will allow weighing of fly ash cumulatively in the same
 weigh hopper with the cement, but weigh the cement first.
 Conform to all strength requirements for loading structures or
 removing falsework before applying loads or removing falsework. If
 strength requirements are not met, increase the required times specified
 in the Required Time in Calendar Days Before Removing Forms and
 Falsework table in Subsection 601.03.14 and the Required Time in
 Calendar Days Before Applying Significant Loads on Concrete
 Structures table in Subsection 601.03.15 by 33 percent.
 To produce the necessary workability, strength properties, and
 expected durability of the concrete, the Department will allow
 adjustment of the proportioning, air entraining agent, finishing
 requirements, and acceptance procedures. Obtain the Engineer’s
 approval for all such adjustments.
 Calculate the maximum free water based on the total cementitious
 material including fly ash. Do not change any of the slump
 requirements.
 Ensure that the mixture contains the specified amount of entrained
 air.
 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag (GGBF Slag). When added as a
 separate ingredient, use Grade 120 GGBF or 100 GGBF slag to reduce
 the quantity of cement, except do not use GGBF slag to reduce the
 quantity of Type IS or I(SM) cement. The Department will allow the
 use of GGBF slag to reduce the quantity of cement up to a maximum of
 30 percent of the minimum cement content. For every 1.0 pound of
 cement reduced, add 1.0 pound of GGBF slag. The combined weight
 of the cement and GGBF slag will determine the minimum cement
 factor and water cement ratio. Due to the lower specific gravity of
 GGBF slag, the concrete volume will increase. Unless directed by the
 Engineer, adjust the increased volume by reducing an equal volume of
 the fine and coarse aggregate in the mixture.
 Use Type I cement unless otherwise specified. Use Type IA and
 Type II cement only if requested and approved in writing. When
 additional cements are approved, store and handle the cement so
 intermixing does not occur. Work done with each cement shall be
 readily identifiable. If test results are unsatisfactory, complete the work
 using Type I cement. Use only one brand of cement for each structure
 unless otherwise permitted by the Engineer.
 Weigh the cement first when weighing GGBF slag cumulatively in
 the same weigh hopper. Incorporate the GGBF slag into the mixture by
 methods and equipment that ensure uniform distribution throughout the
 mixture.
 Microsilica. When added as a separate ingredient, replace cement with
 microsilica as a percentage by weight specified elsewhere in the
 contract. When not specified elsewhere, replace 7 percent. The
 Department will allow the use of microsilica to reduce the quantity of
 
 601—12
 
 cement up to a maximum of 10 percent of the minimum cement
 content. The combined weight of the cement and microsilica will
 determine the minimum cement factor and water cement ratio.
 Use a high range water reducer conforming to ASTM C 494, Type
 F or Type G. Incorporate into the microsilica slurry or add at the time
 of batching for dry microsilica.
 Use Type I cement unless otherwise specified. Use Type IA, IS,
 I(SM) and Type II cement only if requested and approved in writing.
 When additional cement types are approved, store and handle the
 cement so intermixing does not occur. Work done with each cement
 shall be readily identifiable. If test results are unsatisfactory, complete
 the work using Type I cement. Use only one brand of cement for each
 structure unless otherwise permitted by the Engineer.
 Weigh the cement first when weighing microsilica in the dry or
 pellet form cumulatively in the same hopper. When the microsilica is
 in a slurry form, verify the dispenser or other means of measurement to
 the Engineer’s satisfaction. The percent of microsilica will be
 considered in the measurement determinations and in the proportioning
 calculations.
 When the microsilica admixture is in a slurry form, continuously
 recirculate by pumping. Begin recirculation at least four hours before
 batching and continue until batching operations cease.
 When using a truck mixer, limit the mixer charge to 3/4 of its rated
 capacity, unless the Engineer approves a larger size.
 D) Department Tests. The Department will test the work at the minimum
 frequencies indicated in the Manual of Field Sampling and Testing Practices or
 as necessary to determine the quality. The Department will perform the tests
 according to procedures outlined by the applicable Kentucky Method. The
 Department will cast and test compressive strength specimens according to KM
 64-305 and ASTM C 39, respectively. In cases of failures, the Department will
 evaluate cylinder results according to KM 64-314 to determine whether in-place
 investigation may be necessary.
 E) Measuring. Conform to the individual ingredient material batching tolerances
 in Appendix A.
 1)
 
 2)
 
 3)
 
 Cement. Measure cement by weight, considering one bag equal to 94
 pounds, or weigh it in bulk on scales. When the weight of an entire
 shipment of cement in bags varies more than 2 percent from 94 pounds per
 bag, weigh the cement in bulk on scales. Do not produce batches from
 fractional bags, unless the entire quantity of cement is batched by weight as
 required for handling bulk cement.
 Aggregates. Measure fine and coarse aggregates by weight, making
 corrections for moisture content. When the fine and coarse aggregates used
 contain more than the maximum free water stipulated in the Ingredient
 Proportions and Requirements for Various Classes of Concrete table in
 Subsection 601.03.03, increase the cement content according to the concrete
 proportioning requirements, and ensure that the maximum water/cement
 ratio is not exceeded.
 Water. Measure water either by weight or by volume. Use an approved
 visible measuring device for measuring water. Use only water meter
 systems and other approved volumetric systems that can accurately deliver
 into the mixer, to within ± 1.0 percent of the required amount of water per
 batch and are arranged to automatically stop flow of water when the
 required quantity has been delivered into the mixer. When the water
 measuring device fails to deliver the quantity of water discharged into the
 mixer within the limits specified, suspend operation of the mixer until
 
 601—13
 
 4)
 
 making repairs and proper adjustments. Assume water weighs 8.34 pounds
 per gallon.
 Each time the scales are checked, check, or obtain an approved scale
 company to check, water meter systems for accuracy in the presence of the
 Engineer. Ensure that all calculations are included in the scale company’s
 report.
 Withhold a portion of the water until the last part of the batching
 process to wash any cement that is sticking to the sides of the mixer into the
 mix.
 Measuring Admixtures. Introduce liquid admixtures into the concrete batch
 along with, or as part of, the mixing water. Keep air-entraining admixtures
 completely separate from all other admixtures until introduction into the
 batch. Maintain and equip dispensing equipment to ensure no chlorides are
 introduced into any Department mix.
 Use approved dispensing equipment with a meter, gauge, or scale that
 can accurately be pre-set for the needed amount of admixture and can
 consistently deliver quantities of admixture to successive batches at any
 setting with satisfactory accuracy. The dispensing equipment must be
 visible to the batch operator if the actual dispensed amounts are not
 recorded on the computer batch ticket. Ensure admixture dispensers are
 inspected, calibrated and certified every 6 months.
 The Department may allow admixtures to be added, to the truck, at the
 project site provided the Engineer’s approval is obtained first.
 
 601.03.04 Classes and Primary Uses. Use the following classes of concrete in the
 types of construction designated.
 A) Class A. All reinforced concrete abutments below top of caps including
 pedestals, retaining walls, box culverts, pipe culvert headwalls, nonstructural
 concrete, and all items for which the concrete class is not specified.
 B) Class A Modified. All concrete deposited under water.
 C) Class AA. All reinforced concrete in bridge substructures and superstructures
 above the tops of caps, excluding pedestals.
 D) Class AAA. Bridge decks and other high strength uses.
 E) Class B. Gravity retaining walls, and all non-reinforced concrete deposited as
 fill for cavities or voids and mass footings.
 F) Class D. Prestressed I beams, cast-in-place piles, and precast piles.
 G) Class D Modified. Prestressed box, slab, and I-beams; and prestressed concrete
 piles.
 H) Class M1. High early strength for bridge joint repair and full or partial depth
 bridge deck patching. (Type I cement)
 I) Class M2. High early strength for bridge joint repair and full or partial depth
 bridge deck patching. (Type III cement)
 J) Class P. JPC pavement.
 K) Class S. Bridge slabs or barrier walls when specified in the Contract.
 L) Mortar. Concrete pipe joint seals, leveling drainage structure flowlines, and
 filling around inlets or outlets of drainage structures.
 M) Flowable Fill. Backfill for pipe.
 N) Grout. Patching, filling spalled areas, or other uses specified in the Contract.
 O) Latex Grout. Bond coat between existing bridge surface and new overlays; and
 joint sealing for centerline and other construction joints and minor cracking on
 overlays.
 P) Non-Shrink Grout. Bonding and sealing for post-tensioning, tie-back rods and
 bolts, and box beams.
 Q) Self-Consolidating Concrete (SCC). Precast Units.
 R) Dry Cast. Precast units.
 
 601—14
 
 601.03.05 Admixtures. For all classes of concrete, add at least a water-reducing
 admixture. Water reducing admixtures are not required when slip forming is used for
 concrete placement. The Department will allow the use of other admixtures when
 specified or approved by Engineer. The Department will allow admixtures according to
 the Ingredient Proportions and Requirements for Various Classes of Concrete table in
 Subsection 601.03.03. Follow the manufacturer’s recommendations in determining the
 quantity of admixture to use.
 Ensure that the concrete producer establishes the quantity of air-entraining admixture
 necessary to produce a mixture having the specified air content for the class of concrete
 being produced. Add air-entraining admixtures separately from other admixtures, and
 keep them separate until introducing them into the mixing water or concrete mixture. The
 Engineer will not require air-entraining of mortar or grouts, except when they are exposed
 to freeze-thaw conditions.
 Ensure that any type of admixture is uniform in properties throughout its use in the
 work. Only dispense of admixtures in liquid form unless the Engineer approves
 prepackaged powdered water reducing admixtures. When using more than one admixture
 ensure that the admixtures are compatible. When using fly ash, ensure that the concrete
 producer uses fly ash compatible admixtures.
 Clearly label admixture containers that indicate the exact brand name and type of
 admixture. Store products in containers with the correct label. Store admixtures where
 the liquid temperatures can be maintained between 32 and 110 °F.
 When using water-reducing and retarding admixtures provide the Engineer with
 manufacturer’s recommendations regarding the quantity of admixture used and expected
 retardation period for the job mixture and conditions.
 601.03.06 Slump. The Department will measure the slump of the concrete as
 described in KM 64-302. Do not exceed the water/cement ratio, including the free water
 on the aggregates, according to the Ingredient Proportions and Requirements for Various
 Classes of Concrete table in Subsection 601.03.03. In general, use a mixture which
 contains the minimum quantity of water required by these specifications, and ensure that
 concrete mixtures are such that:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 
 mortar clings to the coarse aggregate;
 concrete is not sufficiently fluid to segregate when transported to the place of
 deposit;
 mortar shows no free water when removed from the mixer;
 concrete, when transported in metal chutes at an angle of 30 degrees with the
 horizontal, slides rather than flows into place; and
 upper layers of the hardened concrete show a cement film on the surface but are
 free from laitance.
 
 601.03.07 Delivery. Mix the concrete in the quantities required for immediate use.
 Except for prestressed box beams, do not allow an interval greater than 20 minutes
 between delivery of batches placed contiguously in the work. When using concrete with a
 water reducing and retarding admixture, the Engineer will allow a 30-minute intervals
 between the delivery of batches, except for bridge deck slabs. For prestressed box beams,
 the Engineer will allow a 45-minute interval for delivery of batches between placement of
 the bottom slab and the remainder of the box beam when using concrete with a water
 reducing and retarding admixture.
 After adding all water, cement, and aggregates to the mixer, deliver and place
 concrete in its final position within the time limits listed in the following table. Do not use
 concrete that has developed initial set, that has become segregated, or that has not been
 delivered within the time limits listed.
 
 601—15
 
 TIME OF DISCHARGE LIMITS (1)
 (minutes)
 (2)
 
 Normal Concrete
 Retarded Concrete (3)
 (5)
 Agitated
 Agitor
 Non-Agitated Agitated (4) Agitor (5) Non-Agitated
 (4)
 
 60
 (1)
 (2)
 
 (3)
 
 (4)
 
 (5)
 (6)
 
 45
 
 30
 
 90(6)
 
 60
 
 30
 
 All times begin when cement first enters the mixer.
 Normal concrete is concrete without the addition of a water-reducing and
 retarding admixture.
 Retarded concrete is concrete to which a water-reducing and retarding
 admixture has been added at the Engineer’s direction or approval.
 Agitated is defined as concrete that has been continuously agitated from the
 time of initial contact between cement and mixing water to the time of
 placement at the site of work.
 An agitor is a truck with paddles.
 120 minutes for Class B concrete placed in miscellaneous work such as fence
 post footings.
 
 601.03.08 Mixing Concrete.
 A) General. The Department will allow mixing of concrete at the site of work or
 the use of ready-mixed methods. Ready-mixed concrete includes central-mixed
 and truck-mixed concrete. Site mixing includes batch mixing and continuous
 mixing. The Engineer may allow hand mixing.
 B) Site Mixing. Thoroughly mix concrete in a batch mixer or continuous mixer.
 Maintain the mixer, whether batch or continuous type, free of partially dried
 or hardened materials at all times. Consistently produce concrete to provide a
 uniform thoroughly blended mixture within the specified air content and slump
 limits.
 1)
 
 2)
 
 Batch Mixing. Mix all concrete for a period of no less than 60 seconds after
 all materials, including water, are in the mixer. During the period of
 mixing, operate the drum at the manufacturer’s recommended drum speed.
 When necessary, continue mixing until all aggregates are thoroughly coated
 with mortar.
 Remove the entire contents of the mixer from the drum before adding
 any materials for the succeeding batch. Deposit materials composing a
 batch simultaneously into the mixer. Do not operate any mixer above its
 rated capacity.
 Continuous Mixing. The Department will allow the use of continuous type
 mixers for Class A or Class B concrete, except do not use them to place
 concrete in bridges or box culverts. Notify the Engineer of any proposed
 changes in the proportioning of any of the ingredients. Maintain the freemoisture content of the fine aggregate within the limits necessary to produce
 concrete conforming to these specifications.
 Perform slump tests on mixtures produced by continuous type mixers
 4 to 5 minutes after depositing the concrete.
 
 601—16
 
 C) Ready-Mixed. When electing to use ready-mixed concrete, prevent delays in
 delivery and placing concrete. Provide a means of direct voice communication
 between the inspector at the job site and the inspector at the plant.
 1)
 
 2)
 
 Truck Mixing. Accurately measure and control the entire quantity of
 mixing water to within ± 1.0 percent accuracy. Mix each batch no less than
 70 revolutions at the plant site, at the rate of rotation the manufacturer
 specifies for a mixing speed. The Department will allow a reduction in
 mixing to 50 revolutions when the batch is charged so that all ingredients,
 including water, are uniformly blended during charging to produce a
 satisfactory mixture. In this case, mix the concrete an additional 10
 revolutions at the specified mixing speed at the job site. When the Engineer
 allows additional water or admixtures at the job site, mix the concrete an
 additional 30 revolutions at the specified mixing speed after addition.
 Perform any additional mixing at a lower speed as the mixer manufacturer
 specifies for agitation, and continuously agitate until discharging the batch.
 Replace or repair any truck mixer that does not produce a uniform
 mixture.
 Central Plant Mixing. When using a central-mixing plant, mix the concrete
 in an approved drum type mixer or pan type mixer. For drum type mixers
 having a rated capacity of 2 cubic yards or less, mix for a minimum of
 60 seconds. For mixers having capacities greater than 2 cubic yards, mix
 for a minimum of 90 seconds. The Department will allow a reduction in the
 minimum mixing time for drum type mixers from 90 to 75 seconds when
 the concrete ingredients are uniformly blended during the charging of the
 mixer. In order to attain uniform blending, charge the batch so that the
 flows of water, coarse aggregate, fine aggregate, and cement are started,
 continued, and ended simultaneously or nearly simultaneously.
 For pan type mixers having a rated capacity of 3 cubic yards or less,
 mix for a minimum of 45 seconds. Increase the mixing time for pan type
 mixers having rated capacities greater than 3 cubic yards by 15 seconds for
 each 3 cubic yards, over that allowed for the 3-cubic yard mixer. Any
 fraction of 3 cubic yards is considered to be 3 cubic yards.
 The Engineer may increase the minimum mixing time for any type of
 mixer if the mixer does not produce the desirable quality with respect to
 uniformity of mixture, slump, and air content, or upon proof by tests that
 concrete of an undesirable quality with regard to compressive strength
 would be prevented by additional mixing. Measure the mixing time from
 the time all cement and aggregates are charged into the mixer until the
 mixer is ready for discharging.
 Deliver concrete for use at points other than the central plant site in
 approved truck mixers. Start agitating immediately after introducing the
 batch into the mixer and continue without interruption until discharging the
 batch. Completely discharge each batch before introducing the succeeding
 batch.
 The Department will allow the delivery of central-mixed concrete
 without agitation to a structural unit having a volume not exceeding 10
 cubic yards, provided the time of delivery does not exceed the 30-minute
 limit listed in the Time of Discharge Limits table in Subsection 601.03.07
 and the interval between delivery of batches does not exceed 20 minutes.
 
 601.03.09 Placing Concrete.
 A) General. Deliver concrete to its final position of placement within the time
 required for delivery after mixing and within the required time interval between
 delivery of batches as specified for the method of mixing and handling
 employed. Moisten forms and reinforcement with water immediately before
 
 601—17
 
 placing the concrete.
 Ensure that all equipment used for handling or placing concrete
 accommodates concrete of the proportions and consistencies as specified. The
 Engineer will make no adjustments in mixture proportions to accommodate
 equipment incapable of handling concrete of specified proportions and
 consistencies.
 Whenever possible, completely remove water from all foundation
 excavations before depositing concrete. When it is necessary to deposit concrete
 under water, place concrete according to the requirements specified.
 Employ methods and manners of placing concrete that avoid segregation or
 separation of aggregates or displacement of reinforcement. The Department will
 allow the use of long chutes, troughs, belts, and pipes for conveying concrete
 from the mixing plant or point of delivery to the forms only with the Engineer’s
 written permission. When the Engineer allows such conveyers and the quality of
 concrete or methods of placing or working it are not satisfactory, discontinue
 their use and re-equip his plant or conveyance to place concrete in a satisfactory
 manner. Arrange and use troughs, pipes, or chutes used as aids in placing
 concrete so that ingredients of the concrete are not separated. Where steep
 slopes are required, equip the chutes with baffle boards or provide the chutes in
 short lengths that change the direction of movement. Maintain all chutes,
 troughs, and pipes clean and free from coating of hardened concrete by
 thoroughly flushing with water after each run or when out of operation for more
 than 30 minutes. Discharge water used for flushing clear of in-place concrete.
 Use troughs, pipes, and chutes that are either metal or metal lined and extend as
 near as possible to the point of deposit. Do not use aluminum or aluminum alloy
 troughs, pipes, or chutes that have surface damage or for lengths greater than 20
 feet.
 Do not drop concrete in excess of 5 feet without using pipe or tremies, and
 do not deposit a large quantity at any point and run or work it along the forms.
 When pumping, equip the delivery pipe with a nozzle, having a minimum of 2
 right angles, at the discharge end. Alternate nozzles or restriction devices may be
 allowed with prior approval by the Engineer. Maintain the discharge end of the
 pipe as close to the point of deposit as feasible. Place concrete to entirely fill but
 not bulge or distort the forms or to disturb their alignment. Fill each part of the
 forms by depositing concrete as near its final position as possible, to work the
 coarser aggregate back from the face, and to force concrete under and around
 reinforcing bars without displacing them. After concrete has taken its initial set,
 avoid jarring the forms or placing any strain on ends of projecting reinforcement.
 Consolidate concrete in all bridges and box culverts with a mechanical
 vibrator operated within the mass of concrete. Consolidate concrete in all other
 concrete construction, exclusive of pavement, either by vibration as described
 herein or with approved spading tools. When vibrating concrete, the Engineer
 will require spading in addition to vibrating to prevent formation of honeycomb,
 voids, and air pockets against the forms, except for concrete placed in
 pavements, bridge slabs, footings, and culvert slabs.
 Provide vibration of sufficient intensity and duration to cause flow or
 settlement of the concrete and complete consolidation, but ensure that vibration
 is not used to cause concrete to flow over long distances in the forms or is
 unduly prolonged to cause segregation or undesirable laitance at the surface of
 the lift being consolidated. Use plastic coated vibrators, when necessary, to
 prevent damage to the epoxy coating of the steel. Provide and use a sufficient
 number of mechanical vibrators to ensure that consolidation can be started
 immediately after concrete has been deposited in the forms. Do not attach the
 mechanical vibrator to the forms or reinforcing steel or apply to the surface of
 the concrete. Apply the vibrator to the concrete immediately after depositing the
 concrete and move it throughout the mass, thoroughly working the concrete
 around the reinforcement, embedded fixtures, and into angles and corners of the
 
 601—18
 
 forms. Design forms to provide for requirements of vibration.
 Place concrete in continuous horizontal layers not exceeding a thickness of
 one foot, unless otherwise specified for different types of structures. In any
 given layer, place and consolidate consecutive batches before the preceding
 batch has taken its initial set. Ensure that each layer of concrete retains a rough
 surface to secure efficient bonding with the next layer. Consolidate a succeeding
 layer placed before the underlying layer has set in a manner that will entirely
 break up and eliminate the tendency to produce a cold joint between layers.
 Construct the bridge seats comprising the area of that portion of the pier or
 abutment tops receiving steel bridge bearings to an elevation of 1/8 inch greater
 than that specified in the Plans for an area in excess of the bearing area occupied
 by masonry bearing plates. Construct this excess material for the bearing area
 with mortar of the same proportions as that in the concrete and cast it monolithic
 with the pier or abutment. Prevent the coarse aggregate from being placed
 within 1/4 inch of finished elevation specified in the Plans. Immediately after
 depositing the mortar, strike the surface off by means of a wooden float. When
 the concrete has thoroughly hardened, finish it to the true, correct elevation
 specified in the Plans by tooling and polishing. Test the finished surface with a
 spirit level, and ensure that there is no variation in excess of 1/32 inch above or
 below a true level plane.
 When temporarily discontinuing placing, clean the concrete, after it
 becomes firm enough to retain its form, of laitance and other objectionable
 material to a sufficient depth to expose sound concrete. To avoid visible joints
 as far as possible upon exposed faces, make construction joints according to
 Subsection 601.03.10.
 Regulate the method and manner of placing concrete so as to place all
 construction joints across regions of low shearing stress and in locations that will
 be hidden from view the greatest possible extent. Use methods and sequences of
 placing concrete for various types of concrete bridge construction as specified
 for the particular type of construction involved.
 Deposit and consolidate concrete to form a compact, dense, and impervious
 mass of uniform texture having smooth faces on exposed surfaces. When any
 section of concrete is defective, remove and satisfactorily replace or repair it as
 directed.
 B) Placing Concrete Under Water. Do not expose concrete to the action of water
 before setting, or deposit it in water, except upon the Engineer’s written
 permission. Mix all concrete deposited under water in proportions specified for
 Class A Modified. Place concrete deposited under water in its final position by
 means of a tremie or by other approved methods. Do not disturb it after
 depositing. Provide a sufficient number of tremies or other approved devices to
 ensure proper distribution of concrete to all portions of the seal. Maintain calm
 water at the point of deposit. Do not place any concrete in flowing water.
 Ensure that all form work, such as interlocking sheeting, designed to retain
 concrete under water is water-tight.
 Regulate the consistency of the concrete to prevent segregation of materials.
 Maintain the surface of the concrete as nearly horizontal as practical at all times.
 To ensure thorough bonding, place each succeeding layer before the preceding
 layer has taken its initial set.
 Close the discharge end at the start of work to prevent water from entering
 the tube. Induce the flow of concrete by slightly raising the tremie, but always
 keeping the discharge end in the deposited concrete. Stop the flow by lowering
 the tremie. Provide a continuous flow and, unless unavoidable, do not interrupt
 it until completing the work.
 The Department will allow dewatering when the concrete is sufficiently
 strong to withstand hydrostatic pressure, but in no case in less than 3 calendar
 days after placing, or such additional length of time as the Engineer may direct.
 Remove all laitance or other unsatisfactory material from the exposed surfaces
 
 601—19
 
 by scraping, chipping, or other means which will not injure the concrete surface,
 as the Engineer directs.
 When it is necessary to use a concrete seal in construction of a foundation,
 construct it as hereinafter described. A concrete seal in a foundation is that
 volume of concrete placed under water by means of a tremie or other approved
 means for sealing the entire bottom area of the excavated pit within the
 cofferdam against hydrostatic pressure, to dewater the excavation and construct
 the remainder of the foundation in dewatered forms. Use Class A Modified
 concrete for the seal, and in general make the thickness of the seal course
 0.43 times the hydrostatic head exerting pressure on the bottom of the
 foundation, or of a thickness as specified in the Plans. Place the corners of the
 seal to an elevation lower than the remaining surface of the seal course for the
 purpose of dewatering. In such cases, do not exceed an elevation difference
 between the corners and the remaining surface of 6 inches.
 C) Placing Flowable Fill. To place flowable fill requires a minimum trench width
 of 6 inches clearance on each side of the pipe. The Engineer will allow standing
 water to be in the trench when backfilling with flowable fill. Deep trenches may
 require bleeder trenches or placement in layers to drain excess water.
 Because certain types of pipe may float, backfill in lifts or anchor the pipe
 when necessary. Backfilling in lifts is more applicable to long lines of pipe,
 allowing time for a substantial amount of the water to dissipate before applying
 the next lift. The Department will allow the use of adequately spaced anchors
 made of small lumber or metal straps to anchor the pipe. For larger diameter
 pipe, it may be possible to maintain a surge of flowable fill on top of the pipe to
 prevent floating. Floating usually does not occur after the level of the backfill is
 above the springline of the pipe. Ensure that the pipe remains in the correct
 horizontal position and elevation.
 Place flowable fill by discharging directly from truck chutes into the trench
 or place by means of conveyors, buckets or pumps. When pumping, fill the
 voids adequately with solid particles to provide cohesion during the transport
 through the pump line under pressure to prevent segregation and line blockage.
 Maintain continuous flow through the pump line to prevent segregation and line
 blockage.
 Place the flowable fill from the top of the compacted bedding to the bottom
 of the pavement structure. Unless the Engineer directs otherwise, allow a
 minimum of 2 hours before adding and compacting any material above the
 flowable fill.
 To expedite settling and hardening in cool weather, drain or pump the bleed
 water from the surface or overfill the trench to allow bleed water to flow out.
 When overfilling, remove all excess material after hardening.
 The flowable fill will bleed water within 5 to 10 minutes after placement.
 The release of water by bleeding causes the solid particles to realign and become
 firm. A delay in bleeding indicates there are too many fines in the mixture or
 insufficient water. If the maximum water was added, reduce the fly ash quantity
 in increments of 50 pounds until the mixture bleeds freely. Add approximately
 60 pounds of sand to replace each 50-pound increment of fly ash to maintain the
 original yield. When 2 increment reductions, 100 pounds total, do not promote
 free bleeding of the mixture, evaluate other possible remedies. The flowable fill
 is too dry when cracks develop as it flows into place.
 D) Weather Limitations and Protection. Designate an employee for the Engineer
 to contact in case of unexpected situations. The Department reserves the right to
 discontinue concrete placement when the means of protection or method of
 placement does not produce satisfactory results.
 Maintain the temperature of the mixture at or below 90 °F during
 placement. Unless the Engineer determines that safety concerns or other
 considerations prohibit a shutdown, cease concrete production when the mixture
 exceeds 90 °F until adequate methods are in place to reduce or maintain the
 
 601—20
 
 mixture temperature. Ensure that the temperature of the concrete mixture
 immediately before placing in bridges or box culverts is between 50 and 90 °F.
 When the ambient air temperature is above 90 °F, cool the temperature of the
 forms, reinforcing steel, steel beam flanges, and other surfaces that will come in
 contact with the mixture to below 90 °F by means of a water spray or other
 approved methods. Allow excess water to drain, or remove it from the forms
 before placing concrete. Do not place concrete in box culverts or bridges if the
 ambient temperature exceeds 100 °F.
 Maintain a minimum surface concrete temperature of 45 °F for 3 calendar
 days after placement and at a minimum surface concrete temperature of 40 °F for
 an additional 4 calendar days, unless acceptable cylinder strength is achieved, as
 determined by the engineer.
 Do not place concrete during times of the year that ambient temperatures
 may be expected to drop below the 45 °F or 40 °F limits, unless there are
 adequate provisions at the job site for maintaining concrete at the specified
 temperature. Do not place concrete in contact with any material coated with
 frost or having a temperature of 32°F or lower. Submit a written plan detailing
 the methods to be used for protecting concrete for the Engineer’s review. When
 performing cold weather concrete work, provide and install recording
 thermometers or other approved temperature measuring devices.
 In cold weather, heat all water and/or aggregate so the temperature of the
 mixed concrete is no less than 50 °F or more than 90 °F at the time of placement.
 To avoid the possibility of flash set when water or aggregate is heated to above
 100 °F, mix the water and aggregate before adding the cement, and do not
 exceed a temperature of 90 °F for the mixture of water and aggregate when
 adding the cement.
 When using artificial heat, provide a means to maintain adequate moisture
 in the air within the enclosure. Maintain surfaces of all concrete in a moist
 condition as specified for curing during the entire curing period. When using
 artificial heat, do not exceed a temperature of 90 °F for concrete near the source
 of heat, and maintain the temperature of concrete remote from the source of heat
 higher than the designated 45 °F or 40 °F for the time of curing after placement.
 When using stoves or salamanders, make adequate provisions for fire protection.
 Assume all risk connected with placing concrete under these conditions, and
 even with the Engineer’s permission to do the work, take responsibility for
 proper results.
 Should concrete placed under such conditions prove
 unsatisfactory, remove and replace it with satisfactory concrete.
 Do not use fly ash or Type 1P cement in bridge decks, JPC pavement, JPC
 base, or JPC shoulders between November 1 and March 1 if the item is to be
 opened to public traffic and exposed to deicing salts. If the item will remain
 closed to public traffic until the following spring or later, the Department will
 allow the use of fly ash or Type 1P cement during this period.
 601.03.10 Construction Joints.
 A) General Requirements for Structures. When work of placing concrete is
 delayed until the concrete attains its initial set, deem the point of stopping to be a
 construction joint. Locate construction joints in the structure as specified in the
 Contract for the different types of structures; but, when the volume of concrete is
 too great to be placed without the use of additional construction joints, locate and
 construct the additional construction joints without impairing the strength or
 appearance of the structure as the Engineer approves. Avoid construction joints
 through paneled wingwalls or other surfaces to be treated architecturally. To
 avoid visible joints as far as possible upon exposed faces, finish the top surface
 of concrete adjacent to the forms by smoothing with a mason’s plastering trowel.
 Where a featheredge might be produced at a construction joint, as in the sloped
 top surface of a wingwall, use an inset form work to produce a blocked out
 
 601—21
 
 portion in the preceding layer that produces an edge thickness of 6 inches or
 more in the succeeding layer. Do not stop or temporarily discontinue work on
 any section or layer within 18 inches below the top of any face unless details of
 the work provide for a coping having a thickness less than 18 inches. When the
 details provide for a coping having a thickness less than 18 inches, the Engineer
 may allow placement of the construction joint at the underside of the coping.
 Whenever construction joints are required and in the opinion of the
 Engineer an insufficient quantity of reinforcement is projecting to secure
 satisfactory bond, accomplish bonding as specified in B) below.
 B) Bonding Construction Joints for Structures. In joining fresh concrete to
 concrete that has already set, or to preceding layers, thoroughly clean the surface
 of work already in place of all laitance, loose, and foreign material. Then, wash
 and scrub this surface with wire brooms and thoroughly drench with water until
 saturated. Keep the surface saturated until placing new concrete. Immediately
 before placing new concrete, draw all forms tight against concrete already in
 place.
 After interrupting concrete placement and forming a construction joint,
 interlock with the succeeding concrete by forming suitable keys in the concrete.
 Form these keys by inserting and subsequently removing beveled wood strips.
 Thoroughly saturate the wood strips with water before inserting them. The
 Department may allow the use of steel dowels instead of keys. The Engineer
 will determine the size and placement of keys and dowels.
 C) Non-Structural Concrete Items. When non-structural concrete items are
 constructed on top of rigid pavement, ensure that construction joints in the nonstructural items coincide with the pavement joints. Install expansion joint
 material 1/2 inch thick and cut it to conform to the cross section of the nonstructural item at all construction joints. When a construction joint is within 100
 feet of a break in alignment or a drainage structure; treat the construction joint as
 a contraction joint.
 601.03.11 Falsework. Design and construct falsework that provides the necessary
 rigidity, supports the loads imposed, and produces, in the finished structure, the lines and
 grades specified in the Plans. Have a Registered Professional Engineer design all
 falsework that is not a Department standard design for structures with clear span lengths of
 20 feet or more and all falsework where traffic openings are specified.
 Furnish the Engineer detailed working drawings in triplicate and design calculations
 for falsework. Do not begin any falsework construction until the Engineer has reviewed
 the falsework drawings. Take full responsibility for any falsework constructed prior to the
 Engineer's review of falsework drawings. Do not place any concrete until the Engineer
 has completed the review of the falsework drawings. Provide time for the Engineer to
 complete this review that is proportionate to the complexity of the falsework design;
 however always provide at least 3 weeks. For falsework over railroads or navigable
 streams, the Engineer’s review of the falsework drawings will be contingent upon the
 drawings being satisfactory to the railroad company involved, US Coast Guard, Army
 Corps of Engineers, or other agency having jurisdiction, as applicable.
 The Department will allow the revision of falsework drawings at any time. When
 requesting a revision, allow sufficient time for the Engineer’s review before starting
 construction on the revised portion.
 When using footing type falsework foundations, decide the bearing value of the soil,
 and show the values assumed in the design of the falsework on the falsework drawings.
 Show assumed values for both wet and dry soil conditions.
 Construct slab forms between girders with no allowance for settlement relative to the
 girders.
 Ensure that the design load for falsework consists of the sum of dead and live vertical
 loads. Include the weight of concrete, reinforcing steel, forms, and falsework in the dead
 loads. Assume the weight of concrete, reinforcing steel, and forms to be no less than 160
 pounds per cubic foot of concrete. In addition to the full dead load, assume a live load of
 
 601—22
 
 50 pounds per square foot for horizontal surfaces and finishing machine weight, if
 necessary, in the design of falsework and centering.
 Design the falsework so that horizontal loads are resisted in any direction by diagonal
 bracing, blocking, ties, or other means the Engineer approves, to be no less than 2 percent
 of the total dead load.
 Design falsework footings to carry the load imposed upon them without exceeding
 the estimated soil bearing values and all anticipated settlements. When post-tensioning
 the concrete, design the falsework to support any increased or readjusted loads caused by
 the post-tensioning.
 Ensure that the design of all plywood form panels and studs supporting them is as
 specified for forms. Design all joists supporting slabs and overhangs as falsework.
 When falsework is over or adjacent to roadways or railways, install all details of the
 falsework system which contribute to horizontal stability and resistance to impact at the
 time each element of the falsework is erected and leave them in place until removing the
 falsework.
 Construct falsework to reasonably conform to falsework drawings. Use materials in
 the falsework construction of the quality necessary to sustain stresses required by the
 falsework design. Use workmanship in falsework construction of such quality that the
 falsework will support the loads imposed without excessive settlement or deformation.
 Use suitable jacks or oak wedges in connection with falsework to set the forms to the
 required grade and to take up any excessive settlement in the falsework, either before or
 while placing concrete.
 If unanticipated events occur, including undue settlements, which in the opinion of
 the Engineer would prevent obtaining a structure conforming to the Contract, discontinue
 placing concrete and provide corrective measures satisfactory to the Engineer. In the
 event satisfactory measures are not provided before initial set of the concrete in the
 affected area, discontinue placing concrete at a location the Engineer determines. Remove
 all unacceptable concrete.
 Do not place temporary supports or shoring under prestressed concrete or structural
 steel girders when paving bridge slabs or when taking top of beam elevations.
 When placing falsework installations over or adjacent to an open public road, include
 design considerations and protection to ensure that the falsework system is not disturbed
 by errant highway vehicles or from vibration forces caused by passing vehicles. Include
 provisions to protect traffic from falling objects.
 601.03.12 Forming.
 A) Forms for Structures. Clean the inside surfaces of forms of all dirt, mortar, and
 foreign material. Thoroughly coat forms which will later be removed with form
 oil before use.
 Do not deposit concrete in forms until completing all work connected with
 constructing the forms, placing all materials required to be embedded in the
 concrete for the unit to be poured, and the Engineer has inspected forms and
 materials.
 Control the rate of depositing concrete in forms to prevent over stressing the
 forms due to fluid pressure.
 Provide forms for all concrete surfaces not completely enclosed or hidden
 below the permanent ground surface that conform to the requirements herein for
 forms for exposed surfaces. The Engineer will consider interior surfaces of
 underground drainage structures the same as to be completely enclosed surfaces.
 Prior to using the forming system for exposed surfaces and when the
 Engineer requests, furnish the Engineer the form design and materials data so the
 Engineer may verify compliance with this section.
 Design and construct forms for exposed concrete surfaces so the formed
 surfaces of concrete do not deflect excessively in any direction between studs,
 joists, form stiffeners, form fasteners, or wales. Place plywood with the face
 grain perpendicular to the studs or joists. If placement of the plywood with the
 
 601—23
 
 grain parallel to the studs or joists is desired, furnish the Engineer calculations
 showing that excessive deflection or stresses will not occur. Provide a clear span
 between supporting studs or joists that is no more than 20 times the thickness of
 the form facing and that does not deflect more than 1/360 of the clear span.
 Should any form or forming system, even though previously reviewed before
 use, produce a surface with excessive bulges, discontinue its use until making
 modifications satisfactory to the Engineer.
 Form all exposed surfaces of each element in a concrete structure with the
 same forming material or with materials which produce similar surface textures,
 color, and appearance.
 Face forms for exposed surfaces with form panels. Only use form panels in
 good condition free of defects, such as scars, dents, or delaminations, for
 exposed surfaces.
 In general, furnish and place form panels for exposed surfaces in uniform
 widths of 3 feet or more and in uniform lengths of 5 feet or more, except where
 the dimensions of the member formed are less than these dimensions. Arrange
 panels in symmetrical patterns conforming to the general lines of the structure.
 Precisely align form panels on each side of the panel joint using supports or
 fasteners common to both panels, to obtain a continuous, unbroken concrete
 plane surface.
 Construct forms for exposed surfaces with 3/4 inch chamfer strips attached
 to prevent mortar runs and to produce smooth, straight chamfers at all sharp
 edges of the concrete. Grinding of chamfers is not allowed as a primary
 construction method. Grinding is only acceptable as a means of correction or
 repair as approved by the engineer.
 Use form fasteners consisting of form bolts, clamps, or other devices as
 necessary to prevent spreading of the forms during concrete placement. Do not
 use twisted wire loop ties to hold forms in position.
 The Department will allow casting of anchor devices into the concrete for
 later use in supporting forms or for lifting precast members when the Engineer
 allows. Do not use driven types of anchorages for fastening forms or form
 supports to concrete on bridge decks.
 Construct all forms to allow removal without damaging the concrete. Frame
 forms for copings, offsets, railings, and all ornamental work so there will be no
 damage to or marring of the concrete when removing the forms.
 Leave openings in forms at intervals no greater than 10 feet vertically.
 Ensure that the openings are adequate to allow free access to the forms for the
 purpose of inspection, working, and vibrating the concrete.
 Set and maintain all forms true to lines and grades designated until the
 concrete has hardened. After placing concrete, remove the forms according to
 Subsection 601.03.14.
 For narrow walls where access to the bottom of forms is not readily
 attainable otherwise, leave the lower form boards loose so they may be removed
 to remove all chips, dirt, sawdust, or other extraneous material from inside the
 forms immediately before placing concrete.
 Construct metal ties or anchorages within the forms to allow their removal
 to a depth of at least one inch from the face without injury to the concrete.
 Design all fittings or metal ties such that upon their removal the cavities that
 remain will be the smallest possible size. Regardless of their position in the
 completed construction, ram and fill cavities with mortar, and ensure that the
 surface is sound, smooth, even, and uniform in color.
 When using ordinary tie wires within the forms for areas where concrete
 will be exposed and will receive surface finish, cut back all wires at least 1/4
 inch from the face of the concrete with chisels or nippers. Fill the resulting
 cavities with mortar, and ensure that the surface is sound, smooth, even, and
 uniform in color. Use nippers for cutting wires in fresh concrete. Cut the wires
 that are not included within the areas where the concrete will receive surface
 
 601—24
 
 finish flush with the concrete surface. The Engineer will not require grouting
 unless concrete is damaged in cutting wires.
 Maintain forms that are intended for reuse in good condition to ensure
 accuracy of shape, strength, rigidity, mortar tightness, and surface smoothness.
 Do not use forms that are unsatisfactory in any respect in the opinion of the
 Engineer and remove them immediately from the job site.
 Use forms for circular section concrete columns that are plastic, plastic
 lined, metal, or other approved material in order to provide a smooth and true
 surface free from fins, joints, and other irregularities.
 Apply the above wooden form specifications relative to design, mortar
 tightness, filleted corners, beveled projections, bracing, alignment, removal,
 reuse, and oiling to metal forms, also. Countersink all bolt heads. Design
 clamps, pins, or other connecting devices to hold the forms rigidly together and
 to allow removal without injury to the concrete. Keep metal forms free from
 rust, grease, or other foreign matter that may discolor the concrete.
 B) Forms for Non-Structural Construction. Provide forms used for nonstructural construction, free from warps, of sufficient strength to resist warping
 during construction, and of a height approximately equal to the depth of the
 section to be constructed. Thoroughly clean, oil well, and securely stake, brace,
 and hold forms to the required line and grade before depositing any concrete.
 Use approved flexible forms for construction of circular sections where the
 radius is 100 feet or less.
 C) Slip Forming for Non-Structural Construction. The Department will allow
 the use of slip form or extruding machines for non-structural concrete items
 whose design is compatible with the slip form or extrusion process. For concrete
 placed by the slip form or extrusion process, the Engineer may waive the
 minimum slump requirements for the concrete being placed. Control the slump
 so that during each continuous run the maximum range of slump between the
 various batches or loads does not exceed one inch.
 Produce items by the slip form or extrusion process that are comparable in
 quality to those produced by use of side form methods. When work is not
 satisfactory, the Engineer may require the use of side forms instead of the slip
 form or extrusion process, as well as corrective work.
 D) Slip Forming for Bridge Barrier Wall. The Department will allow slip form
 construction of bridge barrier wall when the Engineer approves test sections.
 Test sections will be the first 25 feet in length and may be poured on the
 structure with the Engineer’s prior approval. If test sections are unacceptable, the
 Contractor will remove the entire test section at no expense to the Department.
 Core or slice the test section as the Engineer directs. The Engineer will review
 the cores or slices to ensure concrete consolidation around the horizontal steel
 reinforcement. When concrete is not consolidated around the steel or the quality
 is not comparable to the side form methods, the Engineer may require the use of
 side forms and corrective work. The Engineer may waive the minimum slump
 requirements. Control the slump so that during each continuous run, the
 maximum range of slump between the various batches of loads does not exceed
 one inch. Conform to the alignment tolerance requirements of Subsection
 601.03.18. Construct joints and bevels according to the Plans. Construct barrier
 wall to the dimensions specified on the Plans.
 601.03.13 Camber. Set falsework and forms to provide structural camber indicated
 or as directed.
 601.03.14 Removal of Falsework and Forms. In determination of time for removal
 of falsework and forms, consider the location and character of the structure, weather, and
 other conditions influencing hardening of the concrete and materials used in the mixture.
 Do not remove falsework centering and falsework supporting any concrete work or
 loosen any wedges without obtaining the Engineer’s permission. Even with the
 
 601—25
 
 Engineer’s permission, take full responsibility for the safety of the work.
 The Department will allow the removal of forms for ornamental work, railing,
 parapets, and vertical surfaces that do not carry loads after 18 hours, unless otherwise
 directed or approved. Column forms may be removed after 18 hours, provided no
 significant structural loads will be placed before adequate concrete strength is reached.
 1)
 
 The Department will allow the removal of supporting forms and falsework for
 structural units subjected to bending stresses, 3 days after placing the last
 concrete in the unit upon conformance to the following conditions:
 a)
 b)
 
 c)
 
 2)
 
 Advise the Engineer in writing at least 24 hours in advance of placing
 concrete that early removal is necessary or desirable, and request that
 additional cylinders for the required testing be made.
 Submit, for approval, a written request for the intended use of any special
 procedures or modifications to the mixture such as increased cement
 content, use of Type III cement, use of high range water reducing
 admixture. If supplying a high range water reducing admixture, subject to
 the Engineer’s approval, the Department will allow the use of a higher than
 specified slump.
 Ensure that results of the compressive strength tests demonstrate a minimum
 of 80% the required 28-day compressive strength for the class of concrete
 specified. The Engineer will sample for compressive strength at the
 minimum frequencies indicated in the Manual of Field Sampling and
 Testing Practices. The Department will cast and test compressive strength
 cylinders according to KM 64-305 and ASTM C 39, respectively. Cure
 cylinders to be tested for early removal of forms and falsework as nearly as
 possible in the identical manner that the concrete in the structural unit is
 cured. The Engineer will allow early removal of forms and falsework when
 all of the cylinders achieve the specified minimum compressive strength.
 Upon conforming to the above conditions, the Department will allow
 the removal of supporting forms and falsework for structural units subjected
 to bending stresses to begin 3 days after placing the last concrete in the unit.
 
 If early release cylinders are not requested or have failed strength requirements,
 do not remove the falsework, centering, and forms supporting any girder, slab,
 beam, arch, or member subject to direct bending stress, or forms inside concrete
 barrels, until the minimum curing time has elapsed as shown in the following
 table. The Engineer will take air temperature readings at approximately 7:30
 AM and 3:00 PM each day during the curing period and determine the average
 temperature from those readings. The curing time will start after placing the last
 concrete in the member considered.
 The Engineer will add one day to the following calendar days shown in the
 table for each day the average ambient air temperature falls below 40 °F.
 
 601—26
 
 REQUIRED TIME IN CALENDAR DAYS
 BEFORE REMOVING FORMS AND FALSEWORK(1)
 Average Ambient Temperature
 During Curing Period
 
 Item
 
 41 to 54 °F 55 to 69 °F
 
 70 °F
 or more
 
 Box Culverts, spans 10 feet or less
 
 18
 
 11
 
 7
 
 Box Culverts, spans 10 to 20 feet inclusive
 
 18
 
 12
 
 8
 
 Slab and Girder Spans, 10 feet or less,
 including Slab Spans between Steel Girders
 
 18
 
 11
 
 7
 
 Slab and Girder Spans, 10 to 20 feet inclusive,
 including Slab Spans between Steel Girders
 
 18
 
 12
 
 8
 
 Slab and Girder Spans, over 20 feet,
 including Slab Spans between Steel Girders
 
 21
 
 15
 
 12
 
 Caps of Concrete Pile Bents, Open Column
 Abutments, and Piers
 
 18
 
 11
 
 7
 
 Caps of Piers with Copings extending 3 feet or
 less beyond Web Walls
 
 7
 
 5
 
 3
 
 Curbs or Slabs Overhanging 2 feet or less, and
 Rails in Open Handrails
 
 7
 
 5
 
 3
 
 Falsework under Web Walls
 
 7
 
 5
 
 3
 
 Curbs or Slabs Overhanging more than 2 feet
 
 18
 
 11
 
 7
 
 Walls, Columns, and Vertical Sides of Beams
 and Girders
 
 18 hours
 min. as the
 Engineer
 directs
 
 (1)
 
 For mixtures using Type IP cement or fly ash, see Subsection 601.03.03
 3)
 
 4)
 
 Remove falsework and centering in such a manner and sequence that allows
 concrete to uniformly and gradually take the stresses due to its own weight.
 Remove forms without defacing the structure. Always remove forms from
 the sides of columns and piers before removing falsework or centering beneath
 girders, beams, or other members that they will support, so the Engineer may
 inspect the quality of concrete.
 The Engineer will not grant any extension of time to complete work due to
 falsework remaining in place during curing.
 Box culvert top slab forms may be removed earlier than 3 days. Submit special
 mix design and early release cylinder plan to the Engineer for approval if
 removal of forms earlier than 3 days is desired.
 
 601.03.15 Opening to Traffic. Conform to the following requirements for the time
 of opening a completed structure to traffic or application of significant loads. The
 Engineer will consider construction equipment passing over a structure to be traffic.
 
 601—27
 
 1)
 
 The Engineer will allow early opening to traffic or application of significant
 loads under the same criteria as early removal for forms and falsework with the
 following additional requirements:
 a)
 b)
 
 2)
 
 Ensure that results of the compressive strength tests demonstrate a minimum
 of 100% the required 28 days compressive strength, for the class of concrete
 specified.
 When possible, continue to cure concrete for the time specified in the
 following table even when the specified strength requirements have been
 met.
 
 If early release cylinders are not requested or have failed strength requirements,
 do not open the structure to traffic or subject it to significant loads until the
 minimum time has elapsed as specified in the Required Time in Calendar Days
 Before Removing Forms and Falsework table in Subsection 601.03.14 and the
 Required Time in Calendar Days Before Applying Significant Loads on
 Concrete Structures table in this subsection. The curing time will start after
 placing the last concrete in the structure, with the exception of handrails not
 designed as load supporting members. The Engineer will add one day to the
 following calendar days shown in the table for each day the average ambient air
 temperature falls below 40 °F.
 The Engineer will take air temperature readings at approximately 7:30 AM
 and 3:00 PM each day during the curing period and determine the average
 temperature from those readings.
 
 601—28
 
 REQUIRED TIME IN CALENDAR DAYS
 BEFORE APPLYING SIGNIFICANT LOADS ON CONCRETE STRUCTURES
 Average Ambient Temperature
 During Curing Period
 
 Item
 
 40 to 54 °F 55 to 69 °F
 
 70 °F
 or more
 
 Box Culverts, spans 10 feet or less
 
 21
 
 13
 
 10
 
 Box Culverts, 10 to 20 feet inclusive
 
 22
 
 14
 
 11
 
 Slab and Girder Spans, 10 feet or less,
 including Slab Spans between Steel Girders
 
 21
 
 13
 
 10
 
 Slab and Girder Spans, 10 to 20 feet inclusive,
 including Slab Spans Steel Girders
 
 22
 
 14
 
 11
 
 Slab and Girder Spans, over 20 feet,
 including Slab Spans between Steel Girders
 
 23
 
 18
 
 14
 
 Overhanging Slabs, age before barrier walls are
 placed(2)(3)
 
 23
 
 18
 
 14
 
 Concentrated Loads, as produced by steel
 superstructures or precast concrete
 
 18
 
 11
 
 7
 
 Distributed Loads, as produced by poured-inplace concrete deck girder superstructures
 
 3
 
 2
 
 1(2)
 
 28
 
 21
 
 21
 
 7
 
 5
 
 3
 
 14
 
 10
 
 7
 
 Backfill against Abutments or Retaining Walls
 
 14
 
 10
 
 7
 
 Pole and Sign Base Foundations
 Setting the poles or truss legs
 Tensioning of Messenger Cables or
 installation of overhead trusswork.
 
 14
 28
 
 10
 21
 
 7
 21
 
 Caps on Concrete Pile Bents, Open Column
 Abutments, and Piers
 
 Class “D” Piles, Moved or Driven(1)
 Class “D” (HES) Piles, Moved or Driven(1)
 Class “D” Modified Piles, Moved or Driven
 
 (1)
 (2)
 (3)
 
 (1)
 
 See Subsection 604.03.
 No strength requirements apply.
 The Engineer will not apply time limits when falsework is designed to support
 barrier wall.
 601.03.16 Joints.
 A) Expansion and Contraction Joints for Structures. Construct expansion joints
 to allow absolute freedom of movement. After completing all work, use a fine
 chisel to carefully remove all loose or thin shells or mortar likely to spall under
 movement from expansion joints.
 Provide and place expansion joints at locations specified in the Plans and
 
 601—29
 
 Standard Drawings as follows:
 1)
 2)
 
 3)
 
 Friction or Sliding Joints. Friction or sliding joints may be either metal,
 neoprene, rubber, or premolded filler type as specified.
 Open Joints. Place at locations designated and form by insertion and
 subsequent removal of a template of timber, metal, or other suitable and
 approved material. Use a method of insertion and removal of joint
 templates that avoids the possibility of chipping or breaking the edges and
 construct the templates so removal is readily accomplished without injury to
 the work. Do not extend reinforcement across an open joint unless specified
 in the Plans. Carefully set structural steel angles, channels, plates, or other
 shapes used in connection with open joints to conform to the crown and
 grade of the bridge deck. Construct the joint with a uniform opening and to
 dimensions specified in the Plans.
 Special Types. Use special types other than those listed when specified in
 the Plans or when the Engineer so orders in writing. Furnish special details
 for such joints.
 
 B) Expansion Joints for Non-Structural Items. Install expansion joints at all
 breaks in alignment and at all locations where one concrete construction abuts
 another concrete or other type construction. Install expansion joints at each
 1,000 feet of continuous construction. The Engineer will not require steel
 reinforcement in expansion joints.
 When another concrete item crosses an expansion joint in JPC pavements,
 construct the expansion joint for the structural or non-structural concrete item
 one inch wide and construct all other expansion joints 1/2 inch wide. The
 Engineer will not require expansion joints in paved ditches except at locations
 where the paved ditch abuts another structure. Cut the one-inch thick expansion
 joint material to conform to the cross section of the concrete.
 C) Contraction Joints for Non-Structural Concrete Items. Either form 1/8-inch
 wide contraction joints for non-structural concrete items or construct them
 according to requirements of this subsection at intervals not to exceed 30 feet,
 except when items are constructed on or adjacent to a rigid pavement or
 shoulder. For these exceptions, make the joint spacing coincide with that of the
 pavement or shoulder. Space contraction joints for sidewalks as specified in
 Section 505. The Engineer will not require the sealing of contraction joints in
 non-structural items.
 The Engineer will not require contraction joints for paved ditches.
 Construct sawed contraction joints to a minimum depth of 2 inches, except that
 the Engineer will allow one inch of depth for header curbs and integral curbs.
 601.03.17 Curing Concrete. Cure reinforced concrete bridge slabs according to
 Subsection 609.03. Wet cure all surfaces that are to receive a masonry coating finish,
 unless using combination material. When using combination material, cure as specified in
 B) below. Either wet cure all other concrete, except pipe culvert headwalls, as specified in
 A) below or cure it by application of membrane forming compound as specified in B)
 below. The Engineer will not require curing for cast-in-place pipe culvert headwalls.
 At any time the Engineer determines concrete on the project is not being properly
 cured, the Engineer may suspend all or any concreting operations on the project.
 At any time during the curing period when the atmospheric temperature is 45 °F or
 less, protect the concrete to satisfy the temperature requirements according to Subsection
 601.03.09 D).
 A) Wet Curing. Cure concrete for a period of at least 7 calendar days, beginning
 immediately after placement and finishing, by frequently applying water to all
 surfaces to keep them continuously damp during the full 7-calendar day curing
 period or until the required strength is attained. Protect exposed concrete
 
 601—30
 
 surfaces from drying by application of a double thickness of wet burlap or
 similar approved material and keep the burlap or other approved material
 continuously wet for a period of 7 or more calendar days. Soak new burlap in
 water for at least 12 hours before the first use.
 When the structure or any portion thereof is enclosed and artificial heat is
 provided for protection, the Engineer will not waive the moist curing
 requirement. When using steamlines for heating, leave the pipe loose so
 sufficient steam escapes into the housing to maintain a moist atmosphere at all
 times. When using stoves or salamanders, maintain vessels containing water on
 each stove or salamander to maintain a moist atmosphere at all times. The
 Department will allow the curing of flat horizontal surfaces with curing blankets.
 B) Membrane Curing. Do not dilute or alter the membrane forming curing
 compound. Thoroughly agitate the compound immediately before using it.
 When the compound is too viscous to apply, warm it in a water bath to
 approximately 100 °F before applying.
 Uniformly apply the compound to a surface by use of an approved pressure
 sprayer. The Department will allow the placement of curing compound in one
 application. When placing in one application, achieve uniform and satisfactory
 coverage. If the Engineer directs that 2 applications are required because one
 application is not satisfactory, then make each application at the rate of one
 gallon per 300 or less square feet. Start the first application as soon as practical
 after the final finish and as the Engineer directs, and start the second application
 after finishing the first application. Use a total actual application rate of at least
 one gallon per 150 square feet or less actual coverage.
 Do not apply curing compound to construction joints, reinforcing steel, or
 surfaces to receive a masonry coating, except:
 1)
 
 2)
 
 The Department will allow the use of materials conforming to the water
 retention requirements of AASHTO M 148 for liquid membrane forming
 curing compound, and also conforming to Section 828 for masonry coating,
 on areas designated to receive masonry coating.
 When using combination materials, follow wet curing procedures until
 completing all patching or other surface corrections and applying the
 compound. Keep the surface covered with wet burlap or other approved
 material and alternately expose small sections for surface corrections, to
 avoid drying. Conform to surface preparation requirements for masonry
 coating in all respects.
 When inadvertently applying curing compound or masonry coating to
 surfaces upon which the compound is not allowed for use, remove it by
 sandblasting or high-pressure water cleaning with or without abrasives
 added to water stream. Some compounds may require chemical removal.
 When chemical cleaners are used, neutralize compounds and fully rinse
 surface with clean water. Do not damage finished concrete. Correct any
 damage at no cost to the Department. Allow surface to dry before
 proceeding.
 Protect the curing compound and maintain it in an acceptable condition
 for a period of at least 7 calendar days. Moisten and respray curing
 compound on surfaces on which the curing compound is damaged before
 the end of the 7-calendar day curing period. Cover surfaces upon which
 curing compound has been applied and that will be used as work surfaces or
 otherwise subject to damage to the curing compound with planks, boards, or
 other protective material to protect the curing compound from damage.
 
 C) Curing Blankets. Only use curing blankets for curing bridge deck slabs and
 other flat horizontal surfaces.
 Keep the concrete continuously damp for the period of time specified for the
 item being constructed, beginning immediately after placing and finishing. As
 
 601—31
 
 soon as possible, without damaging the concrete surface, moisten the concrete by
 applying water, and immediately cover the surface with the curing blankets.
 Place the blankets so that adjoining blankets overlap at least 18 inches.
 Weight all laps and outside edges to prevent displacement of the blankets before
 completing curing. Ensure intimate contact between the blankets and the
 concrete surface.
 If the blankets are disturbed before the curing time expires, immediately
 replace them. Apply water at any time drying of the concrete is evident.
 Immediately repair torn places in the blankets by cementing an additional
 thickness of the same material over the torn area. At the end of each curing
 period, inspect the blankets; repair all tears or holes before reusing the blankets.
 601.03.18 Surface Finish. Apply the following surface finishes to various parts of
 concrete structures:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 Ordinary Surface Finish,
 Masonry Coating Finish, or
 Floated Surface Finish.
 
 Apply ordinary surface finish to all concrete surfaces not required to have masonry
 coating finish or a floated surface finish. Consider ordinary surface finish as a final finish
 on all surfaces not required to have masonry coating.
 Ensure that exposed finished concrete surfaces do not vary more than 1/4 inch in 10
 feet as measured from a straightedge.
 A) Ordinary Surface Finish. Immediately following removal of forms, remove
 all fins and irregular projections from all surfaces except those not to be exposed
 in the completed work. On all surfaces, that have cavities and depressions
 resulting from removal of form ties, and all other holes, honeycomb spots,
 broken corners or edges, and other defects, thoroughly clean the defects, saturate
 them with water, and carefully point them. Use a mortar of the same cement and
 fine aggregates mixed in the same proportions as used in the class of concrete
 being finished. Do not use a mortar that is more than 30 minutes old, and cure
 the mortar patches as specified for the structures. After the mortar has
 thoroughly hardened, finish it to obtain a uniform and smooth surface that is the
 same color and texture as in the surrounding concrete. When required, chip out
 honeycomb areas before pointing. Carefully tool all open and filled contraction
 and expansion joints in the completed work and keep them free of all mortar and
 concrete. Expose the joint filler for its full length with clean true edges.
 Obtain smooth and even surfaces of uniform color and texture without
 unsightly bulges, patched areas, depressions, and other imperfections.
 The Engineer will consider individual surfaces satisfactory and in
 compliance with requirements for ordinary surface finish when the surfaces have
 been formed and finished as specified and the Engineer has approved the
 resultant surface as to uniformity, color, texture, and smoothness.
 The Engineer will consider each face of a column, wing, girder, or parapet
 separately in determining if the finish is satisfactory.
 Protect all exposed surfaces from subsequent construction operations and
 from drip and disfigurement. Clean and finish any surface disfigured as a result
 of construction or other operations as the Engineer may require to give a
 satisfactory surface finish.
 B) Masonry Coating Finish. " After the Engineer has inspected and accepted the
 concrete surfaces of bridges and median barriers as having a satisfactory
 ordinary surface finish, clean the concrete surfaces specified hereinafter of all
 dust, foreign matter, and form oil, and apply a Department approved masonry
 coating finish. Coat the following surfaces, including all beveled edges:
 
 601—32
 
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 
 Bridge End Bents, Abutments, Retaining Walls, and Headwalls for box or
 long span underpasses - every exposed surface including wingwalls, above a
 point 6 inches below ground or fill line.
 Bridge Pier Caps - the tops (including exposed surfaces of pads, pedestals,
 and keys), sides and ends. Do not apply the coating to bearing areas.
 Bridge Superstructure - the tops, inside and outside faces, and ends of all
 barrier walls, parapets, curbs, and plinths that will be exposed. Do not apply
 the coating to the riding surface of the bridge deck.
 Median Barriers - all exposed surfaces of concrete median barriers and
 concrete terminal sections appurtenant to the barriers.
 Exposed Surfaces of Substructure and the Superstructure of Highway,
 Railway, and Pedestrian Bridges Over a Highway - all surfaces identified in
 1), 2), and 3) above and the underneath surfaces of slab overhangs that are
 outside of exterior girders and the exterior side and bottom of exterior
 beams, girders and box beams and all exposed surfaces of piers, abutments
 and walls that are within 200 feet of a public road or street. Extend the
 masonry coating from a point 6 inches below ground line to the top of the
 exposed surface.
 
 Thoroughly clean all surfaces to receive a masonry coating and keep
 them free of oil, form oil, grease, dust, dirt, mud, curing compound, release
 agents, loose patching mortar, or any other substance that may prevent
 bonding. Before applying the masonry coating material, fill all air holes
 flush with the surface with the masonry coating material or an approved
 mortar to provide a uniform surface. Surfaces that will receive Masonry
 Coating Finish must have a roughened surface that meets manufacturer’s
 recommendations for product performance.
 Check all surfaces to receive a masonry coating for the presence of dust by
 wiping a dark cloth across the surface of the concrete. If a white powder can be
 seen on the dark cloth, clean the concrete by wire brushing, grinding, or water
 blasting and then allow it to thoroughly dry before applying the masonry coating.
 The Engineer will recheck the surface for the presence of dust after cleaning.
 Check all surfaces to receive a masonry coating for the presence of oily
 conditions by sprinkling or fogging water on the surface of the concrete. If the
 water stands in droplets without spreading out immediately, this indicates the
 surface is contaminated with an oily substance, and the Engineer will require
 cleaning using a detergent and water followed by thorough rinsing with water.
 The Engineer will recheck the surface for the presence of oily conditions after
 cleaning.
 Thoroughly dry all surfaces to receive a masonry coating before applying
 the coating, unless the coating manufacturer specifically recommends the surface
 to be wet. The Department’s List of Approved Materials contains each
 manufacturer’s recommendation. The Engineer will not consider surfaces to be
 dry unless an absorbent paper pressed tightly against the surface does not show
 any trace of moisture.
 Suspend coating application any time the ambient temperature or the
 temperature of the concrete does not comply with the coating manufacturer’s
 recommendations.
 Prior to application of the materials, furnish the Engineer with copies of the
 coating material manufacturer’s brochures or booklets. Apply masonry coating
 materials in strict conformity with the manufacturer’s written instructions and
 apply the material at a uniform rate of at least 50 ± 10 square feet per gallon.
 Satisfactorily repair or remove any portions of the coating that are not clean,
 uniform in color, texture, thickness, tightly bonded, or that are damaged before
 final acceptance of the project and replace them with an acceptable finish and
 coating.
 Provide a neat uniform appearance, and prevent the coating from being
 601—33
 
 dripped, sprayed, or otherwise deposited upon concrete or steel surfaces not
 designated to receive the coating. Remove any objectionable deposits or
 material and repair the surfaces to the Engineer’s satisfaction.
 C) Floated Surface Finish. Finish horizontal surfaces not subject to wear, and
 those that do not receive the Masonry Coating Finish, such as back walls, and
 headwalls, by placing an excess of materials in the form and removing or
 striking off such excess with a wooden template, forcing coarse aggregate below
 the mortar surface. Do not use mortar topping for surfaces falling under this
 classification. After striking-off the concrete as described, thoroughly work the
 surface and float it by hand with a wooden float leaving a fine grained, smoothsanded surface.
 Finish concrete bridge floors as specified in Section 609.
 Finish sidewalks on structures as specified in Section 505.
 601.03.19 Construction Date and Identification. On all concrete bridges and box
 culverts, stencil the year the Contract was executed and the structure drawing number on
 the concrete at the locations designated. Make the figures on the stencil according to
 details specified in the Plans. For bridges having a clear span of 20 feet or more, stencil
 the year the Contract was executed and load capacity of the structure on the outside face of
 the plinth or barrier wall as shown on the Standard Drawing or as directed. On all box
 culverts, place stenciled figures giving the year in which the Contract is executed on the
 inlet end of the culvert on the outside face and center of the parapet or headwall. Do not
 use permanent plates or markers of any kind, other than those shown, on any structure.
 On all bridges, imprint the name(s) of the prime contractor, and the subcontractor when
 applicable, in the concrete at the location shown or designated. Furnish stencils, all
 equipment, tools, labor, materials, and other incidentals necessary.
 601.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 601.04.01 Concrete. The Department will measure the quantity in cubic yards
 according to the dimensions specified in the Plans. The Department will not measure the
 volume of concrete displaced by pile heads (except when using concrete piles) for
 payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work. The Department will
 measure the volume of concrete displaced by concrete pile heads in cubic yards. The
 Department will not measure forming, including permanent steel forms, for payment and
 will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 601.04.02 Steel Reinforcement.
 according to Subsection 602.04.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity
 
 601.04.03 Masonry Coating. The Department will measure the quantity in square
 yards.
 601.04.04 Mass Concrete. The Department will measure the quantity in cubic yards
 actually placed.
 601.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 08100, 08102-08106,
 02555
 08150
 02998
 10040
 (1)
 
 Pay Item
 
 Pay Unit
 
 Concrete, Class
 Steel Reinforcement
 Masonry Coating
 Mass Concrete(1)
 
 Cubic Yard
 See Subsection 602.05
 Square Yard
 Cubic Yard
 
 The Department will pay for Mass Concrete at a unit price of 2 times the
 
 601—34
 
 delivered cost of the concrete. When mixing concrete on site, the Department
 will pay for Mass Concrete at one-half the contract unit price for that class
 concrete.
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 601—35
 
 SECTION 602  STEEL REINFORCEMENT
 602.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and place steel for reinforcement of concrete.
 Furnish bars, spirals, welded wire fabric, bar mat, or other specified reinforcement, of the
 quality, type, size, and quantity designated by the Contract.
 602.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 602.02.01 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 602.02.02 Epoxy Coating Material. Conform to Section 811.
 602.02.03 Welded Steel Wire Fabric (WWF). Conform to Section 811.
 602.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 602.03.01 Protection of Material. Handle and store steel reinforcement to prevent
 bending, excessive rusting, or contamination with objectionable substances.
 602.03.02 Straightening. Before placing in the work, straighten reinforcement bent
 during shipment or handling without injuring the steel. Do not heat the steel, or use steel
 with sharp kinks.
 602.03.03 Bending. Bend reinforcement cold to the dimensions and shapes specified
 in the Plans and to within tolerances designated in the CRSI Manual of Standard Practice.
 In bending, do not injure the steel. Bend bars in the shop before shipment, not in the field.
 602.03.04 Placing and Fastening. Accurately place all steel reinforcement as
 shown, and firmly hold in position while placing and during hardening of concrete. Hold
 in position to within a tolerance of ± 1/2 inch, and place to within a tolerance of ± 1/4 inch
 of specified clearance from the face of concrete, except for bridge deck reinforcement
 steel. Place steel reinforcement for bridge slabs to within the tolerances specified in
 Subsection 609.03.03. Dimensions shown from the face of concrete to bars are clear
 distances. Bar spacings are from center to center of bars. Tie bars at all intersections,
 except where spacing is less than one foot in both directions, then tie alternate
 intersections. Always pass vertical stirrups around the main tension members and
 securely attach them to the members.
 Use Engineer approved supports to maintain distances from forms. Use precast
 blocks composed of mortar or Engineer approved metal chairs as supports for holding
 reinforcement from contact with the forms. Ensure that the tips of metal chair supports in
 contact with the surface of the concrete are plastic coated steel. When using plastic coated
 steel supports, provide a minimum of 1/8 inch thickness of the plastic material between
 the metal tips and the exposed surface of the concrete. The Engineer will accept metal
 supports as specified for epoxy coated bars. Securely tie down the steel placed in
 reinforced concrete slabs to prevent any possibility of steel rising above the specified
 elevation during placing, vibrating, and finishing the concrete as required by Subsection
 609.03. Ensure that metal supports have a shape that will be easily enveloped by the
 concrete.
 Separate the top and bottom mats of bars with precast mortar blocks or by other
 equally suitable devices. Do not use pebbles, pieces of broken stone or brick, metal pipe,
 and wooden blocks as separators. Securely place reinforcement in any member, and then
 obtain the Engineer’s approval before placing concrete. The Engineer may reject concrete
 placed in violation of this provision.
 When using grout to install steel bars into existing concrete, conform to Section 511.
 602.03.05
 
 Special Requirements for the Installation of Epoxy Coated Bars.
 
 602—1
 
 Either coat all tie wires, clips, chair and bar supports, and other metallic materials used for
 the installation of the epoxy coated reinforcing bars with fusion bonded epoxy resin or
 with an approved vinyl type material, or make them of an approved non-metallic material.
 Use an epoxy material that provides a uniform continuous coating having a film
 thickness of 12 ± 7 mils. Use vinyl-type material that is pliable and provides a uniform
 continuous coating having a thickness of 30 ± 10 mils. Test installation devices coated
 with either material according to KM 64-106.
 Allow the Engineer to check the installation devices for flaking, chipping, or any
 other defects during the pre-pour inspection of the epoxy coated reinforcing bars, and
 repair or replace the devices as the Engineer deems necessary.
 Coat tie wires with a flexible plastic or vinyl material to a thickness of 12 ± 7 mils.
 The Engineer will test the coating according to KM 64-106.
 Provide all systems for handling coated bars with padded contact areas for the bars
 whenever possible. Pad all bundling bands, and lift all bundles with a strong back,
 multiple supports, or a platform bridge so as to prevent bar-to-bar abrasion from sags in
 the bar bundle. Use nylon slings for direct epoxy bar contact. Use loading and unloading
 procedures and equipment that does not damage the coating.
 Unload and store the epoxy coated steel bars on the project site in a manner to avoid
 damage or contamination. Avoid extended outdoor storage of coated bars of over 2
 months. If expecting the outdoor storage to exceed 2 months, cover the bars for protection
 against the elements and to prevent condensation from forming on the bars. Install the
 bars in the bridge deck according to applicable requirements of Section 609, except as
 provided in this section and as the Engineer deems necessary in order to protect and
 preserve the epoxy coating.
 Repair all cuts, nicks, and abrasions that exceed 0.25 percent of the surface area and
 the bar end with the epoxy repair material supplied by the powdered epoxy resin
 manufacturer. If the total surface area covered with patching material exceeds 2 percent in
 a one foot section, sheared ends not included, remove and replace them with acceptable
 bars. Also, repair any damaged metallic accessories with a suitable material.
 Make every reasonable effort to repair all damaged areas of the reinforcing steel and
 accessories before any rusting occurs. If infrequent and small damaged areas do rust,
 thoroughly remove the rust by sandblasting or other Engineer approved methods before
 repairing the areas. Ensure that the coated bars, when incorporated into the work, are
 reasonably free from dirt, paint, oil, grease, or other foreign substance, and, when deemed
 necessary, clean the bars to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
 Place concrete in the deck using methods and equipment that will not damage the
 coated materials.
 Since the epoxy coating is flammable, do not expose the coated bars to any fire or
 flame. Do not cut coated bars by burning.
 602.03.06 Splicing. Do not splice any reinforcement that is not of the type and at the
 locations specified in the Plans without the Engineer’s written permission. The
 Department will allow the use of lapped splices, welded splices, mechanical couplers, or
 other positive connection splices specified in the Plans or designated by Engineer. Do not
 weld rail steel bar reinforcement used for bridges, cast-in-place culverts, and cast-in-place
 walls.
 Make all splices added in the field and not specified in the Plans as far from the point
 of maximum tensile stress in the member as practical, and stagger splice points 3 feet or
 more in adjacent bars, when possible. Do not use any splices which reduce the clear
 distance between the splice and the closest bar to less than the minimum clear distance
 required by the design specifications. Do not use mechanical couplers having a diameter
 of greater than 125 percent of the nominal diameter of the reinforcing bar in the top bars in
 beams, slabs, or girders in which the concrete under the top bars is 12 inches or more in
 depth.
 Make all splices with clean, sound materials properly affixed to the members being
 spliced and free of any substances that would weaken or contaminate the splice or
 concrete surrounding the splice.
 
 602—2
 
 Provide lapped splices that have a length no less than that specified in the Plans.
 When using lapped splices in areas not specified in the Plans, obtain the Engineer’s
 approval. Splice bars by rigidly clamping or to otherwise wire together in a manner the
 Engineer approves. Make splices for spirals, where necessary, with a minimum lap of 1.5
 turns of spiral.
 When welding splices, conform to the AWS Reinforcing Steel Welding Code. Butt
 together and weld bars to develop, in tension, at least 125 percent of the specified yield
 strength of the bars. Do not use welded splices unless specified in the Plans or as the
 Engineer approves.
 Use mechanical couplers primarily for bars required for compression only. Use only
 mechanical couplers or bars designed to carry critical tension or compression that are
 equivalent in strength to approved welded splices (125 percent of the specified bar yield
 strength).
 When the Engineer allows welded splices or mechanical couplers, prepare 2 test
 specimens of the spliced reinforcement for submittal to the Division of Materials for
 testing before incorporating the splices into the work, and submit one additional test
 specimen for each 100 splices made. Ensure that only personnel who are qualified in
 conformance with the AWS Reinforcing Steel Welding Code make the welded splices.
 602.03.07 Welded Steel Wire Fabric (WWF). Overlap sheets of WWF by 40 or
 more times the nominal diameter of the longitudinal wires to maintain a uniform strength,
 and securely fasten the sheets at the ends and edges.
 602.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 602.04.01 Steel Reinforcement. The Department will measure the quantity,
 including bars used to replace test specimens, by the pound in the final work based on the
 theoretical number of pounds. The Department will not measure clips, wire, chairs, or
 other material used for fastening reinforcement in place for payment and will consider
 them incidental to this item of work. The Department will not measure welded splicing
 for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 The Department will base quantities of materials furnished and placed on the
 calculated weights of the reinforcing steel actually placed. The Department will calculate
 the weights based upon the following table:
 ASTM STANDARD REINFORCING BARS
 Bar Size
 English
 and (metric)
 
 Nominal Mass
 pounds
 per foot
 
 #3 (10)
 #4 (13)
 #5 (16)
 #6 (19)
 #7 (22)
 #8 (25)
 #9 (29)
 #10 (32)
 #11 (36)
 #14 (43)
 #18 (57)
 
 0.376
 0.668
 1.043
 1.502
 2.044
 2.670
 3.400
 4.303
 5.313
 7.650
 13.600
 
 Nominal Dimensions - Round Sections
 Diameter
 Cross Section
 Perimeter
 inches
 Area, sq. inches
 inches
 0.375
 0.500
 0.625
 0.750
 0.875
 1.000
 1.128
 1.270
 1.410
 1.693
 2.257
 
 0.11
 0.20
 0.31
 0.44
 0.60
 0.79
 1.00
 1.27
 1.56
 2.25
 4.00
 
 1.178
 1.571
 1.963
 2.356
 2.749
 3.142
 3.544
 3.990
 4.430
 5.320
 7.090
 
 602.04.02 Steel Reinforcement, Epoxy Coated. The Department will measure the
 quantity according to Subsection 602.04.01. The Department will not measure the epoxy
 
 602—3
 
 coating or its application for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 602.04.03 Mechanical Couplers. The Department will measure the quantity by
 each individual unit.
 602.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 08150
 08151
 08130-08139
 08140, 08141
 
 Pay Item
 Steel Reinforcement
 Steel Reinforcement, Epoxy Coated
 Mechanical Reinforced Couplers, Size
 Mechanical Reinforced Couplers Epoxy Coated, Size
 
 Pay Unit
 Pound
 Pound
 Each
 Each
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 602—4
 
 SECTION 603  FOUNDATION PREPARATION AND
 BACKFILL
 603.01 DESCRIPTION. Excavate and backfill or dispose of all materials required for
 the construction of bridges, box culverts, and other structures for which excavation is not
 otherwise provided.
 603.02 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 conforming to Section 845.
 
 Use fabric wrapped backfill drains
 
 603.03 CONSTRUCTION. Remove and dispose of all materials excavated for the
 construction of the foundations for all structures, including the removal of existing
 structures. Place backfill to the original ground level and perform final cleaning up.
 603.03.01 Classification. Perform structure excavation necessary for all bridge
 foundations and culverts, except pipe culverts, as Structure Excavation Solid Rock or
 Structure Excavation Common.
 Perform structure excavation necessary in the
 construction of cribwalls and retaining walls as Structure Excavation Unclassified.
 A) Structure Excavation Solid Rock. The Department considers all of the
 following Structure Excavation Solid Rock:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 All rock in solid beds, detached masses, or ledge formations which cannot
 be removed without blasting or quarrying. Hoe-rams and jackhammers may
 be required for solid rock removal.
 Detached rocks or boulders having a volume of 0.5 cubic yards or more
 each.
 Shale, slate, or coal which cannot be removed without blasting or quarrying.
 Rock layers interspersed with strata of earth, or all conglomerate boulder
 formations, when rock strata or boulders constitute 60 percent or more of
 the volume to be removed.
 
 B) Structure Excavation Common.
 The Department considers
 Excavation Common as all material not classified as Solid Rock
 Excavation.
 C) Structure Excavation Unclassified. The Department considers
 Excavation Unclassified as all excavation regardless of the
 encountered.
 
 Structure
 Structure
 Structure
 materials
 
 603.03.02 Channel Preservation. When any excavation or dredging is done at the
 site of the structure, do not excavate outside of caissons, cofferdams, steel piling, or
 sheeting, and do not disturb the natural stream bed adjacent to the structure without the
 Engineer’s written permission.
 603.03.03 Footing Excavation. Notify the Engineer at least 48 hours in advance of
 beginning structure excavation.
 Excavate the foundation pits to allow placing of the full width and length of footings
 specified in the Plans with full horizontal beds. Do not use rounded or undercut corners
 and edges of footings. Ensure that all rock and other hard foundation material is free from
 all loose material, cleaned, and cut to a firm surface, either level, stepped, or roughened, as
 directed. Clean all seams and fill with concrete, mortar, crushed stone, or sand. When
 masonry is to rest on an excavated surface other than durable rock or durable shale (SDI
 equal to or greater than 95 according to KM 64-513), do not disturb the bottom of the
 excavation, and do not make the final removal of the foundation material to grade until
 just before the masonry is to be placed. When unsuitable foundation material is
 encountered, excavate and replace with acceptable material as the Engineer directs.
 Maintain the excavation free of standing water, insofar as is practical.
 
 603—1
 
 When the Plans require the foundation for a bridge or culvert to be solid rock or
 shale, drill into the foundation material to confirm its suitability. Drill according to the
 Division of Construction’s Guidance Manual.
 603.03.04 Backfilling. Use only approved materials that will provide a dense wellcompacted backfill. Ensure that the backfill material is free of frozen lumps, vegetation,
 debris, and rock fragments larger than 4 inches in any dimension. Before starting backfill,
 clear the excavated pits of all form material and rubbish, and, when practical dewater the
 pits.
 Place and compact backfill material in uniform horizontal lifts not exceeding one foot
 for stone and 6 inches for soil and rock/soil combination material. For backfill that will be
 beneath, or within a proposed embankment, backfill according to Subsection 206.03.03.
 When backfilling piers constructed in a stream bed or flood plain, the Department
 will allow material removed from the excavation as backfill material provided no large
 rock or broken concrete fragments are placed in contact with the structure, and provided
 no logs, stumps or rubbish are used. Backfill below normal low water elevation will not
 require compaction.
 Shape the backfilled areas lying outside the limits of roadway embankment to a
 uniform finish.
 As a precaution against introducing unbalanced stresses in masonry walls or columns,
 place and compact the backfill to the same elevation on both sides of culverts, wingwalls,
 piers, and abutments before proceeding to the next layer.
 For structures over which rock fills will be constructed, first cover the structures to a
 minimum depth of 2 feet with materials placed and compacted as required for backfill.
 Obtain the Engineer’s permission before backfilling against any concrete masonry
 structure.
 603.03.05 Drainage. At locations where depth to weep hole flowline is 30 feet or
 less, drain backfill by installing a fabric-wrapped drain.
 Center a fabric-wrapped drain over the inlet end of each weep hole with a wide side
 against the concrete, and glue the drain in place. Use a glue recommended by the drain
 manufacturer. Ensure that glue is not placed over the portion of the drain covering the
 weep hole. Place drains vertically at each weep hole.
 When using Type 1 drains, the ‘weak’ or ‘cleat’ side shall face the structure, unless
 otherwise noted in the manufacturer’s recommendations and the appropriate product
 accessories are used.
 Extend the drain from top of footing or from 6 inches below the inlet end of weep
 holes to 6 inches below subgrade elevation or, in the case of box culverts, to the top of the
 top slab. Avoid damaging or compressing the drain during backfilling.
 When splices are required, provide a 6-inch lap of fabric to be glued to the adjacent
 piece so the spliced drain is completely covered by fabric.
 Provide flaps or separate pieces of fabric to cover the top and bottom of the drain, and
 overlap the fabric on all sides of the drain at least 6 inches.
 At the weep hole, if necessary, puncture the plastic core to provide free drainage from
 the drain to the weep hole. If puncturing of the core is necessary do not puncture the
 geotextile fabric on the outside face of the drain. Place a piece of plastic, at least 8 inches
 by 8 inches by 3/16 inches on the outside face of the drain over the weep hole, as
 reinforcement.
 When depth to weep hole flow line is greater than 30 feet, cover the inlet ends of
 weep holes with at least 2 cubic feet of No. 57 coarse aggregate. Place the aggregate to
 allow free drainage but at the same time prevent the fill from washing. From
 approximately 6 inches below the bottom of the inlet ends of the weep holes, place a
 column of clean crushed stone or gravel, at least one square foot, up against the back of
 the wall to the upper limits of the backfill. At the time of placing the remainder of
 embankment adjacent to the structure, continue placing the column of stone up to
 subgrade elevation, or, in the case of box culverts, to the top of the top slab.
 
 603—2
 
 603.03.06 Cofferdams. For foundation construction, drive sheet piles for
 cofferdams to an elevation well below the bottom of the footings. Brace walls to ensure
 against collapse. Provide interior dimensions that allow sufficient clearance for the
 construction of forms and the inspection of their exteriors, and to permit pumping outside
 the forms. Right, reset, or enlarge cofferdams that are tilted or moved laterally during the
 process of sinking to provide the necessary clearance. Construct cofferdams sufficiently
 watertight to prevent water from coming in contact with fresh concrete. Do not allow
 bracing to extend into the substructure masonry unless the Engineer permits in writing.
 Submit drawings prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer showing the design and
 construction methods of proposed cofferdams. Include in the drawings all necessary
 details and design calculations. The type and clearance of cofferdams, details that affect
 the character of the finished work and the safety of the installation are subject to
 Department approval. The Department will review design details of cofferdams, bracing,
 shoring, or other work.
 Remove all cofferdams, including all sheeting and bracing, after completion of the
 substructure without disturbing or causing damage to the finished masonry.
 603.03.07 Foundation Seals. When conditions are encountered which, in the
 judgment of the Engineer, render it impracticable to remove water from the cofferdam
 before placing masonry, the Engineer may require construction of a concrete foundation
 seal according to Subsection 601.03.09 B).
 Do not dewater cofferdam until the concrete seal has set sufficiently to withstand the
 hydrostatic pressure and in no case less than 72 hours after placement.
 The Engineer may require longer than 72 hours.
 603.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will not measure the removal of existing
 structures, or portions thereof, in structure excavation when listed in the Contract as a bid
 item.
 The Department will measure removing masonry necessary in the building of
 extensions to or the rebuilding of an existing structure according to Section 203.
 The Department will consider removal of existing pipe incidental to structure
 excavation and will deduct the interior volume of the pipe from the structure excavation
 quantity.
 When the Plans require the foundation to be solid rock or shale, drilling to confirm
 suitability is incidental to the structure excavation.
 603.04.01 All Structures. When it is necessary to backfill in excess of the material
 excavated, the Department will measure the quantity of the additional material necessary
 for such backfill in cubic yards in its original position under Borrow Excavation or
 Roadway Excavation, unless it is paid for as Extra Work.
 The Department will not measure dewatering excavated pits and placing and
 compacting backfill for payment and will consider them incidental to the structure
 excavation bid items.
 When not listed as a bid item, the Department will not measure furnishing and
 placing fabric wrapped drains or coarse aggregate at weep holes for payment and will
 consider them incidental to the structure excavation bid items.
 When it is necessary to construct any footing more than 2.5 feet below the elevation
 specified in the Plans for structures, except pipe culverts, sewers, and underdrains, the
 Department will pay for all excavation below plan elevation as Extra Work.
 The Department will not measure excavation or backfill in excess of the limits
 described in this section for payment.
 603.04.02 Bridges, Culverts, and Retaining Walls. The Department will measure
 the quantity of all excavation in its original position as that actually excavated within the
 limits bounded by vertical planes 18 inches outside the footings and parallel thereto except
 as follows. The Department will measure between the original ground surface and the
 bottom of the excavated pit, except in cuts where the finished cross section will govern,
 
 603—3
 
 and except when structures are removed, the bottom of the excavation for removal shall
 govern. The Department will not include in the quantity the volume of the waterway of
 existing culverts and bridges, the volume of materials removed as Remove Existing
 Structure, nor materials removed as incidental. The Department will not measure structure
 excavation for pipe culverts and pipe culvert headwalls, sewer pipe, or combination sewer
 and storm pipe.
 Where tie beams, struts, web walls, overhangs, or similar construction are required on
 the substructure above the bottom of the footings and extend beyond the area bounded by
 vertical planes 18 inches outside the footings, the Department will measure the excavation,
 except that the Department will measure the area bounded by vertical planes 18 inches
 outside the footings and 18 inches outside the neat lines of the tie beams, struts, web walls,
 and other similar construction. The Department will measure between the original ground
 surface and a plane 18 inches below the bottom of the tie beams, struts, web walls, and
 other similar construction.
 The Department will not measure excavation necessary to construct concrete
 encasement for an individual steel pile for payment and will consider it incidental to the
 pile. The Department will not measure Structure Excavation in the construction of timber
 bents or backing planks, or for excavation incidental to splicing piling for payment.
 603.04.03 Foundation Preparation. When listed as a bid item, the Department will
 measure all work performed as part of Foundation Preparation as a lump sum for each
 structure. The Department will not measure cofferdams, shoring, dewatering, common
 excavation, or backfill for payment, and will consider them incidental to this bid item.
 The Department will measure Structure Excavation Solid Rock and removal of unsuitable
 foundation material and refill separately for payment. The Cabinet will pay Structure
 Excavation Common when conditions are such that excavation is required two (2) feet
 beyond bottom of foundation elevations.
 603.04.04 Structure Excavation Common. When Foundation Preparation is not
 listed as a bid item, the Department will measure the quantity, in cubic yards. The
 Department will not measure any material removed or excavated before the Engineer takes
 measurements.
 603.04.05 Structure Excavation Solid Rock. The Department will measure the
 quantity in cubic yards. The Department will not measure any material removed or
 excavated before the Engineer takes measurements.
 603.04.06 Structure Excavation Unclassified. The Department will measure the
 quantity in cubic yards. The Department will not measure any material removed or
 excavated before the Engineer takes measurements.
 603.04.07 Foundation Undercut. When Foundation Preparation is not a bid item
 and the Engineer directs that unsuitable foundation material is be excavated and replaced,
 the Department will measure the quantity of excavation as Structure Excavation Common,
 Structure Excavation Solid Rock, or Structure Excavation Unclassified in cubic yards, as
 applicable, which will be complete compensation for all excavation, disposal, backfill, and
 all other incidentals necessary to prepare a suitable foundation.
 When Foundation Preparation is a bid item, the Department will pay for Foundation
 Undercut as Extra Work.
 603.04.08 Cofferdams. The Department will not measure the quantity unless it is
 listed as a separate bid item and will consider it incidental to the bid item Structure
 Excavation or Foundation Preparation.
 603.04.09 Foundation Seals. The Department will not measure the quantity unless
 it is listed as a separate bid item or the work is directed by the Engineer.
 
 603—4
 
 603.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 
 Code
 08002
 08001
 02203
 02210
 02200
 08003
 
 Pay Item
 Structure Excavation Solid Rock
 Structure Excavation Common
 Structure Excavation Unclassified
 Borrow Excavation
 Roadway Excavation
 Foundation Preparation
 
 Pay Unit
 Cubic Yard
 Cubic Yard
 Cubic Yard
 See Section 205.05
 See Section 204.05
 Lump Sum
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 603—5
 
 SECTION 604  BEARING PILES
 604.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and drive prestressed concrete, precast concrete, castin-place concrete, or HP shape structural steel bearing piles.
 604.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 604.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 604.02.02 Structural Steel. Conform to Section 812.
 604.02.03 Welded Steel Pipe Piles (Cast-In-Place Pile Shells). Conform to ASTM
 A 252, Grade 3.
 604.02.04 Miscellaneous Metals. Conform to Section 813.
 604.02.05 Polypropylene
 recommendations.
 
 Sleeves.
 
 Conform
 
 to
 
 the
 
 manufacturer’s
 
 604.02.06 Pile Points. Conform to AASHTO M 103, Grade 65/35 or ASTM A 148.
 Furnish pile points from a supplier on the Department’s List of Approved Materials.
 604.02.07 Equipment for Driving.
 A) Hammers. Provide hammers for driving precast or prestressed concrete piles
 that develop a minimum energy per blow at each full stroke of the piston of more
 than one foot-pound per each pound weight of pile being driven. Use 150
 pounds per cubic foot as the weight of concrete in the pile being driven. Use a
 hammer that develops a total energy of 12,000 or more foot-pounds per blow.
 Provide hammers for driving steel piles or steel shells for cast-in-place piles
 that develop a minimum energy of 5,000 foot-pound for each ton of steel in the
 pile or shell being driven and in no case develop less than 10,000 foot-pounds of
 total energy.
 Use diesel powered pile hammers with a ram weighing at least 2,000 pounds
 to drive steel piles, concrete piles, and steel shells for cast-in-place piles. For
 hammers that do not restrict the rebound of the ram use a ram 2,000 pounds or
 more.
 If hammers with an enclosed ram are used, they will have a rated equivalent
 energy of no less than 250 foot-pounds per blow per ton of the required bearing.
 For driving concrete piles, use hammers that have a rated equivalent energy of
 15,000 foot-pounds or more per blow. Equip hammers of this type with a gage
 and charts that will evaluate the equivalent energy actually produced under any
 driving conditions.
 When the Engineer determines the size of the hammer to be unsatisfactory,
 correct or replace it to produce satisfactory results. Provide the Engineer with
 the manufacturer’s specifications regarding hammers on request.
 B) Leads. Use pile driver leads that allow freedom of movement to the hammer
 and ensure proper distribution of hammer blows on the head of piles. Hold leads
 in position with guys, stiff braces, templates, or other Engineer approved means
 for supporting the pile during driving.
 C) Followers. Avoid driving piles with followers if possible. Use followers only
 with the Engineer’s written permission or when driving piles through water. If
 using followers, drive one long pile from every group of 10 without a follower,
 and use this pile to determine the average bearing power of the group.
 D) Water Jets. The Department will allow the use of water jets alone or in
 combination with a hammer. Provide sufficient water volume and pressure at the
 jet nozzles and number of jets to freely erode materials adjacent to the pile.
 
 604—1
 
 When using water jets and a hammer for driving, withdraw external jets or stop
 jetting, and drive the piles with the hammer to secure final penetration. Consider
 the difficulties encountered in driving when determining the time of withdrawal
 of jets. Vary this procedure until obtaining the desired results.
 604.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 604.03.01 General.
 A) Precast and Prestressed Concrete Piles. Construct according to Section 605.
 B) Cast-In-Place Piles. Construct according to Section 601. Use Class D or D
 Modified concrete, according to the Contract. Use welded steel pipe pile shells
 of the design and dimensions specified in the Plans. Select a wall thickness for
 steel shells that is sufficient to withstand driving without injury and to resist
 harmful distortion and buckling due to soil pressure after driving. Use only
 watertight shells to exclude water during the placement of the concrete. For pile
 shells with a fluted or corrugated section, measure the diameter of the shells
 from crest to crest of flutes or corrugations. Use only shells equipped with heavy
 steel ends and with welded joints.
 C) Steel Piles. Use HP shape piles.
 604.03.02 Limitations of Use. Penetrate 10 feet or more into original ground and 10
 feet or more below stream bed, or to rock. In all cases, develop the required bearing value
 with the pile penetration.
 For foundation work, do not penetrate a very soft upper stratum overlying a hard
 stratum unless the piles penetrate the hard material a sufficient distance to rigidly fix the
 ends.
 The Department will allow the driving of precast concrete piles and prestressed
 concrete piles 3 calendar days after casting or any time thereafter provided that samples of
 concrete taken from the respective mixture indicate a compressive strength of at least
 4,000 psi for Class D concrete or 5,000 psi for Class D Modified concrete.
 604.03.03 Storage and Handling. Store and handle piles in a manner that avoids
 injury to the piles.
 604.03.04 Preparation for Driving.
 A) Excavation. Do not drive piles until after completing excavation, except for test
 piles and for piles that extend above the ground in the completed structure.
 Sufficiently excavate the area in the vicinity of the test piles before driving them
 to ensure that the test piles are driven only through material that will not be
 excavated later in constructing the footing. Ensure that the Department allows
 driving test piles before excavating for the entire footing. Remove all material
 forced up between the piles to the correct elevation before placing concrete for
 the foundation.
 B) Caps. Protect the heads of all precast concrete piles and prestressed concrete
 piles with caps of approved design having suitable cushion next to the pile head
 and fitting into a casting which in turn supports a timber shock block.
 Cut the heads of steel piles squarely. Provide a driving cap or head that has
 been properly grooved or made in some manner to fit and hold firmly the head of
 the pile being driven so that the axis of the pile is in line with the axis of the
 hammer.
 Protect tops of steel shells for cast-in-place piles with driving heads,
 mandrels, or other devices properly sized for the hammer according to the
 hammer manufacturer’s recommendations to properly distribute the hammer
 blow and to prevent damage to the shell during driving.
 C) Pointing. For steel piles, provide cast steel points when specified or directed in
 
 604—2
 
 order to obtain penetration. Use pile points of the type specified in the Contract
 or by the Engineer. Weld pile points to the pile with a minimum 5/16 inch
 groove weld along the full outside width of each flange on the pile. Install pile
 points in the shop or in the field. Furnish a mill test report according to
 Subsection 607.03.13 C). Furnish the Engineer with the manufacturer’s
 specifications.
 D) Extensions, Build-Ups, and Splices. The Engineer may allow extensions,
 splices, or build ups when necessary as follows:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 Precast and Prestressed Concrete Piles. Perform extension or build-ups
 according to the Standard Drawings. If alternate methods for extensions or
 build-up are desired, submit proposal to the Engineer for consideration.
 Cast-in-Place Piles. Make extensions, splices, or build-ups on steel shells as
 specified in the Plans or as directed.
 Steel Piles. Make extensions or splices according to the standard drawings
 or the Division of Construction’s Guidance Manual. Weld according to
 Subsection 607.03.07. Never begin driving with a spliced pile. When
 splicing is necessary, use a length that will reasonably assure that bearing
 will be attained without additional splicing.
 
 604.03.05 Methods of Driving and Placing. With the Engineer’s written
 permission, water jet or core holes for prestressed, precast, or cast-in-place concrete piles,
 and then place piles in the holes and drive them to secure the last few feet of their
 penetration. Do not jet or core holes for steel piles unless the Engineer directs. Unless
 otherwise specified in the Plans or directed, prepare jetted or cored holes in compacted
 fills as necessary to secure the required penetration. Core holes to a maximum diameter
 equal to the least cross sectional dimension of the piles driven. Fill all voids that occur
 around a driven pile with free flowing sand.
 Do not drive piles in the vicinity of recently placed concrete until the concrete is
 sufficiently cured to prevent damage, in the judgment of the Engineer.
 For cast-in-place piles, drive the shells using steel heads having a projecting ring
 fitting inside the shell. Provide a 1/4 inch clearance between the ring and the shell. The
 Department will allow the use of other types of driving heads if the Engineer approves.
 The Department will not require painting the steel shells. Provide an inspection light
 before and during the shell filling operation. Remove and replace improperly driven,
 broken, or otherwise defective shells, or otherwise correct them to the Engineer’s
 satisfaction by driving an additional pile. The Engineer will inspect all driven shells.
 When the Engineer approves the driven shells, cut them off to a horizontal plane at the
 required elevation.
 Before placing concrete, remove all water or debris from the shell. Place concrete in
 an approved manner that will ensure against segregation. Do not place concrete until
 completely driving all piles within a radius of 16 feet of the shell to be filled or until
 completely driving all the shells for any one bent or foundation. Continuously place the
 concrete in each pile, and exercise proper care to fill every part of the shell and to ensure a
 dense, homogeneous mixture.
 The Engineer will not require steel reinforcement in cast-in-place piles unless
 specified in the Plans. When specified, use the type and design of reinforcement specified
 in the Plans.
 Ensure that the finished tops of piles are at the elevation specified in the Contract or
 directed by the Engineer and that they project no less than 6 inches into pier footings and
 no less than 3 feet into end bents.
 604.03.06 Test Piles. Drive test piles of a length and at the location designated on
 the plans or determined by the Engineer. These piles shall be of greater length than the
 length assumed in the design in order to provide for any variation in soil conditions.
 Test Piles are for the Engineer’s use in determining capability of the Contractor’s
 equipment and adequacy of design. The Engineer will determine when an adequate
 
 604—3
 
 bearing value has been obtained. The Contractor shall be responsible for determining pile
 lengths that may be necessary to obtain the required bearing values. No claim shall be
 made against the Department for costs of construction delays, or any materials, labor, or
 equipment that may be necessary due to the Contractor’s failure to furnish piles of a length
 sufficient to obtain the required bearing values, or for variations in length due to
 subsurface conditions that may be encountered.
 The same model and size pile hammer shall be used to drive the remaining piles in
 the structure as the one used to drive the test pile. The same type of piles shall be used in
 the remainder of the group as the type tested for the group.
 Soundings, boring logs, soil profiles, or other subsurface data included in the Contract
 documents are used by the Department for making preliminary estimates of quantities and
 should not be used for determining equipment, materials, or labor necessary for driving
 piles as required by the contract. All test piles shall be accurately located so they may be
 used in the finished structure.
 604.03.07 Determination of Bearing Values. The Engineer will determine when
 each pile in the structure has obtained an adequate bearing value. Determine the pile
 lengths necessary to obtain the required bearing values. The Department will determine
 bearing values by the specified formulas. When specified in the Contract or directed by
 the Engineer, the Department will determine the bearing values by static load test. Drive
 piles to develop a bearing value of no less than that specified in the Plans, directed by the
 Engineer, or determined by static load testing. When using water jets or cored holes in
 connection with driving, withdraw the jets or drive the piles in the cored holes, then the
 Department will determine the bearing value.
 A) Static Load Tests. When specified in the Contract or required by the Engineer,
 the Department will determine the size, number, and bearing value of piles by
 actual loading tests. Perform load test according to plans or proposal notes.
 B) Formula. In the absence of load tests, the Department will determine the
 allowable bearing values for piles by the following formulas:
 P =
 
 2 WH
 S + 1.0
 
 for gravity hammers
 
 P =
 
 2 WH
 S + 0.1
 
 for single acting
 steam-air hammers
 
 P =
 
 2E
 S + 0.1
 
 for double acting
 steam-air hammers
 
 P =
 
 2 WH
 S + 0.1
 
 for diesel hammers
 (having unrestricted rebound of ram)
 
 P =
 
 2E
 S + 0.1
 
 for diesel hammers
 (having enclosed ram)
 
 Where:
 P
 W
 H
 S
 
 =
 =
 =
 =
 
 E =
 
 allowable bearing capacity in pounds;
 weight in pounds, of striking parts of hammer;
 height of fall in feet;
 the penetration in inches per blow for the last 5 to 10 blows for
 gravity hammers and the last 10 to 20 blows for steam, air, or diesel
 hammers; and
 90 percent of the average equivalent energy in foot-pounds as
 determined by gage attached to pile hammer and recorded during
 the period when the penetration per blow is being observed.
 
 604—4
 
 The Department will use the preceding formulas only when:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 604.03.08
 directed.
 
 the hammer has a free fall,
 the head of the pile is not broomed or crushed,
 the penetration is reasonably quick and uniform, and
 there is no observed appreciable bounce after the blow.
 Allowable Variation in Driving.
 
 Use templates when specified or
 
 A) Exposed Piles. The Engineer will not accept exposed piles in the finished
 structure when:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 during driving, the pile varies more than 1/4 inch per foot from vertical or
 the batter position specified in the Plans;
 the driven pile varies more than 4 inches from plan position at the pile cutoff elevation; or
 the driven pile varies more than 2 inches from a stringline stretched between
 exterior piles in the exposed portion of the pile bent or group.
 
 B) Unexposed Piles. The Engineer will not accept unexposed piles in the finished
 structure when:
 1)
 2)
 
 during driving, the pile varies more than 1/4 inch per foot from vertical or
 the batter position specified in the Plans; or
 the driven pile varies more than 6 inches from plan position at the pile cutoff elevation.
 
 For either case, the Engineer will reference the plan position of the pile cutoff elevation to determine the variation of 1/4 inch per foot. For all piling that is
 unacceptable because of variations, remove and replace or redrive them in an
 acceptable position or correct them in a manner the Engineer directs. Furnish
 and place all additional concrete and steel reinforcement required to meet plan
 clearance and dimensions in footings, caps, or bridge seats due to variations in
 driving, even when variations are within allowable tolerances.
 604.03.09 Design Modifications. When it is not possible to obtain the capacity
 required by the Plans, the Department will redesign the structure based on the actual
 bearings obtained by test piles or pile load tests. The redesign will be at Department
 expense and time will not accrue during redesign.
 604.03.10 Ordering Piles. Order piles of the number and lengths necessary to
 complete the work.
 604.03.11 Pile Protection. When specified in the Contract, provide protection from
 negative skin friction as the Contract specifies.
 604.03.12 Unused Pile Lengths. Take ownership of unused lengths of piles and pile
 cutoffs, and remove such lengths and cutoffs from the project.
 604.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 604.04.01 Piles. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet for the total
 lengths of the various types and sizes. Splices are incidental to this item of work.
 For precast or prestressed concrete piles having concrete removed in order to expose
 the reinforcing steel, the Department will consider the end of the exposed reinforcing steel
 
 604—5
 
 as the pile end for purposes of measurement.
 The Department will not measure unused lengths of piles or pile cutoffs for payment.
 The Department will not measure corrective work or redriven piles.
 The Department will not measure any additional concrete or steel reinforcement
 required to meet plan clearance and dimensions in footings, caps, or bridge seats due to
 variations in driving, even when variations are within allowable tolerances.
 604.04.02 Pile Points. When included as a bid item, the Department will measure
 the quantity by each individual unit.
 604.04.03 Test Piles. For test piles actually used as a pile in the structure, the
 Department will measure the quantity according to Subsection 604.04.01 except that the
 minimum measured length for test piles will be the length specified in the Plans or
 directed by the Engineer. The Department will not measure unsatisfactory test piles that
 are not used as a pile in the structure.
 Length of test piles specified in the Plans are approximate only. The Department will
 not measure necessary splices for payment and will consider them incidental to this item
 of work.
 604.04.04 Loading Tests. The Department will measure the quantity by each
 individual unit. The Department will not measure for payment load tests made at the
 option of the Contractor.
 604.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 08080, 08082, 08086, 08096
 08072
 08042-08056
 08093-08095
 08033
 08040
 08060-08066
 
 Pay Item
 Pay Unit
 Piles, Prestressed Concrete, Size Linear Foot
 Piles, Cast-in-Place, Size
 Linear Foot
 Piles Steel, Size
 Linear Foot
 Pile Points
 Each
 Test Piles
 Linear Foot
 Loading Tests
 Each
 Piles-Precast Concrete, Size
 Linear Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 604—6
 
 SECTION 605  PRESTRESSED AND PRECAST CONCRETE
 PRODUCTS
 605.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct precast prestressed concrete members.
 Provide complete members, including all steel and other materials. Members include
 I-beams, box beams, barrier walls, deck units (box beams and slab), box culverts, and
 piling and other structural items.
 Fabricate according to the Department’s Precast and Prestressed Concrete Products
 Inspector’s Manual.
 605.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 605.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 605.02.02 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 605.02.03 Prestressing Strands. Conform to Section 811.
 605.02.04 Non-Shrink Grout. Conform to Subsection 601.03.
 605.02.05 Forms. Conform to Subsection 601.02. Only use metal forms for
 prestressed sections, except that wooden bulkheads are acceptable. Ensure that all forms
 are accessible for vibrating, tamping, and consolidating the concrete.
 605.02.06 Styrofoam. Use material the Engineer approves.
 605.02.07 Cardboard. Use material the Engineer approves.
 605.02.08 Batching Plant Equipment. Conform to Subsection 601.02.
 605.02.09 Plant Certification. Ensure that all prestressed and precast concrete
 products supplied to Department of Highways’ projects are manufactured in a Certified
 Plant.
 A) Requirements. For a plant to become a Certified Plant, ensure that the producer
 has the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 A production facility and other necessary equipment that conform to the
 Contract requirements.
 A quality control program conforming to Division 100 of the Department’s
 Precast and Prestressed Concrete Products Inspectors Manual.
 An acceptable record of production of quality products.
 Concrete technicians responsible for design of the concrete mixture and for
 performing quality control and process control testing, as required in
 Subsection 605.02.09 and Division 300 of the Department’s Precast and
 Prestressed Concrete Products Inspectors Manual. Ensure that the concrete
 technicians are certified as ACI Level I and KRMCA Level II as awarded
 by the KRMCA.
 A Level I concrete technician is responsible for quality control tests
 such as air content, slump, and molding cylinders. A Level II concrete
 technician is responsible for supervising this testing.
 The Engineer may require retesting or re-certification as deemed
 necessary.
 
 B) Application for Certification. Each year, ensure that the plant submits a
 written application for plant certification before January 1 to the Division of
 Materials. Ensure that the plant submits an application for re-certification when
 
 605—1
 
 transferring plant ownership.
 Ensure that the plant includes the following items with the application:
 1)
 2)
 
 Company name, plant address, the principle officers of the company, plant
 manager, production superintendent, and quality control supervisor.
 The names and certification levels of the concrete technicians responsible
 for design of the concrete mixture and for performing the required quality
 control and process control testing.
 
 The Department will place any plant that has not previously manufactured
 products for the Department on a one-year probationary period before qualifying
 it as a Certified Plant.
 C) Additional Prestressed Concrete Certification. Ensure that all prestressed
 concrete members supplied to the Department are manufactured in a plant that is
 certified under the appropriate Prestressed Concrete Institute quality control
 program and is designated as a PCI Certified Plant.
 605.02.10 Concrete Production. During production of concrete products, ensure
 that the producer conforms to all requirements of the Contract, and ensure that the
 concrete technicians perform all quality control and process control testing required by the
 Precast and Prestressed Concrete Products Inspectors Manual.
 The Inspector will perform the inspection duties established by the Department for
 the item being produced, including but not limited to the duties in the Department’s
 Precast and Prestressed Concrete Products Inspectors Manual. If, at any time, the
 producer is not abiding by the certification requirements, the Inspector will reject or accept
 those products not manufactured according to the Contract requirements as specified in
 Subsection 105.04.
 When production problems occur which may affect the structural integrity, such as
 holes in webs and flanges, cracks, reinforcement displacement, submit proposed corrective
 procedures to the Engineer. The Department will evaluate the product and determine if it
 will be rejected or if corrective actions are reasonable.
 If a plant consistently produces products not conforming to the requirements as set
 forth in this agreement, the Department will revoke its certification, and the plant may not
 longer produce products for Department projects until the plant corrects all deficiencies
 and regains certification.
 605.03 CONSTRUCTION. For prestressed concrete deck units, use Class D Modified
 concrete of either Type I or Type III cement, except do not allow the cement factor to
 exceed 800 pounds per cubic yard. Ensure all non-composite box beam concrete contains
 an approved corrosion inhibitor from the List of Approved Materials. Construct
 prestressed members other than concrete deck units of Class D concrete that uses either
 Type I or Type III cement, except do not allow the cement content to exceed 800 pounds
 per cubic yard.
 When the ambient temperature is 71 °F or higher, add a water reducing and retarding
 admixture to the concrete mixture for prestressed concrete products. The Engineer may
 direct or allow the use of water reducing and retarding or water-reducing admixture.
 605.03.01 Mixing and Batching. Conform to Subsection 601.03.
 605.03.02 Forming. Construct formwork according to Subsection 601.03.
 When the ambient temperature is above 80 °F, fog spray forms exposed to direct
 sunlight with water in order to cool the forms before placing the concrete mixture. When
 the ambient temperature is below 41 °F, heat forms left unprotected from the weather with
 steam or other Engineer approved methods, unless the temperature of the concrete mixture
 to be placed is maintained at 60 °F or greater.
 Fabricate voids of styrofoam or from cardboard that has been treated with a
 waterproofing agent. Glue and band all voids made by stacking more than one piece of
 
 605—2
 
 material to prevent separation during concreting operations. The Engineer will regard any
 evidence of separation as cause for rejection.
 605.03.03 Casting. Accurately place all steel, when required, as shown or directed.
 Dimensions shown from the face of concrete to steel are clear distances. Spacings are
 from center to center of steel. Place and securely tie all steel reinforcement before placing
 concrete, unless the Engineer requires or allows otherwise.
 For concrete batching equipment and procedures, conform to Section 601. Do not
 begin concreting operations when the wind chill factor at the site is consistently 0 °F or
 less.
 Place concrete continuously in each section, vibrating internally or externally or both
 to consolidate the concrete. Do not vibrate Self-Consolidating Concrete (SCC). Overfill
 the forms, screed off the surplus concrete, and finish the top surfaces to a uniform, even
 texture comparable to the finish produced by the forms.
 Give the top surfaces to be bonded to other concrete a rough finish. Initially, float
 finish the surfaces. Perform further finishing before the concrete takes its initial set, by
 scoring the tops of the members transversely at approximately 3-inch centers with a
 pointed tool. Remove any laitance present during the finishing operations.
 Vibrate in a manner that avoids displacement of any steel or enclosures and
 segregation of the concrete. Properly embed steel and enclosures in the concrete.
 The Department will allow casting of members at the job site or at any location away
 from the job site. The Engineer will inspect members at the site of the casting, but will
 make final acceptance according to Subsection 105.12.
 Determine the compressive strength of the concrete from cylinders cast from concrete
 placed in the members and cured in the same manner as the concrete represented by the
 cylinders. Cast and test cylinders according to KM 64-305 and ASTM C 39, respectively.
 Imprint the name or trademark of the fabricator of I beams, box beams, or deck units
 in the concrete near the abutment end of the right fascia beam or deck unit, on the
 beginning end of each bridge. Cast the name or trademark into the concrete according to
 Subsection 601.03.19 for the plate used to imprint the construction date.
 The Department will inspect, sample, and test precast units to determine their
 acceptability. The fabricator is responsible for providing quality control personnel as
 necessary to ensure the work performed complies with all requirements of the Contract.
 Ensure that fabricators of prestressed concrete members furnish, as part of their
 quality control equipment, a pachometer for determining the depth of concrete cover over
 steel reinforcement. Furnish a meter that is acceptable to the Engineer. Make the
 pachometer available for use by both the fabricator’s quality control personnel and by the
 Inspectors. Instead of tying, the Department will allow tack welding steel reinforcement
 in prestressed or precast concrete members, except for prestressing steel.
 605.03.05 Special Requirements for Prestress Plants.
 A) Hot Weather Production. In addition to the requirements of Subsection
 605.03, ensure that the producer applies the following requirements to outdoor
 prestress operations:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 When the ambient temperature is above 80 °F sprinkle or fog spray coarse
 aggregates.
 Discontinue concreting operations when ambient temperatures are between
 90 and 100 °F if the producer cannot effectively maintain form and concrete
 temperatures below 90 °F.
 Discontinue concreting operations when ambient temperatures are above
 100 °F.
 
 B) Drawings. Have the producer submit drawings conforming to applicable
 requirements of Subsection 607.03 for prestressed girders. Include with the shop
 drawings a detailed drawing, including the total number of stirrups, for each
 
 605—3
 
 different mark number and a diagram of the detensioning procedure. The
 Department will not require reproducible drawings. Obtain the Department’s
 completed drawing review prior to releasing fabrication.
 C) Safety Measures. Ensure that the producer takes effective safety measures to
 prevent injuries to personnel due to the breakage of strands or failure of
 anchorage devices during the tensioning operations. Ensure that the producer
 provides adequate protection that allows the Inspector to perform his normal
 duties. The Inspector will report any safety precautions deemed inadequate to
 the Division of Materials. The Inspector will abide by the safety rules
 established by the producer, provided that they do not interfere with his normal
 duties.
 D) Prestressing. Ensure that the producer performs prestressing by pretensioning
 and provides a skilled technician knowledgeable of the pretensioning system
 used.
 Ensure that the producer conforms to the following:
 1)
 2)
 
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 
 8)
 9)
 10)
 11)
 
 Uses approved jacking equipment to perform prestressing.
 When using hydraulic jacks, equips them with calibrated pressure gages.
 Calibrates the combination of jack and gage to an accuracy of ± 2 percent,
 and furnishes a graph or table showing the calibration to the Engineer. If
 using other types of jacks, furnishes calibrated proving rings or other
 devices to accurately determine jacking forces.
 Accurately holds prestressing elements in position to stress by jacks.
 Applies an initial force to each strand in beams or girders such as to develop
 a stress of 189,000 psi or such other stress as specified in the Plans.
 Maintains a record of the jacking force and elongations produced thereby.
 If desired, cast several units for precast sections in one continuous line, but
 stress them one at a time.
 Does not transfer prestressing forces to any member or release end anchors
 before the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of 4,000
 psi, as determined by tests of standard cylinders cured identically as the
 member. The Department may require a higher strength.
 Removes forms and detensions prestressed members immediately after
 discontinuing steam curing or heat curing while the concrete is still warm
 and moist, when using either of these methods for curing.
 Cuts or releases the elements in an order that minimizes the lateral
 eccentricity of the prestressing.
 The Engineer will reject beams or girders having honeycomb of such extent
 to affect their strength or resistance to deterioration.
 Makes an allowance of 0.0005 times the length for shortening of beams and
 girders as a result of shrinkage and elastic change.
 
 E) Curing. Cure according to Subsection 605.03.06 except the producer may
 discontinue curing after the concrete reaches the detensioning strength.
 F) Removal From Forms. The producer may remove and store precast,
 prestressed members from the casting beds after the prestress force has been
 applied, provided the Engineer approves arrangements for curing and protecting.
 Ensure that the producer conforms to the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Fills all air voids in the inclined surfaces of all I beams with grout.
 Ensures that strand hold-down devices that remain in place are either a
 minimum of 1/2 inch from the surface of the concrete or are galvanized.
 Patches all cavities.
 The producer may use other type devices when the Engineer approves them.
 Complete all finishing operations on prestressed bridge beams within 48
 hours of detensioning, except masonry coating, curbs, and damage repair as
 the Engineer directs.
 
 605—4
 
 605.03.06 Curing. Cure members either by water curing according to Subsection
 601.03.17 or by rapid curing with low pressure steam or radiant heat.
 Perform low pressure steam curing or radiant heat curing under an enclosure capable
 of adequately containing the live steam or radiant heat. Use enclosures that allow free
 circulation of steam or heat about the sides, ends, and tops of members and are constructed
 to contain the live steam with a minimum moisture loss. The Department will allow the
 use of tarpaulins or similar flexible covers that remain in good repair. Secure the
 tarpaulins in a manner that prevents the loss of significant steam and moisture. Allow
 concrete to attain its initial set before applying the steam or heat. After placing the
 concrete, allow an initial set period of not less than 2 hours before applying the steam or
 heat. When using water reducing and retarding admixtures, increase the initial set period
 to 4 hours. The Department will allow determination of the time of initial set using
 ASTM C 403 and waive the time limits specified herein when the initial set has been
 reached as determined by the referenced test. Prevent surface drying during the period
 between placing the concrete and applying the steam or heat by covering the members
 after casting or by keeping the exposed surfaces wet with a fog spray or a double layer of
 wet burlap. During the waiting period, do not allow the temperature within the curing
 chamber to fall below 50 °F. Use live steam or radiant heat to maintain the curing
 chamber at the proper minimum temperature.
 During the initial application of live steam or radiant heat, allow the ambient
 temperature within the curing enclosure to increase at an average rate not exceeding 40 °F
 per hour until reaching the curing temperature within the enclosure. Do not allow the
 maximum curing temperature within the enclosure to exceed 160 °F.
 Apply live steam on the concrete forms in a manner that does not cause localized high
 temperatures.
 Apply radiant heat using pipes circulating steam, hot oil, or hot water. Perform
 radiant heat curing under a suitable enclosure to contain the heat, and minimize moisture
 loss by covering all exposed concrete surfaces with a plastic sheeting. Provide a method
 of maintaining moisture satisfactory to the Engineer.
 Water cure precast, non-prestressed, non-post-tensioned items for 3 days or rapid cure
 them with steam or heat overnight. The Department will allow curing to cease when the
 acceptance strength is reached as shown by test cylinders.
 605.03.07 Removal of Forms and Surface Finish. The Department will allow the
 removal of side forms at any time when no distortion, slump, or misalignment of the
 concrete will result. Ensure that all surfaces are free from rough, open, or honeycombed
 areas, and appreciable depressions or projections. Finish or chamfer edges as directed.
 When removing the forms, avoid spalling or otherwise damaging the concrete. Finish
 members that will be exposed in the finished work according to Subsection 601.03.18.
 Finish dry cast products according to the Precast/Prestressed Concrete Manual. Repair
 vents opened to relieve air pressure in box beams during curing using non-shrink grout.
 605.03.08 Dimensional Tolerances. Ensure that the producer furnishes members
 within the tolerances of the following tables. The Engineer will condition final acceptance
 upon satisfactory placement of the units in the structure.
 
 605—5
 
 I-BEAMS, BOX BEAMS WITH CAST-IN-PLACE SLAB,
 AND PRECAST BARRIER UNITS
 Depth (flanges, web, and fillets)
 ± 1/4 inch
 Depth (overall)
 + 1/2 inch to – 1/4 inch
 Width (flanges and fillets)
 + 3/8 inch to – 1/4 inch
 Width (web)
 + 3/8 inch to – 1/4 inch
 Length of Beam
 ± 1/8 inch per 10 feet or 3/4
 inch, whichever is greater
 Exposed Beam Ends (deviation from square or
 Horizontal ± 1/4 inch;
 designated skew)
 Vertical ± 1/8 inch per foot of
 beam height
 Side Inserts (spacing between centers of inserts
 ± 1/2 inch
 and from the centers of inserts to the ends of the
 beams)
 Bearing Plate (spacing between the centers of
 ± 1/8 inch per 10 feet or 1/2
 bearing plates)
 inch, whichever is greater
 Bearing Plate (spacing from the centers of
 ± 1/4 inch
 bearing plates to the ends of the beams)
 Bearing Plate or Bearing Area (deviation from a
 ± 1/8 inch
 level plane)
 Stirrup Bars (projection above top of beam when ± 3/4 inch
 design projection is more than 3 inches)
 Stirrup Bars (projection above top of beam when ± 1/2 inch
 design projection is 3 inches or less)
 Stirrup Bars (long, spacing, anchorage zone)
 ± 1/2 inch
 Stirrup Bars (long, spacing)
 ± 1 inch
 End Stirrup Bars
 Not more than 2 inches from
 the end of the beam
 Horizontal Alignment (deviation from a straight
 1/8 inch per 10 feet
 line parallel to the centerline of beam)
 Camber of precast barrier units
 ± 1/4 inch per 10 feet
 Camber differential between adjacent beams
 1/8 inch per 10 feet of span to
 1 inch max.
 Center of gravity of strand group
 ± 1/4 inch
 Strand positioning
 ± 1/4 inch
 Center of gravity of depressed stand group at the ± 1/2 inch
 end of beam
 Position of hold-down points for depressed
 ± 6 inches
 stands-longitudinal
 Position of handling devices-longitudinal
 ± 6 inches
 Position of material for debonding of strands
 ± 1 inch
 
 605—6
 
 DECK UNITS (Box Beams and Slabs)
 Depth (top slab, box beam)
 ± 1/2 inch
 Depth (bottom slab, box beam)
 ± 1/2 inch
 Depth (overall)
 ± 1/4 inch
 Width (web, box beam)
 ± 3/8 inch
 Width (overall)
 ± 1/4 inch
 Length
 ± 1/8 inch per 10 feet or 3/4
 inch, whichever is greater
 Void position-longitudinal (flat slab)
 ± 1/2 inch from end of void to
 center tie hole; ± 1 inch
 adjacent to end block
 Void position-transverse and vertical (flat slab)
 ± 1/2 inch
 Square ends (deviation from square)
 ± 1/4 inch
 Skew ends (deviation from designated skew)
 ± 1/2 inch
 Skew angle equal to or less than 30°
 Skew angle greater than 30°
 Bearing plate or bearing area plane (deviation
 ± 1/8 inch
 from level plane) (Bearing plate or bearing area
 plane must be an evenly distributed 80 percent
 of true plane, when tested with a straightedge.)
 Horizontal alignment (deviation from a line
 1/4 inch, up to 40 feet length;
 parallel to the centerline of member)
 3/8 inch, over 40 feet and up
 to 60 feet in length; 1/2 inch,
 over 60 feet in length
 Dowel tubes (spacing between the centers of
 ± 1/2 inch
 tubes and from the centers of tubes to the ends
 and sides of the member)
 Tie rod tubes (spacing between the centers of
 ± 1/2 inch
 tubes and from the centers of tubes to the ends of
 the member)
 Tie rod tubes (spacing between the centers of
 ± 1/2 inch
 tubes to the bottom of the beam)
 Total width of deck
 Theoretical width + 1/2 inch
 per joint
 Camber differential between adjacent units
 ± 1/4 inch per 10 feet,
 3/4 inch max.
 Camber differential between high and low
 1 inch max.
 members in the same span
 Side inserts positioning
 ± 1/2 inch
 Stirrup bar positioning
 ± 1 inch
 Stirrup bar (long, spacing, anchorage zone)
 ± 1/2 inch
 Strand positioning
 ± 1/4 inch
 Handling device positioning
 ± 6 inches
 Center of gravity of stand group
 ± 1/4 inch
 Curbs placed separately on prestressed box
 ± 1/4 inch per 10 feet
 beams (Applies to any portion 10 feet in length
 over the entire length of the beam)
 Position of material for debonding of strands
 ± 1 inch
 
 605—7
 
 PILING
 Width or diameter
 Head out of square
 Length of pile
 Horizontal alignment (deviation from a straight
 line parallel to the centerline of the pile)
 Void position-longitudinal
 Void position-transverse
 Void position-vertical
 Stirrup bars or spiral position
 Tendon positioning
 Center of gravity of strand group
 Handling device positioning
 
 - 1/4 + 3/8 inch
 1/8 inch per 12 inches of
 width
 ± 1 1/2 inch
 1/8 inch per 10 feet
 ± 2 inches
 ± 1/2 inch
 ± 1/2 inch
 ± 1 inch
 ± 1/4 inch
 ± 1/4 inch
 ± 6 inches
 
 605.03.09 Transportation, Storage, Handling, and Erection. Transport precast
 girders in an upright position, and keep the points of support and directions of the
 reactions with respect to the girder approximately the same during transportation and
 storage as when the girder is in its final position.
 Prevent cracking or damage during storage, hoisting, and handling of precast units.
 Replace units damaged by improper storing or handling. Do not ship precast units to the
 Project prior to attaining the specified acceptance strength.
 During erection of members, keep the bridge seats and tops of bearing devices free of
 foreign materials. While shifting members, lift members completely away from bearings.
 Temporarily brace and tie each prestressed concrete I-beam, after erection, in a
 manner that will prevent sliding, tipping, or other movement that may result from high
 winds, creeping down grade, or other causes, until casting the diaphragms. Erect and
 brace at least 2 adjacent members in any one span before suspending operations for any
 one day.
 Begin erecting deck units at the location designated or approved by the Engineer and
 proceed, one member at a time, across the roadway. After placing and fastening the units
 by transverse tie assemblies, fill longitudinal keys between the units with non-shrink grout
 and seal as specified in the Plans. Cure the non-shrink grout keys with 2 layers of wet
 burlap, or other approved covering, placed on the slab. Keep the non-shrink grout
 continuously moist for 3 or more calendar days, except cure commercial mixtures
 according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
 D o not place equipment used to lift deck units into place on a portion of the bridge
 which has been erected without obtaining the Engineer’s approval.
 605.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will not measure the work required to
 qualify the tack welders and tack welding procedures for payment and will consider it
 incidental to the pay item for prestressed or precast members, except the Department will
 test the specimens at no expense to the fabricator.
 605.04.01 Precast I-Beams. The Department will measure the quantity in linear
 feet. The Department will not measure bearing devices for payment and will consider
 them incidental to this item of work.
 605.04.02 Precast Panels. The Department will measure the quantity according to
 Subsection 613.04.
 605.04.03 Precast Box Beams. The Department will measure the quantity in linear
 feet. The Department will not measure bearing devices for payment and will consider
 
 605—8
 
 them incidental to this item of work.
 605.04.04 Precast Concrete Median Barrier. The Department will measure the
 quantity according to Subsection 508.04.
 605.04.05 Precast Piles. The Department will measure the quantity according to
 Subsection 604.04.
 605.04.06 Prestressed Piles. The Department will measure the quantity according
 to Subsection 604.04.
 605.04.07 Masonry Coating. The Department will measure the quantity according
 to Subsection 601.04.
 605.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 Pay Item
 08631-08634, 08639
 Precast PC I-Beam, Type
 08635-08638
 Precast PC I-Beam Modified, Size
 08628
 Precast PC Panels
 08651-08672
 Precast PC Box Beam, Designation
 01953, 01955, 01967,
 Concrete Median Barrier, Type
 01988, 01989, 01992, 01999
 08060-08066
 Piles-Precast Concrete, Size
 08080, 08082, 08086,
 Piles-Prestressed Concrete, Size
 08096
 02998
 Masonry Coating
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 See Subsection 613.05
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 See Subsection 604.05
 See Subsection 604.05
 See Subsection 601.05
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 605—9
 
 SECTION 606  BRIDGE RESTORATION AND
 WATERPROOFING WITH CONCRETE OVERLAYS
 606.01 DESCRIPTION. This work shall consist of bridge deck restoration and
 waterproofing with latex concrete overlays.
 606.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 606.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 606.02.02 Latex Admixture. Conform to Subsection 841.
 606.02.03 Epoxy for Epoxy-Sand Slurry. Conform to Section 826.
 606.02.04 Sand for Epoxy-Sand Slurry. Conform to Subsection 804.
 606.02.05 Mortar Sand. Conform to Subsection 804 (for Grout-Bond Coat).
 606.02.06 Latex Grout. Conform to Section 601.02.
 606.02.07 Joint Materials. Conform to Section 807.
 A) Filler. Use preformed expansion joint filler, Type II (cork).
 B) Sealers. Use rapid cure silicone with closed-cell polyethylene foam back-up rod
 compatible with silicone sealant.
 606.02.08 Concrete Curing Material. Conform to Section 823.
 606.02.09 Structural Steel. Conform to Subsection 812 (for expansion dams and
 joint build up).
 606.02.10 Equipment. Conform to Subsection 601.02 with the following exceptions
 and additions:
 A) Mechanical Scarifiers or Grinders. Furnish mechanical scarifiers or grinders
 designed specifically for scarifying bridge decks that the Engineer approves.
 Ensure that the scarifier or grinder is capable of producing a surface matching
 the existing slab cross section and that each pass of the machine matches the
 previous pass in elevation.
 B) Hammers. Provide Power driven Hammers lighter than nominal 45 lb. class.
 C) Sawing Equipment. Sawing equipment shall be a concrete saw capable of
 sawingconcrete to the specified depth.
 D) Hydraulic Impact/Skid Steer Type Equipment with a maximum rated striking
 Energy of 360 ft-lbs are permitted only in areas of concrete removal more than 6
 inches away from boundaries of surface areas to remain in service. The
 Contractor is to provide data information to the engineer on the equipment they
 wish to utilize to ensure compliance with this note.
 E) Mixers. In addition to the requirements of Subsection 601.02, furnish
 continuous mixers having a latex admixture supply portion equipped with a
 cumulative-type meter that can be read to the nearest 0.1 gallon. Furnish
 continuous mixers having a water supply portion equipped with a flow meter or
 other suitable device for calibrating the water supply, and a cumulative type
 water meter that can be read to the nearest 0.1 gallon. Ensure that the latex and
 water meters are readily accessible, accurate to within ± one percent, and legible.
 F) Hand Tools. In addition to the requirements of Subsection 601.02, furnish
 sufficient hand tools for placement of stiff, plastic concrete capable of working
 
 606—1
 
 the concrete down to approximately the correct elevation for striking off with a
 screed.
 G) Finishing Machine. Conform to the requirements of Subsection 609.02.09.
 F) Brooms. Furnish brooms having bristles of sufficient stiffness to treat the
 surface after finishing.
 G) Air Compressors. Furnish air compressors equipped with separators and traps.
 606.02.11 Coarse Aggregate. Conform to Section 805, size No. 8 or 9-M.
 606.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 606.03.01 Scheduling. Notify the Engineer at least 12 hours before placing concrete
 for the overlay. The Department will not grant a time extension for delay in placing
 concrete resulting from the Engineer receiving less than the 12-hour notice.
 606.03.02 Weather Limitations. Construct the overlay during the night time hours
 when the ambient temperature will remain below 85 °F, the wind velocity is low, and hot
 conditions or rain are not expected. During hot weather, place the concrete when the
 ambient temperature falls to 85 °F or below. Complete placement of concrete before the
 ambient air temperature reaches 85 °F. Do not place concrete when the ambient
 temperature away from artificial heat is less that 45 °F and falling, except when using
 Type III cement. Keep all concrete at a temperature above 45 °F for at least 96 hours after
 placing. Make provisions for the uniform distribution of heat, and do not allow any area
 of the concrete surface to be heated to a temperature above 85 °F. To accomplish uniform
 distribution of heat during cold weather, provide housing, heating, or insulation methods
 that the Engineer approves. Do not place concrete during rain or drizzle. If it begins to
 rain or drizzle during placement, cease placement and finish and protect the material
 already in place.
 606.03.03 Removal of Concrete, Restoration of Reinforcement and Cleaning.
 Treat the entire area of the deck between the curbs (roadway) and the ends of the structure
 (100 percent of the deck area) by machine preparation consisting of removal of concrete to
 a depth of at least 1/4 inch below the existing concrete surface. Machine prepare with
 mechanical scarifiers or grinders. If satisfactory results are not achieved, the Engineer
 may direct that the work be performed with other equipment. The Department will not
 require machine preparation on endwalls.
 Remove epoxy, asphalt, foreign surfaces, and unsound patches in a manner approved
 by the Engineer. Sound concrete patches are to be left in place as determined by the
 Engineer. Do not use equipment that may cause damage to the underlying concrete.
 Remove all other concrete that the Engineer deems unsound. Remove concrete
 within areas where the depth of removal exceeds 1/4 inch with hammers or other small
 equipment. Steel reinforcement damaged by the contractor shall be replaced to the size,
 type, and lap lengths determined by the Engineer. Remove concrete to a depth of 3/4 inch
 below any reinforcing bar which is more than 50 percent exposed or that appears not to be
 bonded to the existing concrete. Protect any underlying sound concrete and steel
 reinforcement. Ensure that the periphery of routed areas is as nearly vertical as possible.
 If the removal of unsound concrete extends through two thirds of the concrete slab or
 more, remove and replace the remaining sound concrete for full depth patching. Ensure
 that all exposed steel reinforcement is tied according to Subsection 602.03.04.
 Remove all inferior concrete in the deteriorated and spalled areas near joints and all
 joint filler. Reform the joints to exact width and true alignment according to Subsection
 609.03.04 for open joints except when a timber template is used, cover it with
 polyethylene sheeting.
 Blast clean all exposed steel reinforcement and structural steel according to
 Subsection 606.03.04 to remove scale, rust, grease, oil and other material that would
 prevent adhesion of the concrete. Before placing concrete, replace or supplement
 deteriorated or damaged reinforcement as the Engineer directs. Remove all dust and chips
 
 606—2
 
 of asphalt materials, concrete, or other debris and clean the entire area with compressed
 air. Ensure that the compressed air is free of detrimental quantities of water, oil, grease, or
 any other injurious substances. Do not allow leakage of oil, grease, gasoline, or other
 substances from the compressor or other equipment on the deck. Suspend protective
 sheeting such as plastic or tarpaulins under all equipment that leaks.
 Remove all spalled or deteriorated concrete in curbs, sidewalks, and plinths to a
 minimum depth of one inch. Blast clean, coat with a grout-bond coat, and restore to the
 original section with overlay material. Seal with epoxy-sand slurry.
 Surface preparation, partial depth, and/or full depth removal of unsound concrete may
 be accomplished using hydrodemolition. Prior to any hydrodemolition operation, submit a
 hydrodemolition plan, in writing, for approval by the Engineer. In the hydrodemolition
 plan state water source, type of machine, water pressure settings and methods to collect
 and strain waste water and protect the public, structural steel paint, and structural steel.
 Calibrate the hydrodemolition machine to remove only unsound concrete. Test the
 machine on an area of concrete as directed by the Engineer.
 Use clean water with a rust inhibitor. Collect and strain all waste water from the
 hydrodemolition operation. The Contractor, at a minimum, shall block all drains on the
 deck and install aggregate dams, or other Department approved devices, as necessary to
 strain runoff. The deck shall be used as a settlement basin within itself unless the
 Engineer or requirements of any associated regulatory agencies state otherwise.
 After hydrodemolition operation, sound deck to ensure that all unsound concrete has
 been removed. Final sounding shall consist of as many successive resoundings as
 required to ensure that all unsatisfactory concrete has been removed. Additional removal
 shall be performed with 40 pound maximum weight hammers.
 When Hydrodemolition is used, cleaning shall be performed with a vacuum system
 capable of removing wet debris and water all in the same pass. The vacuum equipment
 shall be capable of washing the deck with pressurized water prior to the vacuum operation
 to dislodge all debris and slurry from the deck surface. Cleaning shall be done in a timely
 manner, before debris and water is allowed to dry on the deck surface.
 Full Depth repair shall be paid per cubic yard of concrete used and may not be done
 in the same operation as the deck overlay.
 The Contractor shall comply with all federal, state, regional, and local government
 agencies that have requirements regarding the control of fugitive dust generated by
 concrete removal and blasting operations.
 606.03.04 Blast Cleaning. Blast clean the entire area of the deck surface and
 vertical faces of curbs, barrier walls, and plinths up to a height of one inch above the top
 elevation of the overlay, and areas to receive epoxy-sand slurry to a bright, clean
 appearance that is free from curing compound, laitance, dust, dirt, oil, grease, asphalt
 material, paint, and all foreign matter. Perform blast cleaning of an area of the deck
 within the 24-hour period preceding placement of the overlay on the area. If the project is
 done under traffic, perform all blast cleaning within 12 hours prior to placement of the
 overlay. Perform blast cleaning according to the regulations specified in Subsection
 107.01.04.
 Protect the blast cleaned areas with white plastic before placement of the overlay.
 Blast clean contaminated areas and areas exposed more than 24 hours (12 hours when
 under traffic) again as the Engineer directs. Remove or roll the white plastic between the
 mixer truck rear wheels and the overlay placement.
 Hydro blasting may be used in lieu blast cleaning. Use hand held high pressure
 wands with potable water. Water blast the entire area of the deck. Prevent steel
 reinforcement from rusting.
 606.03.05 Full Depth Patching. Fill full depth holes with Class M1 or M2
 Concrete. Immediately before placing concrete, dampen and surface dry the contact
 surface. Then apply a grout-bond coat by vigorously scrubbing or brushing into the
 
 606—3
 
 vertical surface of full depth routed areas. Proportion the grout mixture according to
 Subsection 601.03 using Type I cement. Carefully place the Class M1 or M2 concrete and
 tamp or vibrate into place. Rough-finish the full depth patched areas to an elevation
 corresponding to the scarified grade and cure for a period of no less than 7 calendar days,
 or until the overlay is placed, by means of a double layer of wetted burlap or similar
 material. If the full depth patch area is encompassed by an area of partial depth patching,
 finish the full depth concrete patch to an elevation corresponding to the bottom of the
 partial depth routed areas instead of the elevation of the scarified deck.
 After the concrete has hardened sufficiently to maintain the proper shape, remove all
 joint templates. Avoid chipping or breaking down the edges of the repaired joint.
 Remove all forming material before completion of the project.
 Provide temporary support for existing concrete handrails while removing and
 replacing full depth concrete. Submit the proposed method of supporting the handrails to
 the Engineer for approval before beginning work.
 Blast clean the surfaces of all patched areas and remove sand before constructing the
 overlay. Complete all full depth patching in each lane before beginning overlay
 operations on that lane.
 Place latex concrete overlays only when full depth patches have been placed for 24
 hours or longer. Do not allow construction equipment on the full depth patches until they
 have attained a compressive strength of 4,000 psi.
 606.03.06 Partial-Depth Patching. The Department may allow monolithic
 placement of the partial depth patches with the overlay.
 606.03.07 Prohibited Field Welding. Do not perform welding on load carrying
 members of the bridge without the Engineer’s written consent, and then only in the
 manner and at the locations designated.
 606.03.08 Mixing and Placing. Mix concrete at the site by either batch or
 continuous mixers as the Engineer approves. Mix and deliver according to Subsections
 601.03.07 and 601.03.08 except discharge within 20 minutes.
 Submit to the Engineer for approval proposed methods for anchoring the finishing
 machine supporting rails to the deck.
 Hold the formation of longitudinal joints and transverse joints to a minimum. When
 constructing longitudinal or transverse joints, thoroughly blast clean and coat with groutbond coat material before placing plastic concrete against the hardened sides of the joints.
 Form longitudinal joints using a longitudinal header secured to the deck, 1/4 inch less in
 thickness than the overlay. Locate longitudinal joints along lane lines. After removal of
 the header, saw the overlay longitudinally 3 inches or more inside the formed edge and
 remove the portion of the overlay outside the saw cut before placing the adjacent portion
 of the overlay. The Department may allow alternate methods of constructing joints on
 latex overlays.
 Produce the mixture at a uniform rate and perform finishing immediately after
 mixing.
 606.03.09 Brooming. Immediately after finishing, broom the surface of the overlay
 transversely across the bridge deck from curb to curb. Texture the surface according to
 Subsection 609.03.10 immediately after finishing on new structure overlays, when
 specified in the Contract, and on Federal Aid projects.
 606.03.10 Epoxy-Sand Slurry. After the overlay has been completed and cured,
 apply a thin coat (approximately 1/16 inch) of an epoxy-sand slurry to the 12 inches of the
 overlay adjacent to the curbs, concrete barrier walls, or other vertical walls. Extend the
 epoxy-sand slurry up the faces of the curbs and walls or other vertical walls and extend the
 epoxy-sand slurry up the faces and tops of the curbs and plinth according to the Standard
 Drawings. Thoroughly blast clean to a bright appearance and dry the areas to receive the
 epoxy-sand slurry before applying the slurry. Apply the slurry only after the deck has
 
 606—4
 
 been dry for 24 hours. Place strips of masking tape along the joints to prevent the slurry
 from entering the joints and to ensure a straight line of slurry. Proportion the slurry as
 follows:
 One Gallon of Component A
 One Gallon of Component B
 2 Gallons of dry, silica sand
 The Engineer may allow minor adjustments in the quantity of sand in order to
 produce a more workable mixture. Thoroughly mix the ingredient materials for 3 to 5
 minutes. Then spread the slurry and use a squeegee to completely fill the blast cleaned
 pitted areas, cracks, and rough surfaces. Finish the slurry to a thickness of no more than
 1/16 inch. Sprinkle silica sand very lightly over the slurry to provide skid resistance.
 The Department will allow placement of thoroughly mixed neat epoxy according to
 Subsection 510.03.
 606.03.11 Cleaning and Sealing Joints.
 Standard Drawings and as follows:
 
 Rework each joint according to the
 
 A) Joint Preparation. Remove any old sealant and joint filler. Use tools and
 techniques as approved by the Engineer.
 When joint is dry, sandblast to remove all contaminants. Sandblast each
 joint a minimum of 2 passes, one for each face, with nozzle held at an angle to
 the joint face and within 1 to 2 inches of the pavement. After sandblasting, air
 blast each joint to remove sand and other contaminants. Air blast in only one
 direction to prevent recontamination of the joint. Compressed air used for air
 blasting will be at a pressure of at least 90 psi. The air compressor used will be
 equipped with traps capable of removing moisture, and oil from the air. Apply
 primer as recommended by the sealant’s manufacturer.
 B) Sealant Filler and Installation. Seal joints on same day that preparation
 occurs. When joints are prepared, but not sealed on the same day, sandblasting,
 removal of sand and debris, and primer application will be repeated as directed
 by the Engineer. Also any joint that has become contaminated will be recleaned
 as directed by the Engineer.
 Prior to installation of sealant, each joint will be inspected by the Engineer
 for proper depth, width, alignment, and cleanliness. Install sealant at a minimum
 of 1/2 inch below the pavement face and in accordance with the manufacturers’
 recommendations.
 606.03.12 Bridge End Transitions. Overlay the end sections of the bridge and
 finish as follows:
 A) Rigid Approach. Set the finishing machine rails to provide a 50-foot transition
 on the ends of the bridge to match the finished grade of the overlay with the
 existing grade of the adjacent pavement. Remove the existing concrete as
 necessary to maintain the minimum specified thickness of the overlay.
 B) Non-Rigid Approach or a Rigid Approach with Asphalt Overlay. The
 Department will not require a transition.
 606.03.13 Expansion Dam Treatment. Treat the existing expansion dams
 according to the Standard Drawings. The Department will not require painting of
 structural steel.
 606.03.14 Material Hauling. Haul all material for latex concrete overlays with
 vehicles which do not exceed the regulation for either the legal axle weights or axle
 spacing contained in 603 KAR 5-066. Prior to doing any overlay work on a structure,
 furnish to the Engineer a certified statement listing the empty weight of each hauling
 
 606—5
 
 vehicle, axle weights when empty, axle weights when fully loaded, gross weight of each
 vehicle when loaded with a specific number of cubic yards, and the spacing of axles. The
 Engineer will use this information for the purpose of determining the allowable quantity of
 materials to be hauled. The Engineer will determine the allowable quantity of materials to
 be hauled based on the capacity and condition of the bridge after the removal of unsound
 concrete and prior to the placement of the overlay. Under no circumstances will the
 Department allow loads which exceed legal gross or axle load limits.
 606.03.15 Damage to Structures. Take responsibility for all damage to the
 structure during construction until all work is completed, including the replacement of
 entire spans that fail as a result of this construction.
 606.03.16 Unacceptable Work. When the Engineer deems necessary, the
 Department will core any areas of the overlay that display extensive cracking or other
 characteristics indicating the waterproofing effectiveness or expected life of the overlay
 may be reduced, or that the overlay may not be intimately bonded to the underlying deck.
 Remove and replace with acceptable concrete all areas shown by the cores to either have
 cracks exceeding a depth of 1/4 inch or to not be intimately bonded to the underlying deck
 The Engineer may require removal and replacement without coring when significant
 cracking or lack of bond are apparent. Seal all cracks that are not significant enough to
 require removal of the overlay with a latex grout as the Engineer directs.
 Correct all individual areas of hardened grooved concrete of 25 square feet or larger
 in which the texture is unsatisfactory using methods the Engineer approves.
 606.03.17 Special Requirements for Latex Concrete Overlays.
 A) Existing Bridges and New Structures.
 1)
 
 2)
 
 Prewetting and Grout-Bond Coat. Thoroughly and continuously wet the
 blast cleaned areas to receive the overlay with water at least one hour before
 placing the overlay is started. Keep the areas wet and cooled with water
 until placing the overlay.
 Disperse or remove all accumulations of water before applying the
 grout-bond coat. Immediately ahead of placing the overlay mixture,
 thoroughly brush and scrub a thin coating of the latex concrete mixture to be
 used for the overlay onto the wetted surface as a grout-bond coat. Do not
 allow accumulations of coarser particles of the mixture which cannot be
 scrubbed into intimate contact with the surface.
 Apply the grout-bond coat only for a short distance in advance of
 placing the overlay. Do not allow the grout-bond coat to show any signs of
 drying before placing the overlay. Thoroughly recoat all areas showing
 signs of drying with fresh grout.
 Proportioning and Requirements. Proportion as follows:
 When adjusting, ensure the mixture contains no less than 658 pounds
 per cubic yard of cement nor less than 24.5 gallons per cubic yard of latex
 admixture.
 Material
 Type I or Type III Cement
 Latex Admixture
 Fine Aggregate
 Coarse Aggregate
 Water(2)
 (1)
 
 (2)
 
 Quantity
 94 lbs
 3.5 gal
 215 to 245 lbs(1)
 165 to 195 lbs(1)
 22 lbs(1)
 
 Determine actual quantities and submit to the Engineer for
 approval.
 Includes free moisture on the fine and coarse aggregates.
 
 606—6
 
 Furnish latex concrete with the following properties:
 Property
 Slump(1)
 Maximum Air Content
 Maximum W/C ratio(2)
 7 - day compressive strength(3)
 (1)
 
 (2)
 
 (3)
 
 3)
 
 4)
 
 Value
 4 – 6 in (KM 64-302)
 7% (KM 64-303)
 0.40
 3,000 psi
 
 The Department will perform the slump test 4 to 5 minutes after
 discharging from continuous type mixers.
 Consider all the non-solids in the latex admixture as part of the
 total water.
 Attain a 28-day compressive strength of 4,000 psi when
 compressive strength is tested at 28 days or later due to
 unusual circumstances.
 
 Placing, Consolidating, and Finishing the Overlay. Place the latex concrete
 overlay on the blast cleaned and prewetted deck immediately after applying
 the grout-bond coat. The Department will require a minimum latex concrete
 overlay thickness of one inch except on textured finishes. On textured
 finishes, the Department will require a minimum latex concrete overlay
 thickness of 1 1/4 inches. Ensure that the surface of the overlay conforms to
 the existing deck section while maintaining the minimum thickness. The
 Engineer will determine the deck section in the field, including the cross
 slope or crown. Pass the finishing machine over the existing deck prior to
 placing the overlay so that the Engineer can make measurements to ensure
 the proper cross slope and thickness.
 Construct a transverse construction joint whenever placing is
 interrupted for any reason for 20 minutes or longer.
 Ensure that the top surface of the overlay is uniform, smooth, and
 even-textured after finishing with a finishing machine. Thoroughly
 consolidate the concrete by vibration during the finishing operations. Ensure
 that the finished surface does not vary more than 1/8 inch in 10 feet as
 measured from a straightedge.
 Curing. Immediately following the brooming operation or texturing, when
 texturing is required, cover the overlay with a thoroughly wetted layer of
 burlap immediately followed by a layer of polyethylene film 4 mils or more
 in thickness. Place sections or strips of burlap transversely, so that the
 overlay can be covered immediately after finishing or texturing. Leave the
 burlap and polyethylene film in place for at least 24 hours, and rewet the
 burlap if any signs of drying appear. Soak new burlap in water for at least
 12 hours before the first use.
 After the 24-hour period has ended, remove the burlap and
 polyethylene and allow the overlay to air-cure. Continue the air-cure for an
 additional 48 hours when using Type I cement or an additional 24 hours
 when using Type III cement at an ambient air temperature of 50 °F or more.
 When the overlay has cured, give the tops of all longitudinal and
 transverse construction joints a thorough coating of grout of the same
 proportions as the latex concrete mixture used for the grout-bond coat
 material. Neatly and uniformly apply a 2-inch wide or wider coating to seal
 any minute cracks at these locations. Do not use epoxy-sand slurry to seal
 construction joints in lieu of grout.
 The Department will allow the overlay to be opened to traffic as soon
 as curing is completed, all full depth patches are at least 7 days old or have
 attained a compressive strength of 4,000 psi, all construction joints are
 
 606—7
 
 sealed, and gutterline and curb slurry is applied.
 B) Special Requirements for New Structures. Construct according to A) above
 with the following exceptions and additions:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 5)
 6)
 
 606.04
 
 The Department will not require machine preparation of the top 1/4 inch of
 the deck.
 Construct an overlay having a thickness of 1 1/2 inch.
 Texture the overlay surface according to Subsection 609.03.10.
 Perform operations in the following sequence: blast clean the existing deck;
 apply the grout-bond coat; mix, place, and consolidate the overlay mixture;
 finish; texture; cure; seal joints and cracks; then apply the epoxy-sand
 slurry.
 Do not overlay the deck until it is at least 14 calendar days old.
 When longitudinal construction joints are necessary, completely cure each
 section of the overlay before placing the adjacent section of the overlay.
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 606.04.01 Removal of Epoxy, Asphalt, and Foreign Overlay. When listed as a bid
 item, the Department will measure the quantity in square yards.
 606.04.02 Machine Preparation of Existing Slab. The Department will measure
 the quantity in square yards. The Department will not deduct parts of the deck that are not
 concrete such as deck drains, castings, expansion dams, and patches of foreign material for
 payment.
 606.04.03 Concrete, Class M for Full-Depth Patching. The Department will
 measure the quantity in cubic yards. The Department will not measure removal of epoxy,
 asphalt, or foreign overlays for payment, unless listed as a bid item, and will consider it
 incidental to this item of work.
 606.04.04 Structural Steel. The Department will measure the quantity according to
 Subsection 607.04.
 606.04.05 Blast Cleaning. The Department will measure the quantity in square
 yards. Before placement of the overlay the Department will measure the area of the deck
 and the vertical part of the curb which will be in direct contact with the overlay (distance
 equal to the thickness of the overlay) plus one inch for payment. After placement of the
 overlay and before placement of the epoxy-sand slurry, the Department will measure the
 12-inch width of the overlay and the sides and tops of curbs that are to receive the epoxysand slurry for payment. The Department will not measure any repeated blast cleaning for
 payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 606.04.06 Latex Concrete Overlay Concrete Overlay. The Department will
 measure the quantity in cubic yards as metered from an accurately calibrated mixing unit.
 The Department will measure the overlay partial depth patches and material used to patch
 spalled or deteriorated sections of curbs, sidewalks or plinths for payment. The
 Department will not measure the volume of material wasted or not incorporated in the
 work; grout used for the bond coat; crack sealing; or sand blast cleaning of reinforcing
 steel, longitudinal or transverse construction joints, areas of curbs, sidewalks, plinths, and
 other areas to be patched; or temporary supports for existing concrete handrails while
 removing and replacing full depth concrete for payment and will consider them incidental
 to this item of work.
 606.04.07 Epoxy-Sand Slurry. The Department will measure the quantity in square
 
 606—8
 
 yards. The Department will measure the entire area covered, including the 12-inch width
 of the overlay and the sides and tops of curbs, barrier walls, and plinths for payment.
 606.04.08 Joint Sealing. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet.
 606.04.09 Hydrodemolition. When listed as a bid item, the Department will
 measure the quantity in square yards. Otherwise, the Department will not measure
 Hyrodemolition for payment and will consider it incidental to the overlay.
 606.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 08510
 08551
 08526
 08160
 08549
 08534
 
 Pay Item
 Removal of Epoxy, Asphalt, or Foreign Overlay
 Machine Preparation of Slab
 Concrete, Class M for Full Depth Patching(1)(3)
 Structural Steel
 Blast Cleaning
 Concrete Overlay, Latex(1)(2)(3)
 
 Pay Unit
 Square Yard
 Square Yard
 Cubic Yard
 See Subsection 607.05
 Square Yard
 Cubic Yard
 
 08504
 08540
 08550
 
 Epoxy-Sand Slurry
 Joint Sealing
 Hydrodemolition
 
 Square Yard
 Linear Foot
 Square Yard
 
 (1)
 
 (2)
 
 The Department will establish an adjusted unit price according to the supplemental
 formulas established for excessive overruns and underruns in Subsection 104.02.02
 when this pay item is a major item and either an overrun or an underrun of more than
 25 percent occurs.
 The Department will adjust the Contract unit price of overlays on new structures by
 the Schedule for Adjusted Payment for Thickness Deficiency. The adjusted quantity is
 equal to the measured quantity of the pay item multiplied by the Contract unit price
 for the pay item and the Price Adjustment. As an option, remove and replace
 overlays with an average deficiency in thickness of no more than 1/2 inch with an
 overlay of the specified thickness at no cost to the Department. The Department will
 not make additional payment for average thicknesses of overlay in excess of the
 specified thickness.
 Schedule for Adjusted Payment for
 Thickness Deficiency
 Average Thickness Deficiency
 (inches)
 0
 1/16
 1/8
 3/16
 1/4
 5/16
 3/8
 7/16
 1/2
 Greater than 1/2
 (a)
 
 (3)
 
 Price Adjustment
 (Percent of Contract Unit Bid Price)
 100.0
 95.0
 90.0
 80.0
 70.0
 57.5
 45.0
 25.0
 0.0
 (a)
 
 Remove and replace with an overlay of the specified thickness at no
 expense to the Department.
 
 When placing concrete on overlays is not begun within 2 hours after the scheduled
 
 606—9
 
 time, the Department will deduct all engineering costs from the scheduled time until
 the time placing begins or is canceled from the Contract amount. The Department
 will not deduct engineering costs for uncontrollable circumstances such as inclement
 weather or equipment failure after placing begins.
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 606—10
 
 SECTION 607  STRUCTURAL STEEL BRIDGES
 607.01 DESCRIPTION. Build steel bridges, and perform other structural steel and
 miscellaneous metal construction.
 The dimensions specified in the Plans are for a normal temperature of 60° F with
 dead load on the structure.
 607.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 607.02.01 Paint. Conform to Section 821.
 607.02.02 Structural Steels. Conform to Section 812.
 607.02.03 Miscellaneous Metals. Conform to Section 813 for pins and rollers;
 bearing and expansion plates (rockers and expansion dams); aluminum; high-strength steel
 bolts, nuts, and washers; and welding. Use flat and smooth circular washers and square or
 rectangular beveled washers.
 Ensure that bolt dimensions conform to the heavy hexagon structural bolt
 requirements of ANSI B18.2.1 and Section 813.
 Ensure that nut dimensions conform to the heavy hexagon nut requirements of ANSI
 B18.2.2 and Section 813.
 Identify heavy hexagonal structural bolts, manufactured according to ASTM A 325,
 on the top of the head by 3 radial lines, the legend “A 325”, and the manufacturer’s mark.
 Identify Grade 2H nuts on at least one face by the marking “2H” or “2HB”, and
 Grade DH by the marking “DH”. Ensure that all nuts bear the manufacturer’s
 identification mark.
 Heavy hexagonal structural bolts have shorter thread lengths than other standard
 bolts. Depending on the amount of bolt length added to adjust for incremental stock
 lengths, the full thread may extend into the grip as much as 3/8 inch for the following bolt
 sizes; 1/2 inch, 5/8 inch, 3/4 inch, 7/8 inch, 1 1/4 inch and 1 1/2 inch, and as much as 1/2
 inch for the following bolt sizes; one inch, 1 1/8 inch, and 1 3/8 inch. The fabricator may
 include some of the thread run-out into the plane of the shear. When the thickness of an
 outside part adjacent to the nut is less than these values, the fabricator may use the next
 increment of bolt length together with a sufficient number of flat circular washers to
 ensure full seating of the nut.
 607.02.04 Wrenches. Use manual or power torque wrenches. Use power wrenches
 of adequate capacity and of sufficient air supply to perform the required tightening of bolts
 in approximately 10 seconds.
 607.02.05 Direct Tension Indicators. When specified on the plans, use direct
 tension indicators conforming to ASTM F 959. Determine correct bolt tension by
 examining the gap between the washer and bolt head remaining after tightening.
 Include with each shipment of direct tension indicators, reports of actual tests
 showing the bolt tension achieved when the indicators are loaded. Ensure that the bolt
 tension is ± 20 percent greater than the tension specified in the Bolt Tension table in
 Subsection 607.03.05. Furnish test reports for representative samples of each lot or heat
 and each size tension indicator in the shipment, and provide packaging that easily
 identifies individual lots or heats. The Department may perform any additional sampling
 or testing the Engineer deems necessary.
 Mark the tension indicators with the correct grade (A 325 or A 490) to ensure ready
 verification on the job.
 607.02.06 Tapes. Use only tapes that are correctly calibrated with NIST to ensure
 correct fit of the work.
 
 607—1
 
 607.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 607.03.01 Shop Drawings and Welding Procedures. Submit to the Division of
 Structural Design detailed shop drawings and welding procedures. The Department will
 furnish plans showing sufficient details to prepare detailed shop drawings. Include
 welding procedures and details, when required, as part of the shop drawings. The
 Department will not consider the shop drawing review process to be complete without the
 submittal of welding procedures. Make all initial drawing submittals on sheets of paper,
 11 inches by 17 inches. Ensure that all drawings provide clear, sharp lines on prints.
 Submit initially to the Division of Structural Design 3 sets (6 for railroad bridges) of prints
 of the detailed shop drawings and welding procedures. The Division of Structural Design
 will return one set of reviewed shop drawings with all required corrections noted. When
 corrections are necessary, submit 3 sets of prints of the corrected drawings. After final
 review, furnish to the Division of Structural Design 10 sets of correct shop drawing prints
 for distribution. After fabrication is complete and the Engineer has approved the structural
 steel for shipment, furnish to the Engineer one electronic set of the reviewed shop
 drawings, including the welding procedures, in a 22 inch by 36 inch Portable Document
 Format (PDF) which will produce clear prints.
 Do not make any changes to any drawing after the Engineer has reviewed it without
 the Engineer’s written approval or written direction.
 Allow at minimum 30 days for review of shop drawings of welded plate girders or
 rolled steel sections and per panel of steel trusses after receipt in the Division of Structural
 Design. Special designs may require longer. Partial submittals are allowed for trusses and
 special designs, but reviews may not be complete until full submittals are received.
 Only make substitutions of sections different from those shown on the drawings when
 the Engineer approves in writing.
 Although the drawings may have been reviewed, take responsibility for the
 correctness of the drawings and for shop fits and field connections.
 Take responsibility for any material ordered or work done before the Engineer
 reviews the drawings and welding procedures.
 When design drawings differ from the shop drawings, the design drawings govern.
 When the requirements of this section differ from the shop drawings, the requirements of
 this section govern.
 When the design drawings differ from the requirements of this section, the design
 drawings govern.
 607.03.02 Workmanship.
 A) Quality of Workmanship. Ensure that workmanship and finish are equal to the
 AISC best general practices in modern bridge shops.
 B) Storage of Materials. Store structural material, either plain or fabricated, at the
 fabricating shop above ground upon platforms, skids, or other supports. Keep it
 free from dirt, grease, and other foreign matter and protect it from corrosion.
 C) Straightening Materials. Before measuring or working rolled material, ensure
 that it is straight. When straightening is necessary, use methods that will not
 injure the metal. If sharp kinks and bends are evident, the Engineer will reject
 the material.
 D) Finish. Blast clean all structural steel prior to beginning any fabrication.
 Provide a neat finish to the work. Shear, flame cut, grind, and chip carefully and
 accurately. Remove all burrs resulting from reaming or drilling.
 607.03.03 Bolt Holes. Either punch or drill all holes for connections.
 A) Punched Work. Punch all holes full-size except:
 1)
 
 When there are more than 5 thicknesses, or when any of the main material is
 thicker than 3/4 inch in structural carbon steel, 5/8 inch in high-strength low
 
 607—2
 
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 alloy steel, or 1/2 inch in quenched and tempered alloy steel, sub-punch all
 holes, and ream them after assembling according to the requirements of C)
 below.
 When the metal is thicker than the size of the bolts, drill the holes according
 to the requirements of D) below.
 Sub-punch and ream punched holes for stringer and floor beam field
 connections according to the requirements C) below, or sub-punch and ream
 to a metal template no less than one inch thick, without assembling.
 Sub-punch and ream punched holes in field connections of main truss or
 arch members, skew portals, skew portal bracing plate, girder spans,
 continuous I-beam spans and rigid frames. Punch holes in connection plates
 or other parts of such members according to the requirements of C) below.
 Main truss members are the top and bottom chords, end posts, and web
 members forming the truss.
 
 B) Punched Holes. Punch full-size holes 1/16 inch larger than the nominal
 diameter of the bolt. Do not allow the diameter of the die to exceed the diameter
 of the punch by more than 3/32 inch. Ensure that holes are cut cleanly without
 torn or ragged edges.
 Punch holes so that, after assembling the component parts of a member and
 before reaming, a cylindrical pin 1/8 inch smaller than the nominal diameter of
 the punched hole may be passed through at least 75 of any group of 100
 contiguous holes, or in like proportion for any smaller group of holes. When 10
 percent or more of any group of 100 or fewer holes will not pass a pin 3/16 inch
 smaller than the nominal diameter of the punched hole, the Engineer will reject
 the mispunched pieces. Ream any holes that must be enlarged to admit bolts.
 C) Sub-Punched and Reamed Holes. Punch sub-punched and reamed holes for
 bolts 3/16 inch smaller than the nominal diameter of the bolts. Ensure that the
 punch and die have the same relative sizes as specified for full size punched
 holes.
 After assembling, ream sub-punched holes to a diameter of 1/16 inch larger
 than the nominal diameter of the bolt.
 After assembling and firmly bolting pieces forming a built member perform
 reaming. Do not interchange reamed parts.
 Ream holes with twist drills or with short taper reamers. Do not direct
 reamers by hand unless the Engineer approves. Use solvents, detergents, or
 other Engineer approved means before cleaning and painting, to thoroughly
 remove any oil or grease used as a reaming lubricant.
 D) Drilled Holes. Ensure that drilled holes are 1/16 inch larger than the nominal
 diameter of the bolt. However, do not allow drilled holes for turned bolts to be
 more than 1/32 inch larger than the diameter of the finished bolt. Hold parts
 securely together while drilling assembled members.
 Do not use numerical tape or electronic computer controlled drills unless the
 fabricator can provide a history showing defect free work of this type. This
 means that previous work was free of misdrilled holes caused by human errors or
 machine errors.
 Drill holes according to the requirements of E) below. Submit to the
 Engineer for review with the shop drawings, the proposed procedure for drilling
 holes and assuring correct fit of members. When using numerical tape or
 electronic computer controlled drills, the Department will require shop assembly
 of at least 25 percent of the splices and at least 10 percent of floor beam and
 bracket main member connections as proof of accurate fit. In the event holes do
 not match as prescribed for the assembled pieces, assemble and ream all splices
 to fit and use metal templates to ream all other floor beam connections.
 E) Accuracy of Reamed and Drilled Holes. Ensure that reamed or drilled holes
 are cylindrical and perpendicular to the member. After reaming or drilling, do
 not allow 85 of any group of 100 contiguous holes, or in like proportion for any
 
 607—3
 
 smaller group of holes, to show an offset greater than 1/32 inch between adjacent
 thicknesses of metal.
 F) Edge Distance of Bolts. Maintain a minimum distance from the center of any
 bolt to a sheared or flame cut edge of:
 For one inch diameters, 1 3/4 inch.
 For 7/8 inch diameters, 1 1/2 inch.
 For 3/4 inch diameters, 1 1/4 inch.
 For 5/8 inch diameters, 1 1/8 inch.
 Ensure that the minimum distance from a rolled or planed edge, except in
 flanges of beams and channels, is:
 For one inch diameters, 1 1/2 inch.
 For 7/8 inch diameters, 1 1/4 inch.
 For 3/4 inch diameters, 11/8 inch.
 For 5/8 inch diameters, one inch.
 In the flanges of beams and channels, ensure that the distance is:
 For one inch fasteners, 1 1/4 inch.
 For 7/8 inch fasteners, 1 1/8 inch.
 For 3/4 inch fasteners, one inch.
 For 5/8 inch fasteners, 7/8 inch.
 Ensure that the maximum distance from any edge is 8 times the thickness of
 the thinnest outside plate, but does not exceed 5 inches. If the design drawings
 or the Engineer approves in writing, the Department will allow the use of
 oversize, short-slotted, and long-slotted holes according to the applicable
 structural steel design sections of the AASHTO Standard Specifications for
 Highway Bridges.
 607.03.04
 Shop Assembly and Material Traceability.
 Conform to the
 requirements of A) through D) below when not using numerical tape or electronic
 controlled drills; conform to E) below for all structural steel fabrication.
 A) Assembling Trusses and Other Supports. Assemble trusses, arches, skew
 portals, skew portal bracing, girder spans, continuous I-beam spans, and rigid
 frames in the shop, and adjust the parts to line, camber, and fit for drilling or
 reaming of field connections.
 B) Assembling Members. Thoroughly clean surfaces of metal in contact before
 assembly. Before reaming, assemble, well pin, and firmly draw together the
 parts of a member with bolts. When necessary, take apart assembled pieces to
 remove burrs and shavings produced by the reaming operation. Ensure that
 members are free from twists, bends, and other deformation.
 Progressively shop assemble each longitudinal girder unit in no less than
 3 contiguous sections adjusted to line, elevation, camber, and fit for drilling or
 reaming. Add at least one section at the rear end of the assembly when removing
 any section from the advancing end to ensure that the assembled portion of the
 structure is never less than 3 contiguous sections.
 With connected parts assembled, either drill or ream other major bolted
 connections to the longitudinal girders in the shop or drill or ream to a metal
 template without assembly. Keep girder sections assembled until match marked
 and the Engineer has inspected and approved them.
 Do not apply the assembly requirement for drilling or punching to
 connections for cross frames, diaphragms, lateral bracing, expansion dams, and
 other minor members.
 C) Drifting of Holes. Only allow drifting during assembly to the extent that it
 
 607—4
 
 brings the parts into position, but does not enlarge holes or distort the metal.
 Ream all holes that must be enlarged. Do not allow reaming to exceed the
 allowable tolerances.
 D) Match Marking and Identification. Match mark connecting parts assembled in
 the shop for the purpose of reaming holes in field connections, according to the
 diagram shown on reviewed shop drawings. Match mark with 3/8 inch steel, low
 stress riser dies.
 E) Material Traceability. Ensure that the fabricator can demonstrate by a written
 procedure and by actual practice a method of material application and
 traceability, visible at least through the “fit up” operation, of all elements of a
 shipping piece. Ensure that the traceability method is capable of verifying
 proper material application as it relates to material specification designation; heat
 number and manufacturer; and material test reports for special requirements
 where required.
 In addition, upon completion of fabrication, furnish the Department with a
 list of each component of each major load-carrying member and the heat number
 and manufacturer applicable to the material used for each, including sketches or
 diagrams when necessary. Provide this list as part of the final shop drawings.
 607.03.05 Bolted Connections Using High-Strength Steel Bolts.
 A) General. Use friction type joint for all connections made with high-strength
 steel bolts.
 To determine the required bolt length, add the grip, the adjustment for bolt
 size specified in the following table, 3/16 inch for each hardened flat washer, and
 5/16 inch for each beveled washer. Grip is the total thickness of all connected
 materials, exclusive of washers. Then round up to the next 1/4 inch length.
 BOLT SIZE ADJUSTMENT
 Nominal Bolt Size
 (inch)
 1/2
 5/8
 3/4
 7/8
 1
 1 1/8
 1 1/4
 1 3/8
 1 1/2
 
 Adjustment for Bolt Size
 (inch)
 11/16
 7/8
 1
 1 1/8
 1 1/4
 1 1/2
 1 5/8
 1 3/4
 1 7/8
 
 The adjustment in the above table allows for manufacturing tolerances and
 for the use of a heavy hexagon nut, and provides adequate “stick through” at the
 end of the bolt.
 Provide adequate bolt length to allow for the exposure of at least 2 complete
 threads beyond the face of the nut after tightening.
 Where necessary, clip washers on one side and no closer than 0.875 of the
 bolt diameter from the center of the washer.
 Install bolts with a hardened washer under the nut or bolt head, whichever is
 the element turned in tightening. The Department will allow the use of a flat
 washer when the abutting surface adjacent to the bolt head or nut does not have a
 slope of more than 1:20 with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis. Where
 outer faces of the bolted parts have a slope of more than 1:20 with respect to a
 plane normal to the bolt axis, use a smooth beveled washer to compensate for
 
 607—5
 
 lack of parallelism.
 Ensure that bolted parts fit solidly together when assembled and are not
 separated by gaskets or any other interposed compressible material. Keep all
 joint surfaces free of dirt, burrs, and other defects that would prevent solid
 seating of the parts. Maintain contact surfaces free of oil, excess primer, and any
 other foreign matter.
 Tighten all bolts, with properly calibrated wrenches, to provide at least the
 required minimum bolt tension values shown in the following table on
 completion of the joint.
 
 Nominal Bolt Size
 (inch)
 1/2
 5/8
 3/4
 7/8
 1
 1 1/8
 1 1/4
 1 3/8
 1 1/2
 
 BOLT TENSION
 Minimum Bolt Tension
 ASTM A 325 Bolts
 (KIPS)
 12
 19
 28
 39
 51
 56
 71
 85
 103
 
 ASTM A 490 Bolts
 (KIPS)
 15
 24
 35
 49
 64
 80
 102
 121
 148
 
 Set the calibrated wrenches used to provide the bolt tension specified in the
 table above so as to induce a bolt tension at least 5 percent in excess of this
 value.
 Calibrate the wrenches twice daily by tightening, in a device capable of
 indicating actual bolt tension, no less than 3 typical bolts from the lot to be
 installed. Adjust power wrenches to stall or cut-out at the selected tension.
 When using manual torque wrenches, note the torque indication corresponding to
 the calibrating tension and use it in the installation of all bolts of the tested lot.
 When measuring torque, keep nuts in tightening motion. For short-grip bolts, the
 Department will allow calibration of wrenches by using direct-tension indicating
 washers with solid plates in a manner acceptable to the Engineer.
 When using calibrated wrenches to install several bolts in a single joint, use
 the wrench to “touch up” bolts previously tightened, which may have been
 loosened by tightening of the subsequent bolts, until all are tightened to the
 prescribed amount.
 When required, because of bolt entering and wrench operation clearances,
 tighten by turning the bolt while preventing the nut from rotating.
 Furnish all tension machines and torque wrenches.
 The Engineer will approve the procedure for calibration of wrenches.
 Operate a manual torque wrench as the Engineer spot inspects installed bolts
 by observing the indicated torque. Use a torque wrench that has been calibrated
 as previously described in this subsection. When the Engineer is inspecting
 bolts, apply the inspecting wrench and its required torque to 10 percent of the
 bolts, but not less than 2 bolts, selected at random in a connection. The Engineer
 will accept the connection as properly tightened if the nut or bolt head does not
 turn when applying the required torque. When applying the required torque and
 a nut or bolt turns, the Engineer will test all bolts in the connection. Tighten all
 bolts whose nut or bolt head is turned by the required torque. The Engineer will
 re-inspect all connections whose nut or bolt head is turned by the required
 torque. Alternatively, the Department will allow retightening of all of the bolts
 
 607—6
 
 in the connection and then resubmit the connection for the Engineer to inspect.
 Store bolts and nuts in a dry location until use to protect them from
 contamination by foreign substances and the formation of rust. Only open
 shipping containers when needed for the work or for inspection purposes.
 Properly cover and store partially used containers to avoid contamination or
 exposure to moisture. Only install bolts and nuts that are clean and free of
 excessive rust. Do not consider a thin, tightly adhering rust as cause to require
 cleaning; however, apply a dry lubricant to the threads and bearing surface of all
 nuts to be used when either bolts or nuts show evidence of rust on the threads.
 In lieu of using calibrated wrenches, the Department will allow the use of
 the turn-of-nut method to install bolts. During installation, regardless of the
 tightening method used, install bolts in all holes of the connection and bring
 them to a “snug tight” condition. Snug tight is the tightness that exists when the
 plies of the joint are in firm contact. Attain this condition either by a few
 impacts of an impact wrench or by the full effort of an ordinary spud wrench.
 When snug tightening, progress systematically from the most rigid part of the
 connection to the free edges, and then retighten the bolts of the connection in a
 similar systematic manner as necessary until all bolts are simultaneously snug
 tight and the connection is fully connected.
 When using turn-of-nut tightening: Check a representative sample of not
 less than three bolt and nut assemblies of each diameter, length, and grade at the
 start of work in a device capable of indicating bolt tension. Use the test to
 demonstrate that the method for estimating the snug tight condition and
 controlling the turns from snug tight to be used by the bolting crew to develop a
 tension not less than 5 percent greater than the required tension specified in table
 above. After bringing to a “snug tight” condition, further tighten all bolts in the
 connection by the applicable amount of rotation specified in the following table.
 During the tightening operation, do not allow any rotation of the part not turned
 by the wrench. When tightening, progress systematically from the most rigid
 part of the joint to its free edges.
 NUT ROTATION FROM SNUG TIGHT CONDITIONS(1),(2),(3)
 Bolt Length
 Disposition of Outer Faces of Bolted Parts
 (Under side of
 Both faces normal One face normal to Both faces sloped
 head to end of
 to bolt axis
 bolt axis and other not more than 1:20
 bolt.)
 sloped not more
 from normal to the
 than 1:20 (beveled bolt axis (beveled
 washer not used)
 washer not used)
 Up to and
 including 4
 1/3 turn
 1/2 turn
 2/3 turn
 diameters
 Over 4 diameters
 but not exceeding
 1/2 turn
 2/3 turn
 5/6 turn
 8 diameters
 Over 8 diameters
 but not exceeding
 2/3 turn
 5/6 turn
 1 turn
 12 diameters
 (1)
 Nut rotation is relative to bolt, regardless whether turning the element (nut or
 bolt). For installing bolts by half turn and less, the tolerance is ± 30°; for
 installing bolts by two-thirds turn and more, the tolerance is ± 45°.
 (2)
 Applicable only to connections in which all material within the turn grip of the
 bolt is steel.
 (3)
 There is no research available to establish the turn-of-nut procedure for bolt
 lengths exceeding 12 diameters. Therefore, determine the required rotation by
 
 607—7
 
 actual test in a suitable tension measuring device that simulates conditions of
 solidly fitted steel.
 Perform the rotational-capacity test described in Section 813 on each
 rotational-capacity lot prior to the start of bolt installation. Use hardened steel
 washers for the test even if they are not required in the actual installation
 procedures.
 Verify that a visible lubricant is on the threads of galvanized nuts. Ensure
 that black bolts are oily to the touch when delivered and installed.
 Before installing, clean and relubricate weathered or rusted bolts or nuts not
 conforming to the requirements of the rotational-capacity test. Retreat recleaned
 or relubricated nut and washer assemblies to conform to rotational-capacity test
 requirements before installing.
 Use bolt, nut and washer (when required) combinations from the same lot
 used for the rotational-capacity test.
 B) Direct Tension Indicators. When specified in the Plans, the Department will
 allow tightening all high-strength bolts in diameters of 1/2 inch through 1 1/4
 inch inclusive, using direct tension indicators.
 Before work begins, furnish the Engineer with the manufacturer’s written
 installation instructions. Install direct tension indicators, and tighten the bolts
 according to these instructions.
 Under normal conditions, install the tension indicator under the non-turned
 element of the fastening system. Obtain the Engineer’s permission before
 installing tension indicators under the turned element. If the Engineer
 determines that it is necessary to install the tension indicator under the turned
 element, install additional hardened washers according to the manufacturer’s
 instructions. Use bolt lengths sufficient to accommodate the tension indicators
 and any additional washers required.
 Do not reuse tension indicators. If it becomes necessary to loosen a
 previously tensioned bolt, discard and replace the tension indicator. The fastener
 assembly may also need to be replaced.
 Furnish a device capable of measuring actual bolt tension. Before work
 begins, tighten at least 3 typical bolts and direct tension indicators in the device
 to the correct bolt tension. Keep the tension device available thereafter for
 additional checks when the Engineer deems necessary.
 The Engineer will inspect bolt installation by inserting a feeler gage into the
 opening between adjacent flattened protrusions. The Engineer will examine at
 least 10 percent, but no less than 2, of the bolts in each connection. The
 Engineer will consider the installation acceptable if the gage will not enter the
 opening. The Engineer will not consider a zero gap as cause for rejection. If the
 gap is not uniform around the bolt, the Engineer will base acceptance on the
 average gap. That is, the Engineer will check the gap at several points around
 the bolt and if the gage will not enter the gap on at least half the tries, the
 installation will be acceptable.
 Seal the gap behind the indicator completely with paint. If necessary, use
 moisture cure aluminum polyurethane intermediate coat at that location.
 Furnish tension indicators in addition to washers when specified in the
 Contract.
 607.03.06 Reuse of ASTM A 325 Bolts. The Department will allow the use of nongalvanized ASTM A 325 high-strength bolts one additional time after initially tightening
 them to specification tension, provided a close visual inspection indicates no distress in
 the bolt. This allows non-galvanized ASTM A 325 bolts to remain installed when
 tightened to specification tension twice, one time at original installation and one time at
 reuse. Do not consider touching up or retightening previously tightened bolts, which may
 have been loosened by the tightening of adjacent bolts, as reuse, providing the snugging
 up continues from the initial position. When removing and loosening a bolt after it has
 
 607—8
 
 been tightened to specification tension twice, discard the bolt and substitute a new bolt.
 Reuse of galvanized ASTM A 325 bolts is not allowed. Reuse of any type of ASTM A
 490 bolt is not allowed.
 607.03.07 Welds. Perform all welding, when authorized, according to requirements
 specified in ANSI/AASHTO/AWS D1.5 Bridge Welding Code current edition with
 interims. Do not field weld, except as specified in the Plans, without the Engineer’s
 written permission.
 Ensure that in all cases, welders, welding operators, and tackers have been qualified
 by testing according to KM 64-110 within the previous 24 months of the time of actual
 weld performance.
 Fabricate main members including welded plate girders, welded boxes, components
 for bridge trusses, rigid frames, and bridge arches in a structural steel fabrication shop
 which participates in the AISC fabrication shop certification program and is certified for
 fabrication category Major Steel Bridge (CBR). Proof of this qualification and
 certification shall be submitted to the Director, Division of Structural Design, with the first
 submission of shop drawings. Shop drawings will not be reviewed until this proof has
 been received. Secondary or incidental bridge components shall be fabricated in a steel
 fabrication shop which uses procedures and practices conforming to AISC certification
 Category ‘Standard for Bridge and Highway Metal Component Manufacturers (B-CMP).
 Repair or replace welds shown by visual inspection or by nondestructive testing to be
 defective in accordance with the Bridge Welding Code. All repairs, replacements, and reinspection costs shall be at the Contractor's sole expense.
 607.03.08 Planing and Finishing.
 A) Edge Planing. Plane to a depth of 1/4 inch all sheared edges of plates that are
 more than 5/8 inch thick and carry calculated stress. The Department will allow
 fillet re-entranting cuts before cutting.
 B) Flame Cutting. Obtain a smooth surface free from cracks and notches, and an
 accurate profile using a mechanical guide and the Department will allow flame
 cutting of steel. Only perform flame cutting by hand where the Engineer
 approves. Smooth the surface by planing, chipping, or grinding. Adjust and
 manipulate the cutting flame to avoid cutting beyond the prescribed lines. Fillet
 re-entrant cuts to a radius of no less than 3/4 inch. Do not allow the surface
 roughness value of oxygen cut surfaces to be greater than that specified in
 ANSI/ASME B46.1, as follows:
 Material Thickness
 Less than 4 inch(1)
 4 to 8 inches
 (1)
 
 Surface Roughness Value
 1,000 MU inch
 2,000 MU inch
 
 for ends of members not subject to calculated stress at the ends, conform
 to the surface roughness value of 2,000 MU inches.
 
 Remove roughness exceeding these values and occasional notches or gouges
 no more than 3/16 inch deep, on otherwise satisfactory surfaces, by machining or
 grinding. Leave cut surfaces and edges free of slag. Remove irregularity or
 unevenness from defects to the oxygen cut surfaces with a slope not exceeding
 one in 10. Do not repair defects in oxygen-cut edges by welding except with the
 Engineer’s approval. Perform such weld repairs by suitably preparing the defect,
 welding with low-hydrogen electrodes not exceeding 3/16 inch in diameter and
 grinding the completed weld smooth and flush with the adjacent surface to
 produce a workmanlike finish.
 Preheat members in the area to be cut to a minimum temperature of 200 °F
 to prevent edge cracks. Allow sufficient additional width to permit planing,
 chipping, or grinding to remove rough, burned, cracked, or otherwise defective
 
 607—9
 
 edges. Grind corners at flame cut edges to a radius of at least 1/16 inch, and
 remove any evidence of edge cracking by planing, chipping, or grinding to a
 depth not exceeding 1/4 inch.
 C) Heat Curving. The fabricator may either fabricate welded girders by flame
 cutting the flanges to the required curvature from rectangular plates before fitting
 and welding to the web, or fabricate welded girders or rolled beams by
 fabricating straight units and then, through the application of heat to the flange
 edges, induce the required curvature. Do not perform heat curving in beams or
 girders fabricated from steels that are manufactured to a specified minimum
 yield point greater than 50,000 psi or in beams or girders having a radius shorter
 than the minimum radius of curvature as determined by the procedures outlined
 in the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges.
 When the Contract requires heat curving rolled beams or welded girders,
 ensure that the work conforms to the following requirements.
 Curve beams and girders by either continuous or V-type heating. For the
 continuous method, simultaneously heat a strip along the edge of the top and
 bottom flanges. Ensure that the strip is of sufficient width and temperature to
 obtain the required curvature. For the V-type heating, heat the top and bottom
 flanges in truncated triangular areas having their bases along the flange edge and
 spaced at regular intervals along each flange. Determine the spacing and
 temperature of the areas necessary to obtain the specified curvature. Apply heat
 along the top and bottom flanges at approximately the same rate.
 For V-type heating, terminate the apex of each truncated triangular area
 applied to the inside of a flange surface just before reaching the juncture of the
 web and the flange. To avoid unnecessary web distortion, carefully heat the
 inside flange surfaces (the surfaces that intersect the web) to avoid applying heat
 directly to the web. When the radius of curvature is 1,000 feet or more, extend
 the apex of each truncated triangular heating area applied to the outside of a
 flange surface to the juncture of the flange and web. When the radius of
 curvature is less than 1,000 feet, extend the apex of each truncated triangular
 heating area applied to the outside of a flange surface past the web for a distance
 equal to 1/8 of the flange width or 3 inches, whichever is less. Ensure that each
 truncated triangular area has an included angle of approximately 15 to
 30 degrees; however, do not allow the length of the base of each triangle to
 exceed 10 inches. Obtain the Engineer’s approval before making any variation
 in the patterns as prescribed in this subsection.
 For both types of heating, heat the flange areas that will be on the inside of
 the horizontal curve. Concurrently heat both surfaces of flanges when the flange
 thickness is 1 1/4 inch or greater. Space the heating patterns uniformly along the
 full length of each flange to produce a uniform arc of a circular curve in the
 member. When heating causes a chording effect that the Engineer judges not
 aesthetically pleasing, ensure that the fabricator reheats the member using
 additional heating patterns as required to obtain the desired results.
 Conduct the heat-curving operation so that temperature of the steel does not
 exceed 1,150 °F. Confine heating to the patterns or areas specified in this
 section, and apply heat to bring the steel within the patterns or areas to the
 required temperature as rapidly as possible without overheating the steel.
 Consider any heating procedure which causes a portion of the steel to be heated
 to a temperature greater than 1,150 °F as destructive heating and as a possible
 cause for rejection of the steel. The fabricator may propose to the Engineer
 various means to reaccept, repair, or replace the steel rejected for overheating.
 The Engineer will review the fabricator’s proposal. Do not artificially cool the
 steel until it has cooled naturally to 600 °F. Never quench the steel with water or
 water and air. When appropriate, cool the steel with dry compressed air only
 after it has cooled to 600 °F. The fabricator shall maintain temperature controls
 using temperature indicating crayons or other suitable means during heating and
 cooling of the steel.
 
 607—10
 
 The Department will allow heat curving of beams and girders with the web
 in either a vertical or horizontal position. When heat curving beams and girders
 in the vertical position, brace or support them in such a manner that the tendency
 to deflect laterally during the heat-curving process will not cause them to
 overturn.
 When heat curving beams and girders in the horizontal position, support
 them near the ends and at intermediate points, as required, to obtain a uniform
 curvature. Do not allow the bending stress in the flanges due to the dead weight
 of a beam or girder to exceed 20,000 psi. When a beam or girder is positioned
 horizontally for heating, maintain intermediate safety catch blocks at the
 midlength within 2 inches of the flanges at all times during the heating process to
 guard against a sudden sag due to plastic flange buckling.
 Heat curve beams and girders in the fabrication shop before painting. The
 Department will allow performing of the heat-curving operation either before or
 after completing all required welding of transverse intermediate stiffeners.
 However, unless provisions are made for girder shrinkage, locate and attach all
 connection plates and bearing stiffeners after heat curving. When the Engineer
 requires longitudinal stiffeners heat curve or flame cut them to the required
 radius and then weld them to the curved girder. When attaching cover plates to
 rolled beams, attach them before heat curving when the total thickness of one
 flange and cover plates is less than 2 1/2 inches and the radius of curvature is
 greater than 1,000 feet. For other rolled beams with cover plates, heat curve the
 beams before attaching the cover plates; either heat curve or oxygen cut cover
 plates separately and then weld them to the curved beams.
 Camber girders before heat curving. Obtain camber for rolled beams by
 heat-cambering or cold-cambering methods approved by the Engineer. For
 welded plate or built-up girders, cut the web to the prescribed camber with
 suitable allowance for shrinkage due to cutting, welding, and heat curving. The
 curving process may tend to change the existing vertical camber. This change
 will be most pronounced when the top and bottom flanges are of unequal widths
 on a given transverse cross section. However, subject to approval of the
 Engineer, correct moderate deviations from the specified camber by a carefully
 supervised application of heat.
 The Engineer will not measure horizontal curvature and vertical camber for
 final acceptance until after the fabricator has completed all welding and heating
 operations and the flanges have cooled to a uniform temperature. The Engineer
 will check the horizontal curvature in each edge of each flange with the beam or
 girder in the vertical position by measuring offsets from a stringline or wire or by
 using other suitable means. The Engineer will check camber by similar means.
 D) Facing of Bearing Surfaces. Ensure that the surface finish of bearing and base
 plates and other bearing surfaces that are to come in contact with each other or
 with concrete conforms to the surface roughness requirements as defined in
 ANSI/ASME B46.1, Part I:
 Steel Slabs
 Heavy plates in contact in shoes to be welded
 Milled ends of compression members, stiffeners, and fillers
 Bridge rollers and rockers
 Pins and pin holes
 Sliding bearings
 
 ANSI 2000
 ANSI 1000
 ANSI 500
 ANSI 250
 ANSI 125
 ANSI 125
 
 With the exception of abutting joints and base plates, coat machine-finished
 surfaces with waterproof grease or other approved coating, as soon as practical
 after the Engineer has accepted the structural steel and before removing it from
 the shop. Apply one coat of an approved rust inhibiting primer compatible with
 the finished coat instead of zinc rich primer to machine finished surfaces that are
 to be painted.
 
 607—11
 
 E) Abutting Joints. Face abutting ends of compression members and girder
 flanges accurately to secure an even bearing when assembled in the structure.
 Rough finish ends of tension members at splices to secure close and neat but not
 contact fitting joints. Where joints are not faced, do not allow the opening to
 exceed 1/4 inch.
 F) End Connection Angles. Build floor beams, stringers, and girders having end
 connection angles to the exact length specified in the Plans measured between
 the heels of the connection angles, with a permissible tolerance of + 0 to - 1/16
 inch. Where the Contract requires continuity, face end connections. Do not
 allow the thickness of the connection angles to be less than 3/8 inch, or less than
 that shown on the detailed drawings.
 G) Finished Members. Ensure that finished members are true to line and free from
 twists, bends, and open joints.
 H) Web Plates. Cut web plates to provide for camber of the girder. At bolted web
 splices, do not allow clearance between ends of web plates to exceed 3/8 inch.
 I) Fit of Stiffeners. Mill or grind bearing stiffeners of girders and stiffeners
 intended as supports for concentrated loads to secure an even bearing against the
 flanges. Ensure that intermediate stiffeners fit sufficiently tight to exclude water
 after being painted. Ensure that clearance between the ends of horizontal
 stiffeners and the sides of vertical stiffeners is one inch. Place bearing stiffeners
 plumb. Place intermediate stiffeners perpendicular to flanges.
 J) Bent Plates. Ensure that unwelded, cold-bent, load-carrying, rolled-steel plates
 conform to the following:
 1)
 2)
 
 Take them from stock plates so the bend line will be at right angles to the
 direction of rolling.
 The radius of bends, measured to the concave face shall not be less and
 preferably shall be greater than shown as follows where “T” is the thickness
 of the plate:
 Angle of Bend
 61° to 90°
 91° to 120°
 121° to 150°
 
 3)
 
 Minimum Radius
 1.0T
 1.5T
 2.0T
 
 When a shorter radius is essential, bend the plates while hot at a
 temperature not to exceed 1,150 °F; except for ASTM A 514 or ASTM A
 517 steel, in which case bend at a temperature not to exceed 1,125 °F and
 requench and temper them. Ensure that hot-bent plates conform to the
 requirements of 1) above.
 Before bending, round corners of the plate to a radius of 1/16 inch through
 that portion of the plate where bending is to occur.
 
 607.03.09 Pins and Rollers.
 A) General. Accurately turn pins and rollers to the dimensions shown on the
 drawings. Furnish pins and rollers that are straight, smooth, and free from flaws.
 Produce the final surface by a finishing cut, and provide a smooth finished
 surface with an ANSI 125 standard finish.
 Forge and anneal pins and rollers more than 7 inches in diameter.
 In pins larger than 7 inches in diameter, bore a hole 2 inches or more in
 diameter full length along the axis after the forging has cooled to a temperature
 below the critical range. Bore under suitable conditions to prevent injury by too
 rapid cooling and before being annealed.
 Furnish 2 pilot nuts and 2 driving nuts for each size of pin.
 B) Boring Pin Holes. Bore pin holes true to the specified diameter, smooth and
 straight, at right angles with the axis of the member and parallel with each other.
 
 607—12
 
 Produce the final surface by a finishing cut, and leave the finished surface
 smooth and polished.
 Do not allow the outside-to-outside distance of holes in tension members
 and inside-to-inside distance of holes in compression members to vary from that
 specified by more than 1/32 inch. Bore holes in built-up members after
 completing connections.
 C) Pin Clearances. Do not allow the diameter of the pin hole to exceed that of the
 pin by more than 1/64 inch for pins 5 inches or less in diameter, or 1/32 inch for
 larger pins.
 607.03.10 Threads for Bolts and Pins. Furnish threads for bolts and pins that
 conform to the United States Standard Series UNC-ANSI B1.1, Class 2A for external
 threads and Class 2B for internal threads, except that pin ends having a diameter of 1 3/8
 inches or more shall be threaded 6 threads to the one inch, and except as required for
 high-strength steel bolts.
 607.03.11 Annealing and Stress Relieving. For structural members indicated in the
 Contract to be annealed or normalized, finish machining, boring, and straightening after
 heat treatment. Normalize and anneal (full annealing) as specified in ASTM E 44.
 Maintain temperatures uniformly throughout the furnace during heating and cooling so
 that temperatures at points on the members will not differ by more than 100 °F at any one
 time.
 Maintain a record of each furnace charge that identifies pieces in the charge and lists
 temperatures and schedule actually used. Provide proper instruments, including recording
 pyrometers, for determining temperatures of members in the furnace at any time. Make
 records of the treatment operation available to the Engineer.
 Stress relieve members, such as bridge shoes, pedestals, or other parts built up by
 welding sections of plates together according to the requirements of AWS D1.5 when
 required by the Contract.
 607.03.12 Forgings. Furnish forgings that are free from internal and external cracks
 and other harmful defects. The Engineer will determine the method of inspection.
 607.03.13 Mill and Shop Inspection and Shipping.
 A) Notice of Beginning Work. Designate to the Engineer within 30 days
 subsequent to the award of the Contract the locations of fabricating shops and
 estimated quantities of steel to be fabricated at each.
 The Department will not allow structural steel to be fabricated in more than
 2 fabricating locations (a location will be considered all shops within one city)
 unless approved in writing by the Engineer.
 The Engineer will not allow any work to be done in the shop before granting
 authorization to proceed. Furnish the Department copies of mill tests and
 analyses reports of such structural shapes bearing the manufacturer’s name and
 heat number. When such identification does not exist, the Engineer may require
 samples for test purposes be cut from the materials. When mill tests and
 analyses, or subsequent tests of samples, indicate material does not comply with
 this section, the Engineer will reject such materials. When the Engineer rejects
 materials, furnish suitable material.
 B) Facilities for Inspection. Furnish all facilities for inspection of material and
 workmanship in the mill and shop, and allow the Inspector free access to
 necessary parts of the premises. Notify the Engineer when material is ready for
 shop inspection.
 Furnish power and utilities for operating inspection equipment, provide
 shop space for inspection work, handle material as necessary, and enforce
 required safety precautions for radioactive exposure.
 
 607—13
 
 C) Mill Orders, Change Orders, Shipping Statements, Mill Test Reports, and
 Shop Bills. Furnish 3 copies of mill orders, change orders, mill shipping
 statements, mill test reports, fabricator’s shop bills (when not attached to
 drawings), and shipping statements to the Engineer for all structural steel
 materials. Ensure that mill test reports show that all materials conform to this
 section and are signed by a responsible representative of the company. Include
 the weights of individual members on shipping statements.
 D) Facilities for Testing. Furnish test specimens, and all labor, testing machines,
 and tools necessary to prepare specimens and make full size tests.
 E) Rejections. The Inspector’s initial acceptance of any material or finished
 members will not prevent the Engineer from subsequently rejecting material or
 finished members when he determines that they do not conform to the Contract.
 F) Weighing of Members. When the Contract specifies that the Department will
 pay for any part of the material by weight, weigh the finished work in the
 presence of the Inspector. Supply accurate scales and perform all work involved
 in handling and weighing various parts.
 G) Marking and Shipping. Paint or mark each member with an erection mark for
 identification and furnish an erection diagram with erection marks shown
 thereon.
 Mark the weights of members weighing more than 3 tons on the member.
 Load structural members on trucks or cars so that they may be transported and
 unloaded at their destination without being excessively stressed, deformed, or
 otherwise damaged. Ship girders and store them with the web vertical, unless
 the Engineer allows in writing. The Cabinet’s Shop Inspector will not stamp for
 acceptance until the members are loaded on cars or trucks just prior to shipping.
 Pack bolts of one length and diameter and loose nuts and washers of each
 size separately. Mark a list and description of contents on the outside of each
 container.
 H) Handling Material. Conduct loading, transporting, unloading, and storing of
 structural material to maintain it clean and free from injury.
 607.03.14 Field Inspection. When the substructure is constructed under a separate
 contract, establish lines and elevations for setting steel from the completed substructure.
 Obtain the Engineer’s approval of the existing lines and elevations prior to submitting
 shop details for review. The Engineer’s approval of the established lines and elevations
 does not relieve the substructure contractor from the responsibility for constructing the
 substructure to the lines and elevations shown.
 Provide inspection facilities to inspect erection of structural steel. When the Contract
 does not require shop inspection of the structural steel, the Engineer will inspect the
 material and workmanship upon site delivery.
 607.03.15 Field Storing and Handling Materials. Place material to be stored on
 blocking above ground. Maintain it clean and properly drained. Place uniform depth
 girders and beams upright. Support long members, such as columns and chords, on skids
 placed to prevent injury from deflection.
 Use extreme care in handling the steel at all times to prevent damage of any parts.
 Insulate the steel from binding chains with approved softeners. Pad the hooks and slings
 used to hoist steel. Place the steel so that rubbing will not occur during shipment. Store
 the steel at the job site on pallets, or other means approved by the Engineer, so that it does
 not rest on the ground and so that its components do not fall or rest on each other.
 607.03.16 Falsework, Erection Methods, and Equipment. Ensure falsework is
 properly designed by a Registered Professional Engineer licensed to practice in Kentucky.
 Construct and maintain falsework for the loads that will be placed thereon. When
 required, prepare and submit for review plans for falsework or for changes in an existing
 structure necessary for maintaining traffic. Although the Engineer has reviewed these
 plans, take responsibility for the falsework design.
 
 607—14
 
 Before starting work present for the Engineer’s review, the proposed method of
 erection, and the proposed amount and character of equipment to use for erection.
 Although the Engineer has reviewed this method, take responsibility for safety and
 erection.
 Provide the Engineer with a certification by a Registered Professional Engineer,
 licensed to practice in Kentucky, that falsework towers have been assembled according to
 the approved falsework drawings before placing loads on the falsework.
 When placing falsework installations adjacent to an open public road, design and
 protect the falsework system from errant highway vehicles or from vibration forces caused
 by passing vehicles.
 607.03.17 Bearings and Anchorages. Set all bearing assemblies level and to the
 elevations specified in the Plans. Make adjustments in the horizontal positions of bearing
 assemblies for temperature as the Engineer directs. Obtain full bearing on the concrete
 under bearing assemblies regardless of tolerances.
 Set masonry plates and the bearing plates of bearing assemblies on ground concrete
 surfaces, or elastomeric bearing pads, or on lead plates in conformance with the details
 specified in the Plans.
 Immediately before setting bearing assemblies or masonry plates, thoroughly clean
 the surfaces of concrete and metal to be in contact.
 Drill the anchor bolt holes to the depth and dimensions specified in the Plans, after
 properly setting the base plates. Keep the holes dry during freezing weather. Do not lead
 or grout anchor bolts until after assembly of each continuous unit or span. After placing
 the anchor bolts, pour molten lead into the holes and pack them so the holes will be
 completely filled flush to the top of the base plates. Heat anchor bolts prior to pouring the
 lead to ensure the lead reaches the bottom and to prevent premature cooling.
 Ensure that the final adjustment and setting of expansion rockers, rollers, and anchor
 bolts take into consideration dead load elongation in the span and temperature at the time
 of setting. Normal temperature is considered 60 °F. Set rockers so as to be vertical at 60
 °F, after applying all dead load. Adjust nuts on anchor bolts at the expansion ends of
 spans to allow free movement of the span.
 When expansion devices such as rockers and expansion dams have been rigidly fixed
 to hold them in correct alignment, release them immediately upon completing concrete
 placement in the portion of the structure they are installed.
 607.03.18 Straightening Bent Material. Straighten bent plates and angles or other
 shapes by methods that will not produce fracture or other injury. Do not heat the metal
 unless the Engineer allows, in which case do not heat to a higher temperature than 1,150
 °F as determined by a temperature stick or crayon. After heating and straightening, cool
 the metal as slowly as possible. Following straightening, carefully inspect the surface of
 the metal for evidence of fracture. The Department will reject metal with sharp kinks and
 bends. Do not straighten material by direct hammering.
 607.03.19 Field Assembling. Assemble parts accurately as shown, and follow all
 match marks. Handle material so no part will be bent, broken, or otherwise damaged. Do
 not injure or distort the members by hammering them. Clean bearing surfaces and
 surfaces to be in permanent contact before assembling the members. Unless erected by
 the cantilever method, erect truss spans on blocking that is placed to provide proper
 camber. Leave blocking in place until tension chord splices and all other truss
 connections are pinned and bolted, and then release it sufficiently from the falsework to
 bring compression chord joints into full bearing.
 607.03.20 Pin Connections. Use pilot and driving nuts in driving pins. Drive pins
 so that members will take full bearing. Screw pin nuts tight and burr the threads at the
 face of the nut with a pointed tool.
 607.03.21 Misfits. The Engineer will allow the correction of minor misfits using
 
 607—15
 
 small amounts of reaming, cutting, and chipping. However, immediately report to the
 Engineer any error in shop fabrication or deformation resulting from handling and
 transportation that prevents proper assembly and fitting of parts by moderate use of drift
 pins or by a moderate amount of reaming and slight chipping or cutting. Obtain the
 Engineer’s approval of the proposed method for correction. Make the correction in the
 Engineer’s presence.
 For beams or girders that do not conform to the plan camber and grade in the erected
 position, either adjust the depth of the concrete slab haunch over the steel supporting
 members or rework the girder camber to meet the plan grade and slab thickness. Do not
 allow shear connectors to penetrate the slab less than 2 inches.
 607.03.22 Removal of Falsework. Upon completion of erection and before final
 acceptance, remove all falsework, excavated or useless materials, rubbish, and temporary
 buildings. Replace or renew any fences damaged and restore in an acceptable manner all
 property, both public and private, which may have been damaged during prosecution of
 work. Leave the bridge site and adjacent highway in a neat and presentable condition
 satisfactory to the Engineer. Remove all excavated material or falsework placed in the
 stream channel during construction before final acceptance.
 607.03.23 Cleaning and Painting.
 A) General. Furnish a coating system from the Departments List of Approved
 Materials for Bridge Coatings, Class I.
 Furnish a coating system in which all coats are produced by the same
 manufacturer. Follow the manufacturer’s recommendations for all mixing and
 application conditions and methods. Apply the prime coat in the shop. Field
 apply the remaining coatings of the selected coating system. When using
 thinners, mix according to the manufacturer’s written recommendation in the
 presence of the Engineer.
 
 Furnish copies of the manufacturer’s technical data sheets, material
 safety data sheets, and application procedures to the Engineer for review and
 approval before beginning painting.
 Submit written procedures for compliance with this subsection for cleaning
 and painting in both the shop and the field to the Engineer for approval before
 beginning work. Include at least the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 4)
 5)
 
 6)
 
 Surface Preparation Methods and Equipment. Detail all equipment and
 operational procedures intended to be utilized in any process which prepares
 a surface to receive a coating.
 Painting Methods and Equipment. Detail all equipment and operational
 procedures intended to be utilized in the application of coatings.
 Containment. Detail all equipment and operational procedures to be utilized
 in the erection, maintenance, and dismantling of containments. Include
 provisions for safety precautions, traffic control, and access. Address
 responsibility for damage to public, property and the environment due to
 any cleaning or painting operation.
 Storage and Handling. Detail all equipment and operational procedures to
 be utilized in handling, storing, and transporting painted members.
 Coating Manufacturer’s Special Instructions. Detail all recommendations
 and special instructions provided from the coatings manufacturer to be
 utilized for surface preparation or coatings application. Submit the coating
 manufacturers written approval for application of the coating system to
 surfaces prepared in accordance to the detailed operational procedures.
 Quality Control Plan. Detail all equipment and operational procedures to be
 utilized to ensure the quality of the completed coating system. Include the
 following:
 
 607—16
 
 a)
 b)
 c)
 d)
 e)
 f)
 
 Name and qualifications of painting supervisors and inspection
 personnel.
 Assurance of authority and responsibility for painting supervisors to
 halt operations and make corrections upon discovery of nonconforming work.
 Methods of informing painting personnel of the written approved
 painting procedures and their responsibility to comply.
 Equipment and operational procedures for inspection, acceptance or
 rejection, and documentation of surface preparation and coatings
 application operations.
 Procedures and documentation for calibration and field verification of
 calibration of equipment utilized for inspection of surface preparation
 and coatings application.
 Process for control of project related documentation.
 
 The Department requires acceptance testing of coatings on a per-lot basis
 per-shipment. The Division of Materials will perform acceptance testing. At his
 option, the Engineer may elect to conduct more frequent sampling and testing.
 The Engineer will obtain test samples of coatings to be applied at the shop and
 the field. Allow 10 working days for testing and approval of the sampled
 coating. Apply coating only after it has been approved by the Department. It is
 the Contractor’s responsibility to maintain an adequate inventory of approved
 coating. The Department assumes no responsibility for lost work due to
 rejection of coating or approved coating subsequently found to be defective
 during the application process.
 Store the coating according to Section 821. The Department will reject the
 coating when test results indicate that the material does not conform to the
 requirements of this section. Remove all rejected coating materials from the job
 before beginning any painting.
 Mix coatings with a high shear mixer according to the manufacturer’s
 instructions to obtain a smooth, lump-free consistency. Do not use paddle
 mixers or paint shakers. Mix in the original containers unless the Engineer
 approves otherwise. Ensure that all of the solids that may have settled to the
 bottom of the container are thoroughly dispersed. When specified by the
 manufacturer’s product data sheet or application instructions, continuously
 agitate the mixed coating throughout the application process.
 Apply coatings smoothly and uniformly allowing no excess coating to
 collect at any point. Paint the contacting surfaces of joints or connections with
 primer only.
 When deemed unsatisfactory by the Engineer, remove, clean, and prepare
 again all paint work at any stage of its completion.
 When necessary or requested by the Engineer, and at no additional cost to
 the Cabinet, furnish a technical representative from the coating manufacturer to
 observe the initial application of all coatings used, to advise as to proper
 application techniques, and to determine that proper results are being obtained.
 Ensure that the technical representative is also available to visit the project at all
 times during the work if the Engineer requests or deems a visit is necessary.
 Obtain and record ambient conditions (air temperature, steel temperature,
 relative humidity, and dew point) to verify compliance to this subsection.
 Apply coatings using methods recommended by the manufacture of the
 coating system to attain the manufacturers recommended dry film thickness as
 stated on the applicable technical data sheet.
 All coating thickness measurements are dry film thickness. Determine dry
 film thicknesses with a Type II nondestructive dry film thickness gage. At a
 minimum, verify calibration of the Type II gage in accordance with SSPC PA 2,
 by placing a plastic shim representing the expected dry film thickness of the
 
 607—17
 
 coating over a representatively blasted surface, before and after obtaining dry
 film thickness measurements for any surfaces painted in a shift. Obtain dry film
 thickness measurements in accordance with SSPC PA 2 per shift for each
 coating application. Use of a Tooke gage or other destructive film thickness
 gage to assess the coating thickness on all coats may be used at the Engineer’s
 discretion. The Engineer will reject the total coating system when any coating is
 determined to be less than the specified minimum thickness even when the total
 dry film thickness exceeds the total of the minimum for all coats.
 Provide OSHA compliant safe and adequate access for proper inspection of
 the cleaning and painting at both the fabrication plant and the construction site
 during all phases of work and for a period of at least 15 working days after
 completing each painting section. Furnish, erect, and move scaffolding or
 appropriate equipment approved by the Engineer, to allow the Inspector to
 closely inspect all surfaces. Use rubber rollers or other protective devices on
 scaffold fasteners. Do not use metal rollers or other types of fasteners that may
 mar or damage the freshly surfaces.
 Comply with all Federal, State, and local regulations relative to
 environmental contamination, safety, and protection of persons and property.
 B) Preparation for Shop Coating. After fabrication and immediately before
 painting, remove all areas of oil, grease, or other deleterious material by solvent
 cleaning in accordance with SSPC SP 1. Perform blotter tests in accordance
 with ASTM D 4285 Standard Test Method for Indicating Oil or Water in
 Compressed Air; daily, per compressor, in the presence of the Engineer. Use
 compressed air only when there is no evidence of moisture or oil. Abrasive
 blast clean all exposed surfaces of the metal to a minimum of SSPC SP
 10/NACE 2; Near White Metal Blast Cleaning. Use abrasive media that
 produces an angular profile and conforms to SSPC AB 1, AB 2, or AB 3 as
 applicable. Ensure that the depth of the anchor profile of the abrasive blastcleaned surfaces meets the coatings manufacturers recommended anchor profile
 range as stated on the applicable technical data sheet. If no range is
 recommended, produce an anchor profile within the range of 1.5 mils to 3.5 mils.
 Measure anchor profile on metal surfaces in accordance with ASTM D 4417
 Method C. Take at a minimum, 3 randomly distributed anchor profile
 measurements for each 5,000-square foot area of prepared surface. Remove all
 fins, tears, slivers, and burred or sharp edges that are present on steel members,
 and that appear during the blasting operation, by grinding and re-blasting the
 area to achieve the required anchor profile.
 Apply coating only after the Engineer inspects and approves the surfaces.
 C) Application of Shop Coating. Apply one full coat of primer to all metal
 surfaces prior to shipping steel from the plant. Include surfaces that are to be
 field bolted in contact. Apply primer only to clean, dry metal surfaces that meet
 the surface preparation standard. Ensure that the application and curing of the
 primer coat to surfaces that are to be field bolted in contact is in accordance with
 the manufacturer’s recommendations as stated on the certificate of analysis
 certifying Class B slip coefficient of the primer.
 Apply coating only when ambient conditions are in accordance with the
 coating manufacturers recommended ambient condition ranges for application.
 Maintain the manufacturer’s recommended ambient conditions for curing
 through full cure of the applied prime coat. In the location where application and
 curing of coatings is to be performed, record and verify ambient conditions
 through the use of a 24-hour data logger system.
 Ensure that the dry film thickness of the prime coat is within the
 manufacturers recommended dry film thickness application range on all surfaces,
 except those that are to be field bolted in contact. Ensure that the dry film
 thickness on surfaces to be field bolted in contact does not exceed the maximum
 
 607—18
 
 dry film thickness as stated on the certificate of analysis certifying Class B slip
 coefficient of the primer.
 If the prime coat is deficient in thickness, follow the coating manufacturer’s
 recommendation to achieve acceptable full prime coat thickness.
 Protect freshly coated primed surfaces from subsequent blast cleaning
 operations. When damage occurs, thoroughly wire brush or if visible rust
 occurs, re-blast to the specified surface preparation condition. Vacuum and reprime these surfaces.
 Do not apply successive coats of the system over the prime coat until it is
 fully cured. Apply the remaining coatings of the coating system in the shop
 before assembly or erection in areas that will be inaccessible when assembled in
 the field. Apply the shop primer to interior surfaces of box sections that are to be
 sealed by welding.
 Paint structural steel that is to be welded only after completing welding.
 When welding the steel in the shop and subsequently erected by bolting, apply
 one coat of primer after finishing the shop welding and blast cleaning.
 Paint surfaces of iron and steel castings only when directed according to
 Subsection 607.03.08 D).
 
 Transfer or preserve field identification erection marks and weight
 marks. Load the steel for shipment only after the shop coating has fully
 cured and the Engineer has inspected it.
 D) Preparation for Field Coatings. Clean by sections, bays, or other readily
 identifiable portions of the structure. Apply coating only after the Engineer has
 inspected and accepted each section, bay, or portion.
 After erection, including all bolting and remedial work, prepare the shop
 applied prime coating for field applied coatings as follows. Remove all grease,
 oil, lubricants, or other deleterious material from all surfaces to be painted
 including lubricant or residuals from the surfaces of all galvanized nuts, bolts
 and washers by solvent cleaning according to SSPC SP 1. When dry overspray
 from the shop applied primer exists, remove by sanding. High pressure water
 wash all structural steel at 4,500 to 5,000 psi using clean potable water. As
 needed, use a non-sudsing, biodegradable detergent to remove all surface
 contaminants not removed by high pressure water washing. Rinse all areas
 where a detergent or solvent was applied by high pressure water washing with
 clean potable water. Repair all damaged prime coating in accordance with the
 coating manufacture’s recommendations. Apply a field coat of approved prime
 coating to all areas not possessing an acceptable shop applied prime coating.
 Completely remove all dirt, dry spray and other foreign material before applying
 field coatings. Assume sole responsible for any damage resulting from field
 surface preparation operations.
 When application of any coating will exceed the recoat window of the
 previously applied coating, abrade the surface of the previously applied coating
 according to the coating manufacturer’s recommendations before applying
 additional coatings.
 E) Application of Field Coatings. Apply field coatings between April 1st and
 November 15th. The Department may allow painting at other times when the
 Engineer approves in writing. Apply coatings only to clean and dry surfaces,
 when the ambient air temperature is 40 °F or greater, the surface temperature
 of the steel members to be painted is at least 5 °F above the dew point, and
 the relative humidity is less than 90 percent or in accordance with the coating
 manufacture’s recommended ambient condition ranges, whichever is more
 stringent. Record and verify ambient conditions are in compliance at the
 location where painting is to be performed prior to beginning coating application
 and at a minimum of every 4 hours throughout the application and curing process
 for each applied coating. Additional monitoring and recording of ambient
 conditions may be required at the Engineers discretion.
 607—19
 
 Totally enclose each section, bay, or portion of the structure with
 containment meeting, at a minimum, the requirements of SSPC Guide 6 Class
 2W during all coating applications including repair of coatings defects and
 deficiencies. Protect pedestrian, vehicular, and other traffic on or underneath the
 bridge and all portions of the bridge superstructure and substructure against
 damage or disfigurement by spatters, splashes, and smirches of coating or
 coating materials. Maintain the containment materials to prevent releases of
 coating materials. Monitor the containment a minimum of 15 minutes for each 4
 hours of coating application operations in accordance with SSPC Guide 6
 Method A and Visible Emissions Monitoring – General Surveillance Level 2
 Emissions. Assume sole responsibility for all damages resulting from coating
 application operations. Submit a detailed written outline to the Engineer for
 approval before field painting. Include sketches, if necessary, of methods to
 prevent overspray drift. Include protection of vehicular traffic, boats, and
 marinas beneath the bridge, and buildings or other property in the vicinity of the
 bridge.
 Apply field coatings only after satisfactorily completing field cleaning and
 ensuring that the coating applied for retouching the shop coat is thoroughly dry.
 Do not apply succeeding coats until the previous coats have dried throughout the
 full thickness of the coating film and the coating application has been accepted
 by the Engineer.
 Paint from the top of the structure toward the bottom, and proceed by
 sections, bays, or other readily identifiable portions of the structure, unless the
 Contract or Engineer directs otherwise.
 Apply successive coats of the coating system to all exposed surfaces of the
 completed structure.
 Stencil the completion date of painting, including the year and month, on
 the structure as the Engineer directs.
 F) Repair of Shop and Field Coatings. Repair according to the manufacturer’s
 recommendations and as otherwise specified in this section.
 When spot repair will not produce a uniform and durable coating, repaint
 the entire member as the Engineer directs.
 Repair surfaces before erection that will be inaccessible after erection.
 607.03.24 Name Plates. When shown, furnish and install name plates including
 fastening devices.
 607.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure the quantity by the lump
 sum. The Department will not measure miscellaneous metals, shop inspections,
 inspection facilities and equipment, material samples for mill authorization, enforcement
 of required safety precaution for radioactive exposure, furnishing of technical
 representatives for paint, extra paint required when bolting, nameplates, or direct tension
 indicators for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 607.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 08160
 
 Pay Item
 Structural Steel
 
 Pay Unit
 Lump Sum
 
 The Department will adjust the Contract unit price for Structural Steel by the
 following formula when the Engineer makes plan changes that result in an increase of the
 estimated plan weight of steel:
 Adjusted Contract =
 Unit Price
 
 Original Contract x
 Unit Price
 
 607—20
 
 (Revised Estimated Plan Weight)
 (Original Estimated Plan Weight)
 
 Bear all shop inspection costs incurred at locations other than the 2 original
 designated locations. The Department will initially pay for the inspection cost.
 Reimburse the Department subsequently.
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 The Department will make partial payment for structural steel plate stored at the
 fabrication shop when requested. This applies to structural steel quantities of 1,000,000
 pounds or more.
 
 607—21
 
 SECTION 608  CONCRETE BRIDGES
 608.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct concrete bridges and parts of other bridges that are
 concrete.
 608.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 608.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 608.02.02 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 608.02.03 Bearing and Expansion Plates. Conform to Section 813. When the
 Contract requires self-lubricating plates, furnish machine surfaces with trepanned recesses.
 608.02.04 Rockers. Conform to Section 812.
 608.02.05 Elastomeric Bearing Pads. Conform to Section 822.
 608.02.06 Preformed Cork Expansion Joint Filler (Type II). Conform to Section
 807. Use with bearing pads.
 608.02.07 Forms. Conform to Subsection 601.02.
 608.02.08 Structural Steel. Conform to Section 812.
 608.02.09 Masonry Coating. Conform to Section 828.
 608.02.10 Anchor Bolts. Conform to Section 813.
 608.02.11 Precast and Prestressed Members. Conform to Subsection 605.
 608.02.12 Concrete Curing Materials. Conform to Section 823.
 608.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 608.03.01 Foundation. Begin work after structure excavation, sheet piling, and all
 bearing piles have been prepared according to Sections 603 and 604.
 608.03.02 Falsework and Forms. Construct all falsework and forms according to
 Subsections 601.03.11 and 601.03.12.
 608.03.03 Classes of Concrete for Substructure. Use Class AA concrete in
 portions of the substructure above the top of caps except pedestals. Use Class A concrete
 in portions of the substructure below the top of caps and in pedestals. When placing
 concrete under water, use Class A Modified concrete.
 608.03.04 Placing Steel Reinforcement in Substructure. Place steel reinforcement
 according to Subsection 602.03.
 608.03.05 Placing Concrete in Substructure. Proportion, mix, and place concrete
 according to Subsection 601.03. Construct construction joints according to Subsection
 601.03.10. Place concrete for footings to the full depth in one continuous operation, and
 allow them to set at least 12 hours before placing forms thereon for other parts of the
 substructure unit. Place concrete in columns in one continuous operation between
 construction joints. Allow concrete in columns to set at least 12 hours before placing
 forms for caps. Place concrete for bridge seats according to Subsection 601.03.09.
 Finish all exposed surfaces according to Subsection 601.03.18. Bevel all exposed
 
 608—1
 
 edges 3/4 inch.
 Cure according to Subsection 601.03.17.
 608.03.06 Placing Anchor Bolts.
 according to Subsection 607.03.17.
 
 Place anchor bolts in piers and abutments
 
 608.03.07 Setting Expansion Devices. Install bearing and expansion plates, bearing
 pads, rockers, and other expansion devices, except friction or sliding type, according to
 Subsection 607.03.17.
 For friction or sliding expansion devices furnish either structural steel plates,
 elastomeric bearing pads, or preformed cork. Firmly anchor expansion devices in correct
 position as specified in the Plans. Thoroughly coat all sliding surfaces of expansion
 devices with graphite lubricant just before placing them in position. Do not place concrete
 in a manner that will interfere with free movement of the expansion devices.
 When preformed cork expansion devices are specified for sliding joints, furnish
 preformed cork material that is the full width and depth of each contact surface and is not
 built up with several pieces or strips.
 608.03.08 Protection. Protect the structure during construction. Protect concrete
 parapet walls of abutments and end bents or ends of concrete spans from damage by
 equipment or traffic by methods specified in the Plans or as directed. Do not allow any
 traffic over the structure from the time it is completed until the pavement is completed,
 without protecting the ends of the bridge.
 608.03.09 Placing Superstructure. Do not place any superstructure on finished
 piers or abutments until attaining the required concrete strength or the table in Subsection
 601.03.15 for applying significant loads. With the exception of rigid frame structures, do
 not start the erecting or placing of the superstructure until removing the forms and
 determining the character of concrete in the substructure.
 Construct the concrete deck according to Subsection 609.03. Construct the concrete
 beams according to Subsection 605.03.
 608.03.10 Concrete Pile Piers, Steel Pile Piers, and Abutments. Construct all
 precast or cast-in-place concrete pile piers and abutments, and steel pile piers and
 abutments according to the lines, grades, dimensions, and design specified in the Plans
 and according to Sections 601, 602, and 604. Remove falsework under pier caps
 according to Subsection 601.03.14.
 608.03.11 Construction Date and Identification. Stencil the construction date and
 identification according to Subsection 601.03.19.
 608.03.12 Inspection Facilities. Provide facilities for inspection of work as it
 progresses and for final inspection of completed work. Provide ladders, or other
 satisfactory means, to enable the Engineer to examine and inspect pier and abutment caps
 and bearings. Remove them after final inspection and the Engineer’s approval of work.
 608.03.13 General Requirements for Superstructure. Give all exposed surfaces a
 finish according to Subsection 601.03.18. Construct bridge slabs according to Subsection
 609.03. Construct precast and prestressed beams according to Subsection 605.03.
 608.03.14 Steel Reinforcement for Superstructures. Place all steel according to
 Subsection 602.03.
 608.03.15 Concrete Bridge Layout. Dimensions specified in the Plans are for a
 normal temperature of 60 °F. Layout dimensions are horizontal measurements.
 608.03.16
 
 Permissible Finish Variations.
 
 608—2
 
 Do not allow lines of the finished
 
 concrete, except bridge slabs and precast piles, to vary more than 1/4 inch per 10 feet or
 vary from plan lines more than 0.1 percent of the distance between extremities of the unit
 considered.
 The Engineer will decide whether any variations in excess of those stated are cause
 either for removal and replacement of the work according to Subsection 105.01.04 or for a
 reduction in payment.
 608.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 608.04.01 Concrete. The Department will measure the quantity according to
 Subsection 601.04.
 The Department will not measure furnishing inspection facilities or stenciling for
 payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 608.04.02 Steel Reinforcement.
 according to Subsection 602.04.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity
 
 608.04.03 Structural Steel. The Department will measure the quantity according to
 Subsection 607.04.
 608.04.04 Masonry Coating. The Department will measure the quantity according
 to Subsection 601.04.
 608.04.05 Quality Control. Measure and pay according to Section 113.
 608.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 Pay Item
 08100-08105, 02555 Concrete, Class
 08150
 Steel Reinforcement
 08160
 Structural Steel
 02998
 Masonry Coating
 (1)
 
 Pay Unit
 See Subsection 601.05(1)
 See Subsection 602.05
 See Subsection 607.05
 See Subsection 601.05
 
 When the variation is not within the permissible limits and the Engineer does
 not require removal and replacement, the Department will deduct from the
 total Contract price the product of the volume of Concrete not within the
 permissible limits multiplied by the Contract unit price for the Concrete.
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 608—3
 
 SECTION 609  REINFORCED CONCRETE BRIDGE SLABS
 609.01
 
 DESCRIPTION. Construct reinforced concrete slabs on bridges.
 
 609.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 609.02.01 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 609.02.02 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 609.02.03 Joint Materials. Conform to Section 807.
 609.02.04 Structural Steel Joints. Conform to Section 812.
 609.02.05 Forms. Conform to Subsection 601.02.13.
 609.02.06 Concrete Curing Materials. Conform to Section 823.
 609.02.07 Welded and Seamless Steel Pipe for Bridge Floor Drains. Conform to
 Section 810.
 609.02.08 Zinc Oxide-Zinc Dust Primer. Conform to Federal Specification TT-P641, Type II.
 609.02.09 Finishing Machines. Provide each finishing machine with at least 2
 movable footbridges from which to perform finishing and curing.
 Furnish a self-propelled finishing machine equipped with:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 one or more augers or other equally effective device to move and position the
 concrete,
 a cylinder to compact and finish the concrete, and
 a pan float.
 
 Provide a machine that is readily adjustable so all its devices may be easily operated
 to satisfactorily position, consolidate, and finish the concrete.
 Use machines that span the full width of the bridge, are adjustable to grades
 paralleling the roadway crown, and are of rigid construction to ensure a surface finish true
 to the lines, grades, and cross sections specified in the Plans or established by the
 Engineer. Give consideration to setting finishing machine on skew if angle exceeds 15
 degrees.
 Support the machine by rails or tracks of sufficient section modulus to withstand the
 imposed loads and deflect no more than 1/16 inch between the rail supports. Provide rails
 or track that are sufficiently rigid to prevent the machine from riding up when finishing
 concrete of the specified slump. Install the rails outside the limits of the roadway slab, set
 and maintain them true to grades paralleling the bridge grade, throughout the entire
 finishing operation.
 609.02.10 Hand Operated Internal Vibrators. Conform to Subsection 601.02.
 609.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 609.03.01 Swinging the Spans. Before placing concrete slabs on steel spans or
 precast concrete release the temporary erection supports under the bridge and swing the
 span free on its supports.
 609.03.02 Forming. Form according to Subsection 601.03.12. Construct falsework
 according to Subsection 601.03.11. Construct falsework and forms for multiple slab spans
 
 609—1
 
 to provide the camber required in the finished structure.
 Department will allow the use of permanent steel bridge deck forms as follows:
 A) Design. Conform to the following criteria for designing permanent steel bridge
 deck forms:
 1)
 
 2)
 
 3)
 
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 8)
 9)
 
 10)
 11)
 
 Design the steel forms on the basis of dead load of form, reinforcement, and
 plastic concrete plus 50 pounds per square foot for construction loads. Do
 not allow the unit working stress in the steel sheet to exceed 0.725 of the
 specified minimum yield strength of the furnished material, or to exceed
 36,000 psi.
 Do not allow deflection under the weight of the forms, the plastic concrete,
 and reinforcement to exceed 1/180 of the form span or 1/2 inch whichever is
 less, and do not base this deflection on a total loading of less than 120
 pounds per square foot.
 Base the permissible form camber on the actual dead load condition.
 Do not use camber to compensate for deflection in excess of the forgoing
 limits.
 Use the design span of the form sheets as the clear span between edges of
 support angles plus 2 inches measured parallel to the form flutes. Do not
 use a fabricated panel length that is less than the distance between edges of
 beam flanges minus 2 inches.
 Compute physical design properties according to AISI Specification for the
 Design of Cold-Formed Steel Structural Members.
 Maintain the plan dimensions of both layers of primary deck reinforcement
 from each surface of the concrete deck.
 Do not consider permanent steel bridge deck forms as lateral bracing for
 compression flanges of supporting structural members.
 Except when permitted by the Engineer, do not use permanent steel bridge
 deck forms in panels where longitudinal deck construction joints are located
 between stringers.
 Do not weld to any steel girder, stringer, or floor beam; to reinforcement
 bars in concrete beams; or to form supports fabricated from nonweldable
 grades of steel. Protect flanges from damage during erection of forms.
 Submit fabrication, shop, and erection drawings, with design calculations, to
 the Engineer for review. Clearly indicate on these plans the grade of steel,
 the physical and section properties for all permanent steel bridge deck form
 sheets, and the locations where the forms are supported.
 Adjust the steel forms to grade, from the plan construction elevations, to
 provide the plan slab thickness with no additional dead load other than that
 of the steel forms.
 Fasten laps between sheets to ensure mortar tightness. Consider direction of
 concrete placement to determine lap orientation.
 
 B) Installation. Install all forms according to approved fabrication and erection
 plans.
 On steel members, do not rest form sheets directly on the top of the girder,
 stringer, or floor beam flanges. Securely fasten sheets to form supports with a
 minimum bearing length of one inch at each end. Place form supports in direct
 contact with the flange of girder, stringer or floor beam. Make all attachments
 by permissible welds, screws, bolts, clips or other approved means. However, do
 not weld form supports to flanges of steel. Ensure that welding and welds are
 according to the provisions of AWS D 1.5 pertaining to fillet welds, except that
 the Engineer will allow 1/8 inch fillet welds. Welder certification is not
 required.
 Securely fasten all forms to supports while placing them.
 
 609—2
 
 On concrete beams, show all support hardware that is to be cast into the
 beam, on the shop drawings. Make attachments to the form supports or to the
 auxiliary components by permissible welds, screws, bolts, clips, or other
 approved means.
 Protect the concrete beam from damage.
 Clean all form welds of slag and wire brush just before placing the deck
 concrete.
 Thoroughly clean, wire brush, and paint any form metal where the
 galvanized coating has been damaged or where white rust has formed on the
 metal with 2 coats of zinc oxide-zinc dust primer with no color added, to the
 satisfaction of the Engineer. It is not necessary to touch up minor heat
 discoloration in areas of welds.
 Locate transverse construction joints in the concrete deck slab at the bottom
 of a flute and field drill 1/4 inch weep holes at not less than one foot on center
 along the line of the joint. Locate the joint and weep holes at the lowest portion
 of the concrete soffit.
 C) Inspection. The Engineer will carefully observe placement of the bridge deck
 slab. If the Engineer determines that an event such as a delay that may have
 caused a cold joint or insufficient vibration of concrete during the placement of
 the concrete warrants inspection of the underside of the deck, remove at least one
 section of the forms at a location and time selected by the Engineer to provide
 visual evidence that the concrete mixture and construction procedures are
 obtaining the desired results.
 When forms are removed for inspection, do not replace the forms, but repair
 the adjacent metal forms and supports to present a neat appearance and ensure
 their satisfactory retention. Upon removal of the forms, the Engineer will
 examine the concrete surfaces for cavities, honeycombing and other defects. If
 the Engineer finds irregularities, and determines that these irregularities do not
 justify rejection of the work, repair the concrete and give it an ordinary surface
 finish. If the Engineer determines that the concrete where the form was removed
 is unsatisfactory, remove additional forms, as necessary, for the Engineer to
 inspect. Modify methods of construction as the Engineer requires to obtain
 satisfactory concrete in the slab. Remove or repair all unsatisfactory concrete.
 Provide all facilities reasonably required for the safe and convenient
 conduct of the Engineer’s inspection procedures.
 609.03.03 Placing and Fastening Reinforcement. Place all steel reinforcement to
 within ± 1/4 inch vertically and horizontally of the position shown and according to
 applicable requirements of Subsection 602.03. When concrete overlays are included in the
 original bridge construction, construct according to the tolerance requirements for a new
 slab. Tie down reinforcing mats securely with wire 0.148 inch or greater in diameter at
 intervals of no greater than 8 feet in both the longitudinal and transverse directions to
 prevent upward movement of reinforcement during construction operations. When tied to
 the forms, extend the ties through the forms.
 Do not deposit any concrete until the reinforcement is in place and the Engineer has
 inspected and approved it, and observed a complete and thorough “dry run” with the
 finishing machine over the entire slab area to be placed to ensure accurate placement of
 steel top clearance and proper slab depth.
 The Engineer may allow splicing the reinforcement according to Subsection 602.03.
 609.03.04 Expansion and Fixed Joints. Place all joints according to the details
 specified in the Plans or as directed. Correct improperly placed joints to the satisfaction of
 the Engineer even when the correction requires removal and replacement.
 A) Open Joints. Place open joints in the locations specified in the Plans and
 construct them by the insertion and subsequent removal of a template of
 approved material. Accomplish the insertion and removal of the template
 
 609—3
 
 without chipping or breaking the corners of the concrete. Do not extend
 reinforcement across an open joint.
 B) Steel Joints. Accurately shape the plates, angles, or other structural shapes at
 the shop, to conform to the configuration of the concrete slab. Ensure that the
 surface in the finished plane is true and free of warping. Employ methods in
 placing the joints to keep them in correct position during placement of the
 concrete. Set the opening at expansion joints to the temperature adjustment
 specified in the Plans. Avoid impairment of the clearance. When placing
 concrete, make adjustments in the joint widths to accommodate temperature
 changes.
 C) Cold-Applied or Hot-Applied Sealing Compound. Ensure that all joints to be
 sealed are free of cracked or spalled areas. Chip cracked areas back to sound
 concrete.
 Ensure that the faces of all joints to be sealed are free of all foreign matter,
 curing compound, oils, greases, paint, dirt, free water, and laitance. Thoroughly
 clean all joint faces by sandblasting or by means of a mechanical rotary wire
 brush.
 Immediately before sealing, blow out the joint with air from an air
 compressor equipped with an oil and water trap. Use an air compressor of such
 capacity as will maintain 90-psi pressure when air is delivered to the joint
 through a nozzle no more than 1/4 inch in diameter.
 When any sealing compound has not bonded to the joint wall or face,
 remove it and clean and reseal the joint.
 Place all cold-applied sealing compound with a manufacturer recommended
 applicator, and follow the manufacturer’s mixing and placing instructions.
 Provide a copy of these instructions and the specifications for the applicator to
 the Division of Materials.
 D) Preformed Neoprene Joint Seals. Ensure that all joints are true to alignment
 and have vertical faces. Ensure that each joint is uniform in width throughout its
 length. Reform, reconstruct, and resaw or otherwise modify improperly
 constructed joints to the satisfaction of Engineer.
 Construct expansion joints to be sealed by this method according to the
 details shown on the Standard Drawings or specified in the Plans.
 When a joint, as constructed, has a width larger or smaller than the specified
 width, provide a seal for that joint that is the correct size for the as-built width.
 Ensure that all joints to be sealed are free of cracked or spalled concrete.
 Chip damaged areas back to sound concrete and repair them with an
 approved epoxy resin compound or other materials approved by the Department.
 Install the seals in the properly prepared joints by a tool designed
 specifically for installing joint seals. Remove and replace any seal that is
 damaged during installation. Remove any seal that is improperly positioned in
 the joint and reinstall it at the proper elevation. Use hand methods to install seals
 only in areas that are inaccessible to the machine, or obtain the Engineer’s
 written permission to install seals by hand methods.
 The Engineer will measure seals before and after installation as a check
 against stretch. Remove any installed seal that shows more than 5 percent
 stretch and correctly reinstall it or replace it. Install the seals in structures
 immediately after expiration of the curing period. Install all seals securely and
 ensure that they are free from any objectionable curling or twisting in the joint
 groove. Use a lubricant adhesive that covers both sides of the seal over the full
 area in contact with the sides of the joint. Apply the lubricant adhesive either to
 the faces of the joint or to the seal, or to both. Install all seals in a highly
 compressed state so that the top of the seals is 3/8 ± 1/8 inch below the level of
 the roadway surface. Install the seals in one piece, without field splicing, for the
 full length of each of the transverse joints. The Engineer will allow one factory
 splice per transverse joint. Obtain the Engineer’s approval for any field splices
 required by partial width construction.
 
 609—4
 
 When specified for longitudinal joints in structures, install the seals in
 practical lengths, without field splicing.
 E) Neoprene Expansion Joints. Furnish neoprene expansion joint consisting of
 any one of the manufactured joint seals specified in the Plans. Determine which
 of the specified joint seals will be used and obtain written approval of joint
 details, prior to placing the deck concrete.
 Submit shop drawings for approval according to Subsection 607.03.01.
 Ensure that these drawings, along with joint details, include a layout plan of the
 joint units to be used. Also include procedures for setting expansion joint width,
 so the opening will be the specified width at 60 °F. The Engineer will approve
 of details of installation and his decision will be final.
 Include the details and material specifications for the manufactured
 neoprene expansion joints and incidental accessories, sealants, and adhesives
 with the shop drawings for approval.
 Before beginning work on the joint, furnish the manufacturer’s written
 installation instructions.
 Comply with the manufacturer’s installation instructions, apply sealants and
 adhesives, and install joint units as shown on the approved shop drawings and as
 specified in this section.
 When the Engineer requests, obtain technical assistance from the supplier of
 the joint. Failure of the joint supplier to provide adequate technical assistance
 may be cause for removal of the joint seal from the Department’s List of
 Approved Materials.
 Remove all forms and debris from the joint opening. Ensure that concrete
 or metal surfaces where the neoprene expansion joints are to be set are dry; clean
 and free from dirt, grease, and contaminants; level; and sound with no broken or
 spalled concrete. Ensure that adjacent joint seats are on a straight plane with
 each other.
 Furnish and install the neoprene strip sealing element in one continuous
 unbroken length for the entire joint length. For the strip seal type joint, ensure
 that the locking groove in the metal extrusion is clean and free of any dirt or
 corrosion before installing the neoprene strip seal element. Bond the strip seal in
 place with the manufacturer’s recommended adhesive which meets the
 Engineer’s approval.
 Where longitudinal joints cross transverse joint seals, provide a seal by
 flattening and extending the longitudinal joint neoprene seal element under the
 transverse joint pad. When this procedure is not practical, use a separate
 neoprene apron, bonded to the longitudinal seal element.
 Ensure that the finished joint presents a smooth, neat appearance. Wipe or
 scrape away excess sealant before it becomes hard. Upon completion of an
 entire joint, grind any uneven concrete or armored edge.
 609.03.05 Drainage. Install deck drains at the locations shown or as directed and
 place them before placing the bridge deck slab. Paint all drain pipes according to
 Subsection 607.03.23. Provide transverse drainage of the roadway surface by means of a
 suitable crown or cross slope in the floor slab. Effectively drain gutters using weep holes
 or drain scuppers constructed at locations and in the manner specified in the Plans. Install
 drain scuppers to prevent drainage water from staining exposed surfaces of girders and
 abutment walls. In general, extend drain pipes through the concrete slab to a distance of
 no less than one inch below the slab or underlying beam. Provide the under surface of
 cantilever brackets and overlapping slabs with a V groove (drip strip) 1/2 inch in depth at
 a point no more than 6 inches from the outside face of the overhang for the purpose of
 arresting flow of moisture to prevent staining.
 609.03.06 Weather Limitations and Placing Concrete. Do not place any concrete
 within deck slabs during the months of January or February, except for barriers, plinths,
 curbs, walks, etc, without Engineer approved cold weather plan. Place all deck concrete
 
 609—5
 
 according to Subsection 601.03.09. Any time the ambient temperature is anticipated to be
 85 °F or higher, place concrete in the deck slab during evening hours after ambient
 temperatures cool to below 85 °F and cease placement before temperatures rise above 85
 °F. Cool forms and beams tops by water spray if their temperature exceeds 85 °F.
 Always protect deck placement from rain water being introduced into the concrete
 and from rainwater surface damage. Cease deck placement immediately or cover it for
 complete protection when rain occurs.
 609.03.07 Depositing, Consolidating, and Striking Off Slab Concrete. Wet the
 reinforcing steel and forms with water prior to placing concrete. Deposit the concrete
 between the curbs or between the longitudinal joints when specified in the Plans to the full
 depth of the slab, and consolidate it. Consolidate by means of hand-operated internal
 vibrators according to Subsection 601.03.09. Use a spade in addition to vibrating, if
 required, to ensure that no honeycomb, voids, or air pockets exist against the forms.
 Continue consolidating the concrete until there is complete contact between the
 reinforcing steel and the concrete, and until mortar flushes to the top surface.
 When using permanent steel bridge deck forms, place emphasis on proper vibration
 of the concrete to avoid honeycombing and voids, especially at construction joints,
 expansion joints, and valleys and ends of form sheets. Obtain the Engineer’s approval of
 pouring sequences, procedures, and mixtures.
 Continuously place concrete in any slab between expansion joints or between
 construction joints as specified in the Plans.
 Prevent displacement of reinforcement during placing of concrete. Place concrete in
 the sequence as specified in the Plans and in the absence of such designation, place as
 directed. Obtain written approval to change the pouring sequence. Provide sufficient
 work capacity to place concrete at a minimum rate of 25 cubic yards per hour.
 When, in case of an emergency, it becomes necessary to introduce a construction
 joint, form it by means of a vertical bulkhead constructed to produce a keyed joint and
 located as approved by the Engineer.
 In placing concrete around steel shapes, place it only on one side of the shape until it
 flushes up over the bottom flange of the shape on the opposite side, after which place it on
 both sides to completion.
 Do not place concrete railings monolithic with the slab.
 On continuous, composite design structures, keep concrete in slabs plastic for a
 sufficient length of time to allow the structure to deflect to the natural deflected shape.
 Place the concrete in each integral unit of the superstructure continuously. Do not
 begin placing concrete without sufficient approved material on hand nor without sufficient
 forces and equipment to complete that unit without interruption. Avoid joints in the
 concrete due to work stoppage. Form construction joints, when necessary, according to
 Subsection 601.03.10.
 Place concrete in slab spans in one continuous operation for each span. Place
 concrete in transverse strips the entire width of the bridge. Place concrete for the full
 depth and ensure that the width of strips is such that concrete in any one strip does not
 take its initial set before placing the adjacent strip.
 When expansion devices such as rockers, expansion dams, and similar fixtures have
 been rigidly fixed to hold them in correct alignment, immediately release them upon
 completion of concrete placement in the portion of the structure in which they are
 installed.
 Immediately following consolidation of the concrete, strike off the surface to crown
 and cross section with the finishing machine. Move the machine in the direction that work
 is progressing. Maintain a slight excess of concrete at all times so no low spots are left in
 front of the finishing machine. Prevent the excess concrete from tearing the surface.
 After finishing, do not work, walk on, or disturb the concrete in place except as described
 in this section.
 In general, do not add water to the surface of the concrete to assist in finishing
 operations. If the Engineer allows the application of water to the surface, apply it as a fog
 spray using approved spray equipment.
 
 609—6
 
 609.03.08 Working the Surface. Following the striking off or screeding, randomly
 check the surface for irregularities and mortar ridges, at least every 50 feet of bridge
 length, with an approved 10-foot straightedge operated parallel to the centerline of the
 bridge and slab surface. Eliminate all variations greater than 1/8 inch.
 After the concrete slab has cured, the Engineer will again check the slab for variations
 exceeding 1/8 inch. Perform any corrective action that the Engineer deems necessary.
 After completing the finishing operation, ensure that the surface of the concrete
 presents a uniform appearance; conforms to the required grade and cross section; and is
 free from surplus water, rough and porous spots, irregularities, depressions, and other
 objectionable surface features resulting from improper finishing.
 609.03.09 Finish with Burlap Drag. If the Contract does not require texturing,
 finish the slab using a burlap drag. Use a burlap drag of double thickness, at least 3 feet
 wide, and long enough to span between curb faces. Lay the burlap on the slab surface and
 drag it in the direction the slab is being placed, keeping approximately 2 feet of its width
 in contact with the slab surface. Keep the burlap drag damp, clean, and free from
 hardened concrete.
 609.03.10 Texturing. Texture the surface by forming transverse grooves. Form the
 transverse grooves by approved manual tools such as rakes with spring steel tines. Form
 the grooves in the concrete at an appropriate time during concrete set, so that in the
 hardened concrete, the grooves will be between 0.09 to 0.13 inch in width, between 0.12
 and 0.19 inch in depth, and be spaced at random intervals between 0.3 and 1.0 inch.
 Terminate the grooves approximately 18 inches from faces of the curbs, concrete barrier
 walls, or other vertical walls.
 Regardless of the method used to form the grooves, ensure that the grooves are
 relatively smooth and uniform, are formed without tearing the surface or without bringing
 pieces of the coarse aggregate to the top of the surface, and are formed to drain
 transversely.
 Correct any individual areas of hardened grooved concrete that do not conform to
 these requirements by the cutting of acceptable grooves in the hardened surface with an
 approved cutting machine or by other approved methods.
 609.03.11 Waterproofing Membranes and Surface Courses for Slabs. When a
 waterproofing membrane overlay or special surface course is specified in the Contract,
 prepare the slab surface according to the procedures designated in the Contract. Do not
 texture the surface and do not apply a liquid membrane forming curing compound when
 the slab is to be waterproofed or receive a surface course.
 609.03.12 Curing. Immediately after finishing and while the surface is slightly
 damp, apply Type II (white pigmented) membrane-forming curing compound to the slab
 between the curb lines. Do not dilute or alter the compound, but thoroughly agitate it
 immediately before applying it. When the compound is too viscous to apply, warm it in a
 water bath to approximately 100 °F before applying it. Apply the compound uniformly
 using an approved pressure sprayer at a rate of one gallon per 120 square feet. If the
 Engineer deems the application is not uniform as it progresses, apply the compound in 2
 applications, each at a minimum rate of one gallon per 240 or less square feet. Start the
 second application after completing the first application. The Engineer will determine the
 total quantity of compound actually applied to the slab and compute the actual rate of
 application. When the Engineer determines the total actual application rate is less than
 one gallon per 120 square feet actual coverage, apply additional compound immediately
 and uniformly over the entire surface at a rate the Engineer directs.
 When the Contract does not require texturing, reduce the total rate of application to
 one gallon per 150 square feet. If the Engineer deems the application is not uniform as it
 progresses, apply the compound in 2 applications, each at a minimum rate of one gallon
 per 300 square feet. Start the second application after completing the first application.
 
 609—7
 
 When the Engineer determines the total actual application rate is less than one gallon per
 150 square feet actual coverage, apply additional compound immediately and uniformly
 over the entire surface at a rate the Engineer directs.
 Prevent the compound from being applied to reinforcing steel, concrete surfaces to be
 bonded to other concrete, or any other surfaces not specifically designated to receive the
 compound. When having inadvertently applied the compound to areas or surfaces not
 designated, remove by sandblasting or other approved methods.
 After applying the compound, and as soon as possible without damaging the surface
 texture, cover the slab between the curb lines with curing blankets or a double thickness of
 burlap and keep the slab continuously wet until the required compressive strength is
 attained as determined by testing field cured cylinders. If other operations are not delayed,
 the Engineer may require 7 days wet cure regardless of cylinder strengths. If using curing
 blankets, place and maintain blankets and apply water as specified in Subsection
 601.03.17.
 When using Class S concrete, wet cure according to Subsection 601.03.17.
 609.03.13 Surface Finish. Finish exposed areas of curbs, railings, and plinths, as
 specified in Subsection 601.03.18.
 609.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 609.04.01 Concrete. The Department will measure the quantity in cubic yards
 according to the Record Plans. The Department will base the final quantity on the design
 quantity. When there is an error or omission in the design quantity in excess of 2 percent,
 the Department will adjust the design quantity accordingly. The Department will adjust
 quantities resulting from authorized dimension changes. The Department will not subject
 these quantities to the 2 percent limitation.
 The Department may measure the depth of concrete cover above the top mat of steel
 reinforcement in inches according to KM 64-313. The Department will not measure the
 depth of concrete cover above the top mat of steel reinforcement as a separate pay unit,
 but will use it to calculate an adjusted Contract quantity for Concrete.
 The Department will not measure furnishing inspection facilities, joint construction,
 or stenciling for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 609.04.02 Steel Reinforcement.
 according to Subsection 602.04.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity
 
 609.04.03 Drain Pipe. If this item is a separate pay item, the Department will
 measure the quantity in linear feet. If this item is not a separate pay item, the Department
 will not measure the quantity for payment and will consider it incidental to Structural
 Steel.
 609.04.04 Structural Steel. The Department will measure the quantity, including
 drainage systems and structural steel expansion joint systems, according to Subsection
 607.04. The Department will not measure paint, fittings, and connections for payment and
 will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 609.04.05 Neoprene Expansion Dams. The Department will measure the quantity
 in linear feet.
 609.04.06 Joint Sealing. The Department will measure the quantity according to
 Subsection 606.04.08.
 609.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 
 609—8
 
 Code
 08100-08105, 02555
 08150
 08160
 02998
 08820, 08821
 08469-08472
 08540
 (1)
 
 Pay Item
 Concrete, Class(1)
 Steel Reinforcement
 Structural Steel
 Masonry Coating
 Drain Pipe, Size
 Neoprene Expansion Dam, Size
 Joint Sealing
 
 Pay Unit
 See Subsection 601.05
 See Subsection 602.05
 See Subsection 607.05
 See Subsection 601.05
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 See Subsection 606.05
 
 The Department will adjust the Contract quantity for Concrete by the Schedule
 for Adjusted Quantity for Depth of Cover Deficiency. The adjusted quantity is
 equal to the theoretical slab volume of concrete times the ratio of the area in
 square feet, which is not within the specified tolerance to the plan slab area in
 square feet, times the factor listed in the Schedule for Adjusted Quantity for
 Depth of Cover Deficiency. The Department will not make additional payment
 for depth of cover in excess of the specified thickness.
 Schedule for Adjusted Quantity for
 Depth of Cover Deficiency
 
 Depth of Cover Deficiency (inches)
 0.00 to -0.50
 -0.51 to -0.63
 -0.64 to -0.75
 -0.76 to -0.88
 -0.89 to -1.50
 -1.51 or greater
 0.00 to +0.50
 +0.51 to +0.63
 +0.64 to +0.75
 +0.76 to +0.88
 +0.89 to +1.00
 +1.01 or greater
 
 Quantity Adjustment Factor
 0.00
 0.12
 0.25
 0.50
 (1)
 (2)
 
 0.00
 0.12
 0.25
 0.37
 0.50
 (3)
 
 (1)
 
 Construct a concrete overlay at no expense to the Department. The Department
 may apply a factor of 1.00 to small isolated areas in lieu of a concrete overlay.
 (2)
 Remove and replace these areas with concrete of the specified thickness at no
 expense to the Department.
 (3)
 Perform corrective work at no expense to the Department. The Department
 may require removal of any excess concrete or removal and replacement of the
 entire slab. The Department may apply a factor of 1.00 to small isolated areas
 in lieu of corrective work.
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 609—9
 
 SECTION 610  CONCRETE BOX CULVERTS
 AND CONCRETE HEADWALLS
 610.01 DESCRIPTION. Build all concrete box culverts and concrete headwalls
 according to the Contract.
 For box culverts constructed using precast sections, conform to Section 611. For
 precast headwalls, conform to Section 710.
 610.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 610.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 610.02.02 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 610.02.03 Concrete Pipe. Conform to Section 810.
 610.02.04 Joint Materials. Conform to Section 807.
 610.02.05 Masonry Coating. Conform to Section 828.
 610.02.06 Concrete Curing Materials. Conform to Section 823.
 610.03 CONSTRUCTION.
 construction.
 
 Conform to Subsection 601.03 for all concrete
 
 610.03.01 Footings. Construct footings to the elevation specified in the Plans, and
 increase the depth when the Engineer determines that it is necessary to provide sufficient
 bearing or to prevent undermining. Only raise footing elevations when encountering solid
 rock at elevations above those specified in the Plans and with the approval of the
 Engineer.
 Form the outside face of all footings of concrete headwalls for pipe, box, or arch
 culverts to the full depth of the footing. Do not place any concrete in the foundation until
 the Engineer has inspected and approved the depth of excavation and character of the
 foundation material.
 Whenever the natural foundation material is not sufficiently stable to support the
 structure or whenever it is anticipated that high water may cause excessive erosion around
 the footings, the Engineer may order Extra Work to provide the structure with adequate
 support or protection according to Subsection 109.04.
 When the condition of excavation for footings is otherwise satisfactory but is such
 that concrete cannot be placed without mud becoming mixed with the concrete, remove
 the entire mass of mud and replace it with stable material or prevent infiltration of mud by
 methods such as a layer of coarse aggregate and geotextile fabric or a layer of plastic
 material. Perform work by methods other than removing and replacing the entire mass of
 mud according to Subsection 109.04.
 610.03.02 Apron Walls and Headwalls.
 A) Apron Walls. The Engineer may require additional depth than that specified in
 the Plans if necessary to prevent undermining. Form the outside faces of all
 concrete apron walls for the full depth. When necessary to form the back face or
 the end of apron walls due to the lack of solid material, do not exceed the
 excavation limits specified for footing structure excavation.
 Pave the space between wings when the Engineer directs. In this event,
 relocate the apron walls so that they are in a straight line between the ends of the
 wings, or at locations to provide the best protection.
 B) Headwalls. Construct headwalls according to the Standard Drawings for
 Headwall Supplement. When headwalls for pipe culverts are located at the
 
 610—1
 
 shoulder, construct the top of the headwalls parallel to the shoulder line for both
 line and grade.
 610.03.03 Drainage. Place weep holes consisting of 4-inch pipe or formed to 4
 inches in diameter at intervals not to exceed 25 feet in retaining walls, nor exceeding 10
 feet in box culverts. Place the outlet invert elevation of weep holes in box culverts 4
 inches above the flowline of the culvert. Raise box culvert weep holes to accommodate
 significant silting when the Engineer directs. Make adequate provisions for thorough
 drainage of backfill and embankment according to Subsection 603.03. Boxes less than 4
 feet in height are not required to have weepholes.
 610.03.04 Placing Concrete. Place concrete according to Subsection 601.03.09.
 Place the base slab or footings, and allow them to cure before constructing the
 remainder of the structure. Construct base slabs, footings, and apron walls as monolithic
 units when practical. When construction joints are necessary, place them at right angles to
 the culvert barrel.
 Bond construction joints, according to Subsection 601.03.10.
 In constructing all box culverts having a clear height of 5 feet or more, place concrete
 in the side walls, and allow it to set before placing the top slab.
 For culverts having a clear height of less than 5 feet, if desired, pour the culvert top
 slab monolithically with the side walls. When using this method of construction, make all
 necessary construction joints vertical and at right angles to the axis of the culverts.
 Construct each wingwall as a monolithic unit. Place construction joints, where
 unavoidable and when not specified in the Plans, horizontal or vertical as appropriate.
 610.03.05 Removing Forms. Remove forms according to Subsection 601.03.14..
 610.03.06 Surface Finish and Placing Fill. Finish surfaces according to Subsection
 601.03.18. Texture top slabs of box culverts to be used as the wearing surface for traffic
 according to Subsection 609.03.10, and conform to the roadway rideability requirements
 of Subsection 501.03.19.
 Place backfill or embankment as allowed by concrete strength.
 Backfill according to Subsection 603.03. Construct embankment according to
 Subsection 206.03.
 610.03.07 Extensions to Existing Culverts. Construct extensions according to the
 lines and grades established and to dimensions specified in the Plans.
 Remove portions of the existing structure designated to be removed according to
 Subsection 203.03. Remove portions of the existing structure designated to be removed in
 a manner that provides a neat junction with the extension, and leave undamaged that
 portion of the existing structure that is to remain in service. For exposed joints in the
 finish work, the Engineer may require sawing of the existing concrete to a depth sufficient
 to ensure a neat joint. Repair all damage to the existing structure due to his activities.
 Remove and dispose of all silt or other debris that may have collected within the barrel of
 the existing structure. The Engineer will only require this silt and debris removal once,
 unless erosion control measures were not adequate.
 610.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 610.04.01 Concrete.
 Subsection 601.04.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity according to
 
 610.04.02 Steel Reinforcement.
 according to Subsection 602.04.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity
 
 610.04.03 Structure Excavation. The Department will measure the quantity
 according to Subsection 603.04. The Department will measure the removal and
 
 610—2
 
 replacement of unstable material in footing excavation as Structure Excavation.
 610.04.04 Removal of Existing Structure. The Department will measure the
 quantity according to Subsection 203.04. The Department will not measure repair of
 damage to, removal of silt and debris from, and providing a neat cut for the joint on the
 portion of the structure designated to remain for payment and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work.
 610.04.05 Headwall. The Department will measure the quantity as each.
 610.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 Pay Item
 08100, 08102-08105,
 02555
 Concrete
 08150
 Steel Reinforcement
 ---Structure Excavation
 02731
 Remove Structure
 01200-01221
 Pipe Culvert Headwall, Size
 
 Pay Unit
 See Subsection 601.05
 See Subsection 602.05
 See Subsection 603.05
 See Subsection 203.05
 Each
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 610—3
 
 SECTION 611  PRECAST REINFORCED CONCRETE BOX
 CULVERT SECTIONS
 611.01 DESCRIPTION. Install precast reinforced concrete box sections used as
 culverts, storm drains, and sewers.
 611.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 611.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsections 601.02 and 601.03 and the
 Precast/Prestress Concrete Manual.
 611.02.02 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 611.02.03 Backfill Material. Conform to Subsection 206.03.01.
 611.02.04 Free Draining Backfill Material. Conform to Section 805.
 611.02.05 Grout. Conform to Subsection 601.02.
 611.02.06 Sand. Conform to Section 804.
 611.02.07 Sand for Pipe Bedding. Conform to Section 804.
 611.02.08 Crushed Aggregate for Bedding. Conform to Section 805.
 611.02.09 Joint Sealer for Rigid Pipe. Conform to Section 807.
 611.02.10 Geotextile Fabric. Conform to Section 843.
 611.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 611.03.01 Transportation and Handling. Handle and store the precast units so
 that flexural stresses are not induced until the concrete age is 7 days or attains a
 compressive strength of 3,000 psi.
 Remove and replace all sections that are not in true alignment and grade or that show
 undue settlement after laying, or are otherwise damaged.
 611.03.02 Precast Unit Construction. Construct units according to ASTM C 1577
 and Section 605 with the following exceptions and additions:
 1)
 2)
 
 A water meters is not required if using dry-cast methods.
 Mark all box culverts sections with the following information on the inside top
 of each section with letters no less than 2 inches high:
 a)
 b)
 c)
 
 3)
 4)
 
 Span, rise, maximum and minimum design earth cover, and KY Table 1.
 Date of manufacture.
 Name and trademark of the manufacturer.
 
 For entrance and exit box sections, indent the required information. Mark
 interior sections by indenting or with waterproof paint.
 Furnish precast sections at least 4 feet long.
 Contrary to ASTM C 1577 Section 10.3, ensure the compressive strength of the
 cores tested is equal to or greater than the design strength.
 
 611.03.03 Shop Drawings. Precast box sizes outside the depth or size range of
 ASTM C 1577 will require shop drawings with structural steel calculation by an engineer
 
 611—1
 
 licensed in Kentucky. Precast box dimensions and fill depth within KYHL-93 or KY
 Table 1 will not require shop drawings or calculations unless requested by the engineer.
 Precast wing walls and headwalls will require shop drawings and stamped calculations by
 an engineer licensed in Kentucky for all precast structures.
 Submit shop drawings for review according to Subsection 105.02, except do not
 include original tracings. Include on the shop drawings details of joint configuration, the
 size of rubber gaskets or butyl rubber sealants when used, the area of steel reinforcement,
 lift holes, and the size and location of reinforcement.
 611.03.04 Excavation. Perform structure excavation according to Section 603,
 except as modified in this subsection.
 611.03.05 Bedding. Perform bedding as specified in the Plans or Standard Drawings.
 Level the compacted bedding with a template or straightedge to ensure uniform support
 throughout the entire width and length of the structure.
 When desired, substitute crushed aggregate up to 3/4 inch maximum size for sand as
 bedding material. Do not use DGA or gravel base for this substitution. Substitute
 measure for measure.
 The Engineer will require a vertical trench from the bottom of the excavation to the
 top of the culvert or original ground, whichever is lower, as specified in the Plans or
 Standard Drawings.
 611.03.06 Laying Sections. Do not lay any unit until the Engineer approves the
 proposed location. Take soundings for foundation design at the inlet and outlet of each
 culvert and at intervals no greater than 20 feet along the grade line of the bottom of the
 culvert, to a depth of 3 feet. Perform soundings on the centerline and at each edge of the
 culvert. Where ledge rock, gravel, hardpan, or other unyielding material is encountered or
 known to exist within the limits stated, prepare the foundation as specified in the Plans or
 Standard Drawings.
 Camber the box culvert sections as the Engineer directs. Begin placing sections at the
 outlet end of the pipe with the bell or groove end being laid upgrade. Fully extend
 successive spigot ends into each adjoining hub. Provide a “come-along” or other
 mechanical device to pull each section firmly into the previously placed section, tightly
 meshing the joints. Do not push sections together with a tractor-mounted blade. After
 installing the sections, seal lift holes by inserting a tapered precast concrete plug and
 coating the top of the joint around the plug with asphalt mastic material.
 When the Plans require the volume between side-by-side installations to be filled
 with grout, use grout consisting of one part cement to 6 parts mortar sand or concrete
 sand, with sufficient water to provide a consistency suitable for job conditions.
 Provide drainage with 4-inch weepholes as specified in Subsections 610.03.03 and
 603.03.05 respectively, except that for side-by-side installations separated by grout, place
 weepholes in the extreme outside walls only.
 Grout formed openings between the precast sections and any side entry of pipes or
 top entry of manholes to form a watertight joint. When manholes are to be placed directly
 on the top slab of the precast sections, provide sufficient additional steel reinforcement in
 the top slab to compensate for the section removed.
 611.03.07 Joints. Use either rubber gaskets, butyl rubber sealants, or asphalt mastic
 joint sealing compound in joints between the precast box sections. Use the same material
 throughout each individual structure.
 A) Rubber Gaskets. Use a cement and lubricant to facilitate joining the sections
 that is recommended by the manufacturer of the rubber gaskets. Install the
 rubber gaskets in a manner to snugly fit in the beveled surface of the tongue and
 groove ends of the section to form a flexible water-tight seal under all conditions
 of service.
 B) Butyl Rubber Sealants. Use a primer; rate and method of primer application;
 
 611—2
 
 and width and method of application of the butyl rubber sealant recommended
 by the manufacturer. Provide the Engineer with the manufacturer’s literature for
 installation procedures.
 C) Asphalt Mastic Joints. Prime and seal asphalt mastic joints according to
 Subsection 701.03.05.
 D) Joint Fit. Regardless of the type of sealant to be used, ensure proper meshing of
 the joints.
 Do not allow sand or foreign materials to intrude into joints. If sand or foreign
 material is present within the joint upon joining the sections, thoroughly clean until no
 sand or foreign material is present, and reseal the joint.
 If the joint is not entirely filled with sealant after connecting the culvert sections fill
 all exposed unsealed areas, both inside and outside the culvert, with asphalt mastic or
 other approved material. If using plastic gaskets, use an additional sealant compatible
 with the plastic and recommended by the gasket manufacturer.
 Fill the exterior joint gap on the top of precast reinforced concrete boxes with mortar.
 Cover the exterior joint with a minimum of a 15-inch double layer geotextile fabric joint
 wrap. Before applying the wrap, ensure that the surface is free from dirt and foreign
 substance. Use one continuous roll of double layered joint wrap to cover the joint on the
 top of the box and to extend completely down the sides to the bottom of the box. During
 backfilling, keep the joint wrap in the proper location over the joint. Apply the joint wrap
 to all joint sections.
 611.03.08 Backfilling. Backfill according to Subsection 603.03, the Plans, and the
 Standard Drawings. Place free draining backfill between side-by-side installations when
 required by the Plans. Compact the backfill as the Engineer directs.
 611.03.09 Headwalls. Construct headwalls as specified in the approved Shop
 Drawings, Plans, or Standard Drawings.
 611.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 611.04.01 Structure Excavation. The Department will measure the quantity
 according to Subsection 603.04. For necessary side-by-side installations, the Department
 will measure the entire excavated volume between sections when the Plans or the
 Engineer require excavation of this volume. The Department will measure embankment
 placed and subsequently excavated according to the plan requirements for bedding as
 structure excavation. The Department will not measure free draining backfill or grout
 between side-by-side installations for payment and will consider them incidental to this
 item of work.
 611.04.02 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box Sections. The Department will
 measure the quantity in linear feet according to the length dimensions specified in the
 Plans. The Department will not measure joint materials (including the geotextile fabric
 wrap), shear connectors required for joining sections, and any required acceptance coring
 for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 The Department will not measure repair of sections not in true alignment and grade or
 that show undue settlement after laying, or otherwise damaged.
 611.04.03 Headwalls. Headwalls and wingwalls may be precast or poured-in-place.
 The Department will measure the quantity as each regardless of which construction
 method is used for construction of the headwall.
 611.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 
 611—3
 
 Code
 ---03010-03038
 01200-01221
 08100-08105, 02555
 08150
 
 Pay Item
 Structure Excavation
 Precast Concrete Box Sections, Size
 Pipe Culvert Headwall, Size
 Concrete, Class
 Steel Reinforcement
 
 Pay Unit
 See Subsection 603.05
 Linear Foot
 Each
 See Subsection 601.05
 See Subsection 602.05
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 611—4
 
 SECTION 612  STRUCTURAL PLATE SOIL INTERACTION
 STRUCTURES
 612.01 DESCRIPTION.
 Furnish and install corrugated metal multi-plate soil
 interaction structures where an equivalent inner diameter of greater than 10 feet and less
 than or equal to 20 feet is required for drainage or other openings. Corrugated metal multi
 plate soil interaction structures include pipe, pipe arches, and arches.
 612.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 612.02.01 Pipe. Conform to Section 809 for the following:
 1)
 2)
 
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate Pipe, Pipe Arches, and Arches.
 Corrugate Steel Structural Plate Pipe, Pipe Arches, and Arches.
 
 612.02.02 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 612.02.03 Asphalt Material for Coating and Paving. Conform to Section 806.
 612.02.04 Bedding and Backfill Materials.
 A) Fine Aggregate. Conform to Section 804, Sand for Pipe Bedding.
 B) Coarse Aggregate. Conform to Section 805, Structural Granular Backfill.
 C) Flowable Fill. Conform to Section 601.02 and 601.03.
 612.02.05 Joint Materials. Conform to Subsection 701.02.
 612.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 612.03.01 Composition. Provide structures that consist of prefabricated sections
 ready to be assembled and erected at the site. Furnish prefabricated sections consisting of
 asphalt coated galvanized (zinc coated) corrugated steel or aluminum alloy plates that
 have been factory shaped and punched. The Department will allow the use of a factory
 assembled structure when units are available that conform to the requirements of the
 Contract for opening size, material, corrugation dimensions, metal thickness, and coating.
 Ensure that factory assembled steel units are asphalt coated. The Department will not
 extend the Contract time to accommodate the use of factory assembled pipe or pipe
 arches. Ensure that field and factory assembled steel pipe and pipe arch units are asphalt
 coated and paved.
 612.03.02 Transportation and Handling.
 Subsection 701.03.04.
 
 Transport and handle according to
 
 612.03.03 Erections Plans. Submit 3 full sets of erection plans for each unit to the
 Engineer. Include with each submitted set of erection plans a natural scale plan, an
 elevation view of the structure, and the design calculations. In lieu of design calculations,
 the Department will accept a manufacturer’s certification that the proposed structure
 conforms to all of the Department’s structural design requirements. The Department will
 return one set after review with needed corrections noted. Each time the Department
 requires corrections, submit 3 full sets of the erection plans. The Department will have 20
 calendar days to review each submission.
 After the Department has approved the erection drawings, submit one full set of the
 approved drawings. Submit final drawings on 22 inches wide by 36 inches long and 0.003
 inch thick mylar film or equivalent capable of producing clear prints and microfilms.
 612.03.04 Shop Drawings. Before fabricating any parts of the structure, submit
 shop drawings according to Subsection 607.03.01.
 
 612—1
 
 612.03.05 Soundings for Foundation. Take the soundings for foundation design for
 pipe, and pipe arches according to Subsection 701.03. Where rock foundations are
 encountered or known to exist within the limits specified, excavate the foundation to a
 depth below the proposed outside bottom of the structure of 1/2 inch per foot of fill to a
 subgrade elevation above the proposed outside top of the structure. Excavate no less than
 one foot and no more than 0.75 times the height of the structure. Replace with material
 conforming to Subsection 612.02.04. Rock foundations include ledge rock, gravel,
 hardpan, or other unyielding material. Camber the pipe or pipe arch whenever directed.
 Do not lay the pipe in cuts until completing the rough grading.
 When an unstable foundation is encountered at the grade established, remove the
 unstable material and replace it with material conforming to Subsection 612.02.04 to a
 width and depth that will provide a uniform and firm foundation.
 612.03.06 Installation. Install steel pipe, pipe arches, and arches according to
 ASTM A 807. Install aluminum alloy pipe, pipe arches, and arches according to ASTM B
 789. Provide the type and method of bedding according to ASTM A 807 and B 789.
 Compact backfill according to Subsection 206.03.03. Construct in lifts of not
 exceeding 8 inches in thickness. Exercise care to avoid displacement of the true line of
 the arch. Backfill with flowable fill when the Engineer directs. Proportion flowable fill
 according to Subsection 601.03.
 Conform to the elongation tolerance in Appendix A, Tabulation of Construction
 Tolerances.
 612.03.07 Paving. After erecting steel structures and constructing the embankments,
 pave the inverts throughout their length and to a minimum width of 25 percent of the
 circumference for circular pipes or to a minimum of 38 percent of the circumference for
 pipe arches. Pave with wire reinforced asphalt paving mixture or similarly reinforced
 concrete.
 A) Asphalt Paving. Place wire mesh of a diameter of 0.1 inch or more, having
 openings 6 by 6-inch or less, in the invert, and securely fasten it to bolts of the
 structure with wire or suitable clips. Provide reinforcing mesh in widths that are
 one foot less than the finished width of the pavement. Provide an asphalt paving
 mixture that consists of 70 percent mortar sand and 30 percent mineral filler
 combined with sufficient bituminous material (9 to 12 percent by weight) to
 provide a workable plastic mixture. Provide an asphalt material that consists of a
 PG 58-22 asphalt binder. Heat the aggregate and asphalt binder separately to
 300 ± 60 °F, then combine and thoroughly mix them. Ensure that the invert of
 the culvert is clean and dry while spreading and compacting the mixture. Spread
 and shape the mixture by means of a template. Compact the mixture to a
 minimum depth of one ± 0.2 inch over the crest of the corrugations. While the
 compacted paving material is still warm, apply a 0.1 inch coating of heated
 asphalt cement throughout its width and length by spraying or other suitable
 means.
 During the paving operation take precautions against asphyxiation, heat, or
 the accumulation of inflammable vapors in culverts.
 The Department
 recommends using forced ventilation.
 B) Concrete Paving. Place wire mesh of a diameter of 0.1 inch or more, having
 openings 6 by 6-inch or less, in the invert, and securely fasten it to bolts of the
 structure with wire or suitable clips. Spread and shape Class D Concrete having
 3/4 inch maximum size coarse aggregate throughout the required width and
 length of the invert to provide a uniform thickness of 1.5 ± 0.5 inch over the
 crest of corrugations. Shape and smooth the concrete pavement by means of a
 template to conform to the approximate contours of the invert. Float finish the
 concrete. After initial set, cure the concrete for 3 calendar days using a double
 layer of wet burlap.
 
 612—2
 
 612.03.08 End Structures. Construct end structures according to the Contract.
 612.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 612.04.01 Structural Plate Pipes, Pipe Arches, and Arches. The Department will
 measure the quantity in linear feet along the bottom centerline. The Department will not
 measure paving, bedding, backfilling, bolts and other hardware, erection plans and shop
 drawings for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 612.04.02 Embankment-In-Place.
 according to Subsection 701.04.10.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity
 
 612.04.03 Roadway Excavation.
 according to Subsection 701.04.11.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity
 
 612.04.04 Pipe Undercut. The Department will measure the quantity according to
 Subsection 701.04.12.
 612.04.05 Structure Excavation Unclassified. The Department will measure the
 quantity according to Subsection 701.04.13.
 612.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 ------------------02230
 02200
 02219
 02203
 
 Pay Item
 Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate Pipe, Size
 Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate Pipe Arch, Size
 Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate Arch, Size
 Steel Structural Plate Pipe, Size
 Steel Structural Plate Pipe Arch, Size
 Steel Structural Plate Arch, Size
 Embankment-In-Place
 Roadway Excavation
 Pipe Undercut
 Structure Classification, Unclassified
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 See Subsection 701.05
 See Subsection 701.05
 See Subsection 701.05
 See Subsection 701.05
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 612—3
 
 SECTION 613  RETAINING WALLS
 613.01 DESCRIPTION.
 Construct a standard gravity, cast-in-place reinforced
 concrete (CIP), or gabion retaining wall as specified in the Contract.
 613.02 MATERIALS. Use the same material throughout all individual walls, and at
 both ends of all individual structures. Use only approved systems and materials.
 613.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Section 601.02 and 601.03.
 613.02.02 Reinforcing Steel. Conform to Section 811.
 613.02.03 Joint Materials. For CIP walls conform to Section 807.
 613.02.04 Geotextile Fabric. Conform to Section 843, Table I. Use fabric sheets
 with a minimum width and lap of 18 inches for vertical joints, one foot for horizontal
 joints, and 4 inches for all laps in fabric.
 613.02.05 Granular Embankment. Conform to Section 805.
 613.02.06 Gabion Baskets. Conform to Section 813.
 613.02.07 Gabion Fill Material. Conform to Section 805.
 613.02.08 Grout. Conform to Subsection 601.02.
 613.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 613.03.01 Design. When the plans do not include a complete design for the
 retaining wall, provide all design calculations, shop drawings, and construction plans
 required.
 Comply with Subsection 107.05, covering the use of patented devices, materials, and
 processes.
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Design the wall through a Registered Professional Engineer.
 Design the wall in conformance with the AASHTO Standard Specifications for
 Highway Bridges, current edition and all published interims, and all other
 AASHTO or Industry specifications required by the plans.
 Require a minimum top wall thickness of 10 inches for standard gravity walls
 and a 9 inches minimum for all other CIP walls.
 No materials are to be furnished and no fabrication or work done before the
 Department’s review of the proposed design, drawings, and instructions.
 
 613.03.02 Foundation. Excavate the foundation bed for the retaining wall as
 required. Before wall construction, compact the foundation to 95 percent of the maximum
 density as determined by KM 64-511. Remove and replace all foundation soils found
 unsuitable. If shown on the plans or directed by the Engineer, place structure granular
 backfill to the dimensions required under the footings or bottom units. Obtain approval by
 the Engineer before erection is started.
 613.03.03 Standard Gravity Wall. Construct according to Standard Drawing No.
 RGX-002. Construct walls, footings, leveling pads, copings, and all other cast-in-place
 appurtenances using Class B concrete according to Subsection 601.03. When the wall will
 be surcharged, special drawings are required.
 Ensure the base width is half the vertical height of the wall and the top width is one
 
 613—1
 
 foot. Place transverse expansion joints 1/2 inch in width at minimum intervals of 30 feet
 throughout the length of retaining walls and fill with expansion joint material. All
 exposed edges shall be beveled 3/4 inch.
 When it is not practical to pour the wall to full height in one operation, ensure
 construction joints are truly horizontal and provide a bond between the sections with keys
 formed by beveled timbers. Where necessary to provide construction joints in the length
 of the wall, ensure joints are truly vertical and provide a bond between the sections with
 shear keys formed by beveled timbers.
 Grout around and behind all pipes in the wall face. Proportion grout according to
 Subsection 601.03.
 At the end of each day’s operation slope the last level of the backfill away from the
 wall facing to direct runoff away from the wall face. Do not allow surface runoff from
 adjacent areas to enter the wall construction site.
 When shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer, backfill with structure granular
 backfill.
 613.03.04 CIP Walls. Construct according to the structure plans.
 613.03.05 Joints. Provide contraction joints at 30-foot intervals and 1/2-inch
 expansion joints at 90-foot intervals in all CIP walls. Provide 1/2-inch joint material in all
 expansion joints. Place 24-inch long, 1/2-inch diameter, commercial grade steel dowels
 and 12-inch long, 5/8-inch inside diameter, commercial grade steel dowel sleeves across
 the joint. Provide caps on one end of the sleeves. Grease one end of the dowel and insert
 into the sleeve. Space dowels and sleeves at 12-inch intervals along the centerline of the
 wall stem. Do not pass reinforcing steel through either joint. Seal joints from top to
 bottom with waterstops.
 613.03.06 Drainage. Provide 4-inch weep hole drains at 8-foot intervals through
 standard gravity and CIP walls. Place fabric wrapped backfill drains at each weep hole
 according to Subsection 603.03.05. Place weep hole inverts 6 inches above finish grade at
 the front face.
 613.03.07 Gabion Walls. Construct according to Standard Drawings and the
 Contract. Place the basket flat on the ground, flatten any kinks or bends, and erect the
 sides, ends and diaphragms. Ensure all creases are in the correct position and the tops of
 all sides are level. Lace the 4 corners of the basket together with alternating single and
 double loops at 5-inch intervals. Secure both ends of the lacing wire by looping and
 twisting. Install and lace internal diaphragms in the same manner. Place the individual
 assembled baskets in their proper location. Connect all adjoining baskets using individual
 tie wires looped and twisted at approximately 3-inch intervals along the entire perimeter of
 their contact surfaces.
 Partially fill the first basket in line for anchorage and stretch the connected gabions to
 proper alignment using a come-along or other means of at least one ton capacity. Keep
 the baskets in tension while filling. Control joints to avoid any unraveling. Filled in onefoot layers, in a manner that will minimize voids. Place 2 connecting wires in each
 direction between each layer in all cells by looping lacing wire around 2 mesh openings in
 the front and back face, and in the ends and diaphragms. Securely fasten the ends of the
 connecting wires to prevent their loosening under tension. Fill cells in each course of in
 stages. Do not allow any cell at any time to be filled to a depth exceeding one foot more
 than the adjoining cell. Level the last layer of stone with the top of the basket to allow
 proper closing of the lid and provide an even surface for the next course. Stretch the lids
 tightly over the stone fill using crowbars or similar methods, until the lid meets the edges
 of the front and ends. Tie the lids along all edges, ends, and diaphragms in the same
 manner as required for connecting adjoining baskets. Place and connect succeeding
 courses or tiers as specified for the first course. Offset vertical joints for succeeding
 courses at least 18 inches from course to course. Place baskets as headers or stretchers in
 accordance with the Contract. Tie each course of baskets to the lower course after
 
 613—2
 
 stretching but before filling, with individual tie wires looped and twisted at approximately
 3-inch spacing along all edges and diaphragms. Reinforce vertical edges at each end of
 the wall that are not connected to an adjoining basket by looping and twisting individual
 tie wires at approximately 3 inches spacing the full length of such edges.
 Ensure the stone fill is firmly in place, bulging or distortion of the filled baskets is
 minimal, and all lacing and tying is thoroughly wound, looped and twisted to preclude
 loosening in service.
 613.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure items such as concrete
 barriers that are not a part of normal retaining wall construction as the wall area. When
 barriers are constructed on retaining walls, the plans will show the top of the wall for
 payment purposes.
 The Department will consider all joint material, design calculations, shop drawings,
 and construction plans with required corrections, manufacturer supplied technical
 assistance incidental to the retaining wall.
 613.04.01 Standard Gravity and CIP Walls. The Department will measure
 concrete, steel reinforcement, and structure excavation according to Subsections 601.04,
 602.04, and 603.04, respectively. The Department will consider backfill, foundation
 preparation, portions of the footings for cast-in-place walls outside of the approved gross
 area, structure granular backfill, and geotextile fabric required incidental. The Engineer
 may include portions or all of the footings for cast-in-place walls in the gross area as
 shown on the plans. The Department will include the WWF dowel and dowel sleeves in
 the weight of steel reinforcement.
 613.04.02 Gabion Walls. Unless the Contract provides for payment based on field
 measurements, the Department will not measure gabion walls but will make final payment
 at the Contract unit price for the design quantity, increased or decreased by authorized
 adjustments.
 The Department will measure structure excavation according to Subsection 603.04.
 613.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 08100-08105, 02555
 08150
 02203
 02223
 02610
 
 Pay Item
 Concrete
 Steel Reinforcement
 Structure Excavation Unclassified
 Granular Embankment
 Retaining Wall, Gabion
 
 Pay Unit
 See Subsection 601.05
 See Subsection 602.05
 See Subsection 603.05
 Cubic Yard
 Cubic Yard
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 613—3
 
 SECTION 614  MAINTENANCE CLEANING AND PAINTING
 STEEL BRIDGES
 614.01 DESCRIPTION. Clean and prepare all surfaces to be painted; furnish and
 apply all paint; maintain, protect, and control all pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
 protect the structure and all other property against damage that may result from this work.
 The surfaces to be painted include all structural steel surfaces and other exposed metal
 surfaces that may exist within the limits of the project, such as handrails, guardrails,
 cables, wire fence, light fixtures, metal flooring, and other metal appurtenances, except
 items specifically deleted in the Contract.
 614.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 614.02.01 Paint. Conform to Section 821 or as the Contract designates. Furnish a
 paint system in which all coats are produced by the same manufacturer and use the same
 system throughout the entire project.
 614.02.02 Brushes. Use brushes not exceeding 4 inches in width. Maintain brushes
 in a usable and acceptable condition at all times.
 614.02.03 Spraying Equipment.
 Conform to the paint manufacturer’s
 recommendations. Use equipment that applies the paint in a fine, even spray without
 adding thinner. Provide adequate separators and traps in the air spraying equipment to
 remove all water and oil from the compressed air.
 614.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 614.03.01 Responsibility for Damage. Protect all pedestrian, vehicular, and other
 traffic upon or beneath the bridge; all adjacent property; and all portions of the bridge
 superstructure and substructure against damage or disfigurement by paint or paint
 materials.
 When performing work in urban areas, or when developed areas exist in the close
 vicinity of the work, submit for the Engineer’s review a detailed written outline, including
 sketches, if necessary, of the proposed methods to prevent damage to these areas from the
 work. Include specific information for protecting vehicular traffic on or beneath the
 bridge, boats and marinas beneath the bridge, and buildings or other property in the
 vicinity of the bridge. Do not begin work until the Engineer reviews and accepts the
 protection methods.
 Take sole responsibility for all damage resulting from painting operations, even if the
 Engineer reviewed and accepted the protection methods.
 614.03.02 Seasonal and Weather Limitations. Do not paint between November 15
 and April 1 unless the Engineer provides written permission. Apply paint only when the
 temperature measured at the area of the bridge to be painted is 40 °F or greater; the surface
 temperature of the steel members to be painted is at least 5 °F above the dew point
 temperature; and the relative humidity measured at the site is 90 percent or less. Do not
 apply paint when the surfaces are hot enough to cause the paint to blister or produce a
 porous film; when the air is misty; when there is moisture or frost on the surfaces; or when
 other weather conditions, in the judgment of the Engineer, are unsatisfactory for work.
 614.03.03 Prosecution of the Work. Upon beginning the operation of cleaning and
 painting, proceed with the operation on all working days, without stoppage, until
 completion. When specified in the Contract, submit a schedule proposing the sequence
 and time needed to clean and paint all structures included in the Contract.
 Clean and paint all areas in strict conformance with the Contract, unless the Engineer
 approves alternate methods in writing.
 
 614—1
 
 614.03.04 Maintaining Traffic. Maintain all pedestrian, highway, railway, and
 waterway traffic while working. Do not leave cleaning or painting equipment on the
 roadways or sidewalks of any structure overnight.
 Furnish and erect all necessary warning signs and other traffic control devices as
 directed to ensure public safety and convenience.
 614.03.05 Surface Preparation. Before applying any paint, thoroughly clean and
 properly prepare all surfaces to be coated, including drains, expansion dam troughs, and
 other areas subject to build up of rust and debris, to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
 Expect that surface conditions may vary throughout the structure, requiring different
 cleaning methods to prepare the surfaces for painting. Remove all contaminants that
 might prevent paint from adhering tightly to the underlying surface.
 Pressure wash and tool clean all steel surfaces to be overcoated to requirements
 specified in the Contract. Obtain the minimum acceptable surface quality immediately
 before painting that corresponds to the Contract requirements. Do not apply paint until the
 Engineer inspects and accepts the cleaned surfaces.
 Remove and clean all trash, debris, and other foreign substances from pockets and
 crevices and from around expansion dams, bearing plates, shoes, etc. Clean the entire
 surface of the bridge seat on each unit of the structure. Cut and remove all tree limbs or
 other growth overhanging or fouling the structure.
 Proceed with cleaning by sections, bays, or other readily identifiable parts of work.
 Completely clean each section, bay, or part, and have it inspected and accepted by the
 Engineer before applying any paint. Provide safe access to the work to allow the Engineer
 to properly inspect the cleaning and painting.
 When traffic or any other source produces an objectionable amount of dust, prevent
 dust and dirt from coming in contact with the cleaned or freshly painted surfaces.
 614.03.06 Paint Application. Before beginning painting, provide the Engineer with
 the manufacturer’s technical data sheets, safety instructions, material safety data sheets,
 and application instructions for the paint to be used.
 When necessary or requested by the Engineer, furnish a technical representative from
 the paint manufacturer to observe the initial application of all coatings used, to advise as to
 proper application techniques, and to determine that proper results are being obtained.
 Ensure that the technical representative is also available to visit the project at all times
 during the work if the Engineer requests or deems a visit is necessary.
 Spread the paint smoothly and uniformly, and work it into all corners and crevices
 without allowing excess paint to collect at any point. When the Engineer determines that
 work done by spraying or rolling is not satisfactory, the Engineer may require hand
 brushing or removing and repainting. Apply paint with sheepskin daubers on surfaces
 inaccessible to brushes. When applying paint with spray equipment, immediately brush
 the area sprayed as necessary to secure uniform coverage and to eliminate wrinkling,
 blistering, and air holes.
 Paint from the top of the structure toward the bottom, and proceed by sections, bays,
 or parts of the work, unless the Contract or Engineer directs otherwise. Finish painting
 each coat on each section, bay, or part of work before applying a succeeding coat to any
 portion of that section, bay or part. Ensure that each coat is thoroughly dry throughout the
 full thickness of the coat before applying another coat.
 Conform to the tolerance requirements of Appendix A, Tabulation of Construction
 tolerances or as the Contract specifies.
 A) Thinning. Do not thin paint unless the Engineer gives written permission. Add
 only thinners specified or recommended in writing by the manufacturer
 according to the written recommendations of the manufacturer. Provide the
 Engineer with the manufacturer’s technical data sheets and application
 instructions for the thinner and its use with the paint.
 B) Mixing. Thoroughly mix the paint in the original containers. Use a mechanical
 mixer to mix the paint so the pigment is in uniform suspension. Frequently stir
 
 614—2
 
 the paint to keep it thoroughly mixed while being applied to keep the pigments in
 suspension, according to the paint manufacturer’s written instructions or as
 directed.
 C) Marking. Stencil the Maintenance Project Number, the month and year of the
 painting completion date, and any existing panel numbering system or any panel
 numbering system set forth in the Contract on the structure at approved
 locations. Make the legend in letters and numerals 2 inches high, and use a paint
 color that contrasts with the background.
 614.03.07 Unsatisfactory Work. Remove paint, at any stage of its completion, that
 the Engineer finds unsatisfactory, and clean, prepare again, and repaint the surface at no
 expense to the Department and to the satisfaction of the Engineer. Unsatisfactory work
 includes but is not be limited to:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 failure to properly clean and prepare the surface;
 poor workmanship in application of the paint;
 painting with impure, improperly mixed, thinned, or unauthorized paint; and
 failure of the paint to adhere to the metal or to previously applied paint coat.
 
 614.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure the quantity as a lump sum
 unit. The Department will not measure necessary cleaning and painting; and furnishing all
 materials, equipment, tools, tackles, and scaffolding for separate payment but will
 consider them incidental to this item of work. The Department will consider having the
 manufacturer’s technical representative present incidental to this item of work.
 614.05 PAYMENT. The Department will pay for this work at the lump sum Contract
 price for Clean and Paint Structural Steel, or a designated section of a structure. The
 Department will base partial payments on Department estimates per section as the work
 progresses. When the structure is not divided into sections, the Department will consider
 the entire structure as one section for pay purposes. For purposes of partial payments, the
 Department will allocate percentages of the lump sum Contract price to the various phases
 of the work as set out below depending on the number of paint coats specified.
 The Department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantity under
 the following:
 Code
 08434
 (1)
 
 Pay Item
 Clean and Paint Structural Steel
 
 Pay Unit
 Lump Sum(1)
 
 Two-Coat System. When the specified number of paint coats consists of a prime
 coat and finish coat, the Department will allocate 40 percent to the satisfactory
 cleaning and acceptable spot painting (if applicable), 30 percent to the acceptable
 application of the prime coat of paint, and the remaining 30 percent to the
 acceptable application of the finish coat of paint.
 Three-Coat System. When the specified number of paint coats consists of a
 prime coat, an intermediate coat, and a finish coat, the Department will allocate
 10 percent to the satisfactory cleaning and spot painting (if applicable), 40
 percent to the acceptable application of the prime coat, 25 percent to the
 acceptable application of the intermediate coat, and the remaining 25 percent to
 the acceptable application of the finish coat.
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 614—3
 
 SECTION 615 - PRECAST THREE SIDED STRUCTURES
 615.01 DESCRIPTION. This work shall consist of constructing precast concrete three
 sided units for culverts, storm sewers, tunnels, arch bridges, etc. in accordance with these
 specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines, grades, design and
 dimensions shown on the plans or as established by the Engineer. In situations where two
 or more specifications apply to this work, the most stringent requirements shall govern.
 615.02 TYPES. Precast reinforced concrete units manufactured in accordance with this
 specification shall be designated by span and rise. Precast reinforced concrete endwalls
 manufactured in accordance with this specification shall be designated by length and
 height.
 615.03 MATERIALS – CONCRETE. The concrete for the structures shall be airentrained when installed in areas subject to freeze-thaw conditions, composed of Portland
 cement, fine and coarse aggregates, admixtures and water. Air-entrained concrete shall
 contain 6 ± 2 percent air. The air entraining admixture shall conform to AASHT0 M154.
 615.03.01 Portland Cement. Shall conform to the requirements of ASTM
 Specifications C150-Type I, Type II, or Type III cement.
 615.03.02 Coarse Aggregate. Shall consist of stone having a maximum size of
 1 inch. Aggregate shall meet requirements for ASTM C33.
 615.03.03 Water Reducing Admixture. The manufacturer may submit for
 approval by the Engineer, a water-reducing admixture for the purpose of increasing
 workability and reducing the water requirement for the concrete.
 615.03.04 Calcium Chloride. The addition to the mix of calcium chloride or
 admixtures containing calcium chloride will not be permitted.
 615.04 MATERIALS – STEEL REINFORCEMENT AND HARDWARE. All
 reinforcing steel for the structures shall be fabricated and placed in accordance with the
 detailed shop drawings submitted by the manufacturer.
 615.04.01 Steel Reinforcement. Reinforcement shall consist of welded wire
 fabric conforming to ASTM Specification A 185 or A 497, or deformed billet steel bars
 conforming to ASTM Specification A 615, Grade 60. Longitudinal distribution
 reinforcement may consist of welded wire fabric or deformed billet-steel bars.
 615.04.02 Hardware. Inserts for endwall connections shall be AISI Type 304
 stainless steel, F-58 Expanded Coil inserts. Coil rods and nuts used in endwall
 connections shall be AISI Type 304 stainless steel. Washers used in endwall connections
 shall be AISI Type 304 stainless steel plate washers. Or Equals
 Reinforcing bar splices shall be made using the Dowel Bar Splicer System, and shall
 consist of the Dowel Bar Splicer (DB-SAE) and Dowell-In(DI) or equal system.
 Hook Bolts used in endwall connections shall be ASTM A 307.
 615.05 MANUFACTURE.
 615.05.01 Mixture. The aggregates, cement and water shall be proportioned and
 mixed in a batch mixer to produce a homogeneous concrete meeting the strength
 requirements of this specification. The proportion of Portland cement in the mixture shall
 not be less than 564 pounds (6 sacks) per cubic yard of concrete.
 
 615—1
 
 615.05.02 Curing. The precast concrete units shall be cured for a sufficient
 length of time so that the concrete will develop the specified compressive strength in 28
 days or less. Any one of the following methods of curing or combinations thereof shall be
 used:
 A) Steam Curing. The units may be low pressure, steam cured by a
 system that will maintain a moist atmosphere.
 B) Water Curing. The units may be water cured by any method that
 will keep the sections moist.
 C) Membrane Curing. A sealing membrane conforming to the
 requirements of ASTM Specification C 309 may be applied and shall be left
 intact until the required concrete compressive strength is attained. The concrete
 temperature at the time of application shall be within ± 10 degrees F of the
 atmospheric temperature. All surfaces shall be kept moist prior to the application
 of the compounds and shall be damp when the compound is applied.
 615.05.03 Forms. The forms used in manufacturing shall be manufactured steel
 forms and accurate to maintain the structure dimensions within the permissible variations
 given in Section 7 of these specifications. All casting surfaces shall be of a smooth
 material.
 615.05.04 Handling. Handling devices or holes shall be permitted in each unit
 for the purpose of handling and setting.
 615.05.05 Storage. The precast elements shall be stored in such a manner to
 prevent cracking or damage. The units shall not be moved until the concrete compressive
 strength has reached a minimum of 2500 psi, and they shall not be stored in an upright
 position until the concrete compressive strength is a minimum of 4,000 psi.
 615.05.06 Weep holes. Place weep holes consisting of 4-inch pipe or formed to
 4 inches in diameter in each precast unit. Fabric wrapped perforated pipe drains may be
 used in retaining walls in place of weep holes. Place the outlet invert elevation of weep
 holes in box culverts 4 inches above the flowline of the structure. Raise weep holes to
 accommodate significant silting when the Engineer directs. Make adequate provisions for
 thorough drainage of backfill and embankment according to Subsection 603.03.
 615.06 DESIGN.
 615.06.01. Obtain the precast concrete 3-sided structure and endwalls from a
 pre-approved manufacturer list maintained by the Division of Highway Design. The
 precast element dimension and reinforcement details shall be as prescribed in the plan and
 the shop drawings provided by the manufacturer, subject to the provisions of Section 7,
 below. The minimum concrete compressive strength shall be as shown on the shop
 drawings. The minimum steel yield strength shall be 60,000 psi, unless otherwise noted on
 the shop drawings.
 The manufacturer shall submit 6 sets of Working Drawings, 6 sets of Shop
 Drawings, and Structural Design Calculations to the Department for review and approval
 prior to manufacturing the precast 3-Sided units or endwalls.
 615.06.02. The precast elements shall be designed in accordance with KYHL-93.
 A minimum of one foot of cover is required. “Cover” is defined as the area from the top
 of structure to the top of finished roadway, along the entire length of structure over the
 driving lanes and shoulder. (Unless noted otherwise on the shop drawings, designed
 accordingly, and approved by this Department.).
 
 615—2
 
 615.06.03 Placement of Reinforcement in Precast 3-Sided Units. The cover
 of concrete over the outside circumferential reinforcement shall be 2 inches minimum.
 The cover of concrete over the inside circumferential reinforcement shall be 1 1/2 inches
 minimum, unless otherwise noted on the shop drawings. The clear distance of the end
 circumferential wires shall not be less than one inch nor more than two inches from the
 ends of each section. Reinforcement shall be assembled utilizing single or multiple layers
 of welded wire fabric (not to exceed 3 layers), supplemented with a single layer of
 deformed billet-steel bars, when necessary. Welded wire fabric shall be composed of
 circumferential and longitudinal wires meeting the spacing requirements of 6.6, below,
 and shall contain sufficient longitudinal wires extending through the vault unit to maintain
 the shape and position of the reinforcement. Longitudinal distribution reinforcement may
 be welded wire fabric or deformed billet-steel bars and shall meet the spacing
 requirements of 6.6, below. The ends of the longitudinal distribution reinforcement shall
 be not more than 3 inches and not less than 1 1/2 inches from the ends of the unit.
 615.06.04 Placement of Reinforcement for Precast Endwalls. The cover of
 concrete over the longitudinal and transverse reinforcement shall be 2 inches minimum.
 The clear distance from the end of each precast element to the end transverse reinforcing
 steel shall not be less than one inch nor more than two inches. Reinforcement shall be
 assembled utilizing a single layer of welded wire fabric, or a single layer of deformed
 billet-steel bars. Welded wire fabric shall be composed of transverse and longitudinal
 wires meeting the spacing requirements of 6.7, below, and shall contain sufficient
 longitudinal wires extending through the element to maintain the shape and position of the
 reinforcement. Longitudinal reinforcement may be welded wire fabric or deformed billetsteel bars and shall meet the spacing requirements of 6.7, below. The ends of the
 longitudinal reinforcement shall be not more than 3 inches and not less than 1 1/2 inches
 from the ends of the walls.
 615.06.05 Bending of Reinforcement for Precast 3-Sided Units. The outside
 and inside circumferential reinforcing steel for the corners of the structure shall be bent to
 such an angle that is approximately equal to the configuration of the structures outside
 corner.
 615.06.06 Laps, Welds, and Spacing for Precast 3-Sided Units. Tension
 splices in the circumferential reinforcement shall be made by lapping. Laps may not be
 tack welded together for assembly purposes. For smooth welded wire fabric, the overlap
 shall meet the requirements of AASHTO 8.30.2 and 8.32.6. For deformed welded wire
 fabric, the overlap shall meet the requirements of AASHTO 8.30.1 and 8.32.5. The
 overlap of welded wire fabric shall be measured between the outer most longitudinal wires
 of each fabric sheet. For deformed billet-steel bars, the overlap shall meet the
 requirements of AASHTO 8.25. For splices other than tension splices, the overlap shall be
 a minimum of 12" for welded wire fabric or deformed billet-steel bars. The spacing center
 to center of the circumferential wires in a wire fabric sheet shall be no less than 2 inches
 and no more than 4 inches. The spacing center to center of the longitudinal wires shall not
 be more than 8 inches. The spacing center to center of the longitudinal distribution steel
 for either line of reinforcing in the top slab shall be not more than 16 inches.
 615.06.07 Laps, Welds, and Spacing for Precast Endwalls. Splices in the
 reinforcement shall be made by lapping. Laps may not be tack welded together for
 assembly purposes. For smooth welded wire fabric, the overlap shall meet the
 requirements of AASHTO 8.30.2 and 8.32.6. For deformed welded wire fabric, the
 overlap shall meet the requirements of AASHTO 8.30.1 and 8.32.5. For deformed billetsteel bars, the overlap shall meet the requirements of AASHTO 8.25. The spacing centerto-center of the wire fabric sheet shall not be less than 2 inches or more than 8 inches.
 
 615—3
 
 615.07 PERMISSIBLE VARIATIONS.
 615.07.01 Precast 3-Sided Units.
 A) Internal Dimensions. The internal dimension shall vary not more than 1%
 from the design dimensions nor more than 1-1/2 inches whichever is less. The haunch
 dimensions shall vary not more than 3/4 inch from the design dimension.
 B) Slab and Wall Thickness. The slab and wall thickness shall not be less than
 that shown in the design by more than 1/4 inch. A thickness more than that required in the
 design shall not be cause for rejection.
 C) Length of Opposite Surfaces. Variations in laying lengths of two opposite
 surfaces of the vault unit shall not be more than 1/2 inch in any section, except where
 beveled ends for laying of curves are specified by the purchaser.
 D) Length of Section. The underrun in length of a section shall not be more than
 1/2 inch in any vault unit.
 E) Position of Reinforcement. The maximum variation in position of the
 reinforcement shall be ± 1/2 inch. In no case shall the cover over the reinforcement be
 less than 1 1/2 inches for the outside circumferential steel or be less than 1 inch for the
 inside circumferential steel as measured to the external or internal surface of the vault.
 These tolerances or cover requirements do not apply to mating surfaces of the joints.
 F) Area of Reinforcement. The areas of steel reinforcement shall be the design
 steel areas as shown in the manufacturer's shop drawings. Steel areas greater than those
 required shall not be cause for rejection. The permissible variation in diameter of any
 reinforcement shall conform to the tolerances prescribed in the ASTM Specification for
 that type of reinforcement.
 615.07.02 Endwalls.
 A) Wall Thickness. The wall thickness shall not vary from that shown in the
 design by more than 1/2 inch.
 B) Length/ Height of Wall sections. The length and height of the wall shall not
 vary from that shown in the design by more than 1/2 inch.
 C) Position of Reinforcement. The maximum variation in the position of the
 reinforcement shall be ± 1/2 inch. In no case shall the cover over the reinforcement be
 less than 1 1/2 inches.
 D) Size of Reinforcement. The permissible variation in diameter of any
 reinforcing shall conform to the tolerances prescribed in the ASTM Specification for that
 type of reinforcing. Steel area greater than that required shall not be cause for rejection.
 615.08 TESTING AND INSPECTION.
 615.08.01 Type of Test Specimen. Concrete compressive strength shall be
 determined from compression tests made on cylinders or cores. For cylinder testing, a
 minimum of 4 cylinders shall be taken during each production run. For core testing, one
 core shall be cut from each of 3 precast elements selected at random from each production
 group. A production group shall be defined as 15 or fewer units (of a particular size), or
 
 615—4
 
 endwalls in a continuous production run. For each continuous production run, each
 production group or fraction thereof shall be considered separately for the purpose of
 testing and acceptance. A production run shall be considered continuous if not interrupted
 for more than 3 consecutive days.
 615.08.02 Compression Testing. Cylinders shall be made and tested as
 prescribed by the ASTM C 39 Specification. Cores shall be obtained and tested for
 compressive strength in accordance with the provisions of the ASTM C497 Specification.
 615.08.03 Acceptability of Cylinder Tests. When the average compressive
 strength of all cylinders tested is equal to or greater than the design compressive strength,
 and not more than 10% of the cylinders tested have a compressive strength less than the
 design concrete strength, and no cylinder tested has a compressive strength less than 80%
 of the design compressive strength, then the lot shall be accepted. When the compressive
 strength of the cylinders tested does not conform to this acceptance criteria, the
 acceptability of the lot may be determined as described in section 8.4, below.
 615.08.04
 Acceptability of Core Tests. The compressive strength of the
 concrete in each production group as defined in 8.1 is acceptable when the average core
 test strength is equal to or greater than the design concrete strength. When the
 compressive strength of the core tested is less than the design concrete strength, the
 precast element from which that core was taken may be re-cored. When the compressive
 strength of the re-core is equal to or greater than the design concrete strength, the
 compressive strength of the concrete in that production group is acceptable.
 When the compressive strength of any re-core is less than the design concrete
 strength, the precast element from which that core was taken shall be rejected. Two
 precast elements from the remainder of the group shall be selected at random and one core
 shall be taken from each. If the compressive strength of both cores is equal to or greater
 than the design concrete strength, the compressive strength of the remainder of that group
 is acceptable. If the compressive strength of either of the two cores tested is less than the
 design concrete strength, the remainder of the group shall be rejected or, at the option of
 the manufacturer, each precast element of the remainder of the group shall be cored and
 accepted individually, and any of these elements that have cores with less than the design
 concrete strength shall be rejected.
 A) Plugging Core Holes. The core holes shall be plugged and sealed by the manufacturer
 in a manner such that the elements will meet all of the test requirements of this
 specification. Precast elements so sealed shall be considered satisfactory for use.
 B) Test Equipment. Every manufacturer furnishing structures under this specification
 shall furnish all facilities and personnel necessary to carry out the test required.
 
 615.09 JOINTS. Precast 3-sided units shall be produced with flat butt ends. The ends
 of the units shall be such that when the sections are laid together they will make a
 continuous line with a smooth interior free of appreciable irregularities, all compatible
 with the permissible variations in Section 7, above. The joint width shall not exceed 3/4
 inches. Flat-top units with less than 2 ft. of cover shall be produced with a minimum
 4” deep by 1.5” wide key way joint. Mortar in accordance with section 15.2 shall be
 placed in the keyway.
 When the installed height of cover measures 2.0-feet or less, the precast 3sided end units shall be connected by tie plates to the adjacent interior unit.
 615.10 WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH. The precast units and endwalls shall be
 substantially free of fractures. The ends of the units shall be normal to the walls and
 centerline of the section, within the limits of the variations given in section 7, above,
 except where beveled ends are specified. The faces of the endwalls and units shall be
 parallel to each other, within the limits of variations given in section 7, above. The surface
 615—5
 
 of the precast elements shall be a smooth steel form or troweled surface. Provide an
 ordinary surface finish.
 615.11 REPAIRS. Precast elements may be repaired, if necessary, because of
 imperfections in manufacture or handling damage and will be acceptable if, in the opinion
 of the purchaser, the repairs are sound, properly finished and cured, and the repaired
 section conforms to the requirements of this specification.
 615.12 INSPECTION. The quality of materials, the process of manufacture, and the
 finished structures shall be subject to Department guidelines, specifications, manuals, and
 other contract documents.
 615.13 REJECTION. The precast elements shall be subject to rejection on account of any
 of the specification requirements. Individual precast elements may be rejected because of
 any failure to meet specification and contract document requirements.
 615.14 MARKING. Each unit shall be clearly marked by waterproof paint. The following
 shall be shown on the inside of the vertical leg of the section: Unit Span, Unit Rise, Date
 of Manufacture, and
 Name or trademark of the manufacturer. Units must also be
 stenciled as outlined in Standard Drawing BGX-006, current revision.
 615.15. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. Perform structure excavation in
 accordance with Section 603 except as noted in this Section.
 615.15.01 Site Preparation. Perform Structure Excavation according to
 Section 603. The foundation design must be in accordance with the appropriate
 Geotechnical Notes in the project bid documents. Construct foundations in accordance
 with the foundation design as determined by the Engineer.
 615.15.02 Footings. The precast 3-Sided units and endwalls shall be installed
 on either precast or cast-in-place concrete footings. The design size and elevation of the
 footings shall be as determined by the Engineer based on KYHL-93, the applicable
 Geotechnical Notes in the project bid documents such as bearing capacity requirements,
 specified scour countermeasures, and minimum differential settlement tolerance. In cases
 where a minimum differential settlement tolerance is not specified in the bid contract
 documents, the minimum differential settlement tolerance for the precast 3-sided structure
 shall be 1-inch. A minimum three inch deep keyway shall be formed in the top surface of
 the precast 3-sided unit footing at least three inches clear of the inside and outside faces
 of the bridge units, unless specified otherwise on the plans. The completed footing surface
 shall be constructed in accordance with grades shown on the plans. When tested with a 10
 foot straight edge, the keyway surface shall not vary more than 1/4 inch in 10 feet. If a
 precast concrete footing is used, the contractor shall prepare a 4 inch thick base layer of
 compacted granular material the full width of the footing prior to placing the precast
 footing. The foundations for precast concrete 3-sided units and endwalls must be
 connected by reinforcement to form one monolithic body. Expansion joints shall not be
 used in lieu of a continuous foundation. Compressive cylinders must reach 2,000psi before
 precast units shall be set on the foundation. Compressive cylinder strength must reach
 80% design strength before backfill operations shall begin.
 615.15.03 Placement of the Units and Endwalls. The manufacturer shall
 provide a Technical Representative. The Technical Representative shall be available
 onsite while the contractor is setting the precast 3-sided structure and thereafter as
 determined necessary by the Engineer.
 The units and endwalls shall be placed as shown on the Engineer's plan drawings. Special
 care shall be taken in setting the elements to the true line and grade. The units and
 endwalls shall be set on 6" x 6" masonite or steel shims. A minimum gap of 1/2 inch shall
 
 615—6
 
 be provided between the footing and the bottom of the unit's vertical legs or the endwall.
 The gap shall be filled with non-shrink cement grout (Portland cement and water or
 cement mortar composed of Portland cement, sand and water). If units have been set with
 temporary ties (cables, bars, etc.) all pieces in the current phase must be completely
 grouted before ties may be removed.
 615.15.04 External Protection of Joints. The butt-joint made by two adjoining
 units shall be covered with a 7/8" x 1 3/8" preformed bituminous joint sealant and a
 minimum of a 9 inch wide joint wrap. The surface shall be free of dirt before applying the
 joint material. A primer compatible with the joint wrap to be used shall be applied for a
 minimum width of nine inches on each side of the joint. The external wrap material shall
 meet AASHTO M198. The joint shall be covered continuously from the bottom of one
 unit section leg, across the top of the and to the opposite unit section leg. Any laps that
 result in the joint wrap shall be a minimum of six inches long with the overlap running
 downhill.
 In addition to the joints between unit units, the joint between the end unit and the
 endwall shall also be sealed as described above. Also, if lift holes or lift inserts are
 formed in the units, they shall be plugged and grouted.
 During the backfilling operation, care shall be taken to keep the joint wrap in its proper
 location over the joint.
 Internal Protection of Joints – In applications where the traveling public will be
 expected to cross under the structure (roadways, mixed use paths, sidewalks, etc.), or
 where specified in the contract documents, provide additional joint protection to ensure
 that the structure is water-tight. Various joint sealing details including elastomeric,
 urethane, or liquid sealing may be shown on the plans. Any internal joint sealing shall be
 performed as indicated on the shop drawings.
 615.15.05 Backfill. Critical Backfill shall be clean, durable stone backfill that
 conform to the Structural Granular backfill requirements Section 805. Critical Backfill
 shall be paid as Structural Granular Backfill. The limits of Critical Backfill shall be 2 feet
 to the outside of each structure and from the top of the footing to 2 feet over the top of the
 structure for spans up to 24 feet. For spans greater than 24 feet, the limits of Critical
 Backfill shall be 4 feet to the outside of each structure and from the top of the footing to 2
 feet over the top of the structure. Backfill shall be considered as all other replaced
 excavation and new embankment adjacent to the precast units and endwalls. The project
 construction and material specifications which include the specifications for excavation
 for structures and roadway excavation and embankment construction, shall apply except as
 modified in this section. Any backfill requirements of the manufacturer that are beyond
 the limits of the Department-specified critical backfill requirements shall be binding upon
 the Contractor but will not be measured for payment as they shall be considered incidental
 to the critical backfill quantity.
 No backfill shall be placed against any structural elements until they have been
 approved by the Engineer. Backfill against external joint material or waterproofed surface
 shall be placed carefully to avoid damage to the waterproofing material.
 Mechanical tampers or approved compacting equipment shall be used to compact all
 backfill and embankment immediately adjacent to each side and over the top of each
 precast 3-sided unit until it is covered to a minimum depth of one foot, unless the design
 fill height is less than 1'-0". The backfill within the Critical Backfill Zone, as defined
 above, shall be placed in lifts of six inches or less (loose depth). Heavy compaction
 equipment shall not be operated in this area or over the bridge until it is covered to a depth
 of one foot, unless the design fill height is less than 1'-0".
 Lightweight dozers and graders may be operated over precast units having one
 foot of compacted cover, but heavy earth moving equipment (larger than a D-4 Dozer
 weighing in excess of 12 tons and having track pressures of eight psi or greater) shall
 require two feet of cover unless the design cover is less than two feet. In no case shall
 equipment operating in excess of the design live load (KYHL-93) be permitted over the
 precast 3-sided units unless approved by the producer. Any additional fill and subsequent
 
 615—7
 
 excavation required to provide this minimum cover shall be made at no additional cost to
 the project. As a precaution against introducing unbalanced stresses on the precast 3-sided
 units, when placing backfill at no time shall the difference between the heights of fill on
 opposite sides of the vault exceed 24". Once fill heights reach two feet over the top of
 structure, backfill as specified in Kentucky Standard Specifications Division 200.
 615.16
 QUALITY ASSURANCE. The Precast Supplier shall conform to the
 requirements for precast structures in Section 605 and the KYTC Division of Materials
 Precast & Prestress Concrete Manual.
 The Precast Supplier shall be listed on the KYTC Division of Materials list of
 Approved Precast Concrete Producers.
 615.17
 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 21804EN
 02231
 08100
 08150
 08003
 08002
 08001
 02203
 02200
 02230
 
 Pay Item
 3-Sided Culvert Linear Foot
 Structure Granular Backfill
 Concrete-Class A
 Steel Reinforcement
 Foundation Preparation
 Structure Excavation Solid Rock
 Structure Excavation Common
 Structure Excavation Unclassified
 Roadway Excavation
 Embankment in Place
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Cubic Yard
 Cubic Yard
 Pound
 See Section 603
 See Section 603
 See Section 603
 See Section 603
 See Subsection 204.05
 See Subsection 206.05
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work
 required under this section.
 
 615—8
 
 DIVISION 700
 DRAINAGE, TRAFFIC, AND
 ROADSIDE CONSTRUCTION
 
 SECTION 701  CULVERT PIPE, ENTRANCE PIPE, STORM
 SEWER PIPE, AND EQUIVALENTS
 701.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and install culvert pipe, entrance pipe, and storm
 sewer pipe. Use units conforming to the dimensions, fabrication, material, and strength
 requirements for the type (culvert, entrance, or storm sewer), diameter, cover height, and
 pH level the Contract specifies. This work may include removing pipe, and relaying pipe.
 701.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 701.02.01 Pipe. Conform to Section 810 for the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 8)
 9)
 10)
 11)
 12)
 13)
 
 Reinforced Concrete Circular Pipe.
 Reinforced Concrete Horizontal Elliptical Pipe.
 Corrugated Steel Circular Pipe with Helical Lock Seam or Helical Welded Seam.
 Corrugated Steel Circular Pipe with Longitudinal Riveted or Spot Welded Seam.
 Corrugated Steel Pipe Arch.
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Circular Pipe with Helical Lock Seam.
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe Arch.
 High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) Pipe (Thermoplastic).
 Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe (Thermoplastic).
 Spiral Rib Steel Circular Pipe.
 Spiral Rib Steel Pipe Arch.
 Spiral Rib Aluminum Alloy Circular Pipe.
 Spiral Rib Aluminum Alloy Pipe Arch.
 
 701.02.02 Structural Plate Pipe. Conform to Section 809 for the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Circular Pipe with Longitudinal Seam with
 Aluminum or Steel Bolts.
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Circular Pipe Arch with Longitudinal Seams with
 Aluminum or Steel Bolts.
 Corrugated Steel Pipe Arch with Longitudinal Seams with Steel Bolts.
 Corrugated Steel Pipe with Longitudinal Seams with Steel Bolts.
 
 701.02.03 Joint Materials.
 A) Mortar Joints. Conform to Section 801 for cement and Section 804 for mortar
 sand.
 B) Asphalt Mastic Joint Sealing Compound. Conform to Subsection 807.03.04.
 C) Rubber Gaskets. Conform to Subsection 807.03.04.
 D) Butyl Rubber Sealants. Conform to Subsection 807.03.04.
 E) Elastomeric Seals. Conform to ASTM F477.
 F) Couplings for Thermoplastic Pipe. Conform to Section 810.
 G) Cleated and Non-Cleated, Integral Welded Bell Coupler with Gaskets.
 Conform to Section 810.
 701.02.04 Bedding Materials. Use No. 8 aggregate, No. 9-M aggregate, or a fine
 aggregate conforming to Subsection 804.08 for bedding material. Do not use a DGA or
 gravel base material for bedding material.
 
 701—1
 
 701.02.05 Backfill Materials.
 A) Granular Backfill.
 1)
 
 2)
 
 3)
 
 4)
 
 For Reinforced Concrete Pipe. Use size No. 2, 23, 3, 357, 4, 467, 5, 57, 67,
 68, 78, 8, or 9M aggregate or material conforming to AASHTO M 145 Al
 or A3 material with a maximum plasticity index of 10 (see table below).
 Limit rock fragments to a 3-inch maximum size.
 For Corrugated Metal Pipe. Use size No. 2, 23, 3, 357, 4, 467, 5, 57, 67, 68,
 78, 8, or 9M aggregate or material conforming to AASHTO M 145 Al or
 A3 material with a maximum plasticity index of 10 (see table below). Limit
 rock fragments to a size that does not exceed the corrugation width.
 For Thermoplastic Pipe. Use size No. 5, 57, 67, 68, 78, 8, or 9M aggregate
 or material conforming to AASHTO M 145 Al or A3 material (see table
 below). Limit rock fragments to a 1.5-inch maximum size. For corrugated
 pipe, limit rock fragments to a size that does not exceed the corrugation
 width or 1.5 inches, whichever is least.
 For Structural Plate Pipe. Use Structure Granular Backfill conforming to
 Section 805.
 A1 and A3 Characteristics(1)
 
 Sieve Analysis: Percent passing No. 10
 
 A1
 
 A3
 
 —
 
 —
 
 Percent passing No. 40
 50 max
 Percent passing No. 200
 25 max
 Plasticity index of material passing No. 40
 6 max
 (1)
 For a complete description see AASHTO M 145
 
 51 min
 10 max
 —
 
 B) Flowable Fill. Conform to Subsection 601.03.03 B).
 701.02.06 Embankment. Conform to Subsection 206.
 701.02.07 Geotextile Fabric Material. Use Type IV fabric with a minimum width
 of 36 inches conforming to Section 843.
 701.02.08 Asphalt Material for Coating. Conform to Section 806.
 701.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 701.03.01 Pipe Foundations. Take soundings for the pipe foundation design at the
 inlet and outlet, and along the grade line of each culvert on 20 foot intervals. Take the
 soundings to a depth of 1/2 inch per foot of embankment height (measured from the crown
 of the pipe to the maximum fill height) or 24 inches, whichever is greater.
 Where rock foundations (ledge rock, gravel, hardpan or other unyielding material) are
 encountered or known to exist within the limits specified, prepare the foundation
 according to the Standard Drawings.
 Where unstable (soft) foundations are encountered at the established grade line,
 remove the material that the Engineer determines is unstable and replace with a material
 conforming to Subsection 701.02.04. The Department will determine the depth of the
 over excavation by a soils investigation for the specific structure. Wrap the replacement
 material in geotextile fabric when backfilling.
 701.03.02 Trench Conditions. Install all pipe in excavated trenches. Where an
 embankment condition exists, excavate the trench only after constructing the embankment
 
 701—2
 
 according to Section 206 to an elevation equal to, or greater than, the minimum cover
 height of the pipe.
 701.03.03 Pipe Bedding.
 A) Reinforced Concrete Pipe.
 Drawings and this section.
 1)
 
 2)
 
 Construct bedding according to the Standard
 
 Type 1 Installation. When working on a rock foundation, place bedding to a
 depth of 6 inches or equal to Bc/12, the pipe diameter in inches divided by
 12, whichever is greater. For all other foundations, place a minimum of 4
 inches of bedding. Shape the bedding to conform to the invert shape
 throughout the entire width and length of the proposed structure. Compact
 the bedding, but leave the center third of the pipe diameter (Bc/3)
 uncompacted. Place and compact additional bedding material in lifts 6
 inches or less to an elevation of 0.30 the culvert diameter.
 Type 4 Installation. When working on a rock foundation, place bedding to a
 depth of 6 inches or equal to Bc/12, the pipe diameter in inches divided by
 12, whichever is greater. For all other foundations, place a minimum of 4
 inches of bedding.
 
 B) Corrugated Metal, Thermoplastic, and Structural Plate Pipe. Place and
 compact bedding to provide 4 inches of bedding below the outside invert of the
 pipe after shaping. Shape the bedding to conform to the invert shape throughout
 the entire width and length of the proposed structure. Place and compact
 additional bedding material in lifts 6 inches or less to an elevation of 0.30 the
 culvert diameter.
 701.03.04 Pipe Hauling, Handling, and Installation. Furnish a copy of the
 manufacturer’s handling and installation procedures to the Engineer before beginning
 work. Ensure that pipe structures do not sustain damage during loading, unloading,
 placement on the bedding, compaction of the backfill, by movement of excessively heavy
 equipment over the fill, or by any other forces that may cause damage. Repair or replace
 damaged structures as the Engineer directs. Remove and replace any structure that is not
 constructed to true alignment or shows undue settlement after installation, or is otherwise
 damaged, without additional compensation.
 A) Reinforced Concrete Pipe. Install the pipe beginning at the outlet end of the
 culvert, with the bell or groove end laid upgrade. Extend successive spigot or
 tongue ends fully into each adjoining bell or groove. When the pipe includes
 markings to designate the top and bottom, lay the pipe so the mark is less than 5
 degrees from the vertical plane throughout the longitudinal axis of the pipe.
 Cover all lift holes after installing the pipe by the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 Coat an area 8 inches or wider than the holes on the outside of the pipe with
 an asphalt coating material;
 Place a piece of sheet metal 4 inches or wider than the holes and shaped to
 conform to the outer pipe diameter over each hole; and
 Apply an additional coating of asphalt material over the entire area of
 previously applied metal. When desired, use precast lift hole plugs instead
 of the asphalt and sheet metal.
 
 B) Corrugated Metal Pipe.
 1)
 
 Asphalt Coating. Apply according to AASHTO M-190.
 
 701—3
 
 2)
 
 3)
 
 Transporting and Handling. Transport and handle coated pipe using
 equipment and methods that prevent damage to the coating. When storing
 pipe on the project, keep it supported above the ground using wooden
 timbers or pallets. Repair minor damage to exterior and interior coating
 with asphalt coating material according to AASHTO M 243 or as the
 Engineer directs before installing the pipe. Repair significant damage and
 coating deficiencies at the pipe fabrication site as the Engineer directs.
 Significant damages include spalled coating on the interior of the pipe,
 uncoated areas due to manufacturing error, and insufficient coating
 thickness on the interior or exterior of the pipe.
 At all times during construction, use every precaution to prevent
 damage to the protective coating. Do not allow any metal tools or heavy
 objects to unnecessarily come in contact with the finished coating. Repair
 any damage to the protective coating from any cause during installation and
 before final acceptance as the Engineer directs.
 Installing. Assemble according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Install in
 the bed starting at the downstream end. When using corrugated metal pipe
 with paving material, install the pipe with paving material along the bottom
 centerline or flowline. Construct struts and vertical elongation of corrugated
 metal pipe as specified in the Plans. Remove the struts only after completing
 the embankment over the structure.
 
 C) Thermoplastic Pipe.
 Handle thermoplastic pipe according to the
 manufacturer’s recommendations.
 Provide a manufacturer’s technical
 representative to assist in the installation of the pipe when the Engineer requests.
 D) Structural Plate Pipe. Install the pipe according to the manufacturer's
 specifications and installation procedures. When the Engineer requests, provide
 a manufacturer's technical representative to assist in pipe construction. Do not
 place backfill until all plates in a ring are complete and all bolts in the structure
 are tightened.
 701.03.05 Joints. Provide soil tight joints. Wrap all pipe joints with a geotextile
 fabric when their inner diameters are 54 inches and greater.
 A) Reinforced Concrete Pipe. Use only one type of jointing materials system
 throughout each single structure. Construct joints for reinforced concrete pipe
 with one of the following options.
 1)
 
 2)
 
 Mortar Joints. Use a mixture containing one part cement and 2 parts sand.
 Use enough water, not exceeding 5 1/2 gallons per sack of cement, to
 product a stiff, workable mortar. Thoroughly clean and wet the ends of the
 pipe before joining them. Place the mortar in the lower half of the bell or
 groove section that has been laid, and apply mortar to the upper half of the
 spigot or tongue of the pipe that is being laid. Insert the spigot or tongue in
 the bell or groove of the pipe already laid, pull the joint tight, and ensure
 that the inner surfaces of the abutting sections are flush and even. After
 laying a section of the pipe and before laying the succeeding section,
 thoroughly plaster the lower portion of the bell or groove of the preceding
 section on the inside with mortar to such a depth to ensure a smooth joint
 between the abutting sections. Fill the remainder of the joint flush with
 mortar. Finish the inside of the joint and wipe smooth around the full
 circumference. After the initial set, protect the mortar from air and sun with
 a burlap cover, or permanently backfill.
 Asphalt Mastic Joints. Immediately before installation, apply the asphalt
 mastic joint sealing compound to the ends of the pipe section in the same
 manner as mortar joints except precoat all joining surfaces. Precoat with the
 
 701—4
 
 3)
 
 4)
 
 manufacturer’s recommended primer or an approved emulsified asphalt.
 Complete installation as per manufacturer’s recommendations.
 Rubber Gaskets. In addition to the requirements of Subsection 701.02, use a
 pipe section conforming to AASHTO M 315.
 Use the gasket
 manufacturer’s recommended cement and lubricant. Snugly fit the rubber
 gasket in the beveled surface of the tongue and groove ends of the sections
 to form a flexible seal under all conditions of service. Complete installation
 as per manufacturer’s recommendations.
 Butyl Rubber Sealants. In addition to the requirements of Subsection
 701.02, use pipe with a joint design conforming to AASHTO M 198.
 
 When a joint is located 12 feet or less from the outlet on a 3:1 or steeper
 slope, provide a tied joint according to the Standard Drawings.
 B) Corrugated Metal Pipe.
 Construct joints using a band with annular
 corrugations and a bolt, bar and strap connection. Use a minimum nominal band
 width of 12 inches for all pipe diameters 54 inches and smaller. Use a two-piece
 band with a minimum nominal width of 20 inches for all pipe diameters greater
 than 54 inches. Manufacture the band from the same base materials as the pipe.
 The pipe bands may be up to two gauges lighter than the pipe it is joining, with a
 minimum gauge thickness of 16. The Department may allow dimple band
 connections for field cut pipe. Install the connecting bands according to the
 manufacturer's written recommendations.
 C) Thermoplastic Pipe. Use an integral bell and spigot type with elastomeric seal
 joints. When a joint is located 12 feet or less from the outlet on a 3:1 or steeper
 slope, use a cleated integral bell locking joint or a standard coupling aided by
 two #14 by 2-inch galvanized sheet metal screws inserted through the coupling
 into the corrugation crest 2 inches apart circumferentially at the bell and spigot
 coupler’s quarter points.
 701.03.06 Initial Backfill. Locate a suitable backfill source for each project. For
 backfill containing soils, have an AASHTO accredited lab classify the material, run a
 standard proctor, and certify that the material conforms to the specified granular material.
 Keep the material certification on file and available to the Engineer upon request.
 Place the backfill material in a trench condition as the Contract specifies. Use 6-inch
 lifts and ensure the backfill is compacted to not less than 95 percent of the maximum
 density as determined according to KM 64-511.
 When the top of the pipe is within one pipe diameter of the subgrade, backfill with
 flowable fill to an elevation of one foot above the pipe from the outside edge of shoulder
 or back of curb to outside edge of shoulder or back of curb as applicable. When installing
 under existing pavement, backfill with flowable fill to the subgrade elevation. When
 granular backfill is used, the surrounding conditions are not similar in gradation, and the
 pipe is located within the area bounded by the centerline and a distance 25 feet outside the
 edge of shoulder or back of curb, as applicable, wrap the bedding and granular backfill in
 geotextile fabric. The Department will not require geotextile fabric for entrance pipe.
 When geotextile fabric is required according to this section or the Engineer’s direction,
 install according to Section 214.
 When the Contract specifies, perform quality control testing to verify compaction
 according to KM 64-512. The Department may verify the density results at any time of
 the duration of the project.
 A) Reinforced Concrete Pipe.
 1)
 
 Type 1 Installation. When the top of the pipe is not within one pipe
 diameter of the subgrade, backfill with granular backfill, additional bedding
 material, or flowable fill from the top of the bedding to an elevation equal to
 
 701—5
 
 2)
 
 1/2 the pipe diameter, and either granular backfill, flowable fill, or
 embankment material in 6-inch lifts to an elevation of one-foot above the
 pipe.
 Type 4 Installation. Backfill from the top of the bedding with granular
 backfill, flowable fill, or embankment material in 6-inch lifts to an elevation
 of one-foot above the pipe. The Department will allow Type 4 installations
 for median drains and pipe installations located 35 feet or more from the
 edge of shoulder, back of curb, or any paved surface.
 
 B) Corrugated Metal, Thermoplastic, and Structural Plate Pipe. When the top
 of the pipe is not within one pipe diameter of the subgrade, backfill with either
 granular backfill or flowable fill to an elevation at least one foot above the top of
 the pipe.
 701.03.07 Construction Loads. Do not allow construction equipment or traffic to
 travel over the top of the structure material until the fill is compacted to a minimum depth
 of 48 inches over the top of the structure. The Engineer may require temporary cover
 where the final grade is less than 48 inches. The Engineer may raise but will not lower the
 minimum cover based on the pipe manufacturer’s recommendations.
 701.03.08 Inspection of Pipe. The engineer will visually inspect all pipe.
 The Department will require camera/video inspection on projects that have more
 than 250 linear feet of storm sewer and/or culvert pipe and on routes with an ADT of
 greater than 1,000 vehicles. Conduct camera/video inspections in accordance with KM
 64-114 on 100 percent of the pipes that are located under the road and 50 percent of the
 pipes that are not under the road. Camera/video and laser deflection inspection must be
 completed by a prequalified contractor that has been certified according to KM 64-114.
 Testing performed by a company failing to meet these requirements will result in nonpayment of the pipeline video inspection and non-certification of the pipe tested.
 Deflection testing using the laser deflection method shall be limited to pipe up to 48
 inches in diameter. Deflection testing using physical measurements is limited to pipes
 where adequate access is available and to pipes 48 inches and larger in diameter. Mandrel
 or physical measuring will be used for pipes larger than 48 inches in diameter. Deflection
 testing is not required for concrete pipe. The pipe to be tested will be selected in complete
 runs (junction-junction or headwall-headwall). Provide a pipe inspection summarization
 report in accordance with KM 64-114.
 Unless the Engineer directs otherwise, schedule the inspections no sooner than 30
 days after completing the installation and completion of earthwork to within 1 foot of the
 finished subgrade. When final surfacing conflicts with the 30-day minimum, conduct the
 inspections prior to placement of the final surface. The contractor must ensure that all
 pipes are free, clear of any debris, and as dry as possible so that a complete inspection can
 be performed.
 Notify the Engineer immediately if distresses or locations of improper installation
 are discovered. When camera testing shows distresses or improper installation in the
 installed pipe, the Engineer may require additional sections to be tested. Provide the video
 and report to the Engineer when testing is complete in accordance with KM 64-114.
 Pipes that exhibit distress or signs of improper installation may necessitate repair or
 removal as the Engineer directs. These signs include, but are not limited to: deflection,
 cracking, joint separation, sagging or other interior damage. If flexible pipes exceed the
 deflection and installation thresholds indicated in the Flexible Pipe Deduction Table in
 Section 701.05, provide the Department with an evaluation of each location conducted by
 a Professional Engineer addressing the severity of the deflection, structural integrity,
 environmental conditions, design service life, and an evaluation of the factor of safety
 
 701—6
 
 using Section 12, “Buried Structures and Tunnel Liners,” of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge
 Design Specifications. Based on the evaluation, the Department may allow the pipe to
 remain in place at a reduced unit price as shown in the Flexible Pipe Deduction Table in
 Section 701.05. Provide 10 business days for the Department to review the evaluation.
 When the pipe shows deflection of 10 percent or greater, remove and replace the pipe.
 When laser deflection results are called into question, the Department may require direct
 measurements and/or mandrel testing. If rigid pipes exceed the cracking and installation
 thresholds indicated in the Rigid Pipe Remediation Table in Section 701.05, provide the
 Department with an evaluation of each location conducted by a Professional Engineer
 addressing the severity of the cracking, structural integrity, environmental conditions,
 design service life, and an evaluation of the factor of safety using Section 12, “Buried
 Structures and Tunnel Liners,” of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications.
 Based on the evaluation, the Department may allow the pipe to remain in place if the
 cracking is remediated according to an approved remediation plan submitted in writing to
 the Engineer by the Contractor as shown in the Rigid Pipe Remediation Table in Section
 701.05. Provide 10 business days for the Department to review the evaluation. When the
 pipe shows cracking of .1 inches or greater, remediate or replace the pipe as directed by
 the Engineer. When the camera/video cracking results are called into question, the
 Department may require direct measurements.
 The Cabinet may elect to conduct Quality Assurance verifications of any pipe
 inspections. These verification inspections will be performed by the Kentucky
 Transportation Center. The Division of Construction shall be contacted by the Engineer
 when verification testing is needed.
 701.03.09 End Structures. Construct anchors, concrete headwalls, and other end
 structures specified in the Plans according to Section 610, Section 710, and the Standard
 Drawings.
 701.03.10 Extensions to Existing Culvert Pipe and Entrance Pipe. Construct pipe
 extensions for culvert pipe, entrance pipe, and equivalent pipe arches according to this
 section and the Contract. Remove the necessary portions of the existing structure to
 provide a neat junction with the extension. Do not damage the portion that is to remain in
 service. Remove all silt and debris that has accumulated in the remaining portion of the
 structure for a distance back equal to twice the pipe diameter or as the Engineer directs.
 701.03.11Removing Pipe, Removing and Relaying Pipe. Remove all pipe
 designated for removal in the Contract. Safely store all reusable pipe. Restore or replace,
 any pipe designated for reuse that incurs damage or destruction through faulty handling.
 Relay all removed pipe the Contract designates to be relayed. Where pipe is not to be
 relayed, fill the area to the existing ground line according to subsection 207.03.
 The Department will retain ownership of reusable pipe that is not to be relaid in areas
 on the project. Unless the Engineer directs otherwise, deliver all reusable pipe not relayed
 on the project to the designated maintenance facility in the county where the project is
 located. Take ownership of and remove from the project all pipe that is not designated for
 reuse or salvage.
 701.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 701.04.01 Culvert Pipe. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet
 from end-to-end along the bottom or pipe invert of the installed structure. The
 Department will include bends, elbows, crosses, tees, reducers, laterals, wyes, and other
 shapes in the pipe lengths measured. The Department will not measure joint materials and
 bedding materials for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work. The
 Department will not measure replacement of damaged pipe for payment and will consider
 it incidental to this item of work. The Department will not measure for payment the
 
 701—7
 
 providing of a manufacturer’s technical representative to assist in the construction of the
 pipe and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 701.04.02 Culvert Pipe Equivalent. Culvert Pipe Equivalent includes elliptical
 culvert pipe and culvert pipe arches. The Department will measure the quantity in linear
 feet according to Subsection 701.04.01.
 701.04.03 Entrance Pipe. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet
 according to Subsection 701.04.01.
 701.04.04 Entrance Pipe Equivalent. Entrance Pipe Equivalent includes elliptical
 entrance pipe and pipe arches. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet
 according to Subsection 701.04.01.
 701.04.05 Storm Sewer Pipe. The Department will measure the quantity in linear
 feet according to Subsection 701.04.01.
 701.04.06 Storm Sewer Pipe Equivalent. Storm Sewer Pipe Equivalent includes
 elliptical storm sewer pipe and storm sewer pipe arches. The Department will measure the
 quantity in linear feet according to Subsection 701.04.01.
 701.04.07 Pipeline Video Inspection. The Department will measure the quantity in
 linear feet along the pipe invert of the structure inspected. When inspection above the
 quantity specified in the Contract is performed due to a disagreement or suspicion of
 additional distresses and the Department is found in error, the Department will measure
 the quantity as Extra Work according to Subsection 104.03. However, if additional
 distresses or non-conformance is found, the Department will not measure the additional
 inspection for payment.
 701.04.08 Geotextile Fabric, Type IV. The Department will measure the quantity
 in square yards.
 701.04.09 Flowable Fill. The Department will not measure the quantity for payment
 and will consider it incidental to the pipe bid item. When the Engineer determines that it
 is necessary and to the Department’s benefit to excavate beyond the typical excavation
 limits shown in the Standard Drawings, the Department will measure the quantity of
 flowable fill required for backfill outside the typical excavation limits as Extra Work.
 701.04.10 Embankment-In-Place. The Department will measure the quantity
 where there is unstable foundation material in excess of 3 times the width of outside
 diameter of the pipe or the width of the outside diameter plus 4 feet, whichever is less, in
 cubic yards according to Subsection 206.04.
 701.04.11 Roadway Excavation. The Department will measure the quantity for
 removal of unstable foundation material in excess of 3 times the width of outside diameter
 of the pipe or the width of the outside diameter plus 4 feet, whichever is less, in cubic
 yards according to Subsection 204.04.
 When using Special Design, the Department will measure the quantity by the length
 of the trench the Contract specifies or as the Engineer directs. The Department will not
 measure backfilling the trench with bedding material for payment and will consider it
 incidental to this item of work.
 The Department will not measure any other excavation and will consider it incidental
 to Culvert Pipe, Entrance Pipe, and Storm Sewer Pipe.
 701.04.12 Pipe Undercut. The Department will measure the quantity for removal of
 unstable foundation material or bedded rock in cubic yards up to a maximum of 3 times
 the width of the outside diameter of the pipe or the width of the outside diameter of the
 
 701—8
 
 pipe plus 3 feet, whichever is less, and to a depth of up to 2 feet. The Department will
 measure the quantity at a depth of greater than 2 feet as Extra Work according to
 Subsection 109.04.
 701.04.13 Structure Excavation Unclassified. When the Engineer changes the
 pipe’s plan length or location and causes the required excavation to increase more than 10
 percent above the original average excavation per yard, the Department will measure the
 quantity in cubic yards according to Subsection 603.04. When the Department requires a
 substantial increase in excavation, submit verification to the Engineer before starting
 excavation. The Engineer will then measure the quantity of excess volume. The
 Department will not consider the excavation of unstable material from the foundation
 when determining the percentage of material increase.
 701.04.14 Removing Pipe. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet
 of net laying length per section. The Department will measure bends, elbows, crosses,
 tees, reducers, laterals, wyes, and other shapes in linear feet along the central axis of the
 unit. The Department will not measure furnishing and placing any borrow material
 necessary to refill the area to the original ground line for payment and will consider it
 incidental to this item of work. When the Department retains ownership, the delivery of
 the pipe to the designated maintenance facility will not be measured for payment and is
 considered incidental to this item of work.
 Unless design quantities are included in the Contract, the Department will not
 measure pipe within the typical section for payment and will consider it incidental to
 roadway excavation.
 701.04.15 Removing and Relaying Pipe. The Department will measure the
 quantity according to Subsection 701.04.01. The Department will not measure sections
 that are damaged or broken for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of
 work. The Department will not measure furnishing and placing any borrow material
 necessary to refill the area to the original ground line for payment and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work. When the Department retains ownership, the delivery of
 the pipe to the designated maintenance facility will not be measured for payment and is
 considered incidental to this item of work.
 701.04.16
 Deduction for Pipe Deflection. The Department will determine the
 quantity of deflected pipe using the pipe inspection summarization report in accordance
 with KM 64-114. The Department will make deductions for pipe sections that do not
 meet the requirements of the specifications in accordance with the tables in Section
 701.05.
 701.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 00460-00482
 00490-00512
 00439-00445
 00450-00454
 00520-00542
 00551-00572
 02600
 02230
 02200
 02219
 02203
 01310
 01312
 
 Pay Item
 Culvert Pipe, Size
 Culvert Pipe Equivalent, Size
 Entrance Pipe, Size
 Entrance Pipe Equivalent, Size
 Storm Sewer Pipe, Size
 Storm Sewer Pipe Equivalent, Size
 Fabric-Geotextile, Type IV for Pipe
 Embankment-In-Place
 Roadway Excavation
 Pipe Undercut
 Structure Excavation, Unclassified
 Remove Pipe
 Remove and Relay Pipe
 
 701—9
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Square Yard(2)
 See Subsection 206.05
 See Subsection 204.05
 Cubic Yard(1)
 See Subsection 603.05
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 
 23131ER701
 10065NS
 
 Pipeline Video Inspection
 Pipe Deflection Deduction
 
 Linear Foot
 Dollars
 
 (1)
 
 The unit price is $20.00 per cubic yard for pipe undercut 2 feet in depth or less.
 The Department will pay for pipe undercut exceeding a depth of 2 feet, as specified
 in Subsection 109.04.
 (2)
 The unit price is $2.00 per square yard for Fabric-Geotextile, Type IV for Pipe
 
 RIGID PIPE REMEDIATION TABLE PIPE
 Crack Width (inches)
 Payment
 ≤ 0.1
 100% of the Unit Bid Price
 Greater than 0.1
 Remediate or Replace (1)
 (1) Provide the Department in writing a method for repairing the
 observed cracking. Do not begin work until the method has been
 approved.
 
 FLEXIBLE PIPE DEDUCTION TABLE
 Amount of Deflection (%)
 Payment
 0.0 to 5.0
 5.1 to 7.5
 7.6 to 9.9
 10 or greater
 
 100% of the Unit Bid Price
 75% of the Unit Bid Price (1)
 50% of the Unit Bid Price (2)
 Remove and Replace (3)
 
 (1) Provide Structural Analysis for HDPE and metal pipe. Based on the structural
 analysis, pipe may be allowed to remain in place at the reduced unit price.(2)
 Provide Structural Analysis for HDPE and metal pipe. Based on the structural
 analysis, pipe may be allowed to remain in place at the reduced unit price.
 (3) The Department may allow the pipe to remain in place with no pay to the
 Contractor in instances where it is in the best interest to the public and where the
 structural analysis demonstrates that the pipe should function adequately.
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 701—10
 
 SECTION 702  SLOTTED DRAIN PIPE
 702.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and place slotted drain pipe of the specified size and
 wall thickness, at the locations specified in the Plans or designated by the Engineer.
 702.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 702.02.01 Slotted Drain Pipe. Conform to Subsection 810.04.05.
 702.02.02 Coupling Bands.
 manufacturer.
 
 Provide coupling bands recommended by the
 
 702.03 CONSTRUCTION. Conform to Section 701.03 and the Standard Drawings for
 excavation of the pipe trench, pipe placing, and backfill.
 Do not begin installing the slotted drain pipe until paving of the traffic lanes adjacent
 to the pipe has been completed at the location where the pipe is to be installed.
 Before backfilling, plug the upgrade end of the slotted drain pipe with a metal cap or
 by other methods the Engineer approves.
 During the backfilling operations and paving operations adjacent to the slot, cover the
 slot to prevent infiltration of material into the pipe, and do not damage the slotted drain
 pipe. Remove foreign material that enters the pipe, and repair any damage to the slotted
 drain pipe to the satisfaction of the Engineer, at no expense to the Department.
 702.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 702.04.01 Slotted Drain Pipe. The Department will measure the quantity in linear
 feet. The Department will not measure structure excavation, backfill, plugging, removal
 of foreign material, or coupling bands for payment and will consider them incidental to
 this item of work.
 702.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 00980-00985
 
 Pay Item
 Slotted Drain Pipe, Size
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 702—1
 
 SECTION 703  SLOPE PROTECTION AND CHANNEL
 LINING
 703.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and place the specified material for a protective
 covering for slopes or linings in channels and ditches, according to the Contract or as the
 Engineer directs. Slope protection includes the following types: Reinforced Concrete
 Slope Wall, Cyclopean Stone Riprap, and Crushed Aggregate Slope Protection. Channel
 lining includes the following types: Class IA (mattress units), Class II, Class III, and Class
 IV (prepared from rock excavation).
 703.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 703.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 703.02.02 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 703.02.03 Coarse Aggregate. Conform to Section 805.
 703.02.04 Fine Aggregate. Conform to Section 804, natural sand.
 703.02.05 Joint Material. Conform to Section 807, preformed joint filler.
 703.02.06 Drain Pipe. Conform to Section 810.
 703.02.07 Mattress Units for Channel Lining Class IA. Conform to Section 813.
 703.02.08 Anchor Bars for Channel Lining, Class IA. Use Grade 40 or better
 steel reinforcing bars conforming to the dimensions shown on the Standard Drawings.
 The Engineer will base acceptance of the anchor bars on visual inspection.
 703.02.09 Geotextile Fabric. Use Type I fabric conforming to Section 843.
 703.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 703.03.01 Slope Protection.
 A) General. Do not allow slopes on which protection is placed to be steeper than
 the natural angle of repose. Shape the slopes to the slope and contour indicated
 or as the Engineer directs. Use slope templates in determining the slope. Bring
 depressions to the required slope line with fill material moistened and compacted
 as the Engineer directs.
 Unless solid rock is encountered, begin all slope protection, except crushed
 aggregate slope protection, in a trench 2 feet below the natural ground. Where
 solid rock is encountered, stop the lower terminus of the slope protection at the
 solid rock line unless the Engineer directs otherwise.
 Unless solid rock is encountered, underlay cyclopean stone riprap, crushed
 aggregate slope protection and all classes of channel lining with geotextile
 fabric.
 B) Reinforced Concrete Slope Wall. Use 6-inch slope walls on slopes 1/4 to one
 or flatter.
 Construct porous aggregate underdrains at the location of all construction
 joints at the intervals shown on the Standard Drawings. Ensure that the porous
 aggregate underdrains consist of a 12-inch by 12-inch trench excavated in the
 earth or solid rock and filled with coarse aggregate or natural sand. Place weep
 holes along the toe of the reinforced concrete slope walls at a maximum of 10foot intervals. Construct weep holes by using 4-inch diameter pipe or suitably
 formed 4-inch diameter holes through the walls.
 
 703—1
 
 Construct slope walls using Class A concrete according to Subsection
 601.03. Construct slope walls using the size, position, width of sheets, length of
 laps, and diameter of the mesh shown on the Standard Drawings. Construct the
 finished slope walls with an even, smooth surface that will not show a variation
 from a true plane of more than 1/2-inch in 4 feet. Build warped or curved
 surfaces to the same degree of accuracy as plane surfaces. Cure concrete
 according to Subsection 601.03. After completing the slope protection, backfill
 excavated areas that are not filled by slope protection to the surface of the
 original groundline.
 C) Cyclopean Stone Riprap Slope Protection. Construct cyclopean stone riprap to
 a minimum thickness of 2 feet measured perpendicular to the slope. The
 Department will allow dumping stone in place and relocating it in a manner to
 produce a surface of approximate regularity not varying more than 6 inches from
 a true plane.
 D) Crushed Aggregate Slope Protection. Unless otherwise shown, place the
 aggregate to a depth of one foot measured perpendicular to the slope flush with
 the embankment slopes under the bridge; extend it from the face of the
 abutments or end bents across the berm and down the slope to the toe of the
 slope; and extend it laterally to 18 inches beyond the outer edges of the
 superstructure.
 The Department will allow dumping the crushed aggregate in place and
 relocating it in a manner to produce a uniform surface varying no more than 1
 1/2 inches in 4 feet from a true plane. The Department will not require hand
 placing except as necessary to correct irregularities exceeding the specified
 tolerances.
 703.03.02 Channel Lining. Before placing any channel lining materials, excavate
 and shape the area to receive the channel lining, so that the completed channel lining will
 be uniform and will conform to the designated lines, grades, and cross section.
 A) Channel Lining, Classes II and III. Construct Channel Lining Classes II and
 III to the dimensions specified in the Plans, Standard Drawings, or as the
 Engineer directs. The Department will allow dumping the stone in place and
 relocating it in a manner to produce a surface of approximate regularity, varying
 no more than 3 inches from a true plane. The Department will not require hand
 placing except as necessary to correct any surface irregularities exceeding the
 specified tolerance.
 B) Channel Lining, Class IV. Unless solid rock is encountered, begin the channel
 lining in a trench 2 feet below the natural ground or 2 feet below the channel
 flowline when the flowline is not lined. Where solid rock is encountered, stop
 the lower terminus of the slope protection at the solid rock line. Construct
 Channel Lining, Class IV to the minimum thickness specified in the Plans. The
 Department will allow dumping the stone in place and relocating it in a manner
 to produce a surface of approximate regularity not varying more than 6 inches
 from a true plane.
 C) Channel Lining, Class IA. Construct according to the Standard Drawings. Set
 empty mattress units to the required line and grade. Use lacing wire to join the
 units together.
 After the mattress units are set to line and grade, stretch them to remove any
 kinks from the mesh and to hold alignment.
 Fill the mattress units with stone. Place by hand or machine to ensure good
 alignment. Avoid bulging of the mesh by minimizing voids between the stones.
 After filling a unit, close its top so that it meets the sides and ends of each
 mattress unit. Then, secure the top to the sides, ends, and the diaphragms with
 lacing wire as shown on the Standard Drawings.
 When placing the mattress unit on a grade, begin placing the stone at the
 bottom of the slope and progress upgrade. Overfill mattress units approximately
 
 703—2
 
 one inch to allow for settlement.
 When space limitations prevent the installation of a complete mattress on
 the slope, cut the unit to fit in the manner the Plans specify. Drive anchor bars in
 place at the locations shown on the Standard Drawings when the grade is 5
 percent or greater.
 703.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 703.04.01 Reinforced Concrete Slope Walls. The Department will measure the
 quantity in square yards of surface area including the area of the front face of concrete
 placed within the trench below natural ground. The Department will not measure steel
 reinforcement or any excavation required for the construction of slope protection for
 payment, and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 703.04.02 Cyclopean Stone Riprap. The Department will measure the quantity in
 tons. The Department will not measure excavation required for the construction of slope
 protection for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 703.04.03 Crushed Aggregate Slope Protection. The Department will measure the
 quantity according to Subsection 703.04.02.
 703.04.04 Channel Lining, Class IA. The Department will measure the quantity in
 tons. The Department will not measure excavation below the upper surface of any
 channel lining for payment and will consider it incidental to the work. The Department
 will not measure anchor bars, wire mesh, lacing wire, or other material necessary to
 acceptably complete the wire mattress units for payment, and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work.
 703.04.05 Channel Lining Class II. The Department will measure the quantity in
 tons. The Department will not measure excavation below the upper surface of any
 channel lining for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 703.04.06 Channel Lining Class III. The Department will measure the quantity
 according to Subsection 703.04.05.
 703.04.07 Channel Lining Class IV. The Department will measure the quantity
 according to Subsection 204.04.
 703.04.08 Geotextile Fabric. The Department will measure the quantity according to
 Subsection 214.04.
 703.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 08014, 08016
 08019
 08020
 02482
 02483
 02484
 02488
 
 Pay Item
 Reinforced Concrete Slope Wall, Size
 Cyclopean Stone Riprap
 Crushed Aggregate Slope Protection
 Channel Lining, Class IA
 Channel Lining, Class II
 Channel Lining, Class III
 Channel Lining, Class IV
 
 Pay Unit
 Square Yard
 Ton
 Ton
 Ton
 Ton
 Ton
 See Subsection 204.05
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 703—3
 
 SECTION 704  UNDERDRAINS
 704.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct underdrains of perforated pipe, non-perforated
 pipe, and porous aggregate. When required, construct headwalls according to Section 710,
 and the Standard Drawings.
 704.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 704.02.01 Underdrain Pipe.
 A) All Underdrain Pipe Except Edge Drain Outlet Pipe. Conform to Section 810
 for the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Circular Reinforced Concrete Pipe.
 Corrugated Steel Pipe, Type III.
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe, Type III.
 High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) Pipe (Thermoplastic).
 
 B) Edge Drain Outlet Pipe. Conform to Section 810 for the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Corrugated Steel Pipe, Type III.
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe, Type III.
 High Density Polyethylene Pipe (HDPE), Type S (Thermoplastic).
 Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe (Thermoplastic) as follows:
 a)
 b)
 c)
 
 Smooth. Conform to ASTM D 1785 for Schedule 40, or ASTM D
 2241 for SDR 17.
 Ribbed. Conform to ASTM F 794 for series 46.
 Corrugated. Conform to ASTM F 949.
 
 704.02.02 Coarse Aggregate. Conform to Subsection 805.08.
 704.02.03 Natural Sand. Conform to Section 804.
 704.02.04 Geotextile Fabric. Use Type II fabric conforming to Section 843 for
 wrapping coarse aggregate. Use circular-knit geotextile conforming to ASTM D 6707 for
 perforated pipe socks.
 704.02.05 Pipeline Inspection Camera. Provide a pipeline inspection camera for
 edge drains having the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 8)
 9)
 
 Capable of recording the station, milepost, distance into the drain or other
 indicators of location on the video.
 A device for measuring the distance the camera has been pushed from the end of
 the outlet.
 The ability to record the distance superimposed on the video.
 An outside diameter no greater than 3 inches.
 Color capability with a minimum horizontal resolution of 400 lines according to
 the manufacturer’s specifications.
 Capable of being pushed in the 4-inch outlet pipes and mainline pipes for a
 minimum of 280 feet, 250 feet of mainline plus outlet pipe.
 Capable of being pushed or tractored for 1,000 feet in 8-inch or larger pipes
 serving as a collector system for edge drains without headwalls.
 A video output jack for connecting a VCR.
 Capable of being connected to controls, including the VCR, for the pipeline
 inspection equipment in the inspection vehicle.
 
 704—1
 
 704.02.06 VCR. Provide a VCR capable of connecting to the video output jack on
 the pipeline inspection system for recording the inspection.
 704.02.07 Inspection Vehicle. Provide an inspection vehicle that will accommodate
 the operation of the inspection camera and VCR, and 2 passengers. Provide a pipe
 inspection operator to operate the vehicle and observe the inspection. The Engineer may
 accompany the pipe inspection operator in the vehicle at any time.
 704.02.08 Flowable Fill. Conform to Subsection 601.03.03 B).
 704.02.09 Headwalls. Conform to Subsection 710.02.
 704.02.10 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02.
 704.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 704.03.01 Porous Aggregate Underdrain. Excavate the trench to the lines, grades,
 and section according to the Contract. Finish the bottom of the trench so that it is smooth
 and firm. Tamp if necessary.
 After preparing the trench, place the aggregate in the trench, in loose layers not
 exceeding 6 inches in depth, and firmly tamp each layer in place. Use either crushed or
 uncrushed coarse aggregate, including pea gravel, or natural sand. Continue backfilling
 the trench with aggregate until the backfill reaches the compacted depth specified in the
 Plans. When using coarse aggregate, completely wrap the aggregate in geotextile fabric,
 Type II, according to Subsection 214.03. Backfill above the aggregate with soil that the
 Engineer approves and tamp in place in layers not exceeding 6 inches loose thickness.
 704.03.02 Perforated and Non-Perforated Pipe Underdrains.
 A) All Pipe Underdrains Except Pavement Edge Drains. Excavate the trench to a
 depth below the outside bottom of the plan underdrain elevation to allow for the
 placement of sufficient bedding to eliminate any irregularities in the trench
 bottom, and to a width of at least one foot wider than the external diameter of the
 pipe.
 Place perforated pipe with the perforations in the invert. Join perforated
 sections with coupling fittings or bands. Place and compact granular backfill of
 Size No. 78, 8, or 9M coarse aggregate or natural sand around the pipe ensuring
 that the pipe is true to line and grade and the haunches are fully supported.
 Where perforated pipe installations outlet into open ditches provide a minimum
 of 8 feet of non-perforated pipe from the outlet.
 For non-perforated pipe installations, place the pipe with the bell end
 upgrade and with open joints not exceeding 3/8 inch. Join the last 2 outlet
 sections.
 Close the upgrade ends of all underdrain pipe installations with plugs to
 prevent entry of debris. Equip the outlet end of underdrain pipe with a screen.
 After placing the pipe, place coarse aggregate or natural sand to a height of
 at least one foot above the top of the pipe. When using natural sand for backfill,
 wrap the perforated pipe in circular-knit geotextile fabric; when using coarse
 aggregate for backfill, completely wrap the aggregate in geotextile fabric,
 according to Subsection 214.03. Fill any remaining portion of the trench with
 either granular or impervious material according to the Contract or as the
 Engineer directs. Do not allow the minimum height of fill to be more than 2 feet
 above the top of the pipe, except the Engineer will allow one foot of fill from the
 top of the pipe to the top of subgrade in cases where 2 feet would not allow
 proper installation for drainage. Thoroughly compact the fill material in layers
 not exceeding 6 inches loose measurement. During placement of the aggregate
 and granular or impervious material do not damage or displace the pipe.
 
 704—2
 
 Encase any pipe that has less than one foot of cover at the outlet end in 6inch thick concrete of any class or flowable fill. Proportion the concrete or
 flowable fill according to Subsection 601.03.
 B) Pavement Edge Drains. Construct using 4-inch diameter pipe according to
 Subsection 704.03.02 A), or as shown on the plans, except for the following:
 1)
 
 Backfilling.
 a.
 
 b.
 c.
 
 2)
 
 3)
 
 4)
 
 5)
 
 6)
 
 Fabric Wrapped Trench and Crushed Aggregate. When backfilling,
 place geotextile fabric in the trench and shape to the sides and bottom
 of the trench without stretching the fabric. Ensure that the geotextile
 fabric does not pull down into the trench when placing the backfill
 material. Do not damage the geotextile fabric when placing the filter
 aggregate. Partially wrap the aggregate according to Subsection 214.03.
 Fold the fabric over the backfilled trench and secure.
 Geotextile Pipe, Sock and Sand. Backfill the pipe with a natural sand
 conforming to Section 804. Do not use geotextile pipe, sock and sand if
 the pavement section is constructed with a drainage blanket.
 Edge Drain Outlet Pipe. Encase any outlet pipe with a minimum of 6
 inches of concrete or flowable fill over the top of the outlet pipe. In
 paved sections bring the concrete or flowable fill up to the bottom of
 pavement. Proportion the concrete or flowable fill according to
 Subsection 601.03.
 
 Headwalls for Outlets. When the Contract requires outlet headwalls, the
 Engineer will require adjustments to the headwalls when necessary to fit
 existing drainage conditions. Place precast headwalls according to
 Subsection 710.03.01 B). Install the headwall with a slope of 1/2 inch in one
 foot. When practical, place the toe of the headwall a minimum of 6 inches
 (one foot desirable) above the bottom of the ditch. Place crushed aggregate
 size No. 2 a minimum depth of 4 inches around the headwall as specified in
 the Contract.
 Cored Hole Drainage Box or Cross Drain Headwall Connector. Make the
 connection according to Section 705. Make the cored hole drainage box
 connection a minimum of one foot above the bottom of the box. Attach a
 rodent screen to all edge drain outlet structures according to the Standard
 Drawings.
 Construction Near Guardrail. When guardrail is attached to a structure,
 adjust the placement of the outlet pipe so that guardrail posts will not be
 driven within one foot of the outlet pipe. When the guardrail is not attached
 to a structure, adjust the placement of the outlet pipe or the guardrail so that
 guardrail posts will not be driven within one foot of the outlet pipe. Mark
 the location of the outlet with paint or other means the Engineer approves.
 Conduct a mandrel test after driving the guardrail posts by pushing a piece
 of flexible 2-inch gas pipe through the outlet pipes. Replace all damaged
 outlets.
 Field Data. Visually observe the condition of each headwall. Observe the
 extent of debris blocking the headwall. Provide a description of the debris,
 the condition of the rodent screen, a description of the ditch line drainage,
 and the percent grade of the headwall. Take photographs of significant
 distresses and provide copies of the photographs to the Engineer. Describe
 the location of these significant distresses and the headwall type for each
 headwall. Record all observations and data and submit them to the Engineer
 on standard forms approved by the Engineer.
 Inspection of Edge Drain Systems. Inspect installed pavement edge drain
 system immediately before placing the final surface. Use a pipeline
 
 704—3
 
 7)
 8)
 9)
 704.04
 
 inspection camera to determine if the edge drain system is functioning
 properly. Beginning at the rodent screen, push the camera through the outlet
 pipe system and into the mainline edge drain system. Push the camera into
 the mainline edge drain until there is resistance against further movement,
 the end of the pipe segment is reached, or for approximately 250 feet, and
 record this distance. Use the camera as a mandrel for determining locations
 of compressed pipes when desired. Document observed distresses, including
 blockages, rips, separations, backfill in the crushed pipe, crushed pipe,
 improper couplings, improper connections, and all other distresses. Make all
 photographic observations on video tape and provide a copy to the
 Engineer. Record all observations and data and submit to the Engineer, on
 standard forms approved by the Engineer. Provide the CCTV inspection on
 standard VHS tape or other format the Engineer approves.
 Certification of Edge Drain Systems. Provide certification that the installed
 pavement edge drain system is functioning properly before formal
 acceptance of the project.
 Trenching Material. When the Engineer approves, excavated trench material
 may be used to dress the existing shoulder adjacent to the trench.
 Corrective Work. The Department may require corrective work when the
 video or Inspection report indicates there are pipe distresses.
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 704.04.01 Porous Underdrain. The Department will measure the quantity in linear
 feet along the centerline of the underdrain. The Department will not measure excavation
 for the trench less than or equal to 4 feet in depth or the geotextile fabric used to wrap
 coarse aggregate for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 704.04.02 Perforated and Non-Perforated Pipe. The Department will measure the
 quantity of each size of Perforated and Non-Perforated Pipe in linear feet along the
 centerline of the pipe. The Department will not measure saw cutting the existing shoulder,
 materials for bedding and backfill encasement with concrete or flowable fill, or excavation
 of the trench up to 4 feet in depth for payment, and will consider them incidental to this
 item of work.
 704.04.03 Perforated Pipe Headwalls. The Department will measure the quantity
 according to Subsection 710.04.
 704.04.04 Structure Excavation, Common. The Department will measure the
 quantity of excavation for the trench in excess of 4 feet in depth in cubic yards. The
 Department will measure the maximum trench width as that specified in the Plans or
 Standard Drawings.
 704.04.05 Crushed Aggregate Size No. 2. The Department will measure the
 quantity used for edge drain headwall outlet erosion control by the ton. The Department
 will not measure removal of excess material for payment and will consider it incidental to
 this item of work.
 704.04.06 Inspect and Certify Edge Drain System. The Department will measure
 Inspect and Certify Edge Drains System by the lump sum. The Department will not
 measure corrective work due to the construction operation for payment and will consider it
 incidental to this item of work.
 704.04.07 Perforated and Non-perforated Pipe for Edge Drains. The Department
 will measure the quantity of each size of Perforated and Non-Perforated Pipe for
 Edgedrains in linear feet along the centerline of the pipe. The Department will not
 measure materials for bedding and backfill, encasement with concrete or flowable fill,
 
 704—4
 
 geotextile fabric used for wrapping perforated pipe or for wrapping coarse aggregate
 backfill, or excavation of the trench up to 4 feet in depth for payment, and will consider
 them incidental to this item of work.
 704.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02679
 01000-01004
 ----01010-01014
 01020-01035
 08001
 00078
 01015
 
 Pay Item
 Porous Underdrain
 Perforated Pipe, Size
 Perforated Pipe Edge Drain, Size
 Non-Perforated Pipe, Size
 Perforated Pipe Headwalls, Type, Size
 Structure Excavation Common
 Crushed Aggregate Size No. 2
 Inspect and Certify Edge Drain System
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 See Subsection 710.05
 See Subsection 603.05
 Ton
 Lump Sum
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 704—5
 
 SECTION 705  CORED HOLE DRAINAGE BOX
 CONNECTOR
 705.01 DESCRIPTION. Core drill a hole in the side or sides of existing small drainage
 structures, and connect the outlet end of 4, 6, or 8-inch underdrain pipe, instead of
 constructing concrete headwalls on the underdrain pipe.
 705.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 705.02.01 Non-Shrink Grout. Conform to Subsection 601.03.03 B).
 705.02.02 Asphalt Mastic Joint Sealing Compound. Conform to Section 807.
 705.02.03 Pipe. Conform to Subsection 704.02. Furnish the same type and size as
 the underdrain pipe.
 705.02.04 Styrofoam Backer Rod. Obtain the Engineer’s approval.
 705.03 CONSTRUCTION. Cut holes by core drilling into existing small drainage
 structures at the locations specified in the Contract or where the Engineer directs, without
 damaging the existing structure. Cut holes of a diameter equal to the outside diameter of
 the pipe with a tolerance of plus 1/2 inch. Place 2 styrofoam backer rods on the pipe near
 each wall face, and seal the opening around the pipe with mastic material or a non-shrink
 grout. Use wyes, tees, and ells in the pipe system to reduce the number of holes to be
 drilled. Patch all damage to the existing wall in the coring operation with non-shrink
 grout. Apply non-shrink grout according to Subsection 601.03.
 705.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure the quantity by each
 individual unit. The Department will not measure pipe, wyes, tees, ells, styrofoam backer
 rods, or repair of damage to existing wall for payment and will consider them incidental to
 this item of work.
 705.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 01740-01742
 
 Pay Item
 Cored Hole Drainage Box Connector, Size
 
 Pay Unit
 Each
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 705—1
 
 SECTION 706  ENCASEMENT PIPE
 706.01 DESCRIPTION. Provide an encasement pipe, open cut or a bored and jacked
 pipe under a roadway or other sensitive area.
 706.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 706.02.01 Welded and Seamless Steel Pipe. Conform to the following table for the
 minimum wall thickness for steel pipe
 
 MINIMUM WALL THICKNESS FOR STEEL PIPE
 Nominal Diameter (Inches)
 
 Wall Thickness (Inches)
 
 18 or less
 24
 30
 36
 42
 
 0.375
 0.500
 0.500
 0.532
 0.625
 
 706.03 CONSTRUCTION.
 706.03.01 Open Cut. Install the pipe according to the manufacturer's specifications
 and installation procedures. When the Engineer requests, provide a manufacturer's
 technical representative to assist in pipe installation.
 706.03.02 Bore and Jack. Construct access pits on both sides of the area to be
 tunneled, one for the boring equipment and one on the receiving end.
 Use a boring and jacking machine that is capable of keeping the advanced bore hole
 within the required alignment. Maintain the alignment of the guide rails to the proper line
 and grade, immediately correcting any possible displacement, until completing the boring
 and jacking operation.
 Use a smooth casing pipe of sufficient strength and diameter to provide a tight fit
 against the earth sides of the bore hole and of sufficient size to allow installation of the
 carrier pipe and any required positive anchorage. Weld the joints with a continuous
 circumferential weld.
 Frequently check the line and grade and adjust the alignment as practical. When a
 physical obstruction or other situation requires the abandonment of a partially completed
 bore hole and the starting of a new hole, backfill as the Engineer directs.
 706.04 MEASUREMENT.
 706.04.01 Open Cut Encasement Pipe. The Department will measure the
 completed length of encasement pipe through the flowline from end to end in linear feet.
 The Department will not measure the backfill and will consider it incidental to this item of
 work.
 706.04.02 Bored and Jacked Encasement Pipe. The Department will measure the
 completed length of encasement pipe through the flowline from end to end in linear feet.
 When abandoning a bore hole due to an unforeseen physical obstruction or situation, the
 Department will measure the work according to a negotiated supplemental agreement.
 When abandoning a bore hole due to mechanical malfunction, improper alignment, or
 other problems due to construction operations, the Department will not measure the
 backfill and relocation for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 706.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 
 706—1
 
 Code
 01059-01087
 -----
 
 Pay Item
 Steel Encasement Pipe,Bore and Jack,Size,Thickness
 Steel Encasement Pipe,Open Cut,Size,Thickness
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 706—2
 
 SECTION 707  TUNNELS BY USE OF STEEL LINER
 PLATES
 707.01 DESCRIPTION.
 tunnel liner plates.
 707.02
 
 Tunnel using conventional tunneling methods and install
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 707.02.01 Liner Plates. Conform to Section 819.
 707.02.02 Grout. Conform to Subsection 601.02.
 707.03 CONSTRUCTION. Excavate tunnels by full face, heading and bench, multiple
 drift procedures, or other Engineer approved methods. Complete all work under the
 supervision of a superintendent familiar with tunneling and the use of tunnel liner plates.
 Begin tunneling at either end unless otherwise directed. When necessary to reach the
 entrance grade, construct an access pit of sufficient size to accommodate the tunnel
 excavation, spoil removal, access rails, liner plates, and other items necessary for the
 tunnel operation. Sheet or shore the access pit to accommodate all requirements for safety
 and stability. Excavate for the tunnel in close conformance to the outside shape of the
 liner plates.
 Replace any liner plates damaged during handling and placing. Handle coated plates
 in a manner that prevents damage to the coating. Assemble the liner plates according to
 the manufacturer’s recommendations at such time so there will not be more than 2 feet of
 tunnel mucking ahead of the bolting up of plates. At the end of each work day, construct a
 bulkhead inside the assembled liner plate at the construction face unless the Engineer
 specifically grants permission to omit the bulkhead.
 Install grout blocks at each end after completing bolting of liner plates. Proportion
 grout according to Subsection 601.03. Force grout into voids through the grouting holes
 in the plates with such pressure that all voids occurring between the liner plates and
 excavation will be filled.
 Grout and install liner plates simultaneously.
 707.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure tunnels of each size in linear
 feet along the invert.
 707.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 ----
 
 Pay Item
 Tunnel, Size
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 707—1
 
 SECTION 708  FILLING AND CAPPING, SAFELOADING,
 AND PLUGGING ABONDONED UNDERGROUND
 STRUCTURES
 708.01 DESCRIPTION. Fill and cap designated wells, inlets, catch basins, and
 manholes. Safeload designated small drainage structures and underground containers.
 Plug designated pipe and wells. This work does not include the removal of hazardous
 material.
 708.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 708.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 708.02.02 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 811.
 708.02.03 Coarse Aggregate. Conform to Section 805, No. 8 or 9M.
 708.02.04 Flowable Fill. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 708.02.05 Cement. Conform to Section 801.
 708.02.06 Sand. Conform to Section 804.
 708.02.07 Water. Conform to Section 803.
 708.02.08 Fly Ash. Conform to Section 844.
 708.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 708.03.01 Filling and Capping Wells, Catch Basins, Inlets, and Manholes
 (Diameters 24 inches or less). Fill all wells (except water wells), catch basins, inlets, and
 manholes having an average diameter of 24 inches or less, with coarse aggregate to within
 18 inches of their surface elevation. Place, then rod or tamp aggregate without creating
 large voids or unfilled pockets. After placing the aggregate, fill the remaining 18 inches
 with concrete. Use Class A concrete according to Subsection 601.03. Tamp, rod, or
 vibrate the concrete in place. The Department will not require curing the concrete. When
 it is not practical to completely fill a deep well, the Engineer may allow plugging
 according to Subsection 708.03.03 and then filling and capping the well or structure.
 708.03.02 Filling and Capping Wells, Catch Basins, Inlets, and Manholes
 (Diameters over 24 inches). Fill all wells (except water wells), catch basins, and
 manholes having an average diameter exceeding 24 inches with select compatible soil or
 other approved material to within 8 inches of their surface elevation. Place and compact
 the soil or other approved material in layers not exceeding one foot in thickness. Compact
 by hand or mechanical tamping. Cap the remaining 8 inches with an 8-inch reinforced
 concrete slab either precast or cast-in-place. Use Class A concrete according to
 Subsection 601.03. Reinforce the slab with No. 4 reinforcing bars placed at 6-inch centers
 in both directions and located 2 inches from the bottom surface of the slab. Cure slabs
 according to Subsection 601.03.
 708.03.03 Plugging Water Wells. Plug water wells according to 401 KAR 6:310.
 Employ a Kentucky certified water well driller as required by KRS 223.400 through
 223.460 to perform the work. Furnish copies of the driller’s log sheets to the Engineer
 after completing the plugging work.
 
 708—1
 
 708.03.04 Safeloading Small Drainage Structures. When safeloading, either
 completely fill the designated areas with grout in such a manner to make them safe from
 collapse or fill the designated area with flowable fill. Mix flowable fill according to
 Subsection 601.03. Furnish grout consisting of one part cement or cement with fly ash to
 6 parts mortar sand or concrete sand, by volume, and water. Mix to a workable
 consistency. Add an amount of fly ash that does not exceed 20 percent of the cement
 quantity.
 Clean septic tanks before safeloading. Remove appreciable deposits of debris from
 other structures prior to safeloading. Plug the ends of existing culverts with bulkheads
 containing small openings at the tops through which the grout or flowable fill may be
 pumped at a minimum pressure of 15 psi. Completely fill all structures that require
 safeloading with grout or flowable fill.
 708.03.05 Plugging Pipe. Shape or place plywood, 3/4 inch or greater in thickness,
 or use other approved material to snugly fit the interior of the pipe to be plugged. When
 bracing is necessary, adequately secure it in the designated location to ensure that the
 placement of concrete will not move or distort it. Place the forming material within the
 pipe a distance of no less than 5 feet, measured along the flowline, from the end of the
 pipe to be plugged. Then completely fill the portion to be plugged with concrete. Use
 Class A concrete according to Subsection 601.03. Tamp, rod, or vibrate the concrete in a
 manner to form a dense mass and to exclude voids. Keep the plastic concrete within the
 pipe using adequately braced forms. The Department will not require curing the concrete.
 708.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 708.04.01 Filling and Capping (Diameters 24 inches or less). The Department
 will measure the quantity of wells (except water wells) by each individual unit. The
 Department will not measure plugging wells (except water wells) for payment and will
 consider plugging wells other than water wells incidental to this item of work.
 708.04.02 Plug Water Wells. The Department will measure the quantity by each
 individual unit.
 708.04.03 Capping (Diameters over 24 inches). The Department will measure the
 quantity in square yards of the finished reinforced concrete cap.
 708.04.04 Embankment-in-Place (Diameters over 24 inches). The Department
 will measure the quantity according to Subsection 206.04. The Department will measure
 material used in lieu of select compatible soil as embankment-in-place.
 708.04.05 Roadway Excavation (Diameters over 24 inches). The Department will
 measure the quantity according to Subsection 204.04. The Department will measure
 material used in lieu of select compatible soil as roadway excavation.
 708.04.06 Safeloading. The Department will measure safeloading structures in
 cubic yards.
 708.04.07 Plugging Pipe.
 individual unit per end plugged.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity by each
 
 708.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 01710, 01717, 01786
 02473, 02479
 02220
 
 Pay Item
 Fill and Cap (Item), (24 inches or less)
 Cap (Item), (over 24 inches)
 Roadway Excavation
 
 708—2
 
 Pay Unit
 Each
 Square Yard
 See Subsection 204.05
 
 02230
 02475
 02690
 01314
 
 Embankment-in-Place
 Plug Water Well
 Safeloading
 Plug Pipe
 
 See Subsection 206.05
 Each
 Cubic Yard
 Each
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 708—3
 
 SECTION 709  FLUME INLETS AND PAVED DITCHES
 709.01
 
 DESCRIPTION. Construct reinforced concrete flume inlets and paved ditches.
 
 709.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 709.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 709.02.02 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 602.
 709.03 CONSTRUCTION. Construct according to the Plans and Standard Drawings.
 Excavate the subgrade to the required depth below the finished grade. Remove all soft
 and yielding material, replace it with suitable material, compact the subgrade, and finish it
 to a firm and smooth surface.
 Place Class A concrete with steel reinforcement, finish, and cure according to
 Subsection 601.03.
 When adjacent to a concrete pavement or shoulder, tie flume inlets to the concrete
 pavement or shoulder by means of deformed steel tie bars. Furnish and install strips of
 recessed type longitudinal metal joint, punched to accommodate tie bars, at the designated
 locations adjacent to the forms at the pavement edge. Bend tie bars to right angles at the
 midpoints and install them in the pavement with one end of each tie bar placed in the
 grooves of the metal joint so the bar can be straightened after removing the pavement
 forms.
 When constructing flume inlets prior to installing guardrail posts, provide a blockout
 in the inlet using a 6-inch radius. After setting the posts, fill the holes between the posts
 and flume inlets with concrete.
 Construct paved ditches at the locations and to the widths the Engineer directs. The
 location and width specified in the Plans are for purposes of estimating only.
 Construct anchors according to the Standard Drawings. Construct end anchors at the
 inlet and outlet ends. When required construct intermediate anchors on 20-foot centers.
 Form and cast against earth the exposed ends of end anchors for paved ditches and the
 other ends of end anchors and all intermediate anchors.
 Moisten the subgrade prior to placing the concrete.
 Place sod in areas the Standard Drawings designate.
 709.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 709.04.01 Flume Inlets. The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual unit. The Department will not measure steel tie bars, longitudinal metal joints,
 or blockouts for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 709.04.02 Paved Ditches. The Department will measure this quantity in square
 yards of actual surface area. The Department will not measure intermediate anchors for
 payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 709.04.03 Roadway Excavation.
 according to Subsection 204.04.
 
 The Department will measure this quantity
 
 709.04.04 Sod. The Department will measure this quantity according to Subsection
 212.04.
 709.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 
 709—1
 
 Code
 01689-01691
 02155-02158
 02220
 05990
 
 Pay Item
 Flume Inlet, Type
 Paved Ditch, Type
 Roadway Excavation
 Sodding
 
 Pay Unit
 Each
 Square Yard
 See Subsection 204.05
 See Subsection 212.05
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 709—2
 
 SECTION 710  SMALL DRAINAGE STRUCTURES
 710.01 DESCRIPTION. Construct, reconstruct, or adjust inlets, outlets, manholes,
 junction boxes, catch basins, edge drain outlet headwalls, and other small drainage
 structures.
 710.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 710.02.01 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02.
 710.02.02 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Subsection 811.
 710.02.03 Manhole Pipe. Conform to Section 810.
 710.02.04 Brick Unit Masonry. Conform to Section 824.
 710.02.05 Preformed Joint Filler. Conform to Section 807.
 710.02.06 Dense Graded Aggregate. Conform to Section 805.
 710.02.07 Pipe. Conform to Section 810.
 710.02.08 Mortar. Conform to Section 601.02.
 710.02.09 Structural Steel. Conform to Section 812.
 710.02.10 Miscellaneous Metals. Conform to Section 813.
 710.02.11 Steel Manhole Risers. Conform to Section 813.
 710.02.12 Manhole Covers and Lids. Conform to Section 813.
 710.02.13 Precast Manhole Sections. Conform to Section 824.
 710.02.14 Manhole Steps. Provide manhole steps that are on the Department’s List
 of Approved Materials.
 710.02.15 Plastic Adjusting Rings. Provide plastic or rubber adjusting rings that
 are on the Department’s List of Approved Materials.
 710.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION
 
 710.03.01 Newly Constructed Small Drainage Structures.
 A) General. Construct all small drainage structures according to the Contract or as
 the Engineer establishes. The Engineer may approve similar units that conform
 to the typical features depicted in the Standard Drawings. Construct small
 drainage structures using Class A concrete according to Subsection 601.03.
 Attach all cast iron grates and lids and all structural steel grates to the
 frames, or to the concrete in the event there is no frame, with a chain of
 sufficient length to permit removal for clean out and maintenance purposes.
 Obtain the Engineer’s approval, in writing, of shop drawings for the security
 device, when different from what the Plans specify.
 When extending pipe through the walls of small drainage structures, use
 pipe that is the same size and type, and conforms to the same requirements as the
 existing pipe with which it is to be connected. Use extensions of sufficient
 length to provide for connections and construction to prevent leakage of the pipe
 
 710—1
 
 and structure wall joint.
 When excavation for small drainage structures extends under pavement,
 curb, gutter, or sidewalk, backfill the excavation with dense graded aggregate or
 gravel base. For backfill under aprons around drop box inlets or similar
 structures, use dense graded aggregate or gravel base when required by the
 Standard Drawings. Use dense graded aggregate or gravel base backfill as the
 Engineer directs, and compact it in layers not exceeding 6 inches loose thickness.
 When structures abut rigid pavement, place 1/2 inch preformed joint filler
 between the rigid pavement and the structure for the full depth of the pavement.
 Construct concentric or eccentric concrete pipe cones for manholes
 according to the Standard Drawings. Use precast concrete, precast concrete pipe
 sections, and cast-in-place concrete, for manhole construction according to the
 Standard Drawings. Use precast concrete, precast concrete pipe sections, castin-place, brick, or plastic adjusting rings or for adjustment of existing manholes
 according to the Standard Specifications.
 The Department will allow the use of square outside cast-in-place bases in
 lieu of round bases.
 Form and construct a U-shaped channel in the base of circular pipe
 manholes with Class A concrete for a smooth continuation of the pipe. Do not
 allow the channel height to be less than 3/4 of the diameter of the smaller pipe
 that is intercepted.
 Construct the tops of box inlets specified in the Standard Drawings to the
 same cross slope as any existing or proposed shoulder, sidewalks, medians, or
 islands that will abut the box inlets.
 Install steps according to the Standard Drawings in all manholes 4 feet or
 greater in depth.
 Do not paint frames, grates, and lids made of structural steel or cast iron for
 any of the structures.
 B) Precast Structures Except Manholes. If furnishing precast structures, conform
 to the following requirements.
 Only furnish products manufactured by a precast producer listed in the
 Department’s List of Approved Materials. If the producer does not have an
 approved drawing for the product, submit 5 copies of shop drawings to the
 Engineer for review and approval. Ensure that the shop drawings show details of
 any variation from the Department’s Standard Drawings and include any special
 installation instructions necessary. Submit specifications for any special
 materials for joint construction with the shop drawings, and submit samples of
 joint materials when requested.
 Before beginning fabrication, furnish copies of the approved shop drawings
 to the Engineer.
 Use concrete that equals or exceeds the requirements for Class A concrete.
 Conform to Section 605 for the fabrication of the structures, the requirements for
 a mix design, and a Certified Concrete Technician.
 Set the precast structures on a foundation of at least 4 inches of dense
 graded aggregate compacted using mechanical tampers. Backfill box inlets with
 cantilevered portions to the elevation of the bottom of the cantilevered element,
 and place 4 inches of compacted dense graded aggregate before placing the
 cantilevered element.
 Make positive seals between the pipe and the precast structure, and between
 individual precast segments of the structure, in the field. Obtain any special
 materials required for joint construction from the structure fabricator at no
 additional expense to the Department.
 The Department will sample and test all materials used in manufacture of
 the precast elements, including cement, aggregates, water, admixtures, steel
 reinforcement, and galvanized metal items according to the Department’s
 standard procedures for these items. Do not begin fabrication until the
 Department has approved these materials.
 
 710—2
 
 Repair or replace structures damaged during handling, transporting,
 erecting, or backfilling, or any structure that cannot be placed satisfactorily, as
 the Engineer directs or approves.
 710.03.02 Reconstructed Small Drainage Structures. Reconstruct existing units to
 the required line and elevation according to the Standard Drawings. Recondition
 structures where work is in excess of the limits required for adjusting small drainage
 structures. Attach all cast iron grates and lids and all structural steel grates to the frames,
 or to the concrete in the event there is no frame, with a chain of sufficient length to permit
 removal for clean out and maintenance purposes.
 710.03.03 Adjusted Small Drainage Structures. Adjust existing frames and covers
 or gratings to the proper elevation. Accomplish this by removing or adding cast-in-place
 concrete masonry, precast reinforced concrete masonry, brick masonry, or an adjusting
 ring, for a vertical distance not to exceed one foot above or below the existing masonry,
 and replacing existing castings firmly and permanently in place. For plastic or rubber
 adjusting rings, install and seal according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 When the Contract specifies, use the Adjusting Ring Method as described in this
 section, for adjusting manhole castings to grade. When applicable, use the Adjusting Ring
 Method in lieu of the methods outlined in the preceding paragraph. Raise a casting by
 inserting an additional casting into the existing frame as follows:
 1)
 2)
 
 3)
 
 Use an adjusting casting of an approved type. Hold it rigidly to the existing
 frame using set screws in the bearing leg of the ring, or spot weld the adjusting
 ring to the existing frame in 4 equally spaced locations.
 Adjust existing manhole covers to the proper elevation by inserting variable
 height adjustable casting that the Engineer approves into the existing frame. Use
 an adjustable casting capable of diameter adjustment as well as vertical height
 adjustment.
 When the difference between the existing elevation and the proposed
 elevation is less than the outer thickness of the cover or grate plus 1/2 inch, insert
 a casting that provides for receiving a new casting that is 2 inches less in
 diameter in any horizontal measurement than the existing casting. Furnish a new
 cover or grate similar in design to the existing cover or grate, except for the
 diameter or other horizontal dimensions.
 Use a steel expanding manhole riser that is of the correct height and is designed
 to receive the existing manhole cover.
 
 Attach all cast iron grates and lids and all structural steel grates to the frames, or to
 the concrete in the event there is no frame, with a chain of sufficient length to permit
 removal for clean out and maintenance purposes.
 710.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 710.04.01 Newly Constructed Small Drainage Structures Except Type 12 Drop
 Box Inlets. The Department will measure the quantity by each individual unit. The
 Department will not measure any increase in the height of a structure to one foot from the
 Plan height for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work. The
 Department will measure for payment a change in height that exceeds one foot. The
 Department will measure the quantity of reinforcing steel and concrete placed in excess of
 the plan height plus one foot according to Subsections 602.04 and 601.04, respectively.
 The Department will not measure excavation or materials for backfill for payment and will
 consider them incidental to this item of work. The Department will not measure extra
 work or materials required for use of precast units and will consider them incidental to this
 item of work.
 710.04.02 Type 12 Drop Box Inlets. The Department will measure the quantity by
 
 710—3
 
 each individual unit according to Subsection 710.04.01, except the Department will
 measure the units in linear feet.
 710.04.03 Reconstructed Small Drainage Structures.
 measure the quantity by each individual unit.
 
 The Department will
 
 710.04.04 Adjusted Small Drainage Structures. The Department will measure the
 quantity by each individual unit.
 710.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 01432-01799
 
 Pay Item
 Newly Constructed Small Drainage Structure
 (except Type 12 Drop Box Inlets), Type, Size
 01709, 01719, Adjusting Small Drainage Structure, Type, Size(1)
 01792, 01791
 01633, 01708, Reconstructing Small Drainage Structure, Type, Size
 01720, 01789
 01547
 Drop Box Inlet, Type 12
 (1)
 
 Pay Unit
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot
 
 When small drainage structures that require adjusting exist on a project and
 there is not a bid item for adjusting small drainage structures, the Department
 will make payment according to Subsection 104.03.
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 710—4
 
 SECTION 711  PREFABRICATED VERTICAL WICK
 DRAINS
 711.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and place prefabricated vertical wick drains at the
 locations shown on the Plans.
 711.02
 
 MATERIALS. Conform to the Contract requirements.
 
 711.03 CONSTRUCTION.
 Stake the proposed location of the drains before
 installation. Do not vary the locations by more than 6 inches from those shown on the
 Plans. Maintain staked locations during construction. Install trial drains at locations
 within the work area. Demonstrate that all equipment and materials produce a satisfactory
 installation. Obtain approval from the Engineer that materials and installation procedures
 are satisfactory. Perform corrective action if trial drains are not accepted.
 Install the prefabricated wick drains with a protective mandrel or sleeve. Provide an
 anchor plate or similar arrangement at the bottom to prevent soil from entering the bottom
 of the mandrel during installation of the drain and to anchor the drain tip at the required
 depth. Advance the mandrel or sleeve by continuously pushing or vibrating into the soil
 and retract after each installation. The maximum cross sectional area of the mandrel or
 sleeve is 14 square inches, including the attached anchor. Pre-auger when mandrel or
 sleeve cannot be continuously pushed or vibrated and when the Engineer deems necessary.
 Use augers with a maximum outside diameter of 8 inches. Install the prefabricated wick
 drains vertically from the top of the working platform to the elevation shown on the plans.
 Ensure that plumbness of the drain does not deviate from the vertical more than 2 1/2
 inches in 10 feet. Provide the Engineer a means to verify plumbness of the equipment and
 the depth of the drain.
 Splice, no less than 6 inches, or connect the drain material according to the
 manufacturer’s recommendations to ensure continuity of flow. Limit splices to one per
 drain. Cut the drain flush with the upper surface of the working platform. Install the
 drains in a sequence that prevents travel over previously installed drains.
 Repair or replace drains that are more than 6 inches from the plan locations,
 improperly installed, or damaged during construction at no cost to the Department.
 Remove any auger cuttings or debris from the top of the working platform before
 continuing with fabric and fill placement over drains.
 711.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure prefabricated vertical wick
 drains in linear feet. The Department will not measure trial drains or pre-augering for
 payment and will consider it incidental Prefabricated Vertical Wick Drains.
 711.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02774
 
 Pay Item
 Prefabricated Wick Drain
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 711—1
 
 SECTION 712  RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS
 712.01
 
 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and install raised pavement markers.
 
 712.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 712.02.01 Markers. Use Type IV or Type V raised markers, as designated in the
 Contract, that conform to Section 840.
 712.02.02 Adhesives. Conform to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 712.03 CONSTRUCTION. Before installing the markers, furnish the manufacturer’s
 current recommendations for adhesives and installation procedures to the Engineer.
 Use one brand and design throughout the project for each type of marker required.
 The Contract or Standard Drawings will specify either mono-directional or bidirectional markers, and the marker color.
 Remove all excess adhesive from in front of the reflective faces.
 If any adhesive or foreign matter cannot be removed from the reflective faces, or if
 any marker fails to properly adhere to the pavement surface, remove and replace the
 marker.
 712.03.01 Type IV Markers. Before installing new markers, remove all portions of
 the existing Type IV marker, and all traces of adhesive, rust, and dirt from the casting, to
 the satisfaction of the Engineer. Abrasive blast or use other methods approved by the
 Engineer. Ensure that the casting surface is dry and free from dirt and other deleterious
 material before placing the marker in the casting.
 Place adhesive on the marker or casting in sufficient quantity to ensure complete
 coverage of the contact area with no voids present and with a slight excess after the
 marker is pressed in place.
 Firmly seat the marker in the casting with a minimum load of 100 pounds.
 Ensure that the pavement surface temperature is at or above 45 ºF at the time of
 application. Conform to a higher temperature if recommended by the adhesive
 manufacturer.
 712.03.02 Type V Markers. Install Type V Markers in slots cut into the pavement
 according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Do not cut the slots until the pavement
 has cured sufficiently to prevent tearing or raveling.
 Prepare the pavement surfaces, and install the markers according to the
 manufacturer’s recommendations and the following requirements. Remove all dirt,
 grease, oil, loose or unsound layers, and any other material from the marker area which
 would reduce the bond of the adhesive. Maintain pavement surfaces in a clean condition
 until placing markers. Ensure that the adhesive bed area is equal to the bottom area of the
 marker, and apply adhesive in sufficient quantity to force excess out around the entire
 perimeter of the marker. Use materials, equipment, and construction procedures that
 ensure proper adhesion of the markers to the pavement surface.
 712.03.03 Location and Spacing. Install markers as specified on the Standard
 Drawings. Do not install markers in bridge decks.
 Under no circumstances install a marker on top of a pavement joint or crack. Offset
 markers a minimum of 2 inches from any longitudinal pavement joint or crack and at least
 one inch from the painted stripe, ensuring that the finished line of markers is straight with
 minimal lateral deviation. Preference should be given to maintaining the 2-inch offset
 between marker and joint as opposed to keeping the line of markers straight. If conflicts
 between marker placement in relation to pavement joint and striping cannot be resolved,
 markers may be eliminated with the Engineer’s approval.
 Place Type V markers as much in line with existing pavement striping as possible.
 For facilities with double yellow centerlines, place markers between the 2 lines provided
 
 712—1
 
 the minimum 2-inch gap requirement between the marker and the longitudinal pavement
 joint or crack is not violated. For instances when the double yellow centerline may bound
 the longitudinal pavement joint or crack, use judgment to determine which side of the
 painted stripe would be suitable for marker installation. Place markers installed along an
 edgeline or channelizing line so that the near edge of the casting is no more than one inch
 from the near edge of the line. Place markers installed along a lane line or dashed yellow
 centerline between and in line with the dashes. Do not place markers over the lines except
 where the lines deviate visibly from their correct alignment, and then only when the
 Engineer approves the location.
 712.04 MEASUREMENT.
 individual unit.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity by each
 
 712.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 Pay Item
 06580-06584 Pavement Marker, Type IV (mono- or bi-directional, color)
 06589-06593 Pavement Marker, Type V (mono- or bi-directional, color)
 
 Pay Unit
 Each
 Each
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under the section.
 
 712—2
 
 SECTION 713  PERMANENT PAVEMENT STRIPING
 713.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and apply waterborne striping paint to provide lane
 lines, edgelines, and gore markings as specified in the Contract.
 713.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 713.02.01 Paint. Conform to Section 842 and Section 846.
 713.02.02 Drop On Glass Beads. Use beads that will ensure the pavement marking
 material will meet retroreflectivity requirements. The Department will evaluate the beads
 as part of the marking system through retroreflectivity readings.
 713.02.03 Application Equipment. Use a self-propelled striper capable of heating
 the paint to provide uniform flow. Ensure that the striper has a guide boom or optical
 pointer to attain smooth and straight lines. Ensure that the equipment maintains proper
 application pressures for paint and beads at all times. Provide equipment capable of
 applying a single line or parallel lines of the specified width and in any combination of a
 skip line and a solid line in one pass.
 Provide equipment with a paint cutoff device to provide clean, square marking ends
 of the paint lines.
 Equip the paint pots or tanks with an agitator that will keep the paint thoroughly
 mixed.
 Provide equipment with bead dispensers, minimum of one for each paint spray gun,
 placed such that the beads are applied to the paint almost instantly as the paint is being
 placed on the roadway surface. Design and align the bead dispensers so that beads are
 applied under air pressure uniformly to the entire surface of the paint lines. Equip the
 bead dispensers with cutoff controls synchronized with the cutoff controls for the paint
 spray guns.
 713.03 CONSTRUCTION. Provide yellow centerline markings, which are defined as
 those separating traffic moving in opposite directions. Provide white lane line markings,
 which are defined as those separating traffic moving in the same direction. Ensure that
 these markings are skip lines and solid lines as required by Part 3 of the MUTCD. Ensure
 that edge lines are solid lines, and determine the color from Part 3 of the MUTCD.
 On interstates and parkways, and other routes approved by the State Highway
 Engineer, install pavement striping that is 6 inches in width. On other routes, install
 pavement striping that is 4 inches in width. When centerline markings consist of a
 
 double yellow line (either a one-direction or two-direction no passing zone marking),
 the spacing between the two lines shall be the same as the width of one line marking.
 Ensure that all lines have clean edges with a width tolerance of plus 1/2 inch. The
 Engineer may waive the tolerances when deviations are caused by undulation in the
 pavement surface.
 Construct skip lines with a stripe-to-gap ratio of a 10-foot paint stripe to a 30-foot
 gap. Ensure that the length of the stripe is between 10 and 10 1/2 feet. Ensure that the
 stripe-gap cycle is between 40 and 40 1/2 feet. Offset longitudinal lines at least 2 inches
 from longitudinal pavement construction joints. Offset longitudinal lane lines on multilane highways 2 inches towards the median.
 On resurfacing, pavement restoration, and pavement rehabilitation projects, reinstall
 the recorded existing pavement markings as modified by the Engineer. On new
 construction, place the markings as the Contract specifies or as the Engineer directs.
 713.03.01
 Records.
 On resurfacing, pavement restoration, and pavement
 rehabilitation projects, prepare and keep a written record of the locations of existing
 pavement markings, and furnish a copy to the Engineer before removing or obliterating
 the markings.
 
 713—1
 
 713.03.02 Pavement Surface Preparation. Clean grease, oil, mud, dust, dirt, grass,
 loose gravel, or other deleterious material from the surface where pavement markings are
 to be applied. Use only Engineer approved cleaning methods.
 713.03.03 Paint Application. Apply permanent striping to new pavements when the
 final surface course has been placed and subsequent paving operations will not adversely
 impact the permanent striping. When subsequent paving operations will adversely impact
 the permanent striping, apply temporary striping according to Section 112.03.11 and apply
 the permanent striping as soon as conditions permit. Apply striping before sunset on
 new pavement that is to be driven over by the public.
 Comply with the following application rates.
 Material
 
 Paint Application Rate
 
 4 inch waterborne paint
 6 in waterborne paint
 6 inch durable waterborne
 paint
 
 Min. of 16.5 gallons/mile
 Min. of 24.8 gallons/mile
 Min. of 36 gallons/mile
 
 Glass Bead Application
 Rate
 Min. of 6 pounds/gallon
 Min. of 6 pounds/gallon
 Min. of 6 pounds/gallon
 
 713.03.04 Marking Removal. Remove all markings made in error or not
 conforming to the traffic operation in use. Do not paint with asphalt binder or other
 material to obliterate the markings. Remove pavement striping, temporary or permanent,
 from asphalt or concrete pavement using ultra-high pressure water. Marking removal
 totaling 1,000 linear feet or less may be removed by an abrasive method to the satisfaction
 of the Engineer. Vacuum all marking material and removal debris concurrently with
 
 the marking removal operation.
 Do not damage the pavement in any way and protect all joint seals. If damage is
 observed, stop the removal process until the operation can provide an acceptable marking
 removal. Repair any damage to the pavement as a result of the marking removal.
 Removal of marking will not be measured for payment.
 Waterblast to remove temporary or permanent striping completely as the Engineer
 directs.
 713.03.05 Proving Period. A proving period will follow the application of the
 permanent pavement striping. During this period, the Engineer will make such
 observations as are necessary to determine if the markings are acceptable. The proving
 period begins when the facility is opened to traffic.
 A) Requirements. The minimum retroreflectivity requirements at the end of the
 proving period, as measured with a Department approved 30 meter geometry
 
 handheld or mobile retroreflectometer, are as follows:
 White:
 Yellow:
 
 300 mcd/lux/square meter
 225 mcd/lux/square meter
 
 The Department will take these measurements between 30 and 60 days after
 the start of the proving period, with acceptance based on KM 202 or KM 203 as
 applicable. If the Department determines that the markings are acceptable, the
 installation of the markings will be considered complete.
 B) Failure. For any one-mile section and each gore area during the proving period,
 the Department will consider the section defective when the retroreflectivity falls
 below the minimum required. The Department will consider each edge line,
 centerline, lane line and gore area marking separately.
 C) Corrective Work. If a line is found to be defective, repair or remove and
 replace the line. Perform pavement marking replacement according to the
 
 713—2
 
 requirements specified in this subsection for the initial application.
 corrective work will be subject to a proving period as listed above.
 
 The
 
 713.03.06 Acceptance of Non-Specification Markings. If weather conditions allow,
 perform corrective work to bring striping retroreflectivity into conformance. If corrective
 work has been performed and the work meets all requirements except for minimum
 retroreflectivity, the Department may accept the work according to Subsection 105.04.
 When the Engineer determines that the markings may be left in place, the Department will
 accept them at a reduction in the Contract unit bid price according to the Acceptance Pay
 Schedule. Additionally, the Engineer may remove the striping crew for the remainder of
 the project according to Subsection 108.06 Part A).
 The Engineer may also apply this section when corrective work cannot be performed
 due to weather.
 ACCEPTANCE PAY SCHEDULE FOR PERMANENT STRIPING
 Pay Value
 White
 Yellow
 mcd/lux/square meter
 mcd/lux/square meter
 1.00
 ≥300
 ≥225
 0.50
 251-299
 176-224
 0.25
 226-250
 151-175
 0.00
 200-225
 125-150
 Remove and Replace
 < 200
 < 125
 713.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 713.04.01 Pavement Striping. The Department will measure the quantity in linear
 feet. When a bid item is not included for gore markings, the Department will measure the
 quantity by converting the actual length and width of line installed to an equivalent length
 of the normal width line on that section of roadway. The Department will measure
 temporary striping according to 112.04.07 when subsequent paving operations will
 adversely impact the permanent striping.
 713.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 06514-06517
 24189ER
 24190ER
 24191ER
 
 Pay Item
 Pavement Striping - Permanent Paint, Width
 Durable Waterborne Marking – 6 IN W
 Durable Waterborne Marking – 6 IN Y
 Durable Waterborne Marking – 12 IN W
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 713—3
 
 SECTION 714  DURABLE PAVEMENT STRIPING
 714.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and install durable marking materials, thermoplastic
 or Type I tape, to provide lane lines, edgelines, and gore markings as specified in the
 Contract.
 714.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 714.02.01 Thermoplastic. Conform to Section 837.
 714.02.02 Type I Tape. Conform to Section 836.
 714.02.03 Binder. Furnish a binder that the manufacturer of the pavement marking
 material recommends and the Engineer approves. Provide a binder that forms a
 continuous film that dries rapidly and adheres to the pavement. Provide a material that
 does not discolor or cause any noticeable change in the appearance of the pavement
 outside of the finished pavement marking. Submit the material and method of application
 to the Engineer and obtain written approval from the Engineer and the manufacturer of the
 pavement marking material before applying.
 714.02.04 Drop On Glass Beads. Use beads that will ensure the pavement marking
 material will meet retroreflectivity requirements. The Department will evaluate the beads
 as part of the marking system through retroreflectivity readings.
 714.02.05 Thermoplastic Application Equipment. Provide equipment with an
 extrusion die that simultaneously deposits and shapes lines at a minimum thickness of 90
 mils on the pavement surface. Do not use spray and ribbon gun applicators.
 Ensure the application equipment conforms to the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 
 Capable of providing continuous and uniform heat to maintain the material
 between 400 and 440 °F throughout the mixing, conveying, and dispensing.
 The kettle is capable of continuous agitation during mixing and heated storage
 and is equipped with an automatic thermostat control device and material
 thermometer.
 Motorized and capable of applying a uniform line at a rate of 3 mph.
 Equipped with a cutoff device that provides clean, square stripe ends.
 Equipped with an automatic bead dispenser.
 
 714.03 CONSTRUCTION. Provide yellow centerline markings, which are defined as
 those separating traffic moving in opposite directions. Provide white lane line markings,
 which are defined as those separating traffic moving in the same direction. Ensure that
 these markings are skip lines and solid lines as required by Part 3 of the MUTCD. Ensure
 that edge lines are solid lines, and determine the color from Part 3 of the MUTCD.
 Install pavement striping at the width specified in the Contract. Ensure that all lines
 have clean edges with a width tolerance of plus 1/2 inch. The Engineer may waive the
 tolerances when deviations are caused by undulation in the pavement surface.
 Construct skip lines with a stripe-to-gap ratio of a 10-foot stripe to a 30-foot gap.
 Ensure that the length of the stripe is between 10 and 10.5 feet. Ensure that the stripe-gap
 cycle is between 40 and 40.5 feet.
 Use Type I Tape for markings on bridge decks, JPC pavement and JPC intersections.
 Do not use thermoplastic materials on bridge decks, JPC pavement and JPC intersections.
 714.03.01 Layout. Install all pavement markings according to Part 3 of the MUTCD
 and the following requirements.
 
 714—1
 
 Make the width of lane lines and edgelines as specified in the Plans or as the
 Engineer directs. Make lines for gore area markings twice the normal width line for that
 section of roadway.
 Unless striping plans are included in the proposal or otherwise directed by the
 Engineer, install gore area markings as shown in Figures 3B-8 and 3B-9 of the MUTCD.
 Do not use the optional markings shown (transverse lines in the neutral area and dotted
 extension of the right edgeline).
 Due to the possibility that water may be retained on the roadway by the thermoplastic
 edgelines, place a one foot gap every 20 feet in all thermoplastic edgelines. Do not install
 gaps for taped edgelines.
 Offset longitudinal lines at least 2 inches from longitudinal pavement construction
 joints. Offset longitudinal lane lines on multi-lane highways 2 inches towards the median.
 On resurfacing, pavement restoration, and pavement rehabilitation projects, prepare
 and keep a written record of the locations of existing pavement markings, and furnish a
 copy to the Engineer before removing or obliterating the markings. The Engineer will
 notify you of any changes to the existing markings.
 Before applying the pavement marking material, pre-mark the pavement surface and
 obtain the Engineer’s approval of the proposed location, alignment, and control guides.
 714.03.02 Surface Preparation.
 1)
 
 2)
 
 3)
 
 4)
 
 5)
 6)
 7)
 
 Remove existing pavement markings and clean grease, oil, mud, dust, dirt, grass,
 loose gravel, or other deleterious material from the surface where pavement
 markings are to be applied, as directed by, and by methods acceptable to, the
 Engineer.
 Remove the existing pavement markings until a minimum of 90 percent of the
 pavement surface is uniformly exposed throughout. Ensure that the pavement
 surface is in proper condition for successful bonding of the pavement markings
 and provides a neat appearance. Do not leave any loose or flaking existing
 pavement markings.
 When removing the existing pavement markings, ensure that the finished
 pavement surface is not damaged or left in a condition that may mislead or
 misdirect the motorist. Repair any damage to the pavement, pavement joint
 materials, or the pavement surface caused by the removal of the existing
 pavement markings in a manner acceptable to the Engineer. After completing
 these operations, use compressed air to blow clean the pavement surface of
 residue and debris resulting from the removal of existing pavement markings.
 When removal of existing pavement markings and objectionable materials
 obscures existing pavement markings of a lane occupied by public traffic,
 immediately remove the residue, including dust, from the surface being treated.
 Obtain the Engineer’s approval of the removal methods.
 Place the final pavement markings on the same day that the existing pavement
 markings are removed.
 On concrete surfaces and as the Engineer directs on older asphalt pavements,
 apply binder to the area where placing pavement marking material.
 On new concrete pavement surfaces, remove the curing compound from the
 pavement surface before applying the binder and the pavement marking material.
 
 714.03.03 Application.
 A) Type I Tape. Apply according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. When
 applied to concrete, cut the tape at all joints.
 B) Thermoplastic. Rather than installing thermoplastic pavement markings on
 fresh asphalt, the Department will allow temporary striping with paint. When
 choosing this option, cover the temporary striping with the thermoplastic
 pavement markings within 30 calendar days. The Department will not require
 
 714—2
 
 removal of the interim pavement marking paint before applying the
 thermoplastic pavement markings.
 Install the thermoplastic material at a minimum thickness of 90 mils on the
 pavement surface in a melted state at a temperature from 400 and 440 °F.
 Apply additional glass beads by drop-on or pressure spray methods in
 sufficient quantities to obtain the retroreflectivity requirements specified in
 Subsection 714.03.06.
 Verify the adhesion of the thermoplastic to asphalt pavements by
 performing bond checks, at least 4 per mile of line, as follows. Approximately
 60 to 120 seconds after applying a thermoplastic line to the roadway surface, cut
 and lift approximately a 6-inch section of thermoplastic. The thermoplastic is
 successfully bonding to the pavement surface if a layer of asphalt clings to the
 removed thermoplastic stripe and the pavement surface under the removed stripe
 is shiny and black.
 Provide finished markings that are continuous and uniform in shape, having
 clear and sharp dimensions. Ensure that all lines have well-defined edges.
 714.03.04 Restrictions. Do not apply the pavement marking material when air and
 pavement temperatures are below 50 °F.
 Do not apply the pavement marking material when the surface of the pavement
 contains evidence of moisture in amounts significant enough to prevent the pavement
 marking material from bonding to the pavement. Significant amounts of moisture can be
 caused by heavy dew or very humid nights as well as from rainfall.
 If encountering significant amounts of moisture while applying the thermoplastic, the
 Contractor, at his own risk, may attempt to apply thermoplastic subject to the following
 restrictions. Heat the thermoplastic material to the upper temperature limit specified by
 the manufacturer, and apply a test line on the pavement. Perform a bond check according
 to Subsection 714.03.03. If the thermoplastic successfully bonds to the pavement continue
 to apply thermoplastic lines, provided there is evidence that the moisture is escaping
 through the surface of the line, as indicated by very small pin holes. If there is excessive
 moisture, as indicated by larger sized holes or bubbles on the surface of the line, do not
 apply thermoplastic until the moisture can be effectively dealt with. Perform a sufficient
 number of bond checks to ensure that the thermoplastic is bonding to the pavement.
 714.03.05 Project Conflicts. When other construction projects are in progress
 within the limits of the designated work areas, install no pavement markings that will be
 removed or damaged by immediate subsequent construction. The Engineer will give
 notification of all conflicting construction projects. Schedule the installation of pavement
 markings after completion of the conflicting construction. When scheduling is impossible
 or creates an undue hardship, the Engineer will delete the intersection from this project.
 714.03.06 Proving Period for Durable Markings. A 180 day proving period will
 follow the application of the durable markings. During this period, the Engineer will
 make such observations as are necessary to determine if the markings are acceptable. The
 proving period begins when the facility is opened to traffic.
 A) Requirements.
 1)
 
 Type I Tape. During the proving period, ensure that the pavement marking
 material shows no signs of failure due to blistering, excessive cracking,
 bleeding, staining, discoloration, oil content of the pavement materials,
 deterioration due to contact with grease deposits, oil, diesel fuel, or gasoline
 drippings, chipping, spalling, poor adhesion to the pavement, loss of
 retroreflectivity, vehicular damage, and normal wear. Type I Tape is
 manufactured off site and warranted by the manufacturer to meet certain
 retroreflective requirements. As long as the material is adequately bonded
 to the surface and shows no sign of failure due to the other items listed in
 
 714—3
 
 2)
 
 Subsection 714.03.06 A) 1), retroreflectivity readings will not be required.
 In the absence of readings, the Department will accept tape based on a
 nighttime visual observation.
 Thermoplastic. During the proving period, ensure that the thermoplastic
 pavement marking material shows no signs of failure due to blistering,
 excessive cracking, bleeding, staining, discoloration, oil content of the
 pavement materials, smearing or spreading under heat, deterioration due to
 contact with grease deposits, oil, diesel fuel, or gasoline drippings, chipping,
 spalling, poor adhesion to the pavement materials, loss of retroreflectivity,
 vehicular damage and normal wear.
 The minimum retroreflectivity requirements at the end of the proving
 period, as measured with a Department approved 30 meter geometry
 
 handheld or mobile retroreflectometer, are as follows:
 White:
 Yellow:
 
 300 mcd/lux/square meter
 225 mcd/lux/square meter
 
 The Department will take these measurements between 150 and 210
 days after the start of the proving period, with acceptance based on KM 202
 or KM 203 as applicable. If the Department determines that the markings
 are acceptable, the installation of the markings will be considered complete.
 B) Failure. During the proving period, the Department will consider markings
 defective when the retroreflectivity falls below the minimum required or the
 material fails to meet the other requirements of A) above. Additionally, when
 more than 10 percent of any one-mile section or individual gore area is defective,
 the Department will consider the entire section defective. The Department will
 consider each edge line, centerline, lane line and gore area marking separately.
 C) Corrective Work. If a line is found to be defective, repair or remove and
 replace the line. Perform pavement marking replacement according to the
 requirements specified in this subsection for the initial application. The
 corrective work will be subject to a proving period as listed above.
 714.03.07 Marking Removal. Remove all markings made in error or not
 conforming to the traffic operation in use. Do not paint with asphalt binder or other
 material to obliterate the markings. Remove pavement striping, temporary or permanent,
 from asphalt or concrete pavement using ultra-high pressure water. Marking removal
 totaling 1,000 linear feet or less may be removed by an abrasive method to the satisfaction
 of the Engineer. Vacuum all marking material and removal debris concurrently with
 
 the marking removal operation.
 Do not damage the pavement in any way and protect all joint seals. If damage is
 observed, stop the removal process until the operation can provide an acceptable marking
 removal. Repair any damage to the pavement as a result of the marking removal.
 Removal of marking will not be measured for payment.
 714.03.08 Acceptance of Non-Specification Thermoplastic Markings. When
 reasonably acceptable work has been produced but retroreflectivity requirements are not
 met, the Department may accept the work according to Subsection 105.04. When the
 Engineer determines that the markings may be left in place, the Department will accept
 them at a reduction in the Contract unit bid price according to Acceptance Pay Schedule
 for Thermoplastic.
 714.04 MEASUREMENT. When a bid item is not included for gore markings, the
 Department will measure the quantity by converting the actual length and width of line
 installed to an equivalent length of the normal width line on that section of roadway.
 
 714—4
 
 714.04.01 Thermoplastic Pavement Markings. The Department will measure for
 payment by the units listed in the Quantity Summary. The Department will not measure
 sampling, testing, surface preparation, pre-marking, interim marking, and binder
 application for payment and will consider them incidental to the thermoplastic bid items.
 The Department will not measure corrective work for payment.
 714.04.02 Durable Pavement Markings, Type I. The Department will measure for
 payment by the units listed in the Quantity Summary. The Department will not measure
 sampling, testing, surface preparation, pre-marking, and binder application for payment
 and will consider them incidental to the pavement marking bid items. Corrective work
 will not be measured for payment.
 714.04.03 Pavement Striping Removal. When listed as a bid item, the Department
 will measure for payment by the units listed in the Quantity Summary. The Department
 will not measure for payment the removal of existing pavement markings that have not
 been authorized by the Engineer. When the Contract does not list a bid item, the
 Department will consider existing pavement marking removal incidental to the other
 pavement marking bid items. The Department will not measure for payment any
 corrective work required due to the removal work.
 714.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment upon completion of the work.
 If after the proving period the markings do not meet minimum retroreflectivity
 requirements, the Department will adjust the payment or require corrective work
 according to the following:
 ACCEPTANCE PAY SCHEDULE FOR THERMOPLASTIC
 Pay Value
 White
 Yellow
 mcd/lux/square meter
 mcd/lux/square meter
 1.00
 ≥300
 ≥225
 0.50
 251-299
 176-224
 0.25
 226-250
 151-175
 0.00
 200-225
 125-150
 Remove and Replace
 < 200
 < 125
 Code
 06540-06547
 06554-06561
 
 Pay Item
 Pavement Striping - Thermoplastic, width, color
 Pavement Striping - Durable Type I Tape, width, color
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 714—5
 
 SECTION 715  PANEL TRAFFIC SIGNS
 715.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and install extruded panel traffic signs. Traffic signs
 include ground mounted, overhead structure mounted, or bridge mounted signs.
 715.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 715.02.01 Panel Signs. Conform to Section 833.
 715.02.02 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 715.02.03 Steel Reinforcement. Conform to Section 602.
 715.02.04 Structural Steel. Conform to Section 812.
 715.02.05 Miscellaneous Metals. Conform to Section 813.
 715.02.06 Retroreflective Materials. Conform to Section 830.
 715.02.07 “Pop” Fasteners. Use corrosion resistant protruding head “pop” rivets
 with a minimum diameter of 1/8 inch. Obtain the Engineer’s approval before use.
 715.03 CONSTRUCTION. The Department may inspect fabrication and erection
 work. The Department will perform a day and night inspection after the installation is
 complete.
 If a manufacturer provides a warranty on any materials covered under these
 specifications, furnish the same warranty to the State. Perform the work according to the
 requirements specified in the following publications:
 •
 •
 •
 •
 
 MUTCD
 AASHTO Specifications for Design and Construction of Structural Supports for
 Highway Signs
 Federal Standard 595, Standard Highway Sign Colors
 Standard Highway Signs
 Use Class A concrete according to Subsection 601.03.
 
 715.03.01 Location. Use the Plans as general guidance for the extent and general
 arrangement of signs. Consider sign locations specified in the Plans as approximate only.
 Determine the exact location for each sign and obtain the Engineer’s approval. When it is
 necessary to relocate any sign more than 25 feet from the station listed, obtain the Division
 of Traffic’s approval. Center overhead signs over the lane or lanes to which they apply.
 Allow for differences in elevation across the full shoulder width, as specified in the Plans,
 in maintaining the required 18-foot minimum vertical clearance to the bottom of the
 lowest parts of the signs or supports for overhead signs. Submit all proposed revisions in
 writing to the Engineer for written approval.
 715.03.02 Messages. Sign messages specified in the Plans are the final messages.
 Due to construction phasing, the Engineer may make changes in some messages. If the
 Engineer changes a message before the sign installation store the final message copy on
 the project. Conform message spacing to the applicable requirements of the previously
 cited publications for guide signs, and the manufacturer’s recommendations for sign sizes
 indicated, as the Engineer approves. Center message copy over the lane or lanes to which
 they apply.
 715.03.03 Attachment. Attach letters, symbols, numbers, and borders to sign faces
 with “pop” fasteners (“pop” rivets).
 
 715—1
 
 715.03.04 Shields. For panel sign mounted route markers, use a retroreflectorized
 white cut-out for the US shield and KY round shape, omitting the black background of the
 standard rectangular shapes. Do not use borders on the cut-out shapes. Use the
 dimensions shown in the Standard Highway Signs Manual. Space route markers evenly
 across the panel sign face. Provide Route Markers for panel signs that meet the
 specification requirements for Type VII, VIII or IX Class I of ASTM D 4956, and that
 consist of reflective sheeting having an integral air cavity between the front surface and
 the optical elements, mounted on fully covering aluminum base copy stock not otherwise
 embossed or crimped, but having a minimum thickness of 0.080 inches.
 715.03.05 Covering. Cover sign faces only when absolutely necessary and keep
 covered only as long as necessary. Do not use tape, paper, plastic, or sheet metal covers.
 Replace any signs damaged as a result of being covered at no expense to the Department.
 715.03.06 Shop Drawings. Submit 5 complete sets of detailed shop drawings to the
 Engineer for written approval before fabricating signs. Before installation, obtain the
 Engineer’s written approval of drawings, descriptions, manufacturer’s cuts, etc. covering
 all materials to be used. Submit mill test reports for I-beams, wide flange beams,
 aluminum or steel panels, and each different gauge of aluminum or steel sheeting used to
 the Engineer for approval before installation.
 715.03.07 Fabrication. Hot dip galvanize all steel components after completing
 fabrication. Regalvanize or paint all abraded or damaged surfaces with 2 coats of
 commercially available zinc rich paint.
 Ensure that sign structures are free from kinks, twists, or bends and are uniform in
 appearance. Assemble completed sections in the shop and check them for straightness,
 alignment, and dimensions. Correct any irregularities.
 Consider sign post lengths as approximate only. Conform to the applicable
 requirements contained in AWS for welded fabrication.
 715.03.08 Footings, Bases, and Pedestals. Provide protection for traffic during
 construction of concrete bases for overhead sign structures.
 Exercise caution during any excavation to prevent damaging existing utilities whether
 specified or not specified in the Plans. Repair or replace any utilities that are disturbed or
 damaged during construction at no additional expense to the Department. Provide the
 Engineer the opportunity to inspect repairs to damaged utilities before covering the
 repairs.
 Construct footings and bases according to Subsection 601.03. The Department will
 allow construction of footings against undisturbed earth without forms, unless otherwise
 directed. Slope top surfaces of bases and pedestals to provide for drainage. Provide an
 ordinary surface finish for all exposed concrete. Construct a rustication groove in all
 pedestals. Cure concrete according to Subsection 601.03.17.
 Remove beam sign supports concurrently with the relocation of affected signs to new
 supports. Grade, to the existing slope, any areas disturbed by removing existing signs or
 constructing new signs, and reseed as the Engineer directs.
 715.03.09 Sign Beams and Supports. Use beams of sufficient length to extend
 from the top of the sign to the required base embedment. Use either Type A (standard
 fixed beam installation) or Type B (uni-directional break-away beam installation) or Type
 C (omni-directional break-a-way beam installation) as specified in the Plans. Embed Type
 "A" and Type "B" beams in concrete to a depth equal to the dimension "a" as indicated for
 each sign. Provide a concrete footing for Type "C" beams according to the design on the
 Type "C" beam sheets.
 Wait 7 calendar days after placing concrete before mounting beams and supports to
 the bases or pedestals. Where aluminum is in contact with concrete, thoroughly coat the
 contacting surface with alumilastic compound or an approved equal in order to completely
 
 715—2
 
 insulate the aluminum from the concrete. Where bond between the aluminum and
 concrete is desired, coat the aluminum with commercially available zinc chromate paint,
 and allow it to dry before installation.
 A) Type A Beam. Furnish A 36 steel beams galvanized according to ASTM A 123.
 B) Type B Beam. Specifications for Type B uni-directional break-a-way beams are
 listed on the detail sheet for Type “B” beams. Specifications for Type B beams
 are listed on the break-away detail sheet.
 C) Type C Beam. Specifications for Type C omni-directional break-a-way beams
 are listed on the details sheets for Type “C” beams.
 715.03.10 Bridge Mounting for Signs. Do not install brackets for support of bridge
 mounted signs within 6 inches of open joints in concrete handrail plinths. The Department
 will allow moving of supports to clear handrail posts. Place sign brackets on 4-foot
 maximum centers with a 2-foot maximum sign overhang.
 When necessary, remove existing handrails to drill anchor bolt holes. Reinstall
 handrails after drilling. Locate bolt holes drilled in prestressed concrete beams to not
 interfere with steel strands. Drill holes for concrete beams with a rotary type core drill. Do
 not use impact type drills. Install bolts with expansion plugs and lock washers in the holes
 and fill the void between the plug and face of the concrete with non-shrinking grout.
 715.03.11 Mounting Signs. Install new concrete bases, support beams, etc. before
 dismantling any existing sign. When existing signs are to be out of service for more than
 one work shift, install temporary signing of the proper color, shape, and with copy of
 similar configuration to existing signs at the same approximate station as the out of service
 sign. Install sign panels on sign structures, beams, or bridge mounted brackets as
 specified in the Plans. Delay installation as long as possible to avoid any damage to the
 sign. Replace all damaged signs.
 715.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 715.04.01 Concrete. The Department will measure according to Subsection 601.04.
 715.04.02 Steel Reinforcement.
 Subsection 602.04.
 
 The Department will measure according to
 
 715.04.03 Sign Supports. The Department will measure the quantity by each
 individual unit.
 The Department will not measure clearing and grubbing, excavation, electrical
 conduit and ground rods located in support bases, and temporary panel signing for
 payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 715.04.04 Beams. The Department will measure the quantity in pounds.
 715.04.05 Bridge Mounted Sign Fixtures. The Department will measure the
 quantity by each individual unit. A unit is as all material necessary for mounting a bridge
 mounted sign of given size.
 715.04.06 Sign Panels. The Department will measure the quantity in square feet for
 each size and type.
 715.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 06490
 
 Pay Item
 Class A Concrete for Signs
 
 715—3
 
 Pay Unit
 See Subsection 601.05
 
 06491
 06416-06426, 06436,
 06438, 06443, 06445
 06400, 06440, 06441
 06402
 06448
 06405-06409
 
 Steel Reinforcement for Signs
 Sign Supports, Size and Type
 
 See Subsection 602.05
 Each
 
 GMSS Galvanized Steel, Type
 GMSS Aluminum
 Sign Bridge Attachment Bracket
 Sign Panels, Type and Size
 
 Pound
 Pound
 Each
 Square Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 715—4
 
 SECTION 716  ROADWAY LIGHTING SYSTEMS
 716.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish, install, and connect roadway lighting systems, with
 accessories according to the Contract.
 716.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 716.02.01 Roadway Lighting Materials. Conform to Section 834. Obtain the
 Engineer’s approval for all materials before installation. Submit for material approval an
 electronic file of descriptive literature, drawings, and any requested design data to the
 Division of Traffic Operations. Do not begin work until shop drawings are approved.
 Notify the Engineer when submitting any information to the Division of Traffic
 Operations. Do not make substitutions for approved materials without written permission
 as described above.
 716.02.02 Paint. Conform to Sections 821 and 834.
 716.02.03 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 716.03
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 8)
 9)
 
 CONSTRUCTION. Perform the work according to:
 
 the Contract,
 Kentucky Department of Highways, Standard Drawings,
 National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 70: National Electrical Code,
 Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE), National Electrical Safety
 Code,
 AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs,
 Luminaires and Traffic Signals, 2009 edition,
 AASHTO Roadside Design Guide,
 AASHTO Roadway Lighting Design Guide, 2005 edition,
 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways current
 edition, and
 the standards of the utility company servicing the installation.
 
 The Plans indicate the extent and general arrangement of the lighting circuits and
 equipment and are for general guidance. Advise the Engineer in writing and obtain
 written approval for any necessary modifications. Stake pole locations and obtain the
 Engineer’s approval.
 716.03.01 Utility Requirements. Contact all utility companies and the district utility
 agent before any holes are dug or set to insure proper clearance and shielding from
 existing or proposed utility lines. Before ordering materials, confirm the type and location
 of the service available from the utility company.
 After completing the installation and before the electrical service is connected, obtain
 a certificate of compliance from the Kentucky Department of Housing, Buildings and
 Construction, Electrical Inspection Division. Coordinate with the Kentucky Department
 of Housing, Buildings and Construction, Electrical Inspection Division, to ensure the
 cabinet and all components within are approved as an assembly.
 716.03.02 Lighting Standard Installation. Locate poles to avoid trees, drainage,
 structures, etc. Regardless of the station & offset noted, located all poles/bases behind
 guardrail a minimum of 4 feet behind the face of the guardrail. All poles shall be placed
 
 as close to stations and offsets as stated on plans to provide proper illumination. If
 any pole needs to be located more than 20'from stations indicated, Division of Traffic
 Operations shall be contacted. When submitting brochures for suggested luminaries
 716—1
 
 include iso lux curves, IES type distribution, lamp lumens, and typical ballast factor used
 for each type of luminaire. Submit the photometric data is IES format in a digital format
 to Central Office, Division of Traffic Operations. Include with the submittal a point of
 contact and phone number to answer technical questions about the luminaire.
 A) Conventional Installation. Install each conventional pole as noted on plans and
 have luminaires with light patterns as indicated. Orient luminaires as shown in
 plans. Orient the transformer base door though the backside. The Department
 will allow steel plates or washers between the nuts and the transformer base or
 pole for stabilization and shims to plumb the pole for gaps up to 1/4 inch.
 1)
 
 Breakaway Installation and Requirements. For breakaway supports,
 conform to Section 7 of the Standard Specifications for Structural
 Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaires, and Traffic Signals 2009
 Edition. Grade the surrounding surface appropriately to meet the 4inch breakaway support stub height. This stub height includes the pole
 base, conduits, and the anchors bolts.
 
 2)
 
 Concrete Base Installation. Ensure that concrete bases for lighting up
 to 50 feet high, have a minimum depth of 6 feet and a minimum
 diameter of 2 feet. Construct a level base, with no more than a 3/8-inch
 gap existing between the concrete base and the transformer base when
 the pole is plumbed.
 
 3)
 
 Require Time to Apply Loads on Concrete Structures. See Section
 601.03.15
 
 B) High Mast Installation. Install each conventional pole as noted on plan. Install
 each high mast pole on a separate circuit and have luminaires with light patterns
 as indicated. Orient luminaires as shown in plans. Orient the axis of the winch
 drum along the north- south axis. Top nuts shall be tightened to one-sixth turn
 beyond snug-tight. Snug-tight is defined as the condition where the nut is in full
 contact with the base plate. It is assumed that the full effort of a workman on a
 12-inch wrench results in a snug-tight condition.
 The clearance between the bottom of the leveling nuts and the top of the concrete
 foundation shall not exceed one bolt diameter.
 1)
 
 Breakaway Installation and Requirements. Highmast poles shall not
 be installed on break away supports.
 
 2)
 
 Concrete Base Installation. Drilled shaft depth shall be based on the
 soil conditions encountered during drilling and slope condition at the
 site. Refer to the design chart below.
 
 716—2
 
 Drilled Shaft Depth
 Data
 3:1 Ground
 Slope
 
 Level Ground
 
 2:1 Ground Slope
 
 1.5:1 Ground Slope (2)
 
 Soil
 
 Rock
 
 Soil
 
 Rock
 
 Soil
 
 Rock
 
 Soil
 
 Rock
 
 17 ft
 
 7 ft
 
 19 ft
 
 7 ft
 
 20 ft
 
 7 ft
 
 Note 1
 
 7 ft
 
 Steel Requirements
 Vertical Bars
 
 Ties or Spiral
 
 Size
 
 Total
 
 Size
 
 Spacing or Pitch
 
 #10
 
 16
 
 #4
 
 12 inch
 
 Note 1: Shaft length is 22' for cohesive soil only. For cohesionless soil, contact
 geotechnical branch for design.
 (2): Do not construct high mast drilled shafts on ground slopes steeper than 1.5:1
 without the approval of the Division of Traffic.
 
 If rock is encountered during drilling operations and confirmed by the engineer
 to be of sound quality, the shaft is only required to be further advanced into the
 rock by the length of rock socket shown in the table. The total length of the shaft
 need not be longer than that of soil alone. Both longitudinal rebar length and
 number of ties or spiral length shall be adjusted accordingly.
 If a shorter depth is desired for the drilled shaft, the contractor shall provide, for
 the state's review and approval, a detailed column design with individual site
 specific soil and rock analysis performed and approved by a registered
 professional engineer.
 Spiral reinforcement may be substituted for ties. If spiral reinforcement is used,
 one and one-half closed coils shall be provided at the ends of each spiral unit.
 Subsurface conditions consisting of very soft clay or very loose saturated sand
 could result in soil parameters weaker than those assumed. engineer shall
 consult with the geotechnical branch if such conditions are encountered.
 The bottom of the drilled hole shall be firm and thoroughly cleaned so no loose
 or compressible materials are present at the time of the concrete placement.
 If the drilled hole contains standing water, the concrete shall be placed using a
 tremie to displace water. Continuous concrete flow will be required to insure
 full displacement of any water.
 The reinforcement and anchor bolts shall be adequately supported in the proper
 positions so no movement occurs during concrete placement.
 Welding of anchor bolts to the reinforcing cage is unacceptable, templates shall
 be used.
 Exposed portions of the foundation shall be formed to create a smooth finished
 surface. All forming shall be removed upon completion of foundation
 construction.
 3)
 
 Splicing of reinforcement. See section 602.03.06. Splicing of vertical
 reinforcement shall be CLASS C. When a drilled shaft is lengthened
 
 716—3
 
 in the field, the splice location shall be made at the bottom of the
 reinforcement cage.
 4)
 
 Require Time to Apply Loads on Concrete Structures. See Section
 601.03.15
 
 5)
 
 Highmast Inspection. Each lowering device shall be inspected by a
 representative of the manufacturer of the lowering device prior to final
 acceptance of the project by the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet. The
 contractor shall submit a letter from the manufacturer that this
 inspection has been preformed and that the lowering device has been
 installed according to the manufacturer requirements to the Division of
 Traffic Operations. The letter shall be on the company’s letterhead and
 signed by the representatives from the company that preformed the
 inspection. If the lowering device is not installed according to the
 manufacturer requirements, the contractor shall install according the
 manufacturer requirements.
 
 716.03.03 Trenching.
 A) Trenching of Conduit for Highmast Ducted Cables. Trench and lay
 conduit for ducted cables to a depth at least 24 inches below grade.
 B) Trenching of Conduit for Non-Highmast Cables. Lay conduit not
 subjected to traffic to a depth at least 18 inches below grade. On
 transverse crossings under roadway surfaces and shoulders, place the
 conduit (as specified in Contract) at a depth of no less than 24 inches
 below grade. Make all pavement crossings by placing conduit in the
 subgrade before paving or by boring and jacking under existing
 pavements. When it is necessary to bore under roadways and ramps,
 obtain the Engineer’s approval of the boring procedure. Do not cut any
 pavement without obtaining the Engineer’s prior approval.
 716.03.04 Conduit Installation. Provide rigid steel conduit encasement for all
 conductors except as specified in the Contracts. Provide conduit that is listed on the “List
 of Approved Materials” on the Division of Materials website. Ream all conduit ends to
 remove burrs and sharp edges. Ensure that conduit bends have a radius of not less than 12
 times the nominal diameter of the conduit. Cap spare conduits on both ends with test/pipe
 plugs. Conduit locations are schematic only. Provide exact locations approved by the
 Engineer and denoted on the as-built plans.
 A) Conduit Requirements in Junction Boxes. Provide conduits that are
 installed 4 inches from the bottom of the junction box. Install conduit
 inside the junction box with 90 degree conduit elbow. Provide conduits
 that are accessible inside Junction boxes.
 1)
 
 Highmast Ducted Cable. Install conduit inside the junction
 box that go straight through and shall be 4” from the bottom
 and 4inch from the side of the junction box. The conduit and
 ducted cable shall be accessible inside junction boxes.
 
 B) Barrier Wall Installation. The Department will allow bonded slip
 joints for joining rigid conduit to junction boxes in barrier wall.
 C) Highmast Ducted Cables. Run ducted cables inside 3inch rigid steel
 conduits, or other Engineer approved methods, when crossing
 
 716—4
 
 roadways. Run only one ducted cable through each 3inch rigid steel
 conduit.
 D) Coupling Installation. When a standard coupling cannot be used, use
 an approved threaded union coupling.
 E) Bonding Requirements. Bond together conduits, junction boxes,
 metal poles, and control boxes throughout the lighting system to all
 ground rods by using grounding bushings on the conduit ends. Bond
 these conduits to the electrical system ground.
 F) Painting. Paint damaged portions of galvanized surfaces and untreated
 threads resulting from field cuts with an Engineer approved rust
 prohibitive paint.
 716.03.05 Underground Warning Tape. Install underground utility warning
 tape immediately above the circuit cables. Bury the tape at a depth of 6 to 10 inches.
 716.03.06 Backfilling and Disturbed Areas. Before starting backfilling
 operations, allow the Engineer to inspect the conduit installation. Place and compact the
 backfill materials in lifts of 9 inches or less. Restore all disturbed areas as a result of the
 Contractor’s operations to the Engineer’s satisfaction.
 716.03.07 Wiring Installation. Where installing more than one circuit within
 the same conduit, affix permanent circuit identification numbers to the wires wherever the
 wiring emerges, including junction boxes, poles, transformer bases, and control cabinets.
 Run all cable or wire splice-free from the controller to each pole the cable or wire is
 feeding.
 716.03.08 Splicing. Permission to splice is determined by the Division of
 Traffic Operations and the locations shall be shown on the layout sheet. If splicing is
 needed but not shown on the layout sheet, receive prior approval from the Division of
 Traffic Operations through the Engineer. When the Engineer allows splicing, splice only
 in junction boxes, in transformer bases, or in the pole when no transformer base is
 provided. Where specifically allowed by the plans, ensure the splices are of the correct
 size for the wire being used.
 716.03.09 Fused Connector Kits. Install inside transformer base, barrier wall
 junction box, junction box or as noted on the plans.
 716.03.10 Junction Boxes. Place junction boxes in locations to avoid standing
 water and ditch lines. Where required, junction box shall be oriented such that the
 dimensions comply with the National Electrical Code. Any additional junction boxes
 must be approved by the Engineer.
 716.03.11 Grounding Installation. Ground all conduits, poles, pedestals, the
 controller cabinet, and the service according to the plans. Separate all ground rods by a
 minimum of 6 feet. Ensure the top of the ground rod is a minimum of 3 inches below
 finished grade.
 716.03.12 Marker Installation. When specified in the Contract, mark the
 position of buried circuits with concrete slab markers. Install cable markers immediately
 above the cable. Place the markers with the top exposed approximately one inch above
 ground. Mark each cable run at approximately 100-yard increments between junction
 boxes and/or light poles, with additional markers at each change of direction. Install
 concrete slab markers at the end of the conduits crossing a roadway if a junction box is not
 present.
 716.03.13 Temporary Lighting. The contractor shall furnish and install all
 materials necessary to light the proposed roadway to design standards in section
 
 716—5
 
 716.03. The contractor shall submit his proposed design of temporary lighting to the
 engineer for approval at least 30 days before installation.
 716.03.14 Remove Lighting. Transformers not owned by a utility shall be
 tested for PCB's and disposed of in accordance with state regulations. Pole base shall
 be removed a minimum of 1 foot below finished grade. Chipping off or other method
 that is approved by the engineer may be used. Contractor shall backfill hole with
 material approved by the engineer. Incidental to this item shall be the removal of all
 materials off the project. All salvageable poles, brackets, transformer bases and
 luminaires shall be returned to the district pole yard or as instructed by the engineer.
 716.03.15 Painting.
 Clean ungalvanized or damaged surfaces of exposed
 junction boxes, pull boxes, control panels, poles, and similar equipment, and apply one
 coat of an inhibiting paint and two coats of aluminum paint, inside and out, after
 completing installation. For items fabricated from galvanized or nonferrous alloys, which
 are inherently rust resistant, paint only on damaged surfaces with an application of
 inorganic zinc rich primer or aluminum paint, as applicable.
 716.03.16 Drawings. Before final inspection of the roadway lighting system,
 provide a complete set of reproducible as-built drawings that show the arrangement and
 locations of all equipment and circuits. Include each duct or conduit pavement crossing
 with distances to permanent markers, such as structures and curb lines. Keep a daily
 record of all conduit placed in trenches, showing the distance from the pavement edge, the
 depth, and the length of runs, and indicate these on the as-built drawings.
 716.03.17 Acceptance and Inspection Requirements. See Section 105.12.
 After the work has been completed, conduct an operational test demonstrating that the
 system operates in accordance with the Plans in the presence of the Engineer. The
 Department will also conduct its own tests with its own equipment before final
 acceptance.
 Traffic Operations will conduct an inspection of the installation prior to calling
 the job complete. The inspection will include, but not limited to, the following:
 1. Wires or Ducted Cables shall test free of shorts and unauthorized grounds
 and shall have an insulating resistance of at least one hundred megaohms
 when tested with a 500 volt direct current potential in a reasonably dry
 atmosphere between conductors and ground.
 2. Ground rods shall have a resistance to ground not to exceed 25 ohms. If the
 resistance to ground is greater than 25 ohms, two or more ground rods
 connected in parallel shall be installed.
 716.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 716.04.01 Poles. The Department will measure the quantity as each individual
 unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure anchor bolts, anchor bolt
 
 covers, ground lugs, any associated hardware and will consider them incidental to this
 item of work.
 716.04.02 High Mast Pole. The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure lowering
 
 device (in accordance with manufacturers’ installation instructions), anchor bolts,
 head frame assembly, cables, winch unit, power cables, wiring, connectors, circuit
 breakers, grounding lugs, any associated hardware, adjustment and calibration of the
 unit to provide the desired operation, and will consider them incidental to this item of
 work.
 716.04.03 Bracket The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure any associated
 
 716—6
 
 hardware needed for attaching the bracket to the pole and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work.
 716.04.04 Pole Base The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual unit or cubic yards furnished and installed. The Department will not measure
 excavation, concrete, conduits, fittings, ground rods, ground wires, reinforcing steel,
 and will consider them incidental to this item of work. This item includes backfilling
 and restoring disturbed areas to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
 716.04.05 Pole Base in Median Wall The Department will measure the
 quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure
 conduit, fittings, junction boxes, additional reinforcing steel, ground rod, ground wire,
 aluminum cover plate (if specified), and will consider them incidental to this item of
 work.
 716.04.06 Transformer Base The Department will measure the quantity as
 each individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure
 
 transformer door, ground lug, associated hardware, and will consider them incidental
 to this item of work.
 716.04.07 Pole with Secondary Equipment The Department will measure the
 quantity as each furnished and installed. The Department will not measure pole
 
 mounted cabinet, pole, service racks, lightning arrestors, photoelectric control, circuit
 breakers, contactor, manual switch, fuses, ground rod, transformers, cutouts, conduits
 and service wires. This item includes excavation, backfilling, any necessary anchors,
 and will consider them incidental to this item of work. Electrical service and all
 electrical inspection fees are incidental to this item of work.
 716.04.08 Lighting Control Equipment. The Department will measure the
 quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not
 measure base mounted cabinet with secondary control equipment ,pole, service racks,
 lightning arrestors, photoelectric control, circuit breakers, contactor, manual switch,
 fuses, ground rod, transformers, cutouts, conduits and service wires, excavation,
 backfilling, any necessary anchors, and will consider them incidental to this item of
 work. Electrical service and all electrical inspection fees are incidental to this item of
 work.
 716.04.09 Luminaire. The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual furnished and installed. The Department will not measure lamps, starters,
 ballasts, specified shielding (if required), any adjustments necessary to provide the
 desired lighting pattern, and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 716.04.10 Fused Connector Kits. The Department will measure the quantity
 as each furnished and installed.
 
 716.04.11 Conduit. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet
 furnished and installed. The Department will not measure installation in ground or on
 structure, conduit fittings, pipe/test plugs, expansion joints with bonding straps, drill
 anchors, clamps, any additional hardware required, and will consider them incidental
 to this item of work.
 716.04.12
 
 Markers.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity as each
 
 furnished and installed.
 
 716.04.13 Junction Box. The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure #57 aggregate,
 backfilling, restoration of disturbed areas to the satisfaction of the Engineer, concrete
 716—7
 
 (if required), and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 A) Junction Electrical. The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual furnished and installed. The Department will not measure hot
 dipped galvanized cover, stainless steel screws, rubber gasket, drain, any
 associated hardware, and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 716.04.14 Trenching and Backfilling. The Department will measure the
 quantity in linear feet. The Department will not measure roadway crossings, underground
 utility warning tape (if required), the restoration of disturbed areas to original condition,
 and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 
 716.04.15 Wire or Cable. The Department will measure the quantity in linear
 feet furnished and installed or cable within conduit as indicated in Plans. The
 Department will not measure installation within conduit, splice boots, any other
 hardware required for installing cable, and will consider them incidental to this item
 of work.
 716.04.16 Ducted Cable. The Department will measure the quantity in linear
 feet furnished and installed. The Department will not measure installation within trench or
 conduit, any other necessary hardware, and will consider them incidental to this item
 of work.
 716.04.17 Temporary Lighting. The Department will measure the quantity as lump
 sum furnished and installed. The Department will not measure poles, luminaires, wire,
 conduit, trenching and backfilling, control equipment, all relocations and removal,
 any other necessary hardware to make a complete installation, and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work..
 716.04.18 Remove Lighting. The Department will measure the quantity as
 lump sum furnished and installed. The Department will not measure the removal of
 existing poles, luminaires, control equipment, power transformers, transformer bases
 and pole bases.
 716.04.19 Remove Pole Base. The Department will measure the quantity as
 each individual unit. The Department will not measure removal of pole base a minimum
 of 1foot below ground (Chipping off or any other method that is approved by the
 engineer may be used), backfill hole with material approved by the engineer, and will
 consider them incidental to this item of work..
 716.04.20 Bore and Jack Conduit. See section 706.
 716.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 04700-04701
 04710-04714
 04720-04730
 04740
 04742/23161EN
 04741
 04750
 04760
 04761
 04770-04773
 04780
 
 Pay Item
 POLES (Various) MTG HT
 Poles (Various) MTG HT HIGH Mast
 Bracket (Various)
 Pole Base
 Pole Base –High Mast
 Pole Base In Med Wall
 Transformer Base
 Pole W/ Secondary Control Equip
 Lighting Control Equipment
 HPS Luminaire (Various)
 Fused Connector Kit
 
 716—8
 
 Pay Unit
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each/Cubic Yard
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 04790-04799
 04800
 04810-04811
 20391NS835
 20392NS835
 04820
 04832-04837
 04860-04864
 20454NS835
 04940
 04941
 21543EN
 
 Conduit (Various)
 Marker
 Junction Box (Various)
 Junction Box Type A
 Junction Box Type C
 Trenching and Backfilling
 Wire-No (Various)
 Cable-No (Various) Ducted
 Temporary Lighting
 Remove Lighting
 Remove Pole Base
 Bore and Jack Conduit
 
 Linear Foot
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Each
 Linear Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for installing and
 placing the complete roadway lighting systems in satisfactory operation.
 
 716—9
 
 SECTION 717  INTERSECTION MARKINGS
 717.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and install thermoplastic or Type I tape intersection
 markings (Stop Bars, Crosswalks, Turn Arrows, etc.) by either a machine applied, screed
 extrusion process or by applying preformed thermoplastic intersection marking material.
 717.02
 
 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
 
 717.02.01 Preformed Thermoplastic Intersection Marking Material. Select from
 the Department’s List of Approved Materials.
 717.02.02 Extruded Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Material. Conform to
 Section 837.
 717.02.03 Binder. Conform to Subsection 714.02.03
 717.02.04 Drop On Glass Beads. Use beads that will ensure the pavement marking
 material will meet retroreflectivity requirements. The Department will evaluate the beads
 as part of the marking system through retroreflectivity readings.
 717.02.05 Extruded Thermoplastic Application Equipment. Provide equipment
 with a shaping die that simultaneously deposits and shapes lines at a minimum thickness
 of 90 mils on the pavement surface. Do not use spray and ribbon gun applicators.
 Ensure the application equipment conforms to the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Capable of providing continuous and uniform heat to maintain the material
 between 400 and 440 °F throughout the mixing, conveying, and dispensing.
 The kettle is capable of continuous agitation during mixing and heated storage
 and is equipped with an automatic thermostat control device and material
 thermometer.
 Equipped with a cutoff device that provides clean, square stripe ends.
 Equipped with an automatic bead dispenser.
 
 717.02.06 Type I Tape. Conform to Section 836.
 717.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 717.03.01
 Layout.
 On resurfacing, pavement restoration, and pavement
 rehabilitation projects, prepare and keep a written record of the locations of existing
 pavement markings, and furnish a copy to the Engineer before removing or obliterating
 the markings. The Engineer will notify you of any changes to the existing markings.
 On new construction, the Department will provide more detailed information for each
 intersection prior to beginning work. This information will consist of plans, a drawing of
 each intersection, or an inspector to work with each crew to layout the markings in the
 field.
 Before applying the pavement marking material, pre-mark the pavement surface and
 obtain the Engineer’s approval of the proposed location, alignment, and control guides.
 717.03.02 Surface Preparation. Clean all grease, oil, mud, dust, dirt, grass, loose
 gravel, or other deleterious material from the surface where pavement markings are to be
 applied as directed by, and by methods acceptable to, the Engineer.
 On concrete surfaces and as the Engineer directs on older asphalt pavements, apply
 binder to the area where placing pavement marking material. Ensure that all solvents have
 evaporated from the binder before applying the marking material. On new concrete
 pavement surfaces, remove the curing compound from the pavement surface before
 applying the binder and the pavement marking material.
 
 717—1
 
 717.03.03 Application.
 A) Thermoplastic. Install extruded thermoplastic at a minimum thickness of 90 mils
 on the pavement surface in a melted state at a temperature from 400 and 440 °F. Install
 preformed thermoplastic according to manufacturer's instructions at a minimum thickness
 of 125 mils. Apply additional glass beads by a drop-on method at a rate that satisfies the
 retroreflectivity requirements of Subsection 717.03.05.
 When installing symbols and legends (turn arrows, the word “ONLY” etc.) by the
 extrusion process, ensure that the finished markings conform to the standard size and
 shape in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
 Verify the adhesion of the thermoplastic to asphalt pavements by performing bond
 checks as follows. Approximately 60 to 120 seconds after applying the thermoplastic
 material cut and lift approximately a 6-inch section. The thermoplastic is successfully
 bonding to the pavement surface if a layer of asphalt clings to the removed thermoplastic
 and the pavement surface under the removed section is shiny and black.
 Ensure that finished markings are continuous and uniform in shape having clear and
 sharp edges with uniform bead distribution across the entire width and length of the line,
 symbol, or legend.
 B) Type I Tape. Apply according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Cut all
 tape at pavement joints when applied to concrete surfaces.
 717.03.04 Restrictions. Do not apply the pavement marking material when air and
 pavement temperatures are below 50 °F.
 Do not apply the pavement marking material when the surface of the pavement
 contains evidence of moisture in amounts significant enough to prevent the pavement
 marking material from bonding to the pavement. Significant amounts of moisture can be
 caused by heavy dew or very humid nights as well as from rainfall.
 If encountering significant amounts of moisture while applying the thermoplastic, the
 Contractor, at his own risk, may attempt to apply the thermoplastic material subject to the
 following restrictions. Heat the thermoplastic material to the upper temperature limit
 specified by the manufacturer, and apply a test line on the pavement. Perform a bond
 check according to Subsection 717.03.03. If the thermoplastic successfully bonds to the
 pavement continue to apply thermoplastic material, provided there is evidence that the
 moisture is escaping through the surface of the material, as indicated by very small
 pinholes. If there is excessive moisture, as indicated by larger sized holes or bubbles on
 the surface of the material, do not apply thermoplastic until the moisture can be effectively
 dealt with. Perform a sufficient number of bond checks to ensure that the thermoplastic is
 bonding to the pavement.
 717.03.05 Proving Period. A proving period of 180 days will follow the application
 of the durable markings. During this period, the Engineer will make such observations as
 are necessary to determine if the markings are acceptable. The proving period begins
 when the facility is opened to traffic.
 A) Requirements.
 1) Thermoplastic. During the proving period, ensure that the material shows no
 signs of failure due to blistering, excessive cracking, bleeding, staining,
 discoloration, oil content of the pavement materials, smearing or spreading under
 heat, deterioration due to contact with grease deposits, oil, diesel fuel, or
 gasoline drippings, chipping, spalling, poor adhesion to the pavement materials,
 loss of retroreflectivity, vehicular damage and normal wear.
 The minimum retroreflectivity requirements at the end of the proving
 period, as measured with a Department approved 30 meter geometry handheld
 retroreflectometer, are as follows:
 White: 300 mcd/lux/square meter
 Yellow: 225 mcd/lux/square meter
 
 717—2
 
 The Department will take these measurements between 15 and 45 days after
 the start of the proving period, with acceptance based on KM 201. If the
 Department determines that the markings are acceptable, the installation of the
 markings will be considered complete.
 2) Type I Tape. During the proving period, ensure that the pavement marking
 material shows no signs of failure due to blistering, excessive cracking, bleeding,
 staining, discoloration, oil content of the pavement materials, drippings,
 chipping, spalling, poor adhesion to the pavement, loss of retroreflectivity,
 vehicular damage, and normal wear. Type I Tape is manufactured off site and
 warranted by the manufacturer to meet certain retroreflective requirements. As
 long as the material is adequately bonded to the surface and shows no signs of
 failure due to the other items listed in Subsection 714.03.06 A) 1),
 retroreflectivity readings will not be required. In the absence of readings, the
 Department will accept tape based on a nighttime visual observation.
 B) Failure. The Department will consider any marking defective when the readings
 for that marking do not satisfy the retroreflectivity requirements or more than 10
 percent of the material fails to meet the other requirements of A) above. The
 Department will consider each marking separately.
 C) Corrective Work. If any marking is found to be defective, repair or remove and
 replace the marking. Perform pavement marking replacement according to the
 requirements specified in this subsection for the initial application. The
 corrective work will be subject to a proving period as listed above.
 717.03.06 Marking Removal. Remove all markings made in error or not
 conforming to the traffic operation in use. Remove markings by water blasting process
 to the satisfaction of the Engineer. Vacuum all marking material and removal debris
 concurrently with the removal operation. Do not paint with asphalt binder or other
 material to obliterate the markings.
 A) Waterblast Stripe Removal. Conform to subsection 713.03.04.
 717.03.07
 Acceptance of Non-Specification Markings.
 When reasonably
 acceptable work has been produced but retroreflectivity requirements are not met, the
 Department may accept the work according to Subsection 105.04. When the Engineer
 determines that the markings may be left in place, the Department will accept them at a
 reduction in the Contract unit bid price according to Acceptance Pay Schedule for
 Thermoplastic. The Department will not consider these procedures a means to continue
 accepting non-specification markings.
 717.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure the intersection markings on
 a per unit basis for items listed in the Quantity Summary.
 The Department will not measure the removal of existing markings, layout, surface
 preparation, binder, glass beads, or testing for payment and will consider them incidental
 to the installation of the new marking. The Department will exclude the gaps when
 measuring dotted lane line extensions.
 717.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 ACCEPTANCE PAY SCHEDULE FOR THERMOPLASTIC
 Pay Value
 White
 Yellow
 mcd/lux/square meter
 mcd/lux/square meter
 1.00
 ≥300
 ≥225
 0.50
 251-299
 176-224
 0.25
 226-250
 151-175
 0.00
 200-225
 125-150
 Remove and Replace
 < 200
 < 125
 
 717—3
 
 Code
 Pay Item
 06565, 06566
 Pavement Marking, Thermoplastic X-Walk, Size
 06567, 06568
 Pavement Marking, Thermoplastic Stop Bar, Size
 06569
 Pavement Marking, Thermoplastic Cross Hatch
 06572
 Pavement Marking, Dotted Lane Extension
 06573-06575, 06578 Pavement Marking, Thermoplastic Arrow, Type
 06576
 Pavement Marking, Thermoplastic “ONLY”
 06577
 Pavement Marking, Thermoplastic “SCHOOL”
 06563
 Pave Marking – R/R X Bucks 16 IN
 20782NS714
 Pave Marking Thermo – Bike
 23251ES717
 Pave Mark TY I Tape X-Walk, Size
 23264ES717
 23252ES717
 Pave Mark TY I Tape Stop Bar, Size
 23265ES717
 23253ES717
 Pave Mark TY I Tape Cross Hatch
 23254ES717
 Pave Mark TY I Tape Dotted Lane Extension
 23255ES717
 Pave Mark TY I Tape Arrow, Type
 23268ES717-23270ES717
 23256ES717
 Pave Mark TY I Tape- ONLY
 23257ES717
 Pave Mark TY I Tape- SCHOOL
 23266ES717
 Pave Mark TY 1 Tape R/R X Bucks-16 IN
 23267ES717
 Pave Mark TY 1 Tape-Bike
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Square Foot
 Linear Foot
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot
 Each
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Square Foot
 Linear Foot
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot
 Each
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 717—4
 
 SECTION 718  BRIDGE END OBJECT MARKERS
 718.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnishing and place Type 2 Object Markers at bridge ends.
 See Section 3C.01 of the MUTCD for a general description.
 718.02 MATERIAL. The Type 2 Object Marker has a vertical dimension of one foot
 and a horizontal dimension of 6 inches, and consists of reflective materials on an
 aluminum sheet.
 718.02.01 Retroreflective Sheeting. Provide yellow sheeting conforming to Section
 830.
 718.02.02 Aluminum Substrate. Conform to Section 833.
 718.03 CONSTRUCTION. Prepare the aluminum sheeting and the reflective material
 applied according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
 Mount the object marker on a post meeting the requirements for Type II in Section
 832. The minimum length of post is 8 feet. The Contractor is responsible for determining
 the actual length necessary at each location.
 Install the object markers as near each bridge end as practical. Ensure the inside edge
 of the marker is in line with the inner edge of the bridge wall. Drive the post 3 feet, with
 one foot behind the marker and the remaining length as necessary to provide a mounting
 height to the bottom of the marker of 4 feet above the surface of the nearest traffic lane.
 718.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure the quantity of Object
 Marker Type 2 by each individual unit. The Department considers a unit to include all
 materials, including the post, necessary to acceptably furnish and install the marker.
 718.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02565
 
 Pay Item
 Object Marker, Type 2
 
 Pay Unit
 Each
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 718—1
 
 SECTION 719  GUARDRAIL
 719.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and install or remove all necessary material for each
 type of guardrail, end treatment, terminal section, and guardrail bridge end connector.
 Remove and relocate, or remove and reset, all necessary material for each type of
 guardrail. Adjust guardrail, including replacement of existing offset blocks, with new
 modified offset blocks. Furnish additional new hardware as needed to complete the
 adjustment.
 719.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 719.02.01 Guardrail Systems. Conform to Section 814.
 719.02.02 Concrete. Use Class A concrete conforming to Subsection 601.02 and
 601.03.
 719.02.03 Reinforcement Steel. Conform to Section 811.
 719.02.04 Grout. Conform to Subsection 601.02.
 When used in placement on a curve having a radius of 150 feet or less, curve
 guardrail in shop. Mark the radius of curvature on each of the curved elements. Furnish
 rail elements that have a nominal length of 13 1/2 feet.
 Use the same type of posts, fastenings, and accessories throughout the project.
 719.03 CONSTRUCTION.
 Do not leave uncompleted guardrail, bridge end
 connectors, terminal sections, or end treatments exposed to the traveling public. Construct
 guardrail, end treatments, bridge end connectors, and terminal sections behind lane
 closures or shoulder closures.
 Construct guardrail 29 inches to the top of the rail, with a tolerance of plus or minus
 one inch above the theoretical pavement elevation. Compute these elevations from the
 proposed pavement edge elevations or from other methods to ensure construction of the
 guardrail to the true gradient and with no sags.
 Paint all damaged galvanizing with 2 coats of zinc dust-zinc oxide paint conforming
 to Federal Specification TT-P-641.
 Provide permanent or temporary guardrail where it presently exists throughout the
 winter close-down periods of the Contract as the Engineer directs.
 Proprietary end treatments shall be installed according to the manufacturer’s
 assembly or installation instructions.
 Prior to ordering guardrail materials meet the Engineer on the job site to check the
 guardrail end treatments at locations designated in the plans to ensure they are appropriate
 for the actual field conditions. Adjustments will be made as appropriate and final location
 and end treatment types will be approved by the Engineer. The Engineer will consult with
 the Division of Highway Design when necessary.
 719.03.01 Setting Posts. Install posts according to the Contract without damaging
 the road or shoulder. Provide extra length posts when the Engineer directs to do so. Do
 not damage any portion of the driven posts. If damage occurs, discontinue driving.
 Remove the damaged post and replace with a new post in an excavated hole.
 Ram bottoms of dug post holes to provide a stable foundation. Set posts vertically
 with the rail faces in a straight line, or when on a curve, at a uniform distance from the
 pavement. Backfill post holes in layers not to exceed 6 inches, and compact until the post
 is solid, firm, and in true alignment. Cut and set timber post tops to correct grade, and
 bevel according to the Standard Drawings. Bore holes at proper places to attach the rails.
 Anchor posts according to the Standard Drawings. Repair all damaged pavement.
 
 719—1
 
 Do not drive guardrail posts within one foot of the outlet pipe for pavement
 edgedrains. Repair all damage to the outlet pipe for pavement edgedrains caused by
 guardrail installations. If repair is not possible, remove and replace damaged outlet pipe.
 If a guardrail post is damaged when installing in rock or rock fill, remove the
 damaged post. Drill a hole slightly larger than the post 24 inches into the rock or to the
 desired embedment depth, whichever is less. Backfill around the post with #9 or #57
 stone or with flowable fill for pipe backfill (proportioned in accordance with Subsection
 601.03.03). Wood guardrail posts that are cut or bored, shall be retreated in accordance
 with Subsection 814.04.02.
 If a guardrail post for a proprietary end treatment is damaged during installation into
 rock or rock fill, utilize the manufacturer’s installation instructions to provide holes for
 placement of the guardrail posts.
 719.03.02 Placing Rail. Construct the guardrail to the alignment and at the locations
 shown in the Contract. Splice rail element by lapping in the direction of traffic. Bolt rail
 element to each post through the holes provided in the rail. Where the holes are slotted for
 expansion, erect rail with the bolt in the center of the slot. Install nuts on the backside of
 all bolts, either through splices or through rail and posts. Draw bolts tightly. Extend the
 bolt at least 1/4 inch beyond the nut. Do not tighten bolts so tightly through expansion
 members that they prevent functioning of the members.
 Erect rail so it appears smooth, uniform, continuous, and closely parallels the line and
 grade of the pavement.
 Provide the type of end treatments, terminal sections, and guardrail bridge end
 connectors specified in the Contract. The Department will not allow field cutting,
 punching, burning, or welding.
 719.03.03 Remove Rail. Remove the existing guardrail system, which includes
 bridge end connectors, terminal sections, or guardrail end treatments including all
 associated concrete, components, and incidentals. Fill all voids left from pulling guardrail
 posts with dry sand. Do not damage guardrail.
 719.03.04 Relocate the Existing Guardrail System. Relocate the existing rail and
 posts to the alignment and at the locations shown in the Contract. Spot paint edges of all
 holes punched in the existing rail and posts that are to be reused. Spot paint all scratches
 or marred areas in completed installations where the galvanizing has been damaged. Spot
 paint with 2 coats of zinc dust-zinc oxide paint conforming to Federal Specification TT-P641.
 Do not intermix new pieces of guardrail with pieces of existing rail at any installation.
 Add new pieces, as needed, on one or both ends of an installation.
 The Department will retain ownership of all items in the existing system not suitable
 for reconstruction, except concrete. Remove and dispose of existing concrete off the
 right-of-way.
 If additional guardrail is needed to replace damaged guardrail, furnish and install new
 guardrail.
 719.03.05 Adjust Existing Guardrail. Adjust existing guardrail to the alignment
 and at the locations shown in the Contract. Remove existing rail elements and offset
 blocks from the existing posts. Install new modified offset blocks. Reinstall rail elements.
 Realign guardrail both vertically and horizontally at the raised elevation.
 When new end treatments, terminal sections, or bridge connectors are not specified,
 connect adjusted rail to the existing installation in a smooth transition. When new end
 treatments, terminal sections, or bridge connectors are specified, construct at new shoulder
 elevation or new grade condition.
 719.03.06 Temporary Guardrail. Conform to the same construction requirements
 for temporary guardrail as for permanent guardrail. The Department will show temporary
 guardrail locations in the Contract. Maintain the temporary guardrail system for the
 
 719—2
 
 duration of its use. Retain ownership of damaged or surplus components. The Contractor
 may use undamaged components in permanent installations.
 719.03.07 Salvaged Material. The Department will retain ownership of the existing
 guardrail, guardrail post, and hardware. Stack W-beam rail 45 per bundle (3 wide, 15
 high, overlapped). Stack and band metal posts 50 per bundle (5 wide, 10 high,
 overlapped). Bag nuts, bolts, and washers. Salvage a minimum of 80 percent of the nuts,
 bolts, and washers. Deliver existing guardrail and components to the Bailey Bridge Lot
 located at 1224 Wilkinson Blvd in Frankfort, Kentucky. Contact the lot supervisor at
 (502) 564-8187 to schedule delivery of material a minimum of 10 working days in
 advance of delivery. Deliver the material between the hours of 8:00AM and 3:30PM
 eastern time, Monday through Friday. Dispose of all removed concrete off the right-ofway.
 719.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 719.04.01 Guardrail. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet along
 the actual length of the rail between the limits for end treatments, terminal sections and
 bridge end connections, and crash cushions. The Department will measure the quantity of
 shop curved guardrail in linear feet at 1.3 times the actual length.
 719.04.02 Guardrail Terminal Sections.
 quantity by each individual unit.
 
 The Department will measure the
 
 719.04.03 Extra Length Post. The Department will measure the quantity by each
 individual unit. The Department will still measure guardrail at locations where extra
 length post are required as this item represents only the added work and material required
 by the extra length.
 719.04.04 Guardrail End Treatment. The Department will measure the quantity
 by each individual unit that is not a part of the guardrail. Pay limits for proprietary end
 treatments will in accordance with Standard Drawings.
 719.04.05 Crash Cushion. The Department will measure the quantity by each
 individual unit that is not a part of the guardrail.
 719.04.06 Guardrail Bridge End Connector. The Department will measure the
 quantity by each individual unit, including their end treatment.
 719.04.07 Guardrail Connector to Concrete Median Barrier. The Department
 will measure the quantity, by each individual unit, according to Standard Drawing RBC100.
 719.04.08 Remove Guardrail. The Department will measure the quantity in linear
 feet. The Department will not measure the delivery and stacking of guardrail, posts, and
 its hardware for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 719.04.09 Relocate Guardrail System. The Department will measure the quantity
 in linear feet.
 719.04.10 Adjust Guardrail. The Department will measure the quantity in linear
 feet.
 719.04.11 Temporary Guardrail. The Department will measure the quantity in
 linear feet. The Department will not measure maintenance and removal for payment and
 will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 
 719—3
 
 719.04.12 Nested Guardrail. The Department will measure the quantity in linear
 feet. The Department will still measure guardrail at locations where nested guardrail is
 required as this item represents only added work and materials required by the nested
 guardrail.
 719.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02351, 02355
 02353
 
 Pay Item
 Guardrail, Steel W Beam, Single Face
 Guardrail, Steel W Beam
 Single Face, Install
 Guardrail, Steel W Beam, Double Face
 Guardrail Terminal Section, Type
 Extra Length Post
 Guardrail End Treatment, Type
 Crash Cushion, Type
 
 02352
 02360, 02364, 02366
 02399
 02367, 02369, 02371, 02373,
 02391, 02365, 02885, 02888,
 02894, 02920, 02923, 02929
 02377, 02378, 02382, 02387, 02388 Guardrail Bridge End Connector, Type
 02359
 Guardrail Connector to Concrete
 Median Barrier
 02381
 Remove Guardrail
 02385
 Relocate Guardrail System
 02350
 Adjust Guardrail
 02397
 Temporary Guardrail
 24381EC
 G/R Steel W Beam-S Face-(Nested)
 24382EC
 G/R Steel W Beam-S Face-7 FT
 Post (Nested)
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 719—4
 
 SECTION 720  METAL HANDRAILS
 720.01
 
 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and install metal handrails.
 
 720.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 720.02.01 Handrails. For materials for metal handrails for bridges conform to the
 requirements specified in the Contract. For other handrails, conform to the following
 subsections:
 Handrail, Type A
 Handrail, Type B
 Handrail, Type C
 
 810.05.04
 813.13.01
 813.13.02
 
 720.02.02 Chain Link Fence. When constructed as part of the handrail, conform to
 Section 817, Type A, using aluminum coated steel fabric and tension wire.
 720.02.03 Paint. Conform to Section 821.
 720.03 CONSTRUCTION. Fabricate all handrails according to the details specified in
 the Plans or on Standard Drawings. When erected, ensure that all posts, except on
 bridges, are vertical and the rails are true to the alignment indicated.
 Set bridge railing posts at right angles to the fascia line, perpendicular to grade, and
 erect tubing parallel to the fascia line. Use washer shims not exceeding 1/8 inch in
 thickness between the concrete and post base to obtain post or tubing alignment.
 Fasten railing to the concrete as specified in the Plans.
 Where aluminum is in contact with concrete, thoroughly coat the contacting surfaces
 with alumilastic compound or approved equal so as to completely insulate the aluminum
 from the concrete; or where bond between aluminum and concrete is desired, coat the
 aluminum with commercially available zinc chromate paint, and allow it to dry before
 installing it.
 Paint plain steel handrail according to Subsection 607.03.23.
 The Department will not require painting of galvanized handrail, except paint all
 exposed threads as required for plain handrail.
 The Department will not require painting of aluminum handrail.
 720.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure the quantity of each type in
 linear feet along the top of the rail from center to center of end posts. The Department
 will not measure posts, pipe, channel, pickets, fittings, chain link fence, or painting for
 payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 720.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02611-02616, 02619, 02620, 08232, 08255-08257
 
 Pay Item
 Handrail, Type
 
 Pay Unit
 
 Linear Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 720—1
 
 SECTION 721  FENCE
 721.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and erect fence and gates of the height and type
 specified in the Plans, supported by steel, concrete, or timber posts along the inside limits
 of the right-of-way or at other locations shown or otherwise designated and at grades
 designated during construction.
 721.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 721.02.01 Woven Wire Fencing. Conform to Section 816.
 721.02.02 Chain Link Fencing. Conform to Section 817.
 721.02.03 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 721.03 CONSTRUCTION. Before starting fencing operations, remove all brush,
 stumps, logs, and debris that will interfere with the proper construction of the fence.
 Remove or trim sound standing trees in the fence line as directed.
 Construct fence with new materials according to the Standard Drawings and as
 specified in this section. Install fence as one of the first construction operations. Where it
 is impractical to install fence initially in its final form or location, obtain written
 permission from adjacent property owners either to permit construction of a suitable
 temporary fence or to delay fence erection until such time as the permanent fence may be
 erected. Where tying fence to a new structure, erect a temporary fence until such time as
 the structure is complete and the permanent fence can be anchored to the structure in the
 manner specified in the Plans.
 Install fence 18 inches inside the right-of-way line or in other locations specifically
 indicated.
 Install fence facing the property owner except on horizontal curves. On horizontal
 curves install the fence to pull against all posts. Apply sufficient tension between pull
 posts to make the fence stock tight. Install pull posts at all breaks in horizontal alignment
 of the fence, and at sharp breaks in vertical alignment. For tangents and curves up to one
 degree, space pull posts a maximum of 500 feet on centers; ensure that curves over one
 degree to 4 degrees have pull posts spaced a maximum of 250 feet on centers; and curves
 over 4 degrees have pull posts installed each time the angle of deflection increases 5
 degrees.
 Use any Class concrete according to Subsection 601.03.
 721.03.01 Setting Posts. Set all posts at the required depths and intervals designated
 in the Contract. Set posts plumb and in true alignment on the side where the wire is
 attached. Dig holes for posts to full depth and with sufficient diameter to allow proper
 tamping and compaction of the backfill. Use sound earth for the backfill and tamp it in
 place until the post is firm and rigid in its position. Set wood posts with the butt end
 down.
 When encountering solid rock at grade or below, drill a hole one foot deep and
 slightly larger than the outside dimensions of the post or brace in the rock, and grout in the
 post. At line posts where top of rock is 8 inches or less below grade, remove the anchor
 plate. Backfill all excavation above rock, below grade, in 4 to 6-inch layers and tamp each
 layer thoroughly in place. Field cut posts and braces to fit maximum depth whenever
 encountering solid rock.
 Set all end, gate, corner, and pull posts, and anchor them in concrete placed to the top
 of the ground, finished smooth, and sloped to drain.
 Brace all end, gate, and corner posts. Brace pull posts in 2 directions. Brace corner
 posts in the direction of each line of the fence. Anchor the metal braces from the metal
 posts in concrete that is crowned at the top to shed water. Brace wood or concrete posts
 with a pole or bar of the same type of material as the post. When using wood posts, notch
 the braced post and adjacent line posts one inch deep at one foot from the top of the
 
 721—1
 
 finished post to receive the brace pole. Secure the brace pole to the posts by spiking or
 other means. Loop galvanized smooth wire having a minimum diameter of 0.148 inch
 around the braced post near the ground, and then loop it around the line post at 12 inches
 below its top continuing between the posts until 4 strands of wire are in place and the ends
 of the wire are securely fastened together. Then twist the strands of wire together until the
 brace pole is in compression. Do not allow the compression to be great enough to cause
 lateral springing in the brace pole.
 Allow concrete anchors to cure for at least 5 days before erecting the fence.
 721.03.02 Fencing. Tie any intersecting fence to an independent pull post.
 Stretch woven wire fabric taut and securely fasten it to each post. Accomplish
 stretching with a stretcher that will produce equal tension in each line wire. Stretch fabric
 until the tension is just below the point of producing displacement in the tension crimps.
 At each end, corner, or gate post, cut and turn each strand of line wire around the post and
 tie it back to itself with no less than 3 turns.
 When it is necessary to splice 2 sections of fence, make the splice by placing together
 the end stay wires of each section, and twist the end of each line wire around the stay
 wires and back onto itself with no less than 3 turns; or splice the fence by using Engineer
 approved splicing sleeves designed for that purpose.
 Attach the fence to each wood post with a staple for each line wire and as many
 additional staples as necessary to firmly secure the wire. Furnish galvanized staples
 having a nominal diameter of 0.148 inch and a length of no less than one inch in length,
 for hardwood posts. When using treated softwood posts, furnish staples that are 1 1/2
 inches long. Securely attach the woven wire fabric as shown on the Standard Drawings.
 Use tension wires and rails in erection of chain link fences as shown on the Standard
 Drawings. When shown on the Standard Drawings, place, stretch taut, and secure at ends
 the top or bottom tension wires to all posts in a manner before placing fabric. When a top
 rail is required, secure the bar at each end before stretching and tying the fabric. Secure
 ends of the fabric with stretcher bars threaded through the loops of the fabric and secured
 to the posts by means of clamps with bolts and nuts. Use the number of clamps as
 indicated.
 Place the fabric by securing one end and applying sufficient tension to remove all
 slack before making attachments elsewhere. Fasten the fabric to the line posts and to the
 top tension wire or to the top rail, with tie wires or bands as called for in Section 817 or as
 the Contract designates.
 Determine the number of tension bands required per post of chain link fence by
 taking the height of the fence in feet and subtracting one. Space tie wires for attaching
 chain link fence to the top tension wire or top rail on 24-inch centers. Space tie wires for
 attaching chain link fence to intermediate or line posts on 14-inch centers. Space tie wires
 on chain link gates on 24-inch centers. Install the chain link fence around utility
 installations facing the highway with the barbed wire arms at a 45 degree angle extending
 toward the highway. Design and install post caps for all tubular posts so as to exclude
 moisture from inside the posts, and install socket type brace end connections so as to
 exclude moisture from inside the rails.
 721.03.03 Gates. Erect gates at locations specified in the Plans or as the Engineer
 directs. Erect the gate plumb with its hinges firmly attached to the post and to the gate.
 Allow the gate to swing freely when opened. Install the latch so it works easily and
 secures the gate when closed.
 Furnish water gates of the specified type that conform to the Plans and Standard
 Drawings.
 721.03.04 Finishing. Ensure that the tops of all posts are at a uniform height above
 the ground or at a uniform distance above the top of the woven wire fabric. After erecting
 the fence, saw the tops of wood posts uniformly at least 2 inches above the strand of
 barbed wire. Make the cut at an angle of 60 degrees to the vertical on the side of the post
 away from the wire.
 
 721—2
 
 Ensure that the finished fence is true to line, taut, and solid at all points. Dispose of
 all surplus excavated material and other debris resulting from construction and leave the
 fence line with a neat and orderly appearance.
 721.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 721.04.01 Fence. The Department will measure the quantity of each type and height
 in linear feet along the top of the fence from outside to outside of end posts of fence
 installed, with deductions for all gates.
 The Department will not measure material removal and disposal, drilling, excavating,
 or backfilling, installation or removal of temporary fences, or for connections to abutments
 or other structures for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 721.04.02 Gates. The Department will measure the quantity by each individual unit.
 The Department will not measure excavation or concrete for water gates for payment
 and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 721.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02259, 02261-02263, 02273-02275, 08709-08716
 02281, 02282, 02286-02289
 
 Pay Item
 Pay Unit
 Fence, Type and Height Linear Foot
 Gate, Type
 Each
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 721—3
 
 SECTION 722  REMOVING, RESETTING, OR REPLACING
 FENCE
 722.01 DESCRIPTION. Remove, remove and reset, or remove and replace fences
 (except masonry fences).
 722.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 722.02.01 Posts. Use the same type of posts existing in the original fence, and
 comply with applicable requirements.
 722.02.02 Woven Wire Fencing. Conform to Section 816.
 722.02.03 Chain Link Fencing. Conform to Section 817.
 722.02.04 Concrete. Conform to Section 601.02 and 601.03. Select any class
 concrete specified in Section 601.03.
 722.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 722.03.01 Resetting Fence. Reset the fence to the location designated in the
 Contract, using material from the original fence, and leave all fences in as good condition
 as before removal. Reset all posts using the same type of construction that was used on
 the original fence, and furnish any new material necessary to set these posts in the manner
 used on the original fence. Where any posts are set in concrete, reconstruct the fence in
 the same manner. Ensure that reconstructed fences are true to line and vertical. Ensure
 that all wires are taut and well stapled. Remove and restore gates for service at the new
 location. Repair or replace fence and gates damaged during moving or resetting.
 722.03.02 Remove Fence. When listed as a bid item, remove the designated fence
 and dispose of the materials off the right-of-way.
 722.03.03 Removing and Replacing Fence. Remove the fence as described above.
 Replace the fence according to Section 721.
 722.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will not measure repair or replacement of
 fence or gates damaged during moving or resetting for payment and will consider it
 incidental to the work item being performed.
 The Department will not measure concrete or new material necessary to set posts in
 the manner used on the original fence for payment and will consider it incidental to
 Resetting Fence and Replacing Fence.
 722.04.01 Removing and Resetting Fence. The Department will measure the
 quantity, including gates, in linear feet along the top of the fence and gates from outside to
 outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence.
 722.04.02 Removing Fence. The Department will measure the quantity, including
 gates, in linear feet along the top of the fence and gates before removal from outside to
 outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence.
 722.04.03 Resetting Fence. The Department will measure the quantity, including
 gates, in linear feet along the top of the fence and gates from outside to outside of end
 posts for each continuous run of fence.
 722.04.04 Removing and Replacing Fence. The Department will measure the
 quantity, including gates, in linear feet along the top of the fence and gates from outside to
 outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence.
 
 722—1
 
 722.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02267
 02265
 02266
 02268
 
 Pay Item
 Remove and Reset Fence
 Remove Fence
 Reset Fence
 Remove and Replace Fence
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 722—2
 
 SECTION 723 — SIGNAL SYSTEMS
 723.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish, install, and connect traffic control devices, with
 accessories according to the Plans.
 723.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 723.02.01 Traffic Control Device Materials. Conform to Section 835. Obtain the
 Engineer’s approval for all materials before installation. Submit for material approval an
 electronic copy of descriptive literature, drawings, and any requested design data. Do not
 make substitutions for approved materials without written permission as described above.
 723.02.02 Paint. Conform to Sections 821 and 834.
 723.02.03 Concrete. Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 723.03
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 8)
 
 CONSTRUCTION. Perform the work according to:
 the Contract,
 Kentucky Department of Highways, Standard Drawings,
 National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 70: National Electrical Code,
 Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE), National Electrical
 Safety Code,
 AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs,
 Luminaires and Traffic Signals, 2009 edition,
 AASHTO Roadside Design Guide,
 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, current
 Edition, and
 the standards of the utility company serving the installation.
 
 The Plans indicate the extent and general arrangement of the proposed signal installation
 and are for general guidance. Advise the Engineer in writing and obtain written approval
 for any necessary modifications before beginning the work. Stake pole locations and
 obtain the Engineer’s approval.
 723.03.01 Utility Requirements. Conform to section 716.03.01.
 723.03.02 Poles and Bases Installation. Regardless of the station & offset noted,
 located all poles/bases behind guardrail a minimum of 4 feet behind the face of the
 guardrail. Orient the handhole door away from traffic travel path. Install pole bases 4 to 6
 inches above grade. If pole base is installed within a sidewalk the top of the pole base
 shall be the same grade as the sidewalk.
 A) Steel Strain and Mastarm Poles Installation. Top nuts shall be tightened to
 
 one-sixth turn beyond snug-tight. Snug-tight is defined as the condition
 where the nut is in full contact with the base plate. It is assumed that the full
 effort of a workman on a 12-inch wrench results in a snug-tight condition.
 The clearance between the bottom of the leveling nuts and the top of the
 concrete foundation shall not exceed one bolt diameter. If any pole needs to
 be re-located from stations indicated, Division of Traffic Operations shall be
 contacted. Poles shall not be installed on break away supports.
 See Section 716.03.02 A) 2) with exception of the Drilled Shaft Data table.
 Construct pole bases to the dimensions in the Pole Base Chart shown below:
 
 723—1
 
 Maximum Service
 Forces
 
 Drilled Shaft Data
 Depth (feet)
 < 2:1 Ground Slope
 
 Ties or Spiral
 (1)
 
 2:1 Ground Slope
 
 Vertical Bars
 
 Soil
 
 Rock
 
 Soil
 
 Rock
 
 Size
 
 Total
 
 Size
 
 Spacing
 or Pitch
 
 < 40
 
 10
 
 6
 
 12
 
 6
 
 #8
 
 13
 
 #4
 
 12"
 
 40.0 to 69.9
 
 12
 
 6
 
 15
 
 6
 
 #8
 
 13
 
 #4
 
 12"
 
 70.0 to 99.9
 
 14
 
 6
 
 17
 
 6
 
 #8
 
 13
 
 #4
 
 12"
 
 100.0 to 149.9
 
 16
 
 6
 
 18
 
 6
 
 #8
 
 13
 
 #4
 
 12"
 
 150.0 to 199.9
 
 18
 
 6
 
 21
 
 6
 
 #8
 
 13
 
 #4
 
 12"
 
 200.0 to 299.9
 
 21
 
 7
 
 24
 
 7
 
 #8
 
 13
 
 #4
 
 12"
 
 300.0 to 400.0
 
 23
 
 7
 
 26
 
 7
 
 #8
 
 18
 
 #4
 
 12"
 
 Max Service
 Moment (Ft-kips)
 
 (1) Do not construct drilled shafts on ground slopes steeper than 2:1 without the
 approval of the Division of Traffic..
 For maximum service moment, use the service moment provided by the pole manufacturer
 or the calculated service moment provided on the Plans, whichever is greater.
 B) Pedestal or Pedestal Post Installation. Ensure that concrete bases for poles up
 to 12 feet high, have a minimum depth of 4 feet and a minimum diameter of 2
 feet. If over 12 feet high the base shall have the minimum depth and diameter as
 Section 716.03.02 A) 2). Construct a level base, with no more than a 3/8-inch
 gap existing between the concrete base and the transformer base when the pole is
 plumbed. For breakaway supports, conform to Section 7 of the Standard
 Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaires, and
 Traffic Signals 2009 Edition. Grade the surrounding surface appropriately to
 meet the 4-inch breakaway support stub height. This stud height includes the
 pole base, conduits, and the anchors bolts.
 C) Splicing of Reinforcement. See section 602.03.06. Splicing of vertical
 reinforcement shall be CLASS C. When a drilled shaft is lengthened in the
 
 field, the splice location shall be made at the bottom of the reinforcement
 cage.
 D) Require Time to Apply Loads on Concrete Structures.
 601.03.15
 
 See Section
 
 723.03.03 Trenching. Lay conduit not subjected to traffic to a depth of no less than 18
 inches below grade.
 A) Under Roadway. On transverse crossings under roadway surfaces and
 shoulders, place the conduit (as specified in Contract) at a depth of no less than
 24 inches below grade. Make all pavement crossings by placing conduit in the
 subgrade before paving or by boring and jacking under existing pavements.
 When it is necessary to bore under roadways and ramps, obtain the Engineer’s
 approval of the boring procedure. Do not cut any pavement without obtaining
 the Engineer’s prior approval.
 723.03.04 Conduit Installation. See section 716.03.04.
 
 723—2
 
 723.03.05 Conduit Requirements in Junction Boxes. See section 716.03.04 A).
 See section 716.03.10 for junction box placement.
 723.03.06 Coupling Installation. See section 716.03.04 D).
 723.03.07 Bonding Requirements. See section 716.03.04 E).
 723.03.08 Painting. See section 716.03.04 F).
 723.03.09 Underground Warning Tape. See section 716.03.05.
 723.03.10 Backfilling and Disturbed Areas. See section 716.03.06.
 723.03.11 Wiring Installation. Affix each wire/cable in the controller cabinet with
 a permanent identification label. Where installing more than one loop lead-ins cable
 (IMSA 19-2) within the same conduit, affix permanent identification per loop schedule to
 the cables wherever the wiring emerges, including junction boxes, and poles/pedestal.
 Affix each splice between loop wire (IMSA 51-7) and loop lead-in with a permanent
 identification label per loop schedule. Use heat shrink tape or vinyl to wrap all wires
 where they pass through holes. Deburr all holes and provide a grommet at each opening.
 The contractor shall install all cable or wire runs splice-free from the controller to each
 loop wire, signal head, pedestrian head/detector, camera, blankout sign and audible
 pedestrian head/detector the cable or wire is feeding.
 Connection/Color code for all wiring according to the following chart:
 5-Conductor
 
 IMSA
 19-1
 
 3-Section Heads
 Connection
 Red
 Ball/Arrow
 Yellow
 Ball/Arrow
 Green
 Ball/Arrow
 
 5-Conductor
 
 IMSA
 19-1
 
 4-Section Heads
 
 7-Conductor
 5-Section
 Heads
 
 IMSA 19-1
 
 Color
 
 Connection
 
 Color
 
 Connection
 
 Color
 
 Red
 
 Red Ball
 
 Red
 
 Red Ball
 
 Red
 
 Orange
 Green
 
 Yellow Ball
 
 Neutral
 
 White
 
 Green Ball
 Green
 Arrow
 
 Not Used
 
 Black
 
 Neutral
 
 Orange
 Green
 Black
 White
 
 IMSA
 19-1
 5-Conductor
 Ped Signal and Button
 Connection
 Color
 Walk
 Green
 Red
 Don't Walk
 Button
 Black
 Button
 Orange
 Not Used
 White
 
 723—3
 
 Yellow Ball
 Yellow
 Arrow
 
 Orange
 
 Green Ball
 Green
 Arrow
 Neutral
 Not Used
 
 Green
 
 White/Tracer
 
 Blue
 White
 Black
 
 Connection/Color code for “flashing yellow” arrow signal heads according to following
 chart:
 5-Conductor
 3-Section Heads
 Connection
 Red Arrow
 Steady Yellow
 Arrow
 Flashing Yellow
 Arrow
 Not Used
 Neutral
 
 IMSA
 19-1
 Color
 Red
 Orange
 Black
 Green
 White
 
 5-Conductor
 4-Section Heads
 Connection
 Red Arrow
 Steady Yellow
 Arrow
 Flashing Yellow
 Arrow
 Green Arrow
 Neutral
 
 IMSA
 19-1
 Color
 Red
 Orange
 Black
 Green
 White
 
 7-Conductor
 4-Section Heads
 Connection
 Red Arrow
 Steady Yellow
 Arrow
 Flashing Yellow
 Arrow
 Green Arrow
 Neutral
 Not Used
 Not Used
 
 IMSA 191
 Color
 Red
 Orange
 White/Tr
 acer
 Green
 White
 Blue
 Black
 
 723.03.12 Loop Installation. Twist unshielded loop wire (IMSA 51-7) with three to
 five turns per foot before placing in saw slots, conduits, junction boxes, or cabinets.
 Extend loop wires splice-free to poles, pedestals, or junction boxes as shown on the
 Plans. Splice loop wires (IMSA 51-7) to loop lead-in cable (IMSA 19-2) in poles,
 pedestals, or junction boxes as shown on the Plans. Extend loop lead-in cable splice-free
 from the pole, pedestal, or junction box to the controller. Provide an extra 1 foot of loop
 wire and loop lead-in past the installed conduit in poles, pedestals, and junction boxes.
 Make splices accessible from the handholes of poles. On projects involving new asphalt
 pavement, install loops in the base course of asphalt pavement before the final surface in
 constructed. Coordinate the installation of the loops with the paving contractor and the
 Engineer.
 723.03.13 Grounding Installation. Ground all conduits, poles, pedestals, the
 controller cabinet, and the service according to the Standard Detail Sheets. Separate all
 ground rods by a minimum of 6 feet. Ensure the top of the ground rod is a minimum of 3
 inches below finished grade.
 723.03.14 Splicing. When indicated on the plans, or with approval of the Division
 of Traffic Operations, splice only in poles, pedestals, and junction boxes. Place splices to
 minimize possibility of water intrusion. Use only butt splices. Use copper wire of the
 correct wire range. Cover splices with a 3M mastic pad or approved equal. The mastic
 pad must cover at least 3 inches past each end of the butt splice and shall extend at least
 one inch onto the outer insulation of the lead-in wire (IMSA 19-2). Tape splices with 3M
 #33 electrical tape or approved equal. Encase each conductor, including the ground, in a
 separate splice kit.
 723.03.15 Painting. See section 716.03.15.
 723.03.16 Drawings. Before final inspection of the traffic control device, provide a
 complete set of reproducible as-built drawings that show the arrangement and locations of
 all equipment Included (i.e., junction boxes, conduits, spare conduits, etc.).
 723.03.17 Acceptance and Inspection Requirements. Energize traffic control
 device as soon as it is fully functional and ready for inspection. Ensure that the traffic
 control device remains operational until the Division of Traffic Operations has provided
 written acceptance of the electrical work. After the work has been completed, conduct an
 operational test demonstrating that the system operates in accordance with the Plans in the
 
 723—4
 
 presence of the Engineer. The Department will also conduct its own tests with its own
 equipment before final acceptance.
 
 Traffic Operations will conduct an inspection of the installation prior to calling
 the job complete. The inspection will include, but not limited to, the following:
 1. Induction loop conductors shall test free of shorts and unauthorized grounds
 and shall have an insulating resistance of at least one hundred megaohms
 when tested with a 500 volt direct current potential in a reasonably dry
 atmosphere between conductors and ground.
 2. Ground rods shall have a resistance to ground not to exceed 25 ohms. If the
 resistance to ground is greater than 25 ohms, two or more ground rods
 connected in parallel shall be installed.
 723.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 723.04.01 Conduit. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet
 furnished and installed. The Department will not measure conduit fittings, pipe/test plugs,
 expansion joints, clamps, or weatherheads for payment and will consider them incidental
 to this item of work.
 723.04.02 Junction Box. The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure concrete (if
 required), #57 aggregate, or backfilling and will consider them incidental to this item of
 work.
 723.04.03 Trenching and Backfilling. The Department will measure the
 quantity in linear feet. The Department will not measure underground utility warning tape
 (if required) and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.04 Open Cut Roadway. The Department will measure the quantity in
 linear feet. The Department will not measure concrete, reinforcing steel, or asphalt and
 will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.05 Loop Wire. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet
 furnished and installed. The Department will not measure splice boots, cable rings, or
 other hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.06 Cable. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet
 furnished and installed. The Department will not measure splice boots, cable rings, or
 other hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.07 Pole- Wooden. The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure excavation,
 backfilling or restoring disturbed areas and will consider them incidental to this item of
 work.
 723.04.08 Steel Strain Pole. The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure anchor bolts or
 other necessary hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.09 Mast Arm Pole. The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure anchor bolts,
 arms, mounting brackets, or other necessary hardware and will consider them incidental to
 this item of work.
 723.04.10 Signal Pedestal. The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure excavation,
 
 723—5
 
 concrete, conduit, fittings, ground rod, ground wire, backfilling, restoring disturbed areas,
 or other necessary hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.11 Post. The Department will measure the quantity as each individual
 unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure excavation, backfilling, or
 restoring disturbed areas and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.12 Anchor. The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure down-guy,
 messenger, clamps, guy guard, or insulators (if required) and will consider them incidental
 to this item of work.
 723.04.13 Messenger. The Department will measure the quantity in linear feet
 furnished and installed. The Department will not measure dead ends, bolts, washers, or
 other necessary hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.14 Install Signal LED. The Department will measure the quantity as
 each individual unit installed and connected to signal conductors.
 723.04.15 Loop Saw Slot and Fill. The Department will measure the quantity
 in linear feet. The Department will not measure the loop sealant material and will
 consider it incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.16 Pedestrian Detector. The Department will measure the quantity as
 each individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure sign R103b/R10-3e (with arrow) and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.17 Signal. The Department will measure the quantity as each individual
 unit furnished, installed and connected to signal conductors. The Department will not
 measure the mounting brackets (if necessary) and will consider them incidental to this
 item of work.
 723.04.18 Signal Controller – Type 170. The Department will measure the
 quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure
 constructing the concrete base or mounting the cabinet to the pole, providing electrical
 service, connecting the signal and detectors; furnishing and connecting the induction loop
 amplifiers, pedestrian isolators, load switches, model 400 modem card, electrical service
 conductors, electrical service conduit, fused cutout, ground rods, any necessary pole
 mounting hardware, or electrical inspection fees and will consider them incidental to this
 item of work.
 723.04.19 Beacon Controller – 2 Circuit. The Department will measure the
 quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure
 the controller housing, mounting equipment, S5-1 school zone sign and time clock (if
 necessary), nema flasher, ground rods, ground wires, metering and disconnect hardware,
 or electrical inspection fees and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.20 Install Signal Controller – Type 170. The Department will measure
 the quantity as each individual unit installed including induction loop amplifiers,
 pedestrian isolators, and load switches. The Department will not measure constructing the
 concrete base or mounting the cabinet to the pole, providing electrical service, connecting
 the signal and detectors, ground rods, or electrical inspection fees and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.21 Install Steel Strain Pole. The Department will measure the quantity
 as each individual unit installed. The Department will not measure any necessary clamp
 assemblies and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 
 723—6
 
 723.04.22 Remove Signal Equipment. The Department will measure the
 quantity as each individual unit removed. The Department will not measure the disposal
 or transportation of the material and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.23 Install Span/Pole Mounted Sign. The Department will measure the
 quantity as each individual unit installed. The Department will not measure the hanger or
 any other hardware necessary to install the sign and will consider them incidental to this
 item of work.
 723.04.24 Install Pedestrian Head LED. The Department will measure the
 quantity as each individual unit installed and connected to signal conductors.
 723.04.25 Install Signal LED. The Department will measure the quantity as
 each individual unit installed and connected to signal conductors.
 723.04.26 Install Coordinating Unit. The Department will measure the
 quantity as each individual unit installed and including the radio, modem, cable, antenna,
 and repeater. The Department will not measure any other hardware to complete the
 installation and will consider it incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.27 Video Camera. The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure video modules,
 mounting bracket, truss type arm (if necessary), power cable, coaxial cable, and any other
 hardware necessary to complete the installation and will consider them incidental to this
 item of work.
 723.04.28 Install Ped Detector Audible. The Department will measure the
 quantity as each individual unit installed and connected to pole/pedestal. The Department
 will not measure sign R10-3b/R10-3e (with arrow) and will consider it incidental to this
 item of work.
 723.04.29 Audible Pedestrian Detector. The Department will measure the
 quantity as each individual unit furnished, installed, and connected to pole/pedestal. The
 Department will not measure sign R10-3b/R10-3e (with arrow) and will consider it
 incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.30 Bore and Jack Conduit. The Department will measure the quantity
 in linear feet. This item does not include furnishing and installing the conduit.
 723.04.31 Install Pedestrian Detector. The Department will measure the
 quantity as each individual unit furnished, installed, and connected to pole/pedestal. The
 Department will not measure sign R10-3b/R10-3e (with arrow) and will consider it
 incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.32 Install Mast Arm Pole. The Department will measure the quantity
 as each individual unit installed. The Department will not measure arms, signal mounting
 brackets, anchors, or any other necessary hardware and will consider them incidental to
 this item of work.
 723.04.33 Pedestal Post. The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure excavation,
 concrete, conduit, fitting, ground rod, ground wire, backfilling, restoration, or any other
 necessary hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.34 Span Mounted Sign. The Department will measure the quantity as
 each individual unit furnished and installed. The Department will not measure the hanger
 
 723—7
 
 or any other necessary hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.35 Remove and Reinstall Coordinating Unit. The Department will
 measure the quantity as each individual unit removed and reinstalled.
 723.04.36 Traffic Signal Pole Base. The Department will measure the quantity
 in cubic yards furnished and installed. The Department will not measure excavation,
 reinforcing steel, ground rods, ground wires, backfilling, anchor bolts, or spare conduits
 and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.37 Install Signal Pedestal. The Department will measure the quantity
 as each individual unit installed. The Department will not measure excavation, concrete,
 conduit, fittings, ground rods, ground wires, or backfilling and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.38 Install Pedestal Post. The Department will measure the quantity as
 each individual unit installed. The Department will not measure excavation, concrete,
 conduit, fittings, ground rods, ground wires, or backfilling and will consider them
 incidental to this item of work.
 723.04.39 Install Antenna. The Department will measure the quantity as each
 individual unit installed. The Department will not measure any other materials necessary
 to complete the installation and will consider them incidental to this item of work.
 723.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 4790-4799
 4810-4811,
 20391NS835-20392NS835
 4820
 4821
 4830
 4840-4852
 4871-4873
 4880
 4881
 4882
 4883
 4884
 4885-4886
 4895
 4900
 4910-4916
 4920
 4930
 4931
 4932
 4950
 6472, 20631ND
 20093NS835
 4887, 20188NS835
 20189NS835
 20266ES835
 20408NS835
 20390NS835
 
 Pay Item
 Conduit, Size
 Junction Box, Type
 
 Pay Unit
 Linear Foot
 Each
 
 Trenching & Backfilling
 Open Cut Roadway
 Loop Wire
 Cable, Type
 Pole-Wooden, Size
 Steel Strain Pole
 Mast Arm Pole
 Signal Pedestal
 Post
 Anchor
 Messenger, Strength
 Loop Saw Slot and Fill
 Pedestrian Detector
 Signal
 Signal Controller-Type 170
 Beacon Controller-2 Circuit
 Install Sig Controller-Type 170
 Install Steel Strain Pole
 Remove Signal Equipment
 Install Span/Pole Mounted Sign
 Install Pedestrian Head LED
 Install Signal LED, Size
 
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot
 Linear Foot
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 Install Signal LED, Size
 Install Signal LED, Size
 Install Coordinating Unit
 
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 723—8
 
 20455NS835
 20457NS835
 20495NS835
 21543EN
 21743NN
 22631NN
 23051NN
 23052NN
 23068NN
 23157EN
 23222EC
 23235EC
 23982EC
 
 Video Camera
 Install Ped Detector Audible
 Audible Pedestrian Detector
 Bore and Jack Conduit
 Install Pedestrian Detector
 Install Mast Arm Pole
 Pedestal Post
 Span Mounted Sign
 Remove & Reinstall Coordinating
 Unit
 Traffic Signal Pole Base
 Install Signal Pedestal
 Install Pedestal Post
 Install Antenna
 
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Cubic Yard
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for installing and placing
 the complete traffic control device in satisfactory operation.
 
 723—9
 
 SECTION 724  PLANTING VINES, SHRUBS, AND TREES
 724.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and plant trees, shrubs, vines, seedlings, and other
 materials in the areas and in the arrangement specified in the Plans or as the Engineer
 directs. Dig and prepare beds and planting holes, prune plants, furnish and place backfill,
 fertilize, mulch, water, brace, and perform all other incidentals required for planting.
 Additionally, care for plants during the period required to demonstrate the plants have
 become established in a healthy growing condition, replace plants found defective as
 prescribed, and perform all other incidentals necessary to complete the work as specified
 in the Contract and as provided in this section.
 724.02
 
 MATERIALS.
 
 724.02.01 Plants. Conform to the requirements of the American Standard for
 Nursery Stock as published by the American Nursery and Landscape Association.
 Provide 30 calendar days notice before obtaining nursery stock vines, shrubs, or trees to
 allow Department personnel to inspect the stock at the source. The Department will
 inspect all vines, shrubs, and trees at the work site. Obtain the Engineer’s approval of the
 plants before planting.
 724.02.02 Mulch. Conform to Subsection 827.05.
 724.03
 
 CONSTRUCTION.
 
 724.03.01 Times Permissible for Planting. Perform the initial planting operation
 between the dates of November 1 and April 1. Perform initial planting when the
 temperature is a minimum of 35 °F and the ground is not frozen. Regardless of the
 calendar date, plants must be dormant when they are dug at the nursery source and when
 they arrive at the project site.
 Perform the replacement planting operation between the dates of November 1 and
 May 15.
 724.03.02 Transportation. Transport all plants from the nursery sources to the
 project site by covered vehicle.
 724.03.03 Layout of Planting. Before digging of planting holes or beds, lay out, by
 suitable staking, the location of all planting holes and beds, and obtain the Engineer’s
 approval.
 When the Contract specifies planting at locations that will not sustain healthy growth,
 submit a written request to the Engineer for approval to relocate the plants. If the
 Engineer cannot find a suitable site to relocate the plants, they will be deleted from the
 Contract.
 724.03.04 Backfill for Planting. Backfill with the best available material from the
 site. When desired, use topsoil from an off-site source. Exclude any soil with significant
 amounts of rock, shale, or clay material.
 724.03.05 Surplus Excavation. Dispose of surplus excavation from the planting
 holes as the Engineer directs.
 724.03.06 Mulching. Use either hardwood wood chips or shredded bark for
 mulching material, and place it around the plants as quickly as possible after planting.
 Apply it uniformly over the planting area to a depth of 4 inches and to a distance of one
 foot outside the periphery of the plant hole or planting bed.
 724.03.07 Bracing. Brace evergreens and shade trees. The Department will not
 require bracing on other plants except when the Engineer directs. When bracing is
 
 724—1
 
 required, brace according to the Standard Drawings.
 724.03.08 Period of Establishment. The Department will require a period of
 establishment to follow the completion of the initial planting. During this time perform
 the following maintenance items to ensure that optimum growing conditions for the plant
 material are maintained during the life of the contract. These maintenance items include
 but are not limited to the following: weeding beds, mowing perimeter of beds, watering
 plants, insect and disease control, periodic bracing adjustments.
 When the total of the combined plant materials would constitute a major item, the
 Department will require a 3 growing season period of establishment. When the total of the
 combined plant materials would not constitute a major item, the Department will require a
 one growing season period of establishment. The Department will require a one growing
 season period of establishment for plant material used along channel changes regardless of
 total. The Department will consider the period from April 30th until September 15th of the
 same year to be one growing season.
 724.03.09 Inspection Schedule. When all planting is complete, notify the Engineer
 and the Initial Inspection will be made. The Department will make Replacement
 Inspections by September 15th following each growing season to determine if replacement
 planting is required. Perform all required replacement planting before April 15. When all
 replacement planting is complete, notify the Engineer. If no replacement plantings are
 required at the last Replacement Inspection, the Department will consider the Replacement
 Inspection to be the Final Inspection.
 
 724.03.10 Replacement Planting. Ensure the plant materials remain in a
 healthy growing and vigorous condition at all times throughout the life of the period
 of establishment. The Department will consider plant materials to be unacceptable
 when any of the following conditions occur:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Plants are dead or missing from the planting site.
 Plants that have experienced injury and show obvious signs of damage from
 drought, sun scald, insects, or disease.
 Dieback of central leader and or lateral branches which disfigures the plant
 rendering it unacceptable.
 Plants that have been damaged by physical or mechanical injury.
 
 For 24-inch or shorter trees, perform replacement planting when the number of
 acceptable trees of that species and size falls below 75 percent. Ensure the replacement
 plantings raise the quantity of acceptable trees of that species and size to at least 85
 percent.
 For all other plant materials, perform replacement planting when the number of
 acceptable plants of that species and size falls below 95 percent. Ensure the replacement
 plantings raise the quantity of acceptable trees of that species and size to 100 percent.
 724.03.11 Removal of Stakes, Tags, and Bracing. Remove stakes, tags, and
 bracing materials after the first Replacement Inspection and no later than 18 months after
 initial planting. Dispose of removed material off of the right-of-way.
 724.03.12 Restoring Disturbed Areas. Restore all disturbed areas.
 724.04 MEASUREMENT. The Department will measure the quantity of Plants, Vines,
 Shrubs, and Trees by each individual unit.
 The Department will not measure bracing, mulching, furnishing topsoil, or
 maintenance for payment and will consider it incidental to the plant.
 The Department will not measure replacement planting, including that necessitated by
 a third party, for payment and will consider it incidental to the plant.
 
 724—2
 
 724.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities according to the Warranty Payment Schedule under the following:
 Code
 -------
 
 Pay Item
 Plants, Vines, and Shrubs; Species and Size
 Trees, Species and Size
 
 Pay Unit
 Each
 Each
 
 Warranty Payment Schedule
 (one growing season)
 Completion Date
 —
 Sept 15
 
 Initial Inspection
 1st Year Replacement Inspection
 
 April 30
 
 Payment
 70%
 30%
 
 Warranty Payment Schedule
 (3 growing seasons)
 Completion Date
 —
 Sept 15
 Sept 15
 Sept 15
 
 Initial Inspection
 1st Year Replacement Inspection
 2nd Year Replacement Inspection
 Final Inspection
 
 April 30
 April 30
 
 Payment
 70%
 10%
 10%
 10%
 
 Any replacement work not done by the scheduled completion date and all work found
 unacceptable during final inspection shall receive full deduction of its unit bid price from
 the payment.
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required
 under this section.
 
 724—3
 
 SECTION 725  CRASH CUSHIONS
 725.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and install crash cushion systems of the designated
 types and configurations at the locations shown on the Plans, and furnish replacement
 items in quantities designated on the Plans. Install each type of crash cushion according to
 the Standard Drawings and according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
 725.02 MATERIALS. Conform to the most current specifications and details
 recommended by the manufacturer of the crash cushion designated for use, except as
 otherwise specified herein.
 725.02.01
 
 Type VI Class B & BT. Use either of the following:
 
 1)
 
 The QuadGuard System as developed by Energy Absorption Systems, Inc., of
 Chicago, Illinois. For all miscellaneous metal work conform to ASTM A 36 and
 hot-dip galvanize according to ASTM A 123. Hot-dip galvanize the Quad-Beam
 Guardrail sections, Quad-beam to W-beam connectors, and QuadGuard
 Transition Panels after fabrication according to ASTM A 123.
 
 2)
 
 The TRACC System as developed by Trinity Industries (Syro Steel) of Girard,
 Ohio. For all miscellaneous metal work conform to ASTM A 36 and hot-dip
 galvanize according to ASTM A 123. For the TRACC fender panels conform to
 AASHTO 180. Hot-dip galvanize the TRACC fender panels and TRACC-beam
 connectors after fabrication according to ASTM A 123.
 
 725.02.02
 
 Type VI Class C & CT. Use either of the following:
 
 1)
 
 The QuadGuard ELITE System as developed by Energy Absorption Systems,
 Inc., of Chicago, Illinois. For all miscellaneous metal work conform to ASTM A
 36 and hot-dip galvanize according to ASTM A 123. Hot-dip galvanize the
 Quad-Beam Guardrail sections, Quad-beam to W-beam connectors, and
 QuadGuard Transition Panels after fabrication according to ASTM A 123.
 
 2)
 
 The SCI100GM System as developed by SCI Products, Inc. of St. Charles,
 Illinois. For all miscellaneous metal work conform to ASTM A 36 and galvanize
 according to ASTM A 123. For the SCI100GM fender panels conform to
 AASHTO 180. Galvanize the SCI100GM fender panels and SCI100GM -beam
 connectors after fabrication according to ASTM A 123.
 
 725.02.03
 1)
 
 2)
 
 Type VII Class B. Use either of the following:
 
 The QuadGuard WIDE System as developed by Energy Absorption Systems,
 Inc., of Chicago, Illinois. For all miscellaneous metal work conform to ASTM A
 36 and hot-dip galvanize according to ASTM A 123. Hot-dip galvanize the
 Quad-Beam Guardrail sections and Quad-beam to W-beam connectors after
 fabrication according to ASTM A 123.
 The WIDETRACC System as developed by Trinity Industries (Syro Steel) of
 Girard, Ohio. For all miscellaneous metal work conform to ASTM A 36 and hotdip galvanize according to ASTM A 123. For the TRACC fender panels conform
 to AASHTO 180. Hot-dip galvanize the TRACC fender panels and TRACCbeam connectors after fabrication according to ASTM A 123.
 
 725.02.04 Type VII Class C. Use either of the following:
 1)
 
 The QuadGuard ELITE WIDE System as developed by Energy Absorption
 Systems, Inc., of Chicago, Illinois. For all miscellaneous metal work conform to
 ASTM A 36 and hot-dip galvanize according to ASTM A 123. Hot-dip galvanize
 
 725—1
 
 2)
 
 the Quad-Beam Guardrail sections and Quad-beam to W-beam connectors after
 fabrication according to ASTM A 123.
 The SCI100GM System as developed by SCI Products, Inc. of St. Charles,
 Illinois. For all miscellaneous metal work conform to ASTM A 36 and
 galvanize according to ASTM A 123. For the SCI100GM fender panels conform
 to AASHTO 180. Galvanize the SCI100GM fender panels and SCI100GM-beam
 connectors after fabrication according to ASTM A 123.
 
 725.02.05
 Type VIII. Furnish a TMA conforming to NCHRP 350 at the
 appropriate test level for the project’s posted speed limit. For all miscellaneous metal work
 conform to ASTM A 36 and hot-dip galvanize according to ASTM A 123.
 725.02.06
 Type IX. Use the CAT-350 as developed by Trinity Industries (Syro
 Steel) of Girard, Ohio or FLEAT-MT as developed by the Road Systems, Inc. of Big
 Spring, Texas. Connect to a wall, pier, or other fixed object. For all miscellaneous metal
 work conform to ASTM A 36 and hot-dip galvanize according to ASTM A 123.
 725.02.07
 Type IX-A. Use the CAT-350 as developed by Trinity Industries
 (Syro Steel) of Girard, Ohio or FLEAT-MT as developed by the Road Systems, Inc. of
 Big Spring, Texas. Connect to guardrail. For all miscellaneous metal work conform to
 ASTM A 36 and hot-dip galvanize according to ASTM A 123.
 The Department may allow a higher crash cushion class type to be used in lieu of a
 lower class type of cushion that is specified in the Contract.
 725.02.08
 
 Concrete. Furnish AA concrete conforming to Section 601.
 
 725.03 CONSTRUCTION. Submit to the Engineer for approval installation drawings
 that accurately depict all details necessary for completing the installation. Do not start
 work until the Engineer approves the drawings. Furnish to the Engineer items such as
 manufacturer's brochures or specifications that completely outline the crash cushion
 manufacturer's current recommendations for materials and installation methods before
 beginning installation. All workmanship and materials are subject to the Engineer’s
 approval.
 Furnish and install Type 1 object markers according to the Plans and Standard
 Drawings.
 The Department may specify various components of the system on the plans or in the
 proposal as replacement elements. Furnish the specified quantity of replacement elements
 and deliver to the storage area designated in the proposal or by the Engineer.
 725.03.01
 Type VI Class B & C and VII Class B & C. Install at the locations
 shown on the Plans or where the Engineer directs. Construct a concrete pad when the
 Contract requires or when the Engineer directs. Construct the pad according to Section
 501 for rigid pavement or Section 505 for sidewalk, except use Class AA concrete.
 725.03.02
 Type VI Class BT & CT. Type VI Class BT & CT are temporary
 crash cushions at the end of temporary concrete barriers. Install at the locations shown on
 the Plans or where the Engineer directs, and connect to the temporary concrete barrier
 according to the Plans or Standard Drawings.
 Construct a concrete pad when the Contract requires or when the Engineer directs.
 Construct the pad according to Section 501 for rigid pavement or Section 505 for
 sidewalk, except use Class AA concrete.
 The Plans or the Engineer may require a Crash Cushion Type VI Class BT or CT to
 be used at more than one location on the project. When required, relocate the crash
 cushion at the time and in the sequence designated by the plans or by the Engineer.
 Maintain and keep operative each Crash Cushion Type VI Class BT or CT until its
 usefulness has ended. Stock at all times the necessary materials to repair a damaged crash
 
 725—2
 
 cushion. Repair damaged crash cushion as soon as practical, not to exceed 24 hours, after
 the damage occurs.
 After the usefulness of each Crash Cushion Type VI Class BT or CT has ended,
 dismantle and store on the right-of-way at a site the Engineer approves. Previous KYTC
 approved NCHRP Report 350 crash cushions can continue to be used in temporary
 locations only, until the end of their normal service life.
 725.03.03
 Type VIII. Mount on a truck of the size, and in a manner,
 recommended by the crash cushion manufacturer. During the course of the work, deploy,
 operate, and maintain the truck-mounted crash cushion at locations the Engineer directs.
 Stock enough cells to restore one crash cushion after one impact, and repair all damaged
 crash cushions as soon as practicable after damage occurs. After its usefulness has ended,
 remove the crash cushion from the truck and store the crash cushion together with
 mounting hardware on the right-of-way at a site the Engineer approves. The crash cushion
 and mounting hardware will become the property of the Department. The Department will
 not take ownership of the truck.
 725.03.04
 Type IX, and IX-A. Install at the locations shown on the Plans or
 where the Engineer directs.
 725.04
 
 MEASUREMENT.
 
 725.04.01 Crash Cushion Types VI Class B & C, VII Class B & C, IX, and IX-A.
 The Department will measure the quantity by each individual unit. When the plans or
 proposal specifies that the crash cushion is to be used in a temporary manner, the
 Department will measure as specified for Crash Cushion Type VI Class BT & CT.
 The Department will not measure the work necessary to anchor Crash Cushion Types
 VI Class B & C, VI Class BT & CT and VII Class B & C to existing pavement or bridge
 decks for payment and will consider it incidental to the crash cushion.
 725.04.02 Crash Cushion, Type VI Class BT & CT. The Department will measure
 the quantity of Crash Cushion Type VI Class BT & CT units furnished, installed,
 dismantled, and stored on the right-of-way.
 The Department will not measure furnishing and installing the W-beam to crash
 cushion connectors; furnishing and installing rear unit plates and front unit plates; work or
 materials necessary to repair damaged crash cushions; materials kept in stock or used to
 repair damaged crash cushions; or dismantling the units and storing them on the right-ofway for payment and the Department will consider them incidental to the crash cushion.
 725.04.03 Relocate Crash Cushion. The Department will measure the quantity by
 each unit and will consider it to include the unit’s removal and re-installation at a different
 location.
 725.04.04
 Crash Cushion, Type VIII. The Department will measure the
 quantity by each unit and will consider it to include furnishing, deploying, operating,
 maintaining, and storing on the right-of-way.
 725.04.05
 Crash Cushion Replacement Elements. The Department will
 measure the quantity by the lump sum and will consider it to include all replacement
 elements the Contract specifies and their delivery to the designated storage area.
 725.04.06
 Concrete, Class AA (for pads). The Department will measure the
 quantity used for Crash Cushion Type VII in cubic yards. The Department will not
 measure excavation or steel reinforcement for payment and will consider it incidental to
 the Class AA Concrete.
 The Department will not measure the quantity for payment when used for Crash
 Cushion Type VI or VI-T and will consider it incidental to the crash cushion bid item.
 
 725—3
 
 725.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 08900-08908
 02898
 02892
 08104
 
 Pay Item
 Crash Cushion, Type
 Relocate Crash Cushion
 Crash Cushion Replacement Elements
 Concrete, Class AA
 
 Pay Unit
 Each
 Each
 Lump Sum
 Cubic Yard
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required in
 this provision.
 
 725—4
 
 SECTION 726  RIGHT OF WAY MONUMENTS
 726.01 DESCRIPTION. Furnish and install right-of-way monuments at the location
 and with the type shown on the plans.
 726.02 MATERIALS. Furnish Aluminum Alloy monuments specified on the Standard
 Drawing.
 726.03 CONSTRUCTION. Install right-of-way monuments at the earliest opportunity
 on a project as determined by the Engineer. Install right-of-way monuments under the
 direct supervision of a Kentucky Licensed Professional Land Surveyor.
 Establish right-of-way monuments from existing Primary or Supplemental control
 monuments with an accuracy of 1:15,000 or greater.
 Place right-of-way monument information on a Control Monument Information Sheet
 (Exhibit 300-04 of the Highway Design Manual) provided by the Department. Place the
 completed Control Monument Information Sheet in a final survey report. Completely fill
 out the Control Monument Information Sheet, including the signature and registration
 number of the Kentucky Licensed Professional Land Surveyor in charge of the
 monumentation. Submit the Final Survey Report to the KYTC Survey Coordinator in the
 Division of Highway Design and the Engineer.
 Reset all monuments disturbed or destroyed during or prior to construction, with the
 same accuracy as stated previously. Update the Control Monument Information Sheet
 with any new data and include in the Final Survey Report. Ensure the Kentucky Licensed
 Professional Land Surveyor in charge of the re-monumentation signs and places his
 registration number on the updated Control Monument Information Sheet. Submit the
 updated Final Survey Report to the KYTC Survey Coordinator in the Division of Highway
 Design, the Engineer, and the Kentucky Licensed Professional Land Surveyor who set the
 original monuments.
 Right-of-way monuments that cannot be established at the planned location due to
 inaccessibility should be witnessed by a witness right-of-way monument on both lines and
 labeled as such (see Standard Drawing).
 Use a 6-foot long orange witness post to aid in locating right-of-way monuments. Set
 the witness post within the public right-of-way and within one foot of the monument
 location. Label the witness post to denote that the point is KYTC right-of-way (See
 Standard Drawing).
 726.04 MEASUREMENT.
 individual unit.
 
 The Department will measure the quantity by each
 
 726.05 PAYMENT. The Department will make payment for the completed and
 accepted quantities under the following:
 Code
 02429
 02430
 02431
 02432
 
 Pay Item
 Right-of-Way Monument, Type 1
 Right-of-Way Monument, Type 1A
 Witness R/W Monument Type 2
 Witness Post
 
 Pay Unit
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 The Department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required in
 this provision.
 
 726—1
 
 DIVISION 800
 MATERIALS DETAILS
 
 SECTION 801  CEMENT
 801.01 REQUIREMENTS. Provide portland cement from approved mills listed in the
 Department’s List of Approved Materials. Mills obtain approval by furnishing the
 Department samples and certified mill test data developed over the previous 6 months.
 Approved cement mill laboratories are AASHTO accredited in ASTM C150 test methods.
 Foreign cements are added to the approved list based upon testing by the sponsoring
 approved cement mill laboratory along with submittal and approval of verification
 samples. When supplying cement with a SO3 content above the value in table I of ASTM
 C 150, include supportive ASTM C 1038 14-day expansion test data for the supplied SO3
 content on the certification.
 The Department will require a signed certification from the supplier for each
 shipment of cement stating that the cement complies with the applicable ASTM standard
 and all additional requirements of this subsection.
 Conform to the following requirements for cement:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 Type I, II, III, and IV conforms to ASTM C 150. State, on the mill certification, the
 nature, amount, and identity of any processing addition and its compliance with
 ASTM C 465.
 Type K conforms to ASTM C 845.
 Type IP or Type IPA conforms to ASTM C 595, and the following additional
 requirements to Type IP and IPA:
 a)
 b)
 c)
 
 d)
 e)
 
 The pozzolan constituent shall be fly ash. Ensure that the loss on ignition of the
 fly ash does not exceed 3.0 percent.
 Ensure that the fly ash does not exceed 20 percent of the portland-pozzolan
 cement, by weight. The cement manufacturer shall furnish a statement to the
 Engineer stating the actual fly ash content in each shipment.
 The cement manufacturer shall furnish to the Engineer reports showing the
 results of tests performed on the fly ash used in the manufacture of the Type IP
 cement shipped to the project. The tests shall cover the chemical and physical
 properties listed in ASTM C 618.
 The cement manufacturer shall have a qualified technical representative readily
 available for consultations on the project at any time the Engineer deems
 necessary, at no expense to the Department.
 Use only one brand of Type IP cement throughout the project, unless the
 Engineer approves a change in brand in writing.
 
 4) Types IS or I(SM) conforms to ASTM C 595 and the following additional
 requirements:
 a)
 b)
 c)
 
 d)
 e)
 
 Use Grade 100 or 120 ground granulated blast furnace slag (GGBF slag)
 conforming to the requirements of ASTM C 989.
 Ensure that the GGBF slag does not exceed 30 percent, by weight, of the
 portland blast furnace slag for Type IS.
 The cement manufacturer shall furnish to the engineer reports showing the
 results of the tests performed on the GGBF slag used in the manufacturing of the
 Type IS and I(SM) shipped to the project. The tests shall cover the chemical and
 physical properties required in ASTM C 989.
 The cement manufacturer shall have a qualified technical representative readily
 available for consultation on the project at anytime the Engineer deems
 necessary, at no expense to the Department.
 Use only one brand of Type IS or I(SM) cement throughout the project, unless
 
 801—1
 
 the Engineer approves otherwise.
 Even when tested and approved, do not mix cement from different mills in individual
 batches or use cement from different mills in alternate batches of concrete. Subject to the
 above restrictions, the Engineer may allow the use of cements from different mills for any
 structure or individual elements of a structure, provided color contrasts resulting from
 their usage is minimal or is otherwise unobjectionable and identification of the location of
 concrete containing the different cements is satisfactorily maintained.
 Store cement to prevent damage from the elements. Provide weatherproof storage
 facilities with sufficient storage capacity that cements from different mills or of different
 types will not become intermixed.
 Provide an acceptable means for obtaining samples, from either the cement silo,
 weigh hopper, or truck.
 The Engineer will reject cement that for any reason has become damaged through
 contamination, partial set, or which contains lumps of caked cement. The Engineer may
 reject the entire contents of a container when it contains damaged cement.
 The Engineer may accept cement producing an air content of mortar between 12 and
 16 percent when it is to be used in air-entraining concrete and the air content of the
 concrete is controlled at the mixer.
 801.02 NON-SPECIFICATION CEMENT. The Department accepts cement on the
 basis of manufacturer’s certification attesting to type and conformance to the applicable
 ASTM specification. The Engineer will take check samples. When the check samples do
 not conform to these specifications, the Department will make deductions as shown in the
 following table. When a sample fails more than one test, the Department will make the
 total deduction as the sum of deductions up to a maximum of 100 percent.
 
 801—2
 
 TEST
 
 Autoclave Expansion
 
 MAXIMUM
 DEVIATION FROM
 REQUIREMENT
 (PERCENT)
 
 DEDUCTION RATE
 BASED ON INVOICE
 COST OF CEMENT
 
 0.08
 
 12.5% per 0.01% deviation
 
 Fineness by air
 permeability
 
 10
 
 20% per 2% deviation
 
 Air Content for Air
 Entrained Cement
 
 ±4
 
 25% per 1% deviation
 
 Air Content for NonAir Entrained Cement
 
 ±8
 
 0-4 free, thereafter 25%
 Per 1% Deviation
 
 Compressive Strength
 
 15
 
 20% per 3% deviation
 
 Time of Set
 Magnesium Oxide
 (MgO)
 
 20
 0.3
 
 25% per 5% deviation
 33.3% per 0.1% deviation
 
 Sulfur Trioxide (SO3)
 
 0.4
 
 0.1% free and then 33.3%
 per 0.1% deviation
 
 Loss on Ignition
 
 0.75
 
 20.0% per 0.15% deviation
 
 Insoluble Residue
 
 0.75
 
 20.0% per 0.15% deviation
 
 Tricalcium Aluminate
 (C3A)
 
 1.5
 
 33.3% per 0.5% deviation
 
 Silicon Dioxide (SiO2)
 
 3.0
 
 33.3% per 1% deviation
 
 Aluminum Oxide
 (A12O3)
 
 1.0
 
 20.0% per 0.2% deviation
 
 Ferric Oxide (Fe203)
 
 1.0
 
 20.0% per 0.2% deviation
 
 801—3
 
 SECTION 802  ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE
 802.01 REQUIREMENTS.
 requirements:
 
 Provide admixtures
 
 conforming to
 
 the following
 
 802.01.01 Air-Entraining. AASHTO M 154, except the chloride content (as Cl)
 shall not exceed one percent by weight. The Department may require tests for bleeding,
 time of setting, and length change.
 802.01.02 Water-Reducing and Retarding. AASHTO M 194, Type D, except the
 relative durability factor shall not be less than 90 and the chloride content (as Cl) shall not
 exceed one percent by weight.
 802.01.03 Water-Reducing. AASHTO M 194, Type A, except the relative
 durability factor shall not be less than 90 and the chloride content (as Cl) shall not exceed
 one percent by weight.
 802.01.04 Water-Reducing and Accelerating. AASHTO M 194, Type E, except
 the relative durability factor shall not be less than 90 and the chloride content (as Cl) shall
 not exceed one percent by weight. Use water reducing and accelerating admixture only
 when the Engineer has reviewed proposed procedures for mixing, handling, and placing
 the concrete, and has given written permission to proceed.
 802.01.05 Water-Reducing, High Range. AASHTO M 194, Type F, except the
 relative durability factor shall not be less than 90 and the chloride content (as Cl) shall not
 exceed one percent by weight.
 802.01.06 Water-Reducing, High Range and Retarding. AASHTO M 194, Type
 G, except the relative durability factor shall not be less than 90 and the chloride content
 (as Cl) shall not exceed one percent by weight.
 802.01.07 Accelerating. AASHTO M 194, Type C, except the relative durability
 factor shall not be less than 90 and the chloride content (as C1) shall not exceed one
 percent by weight.
 802.02 APPROVAL. Select admixtures from the Department’s List of Approved
 Materials. The Department places admixtures on the list based on evidence of compliance
 with requirements when determined by either tests performed by the Department; certified
 test data furnished by a recognized laboratory providing such laboratory shall be one
 regularly inspected by the Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory of ASTM; for airentraining admixtures that are aqueous solutions of Vinsol Resin, manufacturer’s shall
 submit a certification in the following form:
 This is to certify that the product (trade name) as manufactured
 and sold by (company) is an aqueous solution of Vinsol Resin that has
 been neutralized with sodium hydroxide. The ratio of sodium
 hydroxide to Vinsol Resin is one part of sodium hydroxide to (number)
 parts of Vinsol Resin. The percentage of solids based on the residue
 dried at 105 °C is (number). No other additive or chemical agent is
 present in this solution.
 The Engineer will not require testing of admixtures included on the Department’s List
 of Approved Materials at the time of their use unless there is indication in actual field use
 
 802—1
 
 of harmful effects on the properties of the concrete or when the Engineer considers testing
 necessary for other reasons.
 The Department will continue to include an admixture on the list contingent upon
 satisfactory performance in actual project use and an annual certification containing the
 following information:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 A statement that the admixture to be furnished during the particular calendar year is
 of the same composition as that previously approved for inclusion on the approved
 list.
 A statement that the admixture conforms to the appropriate requirements of
 AASHTO M 194 or AASHTO M 154, as applicable.
 A statement that the chloride content (as Cl) does not exceed one percent by weight.
 A statement that notification will be made to the Division of Materials of any changes
 in composition before furnishing the material to projects.
 
 The Department provides the specific details governing verification and documenting
 approved status of admixtures at the time of use in the Department’s Manual of Field
 Sampling and Testing Practices.
 
 802—2
 
 SECTION 803  WATER
 803.01 DESCRIPTION. This section describes the requirements for water used in
 mixing or curing concrete, emulsified asphalt or other similar materials.
 803.02 GENERAL. Use water for mixing or curing concrete, emulsified asphalt, or
 other similar materials that is reasonably clean and free from oil, salt, acid, alkali, sugar,
 vegetable, or other substances injurious to the finished product. The Engineer may test the
 water at any time for its suitability for a particular use.
 The Engineer will ordinarily accept water supplied by public distribution systems
 without testing.
 The Engineer will require testing of mixing water for use in concrete when not from a
 public distribution system.
 Provide water that when tested by KM 64-226 does not contain impurities in excess
 of the following limits:
 Acidity or Alkalinity Calculated
 in terms of Calcium Carbonate
 Total Organic Solids
 Total Inorganic Solids
 Chloride Content (as Cl)
 pH
 
 803—1
 
 0.05 Percent
 0.10 Percent
 0.10 Percent
 1,000 parts per million
 7 to 9 pH units
 
 SECTION 804  FINE AGGREGATES
 804.01 GENERAL. Fine aggregates include, but at the discretion of the Engineer are
 not limited to, natural sand, crushed sand, conglomerate sand, mortar sand, mineral filler,
 and lightweight aggregates where permitted.
 The Department’s List of Approved Materials includes the Aggregate Source List and
 the list of Class A and Class B Polish-Resistant Aggregate Sources.
 804.01.01 Natural Sand. Provide fine granular material resulting from the natural
 disintegration of rock.
 804.01.02 Crushed Sand. Provide fine granular material resulting from crushing of
 stone or gravel. Includes slag where permitted.
 804.01.03 Conglomerate Sand. Provide natural materials primarily processed to the
 desired sizes, without crushing. Conglomerate sand may include some material which has
 been produced by crushing larger pieces of the parent material.
 804.01.04 Mortar Sand. Provide natural, crushed, or conglomerate sand suitable for
 use in cement mortar.
 804.01.05 Mineral Filler. Provide limestone dust, cement, fly ash, or other inert
 mineral matter.
 804.02 APPROVAL. Provide fine aggregates from sources included on the Aggregate
 Source List meeting the description and requirements specified in this section.
 The Department will consider a source for inclusion on the Aggregate Source List
 when the aggregate producer complies with KM 64-608 and provides the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 A Quality Control Plan.
 A satisfactory laboratory facility with all necessary testing equipment.
 A Qualified Aggregate Technician to perform the required testing.
 
 When a supplier wishes to supply sand only for asphalt mixtures, Items 1, 2 and 3
 above will be waived. The Department may add the source to the Aggregate Source List
 and restrict its use to asphalt mixtures.
 Obtain the Department’s approval before furnishing aggregate from sources not on
 the Aggregate Source List. The Department will sample the aggregate during stockpiling
 and test according to the Department’s Manual of Field Testing and Sampling Practices.
 The Department will reject aggregate when excessive variation of gradation or
 physical properties cause unworkable mixtures, mixture control problems, or nonconformance to the finished product or mixture requirements.
 The Department will reject contaminated aggregate when the Engineer deems it could
 be detrimental to the finished product.
 804.03 CONCRETE. Provide natural, crushed, or conglomerate sand. The Department
 will allow any combination of natural, crushed, or conglomerate sand when the
 combination is achieved in the concrete plant weigh hopper. The Engineer may allow
 other sands.
 Use natural or conglomerate sands as fine aggregates in concrete intended as a
 wearing surface for traffic.
 Conform to the following:
 
 804—1
 
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 8)
 
 Sand Equivalent - 80 (minimum).
 Soundness - 10% loss (maximum).
 Friable Particles - 3.0% (maximum).
 Coal plus Lignite - 0.5% (maximum).
 Uncompacted Voids(1) – 47.0% (maximum).
 Organic Impurities - Not darker than the standard.
 Mortar Strength(2) - 95% at 7 calendar days (minimum).
 Gradation(1):
 Sieve Size
 Percent Passing
 3/8 inch
 100
 No. 4
 90-100
 No. 16
 45-85
 No. 50
 5-25
 No. 100
 0-8
 (1)
 (2)
 
 The Department will permit fine aggregates exceeding when they are used in
 a combination that meets requirements.
 The Department will require testing for mortar strength only for sand not
 passing the test for organic impurities and will supersede the requirement for
 organic impurities.
 
 The Department will waive the requirements for gradation, sand equivalent, and
 uncompacted voids for concrete pipe.
 804.04 ASPHALT MIXTURES. Provide natural, crushed, conglomerate, and slag
 sand, with the addition of filler as necessary, to meet gradation requirements. The
 Department will allow any combination of natural, crushed, conglomerate, and slag sand
 when the combination is achieved using cold feeds at the plant.
 804.04.01 Sand for Mixtures.
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 Gradation - 100 percent passing the 3/8 inch sieve with more than 50 percent
 passing the No. 4 sieve.
 Coal Plus Lignite - 5.0 percent maximum.
 Soundness - 15 percent maximum.
 
 804.04.02 Mineral Filler. Ensure 100 percent passes the No. 16 sieve and at least 30
 percent passes the No. 200 sieve.
 804.04.03 Polish-Resistant Aggregate. Provide fine aggregates required for polishresistant applications from a Class A or B Polish-Resistant Aggregate Source as required.
 In addition to these listed sources, the Department will consider natural sand,
 conglomerate sand, and crushed gravel sand meeting the requirements of Section 804 to be
 Class A polish-resistant.
 Provide a signed certification from the aggregate producer for the manufactured
 polish-resistant fine aggregate stating that the aggregate is supplied from the approved
 parent material as found on the Department’s List of Approved Materials, Polish-Resistant
 Aggregate Source List and Guidelines on the Division of Materials' webpage.
 804.04.04 Requirements for Combined Aggregates.
 A) Uncompacted Voids. Provide aggregates for Superpave mixtures meeting the
 minimum voids content as listed in the Superpave Fine Aggregate Consensus
 Property Requirements table.
 B) Sand Equivalent. Provide aggregate having a sand equivalent value of 45 or
 
 804—2
 
 greater for the portion of the total combined aggregates passing the No. 4 sieve.
 Provide aggregates for Superpave mixtures meeting the minimum sand
 equivalent limits as listed in the Superpave Fine Aggregate Consensus Property
 Requirements table.
 The sand equivalent limits specified in this section apply to aggregates in
 the final mixture. The Department will normally take samples from stockpiled
 aggregates or aggregate cold feeds, including mineral filler, for acceptance
 testing. When these tests do not meet the required values, make trial runs through
 the plant to provide material for sampling which is intended for the final mixture.
 The Department may waive the sand equivalent requirement provided the
 portion of the combined aggregate passing the No. 40 sieve is non-plastic
 according to AASHTO T 90.
 SUPERPAVE FINE AGGREGATE CONSENSUS PROPERTY
 REQUIREMENTS
 Uncompacted Void Content
 of Fine Aggregate (Percent),(1)
 Sand Equivalent
 ESAL
 Design ESALs
 Minimum
 (Percent),
 Class
 (millions)
 (Depth From Surface)
 Minimum
 ≤ 100 mm
 > 100 mm
 1
 40.0
 40.0
 45
 < 0.3
 
 (1)
 
 2
 
 0.3 to < 3
 
 40.0
 
 40.0
 
 45
 
 3
 
 3 to < 30
 
 45.0
 
 40.0
 
 45
 
 4
 45.0
 45.0
 ≥ 30
 Performed according to AASHTO T 304, Method A.
 
 50
 
 C) Friable Particles. Limit friable particles, excluding sandstone, to a maximum of
 1.0 percent of the total combined aggregates.
 D) Absorption. Provide total combined fine aggregates having a water absorption
 of no more than 4.0 percent.
 804.05 MORTAR SAND. Provide natural sand, crushed sand, or conglomerate sand
 conforming to Subsection 804.03 with the exception of Uncompacted Voids and
 Gradation. Conform to the following gradation:
 Sieve Size
 No. 8
 No. 50
 No. 100
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 10-40
 0-10
 
 804.06 EPOXY SEAL COATS. Provide either natural or conglomerate sand having an
 insoluble content of 90 percent or greater. Conform to the following gradation:
 Sieve Size
 No. 16
 No. 50
 No. 100
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 10-40
 0-5
 
 804.07 EPOXY SAND SLURRY. Provide silica sand containing no less than 90
 percent insolubles. Ensure the sand is rounded to subangular, clean, dry and non-friable.
 Conform to the following gradation:
 
 804—3
 
 Sieve Size
 No. 8
 No. 50
 No. 100
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 0-40
 0-5
 
 The Department may allow material not meeting this gradation if it produces a
 workable mixture and an acceptable slurry seal.
 804.08 PIPE BEDDING. Provide natural, crushed, or conglomerate sand having a sand
 equivalent of 20 or greater. The Department may waive the sand equivalent requirement
 when the portion passing the No. 40 sieve is non-plastic according to AASHTO T 90.
 Conform to the following gradation:
 Sieve Size
 3/8 inch
 No. 100
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 0-15
 
 804.09 UNDERDRAINS, EMBANKMENT DRAINAGE BLANKET, AND
 NATURAL SAND FOR DRAINAGE AND BACKFILL. Provide natural sand having
 a sand equivalent of 70 or greater. Conform to the following gradation:
 Sieve Size
 3/8 inch
 No. 4
 No. 100
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 75-100
 0-8
 
 804.10 GRADATION ACCEPTANCE OF NON-SPECIFICATION FINE
 AGGREGATE. When reasonably acceptable work has been produced using the
 aggregate in question, the Department may accept the work according to Subsection
 105.04. When the Engineer determines that the aggregate not conforming to gradation
 requirements may be left in place, the Department will accept the aggregate at a reduction
 in the Contract unit bid price for the work containing the aggregate according to the
 following procedures. The Department will not consider these procedures a means to
 continue accepting non-specification aggregates.
 The Department will base the reduction on the invoice price for the aggregate at the
 source. When satisfactory invoices are not furnished, the Department will use current bin
 prices for that source on file with the Cabinet’s Division of Purchases. The maximum
 deduction for non-specification material, which is allowed to remain in place, is 50
 percent.
 When aggregate fails to conform to gradation on more than one sieve, the Department
 will apply the largest payment reduction.
 The Department will define a lot based on the smallest definable quantity of material
 represented by acceptance test results, either passing results or failing results, or both.
 Normally, the Department will average all test results for the lot to determine the test
 result for payment according to the deduction tables. However, when test results are not
 reasonably uniform the Department will not average the high and low test results within a
 lot. The Department will assign each test result to equal quantities in new smaller lots in
 proportion to the number of tests representing the original lot. When daily tests are
 performed, the lot will be a day’s production unless the Department defines a smaller lot.
 When 2 consecutive lots contain non-specification material, discontinue the use of the
 aggregate until the Department makes a decision concerning the overall acceptability of
 the aggregate from that source.
 The Department will not impose a reduction in payment for quantities less than 50
 tons unless the Engineer deems it necessary.
 
 804—4
 
 GRADATION - CONCRETE SAND
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 3/8 inch
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 No. 4
 No. 16
 No. 50
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 98-99
 
 88-89
 
 97
 
 87
 
 96
 
 86
 
 95
 
 85
 
 45-85
 43-44
 86-87
 42
 88
 41
 89
 40
 90
 
 No. 100
 
 5-25
 3-4
 26-27
 2
 28
 1
 29
 0
 30
 
 0-8
 9
 10
 11
 12
 
 GRADATION - MINERAL FILLER
 Payment
 Reduction
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 No. 16
 No. 200
 
 0%
 10%
 20%
 30%
 50%
 
 100
 98-99
 97
 96
 95
 
 30 minimum
 29
 28
 27
 26
 
 GRADATION - MORTAR SAND
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 No. 8
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 No. 50
 
 100
 
 10-40
 8-9
 41-42
 7
 43
 6
 44
 5
 45
 
 98-99
 97
 96
 95
 
 804—5
 
 No. 100
 0-10
 11
 12
 13
 14
 
 GRADATION - SAND FOR EPOXY SEAL COAT
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 No. 16
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 No. 50
 
 100
 
 No. 100
 
 10-40
 8-9
 41-42
 7
 43
 6
 44
 5
 45
 
 98-99
 97
 96
 95
 
 0-5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 
 GRADATION - PIPE BEDDING
 Payment
 Reduction
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 3/8 inch
 No. 100
 
 0%
 10%
 20%
 30%
 50%
 
 100
 98-99
 97
 96
 95
 
 0-15
 16
 17
 18
 19
 
 GRADATION - UNDERDRAINS, EMBANKMENT DRAINAGE BLANKET, AND
 NATURAL SAND FOR DRAINAGE AND BACKFILL
 Payment
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 Reduction
 3/8 inch
 No. 4
 No. 100
 0%
 10%
 20%
 30%
 50%
 
 100
 98-99
 97
 96
 95
 
 75-100
 73-74
 72
 71
 70
 
 0-8
 9
 10
 11
 12
 
 804.11 SAMPLING AND TESTING. The Department will sample and test according
 to the following methods when applicable:
 Absorption (Fine Aggregate)
 Chemical Analysis
 Coal and Lignite
 Dry Sieve Analysis
 Friable Particles
 Insoluble Content (Fine Aggregate)
 Mortar Strength
 Organic Impurities
 Plastic Limit and Plasticity Index
 Sampling
 Sand Equivalent
 Sieve Analysis of Mineral Filler
 
 804—6
 
 KM 64-605
 KM 64-224
 KM 64-615
 AASHTO T 27
 AASHTO T 112
 ASTM D 3042
 AASHTO T 71
 AASHTO T 21
 AASHTO T 90
 AASHTO T 2
 AASHTO T 176
 AASHTO T 37
 
 Sodium Sulfate Soundness
 Uncompacted Voids (Method A)
 Wet Sieve Analysis
 
 804—7
 
 KM 64-610
 AASHTO T 304
 KM 64-620 or AASHTO T 11
 (Procedure B)/T 27
 
 SECTION 805  COARSE AGGREGATES
 805.01 GENERAL. Coarse aggregates include, but at the discretion of the Engineer are
 not limited to, crushed stone and crushed or uncrushed gravel. Includes lightweight
 aggregates or slag where permitted.
 The Department’s List of Approved Materials includes the Aggregate Source List, the
 list of Class A and Class B Polish-Resistant Aggregate Sources, and the Concrete
 Aggregate Restriction List.
 805.02 APPROVAL. Provide coarse aggregates from sources included on the
 Aggregate Source List meeting the description and requirements specified in this section.
 The Department will consider a source for inclusion on the Aggregate Source List
 when the aggregate producer complies with KM 64-608 and provides the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 A Quality Control Plan.
 A satisfactory laboratory facility with all necessary testing equipment.
 A Qualified Aggregate Technician to perform the required testing.
 
 Obtain the Department’s approval before furnishing aggregate from sources not on
 the Aggregate Source List. The Department will sample the aggregate during stockpiling
 and test according to the Department’s Manual of Field Testing and Sampling Practices.
 The Department will reject aggregate when excessive variation of gradation or
 physical properties cause unworkable mixtures, mixture control problems, or nonconformance to the finished product or mixture requirements.
 Coarse aggregates are subject to preliminary source approval.
 805.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. Provide coarse aggregates that are free of
 objectionable amounts of clay lumps, dirt coatings, and foreign material. The Department
 will reject contaminated aggregate when the Engineer deems it could be detrimental to the
 finished product.
 805.03.01 Soundness and Shale. Conform to the following:
 AGGREGATE USE
 
 SHALE
 PERMITTED(1)
 (Maximum %)
 
 SOUNDNESS
 REQUIREMENT
 (Maximum %)
 
 Portland Cement Concrete Mixtures
 Aggregate for Bridge Decks, Bridge Deck Overlays,
 and Bridge Barrier Walls
 All Other Concrete Classes and Uses
 
 1.0
 2.0
 
 9
 12
 
 Asphalt Mixtures
 Aggregate for Polish Resistant Surfaces and Asphalt
 Surface Under OGFC:
 Limestone and Dolomite
 Other Aggregate Types
 All Other Asphalt Mixtures
 
 1.0
 2.0
 2.0
 
 9
 12
 15
 
 Other Uses
 Sizes No. 610 or 710 When Used for Aggregate
 Surfacing, Traffic Bound Base, and Maintenance
 Riprap and Channel Lining
 
 5.0
 2.0
 
 18
 12
 
 805—1
 
 DGA & CSB
 All Other Uses
 (1)
 
 2.0
 2.0
 
 15
 15
 
 The Department will determine shale quantity by visual estimation for Riprap
 and Channel Lining and according to KM 64-604 for all other aggregate.
 805.03.02 Physical Properties. Conform to the following:
 Wear (Except Slag and Sandstone)
 Wear (Sandstone)
 Wear (Slag)
 Friable Particles
 Unit Weight (Slag)
 
 40% (maximum)
 50% (maximum)
 60% (maximum)
 1.0% (maximum)
 70 lbs/ft3 (minimum)
 
 805.03.03 Gradation. Where the Department specifies or permits designated sizes of
 coarse aggregates, provide aggregates meeting the grading limits indicated for the various
 sizes listed in the Sizes of Coarse Aggregates table. When the Contract does not specify
 sizes or combinations of aggregate for various types of construction, furnish aggregate
 according to the Aggregate Size Use table. The Department will allow blending of same
 source/same type aggregate to achieve designated sizes when precise procedures are used
 such as cold feeds, belts, weigh hoppers, or equivalent.
 805.03.04 Erodible or Unstable Material. Treat as applicable. The Department
 considers Size No. 57 or larger aggregate, except crushed or uncrushed gravel, nonerodible. The Department considers the following materials to be erodible or unstable:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Friable sandstone. The Engineer determines when sandstone is friable or
 non-friable.
 Crushed or uncrushed gravel, any size.
 Crushed coarse aggregate smaller than Size No. 57.
 Any material with 50 percent or more passing the No. 4 sieve.
 
 805.04 CONCRETE. Provide crushed stone or crushed or uncrushed gravel. The
 Department will allow any combination of crushed stone, crushed or uncrushed gravel
 when the combination is achieved in the concrete plant weigh hopper. Conform to the
 following:
 Max. Pct. by Wt.
 Friable Particles
 1.0
 Finer than No. 200
 2.0
 Coal and Lignite
 0.5
 Lightweight particles (Gravel)
 4.0
 (Sp. Gr. Less than 2.40)
 Lightweight particles (Limestone)
 1.0
 (Sp. Gr. Less than 2.40)
 The Department will waive the requirements for gradation and finer than No. 200 for
 concrete pipe.
 Do not use aggregate produced from an individual production lift until the
 Department obtains the finished product results from the Concrete Beam Expansion Test
 Method KM 64-629. If beam expansion is greater than 0.06 percent at 6 months, the
 Department will reject the production lift for use in concrete applications.
 The Department will not require tests for Concrete Beam Expansion from an
 individual production lift if the individual ledges are accessible for hand sampling and the
 lift is acceptable based on petrographic examination of the hand samples. The Department
 
 805—2
 
 will accept a production lift if no more than 20 percent of the total lift footage is
 considered potentially alkali carbonate reactive upon petrographic inspection.
 805.04.01 JPC Base, JPC Pavement, JPC Shoulders, Concrete for Bridge Decks,
 and Precast Products. The Department will subject coarse aggregates that are to be used
 in JPC base, JPC pavement, JPC shoulders, bridge decks, concrete overlays, and precast
 products to freeze-thaw testing according to KM 64-626. The Department will allow
 sources having expansions of 0.06 percent or less and a minimum of 80 percent durability
 factor to supply any size coarse aggregate listed in the Aggregate Size Use table,
 providing that size or a larger size has tested satisfactorily. When sources have
 expansions of more than 0.06 percent or a durability factor of less than 80 percent the
 Department will:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 Reject the material.
 Limit to the permitted sizes determined from acceptable freeze-thaw testing.
 Allow the submittal of a proposal to the Engineer for production of acceptable
 coarse aggregate. The Department will require acceptable freeze-thaw test
 results before approving any proposal.
 
 Provide a signed certification from the aggregate producer for the approved freezethaw coarse aggregate stating that the aggregate is supplied from the approved parent
 material as found on the Department’s List of Approved Materials and Concrete
 Aggregate Restriction List.
 805.04.02 Lightweight Aggregate.
 aggregate conform to the following:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 8)
 9)
 
 When the Department allows lightweight
 
 Dry Loose Unit Weight. As appropriate or as specified, AASHTO M 195, Table
 2.
 Gradation (by weight). Provide size specified, AASHTO M 195, Table 1.
 Wear. 50 percent maximum.
 Soundness. 9 percent loss maximum.
 Friable Particles. 1.0 percent maximum.
 Deleterious Particles. 1.0 percent maximum.
 Freeze-Thaw Resistance. 85 percent minimum durability factor and 0.06 percent
 maximum length change according to KM 64-626.
 Provide creep, shrinkage, and tensile splitting strength test data made on concrete
 produced from the lightweight aggregate when the Engineer requests.
 If lightweight aggregate from an unapproved source is proposed for use, notify
 the Engineer of the aggregate source and proposed concrete mix design at least
 10 weeks before any lightweight aggregate concrete is placed, so the Department
 may subject the lightweight aggregate to testing as outlined above, plus any
 additional testing as deemed necessary and indicated in AASHTO M 195. At the
 Department’s option, suitable documentation of such testing by an independent
 testing laboratory may be accepted.
 
 805.05 ASPHALT MIXTURES AND SEALS. Provide crushed stone, crushed gravel,
 or blast furnace slag. The Department will allow any combination of crushed stone,
 crushed gravel, or blast furnace slag when the combination is achieved using cold feeds at
 the asphalt plant. The Engineer may allow other coarse aggregates.
 805.05.01 Absorption. Provide aggregates having a water absorption of no more
 than 3.0 percent for each size and type. When blast furnace slag is used, provide total
 combined aggregates having a water absorption of no more than 4.0 percent.
 
 805—3
 
 805.05.02 Crushed Particles. Applies to the total combined aggregates retained on a
 No. 4 sieve, including the material from the fine aggregate. Conform to the following:
 A) Superpave Mixtures. Minimum percent crushed requirements as listed in the
 Superpave Coarse Aggregate Consensus Property Requirements table.
 B) Open-Graded Friction Courses. Minimum 95 percent one or more crushed
 faces and 75 percent 2 or more crushed faces.
 C) Seal Coats. Minimum 90 percent one or more crushed faces.
 D) Other Mixtures. Unless otherwise specified, minimum 75 percent one or more
 crushed faces.
 SUPERPAVE COARSE AGGREGATE CONSENSUS PROPERTY
 REQUIREMENTS
 Coarse Aggregate Angularity
 Flat and
 (Percent)
 Elongated(1)
 ESAL
 Design ESALs
 Minimum Depth From Surface
 (Percent),
 Class
 (millions)
 maximum
 ≤ 100 mm
 > 100 mm
 Crushed Faces
 Crushed Faces
 ≥1
 ≥2
 ≥1
 ≥2
 1
 75
 75
 10
 < 0.3
 2
 75
 75
 10
 0.3 to < 3
 3
 
 3 to < 30
 
 95
 
 90
 
 (1)
 
 80
 
 100
 100
 100
 ≥ 30
 Criterion based on a 5:1 maximum-to-minimum ratio.
 4
 
 75
 
 10
 
 100
 
 10
 
 805.05.03 Flat and Elongated. Provide aggregates for Superpave mixtures not
 exceeding the flat and elongated maximum as listed in the Superpave Coarse Aggregate
 Consensus Property Requirements table.
 805.05.04 Finer Than No. 200 (Seals). Provide coarse aggregates having no more
 than 3.0 percent passing the No. 200 sieve.
 805.05.05 Polish-Resistant Aggregate. Provide coarse aggregates required for
 polish-resistant applications from a Class A or Class B Polish-Resistant Aggregate Source,
 as applicable, based on mixture designation of aggregate type.
 Provide a signed certification from the aggregate producer for the manufactured
 polish-resistant coarse aggregate stating that the aggregate is supplied from the approved
 parent material as found on the Department’s List of Approved Materials, Polish-Resistant
 Aggregate Source List and Guidelines on the Division of Materials' webpage.
 805.06 DENSE GRADED AGGREGATE (DGA) AND CRUSHED STONE BASE
 (CSB). Provide crushed stone having a sand equivalent value of 30 or greater with
 mineral filler as needed to meet gradation requirements. The Department may waive the
 sand equivalent requirement when the portion passing the No. 40 sieve has a plasticity
 index of 4 or less according to AASHTO T 90.
 805.07 FREE DRAINING BEDDING AND BACKFILL. Provide crushed stone or
 crushed or uncrushed gravel. The Department will allow a shale content of 5 percent
 providing the combined shale, friable particles, and minus No. 200 content does not
 exceed 5 percent. Conform to the following gradation:
 
 805—4
 
 Sieve Size
 1 1/2 inch
 No. 4
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 0-30
 
 805.08 COARSE AGGREGATES FOR UNDERDRAINS. Furnish crushed or
 uncrushed aggregate, including pea gravel meeting the quality requirements of Section
 805 with the following exception: The Department will allow a shale content of 5 percent
 providing the combined shale, friable particles, and minus No. 200 content does not
 exceed 5 percent. Conform to the following gradation:
 Sieve Size
 1 1/2 inch
 No. 4
 No. 100
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 0-30
 0-5
 
 805.09 COARSE AGGREGATE FOR ROCK DRAINAGE BLANKET. Provide
 crushed or uncrushed aggregate, including pea gravel, meeting the quality requirements of
 this section with the following additional requirement: Ensure the minus No. 200 content
 does not exceed 5 percent. When the material includes a significant amount of individual
 fragments greater than 1 1/2 inches, the Engineer may accept the minus No. 200 portion
 based on visual inspection. Conform to the following gradation:
 Sieve Size
 4 inch
 No. 4
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 0-30
 
 805.10 GRANULAR EMBANKMENT. Provide granular material up to 12-inch
 maximum size with a maximum shale content of 5 percent. Use either:
 1)
 2)
 
 Engineer approved shot limestone or sandstone from roadway excavation, borrow
 excavation, or another approved source.
 Crushed stone, crushed or uncrushed gravel, or crushed or natural sand meeting
 general requirements of Section 804 and this section, with a minus No. 200 content
 not exceeding 10.0 percent.
 
 805.11 STRUCTURE GRANULAR BACKFILL. Provide crushed or uncrushed
 aggregate meeting the quality requirements of this section. When the material includes a
 significant amount of individual fragments greater than 1 1/2 inches, the Engineer may
 visually accept the minus No. 200 portion. Conform to the following gradation:
 Sieve Size
 4 inch
 No. 4
 No. 200
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 0-10
 0-5
 
 805.12 REINFORCED FILL MATERIAL.
 Obtain the Engineer’s approval for
 material quality before use. Ensure the material is reasonably free of shale or other
 deleterious material. Conform to the following:
 A) Gradation. Conform to Subsection 805.11.
 B) Resistivity. Greater than 3,000 ohm-cm (applicable only when granular fill has
 more than 50 percent passing the No. 4 sieve).
 C) PH. Between 5-10.
 D) Chlorides. Less than 200 parts per million.
 
 805—5
 
 E) Sulfates. Less than 1,000 parts per million.
 F) Angle of Internal Friction. Greater than or equal to 34 degrees. When
 providing gap-graded materials, single size aggregates, uncrushed gravel, or
 blends including uncrushed gravel, furnish a test report showing the 34 degree
 minimum internal friction angle is met. Test sample according to AASHTO T
 236 compacted to 95 percent of AASHTO T 99 Methods C or D at optimum
 moisture content. When such materials are approved, the Engineer will perform
 sampling and testing on the project as necessary to assure that the material
 furnished is closely similar to that approved.
 805.13
 
 SLOPE PROTECTION AND CHANNEL LINING.
 
 805.13.01 Cyclopean Stone Riprap and/or Channel Lining Class III. Provide
 material meeting the general requirements of Section 805. Ensure that 100 percent passes
 through a square opening of 16 inches by 16 inches, and no more than 20 percent passes
 through square openings of 8 inches by 8 inches. The Department may allow stones of
 smaller sizes for filling voids in the upper surface and dressing to the proper slope.
 805.13.02 Crushed Aggregate Slope Protection. Provide aggregate meeting the
 general requirements of Section 805. Conform to the following gradation (Coarse
 aggregate sizes No. 1 and No. 2 conform to this requirement):
 Sieve Size
 4 inch
 2 1/2 inch
 1 1/2 inch
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 25-100
 0-15
 
 805.13.03 Channel Lining, Class IA. Provide crushed stone meeting the general
 requirements of this section. Use a crusher, grizzly, or sieve with openings to produce a
 grading that 100 percent passes the 5 inch sieve, no more than 20 percent of the finished
 product passes through square openings 1 1/2 by 1 1/2 inches.
 805.13.04 Channel Lining, Class II. Provide crushed stone meeting the general
 requirements of this section. Use a crusher, grizzly, or sieve with openings to produce a
 grading that 100 percent passes the 9-inch sieve, and no more than 20 percent of the
 finished product passes through square openings 5 by 5 inches.
 805.13.05 Channel Lining, Class IV. Provide material excavated and prepared
 according to Section 204.
 805.13.06 Stone for Gabions. Provide aggregate meeting the general requirements
 of this section and be of such gradation that 100 percent passes through a square opening
 of 12 by 12 inches and 100 percent is retained on a 4 inch sieve.
 805.14 AGGREGATE
 SURFACING,
 TRAFFIC-BOUND
 BASE,
 AND
 MAINTENANCE. When providing size No. 610 or 710 coarse aggregate for aggregate
 surfacing (shoulders, entrances, mailbox turn outs, or similar items), traffic bound base
 and maintenance operations; furnish aggregate meeting the grading requirements in Sizes
 of Coarse Aggregates table, with no more than 12 percent finer than a No. 200 sieve.
 When providing DGA for aggregate surfacing, traffic bound base, and maintenance
 operations conform to the grading requirement in Sizes of Coarse Aggregates table.
 805.15 GRADATION ACCEPTANCE OF NON-SPECIFICATION COARSE
 AGGREGATE. It is intended that all aggregate purchased for Department work meet the
 requirements of this section. When reasonably acceptable work has been produced using
 
 805—6
 
 the aggregate in question, the Department may accept the work according to Subsection
 105.04. When the Engineer determines that the aggregate not conforming to gradation
 requirements may be left in place, the Department will accept the aggregate at a reduction
 in the Contract unit bid price for the work containing the aggregate according to the
 following procedures. The Department will not consider these procedures a means to
 continue accepting non-specification aggregates.
 The Department will base the reduction on the invoice price for the aggregate at the
 source. When satisfactory invoices are not furnished, the Department will use current bin
 prices for that source on file with the Cabinet’s Division of Purchases. The maximum
 deduction for non-specification material which is allowed to remain in place is 50 percent.
 When aggregate fails to conform to gradation on more than one sieve, the Department will
 apply the largest payment reduction.
 The Department will define a lot based on the smallest definable quantity of material
 represented by acceptance test results, either passing results or failing results, or both.
 Normally, the Department will average all test results for the lot to determine the test
 result for payment according to the deduction tables. However, when test results are not
 reasonably uniform the Department will not average the high and low test results within a
 lot. The Department will assign each test result to equal quantities in new smaller lots in
 proportion to the number of tests representing the original lot. When daily tests are
 performed, the lot will be a day’s production unless the Department defines a smaller lot.
 When 2 consecutive lots contain non-specification material, discontinue the use of the
 aggregate until the Department makes a decision concerning the overall acceptability of
 the aggregate from that source.
 The Department will not impose a reduction in payment for quantities less than 50
 tons unless the Engineer deems it necessary.
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 1
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 4 inch
 
 3 1/2 inch
 
 2 1/2 inch
 
 1 1/2 inch
 
 3/4 inch
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 0-15
 
 0-5
 
 98-99
 
 88-89
 
 16-17
 
 6-7
 
 97
 
 87
 
 18
 
 8
 
 96
 
 86
 
 19
 
 9
 
 95
 
 85
 
 25-60
 61-62
 23-24
 22
 63
 21
 64
 20
 65
 
 20
 
 10
 
 805—7
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 2
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 3 inch
 
 2 1/2 inch
 
 2 inch
 
 1 1/2 inch
 
 3/4 inch
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 0-15
 
 0-5
 
 98-99
 
 88-89
 
 16-17
 
 6-7
 
 97
 
 87
 
 18
 
 8
 
 96
 
 86
 
 19
 
 9
 
 95
 
 85
 
 35-70
 33-34
 71-72
 32
 73
 31
 74
 30
 75
 
 20
 
 10
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 23
 Payment
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 
 Reduction
 
 3 inch
 
 2 inch
 
 1 inch
 
 1/2 inch
 
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 100
 
 40-90
 38-39
 91-92
 37
 93
 36
 94
 35
 95
 
 0-15
 
 0-5
 
 16-17
 
 6-7
 
 18
 
 8
 
 19
 
 9
 
 20
 
 10
 
 98-99
 97
 96
 95
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 3
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 2 1/2 inch
 
 2 inch
 
 1 1/2 inch
 
 1 inch
 
 1/2 inch
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 0-15
 
 0-5
 
 98-99
 
 88-89
 
 16-17
 
 6-7
 
 97
 
 87
 
 18
 
 8
 
 96
 
 86
 
 19
 
 9
 
 95
 
 85
 
 35-70
 33-34
 71-72
 32
 73
 31
 74
 30
 75
 
 20
 
 10
 
 805—8
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 357
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 2 1/2 inch
 
 2 inch
 
 1 inch
 
 1/2 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 100
 
 95-100
 93-94
 
 97
 
 92
 
 96
 
 91
 
 95
 
 90
 
 10-30
 8-9
 31-32
 7
 33
 6
 34
 5
 35
 
 0-5
 
 98-99
 
 35-70
 33-34
 71-72
 32
 73
 31
 74
 30
 75
 
 6-7
 8
 9
 10
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 4
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 2 inch
 
 1 1/2 inch
 
 1 inch
 
 3/4 inch
 
 3/8 inch
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 0-15
 
 0-5
 
 98-99
 
 88-89
 
 16-17
 
 6-7
 
 97
 
 87
 
 18
 
 8
 
 96
 
 86
 
 19
 
 9
 
 95
 
 85
 
 20-55
 18-19
 56-57
 17
 58
 16
 59
 15
 60
 
 20
 
 10
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 467
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 2 inch
 
 1 1/2 inch
 
 3/4 inch
 
 3/8 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 100
 
 95-100
 93-94
 
 97
 
 92
 
 96
 
 91
 
 95
 
 90
 
 10-30
 8-9
 31-32
 7
 33
 6
 34
 5
 35
 
 0-5
 
 98-99
 
 35-70
 33-34
 71-72
 32
 73
 31
 74
 30
 75
 
 805—9
 
 6-7
 8
 9
 10
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 5
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 1 1/2 inch
 
 1 inch
 
 3/4 inch
 
 1/2 inch
 
 3/8 inch
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 0-10
 
 0-5
 
 98-99
 
 88-89
 
 11-12
 
 6-7
 
 97
 
 87
 
 13
 
 8
 
 96
 
 86
 
 14
 
 9
 
 95
 
 85
 
 20-55
 18-19
 56-57
 17
 58
 16
 59
 15
 60
 
 15
 
 10
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 57
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 1 1/2 inch
 
 1 inch
 
 1/2 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 No. 8
 
 100
 
 95-100
 
 0-10
 
 0-5
 
 98-99
 
 93-94
 
 11-12
 
 6-7
 
 97
 
 92
 
 13
 
 8
 
 96
 
 91
 
 14
 
 9
 
 95
 
 90
 
 25-60
 23-24
 61-62
 22
 63
 21
 64
 20
 65
 
 15
 
 10
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 610
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 1 1/2 inch
 
 1 inch
 
 1/2 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 100
 
 85-100
 
 98-99
 
 83-84
 
 97
 
 82
 
 96
 
 81
 
 95
 
 80
 
 40-75
 38-39
 76-77
 37
 78
 36
 79
 35
 80
 
 15-40
 13-14
 41-42
 12
 43
 11
 44
 10
 45
 
 805—10
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 67
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 1 inch
 
 3/4 inch
 
 3/8 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 No. 8
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 0-10
 
 0-5
 
 98-99
 
 88-89
 
 11-12
 
 6-7
 
 97
 
 87
 
 13
 
 8
 
 96
 
 86
 
 14
 
 9
 
 95
 
 85
 
 20-55
 18-19
 56-57
 17
 58
 16
 59
 15
 60
 
 15
 
 10
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 68
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 1 inch
 
 3/4 inch
 
 3/8 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 No. 8
 
 No. 16
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 0-5
 
 88-89
 
 11-12
 
 6-7
 
 97
 
 87
 
 13
 
 8
 
 96
 
 86
 
 14
 
 9
 
 95
 
 85
 
 5-25
 3-4
 26-27
 2
 28
 1
 29
 0
 30
 
 0-10
 
 98-99
 
 30-65
 28-29
 66-67
 27
 68
 26
 69
 25
 70
 
 15
 
 10
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 710
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 1 inch
 
 3/4 inch
 
 3/8 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 100
 
 80-100
 
 0-30
 
 98-99
 
 78-79
 
 97
 
 77
 
 96
 
 76
 
 95
 
 75
 
 30-75
 28-29
 76-77
 27
 78
 26
 79
 25
 80
 
 805—11
 
 31-32
 33
 34
 35
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 78
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 3/4 inch
 
 1/2 inch
 
 3/8 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 No. 8
 
 No. 16
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 0-5
 
 88-89
 
 11-12
 
 6-7
 
 97
 
 87
 
 13
 
 8
 
 96
 
 86
 
 14
 
 9
 
 95
 
 85
 
 5-25
 3-4
 26-27
 2
 28
 1
 29
 0
 30
 
 0-10
 
 98-99
 
 40-75
 38-39
 76-77
 37
 78
 36
 79
 35
 80
 
 15
 
 10
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 8
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 1/2 inch
 
 3/8 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 No. 8
 
 No. 16
 
 100
 
 85-100
 
 0-10
 
 0-5
 
 98-99
 
 83-84
 
 11-12
 
 6-7
 
 97
 
 82
 
 13
 
 8
 
 96
 
 81
 
 14
 
 9
 
 95
 
 80
 
 10-30
 8-9
 31-32
 7
 33
 6
 34
 5
 35
 
 15
 
 10
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 9-M
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 20%
 30%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 1/2 inch
 
 3/8 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 No. 8
 
 100
 98-99
 97
 96
 95
 
 75-100
 73-74
 72
 71
 70
 
 0-25
 26-27
 28
 29
 30
 
 0-5
 6-7
 8
 9
 10
 
 805—12
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 10
 Payment
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 
 Reduction
 
 3/8 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 No. 100
 
 100
 
 85-100
 
 98-99
 
 83-84
 
 97
 
 82
 
 96
 
 81
 
 95
 
 80
 
 10-30
 8-9
 31-32
 7
 33
 6
 34
 5
 35
 
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 GRADATION - SIZE NO. 11
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 50%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 3/8 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 No. 8
 
 No. 100
 
 100
 
 40-90
 38-39
 91-92
 37
 93
 36
 94
 35
 95
 
 10-40
 8-9
 41-42
 7
 43
 6
 44
 5
 45
 
 0-5
 
 98-99
 97
 96
 95
 
 6-7
 8
 9
 10
 
 GRADATION - DENSE GRADED AGGREGATE
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 5%
 5%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 1 inch
 
 3/4 inch
 
 3/8 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 No. 30
 
 No. 200
 
 100
 
 70-100
 68-69
 
 50-80
 48-49
 81-82
 46-47
 83-84
 45
 85
 44
 86
 
 30-65
 28-29
 66-67
 26-27
 68-69
 25
 70
 24
 71
 
 10-40
 
 4-13
 
 41-42
 9
 43-44
 
 14
 
 98-99
 66-67
 96-97
 95
 
 65
 64
 
 94
 
 805—13
 
 45
 8
 46
 
 15
 3
 16
 2
 17
 
 GRADATION - CRUSHED STONE BASE
 Payment
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 
 Reduction 2 1/2 inch 1 1/2 inch 3/4 inch
 0%
 5%
 5%
 10%
 10%
 20%
 20%
 30%
 30%
 
 100
 
 90-100
 88-89
 
 60-95
 58-59
 96-97
 56-57
 98
 54-55
 99
 53
 100
 
 98-99
 86-87
 96-97
 84-85
 95
 83
 94
 
 3/8 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 No. 30
 
 No. 200
 
 30-70
 28-29
 71-72
 26-27
 73
 24-25
 74
 23
 75
 
 15-55
 13-14
 56-57
 11-12
 58
 9-10
 59
 8
 60
 
 5-20
 3-4
 21-22
 1-2
 23
 0
 24
 
 0-8
 
 25
 
 11
 
 9
 10
 
 GRADATION - FREE DRAINING BEDDING AND BACKFILL
 Payment
 Reduction
 0%
 10%
 20%
 30%
 50%
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 1 1/2 inch
 No. 4
 100
 98-99
 97
 96
 95
 
 0-30
 31-32
 33
 34
 35
 
 GRADATION - COARSE AGGREGATES FOR UNDERDRAINS
 Payment
 Reduction
 
 1 1/2 inch
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 No. 4
 
 No. 100
 
 0%
 10%
 20%
 30%
 50%
 
 100
 98-99
 97
 96
 95
 
 0-30
 31-32
 33
 34
 35
 
 0-5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 
 GRADATION - COARSE AGGREGATE FOR ROCK DRAINAGE BLANKET
 Payment
 Reduction
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 4 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 0%
 10%
 20%
 30%
 50%
 
 100
 98-99
 97
 96
 95
 
 0-30
 31-32
 33
 34
 35
 
 805—14
 
 GRADATION - CRUSHED AGGREGATE SLOPE PROTECTION
 Payment
 Reduction
 
 4 inch
 
 Sieve Size-Percent Passing
 2 1/2 inch
 
 1 1/2 inch
 
 0%
 10%
 20%
 30%
 50%
 
 100
 98-99
 97
 96
 95
 
 25-100
 23-24
 22
 21
 20
 
 0-15
 16-17
 18
 19
 20
 
 805—15
 
 SIZES OF COARSE AGGREGATES
 Sieve
 
 AMOUNTS FINER THAN EACH LABORATORY SIEVE (SQUARE OPENINGS) PERCENTAGE BY WEIGHT
 
 Aggregate Size
 
 Nominal (3)
 Maximum
 Aggregate Size
 
 4 inch
 
 3 1/2 inch
 
 1
 
 3 ½ inch
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 2
 
 3 inch
 
 2 1/2 inch
 
 2 inch
 
 2 ½ inch
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 23
 
 2 inch
 
 100
 
 3
 
 2 inch
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 357
 
 2 inch
 
 100
 
 95-100
 
 4
 
 1 ½ inch
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 467
 
 1 ½ inch
 
 100
 
 95-100
 
 5
 
 1 inch
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 25-60
 
 1 1/2 inch
 
 1 inch
 
 0-15
 35-70
 
 3/8 inch
 
 No. 4
 
 No. 8
 
 No. 16
 
 No. 30
 
 No. 100
 
 No. 200
 
 0-5
 0-15
 
 35-70
 
 1/2 inch
 
 0-5
 
 0-15
 
 40-90
 
 3/4 inch
 
 0-5
 
 0-15
 
 0-5
 
 35-70
 
 10-30
 
 20-55
 
 0-15
 35-70
 20-55
 
 0-5
 0-5
 10-30
 
 0-10
 
 0-5
 
 0-5
 
 57
 
 1 inch
 
 100
 
 95-100
 
 25-60
 
 0-10
 
 610
 
 1 inch
 
 100
 
 85-100
 
 40-75
 
 15-40
 
 67
 
 3/4 inch
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 20-55
 
 0-10
 
 0-5
 
 68
 
 3/4 inch
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 30-65
 
 5-25
 
 0-10
 
 710
 
 3/4 inch
 
 100
 
 80-100
 
 30-75
 
 0-30
 
 78
 
 1/2 inch
 
 90-100
 
 40-75
 
 5-25
 
 0-10
 
 0-5
 
 8
 
 3/8 inch
 
 100
 
 85-100
 
 10-30
 
 0-10
 
 0-5
 
 100
 
 0-5
 
 100
 
 0-5
 
 0-5
 
 9-M
 
 3/8 inch
 
 75-100
 
 0-25
 
 10(2)
 
 No. 4
 
 100
 
 85-100
 
 11(2)
 
 No. 4
 
 100
 
 40-90
 
 DENSE GRADED
 AGGREGATE (1)
 
 3/4 inch
 
 70-100
 
 50-80
 
 30-65
 
 10-40
 
 4-13
 
 CRUSHED
 STONE BASE (1)
 
 1 ½ inch
 
 60-95
 
 30-70
 
 15-55
 
 5-20
 
 0-8
 
 100
 100
 
 90-100
 
 (1)
 
 10-30
 10-40
 
 0-5
 
 Gradation performed by wet sieve KM 64-620 or AASHTO T 11/T 27.
 Sizes shown for convenience and are not to be considered as coarse aggregates.
 (3)
 Nominal Maximum Size is the largest sieve on the gradation table for an aggregate size on which any material may be retained
 Note: The Department will allow blending of same source/same type aggregate when precise procedures are used such as cold feed, belt, or equivalent and combining of sizes or types of aggregate using
 the weigh hopper at concrete plants or controlled feed belts at the pugmill to obtain designated sizes.
 (2)
 
 805—16
 
 .
 
 AGGREGATE SIZE USE
 Type of Construction
 Asphalt Mixtures
 
 Sizes to be Used
 See Subsection 403.03
 
 Traffic-Bound Base
 
 57, 610, 710, or DGA
 
 JPC Base and Class P Concrete
 
 57, 67, 68, 78, 8, or 9-M with fine aggregate as
 specified in Section 804.
 
 Cement Concrete Structures and
 Incidental Construction
 
 57, 67, 68, 78, 8, 9-M for Classes “A”, “AA”, “D”,
 “D” Modified, “M1”, “M2”, and “B” (357 & 467
 also for Class B).
 8 or 9-M for Waterproofing Overlays.
 67, 68, 78, 8, 9-M for all other Overlays and
 Classes “AAA” and “A” Modified; with fine
 aggregate as specified in Section 804.
 
 805.16 SAMPLING AND TESTING. The Department will sample and test coarse
 aggregates at locations and frequencies that the Engineer determines. The Department
 will sample and test according to the following methods when applicable:
 Absorption (Coarse Aggregate)
 Angle of Internal Friction
 Chlorides
 Clay Lumps and Friable Particles
 Coal and Lignite
 Concrete Beam Expansion Test
 Dry Sieve Analysis
 Finer Than No. 200
 Flat and Elongated Particles
 Freeze/Thaw
 Insoluble Residue
 Lightweight Particles
 Percent Crushed Particles
 pH
 Plastic Limit and Plasticity Index
 Resistivity
 Sampling
 Sand Equivalent
 Shale
 Sodium Sulfate Soundness (5 Cycles)
 Sulfates
 Unit Weight
 Wear
 Wet Sieve Analysis
 
 805—17
 
 AASHTO T 85
 AASHTO T236 and T 99
 Methods C or D
 Calif. DOT 422
 AASHTO T 112
 KM 64-615
 KM 64-629
 AASHTO T 27
 KM 64-606 or
 AASHTO T 11 (Procedure B)
 ASTM D 4791 (By Mass)
 KM 64-626
 KM 64-265
 AASHTO T 113
 ASTM D 5821 (By Mass)
 Calif. DOT 643
 AASHTO T 90
 Calif. DOT 643
 AASHTO T 2
 AASHTO T 176
 KM 64-604
 KM 64-610
 Calif. DOT 417
 AASHTO T 19
 AASHTO T 96
 KM 64-620 or
 AASHTO T 11 (Procedure B)/T27
 
 SECTION 806  ASPHALT MATERIALS
 806.01 DECRIPTION. The asphalt materials section covers performance-graded (PG)
 binders, emulsified asphalts, cut-back emulsions, and liquid asphalt for cold-patching
 mixtures. Provide the specified grade of material conforming to the requirements in this
 section from suppliers listed in the Department’s List of Approved Materials. Inclusion on
 the list of approved suppliers is obtained by following the guidelines of the Approved
 Supplier Certification (ASC) program contained in Kentucky Method (KM) 64-444, by
 following the guidelines of the Emulsified Asphalt Supplier Certification (EASC) program
 contained in KM 64-445, or by pretesting and approval. The Department may approve
 other types of asphalt materials provided they conform to the requirements of the type
 specified in the contract.
 806.02 SAMPLING. The Department will sample all asphalt materials according to
 KM 64-404.
 806.03 PG BINDERS. This subsection covers the requirements and pay schedules for
 PG binders.
 806.03.01 General Requirements. Provide PG binders conforming to AASHTO M
 320 except the intermediate dynamic shear will be tested at 25 °C for all material.
 Additionally, the material must have a minimum solubility of 99.0 percent when tested
 according to AASHTO T 44 and PG 76-22 must exhibit a minimum elastic recovery of 75
 percent when tested according to AASHTO T 301.
 PG BINDER REQUIREMENTS AND PRICE ADJUSTMENT SCHEDULE
 Test
 
 Specification
 
 100% Pay
 
 90% Pay
 
 80% Pay
 
 70% Pay
 
 50% Pay(1)
 
 1.00 kPa Min.
 
 1.00-0.95
 
 0.94-0.90
 
 0.89-0.85
 
 0.84-0.80
 
 < 0.80
 
 1.00 Max.
 
 1.01-1.10
 
 1.11-1.20
 
 1.21-1.30
 
 1.31-1.40
 
 > 1.40
 
 2.20 kPa Min.
 
 2.00-2.20
 
 1.70-1.99
 
 1.50-1.69
 
 1.30-1.49
 
 < 1.30
 
 ≥70
 
 65-69
 
 60-64
 
 55-59
 
 < 55
 
 316-330
 
 331-345
 
 346-360
 
 Original Binder
 Dynamic Shear, G*/sinδ
 Viscosity (2)
 
 3 Pa·s
 
 RTFO Residue
 Mass Loss, %
 Dynamic Shear, G*/sinδ
 Elastic Recovery, % (3)
 (AASHTO T 301)
 PAV Aging
 
 75 Min.
 
 BBR
 Creep Stiffness
 m-value
 Dynamic Shear, G*sinδ
 (1)
 
 (2)
 (3)
 
 300 MPa Max.
 
 300-315
 
 0.300 Min.
 
 0.285-0.300
 
 0.280-0.284 0.275-0.279 0.270-0.274
 
 < 0.270
 
 > 360
 
 5,000 kPa Max.
 
 0-5,500
 
 5,501-5,800 5,801-5,900 5,901-6,000
 
 > 6,000
 
 If allowed to remain in place, the Department will review materials performing in
 this range on a project-by-project basis to determine if removal of the material is
 warranted.
 Results are for certification purposes only.
 Age sample according to AASHTO T 240 and then condition and test the sample at
 77 ± 1 °F. Elongate the sample to 10 cm.
 % Elongation Recovery = (10-X) x 10 where X is the final reading in cm after
 bringing the two severed ends of the specimen back together.
 
 806—1
 
 806.03.02 Handling Requirements. Submit written instructions to the Division of
 Materials for handling requirements. Submit the Supplier’s written instructions and
 requirements for the proper use and handling of the asphalt binder to the Engineer.
 Include tank requirements, construction equipment requirements, and storage and mixing
 temperature requirements. Submit material test data and a certification of conformance
 prior to shipping material.
 806.03.03 Modification. Use only styrene-butadiene (SB) or styrene-butadienestyrene (SBS) modifiers. All binders are to be homogeneous blends. Include a statement
 of the type of modification with all samples submitted to the Division of Materials for
 testing and certification. Circulate or agitate the modified asphalt binders in the storage
 tank as specified in the Supplier’s handling procedures. Obtain the Engineer’s approval for
 the means of circulation. Do not use in-line blending at the asphalt plant.
 806.04 EMULSIFIED ASPHALTS. This subsection covers emulsified asphalts of the
 following grades:
 • RS-2
 • AE-200
 
 • SS-1
 • HFRS-2
 
 • SS-1h
 • HFMS-2
 
 806.04.01 General Requirements.
 Furnish emulsified asphalts that are
 homogeneous, showing no separation of asphalt during normal handling or storage. The
 Engineer will reject emulsified asphalt that has been frozen.
 806.04.02 Specific Requirements for Grades RS-2, SS-1, SS-1h, HFRS-2,
 HFMS-2. Conform to AASHTO M 140 with the following exceptions and requirements
 of the Emulsified Asphalt Requirements and Price adjustment Schedule except the
 cement-mixing test is not required.
 806.04.03 Testing of Grades RS-2, SS-1, SS-1h , HFRS-2, and HFMS-2. Perform
 tests according to AASHTO T 59. Use Tyrone Formation limestone as the reference
 aggregate for the coating test.
 
 806—2
 
 EMULSIFIED ASPHALT REQUIREMENTS AND PRICE ADJUSTMENT SCHEDULE
 Test
 
 Grade
 
 Specification 100% Pay
 
 90% Pay
 
 80% Pay
 
 60% Pay
 
 0% Pay
 
 15-17
 
 12-14
 
 9-11
 
 ≤8
 
 Saybolt Furol
 
 SS-1, SS-1h
 
 20-100
 
 18-110
 
 111-120
 
 121-130
 
 131-140
 
 ≥ 141
 
 @ 77 ºF, s
 
 HFMS-2
 
 ≥ 100
 
 ≥ 90
 
 80-89
 
 70-79
 
 60-69
 
 ≤ 59
 
 AE-200
 
 ≥ 50
 
 ≥ 45
 
 40-44
 
 35-39
 
 30-34
 
 ≤ 29
 
 60-64
 
 55-59
 
 50-54
 
 ≤ 49
 
 75-400
 
 65-440
 
 441-480
 
 481-520
 
 521-560
 
 ≥ 561
 
 Viscosity,
 
 Viscosity,
 
 RS-2,
 
 Saybolt Furol
 
 HFRS-2
 
 @ 122 ºF, s
 Residue by
 
 SS-1, SS-1h
 
 ≥ 57
 
 ≥ 28
 
 27
 
 26
 
 25
 
 ≤ 24
 
 Distillation, %
 
 HFMS-2
 
 ≥ 65
 
 ≥ 64
 
 61-63
 
 58-60
 
 55-57
 
 ≤ 54
 
 HFRS-2, RS-2
 
 ≥ 63
 
 ≥ 62
 
 59-61
 
 56-58
 
 53-55
 
 ≤ 52
 
 AE-200
 
 ≥ 60
 
 ≥ 59
 
 56-58
 
 53-55
 
 50-52
 
 ≤ 49
 
 Oil Distillates, % AE-200
 
 0-6
 
 0-7
 
 8-10
 
 11-13
 
 14-16
 
 ≥ 17
 
 Demulsibility, %
 
 ≥ 60
 
 ≥ 57
 
 51-56
 
 45-50
 
 39-44
 
 ≤ 38
 
 34-36
 
 31-33
 
 28-30
 
 ≤ 27
 
 109-120
 
 121-130
 
 ≥ 131
 
 RS-2, HFRS-2
 
 Residue
 Penetration
 
 SS-1h
 
 40-90
 
 37-98
 
 99-108
 87-91
 
 82-86
 
 77-81
 
 ≤ 76
 
 RS-2, HFRS-2
 
 100-200
 
 92-216
 
 217-225
 
 226-235
 
 236-245
 
 ≥ 246
 
 AE-200, HFRS-2,
 
 ≥ 1,200
 
 ≥ 1,100
 
 800-1,099
 
 500-799
 
 300-499
 
 ≤ 299
 
 ≥ 95
 
 ≥ 90
 
 85-89
 
 80-84
 
 75-79
 
 ≤ 74
 
 ≤ 0.10
 
 ≤ 0.30
 
 0.31-.45
 
 0.46-0.60
 
 0.61-0.75
 
 ≥ 0.76
 
 ≥ 40
 
 ≥ 38
 
 35-37
 
 32-34
 
 29-31
 
 ≤ 28
 
 SS-1, HFMS-2
 
 Float Test
 @ 140 ºF, s
 
 HFMS-2
 
 Coating Test, %
 
 AE-200, HFMS-2
 
 Sieve, %
 
 RS-2, HFRS-2
 SS-1, SS-1h
 
 Ductility, cm
 
 SS-1, SS-1h,
 
 @ 77 ºF
 
 RS-2, HFMS-2
 HFRS-2,
 
 Storage
 
 SS-1, SS-1h,
 
 Stability, % (1)
 
 RS-2, HFRS-2
 
 ≤ 1.5
 
 AE-200
 Solubility in
 
 SS-1, SS-1h,
 
 Trichloro-
 
 RS-2, AE-200
 
 ethylene, % (1)
 
 HFRS-2
 
 (1)
 
 ≥ 97.5
 
 Results are for certification purposes only.
 
 806.04.04 Specific Requirements for Grade AE-200. Conform to the Emulsified
 Asphalt Requirements Schedule.
 806.04.05 Testing of Grade AE-200. Perform tests according to AASHTO T 59.
 806.05 POLYMER ASPHALT EMULSIONS (CRS-2P). These materials are
 designed to be used in seal coats and stress-absorbing membrane interlayers (SAMI).
 
 806—3
 
 Make the polymer modification to the base asphalt before the emulsification process.
 Ensure that polymer-modified asphalt emulsions conform to AASHTO M 316 and the
 following Polymer Asphalt Emulsion (CRS-2P) Requirements and Price Adjustment
 Schedule.
 
 POLYMER ASPHALT EMULSION (CRS-2P) REQUIREMENTS AND
 PRICE ADJUSTMENT SCHEDULE
 Test(1)
 
 Specification
 
 100% Pay
 
 90% Pay
 
 80% Pay
 
 60% Pay
 
 80-84
 
 70-79
 
 60-69
 
 ≤ 59
 
 85-480
 
 481-520
 
 521-560
 
 561-600
 
 ≥ 601
 
 Viscosity @ 122 ºF, SFS
 100-400
 
 0% Pay
 
 Evaporation Residue, %
 
 ≥65
 
 ≥63
 
 60.0-62.9
 
 57.0-59.9
 
 55.0-56.9
 
 ≤ 54.9
 
 Sieve, %
 
 ≤ 0.1
 
 ≤ 0.35
 
 0.36-0.50
 
 0.51-0.70
 
 0.71-0.90
 
 ≥ 0.91
 
 80-84
 
 75-79
 
 70-74
 
 ≤ 69
 
 206-215
 
 216-225
 
 226-235
 
 ≥ 236
 
 Residue Penetration @ 77 ºF
 100-175
 
 85-205
 
 Residue Ductility @ 39 ºF, cm
 
 ≥ 30
 
 ≥ 28
 
 25-27
 
 22-24
 
 20-21
 
 ≤ 19
 
 % Recovery @ 39 ºF (2)
 
 ≥ 50
 
 ≥ 45
 
 40 - 44
 
 35 - 39
 
 30 - 34
 
 ≤ 29
 
 ≥40
 
 ≥35
 
 32-34
 
 29-31
 
 26-28
 
 ≤ 25
 
 (AASHTO T 301)
 % Demulsibility:
 
 Particle Charge
 (1)
 (2)
 
 Positive
 
 Test according to AASHTO T 59 except where noted.
 Condition the sample and test the sample at 39 ± 2 °F. Elongate the sample to 10 cm.
 %Elongation Recovery = (10-X) x 10 where X is the final reading in cm after
 bringing the two severed ends of the specimen back together.
 
 806.06 ASPHALT COATING AND PAVING FOR METAL PIPE, PIPE
 ARCHES, AND ARCHES. These requirements apply to all corrugated metal pipe, pipe
 arches, and arches that are required to be asphalt-coated or coated and paved, except fieldassembled structural plate pipe and pipe arches as specified in Section 612.
 806.06.01 Asphalt Coating Material. Furnish asphalt coating material conforming
 to AASHTO M 190 and, in addition, the following physical properties:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 
 Penetration at 32 °F, AASHTO T 49 - 20 minimum at 200 g for 60 seconds.
 Penetration at 77 °F, AASHTO T 49 - 35 to 55 at 100 g for 5 seconds.
 Flash Point, AASHTO T 48 - 450 °F minimum.
 Specific Gravity, AASHTO T 229 - 0.98 minimum.
 Softening Point, AASHTO T 53 – 200-230 °F.
 Perform the “loss of heating” test in a standard forced-draft oven.
 
 The Department will obtain random samples of the asphalt coating material for
 analysis. The Department will reject all material not conforming to AASHTO M 190 and
 this subsection.
 806.07
 
 LIQUID ASPHALT FOR COLD-PATCHING MIXTURES. Ensure that the
 
 806—4
 
 liquid asphalt material furnished under this subsection provides satisfactory coating
 properties, workability, and adherence characteristics for patching during cold and damp
 weather in either asphalt or concrete pavement surfaces. Furnish patching mixtures made
 with liquid asphalt or KP-6 that is capable of being stored for at least 6 months before
 being used and that is readily workable at all ambient temperatures above 25 °F.
 With each shipment of material, provide test results certifying that the materials
 furnished conform to the following KP-6 Requirements table. Additionally, take a onegallon sample from each transport as specified in the Materials Field Sampling and
 Testing Manual from the Department’s Division of Materials. Ship the sample to the
 Division of Materials by any expedient means of transport. Obtain the Division of
 Materials’ approval before using the liquid asphalt.
 KP-6 REQUIREMENTS
 Property
 Kinematic Viscosity @ 140 °F, cSt
 Flash Point, Tag Open Cup, °F
 Percentage of Water, %
 Distillation to 680 °F
 
 Test Method
 
 Value
 
 ASTM D 2170
 ASTM D 1310
 ASTM D 95
 ASTM D 402
 Volume of Total Distillate
 (Minimum/Maximum %)
 0/0
 0/0.5
 10/65
 
 300 to 4000
 200 min.
 0.2 max.
 See values below
 Volume of Original Sample
 (Minimum/Maximum %)
 0/0
 0/5
 0/25
 
 Temperature (°F)
 to 437
 to 500
 to 600
 Residue From Distillation @ 680 °F (%
 Volume by Difference)
 Tests on Residue from Distillation
 Absolute Viscosity @ 140 °F, Poises
 ASTM D 2171
 Modified Penetration With Cone(1)
 ASTM D 5
 Ductility, 39 °F, 1 cm/minute
 ASTM D 113
 Solubility in Trichloroethylene, %
 ASTM D 2042
 (1)
 
 72/95
 75 to 425
 180 min.
 100 min.
 99.0 min.
 
 Ensure the cone conforms to ASTM D 217, except that the interior construction may be modified as necessary.
 Ensure the total moving weight of the cone and attachments is 150 ± 0.1 g.
 
 806.08 FIELD TOLERANCES. The Department, according to established criteria,
 allows tolerance limits to be applied to field samples. These limits are incorporated into
 the price adjustment schedules. These tolerances are for field samples only and will not
 apply to certification samples.
 806.09 ACCEPTANCE.
 The Department will normally perform field quality
 acceptance testing on samples obtained at the project site or Contractor’s storage facility.
 When required by the Department, the asphalt supplier shall send, at his expense,
 representative samples of materials stored at the source terminal or refinery to the
 Department’s Division of Materials.
 When the Department accepts asphalt materials by pretesting and certification,
 provide two copies of the bill-of-lading/load ticket with each hauling unit. The bill-oflading/load ticket will contain the material’s lot number, a statement of the quantity of
 materials within each load by weight and volume, and other information as required by
 KM 64-444 or KM 64-445. The Contractor and Department’s representative will each
 receive copies at the point of delivery. Also, forward a copy of the bill-of-lading/load
 ticket directly to the Department’s Division of Materials as soon as practical following
 shipments.
 Do not use asphalt materials that are not properly covered by certification or
 otherwise tested and approved by the Department. When asphalt materials not of the
 
 806—5
 
 specified grade, not appropriately certified, or not conforming to the applicable
 requirements when tested become incorporated into projects, the Engineer will, according
 to Section 105, evaluate the work affected and require adjustment of pay quantities or
 corrective work as deemed appropriate.
 806.09.01 Acceptance of Non-Specification Asphalt Materials. Furnish asphalt
 materials purchased for Department work conforming to the requirements of this section.
 The Department will apply the following procedures only when reasonably acceptable
 work has been produced using the material in question, as provided in Subsection 105.04.
 When the use of non-specification material results in an inferior or unsatisfactory product,
 remove and replace the material at no expense to the Department, or at the Vendor’s
 expense when materials are purchased directly by the Cabinet.
 The Department may accept, at a reduced Contract price, asphalt materials not of the
 specified grade, not appropriately certified, or not conforming to the applicable
 requirements when check-tested after an evaluation of the work. However, the
 Department will not consider these procedures as a means to continue accepting nonspecification material.
 The Department will determine the price adjustment based on the delivered cost of
 the material. If the liquid asphalt has been incorporated into the project as an asphalt
 mixture, the deduction will be applied to the posted price of asphalt item.
 When the material is not of the specified grade or not appropriately certified, the
 Department may deduct the full cost of the material.
 When the material fails to conform to the applicable requirements, the Department
 will normally make deductions according to the pay schedules in this section. As
 provided in Subsection 806.08, the Department has established field tolerances for
 determining the acceptability of failing material at no price deduction. The Department
 will determine the frequency of check-sampling and testing on pretested material. The
 Department will make deductions for failing test results based on the average of two check
 samples representing the material in question. When a sample fails on two or more tests,
 the Department may add the deductions, but the total deduction will not exceed 100
 percent.
 806.10 TIME LIMITATION ON APPROVALS. The Department will test materials
 in storage at the terminal as deemed necessary. Additionally, the Department will require
 the retesting, and re-approval, of materials not incorporated into the work within one
 month (2 months for PG binders) of the shipment date.
 
 806—6
 
 SECTION 807  JOINT MATERIALS
 807.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers joint sealers and joint fillers of various
 types. The Department may approve other types of joint materials provided they conform
 to the requirements of the type specified in the Contract.
 807.02 SAMPLING. The Department will sample all materials according to the
 Materials Field Sampling and Testing Manual from the Department’s Division of
 Materials.
 807.03 JOINT SEALERS.
 807.03.01 Hot-Poured, Elastic Joint Sealers. Furnish hot-poured, elastic joint
 sealers that meet or exceed the requirements of ASTM D 6690, Type II and the following
 table. Provide a certification of conformance with each lot of sealer.
 HOT-POURED, ELASTIC JOINT SEALER REQUIRMENTS AND PRICE
 ADJUSTMENT SCHEDULE
 Test
 Cone Penetration
 
 Specification
 90 max.
 
 100% Pay
 91-92
 
 90 % Pay
 93-94
 
 80 % Pay
 95-96
 
 60% Pay
 97-98
 
 0% Pay
 ≥ 99
 
 Softening Point, °C
 
 80 min.
 
 79-79.9
 
 78-78.9
 
 77-77.9
 
 76-76.9
 
 < 76
 
 Resilience, %
 Bond, Non-immersed
 
 60 min.
 Pass
 
 59-58
 
 57-56
 
 55-54
 
 53-52
 
 ≥ 51
 
 807.03.02 Preformed, Compression Joint Sealers With Lubricant. Furnish
 preformed, compression joint sealers of approved shapes and sizes for the applicable joints
 to be sealed. Furnish sealers and lubricant that conform to the following requirements as
 applicable.
 A) Sealers. Furnish sealers that conform to ASTM D 2628 with the following
 exceptions and additions:
 1)
 
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 
 6)
 
 The Department’s Division of Materials and Division of Bridge Design will
 approve the configuration of compression joint sealers. Approved sealers
 will be placed on the Department’s List of Approved Materials. Obtain the
 Department’s approval for sealers not on the List of Approved Materials
 before shipping to the project.
 Furnish sealers designed to be substantially solid at closure (when fully
 compressed). Closure of a sealer should occur at 50 to 70 percent of its
 original width.
 Ensure that the manufacturer provides sealers accurately marked at 12-inch
 intervals to determine elongation after installation.
 Ensure that sealers are designed so that, when compressed, the center
 portion of the top surfaces will not protrude upward above the original
 elevation of the sealer.
 The Department will subject sealers to a compression-deflection test
 according to KM 64-409. Ensure that the sealer displays a minimum force
 per unit area of 3 psi at 15-percent deflection and a maximum force per unit
 area of 40 psi at 50-percent deflection.
 Ensure that the sealers used in JPC pavement comply with the applicable
 Standard Drawings.
 
 807—1
 
 7)
 8)
 
 Ensure that the uncompressed depth of all sealers is at least equal to the
 uncompressed sealer width, unless the design of the sealer prevents twisting
 or misalignment of the sealer during or after installation.
 Ensure each lot number is accompanied by a certification stating
 conformance with this Subsection.
 
 B) Lubricant. As recommended by the sealer manufacturer, provide lubricant
 
 that is compatible with the sealer, concrete, and steel. Ensure conformance
 to ASTM D 2835 when utilizing lubricant with sealers on concrete
 pavements.
 807.03.03 Preformed, Expansion Joint Strip Seals With Lubricant Adhesive.
 Furnish preformed, expansion joint strip sealers of approved design for the applicable
 joints to be sealed. Furnish sealers and lubricant adhesives that conform to the
 following requirements as applicable.
 A) Sealers. Furnish sealers that conform to ASTM D 5973 with the following
 exceptions and additions:
 1)
 
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 The Department’s Division of Materials and Division of Bridge Design will
 approve the design of the expansion joint strip sealers. Approved sealers
 will be placed on the Department’s List of Approved Materials. Obtain the
 Department’s approval for sealers not on the List of Approved Materials
 before shipping to the project.
 Ensure that the manufacturer provides sealers accurately marked at 12-inch
 intervals to determine elongation after installation.
 Ensure that the sizes of sealers used in JPC pavement comply with the
 applicable Standard Drawings.
 Ensure each lot number is accompanied by a certification stating
 conformance with this Subsection.
 
 B) Lubricant. As recommended by the sealer manufacturer, provide lubricant that
 is compatible with the sealer, concrete, and steel. Ensure conformance to ASTM D
 2835 when working with concrete pavements.
 807.03.04 Joint Sealer for Rigid Pipe.
 A) Asphalt Mastic. Furnish asphalt mastic joint sealing material consisting of a
 smooth, uniform mixture of asphalt material, solvent, and filler. Use filler that
 consists essentially of cellulose fiber. Ensure that the mixture is applicable, by
 means of a trowel or caulking gun, without pulling or drawing, and does not sag
 or flow when applied to metal, concrete, or vitrified clay surfaces. Furnish a
 compound capable of withstanding freezing and not exhibiting any tendency to
 separate or otherwise deteriorate while in storage. Ensure each lot number is
 accompanied by a certification stating conformance with this Subsection.
 When tested according to KM 64-416, ensure that the compound sets to a
 tough, plastic coating and does not shrink, crack, or loosen from the surface. In
 addition, furnish material conforming to the following table:
 
 807—2
 
 ASPHALT MASTIC REQUIREMENTS AND PRICE ADJUSTMENT SCHEDULE
 Test
 
 Test Method Specification 100% Pay
 
 90% Pay
 
 80% Pay
 
 70% Pay 50% Pay(1)
 
 Grease Cone
 
 ASTM
 
 160-169
 
 155-159
 
 150-154
 
 ≤ 149
 
 Penetration
 
 D 217
 
 175-250
 
 170-255
 
 256-265
 
 266-270
 
 271-275
 
 ≥ 276
 
 Weight per
 
 AASHTO
 
 9.75 min.
 
 9.70 min.
 
 9.65-9.69
 
 9.60-9.64
 
 9.55-9.59
 
 ≤ 9.54
 
 Gallon, lbs
 
 T 229
 KM 64-415
 
 75 min.
 
 72 min.
 
 71
 
 70
 
 69
 
 ≤ 68
 
 AASHTO
 
 25.0-45.0
 
 24.0-46.0
 
 23.0-23.9
 
 22.0-22.9
 
 21.0-21.9
 
 ≤ 20.9
 
 46.1-46.9
 
 47.0-47.9
 
 48.0-48.9
 
 ≥ 49.0
 
 (Unworked), 150 g
 
 Non-Volatile, %
 Ash, %
 
 T 111
 (1)
 
 If allowed to remain in place, the Department will review materials in this range on
 a project-by-project basis to determine if removal of the material is warranted.
 B) Butyl Rubber Sealants. Furnish butyl rubber sealants conforming to the
 requirements in ASTM C990, Section 6.2. Ensure each lot number is
 accompanied by a certification of conformance.
 BUTYL RUBBER SEALANT REQUIREMENTS AND PRICE ADJUSTMENT
 SCHEDULE
 Test
 
 Test Method Specification 100% Pay
 
 45-49
 
 40-44
 
 35-39
 
 ≤ 34
 
 126-130
 
 131-135
 
 136-140
 
 ≥ 141
 
 D 217
 
 30
 
 27-29
 
 24-26
 
 21-23
 
 18-20
 
 ≥ 17
 
 AASHTO
 
 1.15 – 1.40
 
 D 217
 
 Cone Penetration,
 
 ASTM
 
 32 ˚F
 
 Ductility, 77 ˚F
 Volatile Matter, %
 Ash, %
 
 70% Pay 50% Pay(1)
 
 121-125
 
 ASTM
 
 77 ˚F
 
 77 ˚F
 
 80% Pay
 
 50-120
 
 Cone Penetration,
 
 Specific Gravity,
 
 90% Pay
 
 T 229
 
 1.10 min.
 
 1.00-1.09
 
 1.04-1.08
 
 1.00-1.03
 
 ≤ 0.99
 
 1.45 max.
 
 1.46-1.50
 
 1.51-1.55
 
 1.56-1.60
 
 ≥ 1.61
 
 AASHTO
 T51
 
 5.0 min.
 
 4.5 min.
 
 4.0
 
 3.5
 
 3.0
 
 ≤ 2.9
 
 AASHTO T
 47
 
 3 max.
 
 3.5 max.
 
 4.0
 
 4.5
 
 5.0
 
 ≥ 5.1
 
 AASHTO
 T111
 
 30 min.
 
 28 min.
 
 26-27
 
 24-25
 
 22-23
 
 ≤ 21
 
 Bitumen, %
 
 ASTM D 4
 
 50 min.
 
 48 min.
 
 46-47
 
 44-45
 
 42-43
 
 ≤ 41
 
 Flash Point ˚F
 
 ASTM D 92
 
 375 min.
 
 370 min.
 
 365-369
 
 360-364
 
 355-359
 
 ≤ 354
 
 (1)
 
 If allowed to remain in place, the Department will review materials in this range on
 a project-by-project basis to determine if removal of the material is warranted.
 C) Rubber Gaskets. Furnish rubber gaskets conforming to the requirements in
 ASTM C 1619, Class C. Ensure each lot number is accompanied by a
 certification of conformance.
 
 807—3
 
 RUBBER GASKET REQUIREMENTS AND PRICE ADJUSTMENT SCHEDULE
 Test
 
 Test Method Specification 100% Pay
 
 90% Pay
 
 80% Pay
 
 70% Pay 50% Pay(1)
 
 Tensile Strength,
 psi
 
 ASTM D 412
 
 1200 min.
 
 1150 min. 1100-1149 1050-1099 1000-1049
 
 ≤ 999
 
 Elongation, %
 
 ASTM D 412
 
 350 min.
 
 325 min.
 
 Hardness, Shore A
 
 ASTM
 
 300-324
 
 275-299
 
 250-274
 
 ≥ 249
 
 33-34
 
 30-32
 
 28-29
 
 ≤ 27
 
 40-60
 
 35-65
 
 66-67
 
 68-69
 
 70-72
 
 ≥ 73
 
 Oven Aged Tensile ASTM D 412
 Reduction, %
 
 15 max.
 
 17 max.
 
 17.1-17.5
 
 17.6-18.0
 
 18.1-18.5
 
 ≥ 18.6
 
 Oven Aged,
 Elongation
 Reduction, %
 
 ASTM D 412
 
 20 max.
 
 22 max.
 
 22.1-22.5
 
 22.6-23.0
 
 23.1-23.5
 
 ≥ 23.6
 
 Compression Set, % ASTM D395
 
 25 max.
 
 27 max.
 
 27.1-27.5
 
 27.6-28.0
 
 28.1-28.5
 
 ≥ 28.6
 
 ASTM D 471
 
 10 max.
 
 12 max.
 
 12.1-12.5
 
 12.6-13.0
 
 13.1-13.5
 
 ≥ 13.6
 
 D 2240
 
 Water Absportion,
 %
 (1)
 
 If allowed to remain in place, the Department will review materials in this range on
 a project-by-project basis to determine if removal of the material is warranted.
 
 807.03.05 Silicone Rubber Sealants. Provide material conforming to the following
 requirements and tables.
 A) Non-Sag and Self-Leveling Silicone Sealant. Furnish sealant in a one-part
 silicone formulation which does not require a primer for bonding to concrete.
 Use a compound that is compatible with the surface to which it is applied. Do
 not use acid-cure sealants on concrete. Apply the sealant with a pressure
 applicator that forces it into the joint. Ensure self-leveling silicone, which is
 suitable for joints of one-inch width or less, exhibits a smooth, level surface with
 no indication of bubbling. Ensure each lot number is accompanied by a
 certification stating conformance to this Subsection. Provide material that
 conforms to ASTM D 5893 with the following exceptions and additions:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Non-sag tensile stress and elongation samples will be cured for 7 days.
 Non-sag durometer hardness will be determined at 73 ± 4 °F.
 The non-sag, tack-free time requirement is 20 – 90 minutes.
 The self-leveling relative tack-free time, according to ASTM C 679, will be
 a maximum of 60 minutes.
 
 B) Rapid-Cure Silicone Sealant. Use sealant that is: (1) furnished as a two-part,
 rapid-cure, cold-applied, ultra-low-modulus, self-leveling, 100-percent silicone
 rubber sealant; (2) flexible over a wide temperature range; and (3) suitable for
 use in concrete-to-concrete, concrete-to-steel, and steel-to-steel joints. Provide
 material meeting the requirements of the following table. Ensure each lot
 number is accompanied by a certification stating conformance with this
 Subsection.
 C) Accessory Items. Use a closed-cell, polyethylene foam, back-up rod that is
 compatible with the sealant. Ensure no bond or reaction occurs between the
 back-up rod and sealant.
 D) Approvals. Ensure that each lot of sealant is delivered in containers plainly
 marked with the manufacturer’s name or trademark and a lot number. Ensure
 
 807—4
 
 that the manufacturer furnishes certified test results of each lot of joint sealant
 shipped to each project. The Department does not require tests for ozone and UV
 resistance, or movement capability and adhesion, on every lot, but ensure that
 every lot is accompanied by certified results of the latest tests performed. Ensure
 that the manufacturer indicates the date of shipment on each lot. Do not use
 material after six months from the date of shipment from the manufacturer
 without first having the material sampled and tested. The Department will take
 routine check samples of silicone sealant during application and test it to verify
 Provide equipment suitable for obtaining
 the material’s acceptability.
 representative check samples from the silicone sealant at a frequency determined
 by the Materials Field Sampling and Testing Manual from the Department’s
 Division of Materials.
 The Engineer may accept the foam back-up rod on the project by visual
 inspection.
 Use rapid-cure silicone sealant conforming to the following table:
 RAPID-CURE SILICONE JOINT SEALANT REQUIREMENTS
 Test
 Test Method
 Specification
 Extrusion Rate, g/minute
 ASTM C 1183
 200 – 550
 Non-Volatile Content, %
 ASTM C 792
 93 min.
 Relative Tack-Free Time, minutes
 ASTM C 679
 20 max.
 Elongation, %(1)
 ASTM D 412
 600 min.
 Tensile Stress (100% elongation), psi(1)
 ASTM D 412
 3 – 20
 Tensile Adhesion, %
 ASTM D 5329
 600 min.
 Bond (10 cycles at 100%and –50%)
 ASTM C 719
 No Failure
 Accelerated Weathering
 ASTM C 793
 No Change
 (1)
 Allow a cure time of 48 hours at 77 °F and 50 % relative humidity.
 807.04
 
 JOINT FILLERS.
 
 807.04.01 General. Furnish preformed fillers in a single piece for the full depth and
 width required for the joint unless otherwise authorized. When the Engineer authorizes
 the use of more than one piece for a joint, fasten the abutting ends securely, and hold them
 accurately to shape.
 807.04.02 Preformed Sponge Rubber and Cork Expansion Joint Fillers. Furnish
 preformed sponge rubber and cork joint fillers that conform to AASHTO M 153 for Type
 I (sponge rubber), Type II (cork), or Type III (self-expanding cork) as specified. Ensure
 each lot number is accompanied by a certification of conformance.
 807.04.03 Preformed Asphalt Expansion Joint Fillers. Furnish preformed asphalt
 joint fillers that conform to AASHTO M 213. Ensure each lot number is accompanied by
 a certification of conformance.
 1)
 
 Ensure that the asphalt filler is free from water and does not foam when heated to
 the flash point.
 
 Ensure each lot number is accompanied by a certification of conformance.
 807.05 FIELD TOLERANCES. The Department, according to established criteria, will
 allow tolerance limits to be applied to field samples. These limits are incorporated into the
 
 807—5
 
 price adjustment schedules. These tolerances are for field samples only and will not apply
 to certification samples.
 807.06 ACCEPTANCE. The Department will normally perform field quality acceptance
 testing on samples obtained at the project site or Contractor’s storage facility. When
 required by the Department, the sealer supplier shall send, at his expense, representative
 samples of materials stored at the source to the Department’s Division of Materials.
 When the Department accepts materials by pretesting and certification, provide two
 copies of the bill-of-lading/load ticket with each delivered unit. The bill-of-lading/load
 ticket, at a minimum, will contain the material’s lot number and a statement of the
 quantity of materials within each load. In addition, materials pretested by the Department
 will include the assigned KMIMS identification number in the shipment documentation.
 The Contractor and Department’s representative will each receive copies at the point of
 delivery.
 Do not use materials that are not properly covered by certification or otherwise tested
 and approved by the Department. When materials not appropriately certified or not
 conforming to requirements when tested become incorporated into projects, the Engineer
 will, according to Section 105, evaluate the work affected and require adjustment of pay
 quantities or corrective work as deemed appropriate.
 807.06.01 Acceptance of Non-Specification Joint Materials. Furnish joint
 materials purchased for Department work conforming to the requirements of this section.
 The Department will apply the following procedures only when reasonably acceptable
 work has been produced using the material in question, as provided in Subsection 105.04.
 When the use of non-specification material results in an inferior or unsatisfactory product,
 remove and replace the material at no expense to the Department, or at the Vendor’s
 expense when materials are purchased directly by the Cabinet.
 The Department may accept, at a reduced Contract price, joint materials not
 appropriately certified, or not conforming to the applicable requirements when checktested, after an evaluation of the work. However, the Department will not consider these
 procedures as a means to continue accepting non-specification material.
 The Department will determine the price adjustment based on the delivered cost of
 the material.
 When the material is not appropriately certified, the Department may deduct the full
 cost of the material.
 When the material fails to conform to the applicable requirements, the Department
 will normally make deductions according to the pay schedules included in this section. As
 provided in Subsection 807.04, the Department has established field tolerances for
 determining the acceptability of failing material at no price deduction. The Department
 will determine the frequency of check-sampling and testing on pretested material. The
 Department will make deductions for failing test results based on the average of two check
 samples representing the material in question. When a sample fails on two or more tests,
 the Department may add the deductions, but the total deduction will not exceed 100
 percent.
 
 807—6
 
 NON-SAG AND SELF-LEVELING SILICONE SEALANT REQUIREMENTS AND PRICE ADJUSTMENT SCHEDULE
 Test
 Specification
 100% Pay
 90% Pay
 80% Pay
 60% Pay
 0% Pay
 Tack-Free Time, minutes
 Non-Sag
 15-19
 12-14
 9-11
 6-8
 ≤5
 20-90
 91-95
 96-98
 99-101
 102-104
 ≥ 105
 Self-Leveling
 300 max.
 301-310
 311-320
 321-330
 331-340
 ≥ 341
 (1)
 Relative Tack-Free Time, minutes
 60 max.
 61-65
 66-68
 69-71
 72-74
 ≥ 75
 Durometer Hardness,
 8
 7
 6
 5
 ≤4
 Shore A(2)
 10-25
 27
 28
 29
 30
 ≥ 31
 Tensile Stress (150% Elongation
 7-Day Cure), psi
 45 max.
 46-50
 51-53
 54-56
 57-59
 ≥ 60
 Elongation (7-Day Cure), %
 600 min.
 525-549
 500-524
 475-499
 ≥ 550
 ≤ 474
 Slump, inches(3)
 0.30 max.
 ≥ 0.32
 0.33-0.34
 0.35-0.37
 0.38-0.40
 ≥ 0.41
 Non-Volatile Content, %
 90 min.
 ≥ 90
 88-89
 86-87
 84-85
 ≤ 83
 (4)
 Flow
 No flow
 Extrusion Rate, inches3/minute(4)
 ≥ 3.5
 Accelerated Weathering(4)
 No change
 Bond(4)
 No failure
 Shelf Life
 6 months
 (1)
 (2)
 (3)
 (4)
 
 For self-leveling silicone only.
 
 Seven day cure for non-sag and twenty-one day cure for self-leveling material.
 For non-sag silicone only.
 For certification purposes only.
 
 807—7
 
 807.07 TIME LIMITATION ON APPROVALS. The Department will test materials in
 storage at the Contractor’s site as deemed necessary. Additionally, the Department will
 require the retesting, and re-approval, of materials not incorporated into the work
 according to the time limitations specified in the Materials Field Sampling and Testing
 Manual from the Department’s Division of Materials.
 
 807—8
 
 SECTION 808  WATERPROOFING MATERIALS
 808.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers materials for use in waterproofing. The
 Department may approve other types of waterproofing materials provided they conform to
 the requirements of the type Contract specifies.
 808.02 SAMPLING. The Department will sample all materials according to the
 Materials Field Sampling and Testing Manual from the Department’s Division of
 Materials.
 808.03 ASPHALT MOP COAT. Furnish material that conforms to ASTM D 449, as
 specified in the Asphalt Mop Coat Requirements and Price Adjustment Schedule. Use
 Type I, II, or III material as the Contract specifies.
 808.04 ASPHALT PRIMER. Furnish material that conforms to ASTM D 41 and
 ensure the supplier provides certification of conformance.
 808.05 FIBERGLASS WATERPROOFING MEMBRANE. Furnish a fiberglass
 waterproofing membrane that is a one-step waterproofing and reflective-crack suppression
 system for bridge decks. The one-step system is comprised of a high strength, fiberglassreinforced, factory coating with an asphalt polymer and a strongly bonding contact
 adhesive on one side that bonds to the surface being treated. Ensure the supplier provides
 certification that the fiberglass waterproofing membrane conforms to the following table:
 
 FIBERGLASS WATERPROOFING MEMBRANE REQUIREMENTS
 Property
 Test Method
 Specification
 Tensile Strength, lbf/in
 ASTM D 146
 44 min.
 (longitudinal and transverse)
 Pliability
 ASTM D 146
 Pass
 Moisture, %
 ASTM D 146
 1 max.
 Permeability, perms
 ASTM E 96
 10 max.
 
 808.06 LAYERED, FIBER-REINFORCED WATERPROOFING MEMBRANE.
 Furnish a plastic film and mesh-reinforced mastic membrane for sealing open expansion
 joints, concrete expansion joints, cracked culverts, or for waterproofing in backfill
 situations. Ensure the supplier provides certification that this material conforms to ASTM
 C 877, Type II, excluding the steel straps.
 808.07 POLYPROPYLENE WATERPROOFING MEMBRANE.
 Furnish a
 polypropylene fabric that is bonded to a self-adhesive polymer modified asphalt
 membrane. Ensure the material conforms to the following table:
 
 808—1
 
 POLYPROPYLENE WATERPROOFING MEMBRANE REQUIREMENTS
 Property
 Test Method
 Specification
 Grab Tensile Strength, lb
 ASTM D 4632
 50 min.
 Elongation, %
 ASTM D 4632
 50 min.
 Pliability, 25 ˚C
 ASTM D 146
 Pass
 Puncture Resistance, lb.
 ASTM E 154
 200 min.
 Permeability, perms
 ASTM E 96
 0.1 max.
 808.08 FIELD TOLERANCES. The Department, according to established criteria,
 will allow tolerance limits to be applied to field samples. These limits are incorporated
 into the price adjustment schedules. These tolerances are for field samples only.
 808.09 ACCEPTANCE. The Department will normally perform field quality acceptance
 testing on samples obtained at the project site of Contractor’s storage facility. When
 required by the Department, the supplier shall send, at his expense, representative samples
 of materials stored at the source to the Department’s Division of Materials.
 When the Department accepts materials by pretesting and certification, provide two
 copies of the bill-of-lading/load ticket with each delivered unit. The bill-of-lading/load
 ticket, at a minimum, will contain the material’s lot number and a statement of the
 quantity of materials within each load. In addition, materials pretested by the Department
 will include the assigned KMIMS identification number in the shipment documentation.
 The Contractor and Department’s representative will each receive copies at the point of
 delivery.
 Do not use materials that are not properly covered by certification or otherwise tested
 and approved by the Department. When materials not appropriately certified or not
 conforming to the applicable requirements when tested become incorporated into projects,
 the Engineer will, according to Section 105, evaluate the work affected and require
 adjustment of pay quantities of corrective work as deemed appropriate.
 808.10 ACCEPTANCE
 OF
 NON-SPECIFICATION
 WATERPROOFING
 MATERIALS. Furnish waterproofing materials purchased for Department work
 conforming to the requirements of this section. The Department will apply the following
 procedures only when reasonably acceptable work has been produced using the material in
 question, as provided in Subsection 105.04. When the use of non-specification material
 results in an inferior or unsatisfactory product, remove and replace the material at no
 expense to the Department, or at the Vendor’s expense when materials are purchased
 directly by the Cabinet.
 The Department may accept, at a reduced Contract price, waterproofing materials not
 appropriately certified, or not conforming to the applicable requirements when checktested, after an evaluation of the work. However, the Department will not consider these
 procedures as a means to continue accepting non-specification material.
 The Department will determine the price adjustment based on the delivered cost of
 the material.
 When the material is not appropriately certified, the Department may deduct the full
 cost of the material.
 When the material fails to conform to the applicable requirements, the Department
 will normally make deductions according to the pay schedules included in this section. As
 provided in Section 808.07, the Department has established field tolerances for
 determining the acceptability of failing material at no price deduction. The Department
 will determine the frequency of check-sampling and testing on pretested material. The
 Department will make deductions for failing test results based on the average of 2 check
 samples representing the material in question. When a sample fails on two or more tests,
 
 808—2
 
 the Department may add the deductions, but the total deduction will not exceed 100
 percent.
 808.11 TIME LIMITATION ON APPROVALS. The Department will test materials
 in storage at the Contractor’s site as deemed necessary. Additionally, the Department will
 require the retesting, and re-approval, of materials not incorporated into the work
 according to the time limitations specified in the Materials Field Sampling and Testing
 Manual from the Department’s Division of Materials.
 
 808—3
 
 ASPHALT MOP COAT REQUIREMENTS AND PRICE
 ADJUSTMENT SCHEDULE
 Property
 
 100%Pay
 113-114
 
 111-112
 
 109-110
 
 107-108
 
 ≤ 106
 
 115-140
 
 141-142
 
 143-144
 
 145-146
 
 147-148
 
 ≥ 149
 
 Softening Point, °F
 Penetration 32 °F
 
 5 min.
 
 77 °F
 
 90 %Pay
 Type I
 
 80 %Pay
 
 70 %Pay
 
 50%Pay(1)
 
 Specification
 
 5
 
 4
 
 3
 
 2
 
 ≤1
 
 48-49
 
 46-47
 
 44-45
 
 42-43
 
 ≤ 41
 ≥109
 
 50-100
 
 101-102
 
 103-104
 
 105-106
 
 107-108
 
 100 min.
 
 98-99
 
 96-97
 
 94-95
 
 92-93
 
 ≤ 91
 
 Flash Point, °F
 
 450 min.
 
 448-449
 
 446-447
 
 444-445
 
 442-443
 
 ≤ 441
 
 Ductility, cm
 
 30 min.
 
 29
 
 27-28
 
 25-26
 
 23-24
 
 ≤ 22
 
 Solubility, %
 
 99 min.
 
 98
 
 96-97
 
 94-95
 
 92-93
 
 ≤ 91
 
 145-170
 
 143-144
 171-172
 
 141-142
 173-174
 
 139-140
 175-176
 
 137-138
 177-178
 
 ≤ 136
 ≥ 179
 
 9
 24
 
 8
 23
 
 7
 22
 
 6
 21
 
 ≤5
 ≤ 20
 
 115 °F
 
 Type II
 Softening Point, °F
 Penetration 32 °F
 77 °F
 
 10 min.
 25-50
 
 51
 
 52
 
 53
 
 54
 
 ≥ 55
 
 130 max.
 
 131
 
 132
 
 133
 
 134
 
 ≥ 135
 
 Flash Point, °F
 
 450 min
 
 448-449
 
 446-447
 
 444-445
 
 442-443
 
 ≤ 441
 
 Ductility, cm
 
 10 min.
 
 9
 
 8
 
 7
 
 6
 
 ≤5
 
 Solubility, %
 
 99 min.
 
 98
 
 96-97
 
 94-95
 
 92-93
 
 ≤ 91
 
 180-200
 
 178-179
 201-202
 
 174-175
 205-206
 
 172-173
 207-208
 
 ≤ 171
 ≥ 209
 
 115 °F
 
 Type III
 Softening Point, °F
 Penetration 32 °F
 
 10 min.
 
 77 °F
 115 °F
 Flash Point, °F
 
 9
 
 8
 
 7
 
 6
 
 ≤5
 
 19
 
 18
 
 17
 
 16
 
 ≤ 15
 
 20-40
 
 41
 
 42
 
 43
 
 44
 
 ≥ 45
 
 100 max.
 
 101
 
 102
 
 103
 
 104
 
 ≥ 105
 
 475 min.
 
 473-474
 
 471-472
 
 469-470
 
 467-468
 
 ≤ 466
 
 1
 
 0
 
 96-97
 
 94-95
 
 92-93
 
 ≤ 91
 
 Ductility, cm
 
 2 min.
 
 2
 
 Solubility, %
 
 99 min.
 
 98
 
 (1)
 
 176-177
 203-204
 
 If allowed to remain in place, the Department will review materials performing in
 this range on a project-by-project basis to determine if removal of the material is
 warranted.
 
 808—4
 
 SECTION 809  STRUCTURAL PLATES FOR PIPES, PIPE
 ARCHES, AND ARCHES
 809.01 CORRUGATED STEEL STRUCTURAL PLATE AND ACCESSORIES.
 Conform to AASHTO M 167. Coat with asphalt material conforming to Subsection
 806.11. The Department will sample and test the material according to its current
 practices.
 809.02 ALUMINUM ALLOY STRUCTURAL PLATE AND ACCESSORIES.
 Conform to AASHTO M 219. The Department will sample and test the material
 according to its current practices.
 
 809—1
 
 SECTION 810  PIPE AND PIPE ARCHES
 810.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers the various types of pipe and pipe arches
 for use on highway projects.
 810.02 APPROVAL. Select pipe or pipe arches supplied by a producer that is listed on
 the List of Approved Materials. All producers of pipe and pipe arches must conform to
 KM 115. These requirements may be obtained from the Division of Materials.
 810.03
 
 REINFORCED CONCRETE PIPE.
 
 810.03.01 Pipe Class.
 A) Circular. Furnish circular reinforced concrete pipe conforming to AASHTO M
 170 for Class I, Class II, Class III, Class IV, and Class V. Furnish a D-load pipe
 conforming to AASHTO M 242 when specified in the Contract.
 B) Elliptical. Furnish horizontal and vertical elliptical reinforced concrete pipe
 conforming to AASHTO M 207 for Class HE-A, Class HE-I, Class HE-II, Class
 HE-III, Class HE-IV, Class VE-V, Class VE-VI, Class V-II, Class VE-III, and
 Class VE-IV.
 C) Arch. Furnish reinforced concrete pipe arch conforming to AASHTO M 206 for
 Class A-II, Class A-III, and Class A-IV.
 810.03.02 Aggregates. Conform to Section 804 and 805.
 810.03.03 Cement. Use any type conforming to Section 801.
 810.03.04 Concrete. Submit concrete mix designs to Central Office Materials.
 810.03.05 Extra Protection. Furnish concrete pipe with extra protection to inhibit
 corrosion when required by the Standard Drawings for culvert pipe, storm sewer pipe, and
 entrance pipe. Furnish concrete pipe with extra protection for all other types of pipe
 when specified in the Contract. Use reinforced concrete pipe conforming to Subsection
 810.03.01 A) for Classes III, IV, and V; Subsection 810.03.01 B) for Classes HE-II, HEIII, HE-IV, VE-II, VE-III, and VE-IV; and Subsection 810.03.01 C) for Classes A-II, AIII, and A-IV. Use concrete having a minimum compressive strength of 6,000 psi at the
 time of acceptance. Use Wall B or Wall C as necessary.
 When using one line of reinforcement, place it 1/2 of the shell thickness from the
 inner surface of the pipe. When using 2 lines of reinforcement, place each line so that the
 nominal protective covering of concrete is one inch from the outer surface of the pipe and
 1 3/4 inches from the inner surface. The Department will allow a variation tolerance of
 ± 1/2 inch with a minimum protective covering of one inch from the inner surface in all
 cases.
 810.03.06 Identification and Markings. Mark pipe sections according to AASHTO
 M 170 or M 207 as applicable for identification. Additionally, mark “EP” on each section
 of pipe manufactured by the extra protection requirements.
 Provide shipment approval form containing the following information:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Project Number and county.
 Name of Contractor.
 The size, class, and quantity of pipe shipped.
 The dates of manufacture of the pipe.
 
 810—1
 
 5)
 
 A signed statement that the pipe is from a tested and approved lot.
 
 The Engineer will check pipe joints to determine if the information on the approval
 form or shipping ticket corresponds to the pipe actually received. Correct all
 discrepancies before using pipe.
 810.03.07 Defects. The Department will reject pipe for any of the following reasons.
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 810.04
 
 Exposed steel in walls, fractures or cracks passing through the wall, except for a
 single end crack that does not exceed the depth of the joint.
 Defects that indicate imperfect proportioning, mixing, or molding.
 Surface defects indicating honey-combed or open texture.
 Damaged or cracked ends that prevent a satisfactory joint.
 A continuous crack, regardless of its position in the wall of the pipe, having a
 surface width of 0.01-inch or more and extending 12 inches or more.
 CORRUGATED METAL PIPE.
 
 810.04.01 Coating Requirements. Use asphalt coating and paving as extra
 protection to inhibit corrosion for the pH values shown on the Standard Drawings for
 culvert pipe, storm sewer pipe and entrance pipe. Coat and pave sanitary sewer pipe and
 all other pipe when specified in the Contract. Coat and pave the invert according to
 Subsection 806.06. Use asphalt material conforming to Subsection 806.06. Coat and pave
 the pipe according to AASHTO M 190.
 Use polymer precoated galvanized corrugate metal pipe when the pH is greater than 9
 or less than 5 according to the Standard Drawings. Manufacture according to AASHTO
 M 245, with a minimum grade of 10/10. Fabricate the sheets into pipe sections according
 to AASHTO M 36.
 The Department will allow exceptions for coating on storm sewer pipe and entrance
 pipe as specified in the Standard Drawings.
 810.04.02 Inlet and Outlet Requirements. Finish all pipe ends in a neat manner to
 allow safe handling and contact with the pipe. Unless the pipe is asphalt coated, paint the
 ends with inorganic zinc primer. When using 14 gauge or thinner sheets to fabricate
 helical lockseam or welded seam pipe, reroll the inlet and outlet end with at least 4
 complete corrugations. Match mark all pipe that is 54 inches or larger in diameter.
 810.04.03 Pipe Type. Furnish steel pipe conforming to AASHTO M 36 and
 aluminum alloy pipe conforming to AASHTO M 196 for types shown below:
 A) Circular. Type I or Type IR.
 B) Arch. Type II or Type IIR.
 C) Underdrain. Type III.
 810.04.04 Coupling Bands. Furnish bands with annular or helical corrugation
 conforming to AASHTO M 36 and the requirements of 701.03.05.
 810.04.05 Slotted Drain Pipe. Furnish pipe according to Subsection 810.04.03 A)
 with the addition of a grate assembly to provide openings in the top of the pipe as
 specified in the Plans. Apply asphalt coating after slotted drain pipe is fabricated. Provide
 material for slotted drain pipe from a supplier on the Department’s List of Approved
 Materials. Furnish one of the following types of grate assemblies:
 A) Type I. The grate assembly is fabricated from structural steel, galvanized
 according to AASHTO M 111 after fabrication, and forms a continuous drain
 
 810—2
 
 slot when 2 or more joints of pipe are banded together.
 B) Type II. The grate assembly is fabricated from 14 gauge steel, galvanized
 according to AASHTO M 218, and laterally supported by a minimum of one
 foot, measured laterally, of concrete on each side.
 810.04.06 Defects. The Department will reject pipe for any of the following reasons.
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 8)
 
 Variation from centerline.
 Elliptical shape in pipe intended to be round.
 Dents or bends in the metal.
 Lack of rigidity.
 Low asphalt coating thickness on coated pipe.
 Cracks or lack of coating adhesion on coated pipe.
 Insufficient coating to provide a smooth level flow line on fully lined pipe and
 pipe with a paved invert.
 Paved sections with less than 25 percent coverage of the pipe circumference.
 
 810.03.07 Concrete. Submit Concrete Mix Design to the Central Office Materials.
 810.05
 
 SMOOTH METAL PIPE.
 
 810.05.01 Cast Iron Pressure Pipe. Conform to ASTM A 377.
 810.05.02 Welded and Seamless Steel Pipe for Bridge Floor Drains. Furnish 6inch diameter round standard weight pipe conforming to ASTM A 53, ASTM A 500, or
 ASTM A 501 with a minimum wall thickness of 0.28 inches.
 810.05.03 Black and Hot-Dipped Galvanized Welded and Seamless Steel Pipe
 for Ordinary Uses. Furnish pipe conforming to ASTM A 53 of the size and weight
 specified in the Contract. The Department will allow plain or threaded end finish.
 810.05.04 Aluminum Alloy Extruded Structural Pipe. For pipe with internal
 connections, conform to ASTM B 221, Schedule 40, Alloy 6063-T52 for railing and
 ASTM B210, Schedule 40, Alloy 6063-T832 for posts.
 For pipe with welded connections, conform to ASTM B221, Schedule 40, Alloy
 6061-T6 or ASTM B210, Schedule 40, Alloy 6061-T6.
 810.06
 
 Thermoplastic Pipe.
 
 810.06.01 Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe.
 A) Pipe Underdrain. Furnish perforated pipe for underdrains conforming to
 AASHTO M 304. Ensure all fittings and pipe are made from the same base
 material. Submit a manufacturer’s certification that the pipe conforms to
 AASHTO M 304 to the Division of Materials annually. Use integral bell and
 spigot type joints with elastomeric seal joints and smooth inner walls.
 B) Culvert Pipe, Storm Sewer, and Entrance Pipe. Furnish pipe and pipe fittings
 conforming to AASHTO M 304. Manufacture from low filler PVC plastic
 having a minimum ASTM 1784 cell classification of 12454. Use pipe fittings
 furnished by the pipe manufacturer.
 C) Sliplining Pipe (Rehabilitation). Furnish pipe conforming to ASTM F949.
 Manufacture from low filler PVC plastic having a minimum ASTM 1784 cell
 classification of 12454B or 12454C. Use integral bell and spigot type joints with
 a STAB-JOINT bell coupler filling flush with the outer wall surface.
 
 810—3
 
 810.06.02 Corrugated High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) Pipe.
 A) Pipe Underdrain. Furnish perforated pipe for underdrains conforming to
 AASHTO M 252. Use only Type S for edge drain outlet pipe. Use caps, bands,
 and other fittings that are of the same material as the pipe. Submit a
 manufacturer’s certification that the pipe conforms to AASHTO M 252 to the
 Division of Materials annually. Use a length that minimizes the number of joints
 in a run or line and facilitates shipment, handling, and installation. Use snap-inplace bands or a split band taped in place with polyethylene tape for pipe-to-pipe
 connections as the Engineer directs. Cap remote ends with a snap-in-place cap.
 Use non-perforated pipe when specified in the Contract or when the Engineer
 directs.
 B) Culvert Pipe, Storm Sewer, and Entrance Pipe. Provide pipe from a
 manufacturer that participates in the National Transportation Product Evaluation
 Program (NTPEP) for HDPE Pipe. Ensure the pipe and pipe fittings conform to
 AASHTO M 294, Type S or D. Use pipe fittings furnished by the pipe
 manufacturer. Use pipe couplings conforming to AASHTO M 294 and that are
 Department approved. When corrugations are spiral, use match marks, specially
 cut ends, or other acceptable methods to facilitate alignment of the corrugations
 at connections. Provide a minimum gap between adjacent sections of pipe.
 Submit a manufacturer’s certification that the pipe conforms to resin
 requirements of AASHTO M 294 to the Division of Materials annually. Provide
 certification from the manufacturer with each shipment that the pipe conforms to
 AASHTO M 294. Use only Department approved pipe. The Department will
 perform all sampling and testing deemed necessary, either at the plant or on the
 project.
 
 810—4
 
 SECTION 811  STEEL REINFORCEMENT
 811.01 CLASSIFICATION AND CONDITION. This specification covers bars,
 welded steel wire fabrics, bar mats, steel wire, prestressing strands, and load transfer
 assemblies. Ensure that these materials, when incorporated into the work, are reasonably
 free from dirt, paint, oil, grease, loose-thick rust, or other foreign substance and, when
 deemed necessary, are cleaned to the satisfaction of the Engineer. The Department will
 not require cleaning when these materials exhibit tight, thin, or powdery rust.
 Reject reinforcement rusted sufficiently to cause it to fail specified physical
 properties or prestressing strands displaying pits visible to the naked eye.
 811.02 BARS. For all bar reinforcement use Grade 60 deformed bars except as
 indicated for the following items:
 A) JPC Pavement Tie Bars, Paved Ditches, Steps, Flume Inlets, Integral Curb,
 Right-of-Way Markers, Transverse Bars for Bar Mats, Piles, Cribbing, Small
 Drainage Structures, Pipe Headwalls, or Manhole Tops. Use Grade 40, 50, or 60
 deformed bars.
 B) Steel Piling Encasement and Spiral Reinforcement for Precast (non-prestressed)
 Piling. Use Grade 40, 50 or 60 plain or deformed bars.
 C) Spiral Reinforcement (excluding piles). Use Grade 60 deformed or plain bars.
 811.02.01 Requirements. Furnish bar reinforcement for bridges, cast-in-place
 culverts, and cast-in-place retaining walls that conforms to ASTM A 615 (billet) or ASTM
 A 996 (rail). ASTM A 706 steel is acceptable with prior approval of the Division of
 Materials. Do not weld any steel bar reinforcement unless it is ASTM A 706 rebar. The
 Engineer will accept rail steel bar reinforcement in straight lengths only. Do not use rail
 steel reinforcement where field bending is allowed or required.
 Furnish bar reinforcement for other uses that conform to either ASTM A 706
 (weldable), ASTM A 615 (billet), ASTM A 996 (rail), or ASTM A 617 (axel).
 811.02.02 Testing and Acceptance. Identify all shipments of steel reinforcement by
 the producer’s heat or test identification numbers. Obtain bar reinforcement from
 manufacturers included on the Department’s List of Approved Materials. To be included
 on this list, Fabricators shall conform to KM 64-101.
 811.03 HOOK BOLTS AND ANCHOR BOLTS. Conform to the design and
 dimensions provided in the Standard Drawings. Furnish hook tie-bolts that, when
 assembled as a unit, are capable of sustaining an axial load of 14,000 pounds or greater.
 811.04
 
 WELDED STEEL WIRE FABRIC (WWF). Conform to AASHTO M 55.
 
 811.05
 221.
 
 WELDED DEFORMED STEEL WIRE FABRIC. Conform to AASHTO M
 
 811.06 BAR MATS. Conform to ASTM A 184 and fabricate by welding deformed
 Grade 60 weldable bars.
 811.07
 
 STEEL WIRE. Conform to AASHTO M 32.
 
 811.08 PRESTRESSING STRANDS. Ensure that Uncoated Seven-Wire Stress
 Relieved Strand for Prestressed Concrete conforms to AASHTO M 203, Grade 270 or low
 relaxation strand Grade 270 as specified.
 
 811—1
 
 811.09 LOAD TRANSFER ASSEMBLIES (CONTRACTION AND EXPANSION).
 The Department will approve the design of assemblies before delivery to the project. The
 Department will approve assemblies incorporating the typical features depicted by the
 Standard Drawings. The Department will reject assemblies at any time that deviate from
 previously approved designs and manufacturing procedures.
 Shop fabricate all
 assemblies.
 Where chair bars fit over ends of dowel bars, form them to obtain a snug fit over the
 end of the dowel bar not welded to the chair bar.
 Control welding to prevent a significant reduction in the areas of the dowel bars or
 the wires. Modify the load-transfer assemblies furnished for slip form construction to
 allow for approximately 4 inches of clearance between the assemblies and the slip forms.
 Accomplish this by welding the outer leg of the chair at an angle of approximately 90
 degrees with the upper and lower spacer bars.
 811.09.01 Chair, Spacer, Aligning Bars, and Upper Tie Bars. Furnish steel for
 these items that conforms to AASHTO M 32.
 811.09.02 Dowel Bars. Furnish dowel bars that are plain round bars conforming to
 ASTM A 706, A 615, A 996, or A 617 with respect to mechanical properties only.
 Provide either Grade 40, 50 or 60 steel. Saw cut the free ends of the dowels and ensure
 that they are free of burrs or projections. Broken or sheared ends are acceptable with prior
 approval of the Division of Materials. Coat dowel bars according to AASHTO M 254
 with the following exceptions for Type B coatings:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 ensure that the thickness is 12 ± 3 mils,
 subject the coated dowel bars to a bend test (KM 64-102),
 use a bond breaker from the Department’s List of Approved Materials for load
 transfer assemblies,
 the maximum pull-out load shall not exceed 2,500 pounds,
 
 Use any Type B Coatings that are on the Department’s List of Approved Materials
 for epoxy coating materials, and apply them (except for thickness) according to
 Subsections 811.10.03 and 811.10.04.
 The Department will inspect and accept dowel bars with Type B coatings as specified
 in Subsection 811.10.06. Obtain a Certificate of Compliance as specified in Subsection
 811.10.07.
 811.09.03 Dowel Bar Sleeves. Furnish a sleeve for each dowel bar used with
 expansion joints. Place these sleeves on alternate and opposite ends of the dowels.
 Furnish sleeves manufactured from sheet metal or metal tubing having a minimum
 thickness of .010 inch, 32 gage. Ensure that they are of such length as to cover no less
 than 2 inches nor more than 3 inches of the dowel, have a closed end, fit the dowel bar
 snugly, and are of such design as to provide an unobstructed expansion space of no less
 than one inch to allow movement of the dowel bar.
 811.09.04 Fabrication Tolerance. Ensure that the longitudinal alignment of dowel
 bars in load transfer assemblies is within 1/4 inch in 18 inches of the specified alignment.
 When checked along the total length of the dowels, allow the deviation to be 0 ± 1/4
 inch for assemblies on a zero degree skew, and 3 ± 1/4 inch for assemblies on a 9.5 degree
 skew.
 811.10
 
 EPOXY COATED STEEL REINFORCEMENT. Conform to ASTM A 775.
 
 811.10.01 Uncoated Bars. Ensure that the deformed steel bars conform to the
 
 811—2
 
 applicable requirements of Subsections 811.01 and 811.02. In addition, blast clean all
 surfaces of the steel bars to a near-white surface finish according to SSPC-SP 10. Blast
 clean to produce a surface having a profile no greater than 3 mils. Immediately before
 application of the coating, ensure that the blast cleaned surface corresponds with either
 pictorial standard A SP 10, B SP 10, or C SP 10 of SSPC-Vis 1, and the surfaces are free
 of all dust and grit.
 811.10.02 Epoxy Coating Material. Select the epoxy coating material for
 reinforcing steel from the Department’s List of Approved Materials. Ensure that the
 coating material conforms to the prequalification requirements of AASHTO M 284.
 Submit documentation in the form of test results from a private testing laboratory
 verifying that the coating material conforms to AASHTO M 284 to the Division of
 Materials to gain approved list status.
 Select and furnish the powdered epoxy resin of the same material and quality as the
 resin which has been previously submitted for prequalification. Ensure that the resin
 manufacturer annually furnishes a written certification to the Division of Materials that
 attesting to the sameness of the powdered epoxy resin.
 Obtain the approval of the Engineer for epoxy material for touch-up and repair work.
 Ensure that the epoxy material furnished by the epoxy manufacturer is compatible with the
 coating material and inert in concrete, and is suitable for use in the field.
 811.10.03 Application of Epoxy Coating Material. Ensure the epoxy application is
 performed by an epoxy coater that is certified and participating in the CRSI (Concrete
 Reinforcing Steel Institute) certification program. Apply the powdered epoxy resin to the
 blast cleaned steel bars within 8 hours after blast cleaning and before any visible rusting of
 the near-white surfaces appears. Apply the resin as an electrostatically charged dry
 powder sprayed onto the grounded steel bars by electrostatic sprays. Ensure that the steel
 bars are at the temperature recommended by the powdered epoxy resin manufacturer at the
 time of the application of the coating.
 After coating the bars, give them the thermal treatment recommended by the
 manufacturer of the powdered epoxy resin to provide fully cured coating on the bars.
 Touch up all uncoated areas of electrical contact points as directed.
 Ensure that the epoxy coating applied to the bars is uniform and smooth with 90
 percent of the film thickness measurements falling between 7 and 12 mils after curing,
 when checked according to KM 64-102.
 The Department will reject the coated bars for either an insufficient or excessive film
 thickness or a partially cured coating.
 811.10.04 Properties of the Coated Bars. Ensure that the coated bars, after curing,
 display a continuous, flexible, and abrasion resistant coating as determined by the
 following.
 A) Continuity of Coating. After curing, check all bars visually for defects in the
 coating such as holes, voids, delaminations, contamination, and damaged areas.
 In addition, check for “holidays” (pinholes not visually discernible) according to
 KM 64-102. When any bar has more than 2 defects or “holidays” per linear foot
 or a total defective area exceeding 0.25 percent of the surface area per linear
 foot, repair the defects or “holidays” with the touch-up material. When any bar
 has more than 5 defects or “holidays” per linear foot or a total defective area
 exceeding 0.5 percent of the surface area per linear foot, the Department will
 reject the bar.
 B) Flexibility of Coating. The Department will evaluate the flexibility of the
 coating by bending tests according to KM 64-102. Ensure that the coated bars
 are capable of being bent 120 degrees (after rebound) over a mandrel, without
 any visible evidence of cracking the coating.
 
 811—3
 
 C) Recleaning. Do not remove the coating from rejected bars for the purpose of
 recoating by any process involving temperatures higher than 500 °F.
 D) Color of Coating. For all epoxy coatings use a light color that will provide a
 distinct contrast with the color of cleaned steel, and the color of rusted steel.
 811.10.05 Fabrication of Coated Bars. Fabricate the steel bars into the shapes and
 lengths specified on the bridge plans either before or after coating. When performing
 fabrication after coating the bars, repair any damage to the coating. Repair the coating on
 straight portions of the bars when damaged or bare areas exceed 0.25 percent of the coated
 area per linear foot or when individual damaged areas are in the order of 0.063 square
 inch, 1/4 inch by 1/4 inch or larger. When repairing coating, clean and repair all damaged
 and bare areas on the straight portion of the bar. When the amount of repair in the straight
 portion of a bar exceeds 2 percent of the surface area per linear foot the Department will
 reject the bar.
 Repair coating within each bent area of the bar when bond loss and damage exceed
 0.25 percent of the surface area within each bent area or when individual damaged areas
 are in the order of 0.063 square inch, 1/4 inch by 1/4 inch or larger. When repairing
 coating, clean and repair all damage within each bent area. When the amount of repair in
 a particular bent portion of a bar exceeds 2 percent of the surface area, the Department
 will reject the bar. It is not necessary to repair hairline cracks that do not have bond loss
 or other minor damage on fabrication bends.
 Do not allow the amount of touch-up area for repair of defects and necessary overlap
 to exceed 5 percent of the surface area of the bar per meter for straight bars.
 Do not allow the amount of touch-up area for repair of defects and necessary overlap
 to exceed 10 percent of the surface area of the bar per linear foot for bent portions of bars.
 The Department will approve of all cleaning and repair methods and materials. Coat
 the ends of the coated bars cut during fabrication with the epoxy used for repairs. Repair
 the damaged areas and the coating of the ends of cut bars within 24 hours and before any
 visible rusting appears.
 Obtain the Department’s approval for any additional requested splices to
 accommodate lengths suitable for coating. Make requested additional splices at no
 additional expense to the Department.
 Coat all areas receiving touch-up material, including ends with a minimum thickness
 of 5 mils. The Department will allow a maximum thickness of 16 mils in repair of overlap
 areas.
 Extend touch-up material, applied to sheared or sawn bar ends to coat the resulting
 damaged area, up to a maximum of 7 inches from the end of the bar. When the sheared or
 sawn surface conforms to the specifications after touch-up, the Department will not count
 the bar end and first 7 inches from the bar end in determining the percent of repair area.
 811.10.06 Inspection and Acceptance. Before subjecting them to blast cleaning
 and coating with the powdered epoxy resin, confirm that uncoated steel bars are from a
 manufacturer on the Department’s List of Approved Materials for Reinforcing Steel
 Manufacturers. The Department may inspect and test all materials at the coating plant,
 and after delivery to the project.
 Use an epoxy coater to apply the coating that is on the Department’s List of
 Approved Materials. To be approved, epoxy coaters must conform to KM 64-101 and
 KM 64-102.
 If the Department’s inspection or testing indicates that material furnished to a
 Department project materially differs from the specification requirements, the Department
 will review and reconsider the approval of the epoxy coater’s quality control program.
 811.10.07 Documentation. Ensure that each shipment of epoxy coated steel
 reinforcement is accompanied by documentation prepared by the epoxy coater according
 to KM 64-101.
 
 811—4
 
 811.11 ACCEPTANCE PROCEDURES FOR NON-SPECIFICATION REINFORCING STEEL. Ensure that all reinforcing steel conforms to the requirements of this
 section. However, when non-specification reinforcing steel is inadvertently incorporated
 into the work before completion of testing, the Department may accept the material with a
 reduction in pay, provided the failure is marginal and will not cause poor performance.
 When the failure is excessive, then remove the reinforcing steel, and replace it unless the
 Engineer determines that the reinforcing steel can remain in place with a 100 percent
 reduction rate. The Department will apply the largest payment reduction when the
 material fails to meet more than one specification requirement. The Department will
 calculate the payment reduction on the invoice cost of the material delivered at the project
 site. The Department will reject reinforcing steel that fails and has not been incorporated
 into the work.
 
 YIELD STRENGTH
 % of Requirement 97% - 100% or more 91% - 96%
 Reduction Rate
 0%
 20%
 
 86% - 90%
 50%
 
 85% or less
 
 TENSILE STRENGTH
 % of Requirement 97% - 100% or more 91% - 96%
 Reduction Rate
 0%
 20%
 
 86% - 90%
 50%
 
 85% or less
 
 ELONGATION
 % of Requirement 97% - 100% or more 91% - 96%
 Reduction Rate
 0%
 20%
 
 86% - 90%
 50%
 
 85% or less
 
 WEIGHT PER FOOT
 % of Requirement 94% - 100% or more 89% - 93%
 Reduction Rate
 0%
 20%
 
 86% - 88%
 50%
 
 85% or less
 
 Thickness (mils)
 
 (1)
 
 EPOXY COATING THICKNESS
 7 - 13
 14 - 15
 
 (1)
 
 (1)
 
 (1)
 
 (1)
 
 0–6
 Over 16
 
 (1)
 Reduction Rate
 0%
 25%
 Remove and replace the reinforcing steel unless the Engineer determines that the
 steel can remain in place at a 100% reduction rate.
 
 811—5
 
 SECTION 812  STRUCTURAL STEELS
 812.01 STRUCTURAL STEEL SHAPES, PLATES, BARS, AND FASTENERS.
 Conform to Charpy V-notch toughness requirements for structural steel for load carrying
 members in bridges when specified in the Plans.
 812.01.01 Structural Steel, All Types. Conform to AASHTO M 270 (ASTM A
 709), Grades 36, 50 50W, 70W, HPS70W, 100 and 100W. When the supplementary
 requirement of this specification are specified, they exceed the requirements of ASTM A
 36, A 514, A 572, A 588, and ASTM A 852.
 A) Structural Steel. Conform to AASHTO M 270 Grade 36, ASTM A 709 Grade
 36, or ASTM A 36.
 B) High-Strength Low-Alloy Columbium-Vanadium Steels of Structural
 Quality. Conform to AASHTO M 270 Grade 50, or ASTM A 709 Grade 50, or
 ASTM A 572.
 C) High-Strength Low-Alloy Structural Steel with 345 MPa Minimum Yield
 Point to 4 Inches Thick. Conform to AASHTO M 270 Grade 50W, ASTM M
 270 Grade 50W, or ASTM A 588.
 D) Quenched and Tempered Low-Alloy Structural Steel Plate with 485 MPa
 Minimum Yield Strength to 4 Inches Thick. Conform to AASHTO M 270
 Grade 70W, ASTM A 709 Grade 70W, or ASTM A 852.
 E) High-Yield-Strength, Quenched and Tempered Alloy Steel Plate, Suitable
 for Welding. Conform to AASHTO M 270 Grade 100/100W, ASTM A 709
 Grade 100/100W, or ASTM A 514.
 F) High-Strength Low-Alloy, Quenched and Tempered Structural Steel Plate.
 Conform to ASTM A 709 Grade HPS70W.
 812.01.02 Hot-Rolled Carbon Steel Sheets and Strip of Structural Quality,
 Grade 33 (Corrugated Steel Plank for Bridge Floors). Conform to ASTM A 1011.
 812.01.03 Cold Rolled Carbon Steel Sheet of Structural Quality, Grade “D” (40
 ksi) (Corrugated Steel Plank for Bridge Floors). Conform to ASTM A 611.
 812.01.04 Steel Sheet Piling. Conform to AASHTO M 202 (ASTM A 328).
 812.01.05 Frames and Grates (for Catch Basins, Inlets, Outlets, and Manholes).
 Use steel in these items that conforms to the following properties:
 Yield Strength
 Tensile Strength
 Elongation in 2-inch specimen
 
 36 ksi. minimum
 58 ksi minimum
 21 percent minimum
 
 The Department will accept steel for frames and grates according to the Manual of
 Field Sampling and Testing Practices.
 
 812—1
 
 SECTION 813  MISCELLANEOUS METALS
 813.01 PINS AND ROLLERS. Use steel specified in the AASHTO Standard
 Specifications for Highway Bridges conforming to AASHTO M 169 (ASTM A 108) or
 AASHTO M 102 (ASTM A 668).
 813.02
 
 STEEL CASTING. Conform to AASHTO M 103, Grade 70-36 (ASTM A 27).
 
 813.03 EXPANDING STEEL MANHOLE RISERS.
 expands to fit tightly and rigidly within the existing frame.
 813.04
 
 Use an approved type that
 
 GRAY IRON CASTINGS. Conform to AASHTO M 105, Class 30-B.
 
 813.05 MALLEABLE CASTINGS.
 specified.
 
 Conform to ASTM A 47.
 
 Use the grade
 
 813.06 CASTINGS FOR RIGHT-OF-WAY MARKERS. Provide aluminum alloy
 conforming to ASTM B 26, Alloy 319.1.
 813.07
 
 LEAD PLATES. Manufacture plates from lead conforming to ASTM B 29.
 
 813.08
 
 ALUMINUM.
 
 813.08.01
 356.0-T6.
 
 Cast Aluminum Sand Castings.
 
 Conform to ASTM B 26, Alloy
 
 813.08.02 Aluminum Alloy Permanent Mold Castings. Conform to ASTM B 108.
 813.08.03 Aluminum Alloy Sheet and Plate. Conform to ASTM B 209.
 813.08.04 Aluminum Alloy Extruded Bars, Rods, Shapes and Tubes. Conform to
 ASTM B 221, Alloy 6061-T 6511 or Alloy 6063-T 6.
 813.08.05 Aluminum Alloy Rolled or Extruded Shapes. Conform to ASTM B
 308, Alloy 6061-T6.
 813.08.06 Aluminum Alloy Seamless Pipe. Conform to ASTM B 241, Alloy
 6061-T 6 and 6063-T 6.
 813.08.07 Aluminum and Aluminum Alloy Bars, Rods, and Wire Bolts.
 Conform to ASTM F 468, Alloy 2024-T 4. Give finished bolts a minimum anodic coating
 of 0.0002 inch.
 813.08.08 Aluminum Nuts. Conform to ASTM F 467, Alloy 6061-T6 or 6062-T 9.
 Give finished nuts a minimum anodic coating of 0.0002 inch.
 813.08.09 Welding Rods. Conform to AWS A5.10.
 813.09
 
 STEEL BOLTS, NUTS, AND WASHERS.
 
 813.09.01 Carbon Steel Bolts and Nuts. Conform to ASTM A 307. Nuts conform
 to AASHTO M 291.
 
 813—1
 
 813.09.02 High-Strength Steel Bolts, Nuts, and Washers. .Mark all bolts, nuts,
 and washers according to the appropriate ASTM Specifications. If using galvanized bolts,
 nuts, or washers, measure the thickness of the zinc coating. Take measurements on the
 wrench flats or top of bolt head.
 Submit mill test reports for all steel used in the manufacture of the bolts, nuts, or
 washers to the Department for approval. Include with the mill test reports the place where
 the material was melted and manufactured. The Department will take field samples for
 testing to verify compliance with this section.
 Ship bolts, nuts, and washers (where required) from each rotational-capacity lot in the
 same container. If there is only one production lot number for each size of nut and
 washer, the Department will allow shipping of the nuts and washers in separate containers.
 Permanently mark each container with the rotational-capacity lot number to allow
 identification at any stage before installation. Supply the appropriate mill test report,
 manufacturer’s certified test report, or distributor’s certified test report to the Engineer
 before beginning installation.
 For bolts, nuts, and washers, conform to the following dimensions:
 
 BOLT AND NUT DIMENSIONS (1)
 
 Nominal
 Bolt
 Size
 in
 D
 1/2
 5/8
 3/4
 7/8
 1
 1 1/8
 1 1/4
 1 3/8
 1 1/2
 
 Bolt Dimensions
 in
 Heavy Hexagon
 Structural Bolts
 Width
 Height
 Thread
 Across
 Length
 Flats
 F
 H
 T
 
 Nut Dimensions
 in
 Heavy
 Hexagon Nuts
 Width
 Height
 Across
 Flats
 W
 H
 
 7/8
 1 1/16
 1 1/4
 1 7/16
 1 5/8
 1 13/16
 2
 2 3/16
 2 3/8
 
 7/8
 1 1/16
 1 1/4
 1 7/16
 1 5/8
 1 13/16
 2
 2 3/16
 2 3/8
 
 5/16
 25/64
 15/32
 35/64
 39/64
 11/16
 25/32
 27/32
 15/16
 
 1
 1 1/4
 1 3/8
 1 1/2
 1 3/4
 2
 2
 2 1/4
 2 1/4
 
 (1)
 
 31/64
 39/64
 47/64
 55/64
 63/64
 1 7/64
 1 7/32
 1 11/32
 1 15/32
 
 ANSI Standards B 18.2.1 and B 18.2.2 shall govern tolerance to these
 dimensions.
 
 813—2
 
 WASHER DIMENSIONS IN MILLIMETERS(1)
 Circular Washers
 
 Bolt
 Size
 1/2
 5/8
 3/4
 7/8
 1
 1 1/8
 1 1/4
 1 3/8
 1 1/2
 1 3/4
 2
 
 Nominal
 Outside
 Diameter(2)
 1 1/16
 1 5/16
 1 15/32
 1 3/4
 2
 2 1/4
 2 1/2
 2 3/4
 3
 3 3/8
 3 3/4
 
 Nominal
 Diameter
 of Hole
 17/32
 21/32
 13/16
 15/16
 1 1/16
 1 1/4
 1 3/8
 1 1/2
 1 5/8
 1 7/8
 2 1/8
 
 Thickness
 Min.
 Max.
 0.097
 0.177
 0.122
 0.177
 0.122
 0.177
 0.136
 0.177
 0.136
 0.177
 0.136
 0.177
 0.136
 0.177
 0.136
 0.177
 0.136
 0.177
 0.178(3) 0.28 (3)
 0.178
 0.28
 
 Square of Rectangular Beveled
 Washers for American Standard
 Beams and Channels
 Minimum
 Slope or
 Side
 Mean
 Taper in
 Dimension Thickness Thickness
 1 3/4
 5/16
 1:6
 1 3/4
 5/16
 1:6
 1 3/4
 5/16
 1:6
 1 3/4
 5/16
 1:6
 1 3/4
 5/16
 1:6
 2 1/4
 5/16
 1:6
 2 1/4
 5/16
 1:6
 2 1/4
 5/16
 1:6
 2 1/4
 5/16
 1:6
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (1)
 
 ANSI Standard B 18.22.1 Type A washer tolerances apply to the nominal dimensions
 for outside diameter and hole diameter.
 (2)
 May be exceeded by 1/4 inch.
 (3)
 3/16 inch nominal.
 A) Bolts. Conform to AASHTO M 164 (ASTM A 325). Do not use bolts
 conforming to AASHTO M 253 (ASTM A 490). Hardness for bolt diameters
 1/2 to 1 inch inclusive are as noted below:
 HARDNESS NUMBER
 Brinell
 
 Rockwell C
 
 Bolt Size
 (in)
 
 Min.
 
 Max.
 
 Min.
 
 Max.
 
 1/2 - 1
 
 253
 
 319
 
 25
 
 34
 
 Perform proof load testing according to ASTM F 606 Method 1 at the
 minimum frequency specified in ASTM A 325.
 Perform wedge testing on full size bolts according to ASTM F 606
 paragraph 3.5 at the minimum frequency specified in ASTM A 325. If bolts are
 to be galvanized, perform tests after galvanizing.
 Plain bolts must be oily to touch when delivered and installed.
 B) Nuts. Conform to AASHTO M 292 (ASTM A 194) as applicable or AASHTO
 M 291. If nuts are to be galvanized (hot dip or mechanically galvanized), use
 heat treated Grade 2H, DH, or DH3.
 For plain (ungalvanized) nuts, use Grades 2, C, D, or C3 with a minimum
 Rockwell hardness of 89 HRB (or Brinell Hardness 180 HB), or heat treated
 Grades 2H, DH, DH3.
 For nuts that are to be galvanized, overtap the nuts the minimum amount
 required for proper assembly allowing the nut to assemble freely on the bolt in
 the coated condition. Overtap the nuts according to the mechanical requirements
 
 813—3
 
 of AASHTO M 291 and the rotational-capacity test requirements of this section.
 Lubricate galvanized nuts with a lubricant containing a dye that contrasts
 with the color of the galvanizing.
 Perform proof load testing according to ASTM F 606, paragraph 4.2 at the
 minimum frequency specified in AASHTO M 291 or AASHTO M 292 (ASTM
 A 194). If nuts are to be galvanized, perform tests after galvanizing,
 overtapping, and lubricating.
 C) Washers. Conform to AASHTO M 293. If supplying galvanized washers,
 perform hardness testing after galvanizing. Remove coating before taking
 hardness measurements.
 D) Rotational-Capacity Test. .Perform rotational-capacity tests on all black or
 galvanized (after galvanizing) bolt, nut, and washer assemblies by the
 manufacturer or distributor before shipping. Perform additional rotationalcapacity tests on each lot at job sit. Use washers as part of the test even though
 they may not be required as part of the installation procedure. Perform the
 following:
 1)
 2)
 
 3)
 4)
 5)
 
 6)
 
 Except as modified herein, perform rotational-capacity testing according to
 AASHTO M 164.
 Test each combination of bolt production lot, nut lot, and washer lot,
 shipped as a rotational-capacity lot, as an assembly. Where washers are not
 required by the installation procedures, the Department will not require lot
 identification for them.
 Assign a rotational-capacity lot number to each combination of lots tested.
 Test at least 2 assemblies per rotational-capacity lot.
 Assemble the bolt, nut and washer assembly in a Skidmore-Wilhelm
 Calibrator or an acceptable equivalent device (Note this requirement
 supersedes the ASTM A 325 requirement that the test be performed in a
 steel joint). For bolts too short to be assembled in the Skidmore-Wilhelm
 Calibrator, test them according to 9) below.
 Provide the minimum rotation, from a snug tight condition (10 percent of
 the specified proof load), as follows:
 300 degrees (0.83 turn) for bolt lengths ≤ 4 diameters
 360 degrees (1 turn) for bolt lengths > 4 diameters and ≤ 8 diameters
 480 degrees (1.33 turns) for bolt lengths > 8 diameters
 
 7)
 
 Ensure that the tension reached at the above rotation is ≥ 1.15 times the
 required installation tension. The installation tension and the tension for the
 turn test are as noted below:
 
 813—4
 
 TENSION
 
 8)
 
 Req. Installation
 Tension (kips)
 
 Turn Test Tension
 (kips)
 
 1/2
 5/8
 3/4
 7/8
 1
 1 1/8
 1 1/4
 1 3/8
 1 1/2
 
 12
 19
 28
 39
 51
 56
 71
 85
 103
 
 14
 22
 32
 45
 59
 64
 82
 98
 118
 
 After exceeding the required installation tension listed above, take and
 record one reading of tension and torque. Ensure that the torque value
 conforms to the following:
 Torque ≤ 0.25 PD
 Where:
 
 9)
 
 Diameter
 (inches)
 
 Torque = measured torque (foot-pounds)
 P = measured bolt tension (pounds)
 D = bolt diameter (feet)
 
 Test bolts too short for assembly in a Skidmore-Wilhelm Calibrator in a
 steel joint. Disregard the tension requirement of 7) above. For the
 maximum torque requirement of 8) above, use a value of P equal to the turn
 test tension shown in the table in 7) above.
 The Department will not require an inspection agency present during
 testing; however, the manufacturer or distributor performing the tests shall
 certify that the results recorded are accurate. The Engineer reserves the
 right to witness testing on request.
 Ensure that the lot number appearing on the shipping package for bolts,
 washers, and nuts corresponds to the lot number identified on the
 distributor’s and manufacturer’s certification.
 Provide the Engineer with the certified test report from the
 manufacturer or distributor performing the rotational-capacity test. Include
 the following information:
 a)
 b)
 c)
 d)
 e)
 f)
 
 The lot number of each of the items tested.
 The rotational-capacity lot number.
 A statement that the items conform to this section and the Contract.
 The results of the tests.
 The location and date of the tests.
 The location where the bolt assembly components were manufactured.
 
 813.09.03 Corrosion-Resisting Steel Bolts and Set Screws. Fabricate bolts and
 screws from bars conforming to ASTM A 276. Use Types 302 or 304 for steel machine
 bolts to attach aluminum posts to concrete and for steel set screws for aluminum railings.
 813.09.04 Stainless Steel Hardware, Bolts, Nuts, and Washers.
 ASTM A 320.
 
 813—5
 
 Conform to
 
 813.09.05 Cadmium Coatings for Steel Anchor Bolts, Nuts, and Washers.
 Conform to ASTM B 766, Class 12, Type II.
 813.10 WELDING MATERIAL, PROCEDURES, AND INSPECTION. For bridges
 comply with the ANSI/AASHTO/AWS D1.5 Bridge Welding Code with modifications
 and additions as specified in the Plans.
 For other steel structures comply with the AWS Structural Welding Code D1.1 with
 modifications and additions as specified in the Plans. For aluminum structures comply
 with the AWS Structural Welding Code-Aluminum D1.2.
 813.11 STUD SHEAR CONNECTORS. Conform to AASHTO M 169 (ASTM A 108,
 Grade 1015).
 813.12
 
 HANDRAIL.
 
 813.12.01 Type B. Fabricate the channel, picket, and posts using hot rolled steel
 conforming to AISI M 1020; ASTM A 519, Grade 1020; ASTM A 575, Grade M 1020; or
 ASTM A 659, Grade 1020. For the lambs tongue, use either a gray iron casting or a
 commercial grade steel. After fabrication and cleaning, paint the handrail with 2 coats of
 commercial grade primer paint and one coat of commercial grade black enamel. Repaint
 damaged areas as directed.
 813.12.02 Type C. Furnish aluminum posts and rails conforming to ASTM B 221,
 alloy 6063, temper T52. Provide rails with a polished finish and posts and fittings with a
 satin finish. Use aluminum alloy fittings for handrails as recommended by the handrail
 manufacturer.
 813.13 MATTRESSES AND GABIONS. Conform to ASTM A 975, Style 1 or ASTM
 A 974, Style 1 or 2. Use wire with a minimum elongation of 10 percent of the length of
 the wire when tested according to ASTM A 370 without reducing the diameter or tensile
 strength of the wire.
 Supply lacing wire in sufficient quantity to ensure that all required tying, connecting,
 and lacing can be performed. For Department direct purchases, supply an amount of
 lacing wire equal to or greater than 8 percent of the weight of the units.
 Fabricate the mattress units to the dimensions required by the Contract. The
 Department will accept mattresses with dimensions within ± 3 percent of the ordered
 width.
 813.13.01 Mattress Units. As an alternate to lacing wire, the Engineer will allow
 mattress unit fasteners, from the Department’s List of Approved Materials, that conform to
 mattress unit manufacturer’s recommended assembly and connection instructions.
 Subdivide the mattress units into compartments a maximum of 3 feet in length
 extending over the full width of the mattress unit by inserting diaphragms made of the
 same mesh as the rest of the mattress unit. Secure the diaphragms in position on the
 bottom with a continuous spiral wire at the factory so no additional tying at this joint is
 necessary.
 813.13.02 Gabion Baskets. As an alternate to lacing wire, the Engineer will allow
 gabion unit fasteners, from the Department’s List of Approved Materials, that conform to
 mattress unit manufacturer’s recommended assembly and connection instructions.
 Supply diaphragms of the same material composition as the gabion to form individual
 cells of equal length and width when the gabion length exceeds its width.
 813.13.03 Acceptance. The Department will test each shipment for wire size and
 
 813—6
 
 zinc coating, and will perform any other Engineer ordered tests. The Department will
 accept shipments based on laboratory testing and the Engineer’s visual inspection.
 
 813—7
 
 SECTION 814  GUARDRAIL SYSTEMS
 814.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers material requirements for corrugated
 sheet steel beams and accessories for guardrail, terminal sections, guardrail posts, offset
 blocks, end treatments, and timber guard posts.
 814.02 BEAMS AND ACCESSORIES. Conform to AASHTO M 180. Hardware for
 Type I, II, or III beams may be either hot-dip galvanized, electrogalvanized, or
 mechanically galvanized. Galvanize hardware according to AASHTO M 232. Galvanize
 beams according to AASHTO M 180. The Engineer will reject beams with zinc oxide
 (white rust) in amounts deemed objectionable. Furnish Type II beams of either Class A,
 0.105 inch thick or Class B, 0.135 inch thick as specified in the Contract.
 814.03 TERMINAL SECTIONS. Conform to AASHTO M 180 and the details shown
 on the Standard Drawings. Galvanize sections after fabrication. Furnish Type 2 sections
 of either Class A, 0.105 inch thick or Class B, 0.135 inch thick as specified in the
 Contract.
 814.04 GUARDRAIL POSTS. Provide either steel or timber, and use the same type
 throughout the Project.
 814.04.01 Steel Guardrail Posts. Fabricate from steel conforming to ASTM A 36
 for the wide flange shapes. Punch or drill holes for connector bolts before galvanizing.
 Galvanize all posts according to AASHTO M 111.
 814.04.02 Timber Guardrail Posts. .Furnish either square sawn or round timber
 guardrail posts. Conform to the nominal dimensions shown on the Standard Drawings.
 The Engineer will allow a minus 2-inch tolerance from the specified nominal length. Saw
 the butts of all posts square, and finish the tips as specified in the Contract.
 Bore bolt holes to a driving fit for the bolts. Frame, bore, and trim, as much as is
 practical, before giving the posts a preservative treatment. When it is necessary to bore or
 cut the posts after treatment, or when any treated surface has been badly scarred, treat the
 cut or scarred surface according to AWPA M4.
 Treat the posts with preservative according to AWPA C 14 as applicable for guardrail
 posts. Use only one type throughout the project unless otherwise approved by the
 Engineer.
 Use any of the species of wood for round guardrail posts covered under AWPA C 5.
 Use any of the softwood species for square sawed posts covered under AWPA C 2. When
 furnishing oak posts, treat with creosote or creosote solution according to AWPA C 2 for
 “Above Ground, Soil or Fresh Water Exposure.”
 See Subsection 818.01 for inspection, testing and acceptance procedures for Timber
 Guardrail Posts.
 A) Square Sawed Posts. Ensure the posts, in the direction parallel to the axis of the
 bolt holes, do not exceed the dimensions specified in the Contract by more than
 1/4 inch.
 Use posts that have straight grain, and that have a slope of the grain not
 deviating more than one inch in 12 inches from being parallel to any face when
 measured over the middle one-half of the length. The Engineer will not accept
 posts having a crook exceeding 1/2 inch in 10 feet. Limit wane to one end of the
 post only, and do not allow it to extend more than 10 feet from that end. Do not
 reduce the flat width of any face by more than 25 percent at the point of most
 wane. Do not use wood with ant tunnels, woodpecker holes, plugged holes, or
 
 814—1
 
 any large unsightly gaps. The Department will allow wood with grub and worm
 holes less than 1/2 inch in average diameter, provided that the sum of the
 diameters of all holes in any 12 inches of post length does not exceed 1/4 the
 nominal width of the face. Do not use posts showing signs of powder post beetle
 infestation. The Engineer will not limit the use of posts that have grub holes
 appearing entirely on the surface of the post and that do not penetrate to more
 than 1/2 inch in maximum depth.
 Do not use posts with knots greater than 3/8 the nominal width of the face,
 measured by the smallest diameter. Do not allow the sum of the diameters of all
 knots in any 6 inches of post length to exceed 3/4 the nominal width of the face.
 Do not allow the sum of the diameter of all knots appearing within the middle
 half of the length of any face to be greater than 4 times the size of the largest
 knot allowed in that face. The Department will allow posts with unsound knots
 no larger than half the maximum allowable size for sound knots and no more
 than 1 1/2 inches in depth, provided that the surrounding wood is not affected by
 the decay. Do not use posts that have clusters of knots where the maximum
 distortion of the grain around the cluster exceeds the maximum allowable size
 for one knot.
 Entirely confine shakes within the ends of the post, without extending to any
 face. Measure the shake as the sum of the 2 adjoining sides of the smallest
 rectangle that will completely enclose the shake. Measure the sides of the
 rectangle parallel to the faces of the post. Do not allow shakes to occur in more
 than one annual ring or to extend to more than 3/4 of the circumference of the
 annual ring in boxed heart. Do not allow total shake measurement to exceed
 one-half the width of the face.
 Do not use posts with splits greater in length than the width of the face. Do
 not use posts with a check or series of contiguous checks having a width of 8
 mm or greater at the surface and more than 3 inches in depth at any point and
 extending more than 3/4 of the length of the post from one end. The Engineer
 will determine the depth of checks by the penetration of a probe 1/64 inch thick
 and 1/4 inch wide. The Engineer will consider the extent of a check or series of
 contiguous checks to end at the last point where the opening does not exceed 1/8
 inch in width and is no more than 3/4 inch in depth.
 Do not use any post having a shake that does not exceed the maximum
 limits for shakes as specified herein, but contains a check which penetrates to the
 annual ring in which the shake occurs.
 B) Round Posts. Peel all posts for their full length, and remove all outer and inner
 bark. Shave all knots and projections smooth and flush with the surface of the
 surrounding wood.
 Ensure that the posts are a constant diameter not less than 1/4 inch under the
 nominal diameter.
 Do not use posts that have short or reverse bends, one way sweeps
 exceeding one inch, and winding twists that are unsightly and exaggerated. The
 Engineer will not allow more than 10 percent of the number of pieces of any
 shipment to contain the maximum sweep.
 Do not use posts with unsound, loose or hollow knots. The Department will
 allow use posts that have sound knots when the diameter of any one knot or
 when the combined diameters of 2 or more knots occurring in the same cross
 section are no greater than 1/3 of the diameter of the post at that cross section.
 Ensure that posts are close grained and do not show spiral grain exceeding
 1/8 turn in 5 feet.
 Do not use posts with seasoning checks that penetrate the interior of the post
 to a depth greater than 1/3 of the diameter at any point, or which measure more
 than 1/4 inch in width at any point.
 Do not use posts that have ring shakes, sap rot, bird pecks, insect holes,
 
 814—2
 
 pitch pockets, or pitch streaks, and other defects that will impair the strength of
 the post, or give it an unsightly appearance.
 814.05 OFFSET BLOCKS. Use the size, and when specified, the type the Contract
 specifies.
 814.05.01 Wood. Conform to 814.04 for material properties.
 814.05.02 Composite Plastic. Use blocks that are uniform in composition
 throughout the product and consist of at least 70 percent plastic by weight. Rubber is an
 acceptable alternative to plastic in their composition. Use sufficient additives to inhibit
 photo degradation. The Department will consider 2 percent carbon black to be a
 minimum. Ensure the blocks conform to the National Cooperative Highway Research
 Program (NCHRP) 350 or the Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware (MASH) Test Level
 3 requirements.
 Submit a written manufacturer’s certification to the Engineer stating the material
 composition conforms to this subsection and is the same that was tested and approved
 under NCHRP 350 or MASH.
 814.06 MATERIALS FOR END TREATMENTS. Conform to Subsections 814.02
 through 814.05 for common components, and, except where otherwise provided, ensure
 they are of the same class and type as required for the guardrail to which they are attached.
 Galvanize all non-corrosion-resistant metals used in end treatments according to
 AASHTO M 111 or AASHTO M 232 as applicable. For proprietary end treatments, all
 materials shall conform to the manufacturer’s specifications. For other materials, comply
 with the following requirements:
 A) Anchorage Systems. Furnish anchorage systems that have a minimum breaking
 strength of 40,000 pounds. The anchorage system may employ either a cable
 assembly or continuous steel rod or other system of equal or greater strength when
 approved. For cable assemblies, use cable that is 3/4-inch (6 by 19) wire rope
 conforming to AASHTO M 30, Class C. Provide swage fittings as required by the
 Standard Drawings and include studs as required. Ensure that eye bolts conform to
 ASTM A 489 and are of either Type 1 or Type 2. For wire rope clips use a
 commercial grade capable of being torqued to a minimum of 130 foot-pounds.
 Use commercial grade wire rope thimbles.
 B) Anchor and Miscellaneous Plates. Fabricate from steel conforming to Subsection
 812.01.01.
 C) Miscellaneous Hardware.
 Bolts
 Nuts
 
 ASTM A 307
 ASTM A 563, Grade A or better
 
 D) Steel Sheet (for rail plates and mounting brackets). Conform to ASTM A 1011,
 Type SS, Grade 36
 E) Tubular Sections (for posts and blocks). Conform to ASTM A 500, Grade B or
 ASTM A 501.
 F) Concrete. Conform to Section 601, Class A.
 G) Welded Wire Fabric. Use welded wire fabric for concrete reinforcement that is W3
 by W3, 6 by 6-inch conforming to Subsection 811.04. The Department may allow
 other approved types of steel reinforcement.
 
 814—3
 
 SECTION 815  CAST ALUMINUM BRIDGE RAILING POSTS
 815.01 CHEMICAL COMPOSITION. Conform to ASTM B 108, Alloy A 356.0.
 Contrary to ASTM B 108, heat treat to a T6 temper instead of T61 to produce the
 following tensile properties:
 TENSILE PROPERTIES (1)
 Properties
 Tensile Strength, psi (1)
 Elongation in 4x Diameter, % (2),(3)
 
 Minimum
 25,000
 6
 
 Typical
 30,000
 8
 
 (1)
 
 For the purposes of design in the tension test, ensure that the specimens
 conform to the minimum yield strength of 18,000 psi (acceptance testing for
 this property is not required).
 (2)
 Minimum tensile properties based on separately cast test bars are 32,000 psi
 tensile strength and 10 percent elongation.
 (3)
 Gage length 4 times the diameter of the specimen.
 
 815.02 TEST SPECIMENS. Machine the tension test specimens from integrally cast
 test coupons extending from one side of the base of the posts sufficiently large enough to
 obtain an 0.350-inch diameter test specimen as defined in ASTM E 8.
 815.03 TESTING. Sample a minimum of one percent of the posts in any lot, but not
 less than one, for tensile testing. For the purpose of sampling, a lot shall consist of not
 more than 1,000 pounds of clean castings when produced from a batch type furnace
 charged with one heat of ingot of known analysis or not more than 2,000 pounds of clean
 castings when produced from one continuous furnace in not more than 8 consecutive
 hours.
 Determine tensile properties according to ASTM E 8. When the results of any tensile
 test do not conform to the requirements prescribed, perform 2 additional tests on the same
 group of castings. The average of the 3 tests must conform to the requirements.
 815.04 HEAT TREATMENT. Heat treat the castings to produce material with the
 utmost uniformity conforming to the properties specified in this section. Perform heat
 treatment on the whole casting, never on a portion only.
 815.05 WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH. Ensure that castings are uniform in quality
 and condition, free from cracks, blowholes, porous places, hard spots, shrinkage defects,
 or other defects that may detrimentally affect the suitability of the castings for their
 intended use. Ensure that the castings are smooth and well cleaned before inspecting.
 Produce castings under radiographic control. Radiographically examine castings to
 establish proper foundry technique for each mold that will produce castings commercially
 free from harmful internal defects, and examine production castings to ensure maintenance
 of satisfactory quality.
 Provide a normal mill finish.
 815.06 INSPECTION. The Department may inspect the manufacturer’s work either
 where the castings are made or at the point at which they are received.
 The Department will either visually inspect the castings or compare the castings by a
 method adopted as standard to determine compliance with the requirements of Subsection
 815.05.
 When the Department elects to have inspection made at the manufacturer’s works, the
 
 815—1
 
 manufacturer shall afford the inspector representing the Department all reasonable
 facilities to verify that the material is being furnished according to this section. The
 Department will conduct all tests and inspection in a manner not interfering unnecessarily
 with the operation of the works.
 815.07 INSPECTION REPORTS. When requested by the Department, furnish
 certified inspection reports certifying compliance with the requirements of this section.
 
 815—2
 
 SECTION 816  WOVEN-WIRE FENCING MATERIALS
 816.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers the materials for use in construction of
 woven-wire fences.
 816.02 GENERAL. Galvanize all ferrous materials used in a complete installation of
 fence, except aluminum coated fabric, aluminum coated posts and braces, or aluminum
 coated barbed wire. Galvanize all iron and steel hardware according to AASHTO M 232.
 Galvanize other components as designated. Where it is not practical to secure a specimen
 of measurable area or uniform thickness for determining the weight of zinc coating, ensure
 that all such galvanizing withstands 4 dips of the Preece Test as set out in ASTM A 239.
 Ensure that post caps and socket type brace connections are galvanized malleable iron, or
 other approved type, and designed to exclude moisture from inside posts or rails.
 816.03 WOVEN WIRE FABRIC. Ensure that the woven wire fabric is either zinccoated steel or aluminum-coated steel. Provide the size and style of fabric specified in the
 Contract.
 Use zinc-coated steel fabric that conforms to ASTM A 116 and that has a Class 3
 coating.
 Use aluminum-coated steel fabric that conforms to ASTM A 116.
 816.04 BARBED WIRE. Use either zinc-coated steel, aluminum-coated steel, or
 aluminum alloy. Use barbs of 4-point pattern spaced at intervals of 5 inches. The wire for
 barbs may be either round or half-round.
 816.04.01 Zinc-Coated Steel. Conform to ASTM A 121. Use size 0.099-inch
 diameter or heavier with Class 3 coating. The Department will allow high tensile strength
 barbed wire provided it conforms to ASTM A 121, and the following exceptions: (1)
 nominal diameter of 0.067 inch for the coated line wires and 0.057 inch for the coated
 barbs; (2) minimum weight of zinc coating of 0.75 ounces per square foot for line wires
 and 0.70 ounces per square foot for barbs; and (3) minimum tensile strength of 475
 pounds for each individual strand of the line wire.
 816.04.02 Aluminum-Coated Steel. Use either Type I or Type II conforming to
 ASTM A 121. Use size 0.099 inch diameter or heavier.
 816.04.03 Aluminum Alloy. Use 2 strands of 0.110 inch nominal diameter or
 heavier wire strands having minimum tensile strength of 42,000 psi, minimum yield
 strength of 35,000 psi and minimum elongation of 10 percent.
 816.05 BRACE WIRE. Conform to ASTM A 824 except provide a minimum weight
 of coating of 0.6 ounce per square foot. Use size 0.148-inch nominal diameter or larger.
 816.06 FABRIC TIES. Use either a minimum 0.109-inch nominal diameter galvanized
 steel conforming to ASTM F 626, except ensure that the minimum weight of coating is 0.6
 ounces per square foot, or 0.148-inch nominal diameter aluminum alloy.
 816.07
 
 FENCE POSTS AND BRACES.
 
 816.07.01 Steel Posts and Braces. Conform to ASTM F 1043, ASTM F 1083, and
 the Standard Drawings.
 When the Contract specifies a thermoplastic acrylic coating, apply a chromate
 conversion coating at the manufacturer’s recommended rate. Ensure that the coating is
 
 816—1
 
 designed for pretreatment of galvanized coatings. After pretreating, electrostatically apply
 the thermoplastic acrylic coating with a minimum dry film thickness of 0.3 mils.
 816.07.02 Wood Posts and Braces. Treat wood fence posts and braces with
 preservative and ensure that they are made of timber cut from live, sound, standing trees.
 See Subsection 818.01 for inspection, testing and acceptance of wood products. Ensure
 that round or half-round posts and braces are preservative treated according to and are of
 the species covered by AWPA C 5. Ensure that sawed posts and braces are preservative
 treated according to and are of the species covered by AWPA C 2 for “Soil or Fresh Water
 Exposure”.
 Use posts that are round, half-round, or square-sawed.
 Ensure that wood for fence posts is sound and free from decay, excessive knots,
 seasoning checks, and end splits that will affect serviceability. The Department will allow
 sound knots, provided the width of the knot does not exceed one-third the diameter of a
 round post at the point where it occurs, or one-third the width of any face of a sawed post,
 or a maximum of 2 1/2 inches. The Department will reject wood with season checks that
 penetrate more than one-third of the diameter of the piece or which have a width of more
 than 1/4 inch.
 Use round posts and half-round posts that are free of multiple crooks. The
 Department will allow crooks in one plane only, provided that a straight line between the
 centers of the butt and tip does not deviate more than 2 inches from the center of the post
 at any point. Ensure that crooks in square-sawed posts do not exceed one inch in 5 feet.
 Cleanly peel round posts and remove all bark. Strips of inner bark that are less than
 1/2 inch wide and 3 inches long may remain on the peeled post. Trim all protruding knots
 flush with the sides and remove all spurs and splinters. In machine peeling operations,
 follow the natural taper of round posts. Manufacture half-round posts by sawing in half
 the round posts complying with the above manufacturing methods.
 Square cut the ends of all posts unless the Engineer allows driving. When driving is
 specified or allowed, point the butt end before receiving preservative treatment. Do not
 allow the length of the point to exceed 1.5 times the diameter or width of face, as
 applicable.
 A) Line Posts. Use line posts with a length of 7 feet and a minus one-inch
 tolerance. Use line posts that are either round, half-round, or square-sawed;
 however, furnish the same type section for all line posts throughout the project.
 Ensure that round posts have a minimum diameter of 4 inches. Ensure that
 half-round posts have a minimum face of 6 inches and a minimum radius of 2
 3/4 inches. Cut square-sawed posts to 4-inch by 4-inch, ± 1/8 inch.
 B) End, Corner, Gate, Brace, and Pull Posts. Do not use lengths less than 8 feet.
 Use either round or square-sawed posts; however, furnish the same type section
 for all of these types throughout the project. Ensure that round posts have a
 minimum diameter of 8 inches. Cut square-sawed posts to 8-inch by 8-inch,
 ± 1/8 inch.
 C) Braces. Conform to all requirements for line posts, except use braces that are
 either round or square-sawed and furnish them in the lengths specified in the
 Plans.
 816.07.03 Untreated Wood Posts. Furnish untreated wood posts of Osage-Orange,
 Black Locust, Red Cedar, White Oak, or of other approved species, and ensure that posts
 conform to all applicable requirements of Subsection 816.07.02. Use untreated wood
 posts only when specified in the Contract.
 816.08 GATES. Fabricate gate frames to the size and dimensions specified in the
 Contract. Ensure that pipe used in frames conforms to Subsection 816.07.01. Weld or
 otherwise construct all joints to form a rigid and water-tight frame.
 
 816—2
 
 Furnish all gates complete with approved hinges, latches, and auxiliary braces as
 required.
 Fit gate frames with a fabric that conforms to the same requirements as the
 corresponding fence.
 The Department may approve the use of gates fabricated of other materials.
 
 816—3
 
 SECTION 817  CHAIN LINK FENCING MATERIALS
 817.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers materials for use in the construction of
 fences of chain link fabric. The Department will allow 3 optional types of fabric; zinccoated steel, aluminum-coated steel, or aluminum alloy (Type I, II, or III fabric,
 respectively). Use vinyl coated fabric (Type IV) only when specified in the Contract.
 817.02 REQUIREMENTS. Conform to AASHTO M 181 for all materials except steel
 posts and barbed wire.
 817.02.01 Fabric. Use 0.148-inch nominal diameter wire woven in 2-inch mesh.
 Coat Type I fabric to conform to Class D. Furnish fabric for fences 4 feet and 6 feet high
 that has the top selvages knuckled and bottom selvage knuckled or twisted and barbed.
 Furnish fabric for fences 8 feet high or higher with both top and bottom selvages twisted
 and barbed.
 817.02.02 Barbed Wire. Conform to Subsection 816.04.
 817.02.03 Post Caps and Socket Type Brace Connections. Use galvanized
 malleable iron, or other approved type, designed to exclude moisture from inside posts and
 rails.
 817.02.04 Posts, Rails, Gate Frames and Expansion Sleeves. With zinc-coated
 steel fabric or with aluminum-coated steel fabric, use either zinc-coated steel or zincacrylic coated steel. With aluminum alloy fabric, use aluminum alloy. Furnish steel posts
 that comply with Subsection 816.07.01.
 817.02.05 Fabric Ties. Use either a minimum 0.148-inch nominal diameter
 aluminum alloy or 0.120-inch nominal diameter galvanized steel.
 817.02.06 Hog Rings and Tension Wire. With zinc-coated steel fabric or with
 aluminum-coated steel fabric use zinc-coated steel wire or aluminum-coated steel wire.
 Ensure that steel ties and wire conform to ASTM F 626, except that the minimum weight
 of coating is 0.6 ounces per square foot. With aluminum alloy fabric, use aluminum alloy
 wire.
 817.02.07 Miscellaneous Fittings and Hardware. With zinc-coated steel fabric or
 with aluminum-coated steel fabric use zinc-coated steel. With aluminum alloy fabric, use
 aluminum alloy.
 
 817—1
 
 SECTION 818  WOOD PRODUCTS
 818.01 INSPECTION, TESTING, AND ACCEPTANCE. The Engineer will visually
 inspect and approve all treated wood products before use on the project. The Division of
 Materials will grade inspect, sample, and test all treated wood products before their use on
 the project if the plant producing the wood materials is located within the Commonwealth
 or a 100-mile driving distance of its borders. When obtaining treated wood materials from
 a plant outside this 100-mile distance, have an independent treated-wood testing company
 approved by the Division of Materials grade inspect, sample, and test the wood treated
 material at no expense to the Department. Obtain a report prepared by the independent
 testing firm that grade inspected, sampled and tested the treated wood material, and submit
 it to the Division of Materials at least 15 days before using the wood materials on the
 project.
 Use only treated wood that has been cut to size before treating. Treat field sawn
 surfaces according to AWPA M4.
 818.02 BOARDS. Boards are defined as being less than 2-inch in nominal thickness
 and one inch or more in width. Only use boards that are one of the available grades
 established by either the Southern Pine Inspection Bureau (SPIB) or the West Coast
 Lumber Inspection Bureau (WCLIB). The Contract will designate the grade and
 applicable inspection bureau.
 818.03 DIMENSION LUMBER. Dimension lumber is limited to surfaced softwood
 lumber of nominal thickness from 2-inch through 4-inch. Only use dimension lumber for
 framing members such as joists, planks, rafters, studs, and small timbers.
 Use only dimension lumber boards that are one of the available grades established by
 either the SPIB or the WCLIB. The Contract will designate the grade and applicable
 inspection bureau.
 818.04 TIMBERS, 5-INCH BY 5-INCH AND LARGER. Use only timbers that are
 of one of the available grades established by either the SPIB or the WCLIB. The Contract
 shall designate the dimensions, grade, species, and applicable inspection bureau.
 818.05 STRUCTURAL LUMBER. Conform to the AASHTO Standard Specifications
 for Highway Bridges.
 818.06
 
 BRIDGE PLANKING AND ROUGH LOCAL HARDWOODS.
 
 818.06.01 Species. Use only bridge planking that is White Oak, Red Oak, or
 Southern Yellow Pine.
 The term “White Oak” includes White Oak, Chestnut Oak, Post Oak, Burr Oak,
 Swamp Chestnut Oak, Swamp White Oak, Live Oak, Chinquapin Oak, and other less
 known varieties of oak of this character.
 The term “Red Oak” includes Red Oak, Black Oak, Southern Red Oak, Willow Oak,
 Water Oak, Pin Oak, Cherrybark, or Swamp Red Oak, and other less known varieties of
 oak of this character.
 Southern Yellow Pine may be any species except Field or Loblolly.
 818.06.02 Quality of White Oak or Red Oak. The Engineer will not approve wood
 for use that has splits, rot, or unsound knots. Use only pieces that are sawed full to
 specified sizes and lengths, with square edges except wane (bark or the lack of wood) as
 follows. The Engineer will allow wane on one corner on 30 percent of the pieces in any
 shipment, not to exceed 15 percent of the width of the face on which it appears. The
 
 818—1
 
 Engineer will allow this grade with sound stains, scattered worm holes or grub holes not
 materially affecting the strength of the piece and sound bird pecks, or their equivalent;
 sound knots or their equivalent not exceeding in diameter 25 percent the width of the face
 in which they appear. Use only boxed heartcenter wood products. Cut pieces not large
 enough to box the heartcenter outside the heart except that sizes 2 to 6 inches in thickness,
 6 inches wide and wider, may show heart on one face only, in 30 percent of the pieces in
 any shipment.
 818.06.03 Quality of Southern Yellow Pine. Conform to the SPIB grades as
 follows:
 A) Structural Light Framing (2-inch by 2-inch to 4-inch by 4-inch). Provide
 No. 1 Dense.
 B) Structural Joists and Planks (3-inch by 8-inch or 4-inch by 6-inch). Provide
 No. 1 Dense.
 C) Stress Rated Timbers (5-inch by 5-inch and larger). Provide No. 1 SR.
 818.06.04 Dimensions and Tolerances. Use rough timber that is cut full size as
 specified, sawed true with parallel faces. The Engineer will allow no more than 25
 percent of a lot or shipment to be scant 1/4 inch in thickness and no more than 10 percent
 of a lot or shipment may be scant 1/4 inch in width.
 Ensure that dressed dimensions for both oak and pine material conform to Southern
 Pine Inspection Bureau thicknesses and widths for Dimension Lumber.
 818.06.05 Rough Local Hardwood. This subsection covers hardwood lumber and
 timber that is produced locally. Use only White Oak, Red Oak, or Beech hardwood.
 Where hardwood material is intended to be used inside, the Department will allow other
 species of hardwood that are suitable for the intended use, when such species are
 specified.
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 
 6)
 7)
 8)
 9)
 
 Use only material that is cut from live standing trees and is free from any form of
 decay.
 The Department does not require seasoned material.
 Cut all pieces to a square edge with no less than 75 percent heart, girth
 measurement, for full length of the piece.
 Saw all material to the full nominal dimensions.
 Ensure that all knots are tight and sound. Do not allow any material with a knot
 of greater diameter than half of the width of the face on which it occurs. Allow
 only one maximum knot, or small knots aggregating in diameter of one
 maximum knot, in each one-foot length of timber.
 Ensure that all material is reasonably free from crook and warp.
 Do not allow any piece that has a shake, crack, or split which extends over half
 through the narrow face of the piece.
 Do not allow any boxed heart in pieces less than 3 inches in thickness.
 The Engineer will reject material having any defect or combination of defects
 that seriously impairs the strength or that renders it unsatisfactory for the
 intended use.
 
 818.07 PRESERVATIVE TREATMENT. When the Contract specifies preservative
 treatment of wood products, treat according to AWPA C14. Provide preservative
 conforming to AWPA C14 as the Contract specifies.
 Do not use creosote or creosote solutions with wood required to be paintable.
 When the Contract specifies pentachlorophenol preservative, use heavy petroleum
 solvent when the Contract does not require painting. Use light petroleum solvent when
 the Contract requires that the wood is to be paintable.
 
 818—2
 
 Do not use water-borne preservatives where the wood will be in contact with water
 unless recommended by AWPA specifications.
 Follow the guidelines set in AWPA M4 for the care of preservative treated wood
 products.
 
 818—3
 
 SECTION 819 —TUNNEL LINING MATERIALS
 819.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers materials requirements for steel plates and
 fittings to be used for lining tunnels. Refer to the Contract for sectional properties.
 819.01.01 Steel Plates. Use base metal for steel plates that conforms to the chemical
 requirements of ASTM A 569. Ensure that the flat plate, before cold forming, conforms
 to the following minimum mechanical properties:
 Tensile Strength
 Yield Strength
 Elongation, 2 inches
 
 42,000 psi
 28,000 psi
 30%
 
 Ensure that nominal plate dimensions provide the sectional properties shown in the
 current edition of the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges. For
 thickness tolerances, conform to Table 6 of AASHTO M 167. Provide steel liner plates of
 additional thickness or protect by coatings or other means when specified in the Contract
 for resistance to abrasion or corrosion.
 819.01.02 Bolts and Nuts. Do not use any bolts and nuts with lapped seams that are
 less than 5/8 inch in diameter. Provide bolts conforming to ASTM A 449 for plate
 thicknesses equal to or greater than 0.209 inch and A 307 for plate thickness less than
 0.209 inch. Provide nuts conforming to ASTM A 307, Grade A.
 Only use bolts and nuts with 4-flanged plates of no less than 1/2 inch in diameter for
 plate thicknesses to and including 0.179 inch and no less than 5/8 inch in diameter for
 plates of greater thickness.
 
 819—1
 
 SECTION 820  TIMBER POLES
 820.01 REQUIREMENTS. Provide poles of Southern Pine conforming to ANSI
 Specification 05.1. Provide poles of the length and ANSI size classification specified in
 the Contract. The Department will not allow sweep exceeding one inch in 10 feet or
 double sweep.
 Treated timber poles shall meet all the general requirements of this subsection and
 shall be treated with pentachlorophenol (oil borne) or CCA (water borne) preservative as
 noted in AASHTO M133 in accordance with requirements of the current AWPA
 standards.
 For poles treated with pentachlorophenol conforming to AWPA P8 according to
 AWPA U1. Treat with a light petroleum solvent to provide an oil-free paintable finished
 product. The Engineer will allow other processes which produce the specified
 paintability.
 Ensure that net retention is no less than 0.75 pounds per cubic foot on the outer 1/2inch and no less than 0.45 pounds per cubic foot in the 1/2 to one-inch zone with average
 retentions of no less than 0.80 and 0.50 pounds per cubic foot, respectively.
 Follow the guidelines for the care of preservative treated wood products as set in
 AWPA M4.
 820.02 ACCEPTANCE. The Department will inspect, test and accept poles according
 to Subsection 818.01.
 
 820—1
 
 SECTION 821 — STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS
 821.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers requirements for structural steel coating
 systems used in steel bridge construction and maintenance.
 821.02 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. Select structural steel coatings systems
 conforming to this section and included on the Department’s List of Approved Materials.
 Use only coating system components that are factory mixed and delivered ready for use.
 Do not allow the use of partial kits. Sediment formed during shipment must be easily
 dispersed with a power mixer to produce a smooth, uniform coating having good
 spreading characteristics. Reject coatings that excessively gel, or cakes in the container.
 Ensure the coatings produce a smooth uniform finish without sags or streaks. Ensure
 successive coating applications, i.e. intermediate coat to prime coat, differ in color a
 minimum of 10.0ΔE*. Ensure each lot of finish coat complies within 2.0ΔE* to the
 contract requirement.
 Store coatings at temperatures above 32 ºF and below the most restrictive maximum
 ambient air temperature for the coating system stated on the coating manufacturer’s
 product data sheets. Equip storage areas with high-low thermometers capable of
 measuring and recording the appropriate temperature range. Do not store coating systems
 in direct sunlight. The Engineer will reject or retest coatings exposed to temperatures
 outside this range.
 821.03 APPROVAL. The Department will approve structural steel coating systems
 based on performance data obtained in accordance with KM 64-266.
 821.04 SAMPLING AND TESTING.
 The Department will sample and test each
 shipment of each lot of coating delivered to the project in accordance with the
 Department’s Materials Field Sampling Manual. Allow the Department 10 working days
 from the date received by the Division of Materials to test and approve samples. Retest
 coatings that are not used within 6 months from their approval. Additionally, retest
 coatings that are stored between painting seasons. Remove rejected coatings from the job
 site before starting painting operations.
 821.05 CERTIFICATION. Submit manufacturer’s certification stating conformance
 to the requirements of this section for each shipment of approved structural steel coatings
 delivered for use on projects. Clearly state the manufacturer and product name as listed in
 the Department’s List of Approved Materials. Identify the lot number(s), expiration date,
 and quantity of each coating or coating component.
 821.06 ACCEPTANCE. The Department will accept structural steel coating systems
 based on verification of inclusion on the Department’s List of Approved Materials,
 compliance of the manufacturer’s certification, verification the coatings will not exceed
 the expiration date, and acceptable tests results obtained by the Department in accordance
 with Table 1.
 821.07 ACCEPTANCE OF NON-SPECIFICATION COMPLIANT COATINGS.
 The Department may accept coatings found to be in non-conformance to the Specification
 Acceptance Range at a reduction in pay, see Table 1. Coatings with analytical test results
 not in conformance to the Specification Acceptance Range but within the Acceptance
 Range with Deduction may be accepted for incorporation into the project with applicable
 reductions in pay. Deductions are cumulative to a maximum of 60% reduction in pay
 applied to the Contractors’ invoiced unit cost for the coating. Coatings with 3 or more
 analytical tests resulting in non-conformance to the Specification Acceptance Range or
 
 821—1
 
 any analytical test result exceeding the Acceptance Range with Deduction will be rejected
 and removed from the project.
 
 821—2
 
 821.08 Table 1.
 COATINGS PRICE ADJUSTMENT SCHEDULE
 Specification
 Acceptance Range
 Deduction
 Acceptance Range
 with Deduction
 Applied to Unit
 Cost
 20%
 Density
 Target Value
 Target Value
 ASTM D1475
 ± 0.25 lbs/gal
 ± 0.26 to 0.50 lbs/gal
 Viscosity
 Target Value
 ASTM D562
 ± 10 KU
 30%
 Weight Solids
 Target Value
 Target Value
 ASTM D2369
 ± 2.0%
 ± 2.1 to 3.0%
 30%
 Volume Solids
 Target Value
 Target Value
 ASTM D2697
 ± 2.0%
 ± 2.1 to 3.0%
 30%
 Pigment
 Target Value
 Target Value
 ASTM D2698
 ± 2.0%
 ± 2.1 to 3.0%
 ASTM D 3723
 30%
 Metallic Pigment
 Target Value
 Target Value
 Content
 ± 2.0%
 ± 2.1 to 3.0%
 ASTM D521
 Volatile Organic
 450 g/L Maximum
 Compounds
 ASTM D3960
 10%
 Color
 2.0 ∆E*Maximum
 2.1 to 3.0 ∆E*
 ASTM D2244
 Maximum
 10%
 Color Differential 10.0 ∆E*Minimum
 9.9 to 8.0 ∆E*
 Minimum
 Gloss
 Target Value
 ASTM D523
 ± 10 Gloss Units
 Sag Resistance
 Target Value
 ASTM D4400
 ± 20%
 Drying Schedule
 Target Value
 ASTM D1640
 ± 20%
 Pot Life
 Target Value
 ± 10 KU
 30%
 Resin Content
 Target Value
 Target Value
 ASTM D1652
 ± 0.5%
 ± 0.6 to 0.8%
 ASTM D2074
 AASHTO TP67
 Analytical Test
 
 821—3
 
 SECTION 822  ELASTOMERIC BEARING PADS
 822.01 ELASTOMERIC BEARING PADS. Furnish elastomeric bearing pads
 conforming to the design and dimensions as specified in the Plans and to the AASHTO
 Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges, Division II, Section 18.
 Use bearings that are low temperature Grade 3 with durometer hardness of 50 and
 that conform to the load test requirements corresponding to Design Method A.
 
 822—1
 
 SECTION 823  CONCRETE CURING MATERIALS
 823.01 GENERAL. This section lists the various types of curing materials allowed for
 concrete and the materials requirements applicable to each. The Department will provide
 specifications governing the particular type or types of curing materials allowed for
 specific classes of construction in the Contract or other sections of these specifications.
 823.02 LIQUID MEMBRANE FORMING COMPOUNDS. Products must have
 completed testing or been submitted for testing through the National Transportation
 Product Evaluation Program (NTPEP) for Concrete Curing Compounds in order to remain
 on or to be placed on the Department’s List of Approved Materials.
 Ensure that all curing compounds Conform to AASHTO M 148 and are from a
 Department approved manufacturer.
 1)
 2)
 
 Type 1-D (Clear with fugitive dye or translucent with fugitive dye), Class A or Class
 B.
 Type 2 (White pigmented), Class A or Class B. Supply Type 2 curing compounds in
 agitating type drums, except the Department will not require agitating type containers
 when Type 2 curing compound is supplied in 5 gallon pails.
 
 The Department will accept curing compounds on the basis of certification of their
 conformance to this section and their being from an approved manufacturer. The
 Department will reject curing compounds from an unapproved manufacturer and require
 their removal from the project site.
 823.01.02 Acceptance Procedures for Non-Specification Curing Compounds.
 The Department will test project samples. When non-specification curing compounds are
 inadvertently incorporated into the work the Department will accept the material with a
 reduction in pay. The Department will apply the largest payment reduction when the
 material fails to meet more than one specification requirement. The Department will
 calculate the payment reduction on the invoice cost of the material delivered at the project
 site.
 MOISTURE LOSS PAYMENT REDUCTION
 kg/square meter
 Reduction Rate
 
 0.00-0.55
 0%
 
 0.56-0.65
 20%
 
 0.66-0.75
 30%
 
 0.76 or more
 50%
 
 REFLECTANCE PAYMENT REDUCTION
 % Reflectance
 Reduction Rate
 
 60.0% or more
 0%
 
 50-59.9%
 20%
 
 40.0-49.9%
 30%
 
 39.9% or less
 50%
 
 823.03
 
 BURLAP CLOTH. Conform to AASHTO M 182, Class 4.
 
 823.04
 
 WATERPROOF PAPER (Regular or White). Conform to AASHTO M 171.
 
 823.05 WHITE POLYETHYLENE FILM (White Opaque). Use white polyethylene
 film of either single sheet construction conforming to AASHTO M 171 or laminated
 construction consisting of 2 sheets of white polyethylene reinforced with synthetic fiber
 
 823—1
 
 cords, providing the total thickness of polyethylene, exclusive of the cords, averages no
 less than 4 mils and the sheeting conforms to all other applicable requirements of
 AASHTO M 171. Incorporate the reinforcing cords diagonally in 2 directions and ensure
 that the number of cords averages 24 per linear foot in each direction.
 823.06
 171.
 
 WHITE BURLAP - POLYETHYLENE SHEET. Conform to AASHTO M
 
 823.07 CURING BLANKETS. Use curing blankets that consist of a top layer of white
 copolymer material and a bottom layer of absorbent, non-woven, synthetic fabric. Ensure
 that the layers are securely bonded together so there will be no separation of the layers
 during handling and curing of the concrete. When tested according to AASHTO M 171,
 ensure that moisture loss does not exceed 0.010grams per square centimeter and that
 reflectance is at least 70 percent.
 
 823—2
 
 SECTION 824  MASONRY MATERIALS
 824.01 CONCRETE MASONRY UNITS (FOR CONSTRUCTION OF CATCH
 BASINS AND MANHOLES). Conform to ASTM C 139.
 824.02 PRECAST REINFORCED CONCRETE MANHOLE SECTIONS. Conform
 to ASTM C 478, KM 64-115 and the Standard Drawings. For flat top slabs, a tongue and
 groove design is optional. The Department will allow the use of lightweight aggregate
 provided that it conforms to subsection 805.04.02.
 824.03
 
 CONCRETE BRICK. Conform to ASTM C 55. Use Type II, Grade N or S.
 
 824.04 SEWER AND MANHOLE LEVELING BRICK. Conform to AASHTO M
 91. The Department will waive the requirement for saturation coefficient for Grades SM
 and MS. Ensure that the dimensions are of the specified standard size.
 824.04.01 Sewer Brick. Use Grade SS or SM.
 824.04.02 Manhole Brick. Use Grade MS or MM.
 824.05
 
 HYDRATED LIME. Conform to ASTM C 206.
 
 824—1
 
 SECTION 825  DE-ICERS
 
 825.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers deicers used for ice/snow removal and
 road conditioning purposes.
 825.02 GENERAL. Provide deicers which conform to this section. Provide
 independent analysis data and certification showing compliance to 40 CFR 261 for
 leachable heavy metals for each deicer annually. Report the total concentration of each
 heavy metal present and the test method used for each determination.
 825.03
 
 CALCIUM CHLORIDE. Conform to ASTM D 98 for the following:
 A) Type S (Solid)
 Grade 2. Class B.
 Grade 3. Class B.
 B) Type L (Liquid). Ensure a minimum calcium chloride content of 32%.
 
 825.04 SODIUM CHLORIDE. Furnish sodium chloride in a free flowing condition
 and conforming to the following chemical and physical requirements:
 825.04.01 Sodium Chloride Content. Ensure a minimum sodium chloride content of
 95.0%.
 825.04.02 Moisture Content. Ensure the moisture content of the sodium chloride does
 not to exceed 2.0%.
 825.04.03 Gradation.
 Sieve Size
 19.0 mm (3/4in.)
 12.5 mm (1/2in.)
 9.5 mm(3/8in.)
 4.75 mm (No. 4)
 2.36 mm (No. 8)
 600 µm (No. 30)
 
 Mass % Passing
 …
 100
 95 to 100
 20 to 90
 10 to 60
 0 to 15
 
 825.05 CERITIFCATION. Submit manufacturer’s certification stating conformance
 to the requirements of this section for each shipment of deicer delivered for use. Clearly
 state the manufacturer, product name, actual test results showing conformance to the
 stated requirements, date of compliance analysis to 40 CFR 261 for leachable heavy
 metals and quantity of deicer.
 825.05 ACCEPTANCE. The Department will accept deicers based on compliance of
 manufacturer’s certification and visual inspection by the Engineer. The Department
 reserves the right to sample and test deicers, at the Engineers discretion, in accordance
 with the Department’s Field Sampling and Testing Manual. The Department will conduct
 testing of calcium chloride deicers in accordance with KM 64-222 and of sodium chloride
 deicers in accordance with KM 64-225.
 
 825—1
 
 SECTION 826  EPOXY RESIN SYSTEMS
 826.01 GENERAL. Conform to ASTM C 881, except as specified in Subsections
 826.01.01, 826.01.02, and 826.01.03. Provide materials, of all types, of the Grade and
 Class required for the intended use. Types are as follows:
 A) Type III. Use in epoxy-sand slurry, as a binder in epoxy mortars or epoxy concretes.
 B) Type IV. Use for installing dowels into hardened portland cement concrete.
 C) Type V. Use for bonding plastic portland cement concrete to hardened portland
 cement concrete.
 826.01.01 Epoxy-Sand Slurry for Concrete Bridge Deck Overlays. Conform to
 ASTM C 881, Type III or AASHTO M 200, Class II.
 826.01.02 Reinforcing Bar Grout Adhesives. The Department will allow
 reinforcing bar grout adhesives, from the Department’s List of Approved Materials, as an
 alternate to Type IV epoxies for doweling reinforcing bars into hardened concrete.
 A) Category I. Conform to KM 64-209 utilizing a maximum one-hour cure time.
 B) Category II. Conform to KM 64-209 utilizing a maximum 24-hour cure time.
 826.01.03
 Structural Adhesives with Extended Contact Time.
 The
 Department will allow structural adhesives, from the Department’s List of Approved
 Materials, as an alternate to Type V epoxies for bonding plastic portland cement to
 hardened portland cement concrete.
 826.02 APPROVAL. The Department will approve epoxy resin systems based on
 review of required independent laboratory data and Department conducted testing. Submit
 independent laboratory data conducted within one year of the date of product submittal for
 Department approval. Obtain Department approval for each epoxy resin system every five
 years.
 826.02.01
 ASTM C881 Epoxy. The Department will approve ASTM C881
 epoxy for Type, Class, and Grade based on the manufacturer’s submission of independent
 laboratory data showing the actual test values for the ASTM specification requirements
 and submission of a product sample from a production lot.
 826.02.02
 AASHTO M 200. The Department will approve AASHTO M200
 epoxy based on the manufacturer’s submission of independent laboratory data showing the
 actual test values for the AASHTO M 200 specification requirements for Class II and
 submission of a product sample from a production lot.
 826.02.03 Reinforcing Bar Grout Adhesives. The Department will approve nonepoxy Reinforcing Bar Grout Adhesives based on testing conducted by the Department in
 accordance with KM64-209.
 826.02.04
 Structural Adhesives with Extended Contact Time.
 The
 Department will approve Structural Adhesives with Extended Contact Time based on the
 manufacturer’s submission of independent laboratory data showing the actual test values
 for the ASTM C881 specification requirements for Type V, with the following
 modifications and submission of a product sample from a production lot.
 A) Gel Time (Minimum)
 
 90 Minutes
 
 826—1
 
 B) Compressive Strength (ASTM C109) (Minimum)
 7-Day
 5,000 psi
 C) Bond Strength (ASTM C882 Modified*) (Minimum)
 14-Days
 0 Hour Contact Time
 2,000 psi
 16 Hours Contact Time
 1,500 psi
 *ASTM C882 is modified to allow for 16 hours contact time. Contact time is
 the time allowed between application of the bonding agent and placement of
 the plastic concrete.
 
 826.03 PACKAGING. Package the 2 components in separate containers. Identify the
 containers as “Component A - Contains Epoxy Resin” and “Component B - Contains
 Hardener.” Include on the container the following information:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 5)
 6)
 7)
 
 Type, mixing directions, and usable temperature range.
 Name of the Manufacturer.
 Lot or batch number.
 Date of packaging.
 Type of pigmentation.
 Quantity contained in pounds and gallons.
 Potential hazards according to the Federal Hazardous Products Labeling Act.
 
 826.04 CERTIFICATION. Submit manufacturer’s certification stating conformance
 to the requirements of this Section for each shipment of approved epoxy resin system
 delivered for use on projects. Clearly state the manufacturer, product name, type, class,
 grade, and category; as appropriate for each epoxy resin system as listed in the
 Department’s List of Approved Materials. Identify the lot number(s), expiration date, and
 quantity of each component of epoxy resin system.
 826.05 ACCEPTANCE. The Department will accept epoxy resin systems based on
 verification of inclusion on the Department’s List of Approved Materials, compliance of
 the manufacturers certification and verification the epoxy resin system has not exceeded
 the expiration date. The Department reserves the right to sample and test epoxy resin
 
 systems, at the Engineer’s discretion, in accordance with the Department’s Field
 Sampling and Testing Manual.
 
 826—2
 
 SECTION 827  EROSION CONTROL MATERIALS
 827.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers the requirements for various materials
 used for erosion control.
 827.02 AGRICULTURAL LIMESTONE.
 Conform to the requirements and
 provisions of the Kentucky Department of Agriculture. The Department of Agriculture
 furnishes a test report and any required weight penalties to each agricultural limestone
 producer. Furnish the Engineer with a copy of the test report, current within 9 months, as
 the basis of approval. The Engineer may sample any agricultural limestone that appears to
 be of questionable quality upon visual inspection.
 827.03 FERTILIZER. Provide commercial fertilizer that complies with the Kentucky
 Fertilizer Law, and contains the plant nutrients of nitrogen, available phosphoric acid, and
 soluble potash as specified in the Contract. Ensure that bagged fertilizer displays the
 following information on the bag or on a sticker or tag attached to the bag:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Net Weight
 Brand and Grade
 Guaranteed Analysis
 Name and Address of Manufacturer
 
 Ensure that the manufacturer includes a statement with the bulk fertilizer (dry or
 liquid) that contains the same information required for the bagged fertilizer.
 Provide either bagged or bulk (dry or liquid) fertilizer manufactured and sold under
 the jurisdiction of the Division of Regulatory Services of the University of Kentucky
 Agricultural Experiment Station. Select a supplier from the Department’s List of
 Approved Materials for fertilizer. The Department must sample, test, and approve any
 other fertilizer prior to its use.
 827.04
 SEED. Conform to the requirements outlined in the . “Kentucky Seed Law and
 Provisions for Seed Certification in Kentucky” and the “Regulations under the Kentucky
 Seed Law”, with following exceptions:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Obtain seed only through registered dealers that are permitted for labeling of
 seed.
 Ensure all deliveries and shipments of premixed seed are accompanied with a
 master blend sheet.
 Ensure all bags and containers have an acceptable seed tag attached.
 The Department may sample the seed at the job site at any time.
 
 827—1
 
 REQUIREMENTS FOR SEEDS
 Purity
 (Min. %)
 
 Germination
 Hard Seed
 (Min. %)
 (Max. %)
 Including
 Allowed
 Hard Seed and
 in
 Dormant Seed Germination
 
 Grasses
 Bentgrass (Argrostic palustris)
 Bermudagrass, common (Cynodon dactylon)
 Bluegrass, Kentucky (Poa pratensis)
 Brome, smooth (Bromus inermis)
 Canarygrass, reed (Phalaris arundinacea)
 Fescue, chewings (Festuca rubra var. commutata)
 Fescue, hard (Festuca trachyphlla)
 Fescue, meadow (Festuca elatior)
 Fescue, red (Festuca rubra)
 Fescue, tall (Festuca arundinacca)
 Orchardgrass (Dactylis glomerata)
 Redtop (Agrostic alba)
 Ryegrass, annual, common or Italian (Lotium multiflorum)
 Ryegrass, perennial (Lolium perenne)
 Lovegrass, Weeping (Eragrostic curvula)
 Oat (Avena Sativa)
 Rye (Secale cereale)
 Timothy (Phleum pratense)
 Wheat, common (Triticum aestivum)
 
 98
 97
 98
 95
 95
 97
 97
 97
 97
 97
 97
 95
 97
 97
 96
 98
 98
 98
 98
 
 85
 85
 85
 80
 80
 85
 85
 85
 85
 85
 85
 80
 85
 85
 80
 85
 85
 85
 85
 
 -
 
 Legumes
 Alfalfa (Medicago sativa)
 Clover, alsike (Trifolium hybridum)
 Clover, ladino (Trifolium repens)
 Clover, white (Trifolium repens)
 Crownvetch (Coronilla varia)
 Lespedeza, Korean (Lespedeza stipulacea)
 Lespedeza, Sericea (Lespedeza cuneata)
 Sweetclover, white (Melilotus alba)
 Sweetclover, yellow (Melilotus officinalis)
 Partridge Pea (Cassia fasciculate)
 Trefoil, birdsfoot (Lotus corniculatus)
 
 98
 97
 98
 98
 97
 97
 97
 98
 98
 97
 97
 
 85
 85
 85
 85
 85
 85
 85
 85
 85
 85
 85
 
 25
 25
 25
 25
 25
 20
 20
 25
 25
 20
 25
 
 Native Grasses
 Little Bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium)
 Big Blustem (Andropogon gerardii)
 Indian Grass (Sorghastrum nutans)
 Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum)
 
 85
 85
 85
 85
 
 80
 80
 80
 80
 
 -
 
 Do not use seed (grasses, native grasses, and legumes) if the weed seed is over one
 percent, total germination (including hard seed) is less than 80 percent, if the seed test date
 
 827—2
 
 is over 9 months old exclusive of the month tested, or if the limits of noxious weed seed is
 exceeded.
 Ensure that noxious weed seeds contained in any seed or seed mixture does not
 exceed the maximum permitted rate of occurrence per pound.
 
 Kind of Noxious Weed
 Balloon Vine (Cardiospermum halicacabum)
 Purple Moonflower (Ipomoea turbinata)
 Canada Thistle (Cirsium Arvense)
 Johnsongrass (Sorghum halepense and Sorghum almum and
 perennial rhizomatous derivatives of these species)
 Quackgrass (Elytrigia Repens)
 Annual Bluegrass (Poa annua)
 Buckhorn Plantain (Plantago lanceolata)
 Corncockle (Agrostemma githago)
 Dodder (Cuscuta spp.)
 Giant Foxtail (Setaria faberii)
 Oxeye Daisy (Chrysanthemum leucanthemum)
 Sorrel (Rumex acetosella)
 Wild Onion and Wild Garlic (Allium spp.)
 *
 
 Max. No. Seeds
 (per pound)*
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 120
 120
 18
 18
 18
 120
 120
 18
 
 Seed or seed mixtures that contain in excess of 120 total noxious seeds per
 pound is prohibited
 
 Wildflower seed shall not be planted until approved by the Engineer.
 827.05 MULCH MATERIALS. Use material for mulching that is baled wheat, oat,
 barley, or rye straw, or excelsior wood fibers. Ensure that mulch material is reasonably
 free from weed seeds, stolons, foreign matter, or chaff, and does not contain any Johnson
 Grass, Canada Thistle, Quack Grass, or Nodding Thistle. Ensure that the mulch material
 is reasonably bright in color and not musty, moldy, or otherwise of low quality, and does
 not contain chemicals toxic to plant growth.
 Use excelsior wood fibers that consist of fibers cut from sound green timber. Ensure
 that the cut is made in a manner to provide maximum strength of fiber, but is at a slight
 angle to the natural grain of the wood so as to cause splintering of the fiber when
 weathering occurs. Use fibers with the following approximate physical properties: width
 0.02 to 0.04 inch, thickness 0.02 to 0.04 inch, and length 4 to 6 inches.
 827.06 ASPHALT MATERIALS FOR MULCH. .Use either SS-1 or SS-1h
 conforming to Section 806 except that the Department may waive retesting as provided by
 Subsection 806.04. The Engineer may reject asphalt materials that fail to disperse
 properly or otherwise fail to provide satisfactory results.
 827.07 EROSION CONTROL BLANKET. Use a blanket from the Department’s
 List of Approved Materials. Blankets must be machine constructed with two-sided netting
 filled with curled wood fiber mat, straw, or a straw and coconut fiber combination. Ensure
 the blanket is smolder resistant without the use of chemical additives.
 A) Dimensions. Furnish in strips with a minimum width of 4 feet and length of 50
 feet.
 B) Weight.
 
 827—3
 
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 Curled Wood Fiber. Ensure a minimum mass per unit area of 7.25 ounces
 per square yard according to ASTM D 6475.
 Straw. Ensure a minimum mass per unit area of 7.5 ounces per square yard
 according to ASTM D 6475.
 Straw/Coconut Fiber. Ensure a minimum mass per unit area of 6.75 ounces
 per square yard according to ASTM D 6475.
 
 C) Fill. Ensure the fill is evenly distributed throughout the blanket.
 1)
 2)
 2)
 
 Curled Wood Fiber. Use curled wood fiber of consistent thickness with at
 least 80 percent of its fibers 6 inches or longer in length.
 Straw. Use only weed free agricultural straw.
 Straw/Coconut Fiber. Conform to the straw requirements above and ensure
 the coconut fiber is evenly distributed throughout the blanket and accounts
 for 30% or more of the fill.
 
 D) Netting. Use photodegradable extruded plastic mesh or netting, with a
 maximum spacing width of one inch square, on both sides of the blanket. Secure
 the netting by stitching or other method to ensure the blanket retains its integrity.
 E) Staples. Use steel wire U-shaped staples with a minimum diameter of 0.09
 inches (11 gauge), a minimum width of one inch, and a minimum length of 6
 inches. Use a heavier gauge when working in rocky or clay soils and longer
 lengths in sandy soils. Provide staples with colored tops when requested by the
 Engineer.
 F) Performance.
 1)
 2)
 
 827.08
 
 C-Factor. Ensure the ratio of soil loss from protected slope to ratio of soil
 loss from unprotected is ≤ 0.15 for a slope of 3:1 when tested according to
 ASTM D 7101 (2-inch/hour for 30 minutes).
 Shear Stress. Ensure the blanket can sustain a minimum shear stress of 1.75
 pounds per square foot without physical damage or excess erosion (> 0.5
 inches soil loss) when tested according to ASTM D 7207.
 
 TEMPORARY SILT FENCE.
 
 A) Posts. Use either hardwood or steel greater than 4 feet in height. For hardwood,
 provide a minimum 1 1/2-inch by 1 1/2-inch cross section that is straight enough to
 provide a fence without noticeable misalignment. For steel, provide a 1 1/4- inch by
 one-inch T-section with projections to fasten wire and fabric in position.
 B) Woven or Welded Wire Fabric. Conform to Section 816 or 811. Provide fabric
 with a minimum height of 2 feet 8 inches. Require at least 6 horizontal wires spaced
 6 1/4 inches or closer with the top and bottom wires 0.134 inch or larger and all other
 wires 0.1 inch or larger. Require 0.1 inch or larger vertical wires spaced 12 inches or
 closer.
 C) Geotextile Fabric. Conform to AASHTO M 288 for temporary silt fence. Provide
 fabric with a height of 3 feet.
 D) Fasteners. Use No. 9, one inch long wire staples and/or fabric ties that conform to
 Subsection 816.06.
 827.09 NETTING AND STAPLES. Conform to the Standard Drawings and the Plans.
 The Engineer may accept netting and staples on the basis of visual inspection.
 827.10 TOPSOIL. Topsoil is the portion of the soil profile defined technically as the
 “A” horizon by the Soil Science Society of America. Use loose, friable, topsoil that is free
 
 827—4
 
 of stones 1 inch or greater in overall dimensions, admixture of subsoil, refuse, stumps,
 roots, brush, weeds, and other material that prevent the formation of a suitable seed bed.
 Before stripping the topsoil, inspect for existing vegetation. Do not use topsoil from sites
 having Johnson Grass, Canada Thistle, Quack Grass, Nodding Thistle, or excessive
 amounts of other noxious weeds, or their rhizomes. The Department will sample the soil
 and determine the textural classification according to the US Department of Agriculture
 system, the particle size according to KM 64-519, the organic content according to KM
 64-243, and the pH according to ASTM D 4972. Acceptable topsoil composition is:
 Clay
 Silt
 Sand
 Organic Material
 pH
 
 40% maximum
 70% maximum
 60% maximum
 2% minimum, 10% maximum
 6.0 minimum, 7.0 maximum
 
 827.11 SOD. Use sod that is either well-rooted Kentucky Bluegrass or Tall Fescue sod.
 However, obtain the Engineer’s approval prior to using Tall Fescue sod in residential
 areas. Use sod that is completely free from noxious weeds and reasonably free from other
 objectionable grasses and weeds and stones or other foreign materials detrimental to the
 development and future maintenance of the sod. Obtain sod from sources that are covered
 with grass having a maximum height of 3 inches. Obtain approval of the selected source
 prior to cutting.
 
 827—5
 
 SECTION 828  MASONRY COATING MATERIALS
 828.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers requirements for materials to be used as
 surface finishes for designated surfaces of cement concrete structures. The masonry
 coatings must hide form marks, patches, and other minor irregularities and prevent
 deterioration, spalling, and other damage to the concrete due to the action of the weather
 and deicing chemicals.
 828.02 APPROVAL. Select masonry coatings from the Department’s List of Approved
 Materials. Use a material that is readily recognizable by its name, trademark, container, or
 other feature. Conform to the Department’s testing criteria to be placed on or remain on
 the Department’s List of Approved Materials.
 For initial approval submit representative samples, color chip(s), and duplicate copies
 of certified test reports to the Division of Materials for review and approval. An
 independent testing laboratory acceptable to the Department shall perform the tests
 described herein on representative samples of the material. Tests listed herein are the
 minimum testing requirements to be met. When requested in writing, the Engineer may
 accept materials based on conformance to the same type of test but differing on minor
 procedural points. Attach copies of test procedures which differ from those stated herein.
 In addition to the material, provide brochures or booklets containing detailed instructions
 and explanatory remarks about surface preparation, application procedures, and other
 pertinent operations.
 The Department will continue to include the masonry coatings on the list contingent
 upon receiving an annual certification containing the following information:
 1)
 
 2)
 3)
 
 A statement that the masonry coating to be furnished during the particular
 calendar year is of the same composition as that previously approved for
 inclusion on the approved list.
 A statement that the masonry coating conforms to the appropriate requirements
 of the Kentucky Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
 A statement that notification will be made to the Division of Materials of any
 changes in composition for review and approval before furnishing the material to
 projects.
 
 828.02.01 Freeze-Thaw Test. Cast and cure 3 concrete specimens no less than 4 by
 4 by 6 inches. Moist cure specimens for 14 days and then dry in room air at 60 to 80 °F
 for 24 hours before applying masonry coating. Ensure that there is no excessive oil on
 specimen forms.
 Coat sides of specimens (brush permitted) according to the
 manufacturer’s directions at a rate of 50 ± 10 square feet per gallon and cure at room
 temperature for 48 hours; after which:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 4)
 
 Immerse in water at room temperature 60 to 80 °F for 3 hours and remove.
 Place in cold storage at -15 °F for one hour and remove.
 Thaw at room temperature 60 to 80 °F for one hour.
 Repeat steps 1), 2), and 3) to complete a total of 50 cycles. At the end of 50
 cycles of the Freeze-Thaw Test, ensure that the coated specimens shows no
 visible defects.
 
 828.02.02 Accelerated Weathering. Test according to ASTM D 822. Apply at an
 application rate of 50 ± 10 square feet per gallon. Test for 335 hours in an Atlas Type XW
 Sunshine Arc Weatherometer or for 500 hours in an Atlas Type DMC Enclosed Violet
 Carbon Arc Weatherometer or equivalent. Perform the test in 120-minute cycles
 
 828—1
 
 consisting of 102 minutes of light and 18 minutes of light and demineralized water. At the
 end of the exposure test, ensure that there is no checking, cracking, or loss in film
 integrity, and no other film defects. Ensure that the coating shows no more than very
 slight color change.
 828.02.03 Salt Spray Resistance. Apply the masonry coating to concrete at a rate
 of 50 ± 10 square feet per gallon, and test the coating according to ASTM B 117. Expose
 the coating to a 5 percent sodium (salt) solution for 300 hours, and maintain it at 90 ± 2 °F
 during the period of exposure. Ensure that it shows no loss of adhesion or deterioration at
 the end of the 300 hours.
 828.02.04 Fungus Growth Resistance. Ensure that the masonry coating passes a
 fungus resistance test as described by Federal Specification TT-P-29. After a minimum
 incubation period of 21 days, ensure that no growth is exhibited on the coating.
 
 828—2
 
 SECTION 829 —HARDWARE FOR TIMBER STRUCTURES
 829.01 GENERAL.
 screws.
 
 Use only black nails, spikes, bolts, dowels, washers, and lag
 
 829.02 BOLTS. Use machine bolts having square heads and nuts, and ensure that screw
 threads make a close fit in the nuts. Furnish machine bolts, drift-bolts, and dowels of
 either wrought iron or medium steel. Designate the weight of bolts as “American
 Standard Regular.”
 829.03 WASHERS. Furnish washers that either are cast O-gee or malleable castings or
 are cut from medium steel or wrought-iron plate, as specified in the Contract.
 829.04 NAILS. For nails, use cut or round wire of standard form. Furnish cut or wire
 spikes, or boat spikes, as specified in the Contract.
 
 829—1
 
 SECTION 830  RETROREFLECTIVE MATERIALS
 830.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers the requirements for retroreflective
 materials for use in delineators, barricades, traffic drum channelizing tapes, cone collars,
 signs, and for other applications as required.
 830.02 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. Ensure that all materials and prepared sign
 faces are free from cracks, tears, ridges, humps, discoloration, or other objectionable
 blemishes. When furnishing materials for the Department or its agent to fabricate signs,
 ensure compatibility with the manufacturer’s recommended fabrication procedures and the
 requirements of this section. The Department will reject material that prevents successful
 fabrication. Use sheeting materials that present a finished surface suitable for receiving
 stenciled messages, paint overlays, or film overlays. Provide only retroreflective sign
 sheeting materials that conform to Federal Specification L-S-300C for solvent, heat, cold,
 and humidity resistance.
 830.02.01 Delineators. Provide the size and shape specified in the Contract,
 referenced Standard Drawing or Sepia Drawing.
 A) Barrier Wall Delineator.
 Provide retroreflective sheeting conforming to
 ASTM D 4956, Type XI, Class 1, of the appropriate color attached to a noncorrosive metal backing or approved equal rigid substrate.
 B) Guardrail Delineator. Provide retroreflective sheeting conforming to ASTM
 D 4956, Type XI, Class 1, of the appropriate color attached to a non-corrosive
 metal backing or approved equal rigid substrate.
 C) Delineator Post. Provide retroreflective sheeting conforming to ASTM D 4956,
 Type XI, Class 1, of the appropriate color attached to an approved delineator
 posts.
 
 830.02.02 Barricade Sheeting. Conform to ASTM D 4956, Type III or IV, Class 1.
 830.02.03 Traffic Drum Channelizing Tape. Conform to ASTM D 4956, Type III
 or IV, Class 1 or 3.
 830.02.04 Cone Collars. Conform to ASTM D 4956, Type VI, Class 1 or 3.
 830.02.05 Roll Up Sign Sheeting. Conform to ASTM D 4956, Type VI Class 5.
 830.02.06 Permanent Sign Sheeting. Conform to ASTM D 4956, Types III, IV,
 VIII, IX, and XI. Use the appropriate type and color of sheeting as specified in the
 Division of Traffic Operations Guidance Manual.
 830.02.07 Construction Sign Sheeting. Conform to ASTM D 4956, Types IV,
 VIII, IX, or XI, for Fluorescent Orange.
 830.03 APPROVAL. The Department will approve reflective sheeting materials
 based on KM 64-204 and conformance to this section.
 
 830—1
 
 830.04 FIELD PERFORMANCE. The using agency is responsible for requiring the
 dating of all signs at the time of installation. The Department will begin the field
 performance obligation period based on that date.
 The Department will consider the retroreflective sheeting defective if any of the
 following conditions are observed:
 1)
 2)
 3)
 
 When viewed from a moving vehicle under normal day and night driving
 conditions, it has deteriorated due to natural causes to the extent that the sign is
 ineffective for its intended purpose.
 It no longer meets the minimum criteria for retained retroreflective after
 atmospheric exposure
 Fluorescent sheeting fails to retain 80 percent of the retroreflective requirements
 detailed in KM 64-204.
 
 830.05 WARRANTY. When the Engineer determines that the retroreflective sign
 sheeting supplied and used according to the manufacturer’s recommendations have not
 met field performance requirements, the manufacturer shall cover restoration costs as
 follows for sheeting:
 1)
 
 2)
 
 Permanent Sheeting. Within the first 7 years after application, replace the
 sheeting and cover the cost of materials and labor required to restore the sign
 surface to its original effectiveness including stenciled messages, paint overlays,
 or film overlays. Within the 8th through 10th year after application, replace the
 sheeting required to restore the sign surface to its original effectiveness including
 stenciled messages, paint overlays, or film overlays.
 Construction Sheeting. Within 3 years after application, replace the sheeting
 required to restore the sign to its original effectiveness including stenciled
 messages, paint overlays, or film overlays.
 
 830.06 PACKAGING. Ensure that all materials are suitably and substantially packaged
 and have the name and address of the manufacturer or vendor, contract or purchase order
 number, kind of material, trade name, date of manufacture, lot and run number, color, and
 net contents plainly marked on each package or container. Ensure that if stored under
 normal conditions, the retroreflective material as furnished is suitable for use for a
 minimum period of one year.
 830.07 CERTIFICATION. Submit manufacturer’s certification stating conformance
 to the requirements of this section for each shipment of reflective sheeting delivered for
 use by the Department. Submit reflective sheeting manufacturer’s certification stating
 conformance to the requirements of this section for fabricated signs, delineators,
 barricades, or other applications of reflective sheeting delivered for use on projects.
 Clearly state the manufacturer, product name and product code as listed in the
 Department’s List of Approved Materials, sheeting type, sheeting color, sheeting lot
 number, sheeting expiration date, and quantity.
 830.08 ACCEPTANCE. The Department will accept reflective sheeting based on
 verification of inclusion on the Department’s List of Approved Materials and conformance
 of the manufacturer’s certification. The Department reserves the right to sample and test
 reflective sheeting, at the Engineers discretion, in accordance with the Department’s Field
 Sampling and Testing Manual.
 .
 
 830—2
 
 SECTION 831 — CONSTRUCTION ZONE TEMPORARY
 MARKING TAPES
 831.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers pavement marking material designed to
 provide reflective delineation in construction zones. This section covers the following
 types of marking material:
 A) Type A. Non-removable Pavement Marking Tape.
 B) Type B. Removable Pavement Marking Tape.
 831.02
 
 GENERAL.
 
 831.02.01 Manufacture. Use a material consisting of a weather and traffic-resistant
 reflective film on a backing precoated with a pressure-sensitive adhesive.
 831.02.02 Adhesive. Use a precoated pressure-sensitive adhesive that does not
 require a liner or activation.
 831.02.03 Application Properties. Ensure that the material adheres to asphalt and
 concrete surfaces, when applied according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, at or
 above surface temperatures of 40 °F. Ensure that the material does not require any
 protective devices such as traffic cones or barricades after application. Do not allow reuse of previously installed material.
 831.02.04 Conformability and Thickness. Use material that is thin, flexible,
 formable, and remains conformed to the texture of the pavement surface following
 application. Ensure that the thickness of the material furnished is within 2 mils of the
 thickness of the material submitted for approval. Use tape with a minimum width of 4
 inches.
 831.02.05 Miscellaneous Requirements. Ensure that the supplied material is of
 good appearance, free from cracks, with edges true, straight, and unbroken. Make the
 material available in rolls with no more than 3 splices per 50 yards of length. Package the
 material according to accepted commercial standards. Ensure that the supplied material is
 capable of being stored at temperatures up to 100 °F for a period of one year after
 purchase without adversely affecting the physical properties stated in this section.
 831.03 APPROVAL. The Department will approve temporary marking tapes based on
 conformance to KM 64-207 and the requirements of this section. The Department may
 remove temporary marking tapes from the Department’s List of Approved Materials for
 poor field performance in Kentucky.
 831.04 CERTIFICATION. Submit manufacturer’s certification stating conformance
 to the requirements of this section for each shipment of approved temporary marking tapes
 delivered for use on projects. Clearly state the manufacturer, product name, product code
 and color as listed in the Department’s List of Approved Materials. Identify the lot
 number(s), expiration date and quantity delivered.
 831.05 ACCEPTANCE. The Department will accept temporary marking tapes based
 on verification of inclusion on the Department’s List of Approved Materials, compliance
 of the manufacturer’s certification, verification the expiration date will not be exceeded,
 and visual inspection of the temporary marking tape installation. The Department reserves
 the right to sample and test temporary marking tape, at the discretion of the Engineer, in
 
 831—1
 
 accordance
 
 with
 
 the
 
 Department’s
 
 Field
 
 831—2
 
 Sampling
 
 and
 
 Testing
 
 Manual.
 
 SECTION 832  SIGN POSTS
 832.01 GENERAL. Furnish Type I and II posts. Type I posts are square tubular posts.
 Type II posts are channels. Provide all posts in lengths as specified in one foot increments
 with a tolerance of ± one inch.
 The Department will require soil stabilizer plates for both Type I and II posts when
 they are not embedded in concrete. When Type I posts are specified, the Department may
 require sign bracing or Type D breakaway supports.
 Ensure that posts are straight, smooth, and free from any defects affecting their
 strength, durability, or appearance. Ensure that all holes and ends are free from burrs and
 sharp edges and that ends are cut square.
 832.02 TYPE I POSTS. Use hot rolled carbon sheet steel of structural quality that
 conforms to ASTM A 1011, Grade 50. Yield strength after cold-forming is 60,000 psi
 minimum.
 832.02.01 Fabrication. Fabricate the post from square tube formed of steel, rolled
 to size and welded directly in the corner by high frequency resistance welding and
 externally scarfed to agree with corner radii. Provide the following sizes:
 Outside Dimensions
 (in.)
 2 by 2
 2 ½ by 2 ½
 2 ½ by 2 ½
 
 Corner Radii
 (in.)
 5/32
 5/32
 5/32
 
 Wall Thickness
 Gauge (in.)
 12 (0.105)
 12 (0.105)
 10 (0.135)
 
 Weight
 (lb/ft)
 2.42
 3.14
 4.01
 
 Provide 7/16-inch diameter holes on the centerline of all 4 sides, space on one-inch
 centers along the entire post length beginning 1 inch from the top. Ensure holes are in true
 alignment and opposite each other directly and diagonally.
 Ensure consecutive sizes of square tubes will freely telescope for 10 feet or more of
 their length without the necessity of matching any particular face to any other face.
 832.02.02 Finish. Conform to ASTM A 653, G90, Structural Quality, Grade 340,
 Class 1. Galvanize both the interior and the exterior of the post. Coat the corner weld
 with zinc after the scarifying operation. Coat the steel with a chromate conversion coating
 and a clear organic polymer topcoat.
 832.02.03 Tolerances. The Department may reject material falling outside any of
 the following tolerances:
 A) Outside Dimensions. ± 0.008 inch. Measure at least 2 inches from the end of
 the tube.
 B) Wall Thickness. ± 0.008 inch.
 C) Holes. ± 0.016 inches in diameter.
 D) Convexity and Concavity. Ensure that no sides exceed ± 0.1 inch. Measure in
 the center of the flat side relative to the corner.
 E) Square (1 3/4-inch posts). Ensure sides are 90 degrees to each other within
 ± 0.01inch.
 F) Square (2-inch posts). Ensure sides are 90 degrees to each other within ± 0.012
 inch.
 G) Twist. Ensure twist does not exceed 0.02 inch in any one-foot length.
 H) Straight. Ensure deviation does not exceed 0.02 inch in any one-foot length.
 
 832—1
 
 I)
 
 Corner Radii. 5/32 ± 0.016 inch.
 
 832.02.04 Type D Breakaway Supports. Use supports from the Department’s List
 of Approved Materials and conforming to the details in the Standard Drawings.
 832.03 TYPE II. Use hot wrought steel conforming to the physical properties of ASTM
 A 499-89, Grade 60, and conforming to the chemical requirements of ASTM A 1 for rails
 of nominal weight between 28.4 and 38 pounds per foot.
 The Contractor may request to furnish posts made of material not complying with the
 specified properties. If desired, submit the written request for approval and include a
 description of the physical and chemical properties of the proposed material. Include with
 the request a certified test report of a dynamic test by an independent laboratory
 substantiating that the posts, when double mounted in an 8-foot span, conform to the
 break-away requirements of AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for
 Highway Signs, Luminaires, and Traffic Signals.
 Provide a manufacturer’s certification that the material was manufactured and tested
 according to the applicable specifications or approved alternate along with a report of the
 physical and chemical test results for each shipment.
 832.03.01 Fabrication. Fabricate posts from uniform, modified, flanged channel
 sections.
 Provide 3/8-inch diameter holes on the centerline, space on one-inch centers along the
 entire post length beginning one inch from the top. Align holes horizontally and vertically
 to accommodate back to back post installations.
 Ensure that the area of contact between the posts and sign is symmetrical about the
 vertical axes of both sign and post and that the back side furnishes a solid bearing surface
 the entire length of the post for back to back installation.
 Conform to the following typical section:
 
 α = β ± 4°
 
 D = D’ ± 1/8 inch
 
 832.03.02 Deflection. Test for deflection as simple beams, with the flanges in
 compression, on non-restricting supports 2 feet apart. Apply a load of 3,500 pounds at the
 center of the span at a deflection rate not to exceed 0.3 inch per minute. Transmit the load
 to the beam through a one-inch minimum diameter pin laid across the flanges. With the
 designated load applied, ensure that the deflection at the center does not exceed 0.18 inch.
 One minute after removal of the load, ensure that the deflection does not exceed 0.018
 inch.
 832.03.03 Finish. Galvanize according to AASHTO M 111 after fabrication.
 
 832—2
 
 832.04 PACKAGING. Securely fasten posts of the same type and length in bundles of
 2,000 pounds or less in a manner that is easily handled by a fork lift and that prevents
 slipping during handling and shipping. The Engineer will reject posts whose finish is
 excessively damaged due to slipping, rubbing, or other reasons.
 
 832—3
 
 SECTION 833  SIGN SUBSTRATES
 833.01
 
 ALUMINUM.
 
 833.01.01 Panel Signs. Conform to ASTM B 221, Alloy 6063-T6. Fabricate signs
 from 12-inch wide extrusions and, if specified, compatible 6-inch wide extrusions. When
 a 6-inch extrusion is specified, use it as the bottom panel of the sign. Typical cross
 sections and minimum weights per foot are specified in the Plans. Use compatible side
 extrusions on all sign edges. Prepare surfaces of extrusions composing the sign face to
 receive retroreflective background material according to the extrusion and retroreflective
 material manufacturers’ recommendations. Provide all remaining surfaces of extrusions
 and side extrusions with a soft matte finish.
 833.01.02 Sheeting Signs. Conform to ASTM B 209, Alloy 6061-T6 or 5052-H38.
 Fabricate signs of the size and shape specified. Provide a thickness of 125 mils inch if any
 single edge dimension of the sign exceeds 3 feet. If no single edge dimension exceeds 3
 feet, provide a thickness of 80 mils. Prepare the side of the sheet to be used as the sign
 face to receive retroreflective background material according to the sheeting and
 retroreflective material manufacturer’s recommendations.
 
 833—1
 
 SECTION 834  ROADWAY LIGHTING MATERIALS
 834.01 GENERAL. This section defines minimum acceptable design and operational
 standards for roadway lighting materials utilized on projects. All materials must be
 approved prior to being utilized on a project.
 834.02 CONCRETE.
 concrete.
 
 Conform to Subsection 601.02 and 601.03.
 
 Use Class A
 
 834.03 STEEL REINFORCEMENT. Steel reinforcement shall have minimum yield
 strength of 60,000 psi.
 834.04 GROUND RODS. Provide only composite shaft ground rods consisting of a
 pure copper exterior that has been inseparably molten welded to a steel core. Use rods
 with a minimum diameter of 5/8 inch and a minimum length of 8 feet. Equip the rods
 with copper or bronze clamps that are the correct size for the rod being used.
 834.05
 sheets.
 
 CONDUIT. Ensure the conduit is the size specified on the plans and detail
 
 834.05.01 Rigid Steel and Fittings. Use rigid steel conduit meeting the requirements
 of ANSI C-80.1. Use rigid steel conduit fittings that are zinc coated and meet the
 requirements of ANSI C-80.1.
 834.05.02 Schedule 40 AND Fittings. Use schedule 40 polyvinyl chloride meeting
 the requirements of NEMA TC-2, UL 651, and UL 514. Use schedule 40 polyvinyl
 chloride fittings having the same chemical and physical properties as the conduit with
 which it is to be used and meeting the requirements of UL 514B. Use joints that are made
 in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Each conduit and fitting shall
 bear the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. label.
 834.05.03 Test/Pipe Plugs. Provide a test/pipe plugs that are galvanized steel or
 stainless steel mechanical type. Provide the test/pipe plug with a rubber grommet that
 expands inside the conduit to seal the conduit.
 834.06 DUCTED CABLE.
 A) Cable. Use stranded annealed copper cable conforming to ASTM B 8 and
 ASTM B 3 rated for 600 volts. Use material that conforms to either the
 applicable requirements of ICEA Standard S-19-81, with thermoplastic
 insulation of GRS-rubber base conforming to Appendix K(A) of ICEA and listed
 by UL as Type USE-2 for direct burial; or the application requirements of ICEA
 Standard S-66-524, with thermo-setting insulation of cross link polyethylene
 conforming to the requirement of Column “A” of ICEA and listed by UL as
 Type USE-2. Use cable and conductors that are preinstalled in the duct.
 B) Duct. Use polyethylene duct with a minimum tensile strength of 3000 psi for
 secondary cable underground. Provide for 40 percent maximum fill. Conform
 to NEMA TC7 EPEC-A.
 
 834—1
 
 834.07 WARNING TAPE. Provide tape that is 6 inch wide by 7.0 mils (nominal) thick,
 has a minimum tensile strength of 600 pounds per 6 inch width, and be color coded
 impregnated with alkali and acid stable, lead-free, organic pigments suitable for direct
 burial. Use tape that is ultraviolet colorfast and non-distorting with no elongation. Use
 tape that includes black lettering/symbols on a red background that conforms to the
 APWA-ULCC national color code. Provide tape that is continuously reads, "caution:
 electric line buried below" alternating with a 'no digging' symbol.
 834.08 JUNCTION BOX. Provide a junction box that meets or exceeds ANSI/SCTE
 77-2007, tier 15. Provide a junction box marked "lighting." Attach covers with a
 minimum of two 3/8” stainless steel hex bolts and washers. Stackable boxes are
 permitted.
 834.09 WIRE For all multiple circuit roadway lighting wires use single-conductor
 AWG copper wire of sizes specified in the Contract. Use No. 12 AWG copper wire as
 leads from pole bases or junction boxes to ballast terminals. Use grounding conductor
 from the grounding system to the grounding terminal in luminaire. Use stranded wire,
 except for ground wires connected directly to ground rods or between bushings. Ensure
 that all insulation for No. 8 or larger wire is Type USE-2 (UL rated). Ensure that all
 insulation for No. 10 or smaller wire is Type THHN-2 or THWN-2. Use copper
 grounding conductors sized as specified by the NEC or as specified in the Contract.
 Install copper service entrance conductors on the service poles sized and insulated as
 specified by the NEC.
 834.10 FUSED CABLE CONNECTOR KIT. Use a fused connector kit that
 completely encloses and protects the fuse against damage from water and weather. Use a
 spring loaded contact between the fuse and fuseholder. Ensure that the springs are not a
 part of the current carrying circuit. Ensure that line and load side terminals of the fused
 connector kit positively connect to the conductors. Insulate and waterproof the terminals
 according to the manufacturer’s recommendation. Ensure that the fused connector kit can
 be repeatedly disconnected without damage to the watertight seals and terminals or
 without a reduction in conductivity. Provide a fused connector kit designed to break away
 without damage. Construct the load side housing to retain the fuse when disconnected,
 and permanently mark it “LOAD” or “LOAD SIDE”. Use a fused connector kit sized for
 the wires being used. Removal of wire strands will not be allowed.
 834.11 FUSES. Use high interrupting capacity type fuses with a rating of 6 amperes.
 Use 13/32 by 1.5inch fuses that are rated for 600 volts. Use fuses that protect circuits
 having a fault current capacity of up to 100,000 amperes AC. Use fuses tested to carry
 110 % of their rated capacity and that open at 135 % in one hour or less.
 834.12 SPLICING. Use butt splices that are copper and of the correct conductor range.
 Cover all butt splices with a 3M mastic pad or approved equal and then taped with a 3m
 brand #33 electrical tape or approved equal.
 834.13 MARKERS FOR BURIED CABLE Use 24 inch by 24 inch by four inch deep
 pre-cast concrete markers with letters, numbers, and arrows cast in the concrete. Each
 marker shall extend approximately 1 inch above the finished grade. Impress the word
 “LIGHTING”, appropriate directional arrow, and circuit identification number on each
 marking slab. Use letters that are neat, clearly legible and approximately four inch high
 
 834—2
 
 and three inch wide. Ensure that the stroke is 0.5 inch wide and 0.25 inch deep. Do not
 pour markers in place or chisel letters in concrete. No substitution of rural Right of Way
 markers will be allowed.
 834.14 LIGHTING POLES. Lighting pole design shall be in accordance with loading
 and allowable stress requirements of 2009 AASHTO "Standard Specifications for
 Structural Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaires and Traffic Signals." fifth edition
 with current interims. Submit drawings in detail demonstrating the compliance with the
 AASHTO specification. Provide materials and products that are manufactured in the
 United States of America.
 834.14.01 Conventional Poles. Provide conventional poles that consist of a tapered
 aluminum pole having a base affixed to the lower end, an aluminum bracket arm (if
 required), and a transformer base. Furnish an opening near the top of the pole to provide
 for a cable entrance from the pole to the bracket arm to provide a smooth cable guide for
 wiring. Equip the top of the pole with a removable cap. Secure a one-piece anchor base
 to the lower end of the pole. Provide this base with four slotted holes to receive the
 anchor bolts and four tapped holes for securing the bolt covers. Also provide four
 removable bolt covers and hardware with each base. Use single member bracket arms for
 four and six foot mast arm assemblies. Use single or double member bracket arms for
 eight foot mast arm assemblies. Use double pipe assemblies for ten, twelve, and fifteen
 foot mast arm assemblies. Double pipe assemblies consist of upper and lower members
 securely joined by means of vertical struts. Provide the pole end of the bracket arm with a
 cast or plate footing or clamp for positioning the assembly on the pole. Ensure that the
 pole manufacturer provides permanent marking on the pole base or other suitable location,
 giving the pole design number and other identification data so the poles may be compared
 with material brochures or drawings. Provide each pole with a 4”x6” handhole at a height
 of between 12” and 18”above the pole base. Provide an aluminum handhole cover
 secured with stainless steel screws.
 834.14.02 Transformer Bases. Provide bases that conform to the AASHTO
 “Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaires and
 Traffic Signals” fifth edition with current interims. Ensure that each base has the
 following outside dimensions (+/- 1 inch): 17 inch high, 15 inch by 15-inch square
 bottom and 12 inch by 12-inch square top. Ensure that bases have a trapezoidal door with
 the following minimum dimensions (+/- 1 inch): 11 inch high, 9 inch across the bottom,
 and 7.5 inch across the top. Construct the door of a high density polyethylene material in
 a color that matches the base. Provide each base with four loose bearing plates (anchor
 washers), lock washers and nuts to fasten the base to the anchor bolts. Fasten each
 transformer base to the base flange of the pole with four loose galvanized bearing plates,
 four lock washers, and four galvanized steel connecting bolts and nuts. Use connecting
 bolts of the same diameter and strength as the anchor bolts. Submit mill test reports on the
 connecting bolts. The manufacturer shall specify the bolt circle and physical dimensions
 of the base bottom to ensure a proper foundation fit. Provide each transformer base with a
 1/2-inch 13 UNC tapped hole or other suitable provisions for grounding purposes.
 834.14.03 High Mast Poles. Use loading that based on a basic wind speed of 90 mph,
 with a design life/recurrence interval of 50 years and designed to fatigue category I.
 Provide steel pole members designed for vortex shedding to eliminate galloping. Provide
 structures that are designed for a gust factor of 1.14. Provide no truck induced gust fatigue
 design for this structure. Use a fabricator that is certified under category I "conventional
 
 834—3
 
 steel structures" as set forth by the American Institute of Steel Construction Quality
 Certification Program.
 Provide welding that is in accordance with sections 1 through 8 of the American
 Welding Society (AWS) D1.1 structural welding code. Use tackers and welders that are
 qualified in accordance with the code. Use tube longitudinal seam welds that are free of
 cracks and excessive undercuts, performed with automatic processes, and visually
 inspected. Inspect with magnetic particle the longitudinal welds suspected to contain
 defects. Inspect ultrasonically and radiographically the circumferential butt welded pole
 and arm splices.
 Provide calculations and drawings that are stamped by a licensed professional
 engineer.
 Provide poles on the Contract that are of the same design and manufacturer. .
 Use Poles that are designed for 12 fixtures per pole. Use the combined effective projected
 area (EPA) and weight of the fixtures and lowering device that are determined by the
 fixture manufacturer.
 Provide calculations that include the pole, base plate, and anchor bolt analysis.
 Provide pole calculations that are analyzed at the pole base, along the pole at 5 ft intervals,
 and at each slip joint splice. At each of these locations, the following information shall be
 calculated:
 1.
 
 Pole's diameter, thickness, section modulus, moment of inertia, and cross
 sectional area.
 
 2.
 
 The centroid, weight, projected area, drag coefficient, velocity pressure, and
 wind force of each trapezoidal pole segment.
 
 3.
 
 The axial force, shear force, primary moment, total moment, axial stress,
 bending stress, allowable axial stress, allowable bending stress, and combined
 stress ratio (csr) at each elevation.
 
 4.
 
 The pole's angular and linear deflection at each elevation.
 
 Provide a pole section that conforms to ASTM A 595 grade A with a minimum yield
 strength of 55 KSI or ASTM A 572 with a minimum yield strength of 55 KSI. Use tubes
 that are round or 16 sided with a four inch corner radius, have a constant linear taper of
 .144 in/ft and contain only one longitudinal seam weld. Circumferential welded tube butt
 splices and laminated tubes are not permitted. Provide pole sections that are telescopically
 slip fit assembled in the field to facilitate inspection of interior surface welds and the
 protective coating. The minimum length of the telescopic slip splices shall be 1.5 times
 the inside diameter of the exposed end of the female section. Use longitudinal seam welds
 on both sections of the slip splice shall be complete penetration welds for a length equal to
 the minimum splice length plus 1/2 ft. Longitudinal seam welds within 1/2 ft of the base
 plate welds shall be complete penetration welds. Provide base plates that conform to
 ASTM grade 36 or grade 50. The thickness of the base plates shall be equal to or greater
 than the nominal diameter of the connection bolt. Plates shall be integrally welded to the
 tubes with a telescopic welded joint or a full penetration butt weld with backup bar.
 Provide products that are hot-dip galvanized to the requirements of either ASTM A 123
 (fabricated products) or ASTM A 153 (hardware items).
 
 834—4
 
 834.15
 LOWERING DEVICE FOR HIGH MAST POLES. Use a head frame
 assembly that is fabricated from galvanized structural steel or stainless steel. The head
 frame assembly shall mount to the high mast pole tenon and shall be secured with stainless
 steel set screws. The manufacturer of the lowering device shall coordinate with the pole
 manufacturer to ensure compatibility between the lowering device and pole. Provide a
 head frame assembly that is stop latched with three lifting cables used to raise and lower
 the luminaire ring. For lifting cables, use 0.18 diameter stainless steel 19 x 7 or 7 x 19
 Strand Core type aircraft cables manufactured according to MIL W-83140. Support each
 lifting cable by two sheaves (pulleys) that are manufactured of cast steel, forged steel, or
 molybdenum disulfide reinforced nylon and supported by smooth stainless steel shafts.
 Machine the sheave groove 0.007 in larger that the nominal diameter of the cable. Use
 sheaves that incorporate oil impregnated sintered bronze bushings. Provide a head frame
 assembly cover, shaped to shed water, that is constructed of copper free spun aluminum or
 clear UV stabilized acrylic. Use an electrical power cord that is 4 conductor #8 AWG or 3
 conductor #10 AWG, type SO, extra flexible, rated for 600 v. Support power cord by a
 minimum of seven Teflon or delrin rollers. Terminate cord with a 4 conductor twistlock
 connector on the free end and 600 v terminal block in the ring enclosure.
 Provide a
 single throw, double pole breaker with a 100 amp frame for 480 v operation. Amperage
 rating shall be 15 a for towers with four or less luminaires, 20 a for towers with six
 luminaries, and 30 a for towers with eight to 10 luminaries.
 834.15.01 Luminaire Ring. Provide a luminaire ring that is constructed of 6 feet x 2
 feet galvanized structural steel. Prewire the luminaire ring and include a weatherproof
 junction box and test receptacle for ground level testing of the luminaires. If a special
 cable is required for ground level testing, supply one cable with each portable power unit
 specified on the contract. Provide a ring that includes the appropriate number of installed
 2 in steel luminaire mounting tenons. Provide a luminaire ring that has spring loaded iris
 arms or spring loaded rollers to keep the ring concentric around the pole during raising
 and lowering. Design the iris arms as shown on the specification sheets in the plans.
 Provide spring and spring mounting hardware that are stainless steel. Provide a latching
 mechanism that consists of three high strength, marine grade aluminum latch housings and
 three stainless steel latch pins. Each latch will include a spring to compensate for pole
 deflection. Latching and unlatching shall be accomplished by alternately raising and
 lowering the luminaire ring. Latching may also be accomplished by rotation of the latch
 pin or travel of the pin through a mechanical circuit. Provide latch housing that are an
 enclosed design with the only opening at the bottom. Provide housing with a flared
 entrance bell to align the latch pin. Include a reflective indicator flat that indicates when
 the latching is complete.
 834.15.02 Winch Assembly. Provide a winch assembly that consists of a winch drum
 and gearbox mounted in the pole and an external power unit. Provide a winch that has a
 load rating of at least 1200 lb with a gear ratio of not less than 30:1. Include a failsafe
 brake system to prevent freewheeling of the winch drum. Provide a portable external
 power unit that consists of a drill motor, torque limiter, step down transformer for 480 v
 operation, and a remote switch. Ensure the power and winch unit are fully compatible
 with the Holophane LD-5 portable lowering device.
 834.16 ANCHOR BOLTS. Use anchor bolts that conform to the requirement of ASTM
 F 1554 grade 55 for hooked smooth bars or grade 105 for headed. Anchor bolts shall be
 fully galvanized. Provide each anchor bolt with 2 galvanized hex nuts as well as one flat
 
 834—5
 
 and one lock washer. Provide nuts that equal or exceed the proof load of the bolts
 strength. Provide bolts that are hot-dip galvanized to the requirements of either ASTM A
 123 (fabricated products) or ASTM A 153 (hardware items). Protect anchor bolt threads
 from damage during shipping. Provide mill test reports on anchor bolts.
 834.16.01 Conventional. Provide L-shaped anchor bolts with a minimum overall
 length of 40 inches, a minimum diameter of one inch, and with the horizontal leg at least 4
 inches long. The manufacturer shall specify the correct dimensions; but in no case shall
 they be less than the dimensions specified above. Provide at least 6 inches of threads at
 the top of the vertical leg and galvanize the entire anchor bolt.
 834.16.02 High Mast. Conform to Section 834.16.
 834.17 LUMINAIRES. Use luminaires that provide light levels conforming to
 AASHTO’s Roadway Lighting Design Guide, 2005 Edition with current interims. Use a
 total light loss factor of 0.65 for closed fixtures and 0.80 for open bottom fixtures.
 834.17.01 Conventional. Provide luminaire that is arranged for ANSI M-S-II
 distribution or otherwise specified in the contract. Provide a 2 in slip-fitter for mounting.
 •
 •
 •
 •
 
 Type A - 100 watt high-pressure sodium horizontal roadway luminaires
 Type B - 150 watt high-pressure sodium horizontal roadway luminaires
 Type C - 250 watt high-pressure sodium horizontal roadway luminaires
 Type D - 400 watt high-pressure sodium horizontal roadway luminaires
 
 834.17.02 High Mast. Use high-pressure sodium high mast luminaires of a wattage
 specified on Contract.
 Provide luminaires that meet the following criteria:
 • Average maintained: .80 footcandles*
 • Minimum maintained: .20 footcandles*
 • Uniformity ratio: <= 4:1*
 * on roadway surface
 Provide a 0.20 iso-footcandle trace covering all roadway surfaces. Provide the trace
 from taper to taper on each mainline and crossroad. All criteria must be met with original
 locations of poles on the plan sheet.
 Use high mast luminaires that are of the same manufacturer on the same project. Use
 specified number of luminaires per pole. Adding luminiares to the pole shall not be
 allowed.
 834.18 LAMPS. Provide only high-pressure sodium lamps with the following
 minimum initial light output:
 •
 •
 •
 •
 •
 
 Type A - 9 500 lm
 Type B - 16 000 lm
 Type C - 28 000 lm
 Type D - 50 000 lm
 HIGHMAST – 140000 lm
 
 834—6
 
 834.19 BALLASTS. Provide a built in constant wattage transformer type ballast for
 specified voltage and wattage
 834.20 STARTERS. Provide an igniter that is designed to work with all brands and
 types of 60 Hz HPS ballast and directs the high voltage spike directly into the lamp
 without being directed to the lamp through the ballast windings. Design the igniter so that
 a cycling or extinguished lamp shall not adversely affect the igniter or the ballast. Provide
 an igniter that is totally epoxy encapsulated in a metal or plastic can. Ensure the igniter
 can be open circuit tested with power applied for 48 h at 100˚C with constant monitoring
 of the case temperature. Provide an igniter that is Payne-Sparkman ULI-050s or ULI-100s
 as is appropriate for ballast wattage or approved equal.
 834.21 LIGHTING CONTROL CABINET. Provide aluminum control cabinet for
 circuit breakers, duplex receptacle, transformers, contactors, fuses and other control
 equipment. Provide a cabinet with all wiring and components approved by the
 manufacturer as an assembly. Provide documentation that the cabinet, wiring, and all
 components are an approved assembly to Central Office Traffic Operations.
 834.21.01 Weatherproof Enclosure. Provide aluminum weatherproof enclosure
 with NEMA 3R rating and UL listed. Provide pad or pole mounting as specified in the
 Contract. Fabricate enclosures from 125-mil/0.125 inch or thicker natural finished
 aluminum.
 Equip the enclosure with two adjustable "c" mounting channels on both of the
 side walls and the back wall of the enclosure. Provide a cabinet that has sufficient size to
 gain easy access to each component. Provide a rear aluminum panel that is a minimum of
 27" w x 42" high. The integrity of the cabinet walls should not be compromised except for
 where the conduit enters (preferably on the bottom) or for a weatherproof vent. The
 enclosure door frame shall be double flanged out on all four sides. Provide all exterior
 seams that are continuously welded and ground smooth. Provide welds that are neatly
 formed and free of cracks, blowholes and other irregularities. Provide inside and outside
 edges of cabinet that are free of burrs. Provide a door restraint to prevent door movement
 in windy conditions. Provide the door with a gasket which forms a weather tight seal
 between the cabinet and door. Provide the door with a stainless steel continuous hinge. All
 exterior hardware shall be stainless steel. Provide interior hardware that is stainless steel
 or cadmium plated, type II, class I or equal. Provide a cabinet that is vented. Provide a
 cabinet door that is keyed with a factory installed standard no. 2 corbin traffic control key.
 Provide a light fixture with switch and bulb. Use a fixture that.01 is 120 volt and utilize a
 compact fluorescent or L.E.D. bulb (60 watt min.) Fixture shall be situated at or near the
 top of the cabinet and illuminate the contents of the cabinet. Provide a 120 VAC GFI
 duplex receptacle in the enclosure with a separate 20 amp breaker.
 834.21.02
 Magnetic Contactor. Provide only magnetic contactors that are
 electrically held, 2 pole, sized as specified in the Contract, and have a 120 volt coil.
 Protect each contactor coil by a 15 amp fuse. Equip contactors with control switches for
 both automatic and manual actuation. Provide photoelectric switches for automatic
 actuation. Ensure that each switch has minimum rating of 125 volts, 15 amperes. Provide
 two pole, double throw switches that manually actuate.
 
 834—7
 
 834.21.03 Photoelectric Control. Use photoelectric controls that are solid state
 cadmium sulfide type designed for use in 120 volts 60 Hz circuits and rated for 1,000
 watts resistive load. Use photoelectric controls with built-in surge protection and designed
 to provide an output circuit closure when photoelectric control components fail. Provide
 photoelectric controls and mounting bases that are twist-lock type.
 834.21.04 Control Transformers. Use control transformers that are one KVA, single
 phase, 240/480 volt primary, 120 volt secondary, dry type, 60 Hz, with primary winding
 isolated from secondary winding. Use transformers that are capable of indoor or outdoor
 installation.
 834.21.05 Secondary Lightning Arresters. Provide only secondary lightning arresters
 designed for use with the specified voltage and rated at 0-650 volts RMS.
 834.22 WOOD POLES. Provide a class 4 pole and conform to Section 820.
 834.23 METER SOCKET. Provide a meter socket that has copper-aluminum line and
 load lugs. Socket shall be ringless type with bypass. Provide a meter socket with a 1 inch
 bolt on hub.
 834.24 SAFETY SWITCH. Provide a safety switch disconnect that is 3-wire, 600 volt,
 2-pole, and 2-fuse in a NEMA 3R enclosure. Provide an enclosure that has a 1" size bolt
 on hub. Provide a bolt pattern on the hub that aligns with predrilled holes on the enclosure.
 Provide a line cover shield. Provide a safety switch that is UL approved and shall be
 marked in accordance with the National Electrical Code Article 230.66.
 834.25 PADLOCKS. Provide a 1 ¾ inch wide, laminated steel body with 5/16 inch case
 hardened steel shackle, 4 pin tumbler, Master Lock No. 1KA. Provide locks that are
 keyed to series 2577. Provide each lock with two keys.
 834.26 WARRANTIES. Warranty equipment for a period of 1 year, or provide the
 manufacturer’s standard warranty, whichever is greater.
 834.27 DOCUMENTATION. With each unit purchased under this section include one
 documentation package consisting of:
 1. A complete instruction manual.
 2. A complete step by step explanation of circuit theory and operation.
 3. A complete schematic.
 4. A complete parts layout. Parts identification may be silk-screened directly on
 circuit board.
 5. All point to point voltages and wave forms pertinent to proper servicing. This
 information may be included on the schematic diagram.
 6. Complete installation procedures for the unit.
 7. A complete parts list with full information as to availability of any custom or
 nonstandard parts.
 8. All applicable warranties and guarantees.
 
 834—8
 
 SECTION 835  SIGNAL SYSTEM MATERIALS
 835.01 GENERAL. This section defines minimum acceptable design and operational
 standards for traffic control devices used within the Commonwealth. Materials shall be
 approved before being installed. Once approval is given for a product, substitutions will
 only be permitted with written permission from the Engineer.
 835.02
 
 CONCRETE. Use Class A Concrete. Conform to Sections 601.02 and 601.03.
 
 835.03 STEEL REINFORCEMENT. Steel reinforcement shall have a minimum yield
 strength of 60,000 psi.
 835.04
 
 GROUND RODS. Provide materials conforming to Section 834.04.
 
 835.05
 
 CONDUIT. Provide materials conforming to Section 834.05.
 
 835.06 JUNCTION BOX. Provide materials conforming to Section 834.08. Provide a
 junction box marked "signal." Attach covers with a minimum of two 3/8” stainless steel
 hex bolts and washers. Stackable boxes are permitted.
 835.07
 TRAFFIC POLES. Pole diameter and wall thickness shall be calculated in
 accordance with the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
 (AASHTO) Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs,
 Luminaires and Traffic Signals, 2009 edition and current interims. For mast arm poles,
 provide fatigue classification that is category II, with galloping and natural wind gusts,
 table 11-1, and with 25 year design life from table 3-3.
 Provide poles and arms that conform to:
 1) ASTM A595, grade A or B with minimum yield strength of 55 ksi,
 2) ASTM A572, grade 55, or
 3) ASTM A53.
 Provide poles, anchor bolts, base plates, and all other hardware that are hot-dip
 galvanized per ASTM A123 or A153. Provide base plates that conform to ASTM A36 for
 grade 36 or ASTM 572 for grade 50.
 Ensure base plates have a thickness > or = to the nominal diameter of the
 connection bolt. Provide a base plate for the vertical pole that fits inside a 36 in diameter
 concrete base. The maximum anchor bolt circle shall not be more than 24.5 inches. The
 maximum anchor bolt diameter shall not be more than 2.25 inches.
 Provide mill certifications as proof of compliance with the specifications.
 Provide poles that are anchor-based, hot-dipped galvanized inside and out. Provide poles
 that are designed to support the specified forces when they are applied across the diagonal
 of the bolt circle. Provide poles that are furnished complete with fully galvanized anchor
 bolts and hardware.
 Provide poles with one (1) 11 inch x 5 inch handhole and cover to allow access
 at the bottom of the pole. Provide a galvanized steel handhole cover that is secured with
 stainless steel screws or some type of device to keep the restraining strap from spinning.
 
 835—1
 
 Provide a copper, stainless steel or brass grounding lug installed 180 degrees from the
 handhole opening and that is accessible from the handhole.
 Provide welding that is in accordance with sections 1 through 8 of the AWS
 D1.1 structural welding code. Use tackers and welders that are qualified in accordance
 with the code. Provide a tube that contains only one longitudinal seam weld. Provide tube
 longitudinal seam welds that are free of cracks and excessive undercuts, performed with
 automatic processes. Visually inspect all welds. Longitudinal welds suspected to contain
 defects shall be magnetic-particle inspected by the manufacturer.
 Provide calculations and drawings that are stamped by a licensed professional
 engineer. Provide materials and products that are manufactured in the United States of
 America. All tables referenced in 835.15 are found in the AASHTO Standard
 specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaries, and Traffic Signals,
 2009 and current interim regulations. Include a shop drawing specifying the pole height,
 arm length(s), bolt circle diameter, bolt diameter, and detailed drawings showing the
 handhole cover assemblies with all Contracts.
 835.07.01 Steel Strain Poles. Provide two, 2 inch blind half couplings installed 3 feet
 from top of pole. Provide steel strain poles with two (2) pole clamp assemblies suitable
 for attaching messenger cable. Each clamp assembly shall include a minimum of one 5/8
 inch bolt that conforms to ASTM A325 with a minimum tensile load of 17,050 lbs).
 Provide steel strain poles with a permanently affixed label 6 feet from the bottom of the
 base plate on the outside with the following information:
 •
 •
 •
 •
 •
 
 manufacturer
 height
 minimum stringing tension at yield
 order number, and
 maximum deflection rate.
 
 Provide a detailed analysis of the pole. The detailed analysis shall be certified by a
 licensed professional engineer. The detailed analysis shall include, but not be limited to,
 the following calculations:
 1.
 2.
 
 3.
 
 4.
 5.
 
 6.
 
 Group I, II, III, IV load combinations as listed in table 3-1.
 Dimensions and weights for all attachments. This includes areas used for wind,
 ice (this shall be the total exterior area of the attachments) and fatigue loads,
 drags coefficients, projected areas, velocity pressures and wind force for each
 segment.
 For group loads II, III, and IV, which have wind loads, Provide calculations for
 each Controlling "worst case" wind direction that controls any aspect of the
 design (anchor bolts, pole sizing, etc.). Loads shall be positioned to produce
 maximum effect. (Wind load is applied in the same direction as the tension).
 Anchor Bolts shall be designed for the orientation that would provide the
 maximum stress on any individual bolt.
 All structural properties for poles, anchor bolts and base plates. This includes the
 poles diameter, thickness, section modulus, moment of inertia, and cross
 sectional area.
 Calculations for each member shall include loads, section properties, member
 forces (axial, shear, bending, and torsion), member deflections (angular and
 
 835—2
 
 7.
 8.
 
 linear), member stresses (actual and allowable), and the combined stress ratio
 (csr).
 Fatigue calculations should be shown for all fatigue related connections. Provide
 the corresponding detail, stress category and example from table 11-2.
 In fatigue calculations, the effective throat thickness of a complete joint
 penetration groove weld shall be the thickness of the thinner part joined per
 AISC J2.1a.
 
 835.07.02
 Mast Arm Poles. Provide mast arm poles that are of monotube design
 similar to the one depicted in the Contract.
 Provide mast arms that have a maximum 3 degrees rise. The diameter of the mast
 arm shall not be greater than 21 inches at the attachment to the pole. For mast arm poles,
 notify pole manufacturer of all extra holes necessary for attachment of signal equipment
 (pedestrian signals, pedestrian detectors, supplemental signal heads, signs, cameras, etc.).
 No vibration mitigation device should be considered on mast arm poles. If specified,
 provide two, 2 inch blind half couplings installed 3 feet from top of pole.
 Provide mast arm poles with a permanently affixed label 6 feet from the bottom
 of the base plate on the outside with the following information:
 1) manufacturer
 2) moment
 3) order number
 Provide a detailed analysis of the pole. The detailed analysis shall be certified by a
 licensed professional engineer. The detailed analysis shall include, but not be limited to,
 the following calculations:
 1)
 2)
 
 3)
 
 4)
 5)
 
 6)
 
 7)
 8)
 
 Group I, II, III, IV load combinations as listed in table 3-1 group load
 combinations in AASHTO.
 Dimensions and weights for all attachments. This includes areas used for wind,
 ice (this shall be the total exterior area of the attachments) and fatigue loads,
 drags coefficients, projected areas, velocity pressures and wind force for each
 segment.
 For group loads II, III, and IV, which have wind loads, Provide calculations for
 each Controlling "worst case" wind direction that controls any aspect of the
 design (anchor bolts, pole sizing, etc.) If dual arm structures, the wind load shall
 be analyzed for the perpendicular to each arm and a 45 degree angle between the
 two arms for Group loads II and III.
 Anchor bolts shall be designed for the orientation that would provide the
 maximum stress on any individual bolt.
 All structural properties for poles, anchor bolts and base plates. This includes the
 poles diameter, thickness, section modulus, moment of inertia, and cross
 sectional area.
 Calculations for each member shall include loads, section properties, member
 forces (axial, shear, bending, and torsion), member deflections (angular and
 linear), member stresses (actual and allowable), and the combined stress ratio
 (csr).
 Fatigue calculations should be shown for all fatigue related connections. Provide
 the corresponding detail, stress category and example from table 11-2.
 In fatigue calculations, the effective throat thickness of a complete joint
 penetration groove weld shall be the thickness of the thinner part joined per
 AISC J2.1a.
 
 835—3
 
 9) Limit vertical deflection to 8 inches for galloping.
 10) The horizontal deflection limits for vertical supports in section 10.4.2.1 of the
 AASHTO specification should be shown and verified.
 835.07.03
 Anchor Bolts. In addition to Subsection 834.16, provide steel strain
 poles with a minimum of four fully galvanized anchor bolts and a minimum of six fully
 galvanized anchor bolts for mast arm poles.
 835.08
 
 WOOD POLES. Provide materials conforming to Section 820.
 
 835.09 ANCHORS. Use anchor rods that are a minimum, unless otherwise specified,
 of 7 feet in length and 0.625 inches diameter. Ensure a double-eye design. Use anchors
 that are of the expandable type, with a minimum area of 135 square inches.
 835.09.01 ROCK ANCHORS. Provide expandable rock anchors that are 53 inches
 long with tripleye (reg tm).type eye.
 835.10
 
 PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL PEDESTAL.
 
 835.10.01
 Pole. Provide 4 ½ inch O.D. aluminum schedule 40 pipe to provide
 maximum of 10 feet overall mounting height. Provide a pole that meets or exceeds
 Component Products CPI-AP.
 835.10.02
 Breakaway Base. Provide a breakaway base cast from 319 aluminum
 alloy. Provide base that has been tested and has accepted by the FHWA in accordance
 with TRB NCHRP Report 350. Provide a base that meets or exceeds Component Products
 CPI-BAS
 835.10.03
 Pedestal Top Mounting Bracket One-Way. Provide a slip Fitter
 Assembly 1 & 2 way Aluminum with necessary hardware. Provide a pole that meets or
 exceeds Pelco Products Inc. SE-3037
 835.10.04 Pedestal Top Mounting Bracket Two-Way. Provide a 2-way 16 ½ inch
 CTC aluminum with necessary hardware. Provide a pole that meets or exceeds Pelco
 Products Inc. SE-3089.
 835.10.05
 Post Top. Provide a natural aluminum post top that can be securely
 attached to the pole specified in section 835.10.01.
 835.10.06
 
 ANCHOR BOLTS. Provide materials conforming to Section 834.16.
 
 835.11
 METER SOCKET. Provide a meter socket that is 125 AMP with copperaluminum line and load lugs, ringless. Provide a meter socket with a 1 inch bolt on hub.
 Provide the meter socket with a bypass.
 835.12 SAFETY SWITCH. Provide a safety switch disconnect that is 60 AMP 250
 volt, 3-wire, 2-pole, and 2-fuse in a NEMA 3R enclosure. Provide an enclosure that has a
 1" size bolt on hub. Provide a bolt pattern on the hub that aligns with predrilled holes on
 the enclosure. Provide a line cover shield. Provide a safety switch that is UL approved
 and shall be marked in accordance with the National Electrical Code Article 230.66.
 
 835—4
 
 835.13
 
 PADLOCKS. Provide materials conforming to Section 834.25.
 
 835.14
 
 MESSENGER/GUY/TETHER CABLE AND HARDWARE.
 
 835.14.01 Messenger/Guy/Tether Cable. Provide messenger/guy/tether cable that
 consists of "class A", zinc-coated, high-strength steel of the specified strength and extra
 galvanized per ASTM A475-03. Provide a minimum of 3/8” diameter and 7 strands.
 835.14.02 Strandvise. Provide a strandvise that has a automatic jaw type dead-end
 for 3/8” galvanized steel messenger. Provide a strandvise that is Reliable #5202L or
 approved equal.
 835.14.03 Strandlink. Provide a Strandlink that is a splice for 3/8” galvanized steel
 messenger. Provide a strandlink that is Reliable #5042 or approved equal.
 835.14.04 Cable Rings. Provide cable ring that are designed for installation on a 3/8
 inch-7 strand galvanized steel messenger cable. Provide cable rings that are fabricated
 from round edge high carbon steel wire and shall be galvanized after forming. Provide
 wire size that is .090 inch x .190 inch (nominal). Provide cable ring size that are 3inch
 (nominal) to accommodate a 2 inch (maximum) cable bundle size. Provide cable ring that
 are designed to be attached to the correct size messenger cable to keep cable ring from
 slipping. Provide a cable ring that designed so that it can be installed and removed
 without tools and without damage to the messenger cable.
 835.14.05
 Bull Rings. Provide bull rings that are weldless 1 inch steel with a
 nominal I.D. of 4”. Provide a bull ring for the working load limit as specified in contract.
 Provide either working load limit as stated below:
 TYPE A- 10800 LBS
 TYPE B- 15400 LBS
 835.15 WIRE AND CABLE. Use wire and cable that is plainly marked in accordance
 with the provisions of the National Electrical Code.
 835.15.01 Ground Wire. Use copper grounding conductors that are 4AWG, solid,
 and bare unless otherwise specified.
 835.15.02 Service Wire. Use service entrance conductors that are 6 AWG, stranded,
 copper, type USE-2. Use conductors that are colored coded according to the National
 Electric Code.
 835.15.03 Signal Cables. Provide signal cables that are 14 AWG, stranded, copper
 with the number of conductors indicated, and shall conform to IMSA spec 19-1.
 835.15.04 Loop Wire. Provide loop wire that is 14 AWG, stranded, copper and
 conform s to IMSA spec 51-7.
 835.15.05
 Loop Lead-In Cable. Provide loop lead-in cable that is 14 AWG,
 stranded, copper, paired conductors, electrically shielded and conforms to IMSA spec 192.
 
 835—5
 
 835.15.06 Radio Cable. Provide RG-213/U coaxial cable consisting of pre-assembled
 cable and with connectors. Provide connectors that are crimp type, silver plated with gold
 center pin and Teflon/TPX insulation. Provide a Connector that is waterproof. Provide a
 connector that meets or exceeds RF Industries RFN 1006 3E.
 A) Cable for Connection to Antenna. Provide a coaxial cable at a minimum of 60
 feet that is RG-213/U, N-Male to N-Male connectors. Provide a coaxial cable
 that is 50 Ohm with minimum 97 percent shielding and a maximum of 8 dB loss
 at 100ft/900 MHz.
 B) Cable for Connection from Radio. Provide a coaxial cable at a minimum of 3
 feet that is RG-58, N-Male to N-Male connectors. Provide a coaxial cable that is
 50 Ohm with minimum 95 percent shielding and a maximum of 13 dB loss at
 100ft/900 MHz.
 835.15.07
 conductor.
 
 Video Cable. Provide video cable that is #20 AWG, 75 Ohms, and solid
 
 835.15.08 Ethernet Cable. Provide Ethernet cable to be General Cable GenSpeed
 5000 CAT 5e Outside Plant Cable 8 wire PN: 5136100 or approved equal. The cable shall
 meet or exceed the following specifications:
 Performance:
 • ANSI/TIA/EIA 568B (Category 5e)
 • MIL-C-24640A Water Penetration
 • Propagation Delay:
 583 ns @ 100 MHz
 • Return Loss @ 100 MHz:
 20.1 DB
 • Frequency Range:
 1-350 MHz
 Physical characteristics:
 • Nominal Outside Diameter:
 • Insulation Type:
 • Maximum Pulling Tension:
 • Maximum DC Resistance:
 • Mutual Capacitance @ 1kHz:
 • Operating Temperature:
 835.15.09
 835.16
 
 0.230 in
 Polyolefin
 25 lbs
 9.38 Ohms/100m
 17 pF/100m
 -45° C to 80° C
 
 Splicing. Provide materials conforming to Section 834.12.
 
 SIGNALS AND BEACONS.
 
 835.16.01 Fittings and Mounting. Supply all traffic control signals, beacons, and
 lane control signals, unless otherwise specified, with necessary fittings. Including wire
 entrance fittings and swivel type balance adjuster (Pelco PAL or approved equal) for span
 wire mounting. Design wire entrance fitting to prevent entrance of water when using
 normal drip loops. Galvanize or cadmium plate span wire clamps and bolts. Ensure that
 the total loose play rotational tolerance between span wire clamp and wire entrance fitting,
 with swivel adjuster assembled, is not more than 3 degrees. Use mounting arms and
 brackets made of 1.5 inch standard metal IPS pipe. The Department will allow cast or
 fabricated bottom brackets. Ensure that signals are adjustable, and arrange them so that
 
 835—6
 
 each face may be rotated to and positively locked within not more than 5 degrees of any
 position in the horizontal plane. Use a separate locking ring mating with serrations cast or
 molded into the signal housing. Do not use serrations cast into the wire outlet body. Use
 a locking ring designed with a minimum of 2 pins or tabs to mate with corresponding
 holes or notches in the wire outlet body. Use locking rings that are machined to provide
 sharp, well formed serrations that exactly match the serrations in the signal housing.
 835.16.02
 Housings.
 Manufacture the housings, doors, and visors from
 polycarbonate resin to withstand a 70 foot-pound impact without fractures or permanent
 deformation. Ensure that the color is homogeneous throughout. Use parts that are fitted
 with rubber or neoprene type gaskets to provide weather tight seals. Use housings of the
 same type and make, and manufacturer. Ensure that housings are interchangeable.
 Reinforce tops and bottoms to which supporting attachments are fastened to prevent
 breakage from vibration and shock. Ensure that doors are suitably hinged and held
 securely to the housing by simple locking devices, which do not require tools of any kind
 for opening. Use stainless steel hinge pins, lens clips, etc.
 835.16.03 Signal Heads. Each signal head contains one or more signal faces and is
 designated as one-way, 2-way, 3-way, etc. One-section signals are standard flashing
 beacons. For one-way and two-way flashing beacons, supply signal heads that are L.E.D.
 ready, as specified in the Contract. Mount signals with 2 or more sections vertically with
 indications positioned according to the MUTCD. Fit each section with a visor or hood.
 Provide combination or tunnel type visors that enclose at least 80 percent of the lens
 circumference for amber optical units. Supply standard visors that enclose at least 50
 percent of the lens circumference for all red and green optical units. Supply visor lengths
 that are approximately the same as the optical unit’s diameter and designed to minimize
 sun phantom. Attach hoods with screws. Do not use snap in hoods. Ensure that 12-inch
 signals display circular indications of not less than 11.5 inches in diameter. Ensure that
 signal sections are of the same make and manufacturer and are interchangeable to provide
 for optional combinations of optical unit sizes. Use tops and bottoms of signals that have
 circular openings for 1.5 inch IPS rigid pipe, and use replaceable tops and bottoms that are
 interchangeable. Close all unused openings with removable plugs and caps. Use signal
 heads that are assembled. Supply and attach visors, brackets, backplates, hangers, etc. that
 are packaged and shipped within the same carton as the signal head for which they are
 being supplied. (Do not attach hangers)
 835.16.04 Pedestrian Signals. Use pedestrian signals that consist of a one-piece die
 cast aluminum housing. Use a housing that has 1 1/2-inch holes in top and bottom for
 post top or bracket mounting. Provide signal heads that are assembled. Supply
 unattached arms and all other necessary hardware that are packaged and shipped within
 the same carton as the signal head for which they are being supplied.
 835.16.05 Optical Units. Use an optical unit that is a complete LED assembly with
 all necessary supporting parts. Ensure conformance with the standards of the Institute of
 Traffic Engineers (ITE), current edition, for LED traffic signals. Provide lenses that are
 integral to the unit with a smooth outer surface constructed of plastic or glass. Provide an
 optical assembly that diffuses the light output and provides uniform illumination across
 the entire surface of the circular lens and the required visible portions of the arrow and
 pedestrian lens. Individual LED’s shall not be visible to the observer of indications
 displayed by vehicular traffic signal modules. If a polymeric lens is used, a surface coating
 
 835—7
 
 or chemical surface treatment shall be used to provide front surface abrasion resistance. In
 addition to the module identification requirements of the respective ITE documents, the
 following additional information shall be permanently identified on the back of each
 module:
 •
 •
 •
 
 Date of manufacture (month/year)
 Color (for vehicular modules)
 Type (circular or arrow)
 
 All modules shall be operationally compatible with traffic signal controllers, cabinets
 and accessories manufactured to the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans)
 Traffic Signal Control Equipment Specifications, latest edition. The wires that connect the
 module to the terminal block shall be terminated with spade lugs.
 Provide documentation that the manufacturer's quality management system is ISO
 9001:2008 certified. Provide modules that are Intertek certified and bear the ETL mark.
 The manufacturer shall have a license agreement with Intertek whereby an initial factory
 assessment and ongoing quality assurance testing every six months is performed. Provide
 certification and copy of license agreement. The manufacturer shall supply the KYTC
 with all quality assurance testing results after they are performed throughout the contract
 period.
 The list of certified products can be found on the following website:
 http://www.intertek.com/uploadedFiles/Intertek/Divisions/Commercial_and_Electrical/Me
 dia/PDFs/Electronics_and_Electrical/LED_Directory_Traffic_Signal_Modules_Certified_
 Products.pdf
 Contrary to Section 835.27, provide a written warranty against defects in
 materials and/or workmanship. The warranty period will last 84 months and begin on the
 date the modules are received by the KYTC. Modules that fail within the warranty period
 will be returned to the vendor and replacement modules shall be provided at no cost to the
 KYTC.
 Construct and mount optical units to provide easy access for all maintenance and
 repairs including wiring within the signal housing.
 Wire and connect each optical unit to a suitable terminal block within the signal
 housing with minimum No. 18 AWG, 194 °F, 600 volt, color-coded, stranded fixture wire.
 Locate the terminal block in the second section from the top in multi-section faces.
 Ensure that optical units are interchangeable regardless of manufacturer.
 Each signal face contains one or more complete optical units in suitable housings for
 control in one direction only and is designated as one-section, 2-section, 3-section, etc.
 A) PEDESTRIAN. Provide a pedestrian signal module that is designed to display
 the walking person icon and hand icon as shown in the ITE specification for
 Pedestrian Traffic Control Signal and a numerical countdown display. Use icons
 that are designed so that the entire areas comprising the icons appear illuminated.
 Use icons that overlay one another adjacent to two 7-segment numerical digits,
 comprised of two rows of LED's. Provide a module that does not have any
 external attachments or options that would allow disabling the countdown
 function. Contrary to the ITE specification, all pedestrian signal modules shall
 have a message bearing surface of 16 inch x 18 inch and a minimum icon size of
 11 inch x 7 inch and minimum digit size of 9 inch x 6.5 inch. Provide a module
 
 835—8
 
 that is capable of detecting any increase or decrease of the pedestrian timing and
 re-programming itself should this be detected. Provide a module that is capable
 of recognizing preemption events and temporarily modifying the crossing cycle
 accordingly.
 835.16.06 Backplates. Provide backplates that are louvered and constructed of 0.049
 inch aluminum; primed and painted flat black on both sides. Provide backplates that
 include a minimum of six (6) #12-14x3/4 inch Hillman Neoprene self drilling steel washer
 screws.
 A) Reflective Backplates. Provide a 2 inch wide fluorescent yellow reflective tape
 that is installed around the outer perimeter of the face of the backplates to project
 a rectangular appearance at night. Provide louvers that are installed horizontally
 and as close to the signal face as possible. Reflective tape shall not be installed
 on louvers. Use reflective tape that complies with ASTM D4956-05, Type IX,
 Fluorescent Yellow and be listed on the KYTC pre-approved materials list.
 835.16.07 Painting. Paint all signals and beacons (except black polycarbonate), arms
 and braces, brackets, trunions, wire entrance fittings, sign housings, etc. black with 2 coats
 of high grade exterior gloss enamel. Paint the inside of all hoods and visors dull black to
 minimize glare reflections.
 Prepare, degrease, and prime all painted surfaces before painting to prevent
 chipping and peeling.
 Ensure that all miscellaneous hardware is corrosion resistant., Galvanize or plate
 the hardware after any drilling, threading, or welding.
 835.17
 SIGN HANGERS. Provide a bracket that accommodates signs made from
 aluminum sheeting 0.080 inches thick with a horizontal dimension as shown below:
 • Type A – 30”x36”
 • Type B – 36”x36”
 • Type C – 48”x48”
 835.17.01
 Span Mounted Hangers. Provide hangers to suspend signs from an
 overhead, untethered, steel span wire with a diameter between 0.25 and 0.625 in. Ensure
 construction permits free swing in two vertical planes at 90 degrees apart (multi-leveling,
 wind dumping). Allow for perpendicular sign alignment with the roadway centerline for
 spans that cross the roadway at any angle up to 45 degrees.
 Provide a bracket assembly that provides a single safety chain at least 12 inches
 in length. Provide a chain that has a minimum diameter of 0.25 inches and will link
 between one of the bolts attaching the sign to the bracket and the span wire to prevent a
 sign from falling in case the bracket assembly fails. Provide a chain that has a threaded
 connector link (quick link) of appropriate size for easy and secure connection of the chain
 to the span wire. Provide parts made from steel that are hot-dip galvanized per ASTM
 A123 or A153.
 835.17.02 Mast Arm Hangers. Provide brackets that meet or exceed PELCO AB0142. Provide sign hangers that attach to the horizontal component of a mast arm pole
 and consist of a sign bracket and a cable assembly. The bracket will have an aluminum
 formed tube with stainless steel fasteners and a natural non-anodic protective coating.
 
 835—9
 
 Bracket will mount to pole using a 120 in. cable assembly.
 that conform to the following types:
 • TYPE A- 24 inch
 • TYPE B- 30 inch
 • TYPE C- 42 inch
 
 Provide hangers with tubes
 
 835.18 SIGNAL HEAD HANGERS.
 835.18.01 Two-Way Span Wire Assembly. Provide two-way span wire assembly
 span wire clamp with u-bolts, iron, ½ inch galvanized pal balance adjuster, ½ inch eyebolt,
 ¾ inch slot zinc bright wire entrance assembly, aluminum painted, and 2-way upper &
 lower span wire assembly painted. Provide Span wire assembly 2-way aluminum w/ pal
 balance adjuster. Provide two way span wire that meets or exceeds PELCO SE 0338,
 3219, 3034, 3038.
 835.18.02
 Three-Way Span Wire Assembly. Provide three way span wire
 assembly with u-bolts, iron, ½ inch galvanized pal balance adjuster, ½ inch eyebolt, ¾
 inch slot zinc bright wire entrance assembly, aluminum painted, and 3-way upper & lower
 span wire assembly aluminum painted. Provide Span wire assembly 2-way aluminum w/
 pal balance adjuster. Provide two way span wire that meets or exceeds PELCO SE 0338,
 3219, 3034, 3039.
 835.18.03 Four-Way Span Wire Assembly. Provide span wire assembly with ubolts, iron, ½ inch galvanized pal balance adjuster, ½ inch eyebolt, ¾ inch slot zinc bright
 wire entrance assembly, aluminum painted, and 4-way upper & lower span wire assembly
 aluminum painted. Provide Span wire assembly 4-way aluminum w/ pal balance adjuster.
 Provide two way span wire that meets or exceeds PELCO SE 0338, 3219, 3034, 3040.
 835.18.04 Mast Arm Assembly. Provide mast arm mount signal bracket that consist
 of a clamp assembly for the types listed:
 • TYPE A- 3-section head
 • TYPE B- 4 section head
 • TYPE C- 5 section head
 Provide a bracket that includes an upper and lower arms and a vertical support tube.
 Provide a bracket that is adjustable about the support tube axis, vertically, about the mast
 arm and about the vertical plane.
 Provide upper and lower arms that are attached to the signal in a clamping manner to
 assure rigidity. Provide a bracket that is capable with the type listed above. Provide a
 bracket that is constructed such that all electrical wiring can be completely concealed in
 the bracket and shall accommodate a minimum of three 14 AWG/10 Conductor Cables.
 Provide a clamp assembly that is equipped with two cables. Provide cables that are
 adjustable to fit all mast arm shapes without special tools or equipment. Provide cables
 that are 120 inches long. Provide each bracket that are furnished complete with all
 necessary hardware (bolts, washers, gaskets, etc.) to attach the signal to the bracket and
 the bracket to the mast arm. Provide aluminum parts that are alodine or approved equal
 finish. Provide steel parts that are stainless steel or galvanized. Provide a bracket that
 meets or exceeds PELCO AB-3043.
 835.19
 PEDESTRIAN PUSHBUTTON DETECTORS. Provide a water tight
 pedestrian detector consisting of a piezo driven solid state switch with no moving parts.
 
 835—10
 
 The button shall have a LED indication and shall beep when pressed. Switch body shall
 be die cast aluminum and painted with powder coated finish paint. Pedestrian detector
 shall be secured to and housed in a type FS, threaded single gang with four stainless steel
 hardware. Include a neoprene gasket for sealing the switch body to the enclosure.
 835.19.01 Pedestrian Detector Body. Provide a 4 holed pole mounted aluminum
 rectangular housing that is compatible pedestrian detector. Provide all necessary hardware
 to seal the enclosure. Provide a natural aluminum painted surface.
 835.20 ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN DETECTORS. Provide a system that meets the
 requirements of the 2003 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) or latest
 Edition. Provide a system that consists of two components:
 • Control Unit
 • Pushbutton
 835.20.01 Control Unit. Provide a control unit that:
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
 7.
 
 is designed to fit inside a 16 in. clam shell style pedestrian signal head. Ensure
 the unit can be powered by the 120 VAC supplied to the walk/don’t walk signals
 capable of providing power to the pushbutton unit
 has terminal blocks for connection of all wires
 has pulsed 15 VDC to power the vibrator in the pushbutton unit
 can detect a walk/don’t walk conflict
 has an audio amplifier of 10 W RMS into 8 ohms
 has an adjustable volume control up to 89 DB for the locator tone and audible
 message. The tone will automatically let to no more than 5 DB above ambient
 noise and will adjust sound levels automatically in response to any ambient noise
 over 60 decibels.
 
 835.20.02 Pushbutton. Provide a vandal resistant pushbutton unit that accepts 12 to
 36 v ac/dc that is imposed by connection of the pushbutton to the traffic signal controller
 cabinet. Ensure the pushbutton frame is powder coated cast aluminum and the face plate
 is powder coated aluminum. Provide a 2 in aluminum pushbutton with a powder coated
 silver arrow indicator on top of a black background and make of hard anodized powder
 coated aluminum. The arrow should adjust to point in any direction The pushbutton shall
 vibrate during the walk interval and shall have a sunlight visible LED light that
 illuminates when the button is pushed, and will remain lit unit the beginning of the walk
 interval. Provide a weatherproof speaker located in the pushbutton unit that will emit a
 locator tone with a duration of 0.15 seconds or less, repeat at 1 s intervals, and will
 automatically adjust to no more than 5 db louder that the ambient noise. The speaker will
 also provide the verbal message “walk sign” followed by the appropriate street name and a
 brief “tick” to confirm the button push. Provide a pushbutton that comes equipped with
 the informational sign R10-3b (9 X 12 in) and R10-3e (9 X 15 in). Provide an
 informational sign that is two sided reversible for right and left applications. Provide a
 system with one complete set of software and any necessary hardware to program the
 system to emit the verbal message. Provide one password protected navigator
 configurator for remote programming that has a backlit LCD screen that can be adjusted
 for contrast.
 
 835—11
 
 835.21 TRAFFIC LOOP ENCAPSULANT. Provide a non-shrink, non-stringing,
 moisture cure, one-part, polyurethane traffic loop encapsulate suitable for use in both
 asphalt and concrete pavements. Ensure it provides a void-free encapsulation for detector
 loop wires and adequate compressive yield strength and flexibility to withstand heavy
 vehicular traffic and normal pavement movement. The Engineer may reject the product if
 any physical property renders the material unsuitable.
 Ensure that the cured encapsulate has the following properties:
 
 835—12
 
 TRAFFIC LOOP ENCAPSULANT REQUIREMENTS
 AND PRICE ADJUSTMENT SCHEDULE
 
 (1)
 
 Test
 Specificati 100% 90% Pay 80% Pay 70% Pay 50%
 (1)
 Hardness
 25-29
 20-24
 15-19
 ≤ 14
 (ASTM D 2240) 35-65
 30-70 71-75
 76-80
 81-85
 ≥ 86
 Tensile Strength,
 (ASTM D 412)
 150 min. 145 min. 140-144 135-139 130-134 ≤ 129
 Elongation, %(2)
 (ASTM D 412)
 125 min. 120 min. 115-119 110-114 105-109 ≤ 104
 Density, lb/gal
 8.30-8.49 8.20-8.29 8.10-8.19 ≤ 8.09
 (ASTM D 1875) 9.00-11.00 8.5011.5111.6111.71≥ 11.81
 Tack-free
 Time,
 (ASTM C 679)
 24 max.
 24.5
 24.6-25.0 25.1-25.5 25.6-26.0 ≥ 26.1
 Complete
 Dry
 hours (KM 64-447) 30 max.
 30.5
 30.6-31.0 31.1-31.5 31.6-32.0 ≥ 32.1
 Chemical
 (KM 64-446)
 Motor Oil
 No Effect
 Deicing Chemicals No Effect
 Gasoline
 Slight
 ll
 Hydraulic
 Brake No Effect
 l idIf allowed to remain in place, the Department will review materials performing in this range on
 
 a project-by-project basis to determine if removal of the material is warranted.
 (2)
 Tested at a 2- inch per minute pull rate.
 
 Use one-quart tubes of loop sealant that are suitable for use with a standard caulking gun.
 Provide each tube with a plastic nozzle to facilitate placing of the material in the pavement
 slot.
 835.22 NON-SHRINK GROUT. Provide non-shrink grout that meets the requirements
 of ASTM C 1090 and Section 601.03. All non-shrink grout shall be on Division of
 Materials Approved List.
 835.23 BACKER ROD. Provide backer rod that has closed cell polyethylene foam.
 Provide a backer rod that is ½” diameter. Provide backer rod that has the minimum
 density of 2.0 lbs/cubic feet using the ASTM D 1622 test method and tensile strength of
 50 PSI using the ASTM D 1623 test method. Provide back rod that has the maximum
 water absorption of 0.03 gm/cc using ASTM C 1016 test method.
 835.24 TEST/PIPE PLUGS. Provide materials conforming to Section 834.05.03
 835.25 TRAFFIC CONTROL EQUIPMENT. Provide Traffic Control Equipment that
 meets or exceeds the specifications for "Traffic Signal Control Equipment Specifications"
 California Department of Transportation, January 1989, or latest edition and California
 Transportation Electrical Equipment Specifications “TEES”, March 12, 2009 or latest
 edition.
 
 835—13
 
 http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/esc/oe/specifications/std_specs/2006_StdSpecs/2006_StdSpecs.
 doc.
 http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/traffops/elecsys/reports/TEES2009.pdf
 
 All Chapters/sections referenced in 835.25 are found in the California Transportation
 Electrical Equipment Specifications “TEES”, March 12, 2009 or latest edition.
 835.25.01 Traffic Signal Cabinet. Conform to Chapter 6. Provide these types of
 cabinets as stated in the plans:
 •
 •
 
 332, Chapter 6 Section 1 for minimum dimensions
 336, minimum dimensions of 46 inches Height, 24 inches width, and 22 inches
 depth.
 
 Provide cabinets that are constructed of aluminum and shall be supplied unpainted.
 Provide cabinets that are supplied with flashers, flash transfer relays, EDI 2010 ECL
 conflict monitors (or approved equal). Provide Conflict monitors, flasher and transfer
 relays that installed inside the cabinet. Provide a cabinet door that has a lock and keyed
 with a standard No. 2 Corbin traffic control key. Provide cabinets that have a fluorescent
 front and back light installed and with a drawer. Provide a drawer that is installed so that
 the drawer opens from the back of the cabinet. Provide a cabinet that is fitted with a PDA2 power distribution assembly. Provide circuit breakers that are used in the PDA-2
 assembly that have screw type terminal connections. Do not provide Stud type
 connection.
 Mount equipment according to Chapter 6 Appendix A6-5 with the following exceptions:
 •
 •
 •
 •
 
 On 332, the PDA #2 shall be above the input file I/J.
 On 332, drawer shall be between the PDA #2 and the input file.
 On 336, drawer shall be between the PDA #2 and the output file.
 On 336, excess space shall be evenly distributed on the top and bottom of the
 cabinet.
 
 Provide cabinets with a surge protector that meets or exceeds the specifications of the
 EDCO SHA-1250 surge protector. Mount surge protector SHA-1250 Base on side panel
 or rack frame near the utility terminations. Surge protector shall not interfere with the
 operation of any access panels. Terminals that have 120VAC present shall be shielded
 with an insulating cover to prevent inadvertent contact. Relay contacts shall be wired to 2
 point barrier style terminal block. One point of the terminal block shall also be connected
 to pin C1-75 of the controller's C1 connector. The other point of the terminal strip shall be
 connected to controller logic ground. One extra SHA-1250 surge protector shall be
 supplied with each cabinet and stored in document pouch.
 Provide cabinets with point to point soldered wiring for load switch sockets. Printed
 circuit wiring for output files shall not be permitted. Do not install side mounted terminal
 blocks and associated wiring for loop connections. Provide cabinet with red monitor
 cabling installed. Provide cabinet that has the red monitor jumpers set in the “enable”
 position.
 
 835—14
 
 Do not connect the pedestrian yellow loadswitch outputs to the conflict monitor cardedge connector. Provide plug like connection for the outputs for the pedestrian yellows
 that can be reconnected. Provide switches/relays that are mercury free and shall be solid
 state type. Provide an ARC FLASH sticker on the outside of the front and back doors.
 Provide one set of documentation including complete schematics that is supplied with
 each cabinet.
 Provide a warranty that the product furnished will perform in accordance with the
 requirements of the specifications and be warranted against defects in materials and/or
 workmanship for a period of 2 years. This warranty is an exception to Section 835.27.
 835.25.02 170E Controllers. Conform to Chapter 2. Provide controllers configured
 to operate using Wapiti Microsystems W4IKS V35 (68HC11F1) firmware. Provide
 controllers with zero insertion force (ZIF) socket for installation of W4IKS firmware on
 CPU board. ZIF socket must be high profile type Aries lever locking type or equal. Low
 profile “butterfly” locking type shall not be used. Provide the controller without software.
 Provide controllers with two blank OTP EPROM chips pin and speed compatible with the
 controller. Provide EPROM chips in static protective packaging. Configure CPU board
 for 1200 baud ACIA and on-board firmware.
 Provide aluminum blanking plate or front panel that does not have an opening
 for PROM module. Provide socket mounting for all integrated circuits that connect to
 controller inputs and outputs. Provide integrated circuit sockets that are machined
 beryllium copper contacts with gold plating.
 835.25.03 Loop Detector. Provide detector that meets the basic functionality of the
 model 222 loop detector in accordance with Chapter 5 section 2. Provide rack mounted
 loop detectors that provide two channels of detection. Provide detectors that have a
 backlit liquid crystal display. Detectors shall display a graph of relative inductance
 change to assist in detector setup. Detectors shall have optoisolated solid state outputs.
 835.25.04 Conflict Monitor. Provide conflict monitor that provides the basic
 functionality of the model 210 conflict monitor in accordance with Chapter 6 section 6.
 Provide conflict monitor that supports Ethernet data communications and event logging.
 A) Program Card. Provide a conflict monitor that meets or exceeds EDI
 2010ECLIP with program card.
 B) Program Key. Provide a conflict monitor that meets or exceeds EDI
 2018KCLIP with datakey and Ethernet Port. Provide a datakey that is
 interchangeable nonvolatile device and does all the programming (jumpers,
 diodes, and dip switches). Provide two DataKey memory devices with conflict
 monitor.
 835.25.05 Pedestrian Isolator. Conform to Chapter 5, section 4.
 835.25.06 Flasher (Model 204). Conform to Chapter 3, section 3.
 835.25.07 Load Switch (Model 200). Conform to Chapter 3, section 2.
 
 835—15
 
 835.25.08 AC powered beacon/school flasher control. Provide a beacon control
 cabinet that is constructed from .125" aluminum and supplied unpainted. Provide a cabinet
 size that has the minimum inside dimensions of 14" high, by 11" wide, by 11" deep.
 Provide a cabinet that has a 1 1/2" flange on the back, predrilled and slotted for both
 banding and lag screw mounting. Provide a door that has a lock and keyed with a standard
 No. 2 Corbin traffic control key. Provide seams that are continuously welded and doors
 shall have gaskets to provide a weatherproof structure. Provide cabinet shall be fitted with
 one, 1 1/4" and one, 3/4" conduit hub in the bottom of the cabinet. Provide conduit hubs
 that are positioned in the middle of the cabinet’s bottom. Provide cabinet that are fitted
 with a .125" removable aluminum back panel with a 15 Ampere circuit breaker, EDCO
 HSP121BT-1RU surge/EMI filter, BEAU S-5408-AB or equal flasher socket, and Cinch
 series 142 terminal block with Y connectors. Provide a back panel that is drilled and
 tapped for equipment mounting with #8-32 hardware. Provide wiring that is routed behind
 the back panel and shall be soldered. Provide wires that are protected with grommets when
 passing through the back panel. Provide cabinet that are wired with a jumper between
 terminals 304 and 305 for flashing operation. Provide cabinets that are supplied with
 flasher (section 835.26.06), cabinet keys, wiring instructions, and all necessary hardware
 for mounting to wood poles. Provide an ARC FLASH sticker on all doors.
 Provide Terminal Strip Connections as shown below:
 • 301 Flasher Ckt 1
 • 302 Flasher Ckt 2
 • 303 Flasher AC+
 • 304 Flasher AC+
 • 305 Filtered AC+
 • 306 AC+ Breaker Protected
 • 307 AC+ Breaker Protected
 • 308 AC+ IN
 • 309 NC
 • 310 Neut
 • 311 Neut IN
 • 312 Ground IN
 Provide a warranty that the product furnished will perform in accordance with
 the requirements of the specifications and be warranted against defects in materials and/or
 workmanship for a period of 2 years.
 835.25.09 Time Clocks. Use time clocks that meet the following specifications:
 1. Microprocessor based
 2. Keyboard programmable
 3. 32 program steps settable by day, hour, minute and relay output if more than one
 relay exists
 4. Manual relay on/off function
 5. One to four relay outputs rated at 10 amps, 115 VAC resistive load
 6. AC power: 95 to 135 VAC, 60 Hz
 7. Temperature: -29 to + 165 °F
 8. Timekeeping and program shall be maintained for at least 48 hours without AC
 power
 9. Enclosure shall mount on a vertical surface
 
 835—16
 
 10. Automatic daylight savings time adjustment as default with a daylight savings
 time override option controlled from the keyboard.
 11. 16 pin circular plastic power and output connector (Amp #520258-3 or approved
 equal)
 
 12. Output connector pin-out as follows:
 Pin No. Function Pin No. Function
 1
 Line
 9
 #4 Com
 2
 Neutral 10
 #1 N.O.
 3
 Ground 11
 #3 Com
 4
 #1 Com 12
 #3 N.C
 5
 #1 N.C 13
 #3 N.O.
 6
 #2 Com 14
 #4 N.C.
 7
 #2 N.O. 15
 #4 N.O.
 8
 No Con. 16
 #2 N.C.
 Supply each unit with a female mating harness with 3-foot wires appropriate for
 the number of relays in the clock. Label each wire one foot from the plug with permanent
 non-fading wire labels indicating the function.
 835.25.10 Solar Powered School Flasher. Provide solar powered school flasher
 system capable of operating two twelve-inch, 5 watt, LED traffic signal indications that
 conforms to section 835.16.03 and operate two hours per day, five days a week at a 50%
 duty cycle (alternating flash). Provide system designed for 3.6 kWh/m solar insulation
 and batteries sized for one week of operation with no sun.
 Provide solar electric arrays of crystalline cells in series. Provide solar cell
 modules with an antireflective coating and low iron glass covering. Solar cells shall be
 encapsulated to protect them from the environment. Each module shall provide a weathertight junction box for connecting the array output cable to the module terminals. The
 modules shall be designed to provide rated power output for a minimum of 15 years. The
 modules shall utilize an anodized aluminum frame for mechanical support.
 The solar electric modules shall be designed to securely attach to a wood pole.
 All the necessary hardware for installing the modules to the mounts and for fastening the
 mount to the side of the pole shall be included. Security hardware shall be used for
 securing the modules to the mount. One set of tools appropriate for use with the security
 hardware shall be included. Mount shall be powder coat painted or hot dipped galvanized
 steel and shall adjust from 30 to 60 degrees from horizontal.
 Batteries shall be low self-discharging, leak proof, non-venting, deep cycle,
 AGM, 12 Volt DC with a 100 amp hour minimum. The operating discharge range shall
 be –40 to +160 degrees F. The operating charge range shall be –10 to +140 degrees F.
 The system shall utilize a solid state, integrated control unit capable of managing
 battery charging and flashing power output control. The charge control portion of the
 control unit shall be designed such that it draws its power only from the solar array when
 power is available so as to reduce the parasitic load on the system. The unit shall use an
 ambient temperature sensor to adjust the charge termination point (temperature
 compensated charging). The charge circuit shall also employ a pulse width modulation
 algorithm for charging the batteries and be of a solid state series switch type configuration.
 
 835—17
 
 The load/flasher control function shall incorporate a low-voltage disconnect
 (LVD) circuit to disconnect power to the flasher control circuit when the battery voltage
 falls to 20 % of full charge. The flasher control circuitry shall be all solid-state and shall
 provide two flasher outputs. When flashing, the unit shall provide an output duty cycle of
 50% per lamp and the lamps shall flash alternately at the rate of 50-60 flashes per minute.
 On board short circuit protection shall the provided.
 The controller shall provide
 automatic built-in night dimming capability.
 Time clock shall be designed for the system and be a DC powered low current
 device. Clocks shall conform to section 835.25.09. Provide the system with a speed limit
 sign in accordance with the Contract.
 Provide a system that utilizes a single enclosure for ease of installation. Provide
 an enclosure that is fabricated from aluminum with a minimum material thickness of
 0.125 inches. Provide an enclosure that is capable of accepting banding tape style mounts.
 Provide a cabinet that has screened louvered vents on each side of each compartment.
 Provide louver screening that is aluminum for longevity. Provide an integral rain lip at the
 top of the main cabinet body to minimize entry of rain.
 Provide a door to the enclosure that is attached with a continuous stainless steel
 hinge that is riveted to the door and to the enclosure body. Provide hinges that are
 installed so that the rivets are not exposed when the door is closed. Provide an integral
 rigid doorstop that is included in the unit so that the door can be fixed in the open position.
 Provide a door that is cover the entire side of the cabinet and shall be constructed of a
 single piece of aluminum. Provide a door that has a neoprene gasket around the entire
 edge. Provide a door that is secured with a standard traffic signal controller cabinet
 Corbin # 2 lock. Provide a keyhole for the lock shall have a cover attached to the door
 with a single rivet. Provide an adjustable latch striker that is included on the side of the
 main cabinet body to allow the user to adjust the pressure between the door gasket and the
 body of the cabinet.
 Provide a battery compartment that has a minimum of one-half inch (1/2”) of
 insulating sheeting around the battery to minimize heat transfer between the battery and
 the enclosure wall.
 835.26
 
 WARRANTIES.
 
 Conform to Section 834.26.
 
 835.27
 
 DOCUMENTATION. Conform to Section 834.27.
 
 835—18
 
 SECTION 836  DURABLE PREFORMED PAVEMENT
 MARKINGS TYPE I TAPE
 836.01 GENERAL. Use preformed pavement marking material consisting of white or
 yellow films with retroreflective optics incorporated to provide immediate and continuing
 retroreflection.
 Use preformed pavement marking material capable of adhering to new dense and
 open graded asphalt surfaces, during the paving operation, or portland cement concrete by
 a pre-coated pressure sensitive adhesive. The Engineer may require a primer to
 precondition the pavement surface. Ensure that the markings conform to pavement
 contours by the action of traffic. Ensure that, after application, the markings are
 immediately ready for traffic.
 Ensure that these markings provide long term reflectivity, as determined in the
 following performance requirements, when applied according to the manufacturer’s
 instructions.
 Ensure that the preformed markings are suitable for use one year after the date of
 receipt when stored according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 836.02
 
 REQUIREMENTS.
 
 836.02.01 Composition. Use retroreflective preformed pavement markings
 consisting of a mixture of high quality polymeric materials, pigments, and retroreflective
 optics distributed throughout its base cross sectional area.
 836.02.02 Reflectance. Ensure that the white and yellow markings have the
 following minimum reflectance values as measured according to the testing procedures of
 ASTME 1701. Measure the coefficient of retroreflected luminance and express the value
 as millicandelas per square meter per lux [(mcd/m2)lx-1].
 
 MINIMUM REFLECTANCE
 Color
 
 Observation
 Angle
 1.05º
 
 Minimum Reflectance
 
 White
 
 Entrance
 Angle
 88.76º
 
 Yellow
 
 88.76º
 
 1.05º
 
 500 minimum
 
 500 minimum
 
 836.02.03 Skid Resistance. Ensure that the surface of the retroreflective
 material provides an initial minimum skid resistance value of 45 BPN when tested
 according to ASTM E 303.
 836.02.04 Patchability. Ensure that the pavement marking material is capable
 of use for patching worn areas of the same type according to the manufacturer’s
 recommendations.
 836.02.05 Material Quality. Replace any material used as longitudinal or
 intersection markings that fails minimum reflectivity values or fails due to loss of
 adhesion or complete wear through. Minimum replacement zone is 300 feet of roadway
 
 836—1
 
 length or one intersection marking.
 836.03 APPROVAL. The Department will approve Type I pavement marking tape
 based on conformance to KM 64-207 and this section.
 836.04 CERTFICATION. Submit manufacturer’s certification stating conformance to
 the requirements of this section for each shipment of approved Type I pavement marking
 tape for use on projects. Clearly stat the manufacturer, product name and product code
 and color as listed in the Department’s List of Approved Materials. Identify the lot
 number(s), expiration date, and quantity delivered.
 836.05 ACCEPTANCE. The Department will accept Type I pavement marking tape
 based on verification of inclusion on the Department’s List of Approved Materials,
 compliance of the manufacturer’s certification, and visual inspection of the
 installation of the Type I pavement marking tape.
 
 836—2
 
 SECTION 837  EXTRUDED THERMOPLASTIC PAVEMENT
 MARKING MATERIALS
 837.01 GENERAL. This section covers extruded thermoplastic pavement marking
 materials for permanent applications.
 837.02 DROP ON BEADS. Use beads that will ensure the pavement marking material
 will meet retroreflectivity requirements. The Department will evaluate the beads as part of
 the marking system through retroreflectivity readings.
 837.03 APPROVAL. Select materials that conform to the composition and physical
 characteristic requirements below when evaluated in accordance with AASHTO T-250 or
 other test methods as cited. The Department will sample and evaluate for approval each
 lot of thermoplastic material delivered for use per contract prior to installation of the
 thermoplastic material. Do not allow the installation of thermoplastic material until it has
 been approved by the Division of Materials. Allow the Department a minimum of 10
 working days to evaluate and approve thermoplastic material from the date received by the
 Division of Materials.
 837.03.01 Composition. Use a maleic-modified glycerol ester resin (alkyd binder)
 to formulate the thermoplastic material. Ensure the pigment, pre-mix beads, and filler are
 uniformly dispersed in the resin. Use material that is free from all dirt and foreign
 material. Provide independent analysis data and certification for each formulation stating
 the total concentration of each heavy metal present, the test method used for each
 determination, and compliance to 40 CFR 261 for leachable heavy metals content.
 COMPOSITION
 (Percentage by Weight)
 Component
 Binder, (1)
 Glass Beads (Premixed)
 Titanium Dioxide
 Calcium Carbonate & Inert Fillers (2)
 Heavy Metals Content
 
 White
 Yellow
 18.0 min.
 18.0 min.
 30 - 40
 30 - 40
 10.0 min.
 —
 42.0 max.
 50.0 max.
 Comply with
 Comply with
 40 CFR 261
 40 CFR 261
 (1)
 Use a binder that consists of a mixture of synthetic resins, at least one being
 solid at room temperature, and high boiling point plasticizers. Ensure that at
 least one-third of the binder composition is solid maleic-modified glycerol ester
 resin and is not less than 8 percent by weight of the entire material formulation.
 Do not use alkyd binder that contains petroleum based hydrocarbon resins.
 (2)
 The manufacturer may choose the amount of calcium carbonate and inert fillers,
 providing all other requirements of this section are met.
 837.03.02 Physical Characteristics. For thermoplastic material heated for 4
 hours at 425ºF under agitation, conform to the following requirements.
 A) Color. As determined with a spectrophotometer using D65 illuminant with a
 
 45 degree entrance angle and 0 degree observation angle geometry.
 
 837—1
 
 CIELAB Color Coordinates
 Yellow
 Daytime Color (CIELAB)
 L* 81.76
 Spectrophotometer using
 a* 19.79
 illuminant D65 at 45º
 b* 89.89
 Maximum allowable
 illumination and 0º viewing
 with a 2º observer
 variation 6.0∆E*
 Nighttime Color (CIELAB)
 L* 86.90
 Spectrophotometer using
 a* 24.80
 illuminant A at 45º
 b* 95.45
 Maximum allowable
 illumination and 0º viewing
 with a 2º observer
 variation 6.0∆E*
 
 White
 L* 93.51
 a* -1.01
 b* 0.70
 Maximum allowable
 variation 6.0∆E*
 L* 93.45
 a* -0.79
 b* 0.43
 Maximum allowable
 variation 6.0∆E*
 
 B) Flowability. Ensure that the white thermoplastic material has a maximum
 residue of 18 percent and the yellow thermoplastic material has a maximum
 residue of 21 percent.
 C) Set Time. Use material that, when applied at a temperature range of 415 ± 15 ºF
 and thickness of 40 to 120 mils, sets to bear traffic in not more than 2 minutes
 when the air and road surface temperature is approximately ≥ 50 ± 3 ºF, and not
 more than 10 minutes when the air and road surface temperature is
 approximately < 50 ± 3 ºF.
 D) Softening Point. Ensure that the thermoplastic material has a softening point of
 215 ± 15 ºF.
 E) Bond Strength. Ensure that the bond strength of the thermoplastic material to
 concrete exceeds 180 psi.
 F) Cracking Resistance at Low Temperature. Ensure that the thermoplastic
 material shows no cracks when observed from a distance exceeding one foot.
 G) Impact Resistance. Ensure the impact resistance of the thermoplastic
 material is a minimum of 1.13 joules.
 H) Flash Point. Use thermoplastic material that has a flash point not less than
 475 °F.
 837.04 PACKAGING. Package thermoplastic material in suitable 50 pound containers
 to which the material shall not adhere during shipment or storage. Include a label stating
 that the thermoplastic material is to be maintained with a temperature range of 400 –
 440ºF during application. Provide the thermoplastic material in either block or granular
 form.
 837.05 SHELF LIFE. Ensure that the thermoplastic material conforms to this section for
 a period of one year. Replace any thermoplastic material not conforming to the above
 requirements.
 837.06 MANUFACTURER’S TESTING. Perform testing in accordance with
 AASHTO T-250 on a minimum of one composite sample per 10,000 pounds, or portion
 thereof, per lot of thermoplastic produced.
 837.07 CERTIFICATION. Submit manufacturer’s certification stating conformance to
 the requirements of this section for each lot of extruded thermoplastic delivered for use on
 projects. Clearly state the manufacture, formulation identification, product name, color,
 date of manufacturer, lot number (s), expiration date, total quantity of lot produced, actual
 quantity of thermoplastic material represented, sampling method utilized to obtain the
 samples, and required manufacturer’s testing data for each composite sample tested to
 represent each lot produced.
 
 837—2
 
 837.08 ACCEPTANCE. The Department will accept extruded thermoplastic based
 on compliance of the manufacturer’s certification and conformance of test results
 obtained by the Department to the requirements of this section.
 
 837—3
 
 SECTION 838  FLEXIBLE DELINEATOR POSTS
 838.01 GENERAL. Furnish surface and ground mounted flexible delineator posts from
 the Department’s List of Approved Materials. The Department considers the flexible
 delineator posts to include the post, reflective sheeting, and mounting hardware.
 838.01.01 Reflective Sheeting. Conform to Section 830.
 838.02 APPROVAL. The Department will approve flexible delineator posts in
 accordance with KM 64-205 and conformance to this Section.
 838.03 PACKAGING. Securely fasten posts of the same type and length in bundles of
 2,000 pounds or less in a manner that is easily handled by a fork lift and that prevents
 slipping during handling and shipping. The Engineer will reject posts with excessively
 damaged finishes.
 
 838.04 CERTIFICATION. Submit manufacturer’s certification stating
 conformance to the requirements of this section for each shipment of approved
 flexible delineator posts delivered for use on projects. Clearly state the manufacturer,
 product name, product code, and type (surface mount or ground mount) as listed in
 the Department’s List of Approved Materials. Identify the lot number(s) and quantity
 of flexible delineator posts delivered.
 838.05 ACCEPTANCE. The Department will accept flexible delineator posts
 based on verification of inclusion on the Department’s List of Approved Materials
 and compliance of the manufacturer’s certification.
 
 838—1
 
 SECTION 839  KY TYPE I GLASS BEADS
 839.01 GLASS BEADS. Use for application to reflective pavement markings.
 Conform to AASHTO M 247, moisture resistant specifications with the following
 additional requirements for gradation and percentage of rounds:
 Gradation:
 
 Sieve Size
 No. 20
 No. 30
 No. 40
 No. 50
 No. 80
 
 Percent Passing
 98-100
 70-90
 —
 0-20
 0-5
 
 Rounds:
 
 70% minimum for + 50 beads
 
 839.01.01 Sampling. The Department will obtain random samples of all shipments
 that are intended for use by State Traffic Forces at the point of delivery. The Department
 will evaluate the beads for acceptance prior to use.
 839.01.02 Testing. The Department will test according to AASHTO M 247 and the
 following.
 A) Chemical Resistance Test. Place three, 0.1 to 0.2-ounce, samples of the beads
 in separate Pyrex-glass beakers or porcelain dishes. Cover one sample with
 distilled water; one with a 3N solution of sulfuric acid; and one with a 50 percent
 solution of sodium sulfide. Examine the samples microscopically after one hour
 of immersion. Reject the beads if they darken or “frost”.
 B) Moisture Resistance Test. Place approximately 2 pounds of glass beads in a
 clean cotton bag not treated with sizing material. Immerse the bag in water,
 completely covering the beads, for approximately 30 seconds. Remove the bag
 and wring free of excess water. Hang the bag in room air for 2 hours to dry.
 Transfer the beads slowly to a clean, dry, standard (4-inch stem, and a 1/4-inch
 diameter exit) glass funnel. Accept beads that flow freely through the funnel.
 839.01.03 Approval. The Department will notify the vendor of acceptance when all
 testing is complete. The Department will evaluate beads used by the Contractor as part of
 the installed pavement marking in accordance with KM 201, KM 202, or KM 203 as
 applicable.
 
 839—1
 
 SECTION 840  RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS
 840.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers the requirements for snow-plowable
 raised pavement markers, replacement lens, and temporary surface mounted raised
 pavement markers.
 840.02 GENERAL. Use raised pavement markers conforming to the following types.
 Provide a certification from the adhesive manufacturer stating the adhesive conforms to
 the requirements of the marker manufacturer and the minimum application temperature at
 which the adhesive can be successfully applied.
 840.02.01 Type IV Markers. Type IV markers are replacement lenses (mono
 or bi-directional) for use in Type V marker castings.
 840.02.02 Type V Markers. Type V markers consist of an iron casting with a
 Type IV marker (mono or bi-directional) attached.
 840.02.03 Type IVA Markers. Type IVA markers are surface mounted lenses
 for temporary use in work zones.
 840.03 APPROVAL. The Department will approve raised pavement markers based on
 conformance to KM 64-206 and the requirements of this section.
 840.04 PACKAGING. Suitably and substantially package all materials with the name
 and address of the manufacturer and vendor, contract or purchase number, kind of
 material, trade name, and net contents plainly marked on each package.
 840.05 CERTIFICATION. Submit a manufacturer’s certification stating conformance
 to the requirements of this section for each shipment of raised pavement markers delivered
 for use on projects. Clearly state the manufacturer, product name, product code, type, and
 color as listed in the Department’s List of Approved Materials. Identify the lot number(s)
 of the raised pavement markers and adhesive(s), expiration date of the adhesive(s) and
 quantity of raised pavement markers delivered.
 840.06 ACCEPTANCE. The Department will accept raised pavement markers based
 on verification of inclusion on the Department’s List of Approved Materials, compliance
 of the manufacturer’s certification, and verification the adhesive(s) has not exceeded the
 expiration date.
 
 840—1
 
 SECTION 841 —LATEX ADMIXTURE
 841.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers Styrene-Butadiene latex admixtures for
 concrete bridge deck overlays.
 841.02 GENERAL.
 Use a certified independent laboratory to conduct testing and
 evaluation of Styrene-Butadiene latex admixtures as described in the Prequalification Test
 Program in the U.S. Department of Transportation Research Report No. FHWA-RD-78-35
 annually. Submit the certified test results along with a 5-gallon sample of the latex
 admixture to the Department’s Division of Materials. Use a latex admixture that is
 produced in the United States. Use only latex admixtures that are free of chlorides.
 841.03 APPROVAL. The Department will approve latex admixtures based upon
 conformance of the required independent laboratory data and test results obtained by the
 Department to the requirements of FHWA-RD-78-35 and this section.. Submit
 independent laboratory data conducted within one year of the date of product submittal for
 Department approval. Obtain Department approval for each latex admixture annually.
 .
 841.04 PACKAGING. Package and store the latex admixture in containers and storage
 facilities that protect the material from freezing and from temperatures above 85 °F.
 When storing outside of buildings during moderate temperatures, keep the material shaded
 and away from direct sunlight. Do not use any latex admixture exposed to freezing
 temperatures without approval from the Division of Materials.
 841.05 CERTIFICATION. Submit manufacturer’s certification stating conformance to
 the requirements of this section for each shipment of latex admixture delivered for use on
 projects. Clearly state the manufacturer, product name, and product code as listed in the
 Department’s List of Approved Materials. Identify the lot number(s), weight percent
 solids, pH, surface tension, expiration date, and quantity for each lot of latex admixture
 delivered.
 841.06 ACCEPTANCE. The Department will accept latex admixtures based on
 verification of inclusion on the Department’s List of Approved Materials and compliance
 of the manufacturer’s certification. The Department reserves the right to sample and test
 latex admixtures, at the discretion of the Engineer, in accordance with the Department’s
 Field Sampling and Testing Manual. Do not accept latex admixture that has been exposed
 to freezing temperatures.
 
 841—1
 
 SECTION 842  PAVEMENT STRIPING PAINT
 842.01 DESCRIPTION.
 This section covers quick-drying waterborne acrylic
 pavement striping paint for permanent applications.
 842.02 GENERAL. Select waterborne acrylic paint that conforms to the composition
 requirements below. Provide independent analysis data and certification for each
 formulation stating the total concentration of each heavy metal present, the test method
 used for each determination, and compliance to 40 CFR 261 for leachable heavy metals
 content.
 
 Property and Test Method
 
 PAINT COMPOSITION
 Yellow
 
 White
 
 Daytime Color (CIELAB)
 Spectrophotometer using
 illuminant D65 at 45º
 illumination and 0º
 viewing with a 2º observer
 
 L* 81.76
 a* 19.79
 b* 89.89
 Maximum allowable
 variation 4.0∆E*
 
 L* 93.51
 a* -1.01
 b* 0.70
 Maximum allowable
 variation 4.0∆E*
 
 Nighttime Color (CIELAB)
 Spectrophotometer using
 illuminant A at 45º
 illumination and 0º viewing
 with a 2º observer
 Heavy Metals Content
 TiO2
 ASTM D 4764
 VOC
 ASTM D 2369 and D 4017
 Contrast Ratio
 (at 15 mils wft.)
 
 L* 86.90
 a* 24.80
 b* 95.45
 Maximum allowable
 variation 4.0∆E*
 Comply with 40 CFR 261
 NA
 
 L* 93.45
 a* -0.79
 b* 0.43
 Maximum allowable
 variation 4.0∆E*
 Comply with 40 CFR 261
 10% by wt. of pigment min.
 
 1.25-lb/gal max.
 
 1.25-lb/gal max.
 
 0.97
 
 0.99
 
 842.03 MANUFACTURER’S TESTING. Perform testing for Daytime and Nighttime
 Color, Contrast Ratio, Titanium Dioxide (white paints) and Volatile Organic Content
 (VOC) on each lot of waterborne acrylic paint to be delivered for use on projects.
 842.04 SAMPLING. The Department will obtain samples of waterborne acrylic paint
 for compliance testing to the requirements of this section in accordance with the
 Department’s Materials Field Sampling Manual.
 842.05 CERTIFICATION. Submit manufacturer’s certification stating conformance
 to the requirements of this section for each shipment of waterborne acrylic paint delivered
 for use on projects. Clearly state the manufacturer, product name, product code, lot
 number(s), expiration date, color, sampling method, test results of manufacturer required
 testing, and quantity delivered.
 842.06 ACCEPTANCE. The Department will accept waterborne acrylic paint based on
 compliance of the manufacturer’s certification and conformance of test results
 obtained by the Department to the requirements of this section.
 842.07 ACCEPTANCE
 PROCEDURES
 FOR
 NON-SPECIFICATION
 PAVEMENT STRIPING PAINT. When non-specification paint is inadvertently
 
 842—1
 
 incorporated into the work the Department will accept the material with a reduction in
 pay. The percentage deduction is cumulative based on its compositional properties, but
 will not exceed 60 percent. The Department will calculate the payment reduction on the
 unit bid price for the routes where the non-specification paint was used. Do not accept
 waterborne acrylic paint with a Daytime or Nighttime color variation greater than 6.0ΔE*
 or if the cumulative deduction exceeds 60 percent.
 
 PAVEMENT STRIPING PAINT REDUCTION SCHEDULE
 Nonconforming
 Property
 
 Reduction Rate
 
 Color
 4.1ΔE* to
 6.0ΔE*
 10%
 
 Heavy
 Metals
 
 TiO
 
 60%
 
 10
 %
 
 842—2
 
 VOC
 
 Contrast
 
 60%
 
 10%
 
 2
 
 SECTION 843  GEOTEXTILE FABRICS
 843.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers requirements for geotextile fabrics for
 slope protection and channel lining, underdrains, subgrade or embankment foundation
 stabilization, and drainage blankets.
 843.01.01 Geotextile Fabric. Use either woven or non-woven fabric consisting only
 of long chain polymeric filaments or yarns such as polypropylene, polyethylene, polyester,
 polyamide, or polyvinylidene-chloride formed into a stable network such that the
 filaments or yarns retain their relative position to each other. Use fabric that is inert to
 commonly encountered chemicals and free of defects or flaws significantly affecting its
 physical or filtering properties. Use circular-knit geotextile conforming to ASTM D 6707
 for perforated pipe socks.
 Ensure that the fabric, except wrapping placed directly against perforated pipe, is
 formed in widths of at least 6 feet. When necessary, sew sheets of fabric together to form
 required fabric widths. Sew the sheets of fabric together at the point of manufacture or
 other approved locations.
 The geotextile manufacturer is responsible for establishing and maintaining a quality
 control program to ensure compliance with this section. The manufacturer must
 participate in the National Transportation Product Evaluation Program (NTEP) for
 Geotextiles and Geosynthetics.
 A) Packaging. During all periods of shipment and storage, wrap the fabric in a
 heavy duty protective covering to protect the fabric from direct sunlight,
 ultraviolet rays, temperatures greater than 140 °F, mud, dirt, dust, and debris.
 B) Physical Requirements. Conform to the following applicable table as specified
 for each use.
 C) Acceptance. Obtain the Department’s approval for all material before
 incorporating it into the project.
 TYPE I FABRIC
 GEOTEXTILES FOR SLOPE PROTECTION AND CHANNEL LINING
 Property
 Grab Strength (lbs)
 Elongation (%)
 Sewn Seam Strength(2) (lbs)
 Puncture Strength (lbs)
 Trapezoid Tear (lbs)
 Apparent Opening Size
 U.S. Std. Sieve
 Permeability (cm/s)
 Ultraviolet Degradation
 at 500 hours
 Flow Rate
 (gal./min./ft2)
 
 Minimum Value(1)
 200
 15
 180
 80
 50
 Sieve U.S. #40
 
 Test Method
 ASTM D 4632
 ASTM D 4632
 ASTM D 4632
 ASTM D 4833
 ASTM D 4533
 ASTM D 4751
 
 0.004
 70% strength
 retained for all classes
 20
 
 ASTM D 4491
 ASTM D 4355
 
 843—1
 
 ASTM D 4491
 
 TYPE II FABRIC
 GEOTEXTILES FOR UNDERDRAINS
 (except pavement edge drains)
 Property
 Minimum Value(1)
 Grab Strength (lbs)
 80
 Elongation (%)
 N/A
 Sewn Seam Strength(2) (lbs)
 70
 Puncture Strength (lbs)
 25
 Trapezoid Tear (lbs)
 25
 Apparent Opening Size
 Sieve U.S. #50
 U.S. Std. Sieve
 Permeability (cm/s)
 0.010
 Ultraviolet Degradation
 70% strength
 at 150 hours
 retained for all classes
 Flow Rate
 50
 (gal./min./ft2)
 
 Test Method
 ASTM D 4632
 ASTM D 4632
 ASTM D 4632
 ASTM D 4833
 ASTM D 4533
 ASTM D 4751
 ASTM D 4491
 ASTM D 4355
 ASTM D 4491
 
 TYPE III FABRIC
 GEOTEXTILES FOR SUBGRADE OR EMBANKMENT
 STABILIZATION
 Property
 Grab Strength (lbs)
 Elongation (%)
 Sewn Seam Strength(2) (lbs)
 Puncture Strength (lbs)
 Trapezoid Tear (lbs)
 Apparent Opening Size
 U.S. Std. Sieve
 Permeability (cm/s)
 Ultraviolet Degradation at
 150 hours
 Flow Rate
 (gal./min./ft2)
 
 Minimum Value(1)
 180
 N/A
 160
 67
 67
 U.S. #40
 
 Test Method
 ASTM D 4632
 ASTM D 4632
 ASTM D 4632
 ASTM D 4632
 ASTM D 4533
 ASTM D 4751
 
 0.002
 70% strength
 retained for all classes
 7
 
 ASTM D 4491
 ASTM D 4355
 
 843—2
 
 ASTM D 4491
 
 TYPE IV FABRIC
 GEOTEXTILES FOR EMBANKMENT DRAINAGE BLANKETS
 AND PAVEMENT EDGE DRAINS
 Property
 Minimum Value(1)
 Test Method
 Grab Strength (lbs)
 180
 ASTM D 4632
 Elongation (%)
 N/A
 ASTM D 4632
 Sewn Seam Strength(2) (lbs)
 160
 ASTM D 4632
 Puncture Strength (lbs)
 80
 ASTM D 4833
 Trapezoid Tear (lbs)
 50
 ASTM D 4533
 Apparent Opening Size
 U.S. #50
 ASTM D 4751
 U.S. Std. Sieve
 Permeability (cm/s)
 0.008
 ASTM D 4491
 Ultraviolet Degradation
 70% strength
 ASTM D 4355
 at 150 hours
 retained for all classes
 Flow Rate
 40
 ASTM D 4491
 (gal./min./ft2)
 TYPE V
 HIGH STRENGTH GEOTEXTILE FABRIC
 Property
 Minimum Value(1)
 Test Method
 Grab Strength (lbs)
 500
 ASTM D 4632
 Elongation (%)
 15
 ASTM D 4632
 Sewn Seam Strength(2) (lbs)
 500
 ASTM D 4632
 Puncture Strength (lbs)
 1250
 ASTM D 6241
 Trapezoid Tear (lbs)
 180
 ASTM D 4533
 Apparent Opening Size
 U.S. #30
 ASTM D 4751
 U.S. Std. Sieve
 Permittivity (1/s)
 0.15
 ASTM D 4491
 Ultraviolet Degradation
 70% strength
 ASTM D 4355
 at 150 hours
 retained for all classes
 (1)
 Minimum. Use value in weaker principal direction. All numerical values
 represent minimum average roll value (i.e., test results from any sampled roll
 in a lot shall meet or exceed the minimum values in the table).
 (2)
 Values apply to both field and manufactured seams.
 843.01.02 Acceptance Procedures for Non-Specification Fabric. Ensure that all
 geotextile fabric conforms to the requirements of this section. However, when nonspecification geotextile fabric is inadvertently incorporated into the work before
 completion of testing, the Department may accept the material with a reduction in pay,
 provided the failure is marginal and will not cause poor performance. When the failure is
 excessive, then remove the geotextile fabric, and replace it unless the Engineer determines
 that the geotextile fabric can remain in place. The Department will apply the largest
 payment reduction when the material fails to meet more than one specification
 requirement. The Department will calculate the payment reduction on the invoice cost of
 the material delivered at the project site. The Department will reject geotextile fabric that
 fails and has not been incorporated into the work.
 
 843—3
 
 AOS PAYMENT REDUCTION
 #35 - #40 or #45 - #50
 Glass Beads Passing
 Fabric as Applicable
 Reduction Rate
 
 0-5
 
 6-10
 
 11-15
 
 16-20
 
 21 or more
 
 0%
 
 20%
 
 30%
 
 40%
 
 *
 
 GRAB STRENGTH PAYMENT REDUCTION
 (The Department will use the lowest value of MACHINE and CROSS for the reduction calculation)
 
 % of Requirement
 Reduction Rate
 
 % of Requirement
 Reduction Rate
 
 100% or more
 0%
 
 90-99%
 25%
 
 75-89%
 40%
 
 74% or Less
 *
 
 ELONGATION PAYMENT REDUCTION
 (TYPE I FABRIC ONLY)
 100% or more
 90-99%
 75-89%
 0%
 25%
 40%
 
 74% or Less
 *
 
 SEWN SEAM STRENGTH PAYMENT REDUCTION
 % of Requirement
 Reduction Rate
 
 100% or more
 0%
 
 90-99%
 25%
 
 75-89%
 40%
 
 74% or Less
 *
 
 FLOW RATE PAYMENT REDUCTION
 % of Requirement
 100% or more
 90-99%
 75-89%
 74% or Less
 Reduction Rate
 0%
 25%
 40%
 *
 *Remove and replace the fabric unless the Engineer determines the fabric can
 remain in place at a 100% reduction rate.
 843.01.03 Fastener Pins. The Engineer will accept fastener pins based on visual
 inspection on the project. Conform to the following:
 A) Underdrain Systems. Use pins that are formed of No. 9 diameter or heavier
 steel wire and are at least one foot long with a 4-inch right angle bend on one
 end.
 B) Slope Protection, Channel Lining, Subgrade and Embankment Foundation
 Stabilization, and Wrapped Aggregate Drainage Blankets. Provide fastener
 pins that are formed of 3/16 inch diameter or heavier steel, pointed at one end,
 with a head on the opposite end to retain a washer with a minimum diameter of
 1 1/2 inches.
 
 843—4
 
 SECTION 844  MINERAL ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE
 844.01 FLY ASH REQUIREMENTS. For fly ash added to concrete mixtures as a
 separate ingredient, conform to ASTM C 618, Class F or Class C, except ensure that the
 loss on ignition does not exceed 3.0 percent.
 Concrete containing Class C fly ash may reduce sulfate resistance. Susceptibility to
 sulfate attack relates to the resistance factor, R. The value of R is defined as the ratio,
 (CaO -5.0)/(Fe2O3), as determined from the fly ash oxide analysis. A resistance factor (R)
 greater than 3.0 indicates a reduction in sulfate resistance. Do not use Class C fly ash
 having an R ratio greater than 3.0 in concrete where sulfate attack is possible. Identify the
 locations on the project where concrete containing Class C fly ash is to be used, and obtain
 the Engineer’s approval of its use before beginning concrete work.
 844.02
 
 APPROVAL.
 
 844.02.01 Fly Ash. Select from the Department’s List of Approved Materials for fly
 ash sources. To be placed on the list, furnish samples and ASTM C 618 test data
 developed over the previous 3 months, and conform to the requirements in KM 64-325.
 844.02.02 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace (GGBF) Slag. The Department’s
 Division of Materials maintains a list of approved GGBF Slag sources by producer.
 Furnish samples and ASTM C 989 test data for the previous six months and meet the
 following requirements to obtain approval.
 1)
 
 2)
 3)
 
 Submit the GGBF slag supplier’s quality control program to the Engineer for
 approval. The GGBF slag delivered to the project shall have uniform properties
 complying with this specification. Laboratories performing tests on GGBF slag
 for conformance to ASTM C 989 shall participate in the laboratory evaluation
 program conducted by the Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory of
 ASTM.
 Submit certification with each shipment of GGBF slag to document its
 compliance with this specification and ASTM C 989.
 Submit actual ASTM C 989 test results for fineness, air content, slag activity
 index, sulfide sulfur content, and sulfate ion content with each shipment.
 
 The Department reserves the right to perform all sampling and testing on GGBF slag
 that it deems necessary or desirable.
 844.02.03 Microsilica. The Department’s Division of Materials maintains a list of
 approved microsilica admixtures by brand name and manufacturer. Furnish samples and
 AASHTO M 307 test data for the previous six months and meet the following
 requirements to obtain approval:
 1)
 
 2)
 3)
 
 Submit the microsilica supplier’s quality control program to the Engineer for
 approval. The microsilica delivered to the project shall have uniform properties
 complying with this specification. Laboratories performing tests on microsilica
 for conformance to AASHTO M 307 shall participate in the laboratory
 evaluation program conducted by the Cement and Concrete Reference
 Laboratory of ASTM.
 Submit certification with each shipment of microsilica to document its
 compliance with this specification and AASHTO 307.
 Submit actual AASHTO M 307 tests results for the chemical and physical
 requirements with each shipment.
 
 844—1
 
 844.03 NON-SPECIFICATION FLY ASH. When either Class C or Class F sampled
 fly ash fails to meet specification requirements for loss on ignition (LOI), but the Engineer
 determines that concrete produced using the fly ash meets requirements for entrained air
 and compressive strength, the Engineer will reduce the price by 5.0 percent of the
 Contractor’s invoice cost of the fly ash for each 0.1 percent that the fly ash LOI is above
 3.0 percent. This procedure is intended to provide for acceptance at a reduced Contract
 price when material is discovered to not meet specification requirements after work is
 performed, and is not intended as a means to utilize non-specification material.
 The Engineer will accept fly ash on the basis of certification and being from an
 approved source and project samples passing the applicable requirements of ASTM C 618
 and/or ASTM C 593. Some variability or small departures from the requirements do not
 adversely affect properties of the finished product enough for removal and replacement.
 Therefore, the Department will use the following pay tables when deviations occur. When
 a sample fails more than one test, the Department will impose the largest reduction rate.
 The Department will calculate the payment reduction on the invoice cost of the fly ash
 delivered to the concrete plant or to the project site.
 
 FINENESS PAYMENT REDUCTION
 % Retained on No. 325 Sieve
 0-34
 35-40
 41-45
 Reduction Rate
 0%
 25%
 50%
 
 46 or more
 *
 
 STRENGTH ACTIVITY INDEX PAYMENT REDUCTION
 Control with Cement (%)
 75 or more
 70-74
 65-69
 64 or less
 PSI with Lime (Class F)
 800 or more
 775-799
 750-774
 749 or less
 Reduction Rate
 0%
 25%
 50%
 *
 
 AUTOCLAVE EXPANSION PAYMENT REDUCTION
 Expansion ± (%)
 0.8
 0.9
 1.0
 Reduction Rate
 0%
 25%
 50%
 
 1.1 or more
 *
 
 WATER REQUIREMENT PAYMENT REDUCTION
 105 or less 106-110 111-115
 0%
 25%
 50%
 
 116 or more
 *
 
 Control (%)
 Reduction Rate
 
 CHEMICAL REQUIREMENTS PAYMENT REDUCTION
 SiO2+Al2O3+Fe2O3 (%) (Class F)
 70 or more
 65-79
 60-64
 59 or less
 SiO2+Al2O3+Fe2O3 (%) (Class C)
 50 or more
 45-49
 40-44
 39 or less
 SO3 (%)
 0-5
 6
 7
 8 or more
 Moisture Content (%)
 0-3
 4
 5
 6 or more
 Available Alkalies as (Na2O) (%)
 0-1.5
 1.6
 1.7
 1.8 or more
 Reduction Rate
 0%
 25%
 50%
 *
 *Remove and replace finished product unless the Engineer determines that it can
 remain in place at a 100% reduction rate.
 
 844—2
 
 SECTION 845  FABRIC WRAPPED BACKFILL DRAIN
 MATERIALS
 845.01 DESCRIPTION. Place fabric wrapped backfill drains at locations where depth
 to weep hole flowline is 30 feet or less.
 845.02 FABRIC WRAPPED BACKFILL DRAIN. Select from the Departments List
 of Approved Materials. Provide Class I fabric wrapped backfill drains when the depth to
 weep hole flowline is 12 feet or less. Provide Class II fabric wrapped backfill drains when
 the depth to weep hole flow line is between 12 feet and 30 feet.
 845.02.01 Compressive Strength. Ensure the drain is capable of withstanding the
 following compressive load on the wide side, with a maximum deflection of 50 percent:
 Class I - 2,000 pounds per square foot.
 Class II - 5,000 pounds per square foot.
 845.02.02 Core. Use a rectangular core at least 17 inches wide, with nominal
 thickness of at least 0.7 inch, consisting of molded plastic; or of a 3-dimensional structure
 of mono-filaments bonded at their intersections; or of 3/8-inch average diameter expanded
 polystyrene beads bound together with an adhesive compound, sufficiently open to allow
 free movement of water entering through the geotextile fabric, and manufactured
 specifically for drainage applications.
 845.02.03 Wrapping. Wrap the core on all 4 sides with Type II geotextile fabric
 conforming to the requirements of Section 843, Type II.
 845.03 PACKAGING AND CARE. Wrap the drain in a protective covering to protect
 the fabric from direct sunlight, ultraviolet rays, temperatures greater than 140 °F, mud,
 dirt, dust, and debris during all periods of shipment and storage.
 Completely cover with backfill material within 14 calendar days after placement. If
 completely backfilling the drain is not feasible, cover exposed portions with approved
 material to protect the fabric from direct sunlight. Remove and replace any drain not
 backfilled or suitably covered within 14 days after placing at no expense to the
 Department.
 845.04 ACCEPTANCE. Furnish the manufacturer’s certification to the Engineer
 stating the fabric wrapped backfill drains meets all requirements herein. The Engineer
 will accept the fabric wrapped backfill drains by certification and visual inspection.
 
 845—1
 
 SECTION 846 - DURABLE WATERBORNE PAINT
 846.01 DESCRIPTION. This section covers quick-drying durable waterborne acrylic
 pavement striping paint for permanent applications. The paint shall be ready-mixed, onecomponent, 100% waterborne acrylic striping paint suitable for application on such trafficbearing surfaces as Portland cement concrete, bituminous cement concrete, asphalt, tar,
 and previously painted areas of these surfaces.
 846.02 GENERAL. Select durable waterborne acrylic paint that conforms to the
 composition requirements below. Provide independent analysis data and certification for
 each formulation stating the total concentration of each heavy metal present, the test
 method used for each determination, and compliance to 40 CFR 261 for leachable heavy
 metals content.
 The non-volatile portion of the vehicle shall be composed of a 100% acrylic polymer as
 determined by infrared spectral analysis. The acrylic resin used shall be a 100% crosslinking acrylic as evidenced by infrared peaks at wavelengths 1568, 1624, and 1672 cm-1
 with intensities equal to those produced by an acrylic resin known to be 100% crosslinking.
 
 Property and Test Method
 Daytime Color (CIELAB)
 Spectrophotometer using
 illuminant D65 at 45º
 illumination and 0º viewing with
 a 2º observer
 Nighttime Color (CIELAB)
 Spectrophotometer using
 illuminant A at 45º illumination
 and 0º viewing with a 2º observer
 Heavy Metals Content
 Titanium Dioxide
 ASTM D 4764
 VOC
 ASTM D 2369 and D 4017
 Contrast Ratio
 (at 15 mils wft)
 
 PAINT COMPOSITION
 Yellow
 L* 81.76
 a* 19.79
 b* 89.89
 Maximum allowable
 variation 4.0∆E*
 L* 86.90
 a* 24.80
 b* 95.45
 Maximum allowable
 variation 4.0∆E*
 Comply with 40 CFR 261
 NA
 1.25 lb/gal max.
 0.97
 
 White
 L* 93.51
 a* -1.01
 b* 0.70
 Maximum allowable
 variation 4.0∆E*
 L* 93.45
 a* -0.79
 b* 0.43
 Maximum allowable
 variation 4.0∆E*
 Comply with 40 CFR 261
 10% by weight of pigment
 min.
 1.25 lb/gal max.
 0.99
 
 846.03 MANUFACTURER’S TESTING. Perform testing for Daytime and Nighttime
 Color, Contrast Ratio, Titanium Dioxide (white paints) and Volatile Organic Content
 (VOC) on each lot of durable waterborne acrylic paint to be delivered for use on projects.
 846.04 SAMPLING. The Department will obtain samples of durable waterborne
 acrylic paint for compliance testing to the requirements of this section in accordance with
 the Department’s Field Sampling and Testing Manual.
 846.05
 
 CERTIFICATION. Submit manufacturer’s certification stating conformance
 
 846-1
 
 to the requirements of this section for each shipment of durable waterborne acrylic paint
 deliverer for use on projects. Clearly state the manufacturer, product name, product code,
 color, sampling method, test results of manufacturer required testing, and quantity
 delivered.
 846.06 ACCEPTANCE. The Department will accept durable waterborne acrylic paint
 based on compliance of the manufacturer’s certification and conformance of test
 
 results obtained by the Department to the requirements of this section.
 846.07 ACCEPTANCE PROCEDURES FOR NON-SPECIFICATION DURABLE
 WATERBORNE PAVEMENT STRIPING PAINT. When non-specification paint is
 inadvertently incorporated into the work the Department will accept the material with a
 reduction in pay. The percentage deduction is cumulative based on its compositional
 properties, but will not exceed 60 percent. The Department will calculate the payment
 reduction on the unit bid price for the routes where the non-specification paint was used.
 Do not accept waterborne acrylic paint with a Daytime or Nighttime color variation
 greater than 6.0ΔE*.
 DURABLE WATERBORNE PAVEMENT STRIPING PAINT REDUCTION
 SCHEDULE
 NonResin
 Color
 Contrast
 TiO2
 VOC
 Heavy
 conforming
 4.1ΔE*
 Metals
 Property
 to
 Content
 6.0ΔE*
 Reduction
 Rate
 
 60%
 
 10%
 
 10%
 
 846-2
 
 10%
 
 60%
 
 60%
 
 APPENDIX A
 TABULATION OF
 CONSTRUCTION
 TOLERANCES
 
 TABULATION OF CONSTRUCTION TOLERANCES
 
 Perform all work and furnish all materials in reasonably close conformity with the lines,
 grades, cross sections, dimensions, and material requirements, including tolerances, shown
 on the plans or indicated in the specifications. The maximum limits of tolerances listed
 below do not necessarily represent total construction acceptability, but are limits at which
 the Department may consider construction tolerances acceptable. It is intended that, in
 general, all work and materials be well within the tolerances given. The Department will
 not allow continued employment of equipment and methods which allow undue
 proportion of all work and materials approaching the tolerances limits.
 
 SECTION
 
 SUBJECT
 
 TOLERANCE
 
 109.01.03 D)
 
 Automatic printing scales
 printed weight compared to
 scale display.
 
 The printed weight is within
 60 pounds of scale display.
 
 204.03.07 A)
 
 Surface for channel lining,
 class IV.
 
 ± 6 inches from a true plane.
 
 204.03.10 1)
 
 Distance from centerline to
 ditch line in cuts and to
 shoulder line in fills.
 
 ± one foot from dimension
 shown on plans.
 
 204.03.10 1)
 
 Total width of roadbed.
 
 ± one foot at any location.
 
 204.03.10 2)
 
 Specified slope limits for
 slope surfaces between ditch
 lines or shoulder lines and
 original ground.
 
 Not to be inside specified
 slope limits more than 6
 inches nor outside specified
 slope more than one foot,
 both measured horizontally.
 
 204.03.10 3)
 
 Cut bench elevation.
 
 ± one foot of bench elevation
 established on plans or by the
 Engineer.
 
 204.03.10 5)
 
 Subgrade tolerance for roadway and drainage excavation.
 
 Complete to within ± 0.1 foot
 of designated grade at time of
 final acceptance, except when
 rock subgrade is specified, the
 tolerance is ± 0.2 foot.
 
 206.03.03
 
 Moisture content of embankment or subgrade material.
 
 ± 2% of the optimum
 moisture content as determined by KM 64-511.
 
 207.03.02
 
 Subgrade prepared for base or
 surface courses.
 
 ± 1/2 inch from specified
 crown section.
 
 302.03.06
 
 Surface of finished gravel and
 DGA base.
 
 ± 1/2 inch from specified
 cross section; ± 3/8 inch in 10
 feet at any location from the
 specified longitudinal grade.
 
 i
 
 401.02.01 H)
 
 Asphalt Binder control unit
 metering devices.
 
 ± 1% when
 accuracy.
 
 401.02.02 B)
 
 Scales for weigh box or
 hopper or for weighting
 asphalt material.
 
 Tolerance on over registration
 and under registration of not
 exceeding 0.5% of indicated
 weight when tested for
 accuracy. The change in load
 required to noticeably alter
 the position of rest of the
 indicating element(s) of a
 non-automatic
 indicating
 scale shall not be greater than
 0.1% of the nominal scale
 capacity.
 
 401.02.03
 
 Batch
 tolerances
 for
 automatic batching or proportioning hot-mix asphalt
 plants. Material:
 Batch aggregate component
 Mineral filler
 Asphalt Binder
 Zero return (aggregate)
 Zero return (asphalt materials)
 Accumulated
 weight
 of
 batches.
 
 ± 1.5% of total batch weights.
 ± 0.5% of total batch weights.
 ± 0.1% of total batch weights.
 ± 0.5% of total batch weights.
 ± 0.1% of total batch weights.
 ± 2.0% of that total batch
 weight.
 
 401.03.01
 
 Bituminous
 plant
 mixed
 pavements - JMF tolerances.
 
 See specifications for individual mixtures.
 
 403.03.06 A)
 
 Asphalt base, initial treatment
 and resurfacing projects.
 
 The rate of application shall
 not exceed designated rate by
 more than + 5%.
 
 403.03.06 B)
 
 Asphalt base, new construction payment on basis of:
 weight, or
 
 tested
 
 for
 
 Total combined thickness of
 all layers within ± 1/2 inch of
 compacted plan thickness.
 
 area.
 
 Deficient in thickness by
 more than 1/2 inch of
 compacted plan thickness.
 
 403.03.07
 
 Transverse joints in all asphalt
 courses.
 
 Deviations do not exceed
 tolerances
 described
 in
 Subsection 403.03.11 from a
 10-foot straight edge after
 joint is complete and rolled.
 
 403.03.11
 
 Surfaces of finished courses;
 asphalt plant-mixed pavements.
 
 Finished surfaces of base
 course and binder course shall
 not deviate more than ± 1/4
 inch from 10-foot straight
 edge.
 
 ii
 
 Finished surface of final
 surface course shall not
 deviate more than + 1/8 inch
 from 10-foot straight edge.
 Cross slope of all courses.
 
 Do not deviate more 1/4 inch
 in 5 feet from required cross
 slope.
 
 405.03.04
 
 Rate for applying cover
 material for asphalt seal coat.
 
 Not to exceed designated rate
 by more than 5%.
 
 407.02.02
 
 Asphalt mixture for pavement
 wedge.
 
 Asphalt binder content shall
 be maintained within ± 0.5%.
 
 408.03.01
 
 Asphalt pavement milling and
 texturing surface tolerance.
 
 Finished surfaced after final
 cut does not deviate more
 than ± 1/8 inch from a 10-foot
 straight edge and that the
 cross slope does not deviate
 more than 3/8 inch in 10 feet.
 Correct
 all
 irregularities
 exceeding these limits.
 
 501.03.04
 
 Fly ash incorporated in
 concrete mixes for JPC
 pavement.
 
 ± 2.0% of specified weight.
 
 501.03.17 D)
 
 JPC pavement; Transverse
 contraction joints.
 
 Not to deviate from true
 alignment more than 1/4 inch
 in one lane width.
 
 501.03.18 C)
 
 JPC pavement - installation of
 preformed neoprene joint
 seals.
 
 Not to be stretched more than
 5%.
 
 501.03.19
 
 JPC Pavement and Base
 Surface Tolerances. Pavement abutted by subsequent or
 JPC shoulder; edge slump
 with edge forms or tailing
 forms or fixed forms;
 
 Not to exceed 1/8 inch.
 
 Pavement not abutted by
 pavement or shoulders edge
 slump;
 
 Does not exceed 1/4 inch.
 
 High spot 6 inches or more
 from pavement edge.
 
 Do not to exceed 1/8 inch
 from a 10-foot straight edge.
 
 508.03.01
 
 508.03.02
 
 Permanent Concrete Median
 Barriers.
 Top surface cast-in-place
 barriers (fixed form).
 Top
 
 surface
 
 cast-in-place
 
 iii
 
 ± 1/4 inch when tested
 longitudinally by a 10-foot
 straight edge.
 No deviation more than 1/2
 
 barriers (slip form).
 
 inch from the line established
 by the reference wire between
 any 2 reference wire supports.
 
 511.03.01
 
 Masonry drill bits for drilling
 holes of installation of steel
 dowels into existing concrete
 by use of grout.
 
 Diameter no less than 1/8
 inch greater nor more than 1/2
 inch greater than diameter of
 dowels.
 
 601.02.14
 
 Scales for weighing water,
 aggregates, cement, and fly
 ash for concrete for structures.
 
 Within + 0.5% of net load on
 scales.
 
 601.03.03
 
 Concrete for structures airentraining admixture net air
 content (by volume).
 
 Volume of 6% ± 2% by
 volume.
 
 601.03.03
 
 Concrete for structures; accuracy of individual ingredient
 materials for each batch.
 
 ± 2.0% for aggregates.
 ± 1.0% for water & cement.
 ± 1.0% for cement in batches
 of 4 cubic yards or greater.
 ± 1.0% for total cementitious
 materials in batches of 4
 cubic yards or greater.
 0.0% to + 4.0% for cement
 in batches less than 4 cubic
 yards.
 0.0 % to + 4.0 % for total
 cementitious materials in
 batches less than 4 cubic
 yards.
 ± 3.0% for admixtures.
 
 601.03.03 B)
 
 Air content of mortar or grout.
 
 Volume of 8% ± 2.0%.
 
 601.03.03 E) 1)
 
 Measuring cement.
 
 When the weight of entire
 shipment of cement in bags
 varies more than 2% from 94
 pounds per bag. Weigh the
 cement in bulk on scales.
 
 601.03.03 E) 3)
 
 Water metering systems for
 mixing
 concrete
 for
 structures.
 
 + 1.0% of required amount of
 water per batch.
 
 601.03.08 C) 1)
 
 Truck mixing of concrete for
 structures, quantity of mixing
 water.
 
 Measure and Control to ±
 1.0%.
 
 601.03.09 A)
 
 Variation of finished surface
 of bridge seats.
 
 Not to vary more than 1/32
 inch above or below true level
 plane.
 
 601.03.18
 
 All exposed finished concrete
 surfaces unless specified elsewhere in the contract.
 
 Not to vary more than 1/4
 inch in 10-feet as measured
 from a straightedge.
 
 iv
 
 602.03.04
 
 All steel reinforcement except
 that placed in bridge decks.
 
 602.03.05
 
 Epoxy Coated Tie Wires,
 Chairs, etc.
 Film thickness of epoxy
 coating.
 Film thickness of vinyl type
 coating.
 Thickness of flexible plastic
 or vinyl coating for tie wires.
 
 604.03.08 A)
 
 604.03.08 B)
 
 ± 1/2 inch of position, and
 specified spacing. ± 1/4 inch
 of specified clearance from
 face of concrete.
 
 ± 7 mils.
 ± 10 mils.
 ± 7 mils.
 
 Bearing piles that will be
 exposed.
 Variance from vertical during
 driving.
 
 ± 1/4 inch per foot from
 vertical or batter position
 specified in the Plans.
 
 Variance from plan position
 after driving.
 
 ± 4 inches from plan position
 at the pile cut-off elevation.
 
 Stringline stretched between
 exterior piles in the exposed
 portion of the pile bent or
 group.
 
 ± 2 inches.
 
 Bearing piles that will be
 unexposed in the finished
 structure.
 Variance from vertical during
 driving.
 
 ± 1/4 inch per foot from
 vertical or batter position
 specified in the Plans.
 
 Variance from plan position
 after driving.
 
 ± 6 inches from plan position
 at the pile cut-off elevation.
 
 605.03.05 D) 2)
 
 Calibration of hydraulic jacks
 for prestressing.
 
 ± 2.0%.
 
 605.03.08
 
 Prestressed or precast concrete members dimensional
 tolerances of I-beams, box
 beams with cast-in-place slab,
 precast barrier unit, deck
 units, and piling.
 
 Refer to tables in Subsection
 605.03.08.
 
 606.02.10 C)
 
 Concrete
 bridge
 deck
 overlays; accuracy of latex
 and water meters used in
 measurement for mixing.
 
 ± 1%.
 
 606.03.18 A) 2)
 
 Concrete
 
 ± 1.5%.
 
 bridge
 
 deck
 
 v
 
 overlays;
 concrete.
 
 air
 
 content
 
 of
 
 606.03.18 A) 2)
 
 Concrete bridge deck overlays; slump of concrete.
 
 ± 1/4 inch.
 
 608.03.16
 
 Concrete bridges. Lines of
 finished concrete, except
 bridge slabs, and precast piles.
 
 ± 1/4 inch per 10 feet or vary
 from plan lines more than
 0.1% of the distance between
 extremities of the unit
 considered.
 
 609.03.03
 
 Reinforced concrete bridge
 slabs; placement of steel
 reinforcement.
 
 ± 1/4 inch vertically and
 horizontally of the position
 shown.
 
 609.03.08
 
 Reinforced concrete bridge
 slabs; slab surface variations.
 
 ± 1/8 inch in 10 feet.
 
 609.05
 
 Reinforced concrete ridge
 slabs; thickness of concrete
 cover over top mat of steel
 reinforcement.
 
 See schedule for Adjusted
 Quality for Depth of Cover
 Deficiency
 Subsection
 609.05.
 
 612.03.06
 
 Field assembled structural
 plate pipes; vertical elongation.
 
 ± 25% of specified elongation.
 
 612.03.07 A)
 
 Asphalt paving for pipe and
 pipe arches; aggregate and
 asphalt binder temperature.
 
 ± 60 °F.
 
 612.03.07 B)
 
 Concrete paving for pipe and
 pipe arches; uniform pavement thickness.
 
 ± 1/2 inch.
 
 703.03.01 B)
 
 Slope protection; reinforced
 concrete slope wall.
 
 No surface variation from a
 true plane of more than 1/2
 inch per 4 feet.
 
 703.03.01 C)
 
 Slope protection; cyclopean
 stone riprap; finished slope.
 
 No surface variation of more
 than 6 inches from a true
 plane.
 
 703.03.01 D)
 
 Slope protection; crushed
 aggregate slop protection.
 
 No surface variation of more
 than 1 1/2 inches per 4 feet
 from a true plane.
 
 703.03.02 A)
 
 Slope protection; channel
 lining classes II and III.
 
 No surface variation of more
 than 3 inches from a true
 plane.
 
 703.03.02 B)
 
 Slope protection;
 lining class IV.
 
 No surface variation of more
 than 6 inches from a true
 plane.
 
 channel
 
 vi
 
 705.03
 
 Cored
 hole
 drainage
 connector; diameter of hole
 shall be equal to the outside
 diameter of pipe.
 
 vii
 
 + 1/2 inch.
 
 APPENDIX B
 INDEX
 
 Abbreviations, 101—1
 Abutments, Concrete Bridges, 608—2
 Accelerating Admixtures, 802—1
 Acceptance, 105—7, 109—9
 Activity Bar Chart, 108—2
 Adjusting
 Small Structures, 710—3
 Adjusting Rings, Manhole, 710—3
 Admixtures for Concrete, 601—1, 802—1
 Accelerating, 802—1
 Air-Entraining, 802—1
 Approval, 802—1
 General, 601—15
 Latex Bridge Overlays, 841—1
 Requirements, 802—1
 Water-Reducing, 802—1
 Water-Reducing and Accelerating,
 802—1
 Water-Reducing and Retarding, 802—1
 Water-Reducing, High Range, 802—1
 Water-Reducing, High Range and
 Retarding, 802—1
 Admixtures for JPC Pavement, Base, and
 Shoulders, 501—3
 Aggregate
 Lightweight, 805—3
 Aggregates, Coarse. See Coarse
 Aggregates
 Aggregates, Fine. See Fine Aggregates
 Agricultural Limestone, 827—1
 Air Content
 Concrete, 601—8
 Air Entraining Admixtures, 802—1
 Air Pollution, 107—1
 Altered Quantities, 109—6
 Alternate Equipment, 108—5
 Alternate Methods, 108—5
 Aluminum Bridge Railing, 815—1
 Aluminum Sign Substrates, 833—1
 Aluminum, Material Requirements, 813—
 1
 AM Best, 103—1
 Anchor Bars
 Channel Lining, Class IA, 703—1
 Anchor Bolts, 608—2
 Material Requirements, 811—1
 Anchorages and Bearings
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—15
 Annealing
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—13
 Apparel, 107—1
 Apron Walls, Concrete Box Culverts,
 610—1
 Arrow Panels, 112—4
 
 As Built Plans
 Definition, 101—6
 Asbestos, 202—1
 Asphalt Coating
 Culvert Pipe, 701—3
 Metal Pipe, 810—2
 Asphalt Curing Seal, 406—1
 Asphalt Equipment
 Pavers, 403—1
 Plant, 401—1
 Rollers, 403—1
 Transport Equipment, 403—1
 Asphalt Field Technician, 403—1
 Asphalt Mastic, 807—2
 Asphalt Materials, 806—1
 Acceptance, General, 806—5
 Acceptance, Non-specification
 Materials, 806—6
 Coating and Paving for Metal Pipe,
 Pipe Arches, and Arches, 806—4
 Emulsified Asphalt, 806—2
 Field Tolerances, 806—5
 Liquid Asphalt for Cold Patching
 Mixtures, 806—5
 PG Binders, 806—1
 PG Binders, Modification, 806—2
 Polymer Asphalt Emulsions, 806—4
 Price Adjustment, 109—10
 Sampling, 806—1
 Time Limitation on Approvals, 806—6
 Asphalt Materials for Mulch, 827—3
 Asphalt Mixture, 403—1
 Acceptance Testing, 402—2
 Asphalt Seal Coat, 405—1
 Asphalt Treated Drainage Blanket,
 402—3
 Coarse Aggregates, 805—3
 Compaction, 403—8
 Composition, 403—3
 Control and Acceptance, 402—1
 F and t Testing, 402—5
 Fine Aggregates, 804—2
 JMF, 402—1
 Joints, 403—6
 Leveling and Wedging, 402—3, 403—
 7
 Lot, 402—1
 Lot Pay Adjustment, 402—9, 402—10,
 402—13
 Mineral Filler, 412—1
 Mix Design Criteria, 403—4
 Moisture Content, 403—4
 
 Open-Graded Friction Course, 402—3,
 404—1
 Overlaying, Breaking and Seating JPC
 Pavement, 504—2
 Pavement Marking, 403—10
 Pavement Wedge, 402—3, 407—1
 Payment, 402—6
 RAP, 402—3, 409—1
 Sampling, 402—2
 Sand Asphalt Surface, 402—3
 Scratch Course, 402—3, 403—8
 Seasonal and Weather Limitations,
 403—2
 Setup Period, 402—1
 Shoulder, 402—3
 Specialty Mixtures, 402—3
 Spreading and Finishing, 403—4
 Stone-Matrix Asphalt, 412—1
 Surface Preparation, 403—2
 Surface Tolerances, 403—9
 Testing, 402—2
 Thickness, 402—6, 403—5
 Transporting, 403—4
 Unsatisfactory Work, 402—3
 Verification Testing, 402—4
 Weight, 402—6
 Asphalt Mountable Medians, 411—1
 Asphalt Pavement
 Milling and Texturing, 408—1
 Overlay, Breaking and Seating JPC
 Pavement, 504—2
 Ride Quality, 410—1
 Asphalt Paving
 Structural Plate Soil Interaction
 Structures, 612—2
 Asphalt Plant, 401—1
 Automatic Batching, 401—5
 Batching Plant, 401—3
 Dryer Drum Mixing Plant, 401—5
 Laboratory, 401—1
 Mix Design Technologist, 402—1
 Mixing and Holding, 401—7
 Plant Technologist, 402—1
 Asphalt Prime Coat, 406—1
 Asphalt Release Agent, 403—1
 Asphalt Seal Coat, 405—1
 Asphalt Tack Coat, 406—1
 Asphalt Wedge Curbs, 411—1
 Asphalt-Treated Drainage Blanket
 (ATDB), 303—1
 Assembling Structural Steel Bridges,
 607—15
 ATDB, 303—1
 Authorized Adjustments
 Definition, 101—6
 
 Embankment-in-Place, 204—5
 Roadway Excavation, 204—5
 Backfill Drain, Fabric Wrapped, 845—1
 Backfilling
 Concrete Box Culverts, 610—2
 Concrete Entrance Pavements, 505—2
 Concrete Headwalls, 610—2
 Concrete Sidewalks, 505—2
 Concrete Steps, 505—2
 Flowable Fill, 601—20
 Initial Pipe Backfill, 701—5
 Material for Pipe, 701—2
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box
 Culvert Sections, 611—3
 Underdrains (except edge drains),
 704—2
 Bar Chart, 108—2
 Bar Mats
 Material Requirements, 811—1
 Barbed Wire, Material Requirements,
 816—1
 Barrels, 112—1
 Barricades, 112—1
 Barrier Median, Concrete (Standard),
 507—1
 Barrier Wall
 Slip Forming, 601—25
 Temporary, 112—5
 Barrier, Temporary Concrete Median. See
 Median Barrier, Temporary Concrete
 Barriers, Permanent Concrete Median. See
 Median Barriers, Permanent Concrete
 Base
 Crushed stone, 302—1
 Dense Graded Aggregate, 302—1
 PCC. See JPC Pavement
 Tolerances, 302—3
 Traffic-Bound Base, 301—1
 Base Course
 Definition, 101—11
 Bases
 Sign, 715—2
 Batch Plant
 Concrete, 601—3
 Beacons, Traffic Control, 835—6
 Bearing Pads, 822—1
 Bearing Piles
 Allowable Variation, 604—5
 Bearing Values, 604—4
 Build-Ups, 604—3
 Caps, 604—2
 Cast-In-Place, 604—2
 Design Modifications, 604—5
 Driving Equipment, 604—1
 Excavation, 604—2
 
 Exposed, Allowable Variations, 604—5
 Extensions, 604—3
 General, 604—1
 Limitations of Use, 604—2
 Methods of Driving and Placing, 604—
 3
 Ordering, 604—5
 Pointing, 604—2
 Precast and Prestressed, 604—2
 Preparation for Driving, 604—2
 Protection, 604—5
 Splices, 604—3
 Static Load Tests, 604—4
 Steel, 604—2
 Storage and Handling, 604—2
 Test Piles, 604—3
 Unexposed, Allowable Variation,
 604—5
 Unused Pile Lengths, 604—5
 Bearing Values
 Bearing Piles, 604—4
 Bearings and Anchorages
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—15
 Bedding
 Pipe, Fine Aggregate, 804—4
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box
 Culvert Sections, 611—2
 Bedding for Culvert Pipe, 701—3
 Bent Plates
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—12
 Best Management Practice (BMP)
 Definition, 101—6
 Developing, 213—1
 Inspection, 213—2
 Maintaining, 213—2
 Plan, 108—4
 Seeding, 212—2
 Bidding, 102—1
 Bid Proposal, 102—2, 102—3
 Bid Proposal Form, 102—1
 Capacity Rating, 102—1
 Computer, 102—2
 Disqualification, 102—4
 Guaranty, 102—3
 Irregular Bid, 102—3
 Prequalification, 102—1
 Process Agent, 102—4
 Quantities, 102—2
 Withdrawal, 102—3
 Binder
 Durable Pavement Striping, 714—1
 Price Adjustment, 806—1
 Blast Cleaning, 107—2
 Blasting, 108—4, 112—5
 General, 107—5
 
 Plan, 107—5
 Presplitting, 204—2
 Bluetops, 201—1
 BMP
 Definition, 101—6
 Plan, 108—4
 Bolt
 Reuse of ASTM A 325 bolts, 607—8
 Tension, 607—6
 Bolt Holes, Structural Steel Bridges,
 607—2
 Bolts
 Connections, Structural Steel Bridges,
 607—5
 Steel, 813—1
 Timber Structures, 829—1
 Bonding, 103—1
 Boring and Jacking of Encasement Pipe
 General, 706—1
 Materials, 706—1
 Borrow Excavation
 General, 205—1
 Seed and Protect, 205—2
 Brace Wire, Material Requirements,
 816—1
 Breaking and Seating JPC Pavement
 Breaking, Test Section, 504—1
 Edge Drains, 504—2
 Equipment, 504—1
 General, 504—1
 Placement of Asphalt, 504—2
 Seating, 504—2
 Size Requirements, 504—1
 Brick, 824—1
 Bridge
 Definition, 101—6
 Bridge Barrier Wall
 Slip Forming, 601—25
 Bridge Deck Restoration and
 Waterproofing with Concrete Overlays
 Latex Admixture, 841—1
 Bridge Decks, Reinforced Concrete. See
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs
 Bridge End Object Marker, 718—1
 Bridge Painting. See Structural Steel
 Coatings
 Bridge Planking. See Wood Products
 Bridge Railing, Cast Aluminum, 815—1
 Bridge Restoration and Waterproofing
 with Concrete Overlays
 Blast Cleaning, 606—3
 Bridge End Transitions, 606—5
 Brooming, 606—4
 Cleaning, 606—2
 Damage to Structures, 606—6
 
 Epoxy-Sand Slurry, 606—4
 Equipment, 606—1
 Expansion Dam Treatment, 606—5
 Field welding, 606—4
 Full Depth Patching, 606—3
 General, 606—1
 Hydrodemolition, 606—3
 Joints, Cleaning, 606—5
 Joints, Sealing, 606—5
 Latex Overlays, Existing Bridges,
 606—6
 Latex Overlays, New Structures, 606—
 8
 Material Hauling, 606—5
 Materials, 606—1
 Mixing Concrete, 606—4
 Partial-Depth Patching, 606—4
 Placing Concrete, 606—4
 Removal of Concrete, 606—2
 Restoration of Reinforcement, 606—2
 Scheduling, 606—2
 Thickness Deficiency, Price
 Adjustment, 606—9
 Unacceptable Work, 606—6
 Weather Limitations, 606—2
 Bridges
 Concrete. See Concrete Bridges
 Removal, 203—1
 Structural Steel. See Structural Steel
 Bridges
 Brush Barriers, 202—1, 212—1
 Build-Ups
 Bearing Piles, 604—3
 Burlap Cloth, 823—1
 Burlap Drag
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—6
 Burning, 107—2, 202—1
 Fire Plan, 107—2
 Butyl Rubber Sealants
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box
 Culvert Sections, 611—2
 Cable Markers, 716—5, 723—4
 Calcium Chloride, 825—1
 Calendar Day
 Contract Time, 108—7
 Definition, 101—6
 Prosecution of Work, 108—5
 Camber
 Box Culverts, 611—2
 Falsework and Forms, 601—25
 Camera Inspection
 Underdrains, 704—4
 Camera Testing
 Equipment Requirements, 704—1
 
 Caps
 For Piles, 604—2
 Cast Aluminum Bridge Railing, 815—1
 Casting
 Prestressed and Precast Concrete
 Products, 605—3
 Castings for Right-of-Way Markers,
 813—1
 Cast-In-Place (CIP), Retaining wall,
 613—2
 Catch Basins. See Small Drainage
 Structures
 Filling and Capping. See Filling and
 Capping Abandonded Underground
 Structures
 Cement
 General, 601—1, 801—2
 Mills, 801—1
 Cement Factor
 Concrete, 601—8
 Cement Stabilized Roadbed. See
 Chemically Stabilized
 Roadbed:General
 Cement Treated Drainage Blanket, 303—1
 Certification
 Prestress Concrete Plants, Special
 Requirements, 605—3
 Prestressed and Precast Plants, 605—1
 Quantities, 109—5
 Certification of Materials, 106—3
 Certified Welder, 106—4
 Chain Link Fencing Materials
 Barbed Wire, 817—1
 Brace Connections, 817—1
 Fabric, 817—1
 Fabric Ties, 817—1
 General, 817—1
 Hog Rings and Tension Wire, 817—1
 Post Caps, 817—1
 Posts, Rails, Gate Frames, and
 Expansion Sleeves, 817—1
 Change in Quantities, 104—1
 Changeable Message Signs, 112—1
 Channel Change
 General, 206—1
 Planting, 724—1
 Channel Lining
 Class IA, 703—2
 Class II, 703—2
 Class III, 703—2
 Class IV, 204—2, 703—2
 General, 703—2
 Geotextile, 214—1
 Gradation, 805—6
 Materials, 703—1
 
 Mattress Units, 703—2
 Channel Preservation, 603—1
 Character of Work
 Change in, 104—1
 Chemically Stabilized Roadbed, 208—1
 Compaction, 208—3
 Curing, 208—3
 Materials, 208—1
 Mixing, 208—2
 Temperature and Weather Lmitations,
 208—1
 Claims, 105—9, 107—6
 Clean Cross Drains, 209—2
 Cleaning Steel Bridges (Maintenance). See
 Maintenance Cleaning and Painting
 Steel Bridges
 Clearing and Grubbing
 Clearing Plans, 107—2
 General, 202—1
 Clothing, 107—1
 Coal, 104—3, 204—2
 Coarse Aggregate
 Asphalt Mixtures, Finer Than No. 200
 (seals), 805—4
 Channel Lining, Class IA, 805—6
 Channel Lining, Class II, 805—6
 Channel Lining, Class IV, 805—6
 Channel Lining, General, 805—6
 Crushed Stone Base (CSB)
 Materials Requirement, 805—4
 Dense Graded Aggregate (DGA),
 805—4
 Free Draining Bedding and Backfill,
 805—4
 Granular Embankment, 805—5
 Maintenance, 805—6
 Non-specification Gradations, 805—6
 Reinforced Fill Material, General,
 805—5
 Rock Drainage Blanket, 805—5
 Slope Protection, Crushed Aggregate,
 805—6
 Slope Protection, General, 805—6
 Slope Protection, Stone for Gabions,
 805—6
 Structure Granular Backfill, 805—5
 Surfacing, 805—6
 Traffic Bound Base, 805—6
 Underdrains, 805—5
 Coarse Aggregates, 805—1
 Approval, 805—1
 Asphalt Mixtures and Seals,
 Absorption, 805—3
 Asphalt Mixtures and Seals, Crushed
 Particles, 805—4
 
 Asphalt Mixtures and Seals, General,
 805—3
 Asphalt Mixtures, Flat and Elongated,
 805—4
 Asphalt Mixtures, Polish-Resistant
 Aggregate, 805—4
 Concrete, Bridge Deck, 805—3
 Concrete, General, 805—2
 Concrete, JPC, 805—3
 Concrete, Lightweight Aggregate,
 805—3
 Concrete, Precast, 805—3
 Erodible or Unstable Material, 805—2
 General Requirements, 805—1
 Gradation, 805—2
 Physical Properties, 805—2
 Sampling and Testing, 805—17
 Shale, 805—1
 Soundness, 805—1
 Cofferdams
 Foundation Seals, 603—3
 General, 603—3
 Compaction
 Asphalt Pavement, 403—8
 Chemically Stabilized Roadbed, 208—
 3
 Crushed Stone Base (CSB), 302—1
 Dense Grade Aggregate (DGA), 302—
 
 1
 Embankment, 206—2
 Option A, 403—9
 Option B, 403—9
 Subgrade, 207—1
 Completion Date, 108—7
 Comprehensive Final Inspection, 105—8
 Compressive Strength
 Concrete, 601—8
 Department Testing, 601—13
 Concrete
 Admixtures, 601—1, 601—15, 802—1
 Air Content by Class, 601—8
 Artificial Heating, 601—21
 Barrier, Temporary, 112—1, 509—1
 Barriers, Permanent, 508—1
 Cement Factor by Class, 601—8
 Classes, 601—8, 601—14
 Compressive Strength by Class, 601—8
 Consolidation, 601—18
 Construction Joints, 601—21
 Construction Requirements, 601—5
 Curbs and Gutters, 506—1
 Curing, 601—30
 Curing, Blankets, 601—31
 Curing, Wet, 601—30
 Delivery, 601—15
 
 Entrance Pavements, 505—1
 Equipment, 601—1
 Falsework, 601—22
 Fine Aggregates, 804—1
 Flowable Fill, 601—9
 Fly Ash, 601—11
 Forms, 601—1
 General, 601—1
 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace
 (GGBF) Slag, 601—11
 Grout, 601—9
 Handling Materials, 601—5
 Identification Stencil, 601—34
 JPC Pavement 24/48/72, 502—1
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—1
 Materials, 601—1
 Measuring Proportions, 601—13
 Medians, 507—1
 Microsilica, 601—11
 Mineral Admixtures, 601—11
 Mix Design, 601—6
 Mix Requirements, 601—8
 Mixing, 601—16
 Mortar, 601—9
 Opening to Traffic, 601—27
 Placing, 601—17
 Placing Under Water, 601—19
 Prepour Meeting, 601—5
 Primary Uses, 601—14
 Producer Responsibilities, 601—6
 Proportioning Requirements, 601—8
 Records, 601—6
 Removal of Falsework, 601—25
 Removal of Forms, 601—25
 Scales, 601—2
 Seal, 601—20
 Sealing and Patching With Epoxy
 Resin, 510—1
 Self-Consolidating, 601—9
 Sidewalks, 505—1
 Significant Loads, Time Required,
 601—29
 Slope Wall, 703—1
 Slump, 601—15
 Slump by Class, 601—8
 Steps, 505—1
 Surface Finish, Floated, 601—34
 Surface Finish, General, 601—32
 Surface Finish, Masonry Coating,
 601—32
 Surface Finish, Ordinary, 601—32
 Temperature Limitations, 601—5
 Trip Tickets, 601—6
 Vibrating, 601—18
 
 Weather Limitations and Protection,
 601—20
 Concrete Admixtures. See Admixtures for
 Concrete
 Concrete Box Culverts
 Apron Walls, 610—1
 Drainage, 610—2
 Extensions To Existing, 610—2
 Footings, 610—1
 General, 610—1
 Headwalls, 610—1
 Placing Concrete, 610—2
 Placing Fill, 610—2
 Removing Forms, 610—2
 Surface Finish, 610—2
 Concrete Bridges
 Classes of Concrete, 608—1
 Falsework and Forms, 608—1
 Foundation, 608—1
 General, 608—1
 Identification Plate, 608—2
 Inspection Facilities, 608—2
 Layout, 608—2
 Materials, 608—1
 Permissable Finish Variations, 608—2
 Piers and Abutments, 608—2
 Placing Anchor Bolts, 608—2
 Placing Concrete in Substructure,
 608—1
 Placing Steel Reinforcement in
 Substructure, 608—1
 Placing Steel Reinforcement in
 Superstructure, 608—2
 Placing Superstructure, 608—2
 Protection, 608—2
 Setting Expansion Devices, 608—2
 Superstrucure, General Requirements,
 608—2
 Concrete Curing Materials
 Burlap Cloth, 823—1
 Curing Blankets, 823—2
 General, 823—1
 Liquid Membrane Forming
 Compounds, 823—1
 Price Adjustment, 823—1
 Waterproof Paper, 823—1
 White Burlap - Polyethylene Sheet,
 823—2
 White Polyethylene Film, 823—1
 Concrete Headwalls
 Footings, 610—1
 General, 610—1
 Placing Concrete, 610—2
 Placing Fill, 610—2
 Removing Forms, 610—2
 
 Surface Finish, 610—2
 Concrete Members
 Prestressed and Precast. See Prestressed
 and Precast Concrete Products
 Concrete Overlays. See Bridge Restoration
 and Waterproofing with Concrete
 Overlays
 Concrete Paving
 Structural Plate Soil Interaction
 Structures, 612—2
 Concrete Pipe. See Culvert Pipe
 Concrete Placement
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—4
 Concrete Plant
 Batching Equipment, 601—3
 Batching Equipment, JPC Pavement,
 Base, and Shoulders, 501—1
 Personnel, 601—6
 Concrete Producer
 Quality Control, 601—6
 Concrete Seal, 601—20
 Conduit Installation
 Roadway Lighting, 716—4
 Traffic Signal, 723—2
 Cones, 112—1
 Conglomerate Sand, 804—1
 Connections
 Pin, Structural Steel Bridges, 607—15
 Consolidation
 Concrete, 601—18
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—5
 Construction
 Maintenance and Control of Traffic,
 
 112—1
 Construction Loads, 701—6
 Contract, 103—1
 Award, 103—1
 Bond, 103—1
 Default and Termination, 108—9
 Definition, 101—7
 Emergency Deferment, 108—10
 Emergency Termination, 108—10
 Execution, 103—2
 Failure to Execute, 103—2
 Termination, 108—10
 Time, 108—6
 Contraction Joints
 Non-Structural Concrete, 601—30
 Contractor
 Cooperation, 105—4
 Definition, 101—7
 Insurance, 107—7
 Liability, 105—4
 
 Maintenance, 105—7, 212—4
 Responsibility for Work, 107—6
 Staking, 201—1
 Utility Responsibilities, 107—7
 Wage Requirements, 107—3
 Control of Work, 105—1
 Control Points, 201—1
 Control Strips
 DGA and CSB Base, 302—1
 Controlling Item
 Definition, 101—8
 Liqidated Damages, 108—8
 Working Days, 108—7
 Controlling Operation
 Definition, 101—8
 Liqidated Damages, 108—8
 Working Days, 108—7
 Cooperation by Contractor, 105—4
 Cored Hole Drainage Box Connector
 General, 705—1
 Materials, 705—1
 Cores
 Asphalt Density, 402—2
 Corrective Seeding, 108—9
 Corrective Work, 105—8
 Cost-Plus
 See Force Account, 109—7
 Coupling Bands, 810—2
 Covering Signs, 112—3
 Crash Cushion, 725—1
 Crash Cushions
 Temporary, 112—5
 Cross Drains
 Cleaning, 209—2
 Crown Vetch, 212—3
 CRSI, 811—3
 Crushed Aggregate Slope Protection,
 703—2
 Crushed Sand, 804—1
 Crushed Stone Base (CSB), 805—4
 General, 302—1
 Gradation, 805—14
 Tolerances, 302—3
 CSB, 302—1
 Culvert
 Definition, 101—8
 Culvert Pipe
 Asphalt Coating, 701—3
 Backfill Material, 701—2
 Backfill, Concrete, 701—5
 Backfill, Metal, 701—5
 Backfill, Thermoplastic, 701—5
 Bedding, 701—3
 Concrete, Material Requirements,
 810—1
 
 Construction Loads, 701—6
 Cover, Minimum, 701—6
 Cover, Temporary, 701—6
 End Structures, 701—7
 Extensions to Existing Pipe, 701—7
 Extra Protection, 810—1
 Flowable Fill, 701—5
 Foundation, 701—2
 General, 701—1
 Geotextile Fabric Use, 701—5
 Identification and Markings, Concrete,
 810—1
 Initial Backfill, General, 701—5
 Installation, Concrete, 701—3
 Installation, Metal, 701—3
 Installation, Structural Plate, 701—4
 Installation, Thermoplastic, 701—4
 Joints, Concrete, 701—4
 Joints, Metal, 701—5
 Joints, Thermoplastic, 701—5
 Materials, 701—1
 Metal, Coating, 810—2
 Metal, Coupling Bands, 810—2
 Metal, Material Requirements, 810—2
 Price Adjustment for Deflection, 701—
 10
 Removing, 701—7
 Removing and Relaying, 701—7
 Testing, 701—6
 Thermoplastic, Material Requirements,
 810—3
 Trenching, 701—2
 Undercutting, 701—8
 Culvert Pipe Equivalent. See Culvert Pipe
 Curb and Gutter (combination), Concrete
 Construction Requirements, 506—1
 Curbs and Gutters, Concrete
 Curb and Gutter (combination), 506—1
 Forms, 506—1
 General, 506—1
 Header Curb, 506—1
 Integral Curb, 506—2
 Removal, 203—1
 Valley Gutter, 506—1
 Curing
 Cement Treated Drainage Blanket,
 303—2
 Chemically Stabilized Roadbed, 208—
 3
 Concrete Sidewalks, 505—2
 Curing Blankets, 823—2
 Curing Compound
 Price Adjustment, 823—1
 Curing Concrete
 Blankets, 601—31
 
 Concrete Entrance Pavements, 505—2
 Concrete Steps, 505—2
 General, 601—30
 JPC Pavement 24/48/72, 502—1
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—7
 Latex Concrete Overlays, 606—7
 Membrane, 601—31
 Prestressed and Precast Products, 605—
 5
 Prestressed Members, 605—4
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—7
 Wet Curing, 601—30
 Curing JPC Pavement
 Blankets, 501—8
 Wet Burlap, 501—8
 White Membrane, 501—7
 Curving With Heat, Steel, 607—10
 Cutting With Flame, Steel, 607—9
 Cyclopean Stone Riprap, 703—2
 Damage
 Existing Roadway, 105—5
 Repair, 107—6
 DBE, 103—2
 Decks, Reinforced Concrete Bridge. See
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs
 Defective Material, 106—3
 Defective Work, 105—2
 Definitions, 101—6
 Deflection Testing, 701—6
 De-Icers
 Calcium Chloride, Solid (Type S),
 825—1
 General, 825—1
 Sodium Chloride, 825—1
 Delays, 108—6
 Delineator Post, 838—1
 Delineators, 830—1
 Delivery of Concrete
 Discharge Time, 601—15
 General, 601—15
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—4
 Demobilization, 110—1
 Dense Graded Aggregate (DGA)
 General, 302—1
 Gradation, 805—13
 Materials Requirement, 805—4
 Tolerances, 302—3
 Density Cores, 402—2
 Design
 Retaining Walls, 613—1
 Design Quantity, 109—1
 Roadway Excavation, 204—4
 
 Detour, 112—4
 Definition, 101—8
 Dewatering, 601—19
 Foundation Seals, 603—3
 Structures, 603—2
 DGA. see Dense Graded Aggregate
 Diamond Grinding JPC Pavement
 Alignment Tolerances, 503—2
 Equipment, 503—1
 General, 501—8, 503—1
 Joints, Preserving Existing Seals, 503—
 1
 Joints, Resealing Existing, 503—1
 Pavement Marking, 503—1
 Ride Quality, 503—2
 Test Section, 503—1
 Texture, 503—2
 Diesel Fuel Price Adjustment, 109—11
 Differing Site Conditions, 104—2
 Digital Terrain Model, 201—2
 Direct Tension Indicators
 Material Rrequirements, 607—1
 Structural Steel Bridges, Use, 607—8
 Disadvantaged Business Enterprise, 103—
 2
 Disagreement, 105—9
 Discharge Time
 Delivery of Concrete, 601—15
 Disposal
 Waste Material, 204—3, 205—1
 Dispute, 105—8
 Resolution, 113—2
 Disqualification of Bidder, 102—4
 Ditches, 204—2
 Ditches, Paved. See Paved Ditches
 Ditching, 209—1
 Ditching and Shouldering
 General, 209—1
 Diversion
 Definition, 101—8
 General, 112—4
 Dowel Bar Sleeves, 811—2
 Dowel Bars, 811—2
 Medians, Concrete, 507—1
 Transverse Expansion Joints, JPC
 Pavement, 501—10
 Drain Pipe, Slotted, 810—2
 Drainage
 Concrete Box Culverts, 610—2
 Pavement, 303—1
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—5
 Retaining Walls, 613—2
 Structure, 603—2
 Subgrade, 209—2
 
 Wick Drains, 711—1
 Drainage Blankets
 Embankment, 210—1
 Embankment, Materials Requirement,
 804—4, 805—5
 Geotextile, 214—2
 Pavement. See Pavement Drainage
 Blankets
 Drainage Structures
 Adjusting, 403—3, 408—2
 Drawings
 Falsework, 601—22
 Roadway Lighting, 716—6
 Driving
 Bearing Piles, 604—3
 Drop-Offs, 112—5
 Durable Pavement Striping
 Layout, 714—1
 Price Adjustment, 713—3, 714—5,
 717—3
 Tape, Type I, 714—1
 Thermoplastic, 714—1
 Weather and Temperature Limitations,
 714—3
 Dust Control, 107—1
 Edge Drain Outlet Headwalls. See Small
 Drainage Structures
 Edge Drains. See Underdrains, See
 Pavement Edge Drains
 Edge Planing
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—9
 Edge Slump
 JPC pavement, base, and shoulders,
 501—13
 Edging
 Concrete Entrance Pavements, 505—1
 Concrete Sidewalks, 505—1
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—6
 Elastomeric Bearing Pads, 822—1
 Electronic Surveying, 201—1
 Embankment
 Channel Changes, 206—1
 Compaction, 206—2
 Embankment-in-Place, 206—2
 Foundations, 206—1
 General, 206—1
 Materials, 206—1
 Embankment Drainage Blankets
 Coarse Aggregate, 805—5
 Fine Aggregate, 804—4
 Rock, 210—1
 Sand, 210—1
 Embankment Foundation Stabilization
 Geotextile, 214—1
 
 Embankment-in-Place, 206—2
 Emulsified Asphalt
 General, 806—2
 Price Adjustment, 806—3, 807—3,
 807—4
 End Connector Angles
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—12
 End Structures. See Also Concrete
 Headwalls
 Concrete Box Culverts, 610—1
 Culvert Pipe, 701—7
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box
 Culvert Sections, 611—3
 Structural Plate Soil Interaction
 Structures, 612—3
 End Treatments, Material Requirements,
 814—3
 Engineer
 Authority, 105—1
 Definition, 101—8
 Enterprise Zone, 107—3
 Entrance Pavements, Concrete
 Backfilling, 505—2
 Curing, 505—2
 Edging, 505—1
 Forming, General, 505—1
 Forming, Side Form, 505—1
 Forming, Slip Form, 505—1
 General, 505—1
 Joints, 505—2
 Straightedging, 505—1
 Entrance Pipe. See Culvert Pipe
 Entrance Pipe Equivalent. See Culvert
 Pipe
 Epoxy
 Coated Steel Reinforcement, 602—1
 Epoxy Bond Coat, 511—1
 Epoxy Coating
 Steel Reinforcing, 811—3
 Epoxy Resin Systems, 826—1
 Epoxy Seal Coats, 804—3
 Epoxy-Sand Slurry
 Bridge Restoration and Waterproofing
 with Concrete Overlays, 606—4
 Fine Aggregate, 804—3
 Equipment
 Pipeline Inspection Camera (edge
 drains), 704—1
 Rental Rates, 109—7
 Spreaders, JPC Pavement, Base, and
 Shoulders, 501—2
 Sufficient, 108—5
 Erection Plans
 Structural Plate Soil Interaction
 Structures, 612—1
 
 Erodible Material
 Coarse Aggregates, 805—2
 Erosion Control
 Brush Barrier, 212—1
 Crown Vetch, 212—3
 Erosion Control Blanket, 212—3
 General, 212—1
 Seeding and Protection, Permanent,
 212—1
 Seeding and Protection, Temporary,
 
 213—5
 Sod, 212—5
 Temporary Mulch, 213—5
 Topdressing, 212—3
 Erosion Control Blanket
 General, 212—3
 Material Requirements, 827—3
 Erosion Control Materials
 Agricultural Limestone, 827—1
 Asphalt Materials for Mulch, 827—3
 Erosion Control Blanket, 827—3
 Fertilizer, 827—1
 General, 827—1
 Mulch Materials, 827—3
 Netting and Staples, 827—4
 Seed, 827—1
 Sod, 827—5
 Temporary Silt Fence, 827—4
 Topsoil, 827—4
 Excavated Materials Use, 204—2
 Excavation
 Bearing Piles, 604—2
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box
 Culvert Sections, 611—2
 Roadway and Drainage, 204—1
 Excessive Overrun and Underrun, 104—2
 Execution of Contract, 103—2
 Expansion Devices, 608—2
 Expansion Joints
 Concrete Structures, 601—29
 Neoprene, Reinforced Concrete Bridge
 Slabs, 609—5
 Non-Structural Concrete, 601—30
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—3
 Explosives, 107—5
 Extensions
 Bearing piles, 604—3
 Concrete Box Culverts, 610—2
 Culvert Pipe, 701—7
 Extra Length Posts, Guardrail, 719—1
 Extra Protection
 Culvert Pipe, Concrete, 810—1
 Extra Work
 Definition, 101—8
 
 General, 104—2
 Payment for, 109—7
 Fabric. see Geotextile
 Fabric Ties, Material Requirements,
 817—1
 Fabric Wrapped Backfill Drain, 845—1
 Fabric Wrapped Drains
 Retaining Walls, 613—2
 Fabric-Wrapped Backfill Drain, 603—2
 Facing of Bearing Surfaces
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—11
 Fall Protection, 107—1
 Falsework
 Camber, 601—25
 Concrete Bridges, 608—1
 Design, 601—22
 Drawings, 601—22
 General, 601—22
 Removal of, 601—25
 Removal of, Structural Steel Bridges,
 607—16
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—14
 Fence
 Gates, 721—2
 General, 721—1
 Remove, 722—1
 Replace, 722—1
 Reset, 722—1
 Setting Posts, 721—1
 Fence Posts, Material Requirements,
 817—1
 Fencing Materials
 Chain Link. See Chain Link Fencing
 Materials
 Woven Wire. See Woven Wire Fencing
 Materials
 Fertilizer, 827—1
 Seedbed, 212—2
 Top Dressing, 212—3
 Fiberglass Membrane, 808—1
 Field Laboratory
 Asphalt Plant, 106—2, 401—1
 Concrete, 106—2
 General, 106—2
 Filling and Capping Abandoned
 Underground Structures (Diameters 24
 inches or Less)
 Inlets, 708—1
 Filling and Capping Abandoned
 Underground Structures (Diameters 24
 Inches or Less)
 Catch Basins, 708—1
 General, 708—1
 Manholes, 708—1
 Materials, 708—1
 
 Wells, 708—1
 Filling and Capping Abandoned
 Underground Structures (Diameters
 Over 24 inches)
 Inlets, 708—1
 Manholes, 708—1
 Filling and Capping Abandoned
 Underground Structures (Diameters
 Over 24 Inches)
 Catch Basins, 708—1
 General, 708—1
 Materials, 708—1
 Wells, 708—1
 Final Dressing
 Class A, 211—1
 Class B, 211—1
 General, 211—1
 Final Estimate
 Definition, 101—8
 General, 109—9
 Final Inspection, 105—7
 Final Payment, 109—9
 Final Release, 109—10
 Final Strike-Off
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—5
 Fine Aggregates
 Approval, 804—1
 Asphalt Mixtures, Combined
 Aggregate, 804—2
 Asphalt Mixtures, General, 804—2
 Asphalt Mixtures, Mineral Filler, 804—
 2
 Asphalt Mixtures, Polish Resistant
 Aggregate, 804—2
 Asphalt Mixtures, Sand, 804—2
 Backfill, 804—4
 Concrete, 804—1
 Conglomerate Sand, 804—1
 Crushed Sand, 804—1
 Drainage, 804—4
 Embankment Drainage Blanket, 804—
 4
 Epoxy Sand Slurry, 804—3
 Epoxy Seal Coats, 804—3
 General, 804—1
 Mineral Filler, 804—1
 Mortar Sand, 804—1, 804—3
 Natural Sand, 804—1
 Non-specification Gadations, 804—4
 Pipe Bedding, 804—4
 Sampling and Testing, 804—6
 Underdrains, 804—4
 Finish
 Surface. See Surface Finish
 
 Finishing
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—5
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—7
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—9
 Finishing Aid, 501—5
 Finishing Machines
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—1
 Fire Plan, 107—2
 Fixed Completion Date, 108—5
 Fixed Joints
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—3
 Flagger
 Apparel, 107—1
 Flame Cutting
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—9
 Flashing Arrow Board, 112—4
 Flexible Delineator Post, 838—1
 Floated Surface Finish
 Concrete, 601—34
 Floating
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—6
 Flowable Fill
 Pipe Backfill, 701—5
 Placing, 601—20
 Proportioning and Requirements, 601—
 9
 Pumping, 601—20
 Flume Inlets
 General, 709—1
 Materials, 709—1
 Fly Ash, 601—11, 801—1
 Material Requirements, 844—1
 Non-Specification, 844—2
 Price Adjustment, 844—2
 Seasonal Limitations, 601—21
 Footing Excavation, 603—1
 Footings
 Concrete Box Culverts, 610—1
 Concrete Headwalls, 610—1
 Signs, 715—2
 Force Account, 109—7
 Definition, 101—8
 Forgings
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—13
 Formal Acceptance
 Definition, 101—9
 Issuing, 105—8
 Formal Partnering, 105—4
 Forming
 Concrete Entrance Pavements, 505—1
 
 Concrete Median Barriers, Fixed Form,
 508—1
 Concrete Median Barriers, Slip, 508—2
 Concrete Sidewalks, 505—1
 General, 601—23
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—4
 Non-Structural Concrete, 601—25
 Prestressed and Precast Concrete
 Products, 605—2
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—1
 Structures, 601—23
 Forming, Slip
 Bridge barrier wall, 601—25
 Concrete Entrance Pavement, 505—1
 Concrete Sidewalks, 505—1
 Non-Structural Concrete, 601—25
 Forms
 Camber, 601—25
 Concrete Bridges, 608—1
 Concrete Curbs and Gutters, 506—1
 Concrete, General, 601—1
 Entrance Pavements, Concrete, 505—1
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—1
 Median Barriers, Permanent Concrete,
 508—1
 Removal of, 601—25
 Removal of, Box Culverts, 610—2
 Removal of, Headwalls, 610—2
 Removal of, JPC Pavement, Base, and
 Shoulders, 501—7
 Removal of, Prestressed Members,
 605—4
 Sidewalks, Concrete, 505—1
 Stay-in-Place Metal, 601—2
 Steps, Concrete, 505—1
 Foundation
 Concrete Bridges, 608—1
 Embankment, 206—1
 Pipe, 701—2
 Retaining Walls, 613—1
 Foundation Preparation
 Backfilling, 603—2
 Cofferdams, 603—3
 Drainage, 603—2
 Footing Excavation, 603—1
 General, 603—1
 Foundation Seals, 603—3
 Foundation Undercut, 603—4
 F-test, 402—5
 Fuel Price Adjustment, 109—11
 Full Depth Patching
 
 Bridge Restoration and Waterproofing
 with Concrete Overlays, 606—3
 Gabion
 Aggregate, 805—6
 Walls, 613—2
 Wire, 813—6
 Gates, Material Requirements, 816—2
 Geogrid Reinforcement
 Base Courses, 304—1
 Subgrade, 304—1
 Geotextile Construction, 214—1
 Channel Lining, 214—1
 Drainage Blankets, 214—2
 Embankment Foundation Stabilization,
 214—1
 Field Splices, 214—1
 Laps, 214—1
 Slope Protection, 214—1
 Subgrade, 214—1
 Underdrains, 214—1
 Geotextile Fabric
 Culvert Pipe, 701—5
 Fastener Pins, 843—4
 General, 843—1
 Price Adjustment, 843—3
 GGBF Slag, 801—1, 844—1
 Glass Beads, Type I, 839—1
 Gradation
 Channel Linings, 805—6
 Granular Embankment, 805—5
 Structure Granular Backfill, 805—5
 Granular Embankment
 Gradation, 805—5
 Grass, 827—1
 Gravity Wall, 613—1
 Gray Iron Castings, 813—1
 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag
 (GGBF)
 General, 601—11
 Material Requirements, 844—1
 Ground Rods, 834—1
 Grout
 Proportioning and Requirements, 601—
 9
 Grouting and Epoxy Bond Coat
 Drilling, 511—1
 Epoxy Bond Coat, 511—1
 General, 511—1
 Grouting, 511—1
 Inserting Bars, 511—1
 Growing Season, 724—2
 Guardrail
 Adjust, 719—2
 Extra Length Posts, 719—1
 General, 719—1
 
 Install, 719—1
 Material Requirements, 814—1
 Placing Rail, 719—2
 Relocate, 719—2
 Remove, 719—2
 Salvaged, 719—3
 Temporary, 719—2
 Hammers
 Pile Driving, 604—1
 Handrail
 Install, 720—1
 Material Requirements, 813—6
 Hardware for Timber Structures, 829—1
 Hauling
 General, 105—5
 Over Railways, 107—4
 Over Structures, 105—6
 Overloads, 109—6
 HDPE Pipe, 701—1
 Header Curb, Concrete
 Construction Requirements, 506—1
 Headwalls. See Endstructures
 Headwalls, Concrete. See Concrete
 Headwalls
 Headwalls, Edge Drain Outlet. See Small
 Drainage Structures
 Health, 107—1
 Heat Curving
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—10
 High Range and Retarding WaterReducing Admixtures, 802—1
 High Range Water-Reducing Admixtures,
 802—1
 High Strength Steel Bolts, Nuts, and
 Washers, 813—2
 Highway
 Definition, 101—9
 Historic Preservation, 205—1
 Holidays, 101—9
 Hook Bolts
 General, 512—1
 Material Requirements, 811—1
 Hot Poured Elastic Seals
 JPC Pavement Uses, 501—11
 Hydrated Lime, 824—1
 Hydrodemolition, 606—3
 Identification
 Marking, Concrete Pipe, 810—1
 Marking, Maintenance Cleaning and
 Painting Steel Bridges, 614—3
 Plates, Concrete Bridges, 608—2
 Plates, Structural Steel Bridges, 607—
 20
 Stencil, Concrete, 601—34
 Indemnify and Save Harmless, 107—6
 
 Informal Partnering, 105—4
 Inlets. See Small Drainage Structures
 Filling and Capping. See Filling and
 Capping Abandonded Underground
 Structures
 Inspection
 General, 105—1
 Inspector
 Authority, 105—1
 Definition, 101—9
 Integral Curb
 Construction Requirements, 506—2
 International Roughness Index
 Asphalt Pavement, 410—1
 Intersection Markings, 717—1
 IRI
 Asphalt Pavement, 410—1
 JPC Pavement, 501—14
 Joint Materials, 807—1
 Fillers, Cork Expansion, 807—5
 Fillers, General, 807—5
 Fillers, Preformed Asphalt Expansion,
 807—5
 Fillers, Preformed Sponge Rubber,
 807—5
 Sealers, General, 807—1
 Sealers, Hot-Poured Elastic, 807—1
 Sealers, Preformed Compression,
 807—1
 Sealers, Preformed Expansion, 807—2
 Sealers, Rigid Pipe, 807—2
 Sealers, Silicone rubber, 807—4
 Joint Resealing
 Diamond Grinding JPC Pavment,
 503—1
 JPC Pavement, 501—13
 Joint Sealant Types
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—11
 Joint Sealing
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—11
 Reinforced concrete bridge slabs,
 609—4
 Joint Seals, Temporary
 JPC Pavement, 501—13
 Joints
 Asphalt Pavement, 403—6
 Concrete Entrance Pavements, 505—2
 Concrete Sidewalks, 505—2
 Concrete, General, 601—29
 Construction (Concrete), 601—21
 Construction (Concrete), Bonding of
 Structural, 601—22
 
 Construction (Concrete), NonStructural, 601—22
 Construction (Concrete), Structural,
 601—21
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—8
 Median Barriers, Permanent Concrete
 (fixed form), 508—1
 Median Barriers, Permanent Concrete
 (precast), 508—3
 Median Barriers, Permanent Concrete
 (slip form), 508—2
 Non-Structural, Contraction, 601—30
 Non-structural, Expansion, 601—30
 Pipe, 701—4
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box
 Culvert Sections, 611—2
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—12
 Structures, Expansion, 601—29
 JPC Pavement
 Admixtures, 501—3
 Breaking and Seating, 504—1
 Burlap Drag, 501—6
 Care, Storage, and Handling of
 Materials, 501—3
 Consolidation, 501—5
 Curing Blankets, 501—8
 Curing, General, 501—7
 Delivery of Concrete, 501—4
 Diamond Grinding, 501—8, 503—1
 Edge slump, 501—13
 Edging, 501—6
 Final Strike-Off, 501—5
 Finishing Aid, 501—5
 Finishing, General, 501—5
 Floating, 501—6
 Forming, 501—4
 Forms, 501—1
 General, 501—1
 Hand Finishing, 501—5
 Joint Resealing, 501—13
 Joint Sealant Types, 501—11
 Joint Sealant, Self-Leveling Silicone
 Rubber, 501—13
 Joint Sealant, Silicone Rubber, 501—
 12
 Joint Sealing, General, 501—11
 Joint Seals, Preformed Neoprene,
 501—12
 Joint Seals, Temporary, 501—13
 Joints, General, 501—8
 Joints, Longitudinal, 501—9
 Joints, Longitudinal Expansion, 501—
 10
 
 Joints, Transverse Construction, 501—
 11
 Joints, Transverse Contraction, 501—
 10
 Joints, Transverse Expansion, 501—10
 Machine Finishing, 501—5
 Materials, 501—1
 Mixing, 501—4
 Opening to Traffic, 501—15
 Placing Concrete, 501—4
 Preparation of Aggregate Base Course,
 501—4
 Producer Responsibilities, 501—3
 Proportioning, 501—3
 Removing Forms, 501—7
 Ride Quality, 501—14
 Rumble Strips, 501—7
 Slip Form Finishing, 501—5
 Slip Form Pavers, 501—1
 Slump, 501—4
 Station Number Stencil, 501—7
 Surface Correction, 501—6
 Surface Tolerance Testing, General,
 501—13
 Texturing, 501—7
 Thickness Deficiency, Payment
 Adjustment, 501—17
 Thickness Tolerance, 501—15
 Weather Limitations, 501—3
 Wet Burlap Curing, 501—8
 White Membrane Curing, 501—7
 JPC Pavement 24/48/72
 Curing, 502—1
 Delay of Opening, Price Adjustment,
 502—3
 General, 502—1
 Opening to Traffic, 502—2
 Placing, 502—1
 Strength Testing, 502—2
 JPC Shoulders. See JPC Pavement
 Junction Boxes. See Small Drainage
 Structures
 Kentucky Seed Law, 827—1
 KEPSC, 213—1
 Labor Requirements, 107—3
 Landscaping. See Planting
 Landslides, 204—2
 Lane Closure, Long Term, 112—4
 Laps
 Erosion Control Blanket, 212—3
 Geotextile Construction, 214—1
 Latent Defects, 107—7
 Lateral Drains, 209—2
 Latex Admixture, 841—1
 Latex Concrete Overlays
 
 Consolidating, 606—7
 Curing, 606—7
 Finishing, 606—7
 General, 606—6
 New Structures, Special Requirements,
 606—8
 Placing Concrete, 606—7
 Prewetting and Grout-Bond Coat,
 606—6
 Proportioning and Requirements, 606—
 6
 Laying Sections
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box
 Culvert Sections, 611—2
 Layout
 Concrete Bridges, 608—2
 Durable Pavement Striping, 714—1
 Planting, 724—1
 Thermoplastic Intersection Markings,
 717—1
 Lead Plates, 813—1
 Legal Responsibilities, 107—1
 Leveling and Wedging, 403—7
 Liability
 Contractor, 105—4
 Insurance, 107—7
 Personal, 107—7
 Licenses, 107—3
 Lighting Standard, Installation, 716—1
 Lighting, Roadway. See Roadway
 Lighting
 Lighting, Roadway (Materials). See
 Roadway Lighting Materials
 Lightweight Aggregate, 805—3
 Lime, 212—2
 Lime Stabilized Roadbed. See Chemically
 Stabilized Roadbed
 Limestone, Agricultural, 827—1
 Limits of Operations, 108—5
 Liquidated Damages, 105—9, 108—8
 List of Approved Materials, 106—3
 Load Transfer Assemblies, 811—2
 Load Transfer Devices
 Transverse Expansion Joints, JPC
 Pavement, 501—10
 Loading
 Concrete, Time Required, 601—29
 Longitudinal Expansion Joints
 JPC Pavement, 501—10
 Longitudinal Joints
 JPC Pavement, 501—9
 Lumber. See Wood Products
 Luminaires, 834—6
 Lump Sum, 109—1
 Mailbox Turnouts, 209—2
 
 Mailboxes, 107—6
 Maintenance, 105—7
 Maintenance Cleaning and Painting Steel
 Bridges
 General, 614—1
 Identification Marking, 614—3
 Maintaining Traffic, 614—2
 Paint Application, 614—2
 Paint Mixing, 614—2
 Paint Thinning, 614—2
 Prosecution of The Work, 614—1
 Responsibility for Damage, 614—1
 Seasonal and Weather Limitations,
 614—1
 Surface Preparation, 614—2
 Unsatisfactory Work, 614—3
 Major Item
 Definition, 101—9
 Overrun and Underrun, 104—2
 Malleable Castings, 813—1
 Manhole Risers, 813—1
 Manhole Steps, 710—1
 Manholes. See Also Small Drainage
 Structures
 Adjusting, 403—3, 408—2
 Adjusting Rings, 710—3
 Filling and Capping. See Filling and
 Capping Abandonded Underground
 Structures
 Masonry Coating Finish
 Concrete, 601—32
 Masonry Coating Material, 828—1
 Masonry Materials
 Concrete Brick, 824—1
 General, 824—1
 Hydrated Lime, 824—1
 Precast Reinforced Manhole Sections,
 824—1
 Sewer and Manhole Leveling Brick,
 824—1
 Units for Catch Basins and Manholes,
 824—1
 Match Marking
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—5
 Materials
 Certification, 106—3
 Control of, 106—1
 Defective, 106—3
 Department Furnished, 106—3
 List of Approved, 106—3
 Rights in and Use of, 104—3
 Storage, 106—3
 Materials (Care, Storage, and Handling)
 Concrete, General, 601—5
 General, 106—3
 
 PCC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—3
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box
 Culvert Sections, 611—1
 Prestressed and Precast Concrete
 Products, 605—8
 Steel Reinforcement, 602—1
 Structural Plate Soil Interaction
 Structures, 612—1
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—14
 Mattress Unit Wire, 813—6
 Mattress Units, 703—2
 Measurement, 109—1
 Design Quantity, 109—1
 Lump Sum, 109—1
 Station, 109—1
 Volumes, 109—1
 Measuring
 Concrete Proportions, 601—13
 Median Barrier, Temporary Concrete
 Construction Requirements, 509—1
 General, 509—1
 Materials, 509—1
 Median Barriers, Permanent Concrete
 Fixed Form Construction, 508—1
 Forms, 508—1
 General, 508—1
 Joints (fixed form), 508—1
 Joints (precast), 508—3
 Joints (slip form), 508—2
 Precast Construction, 508—2
 Slip Form Construction, 508—2
 Median, Concrete Barrier (Standard). See
 Barrier Median, Concrete (Standard)
 Median, Mountable Concrete. See
 Mountable Median, Concrete
 Mediation, 105—10
 Members
 Prestressed and Precast Concrete. See
 Prestressed and Precast Concrete
 Products
 Metal Handrail, 720—1
 Microsilica
 General, 601—11
 Material Requirements, 844—1
 Mill Inspection
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—13
 Milling and Texturing
 Asphalt Pavement, 408—1
 Mineral Admixtures
 General, 601—11
 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace
 (GGBF) Slag, 601—11
 Microsilica, 601—11
 Mineral Admixtures for Concrete
 
 Fly Ash, 844—1
 General, 844—1
 GGBF, 844—1
 Microsilica, 844—1
 Mineral Filler, 412—1, 804—1
 Minor Item
 Definition, 101—9
 Miscellaneous Metals
 for Structural Steel Bridges, 607—1
 Miscellaneous Metals, Material
 Requirements, 813—1
 Misfits
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—16
 Mix Designs
 Concrete, 601—6
 Mixers, Concrete
 Batch, 601—3
 Central, 601—4
 Continuous, 601—3
 General, 601—3
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—1
 Truck, 601—4
 Mixing
 Concrete for Prestressed and Precast
 Members, 605—2
 Mixing Concrete
 Bridge Overlays, 606—4
 General, 601—16
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—4
 On-Site Batch, 601—16
 On-Site Continuous, 601—16
 Ready-Mixed, 601—17
 Ready-Mixed, Central Plant, 601—17
 Ready-Mixed, Truck, 601—17
 Site, 601—16
 Mobilization, 110—1
 Milling and Texturing, 408—2
 Monuments
 Right-of-Way, 726—1
 Mop Coat, 808—1
 Mortar
 Proportioning and Requirements, 601—
 9
 Mortar Sand, 804—1, 804—3
 Mountable Median, Concrete, 507—1
 Mowing, 212—4
 Mulch
 Seedbed, 212—2
 Temporary, 213—2, 213—5
 Mulch Materials, 827—3
 Nails
 Timber Structures, 829—1
 Natural Sand, 804—1
 
 NCHRP 350, 112—1
 Neoprene Expansion Joints
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—5
 Neoprene Joint Seals
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—4
 Neoprene Seals
 Installation, JPC Pavement, 501—12
 JPC Pavement Uses, 501—11
 Netting and Staples for Erosion Control,
 827—4
 Non-Conformance Report
 Definition, 101—10
 Notice of Award, 103—1
 Definition, 101—10
 Notice of Changed Condition, 105—9
 Notice to Begin Work, 103—2, 108—4
 Definition, 101—10
 Nuts,
 Steel, 813—1
 Object Marker, Bridge End, Type 2,
 718—1
 Offset Blocks, Materials Requirement,
 814—3
 OGFC, 404—1
 Open Joints
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—3
 Open-Graded Friction Courses, 404—1
 Opening to Traffic
 Concrete, General, 601—27
 JPC Pavement 24/48/72, 502—2
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—15
 Optical Units, 835—7
 Ordinary Surface Finish
 Concrete, 601—32
 Outlets. See Small Drainage Structures
 Overhaul, 204—6
 Overlaps
 Erosion Control Blanket, 212—3
 Geotextile Construction, 214—1
 Overloads, 109—6
 Overrun, 104—2
 Paint
 Pavement Striping, 842—1
 Paint Striping
 Permanent, 713—1
 Paint, Bridge. See Bridge Coatings
 Painting
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—16
 Painting Steel Bridges. Also See
 Maintenance Cleaning and Painting
 Steel Bridges
 
 Panel Signs
 Sign Substrates, 833—1
 Panel Traffic Signs
 Beams and Supports, 715—2
 Bridge Mounting, 715—3
 Footings, Bases, and Pedestals, 715—2
 General, 715—1
 Locating, 715—1
 Mounting, General, 715—3
 Shop Drawings, 715—2
 Partial Payments, 109—8
 Partial Removal of Structures, 203—1
 Partial-Depth Patching
 Bridge Restoration and Waterproofing
 with Concrete Overlays, 606—4
 Partnering Process, 105—4
 Patents, 107—4
 Paved Ditches
 General, 709—1
 Materials, 709—1
 Pavement
 Drainage Blankets, 303—1
 JPC. See JPC Pavement
 Removal, 203—1
 Structure
 Definition, 101—10
 Pavement Drainage Blankets
 Asphalt-Treated (ATDB), 303—1
 Cement Treated, 303—1
 General, 303—1
 Materials, 303—1
 Pavement Edge Drains. See Also
 Underdrains
 Breaking and Seating JPC pavement,
 504—2
 Pavement Marker
 Removal, 403—3
 Pavement Markers. See Raised Pavement
 Markers
 Pavement Marking. See Pavement Striping
 Pavement Marking Tapes for Construction
 Zones, 831—1
 Pavement Markings
 Intersection, Thermoplastic, 717—1
 Raised Markers, 840—1
 Removal, 112—5
 Temporary, 112—1, 112—5
 Pavement Striping
 Diamond Grinding JPC Pavement,
 503—1
 Durable, 714—1
 Glass Beads, 839—1
 Paint, 842—1
 Permanent, 713—1
 Records, 713—1
 
 Removal, 112—5, 713—2, 714—2
 Tape, Type I, 714—1
 Tapes for Construction Zones, 831—1
 Temporary, 112—5
 Thermoplastic, 714—1, 837—1
 Type I Tape, 836—1
 Pavement Structure
 Subgrade, 207—1
 Pavement Wedge, 407—1
 Pavement Wedge Texturing, 403—7
 Paving
 Structural plate soil interaction
 structures, 612—2
 Paving, Asphalt
 Structural Plate Soil Interaction
 Structures, 612—2
 Paving, Concrete
 Structural Plate Soil Interaction
 Structures, 612—2
 Payment, 109—1
 Partial Payments, 109—8
 Scope, 109—6
 Stockpiles, 109—9
 PCC Base. See JPC Pavement
 PCC Pavement 24/48/72
 Proportioning and Requirements, 502—
 1
 Pedestals, Sign, 715—2
 Pedestrian Pushbutton Detectors, 835—10
 Pedestrian Signals, 835—7
 Perforated Pipe, 810—3
 Performance-Graded Binders (PG
 Binders), 806—1
 Period of Establishment
 Planting, 724—2
 Permanent Paint Striping
 Retroreflectivity Requirements, 713—2
 Permits, 107—3
 Personnel
 Concrete Plant, 601—6
 PG Binder
 Price Adjustment, 806—1
 pH, 212—5
 Piers
 Concrete Bridges, 608—2
 Pile Hammers, 604—1
 Pile Points, 604—1
 Piles, Bearing. See Bearing Piles
 Pin Connections
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—15
 Pin Holes, Boring, 607—13
 Pins
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—12
 Pins and Rollers, 813—1
 Pipe. See Culvert Pipe
 
 Pipe and Pipe Arches, 810—1
 Concrete Pipe, 810—1
 Corrugated Metal, General, 810—2
 Plastic, HDPE, 810—4
 Plastic, PVC, 810—3
 Smooth Metal, 810—3
 Thermoplastic, General, 810—3
 Pipe Underdrains. See Underdrains
 Pipe, Culvert. See Culvert Pipe
 Pipe, Culvert Equivalent. See Culvert Pipe
 Pipe, Entrance. See Culvert Pipe
 Pipe, Entrance Equivalent. See Culvert
 Pipe
 Pipe, Storm Sewer. See Culvert Pipe
 Pipe, Storm Sewer Equivalent. See Culvert
 Pipe
 Placing
 Bearing piles, 604—3
 Placing Concrete
 Box Culverts, 610—2
 Bridge Overlays, 606—4
 Concrete Bridges, Substructure, 608—1
 General, 601—17
 Headwalls, 610—2
 JPC Pavement 24/48/72, 502—1
 Planing
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—9
 Plans
 Conformity, 105—3
 Coordination, 105—3
 Definition, 101—11
 General, 105—2
 Plant
 Inspection, 106—1
 Plant Material, 724—1
 Planting
 General, 724—1
 Inspection Schedule, 724—2
 Layout, 724—1
 Material, 724—1
 Period of Establishment, 724—2
 Replacement Planting, 724—2
 Seasonal and Temperature Limitations,
 724—1
 Plastic Pipe. See Thermoplastic Pipe
 Plugging
 Pipe. See Plugging Abandoned
 Underground Structures
 Plugging Abandoned Underground
 Structures
 General, 708—1
 Materials, 708—1
 Pipe, 708—2
 Water Wells, 708—1
 Pointing
 
 Bearing Piles, 604—2
 Polish Resistant Aggregates
 Asphalt Mixture Composition, 403—3
 Coarse, 805—4
 Fine, 804—2
 Pollution
 Air, 107—1
 Water, 107—1
 Porous Aggregate Underdrain. See
 Underdrains
 Portland Cement. See Cement
 Post
 Cast Aluminum Bridge Railing, 815—1
 Chain Link Fence, 817—1
 Fence, 816—1
 Flexible Delineator, 838—1
 Guardrail, Materials requirements,
 814—1
 Sign, 832—1
 Precast Concrete Products. See Prestressed
 and Precast Concrete Products
 Precast Manhole Sections, 710—1
 Precast Median Barrier, 508—2
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box Culvert
 Sections
 Backfilling, 611—3
 Bedding, 611—2
 Drainage, 611—2
 Excavation, 611—2
 General, 611—1
 Headwalls, 611—3
 Joints, Asphalt Mastic, 611—3
 Joints, Butyl Rubber Sealants, 611—2
 Joints, Rubber Gaskets, 611—2
 Laying Sections, 611—2
 Materials, 611—1
 Precast Unit Construction, 611—1
 Shop Drawings, 611—2
 Transportation and Handling, 611—1
 Precast Three Sided Structures, 615—1
 Backfill, 615—7
 Design, 615—2
 Footings, 615—6
 Preconstruction Conference, 108—3
 Prefabricated Vertical Wick Drains,
 
 711—1
 Preformed Neoprene Joint Seals
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—4
 Preformed Neoprene Seals
 Installation, JPC Pavement, 501—12
 Prepour Meeting, 601—5
 Prequalification
 Bidding, 102—1
 Preservation
 
 Historic, 205—1
 Preservative Treatment, Wood, 818—2
 Presplitting, 204—2
 Prestressed and Precast Concrete Products
 Casting, 605—3
 Curing, 605—5
 Dimensional Tolerances, 605—5
 Erection, 605—8
 Forming, 605—2
 General, 605—1
 Materials, 605—1
 Mixing and Batching, 605—2
 Removal of Forms, 605—5
 Surface finish, 605—5
 Transportation, Storage,Handling,
 605—8
 Prestressed Concrete Members
 Curing, 605—4
 Drawings, 605—3
 Form Removal, 605—4
 Hot Weather Protection, 605—3
 Prestressing, 605—4
 Safety Measures, 605—4
 Prestressed Concrete Products. See
 Prestressed and Precast Concrete
 Products
 Prestressing
 Concrete Members, 605—4
 Prestressing Strands, 811—1
 Price Adjustment
 Concrete Overlay Thickness
 Deficiency, 606—9
 Curing Compound, 823—1
 Durable Pavement Striping, 713—3,
 714—5, 717—3
 Emulsified Asphalt, 806—3, 807—3,
 807—4
 Fly Ash, 844—2
 Fuel, 109—11
 General, 109—10
 Geotextile Fabric, 843—3
 JPC Pavement 25/48/72, Delay of
 Opening, 502—3
 JPC Pavement, Thickness, 501—17
 JPC Shoulders, Thickness, 501—17
 Liquid Asphalt, 109—10
 Non-Sag Silicone Rubber Sealant,
 807—7
 Non-Specification Cement, 801—2
 Pavement Striping Paint, 842—1,
 846—2
 PG Binder, 806—1
 Pipe Deflection, 701—10
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slab,
 Depth of Cover, 609—9
 
 Steel Reinforcement, 811—5
 Structural Steel, 607—20
 Prime Coat, 406—1
 Producer Responsibilities
 Concrete, General, 601—6
 JPC Pavement, 501—3
 Profile Grade
 Definition, 101—11
 Progress Schedule, 108—1
 Project
 Definition, 101—11
 Project Completion
 Definition, 101—11
 Project Completion Notice, 105—8
 Definition, 101—11
 Proportioning and Requirements
 Concrete, 601—8
 JPC Pavement 24/48/72, 502—1
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—3
 Latex Concrete Overlays, 606—6
 Prosecution of Work, 108—4
 Protection
 Property, 107—5
 Work, 107—6
 Proving Period
 Durable Pavement Markings, 714—3
 Permanent Paint Striping, 713—2
 Planting, 724—2
 Thermoplastic Intersection Markings,
 717—2
 Public
 Convenience and Safety, 107—4
 Pumping
 Flowable Fill, 601—20
 PVC Pipe, 701—1
 QA, 113—2
 Definition, 101—10
 QAT, 113—2
 QC, 113—1
 QC/QA, 113—1
 QCP, 113—1
 Definition, 101—10
 Quality Assurance, 113—1, 113—2
 Definition, 101—10
 Quality Assurance Team, 113—2
 Quality Control, 113—1
 Concrete Producer, 601—6
 Quality Control Plan
 Cleaning and Painting Bridges, 607—
 17
 Definition, 101—10
 General, 113—1
 Quantities
 Altered, 109—6
 
 Railing, Cast Aluminum for Bridge, 815—
 1
 Railway, 107—4
 Raised Markers, 840—1
 Raised Pavement Markers
 General, 712—1
 Installing Type IV, 712—1
 Installing Type V, 712—1
 RAP, 409—1
 RDZ, 204—1
 Record Plans, 105—2
 Records
 Concrete, 601—6
 Pavement Striping, 713—1
 Reflectivity Requirements. See
 Retroreflectivity Requirements
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs
 Curing, 609—7
 Depositing, Consolidating, and Striking
 Off, 609—6
 Drainage, 609—5
 Finishing with Burlap Drag, 609—7
 Form Installation, 609—2
 Forming, 609—1
 Forming Design, 609—2
 General, 609—1
 Inspection, 609—3
 Joint Sealing, 609—4
 Joints, Expansion and Fixed, 609—3
 Joints, Open, 609—3
 Joints, Steel, 609—4
 Materials, 609—1
 Placing Steel Reinforcement, 609—3
 Price Adjustment for Depth of Cover,
 609—9
 Surface Courses, 609—7
 Surface Finish, 609—8
 Swinging the Spans, 609—1
 Texturing, 609—7
 Waterproofing Membranes, 609—7
 Weather Limitations, 609—5
 Working the Surface, 609—7
 Reinforcing Bars
 Standard Sizes, 602—3
 Release Agent, 403—1
 Removal of
 Bridges, 203—1
 Defective and Unauthorized Work,
 105—2
 Defective material, 106—3
 Falsework, General, 601—25
 Falsework, Structural Steel Bridges,
 607—16
 Forms, 601—25, 610—2
 Forms, JPC Pavement, 501—7
 
 Partial Removal of Structures, 203—1
 Pavement Striping, 713—2, 714—2
 Septic Tanks, 203—1
 Sidewalks, Curbs and Similar Items,
 203—1
 Structures and Obstructions, General,
 203—1
 Trees and Stumps, 202—1
 Removing and Relaying Culvert Pipe,
 
 701—7
 Removing Culvert Pipe, 701—7
 Rental Equipment, 109—7
 Replacement Planting, 724—2
 Resealing Joints
 JPC Pavement, 501—13
 Reshaping and Compacting
 Subgrade, 207—1
 Retaining Walls
 Cast-in-Place (CIP), 613—2
 Design, 613—1
 Drainage, 613—2
 Foundation, 613—1
 Gabion, 613—2
 General, 613—1
 Joints, 613—2
 Materials, 613—1
 Standard Gravity Wall, 613—1
 Retroreflective Materials
 Delineators, 830—1
 Field Performance, 830—2
 General, 830—1
 Packaging, 830—2
 Sheeting, 830—1
 Warranty, 830—2
 Retroreflectivity Requirements
 Paint, Permanent, 713—2
 Thermoplastic Intersection Markings,
 717—2
 Review
 Shop Drawings, 105—2
 Ride Quality
 Asphalt Pavement, 410—1
 Diamond Grinding JPC Pavement,
 503—2
 JPC Pavement, 501—14
 Right-of-way
 Definition, 101—12
 Right-of-Way
 Marker Castings, 813—1
 Right-of-Way, 107—3
 Establishing, 201—1
 Monuments, 726—1
 Road
 Definition, 101—12
 Roadbed
 
 Chemically Stabilized, 208—1
 Definition, 101—12
 General, 204—3
 Rock Roadbed, 204—3
 Roadside
 Definition, 101—12
 Roadway
 Definition, 101—12
 Roadway and Drainage Excavation
 Classification, 204—1
 Design Quantity, 204—4
 Ditches, 204—2
 General, 204—1
 Landslides, 204—2
 Overhaul, 204—6
 Presplitting, 204—2
 Roadbed, 204—3
 Rock Roadbed, 204—3
 Serrated Slopes, 204—1
 Slopes, 204—1
 Tolerances, 204—4
 Use of Excavated Materials, 204—2
 Waste Areas, 204—3, 205—1
 Roadway Lighting
 Cable Markers, 716—5, 723—4
 Conduit Installation, 716—4
 Documentation, 834—8
 Drawings, 716—6
 General, 716—1
 Painting, 716—6
 Testing, 716—6
 Warranties, 834—8
 Wiring, 716—5
 Roadway Lighting Materials
 Ballasts, 834—7
 Concrete, 834—1
 Control Transformers, 834—8
 Ducted Cable, 834—1
 Fused Cable Connector Kit, 834—2
 General, 834—2
 Ground Rods, 834—1
 Lamps, 834—6
 Lighting Standards, 834—3
 Luminaires, 834—6
 Magnetic Contactors, 834—7
 Markers for Buried Conduit, 834—2
 Secondary Lightning Arresters, 834—8
 Transformer Bases, 834—3
 Weatherproof Enclosures, 834—7
 Wiring, 834—2
 Wood Poles, 834—8
 Rock Drainage Blanket
 Gradation, 805—5
 Rock Roadbed, 204—3
 
 Roll Up Signs, 830—1
 Rollers
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—12
 Rotational-Capacity Test, 813—4
 Rubber Gaskets
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box
 Culvert Sections, 611—2
 Rumble Strips
 Asphalt Pavement, 403—7
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—7
 Wedge Texturing, 403—7
 Safeloading Abandoned Underground
 Structures
 General, 708—1
 Materials, 708—1
 Septic tanks, 708—2
 Small drainage structures, 708—2
 Underground containers, 708—2
 Safety
 General, 107—1
 Plan, 108—4
 Public, 107—4
 Worker, 107—1
 Salt. See Sodium Chloride
 Sampling, 106—1
 Sawed Rumble Strips, 403—7
 Sawing Joints
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—9
 Scales, 109—2, 109—4
 Concrete, 601—2
 Scheduling, 108—1
 Scope of Work, 104—1
 Alterations of, 104—1
 Scratch Course, 403—8
 Sealing and Patching Concrete with Epoxy
 Resin
 Application of Epoxy Mortar for
 Patching, 510—1
 Epoxy Seal Coat, 510—2
 General, 510—1
 Mixing Epoxy Mortar for Patching,
 510—1
 Mixing Epoxy Resin, 510—1
 Surface Preparation, 510—1
 Sealing Joints
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—4
 Seasonal Limitations
 Planting, 724—1
 Seating
 Breaking and Seating JPC Pavement,
 504—2
 Sedimentation Basins, 213—3
 
 Seed, 827—1
 Seed and Protect
 Borrow Excavation, 205—2
 Corrective Seeding, 108—9
 Permanent, 212—1
 Seed Acceptance, 212—4
 Temporary, 213—5
 Seedbed, 212—2
 Seeding Plan, 108—4, 212—2
 Self-Consolidating Concrete, 601—9
 Self-Leveling Silicone Rubber Sealant
 Installation, JPC Pavement, 501—13
 Self-Leveling Silicone Rubber Seals
 JPC Pavement Uses, 501—11
 Septic Tanks
 Safeloading. See Safeloading
 Abandoned Underground Structures
 Treatment, 203—1
 Serrated Slopes, 204—1
 Settlement Platforms, 216—1
 Shear Connectors, Stud, 813—6
 Sheeting Signs
 Sign Substrates, 833—1
 Shipping
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—13
 Shop Coat
 Application, Structural Steel Bridges,
 607—18
 Shop Drawings, 101—14, 105—2
 Panel Traffic Signs, 715—2
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box
 Culvert Sections, 611—2
 Structural Plate Soil Interaction
 Structures, 612—1
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—2
 Shop Inspection
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—13
 Shoulder
 Definition, 101—12
 Pavement Wedge, 407—1
 Shoulder Rumble Strips, 403—7
 Shouldering, 209—2
 Shoulders
 JPC. See JPC Pavement
 Shrubs. See Planting
 Sidewalks, Concrete
 Backfilling, 505—2
 Curing, 505—2
 Edging, 505—1
 Forming, General, 505—1
 Forming, Side Form, 505—1
 Forming, Slip Form, 505—1
 General, 505—1
 Joints, 505—2
 Removal, 203—1
 
 Straightedging, 505—1
 Sign Posts
 General, 832—1
 Type I, 832—1
 Type II, 832—2
 Sign Substrates
 Panel Signs, 833—1
 Sheeting Signs, 833—1
 Signal Heads, 835—7
 Signal System Materials
 Pedestrian Signal Pedestal, 835—4
 Signals and Beacons, 835—6
 Steel Strain Poles, 835—2
 Traffic Poles, 835—1
 Wire and Cable, 835—5
 Signals, Traffic Control, 835—6
 Significant Projects, 112—7
 Signs, 112—3
 Construction Zone, 112—1
 Roll Up, 830—1
 Signs, Panel
 Beams and Supports, 715—2
 Bridge Mounting, 715—3
 Footings, Bases, and Pedestals, 715—2
 Install, 715—1
 Locating, 715—1
 Mounting, General, 715—3
 Shop Drawings, 715—2
 Silicone Rubber Sealant
 General, 807—4
 Installation, JPC Pavement, 501—12
 Non-Sag, 807—4
 Price Adjustment, Non-Sag, 807—7
 Silicone Rubber Seals
 JPC Pavement Uses, 501—11
 Silicone Sealant
 Rapid-Cure, 807—4, 807—5
 Silt Fence, 213—4
 Silt Fence, Temporary, 827—4
 Silt Traps, 213—4
 SinkholeTreatment, 215—1
 Site Conditions
 Differing, 104—2
 Slabs, Reinforced Concrete Bridge. See
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs
 Slip Form Pavers
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—1
 Slip Forming
 Entrance Pavements, 505—1
 Equipment, 601—4
 Finishing JPC Pavement, 501—5
 Median Barriers, Permanent Concrete,
 508—2
 Non-Structural Concrete, 601—25
 
 Pavers, 501—1
 Sidewalks, 505—1
 Slope Protection
 Crushed Aggregate, 703—2
 Cyclopean Stone Riprap, 703—2
 General, 703—1
 Geotextile, 214—1
 Materials, 703—1
 Reinforced Concrete Slope Wall, 703—
 1
 Slope Stakes, 201—1, 201—2
 Slopes, 204—1
 Serrated, 204—1
 Slotted Drain Pipe, 810—2
 General, 702—1
 Materials, 702—1
 Slump
 Concrete, 601—8
 Concrete, General, 601—15
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—4
 SMA, 412—1
 Small Drainage Structures
 Adjusted, 710—3
 Filling and Capping. See Filling and
 Capping Abandonded Underground
 Structures
 General, 710—1
 Materials, 710—1
 Newly Constructed, General, 710—1
 Newly Constructed, Precast (except
 manholes), 710—2
 Reconstructed, 710—3
 Safeloading. See Safeloading
 Abandoned Underground Structures
 Snowplowable Pavement Markers. See
 Raised Pavement Markers
 Sod, 212—5, 827—5
 Sodium Chloride, 825—1
 Soil Interaction Structures. See Structural
 Plate Soil Interaction Structures
 Soundings (Foundation)
 Structural Plate Soil Interaction
 Structures, 612—2
 Spans, Swinging
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—1
 Special Note
 Coordination, 105—3
 Definition, 101—12
 Special Provision
 Coordination, 105—3
 Definition, 101—12
 Specifications
 Conformity, 105—3
 
 Definition, 101—12
 Order of Precedence, 105—3
 Special Note, 101—12
 Special Provision, 101—12
 Standard Specifications, 101—13
 Supplemental Specifications, 101—13
 Spill Prevention Plan, 108—4
 Splicing
 Bearing Piles, 604—3
 Geotextile Construction, 214—1
 Steel Reinforcement, 602—2
 Wiring, 716—5, 723—4
 Stabilization
 Embankment Foundation, 214—1
 Subgrade, 214—1
 Staking
 Contractor, 105—5, 201—1
 Department, 201—1
 General, 201—1
 Standard Drawings
 Coordination, 105—3
 Definition, 101—13
 Standard Specifications
 Coordination, 105—3
 Definition, 101—13
 Static Load Tests
 Bearing Piles, 604—4
 Station Number Stencil
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—7
 Stay-in-Place Forms, 601—2
 Steel Bolts, Nuts, and Washers, 813—1
 Steel Bridges. See Structural Steel Bridges
 Steel Bridges, Maintenance Cleaning and
 Painting. See Maintenance Cleaning
 and Painting Steel Bridges
 Steel Joints
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—4
 Steel Plates
 Tunnel Lining Materials, 819—1
 Steel Reinforcement, 811—1
 Anchor Bolts, Material Requirements,
 811—1
 Bar Mats, 811—1
 Bars, Material Requirements, 811—1
 Bending, 602—1
 Bridge Slabs, 609—3
 Epoxy Coated, 602—1, 811—2
 General, 602—1
 Hook Bolts, Material Requirements,
 811—1
 Load Transfer Assemblies, 811—2
 Placing and Fastening, 602—1
 Prestressing Strands, 811—1
 
 Price Adjustment, 811—5
 Protection of Material, 602—1
 Splicing, 602—2
 Steel Wire, 811—1
 Straightening, 602—1
 Welded Deformed Steel Wire Fabric,
 811—1
 Welded Steel Wire Fabric (WWF),
 602—3, 811—1
 Steel Wire, 811—1
 Stencil, Station Number
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—7
 Steps, Concrete
 Backfilling, 505—2
 Curing, 505—2
 General, 505—1
 Stess Relieving
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—13
 Stiffeners, Fit of
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—12
 Stockpiles
 Cement, 601—5
 Payment, 109—9
 Storing, 109—8
 Topsoil, 204—3
 Stone-Matrix Asphalt, 412—1
 Storing Materials
 General, 106—3
 Stockpiled, 109—8
 Storm Sewer Pipe. See Culvert Pipe
 Storm Sewer Pipe Equivalent. See Culvert
 Pipe
 Straightedges
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—2
 Straightedging
 Concrete Entrance Pavement, 505—1
 Concrete Sidewalks, 505—1
 Straightening Bent Material
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—15
 Straw Mulch, 212—2
 Streams, Construction Activities
 Affecting, 213—3
 Striping
 Durable Preformed, Type I Tape, 714—
 1
 Paint, 842—1
 Permanent, 713—1
 Thermoplastic, 714—1, 837—1
 Structural Plate Pipe, 701—4
 Structural Plate Soil Interaction Structures
 Composition, 612—1
 End structures, 612—3
 Erection Plans, 612—1
 
 General, 612—1
 Installation, 612—2
 Materials, 612—1
 Paving, Asphalt, 612—2
 Paving, Concrete, 612—2
 Shop Drawings, 612—1
 Soundings for Foundation, 612—2
 Transportation and Handling, 612—1
 Structural Plates for Pipe, Pipe Arches,
 and Arches, 809—1
 Aluminum Alloy, 809—1
 Corrugated Steel, 809—1
 Structural Steel
 Price Adjustment, 607—20
 Structural Steel Bridges
 Abutting Joints, 607—12
 Annealing and Stress Relieving, 607—
 13
 Bearings and Anchorages, 607—15
 Bent Plates, 607—12
 Bolt Holes, 607—2
 Bolt Tension, 607—6
 Bolted Connections, 607—5
 Boring Pin Holes, 607—13
 Cleaning and Painting, 607—16
 Direct Tension Indicators, Material
 Requirements, 607—1
 Direct Tension Indicators, Use, 607—8
 Edge Planing, 607—9
 End Connection Angles, 607—12
 Facing of Bearing Surfaces, 607—11
 Falsework, Erection Methods, and
 Equipment, 607—14
 Field Assembling, 607—15
 Field Inspection, 607—14
 Field Storing and Handling Materials,
 607—14
 Finished Members, 607—12
 Fit of Stiffeners, 607—12
 Flame Cutting, 607—9
 Forgings, 607—13
 General, 607—1
 Heat Curving, 607—10
 Inspection Facilities, 607—13
 Match Marking, 607—5
 Material Traceability, 607—4
 Mill and Shop Inspection and Shipping,
 607—13
 Miscellaneous Metals, 607—1
 Misfits, 607—16
 Notice of Beginning Work, 607—13
 Painting, Field Coat Applications,
 607—19
 Painting, Field Coat Preparation, 607—
 19
 
 Painting, Identification Plate, 607—20
 Painting, Repair of Coatings, 607—20
 Painting, Shop Coat Application, 607—
 18
 Painting, Shop Coat Preparation, 607—
 18
 Pin Clearances, 607—13
 Pin Connections, 607—15
 Pins and Rollers, 607—12
 Removal of Falsework, 607—16
 Reuse of Bolts, 607—8
 Shop Assembly, 607—4
 Shop Drawings, 607—2
 Straightening Bent Material, 607—15
 Threads for Bolts and Pins, 607—13
 Web Plates, 607—12
 Welding Procedures, 607—2
 Welds, 607—9
 Workmanship, 607—2
 Structural Steel Coatings
 Project Acceptance, 821—1
 Sampling and Testing, 821—1
 Structural Steel Coatings
 General, 821—1
 Structural Steels
 Material Requirements, 812—1
 Structure Excavation
 Cofferdams, 603—3
 Common, 603—1
 General, 603—1
 Solid Rock, 603—1
 Unclassified, 603—1
 Structure Excavation and Backfill
 Channel Preservation, 603—1
 Classification, 603—1
 Drainage, 603—2
 Footing, 603—1
 Structure Granular Backfill
 Gradation, 805—5
 Structures
 Backfilling, 603—2
 Definition, 101—13
 Forming, 601—23
 Hauling Over, 105—6
 Partial Removal, 203—1
 Removal, 203—1
 Stud Shear Connectors, 813—6
 Subcontracting, 108—1
 Subcontractor
 Definition, 101—13
 Subgrade
 Compaction, 207—1
 Construction Tolerances, 207—1
 Definition, 101—11
 Drainage, 209—2
 
 General, 207—1
 Geotextile, 214—1
 Protection and Maintenance, 207—1
 Reshaping and Compacting, 207—1
 Substructure
 Concrete Bridges, Classes of Concrete,
 608—1
 Concrete Bridges, Placing Concrete,
 608—1
 Concrete Bridges, Steel Reinforcement,
 608—1
 Definition, 101—13
 Subsurface Drainage Outlets. See
 Pavement Edge Drains
 Suits, 107—6
 Superpave Mix Design Technologist,
 402—1
 Superpave Plant Technologist, 402—1
 Superstructure
 Concrete Bridges, General, 608—2
 Concrete Bridges, Placing, 608—2
 Concrete Bridges, Steel Reinforcement,
 608—2
 Supplemental Agreement
 Definition, 101—13
 General, 109—7
 Supplemental Drawings
 Definition, 101—13
 Supplemental Specifications
 Coordination, 105—3
 Definition, 101—13
 Surface Correction
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—6
 Surface Course
 Definition, 101—11
 Surface Courses
 Reinforced concrete bridge slabs,
 609—7
 Surface Finish
 Concrete Box Culverts, 610—2
 Concrete Headwalls, 610—2
 Floated Surface, 601—34
 General, 601—32
 Masonry Coating, 601—32
 Ordinary Surface, 601—32
 Prestressed and Precast Concrete
 Products, 605—5
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—8
 Surface Tolerance Testing
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—13
 Surveying
 Electronic, 201—1
 
 General, 201—1
 Suspension of Work, 108—8
 Tack Coat, 406—1
 Tackifier for Mulch, 827—3
 Tape, Temporary, 831—1
 Tape, Type I, Striping
 Material, 836—1
 Price Adjustment, 713—3, 714—5,
 717—3
 Proving Period, 714—3
 Taxes, 107—3
 TCP, 112—3
 Temperature Limitations
 Bridge Restoration and Waterproofing
 with Concrete Overlays, 606—2
 Cement Treated Drainage Blanket,
 303—3
 Chemically Stabilized Roadbed, 208—
 1
 Concrete, 601—5, 601—20
 Durable Pavement Striping, 714—3
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—3
 Maintenance Cleaning and Painting
 Steel Bridges, 614—1
 Planting, 724—1
 Prestressed and Precast Concrete
 Products, 605—3
 Thermoplastic Intersection Markings,
 717—2
 Temporary Concrete Barrier, 112—1
 Temporary Crash Cushion, 725—1
 Temporary Ditch, 213—4
 Temporary Mulch, 213—2, 213—5
 Temporary Pavement Markings, 112—1
 Temporary Silt Fence, 827—4
 Temporary Striping, 112—5
 Temporary Traffic Signals, 112—2, 112—
 4
 Tension
 Bolts, 607—6
 Termination
 Contract, 108—9
 Contractor's Responsibility, 108—11
 Termination of Contract, 108—10
 Test Piles
 Bearing, 604—3
 Test Section
 Breaking and Seating JPC Pavement,
 504—1
 Diamond Grinding JPC Pavement,
 503—1
 Testing, 106—1
 Pipe, 701—6
 Roadway Lighting, 716—6
 
 Texturing
 Diamond Grinding JPC Pavement,
 503—2
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—7
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—7
 Texturing Pavement Wedge, 403—7
 Thermoplastic Intersection Markings
 Equipment, 717—1
 General, 717—1
 Layout, 717—1
 Proving Period, 717—2
 Restrictions, 717—2
 Retroreflectivity Requirements, 717—2
 Thermoplastic Marking Material, 837—1
 Thermoplastic Pavement Striping
 Price Adjustment, 713—3, 714—5,
 717—3
 Thermoplastic Pipe, 701—1
 Thermoplastic Striping
 Application Equipment, 714—1
 General, 714—1
 Proving Period, 714—3
 Thickness
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—15
 Timber, 104—3
 Timber Guardrail Posts, 814—1
 Timber Poles, 820—1
 Timber Structures
 Hardware, 829—1
 Time Clock, 835—16
 Time Extension, 108—6
 Time Limits
 Discharge of Concrete, 601—16
 TMA, 112—2, 112—4, 725—3
 Tolerances, 105—3, See also, Appendix A
 Accuracy of Reamed and Drilled Holes,
 607—3
 Asphalt Materials, 806—5
 Asphalt Surface, 403—9
 Bearing Piles, 604—5
 DGA and CSB Base, 302—3
 Diamond Grinding JPC Pavement,
 503—2
 Edge Distance of Bolts, 607—4
 JPC Pavement, 501—13
 JPC Pavement, Thickness, 501—15
 Prestressed and Precast, 605—5
 Roadway and Drainage Excavation,
 204—4
 Subgrade, 207—1
 Topdressing, 212—3
 Topdresssing, 108—9
 
 Topsoil, 212—1, 827—4
 Furnish and Place, 212—1
 Spreading Stockpiled, 204—3, 212—1
 Traffic Control
 Arrow Panels, 112—4
 Barrier Walls, 112—5
 Blasting, 112—5
 Coordinator, 112—6
 Crash Cushions, 112—5
 Detour, 112—4
 Devices, 112—1
 Diversion, 112—4
 Drop-Offs, 112—5
 General, 112—1
 Lane Closure, Long Term, 112—4
 Signalized Intersection, 112—7
 Significant Projects, 112—7
 Signs, 112—3
 Supervisor, 112—6
 Technician, 112—6
 Temporary Pavement Marking, 112—5
 Temporary Traffic Signals, 112—4
 Traffic Control Plan, 112—3
 Traffic Control Devices
 Documentation, 835—18
 Pedestrian Pushbutton Detectors,
 
 835—10
 Pedestrian Signals, 835—7
 Signal Heads, 835—7
 Signals and Beacons, 835—6
 Temporary Traffic Signals, 112—2
 Time Clock, 835—16
 TMA, 112—2, 112—4
 Traffic Loop Encapsulant, 835—12
 Warranties, 835—18
 Traffic Control Plans, 108—4
 Traffic Loop Encapsulant, 835—12
 Traffic Signal
 Conduit Installation, 723—2
 Traffic Signs, Panel
 Beams and Supports, 715—2
 Bridge Mounting, 715—3
 Footings, Bases, and Pedestals, 715—2
 General, 715—1
 Locating, 715—1
 Mounting, General, 715—3
 Shop Drawings, 715—2
 Transformers, 834—7
 Transverse Construction Joints
 JPC Pavement, 501—11
 Transverse Contraction Joints
 JPC Pavement, 501—10
 Transverse Expansion Joints
 JPC Pavement, 501—10
 
 Transverse Joints
 Medians, Concrete, 507—1
 Treatment of Open Sinkholes, 215—1
 Trees. See Planting
 Trees and Stumps
 Removal, 202—1
 Tremies, 601—18, 601—19
 Trenching
 Culvert Pipe, 701—2
 Trip Tickets
 Concrete, 601—6
 Truck Mounted Attenuator, 112—2,
 112—4, 725—3
 t-test, 402—5
 Tunnel Lining Materials, 819—1
 Bolts and Nuts, 819—1
 Steel Plates, 819—1
 Tunnels, 707—1
 Unauthorized Work, 105—2
 Under Water Concrete
 Placing, 601—19
 Undercutting
 Foundation, 603—4
 Pipe, 701—8
 Underdrains. See Also Pavement Edge
 Drains
 Backfill, 704—2
 Camera Inspection, 704—4
 Coarse Aggregate, 805—5
 Fine Aggregate, 804—4
 General, 704—1
 Geotextile, 214—1
 Material Requirement, 810—3
 Materials, 704—1
 Non-Perforated, 704—2
 Pavment Edge Drains, 704—3
 Perforated, 704—2
 Porous Aggregate, 704—2
 Underground Containers, Abandoned
 Safeloading. See Safeloading
 Abandoned Underground Structures
 Underground Storage Tanks, 202—1
 Underground Structures, Treatment,
 708—1
 Underrun, 104—2
 Unstable Material
 Coarse Aggregates, 805—2
 Utilities
 Contractor's Responsibilities, 107—7
 Cooperation with, 105—5
 Valley Gutter, Concrete, 506—1
 Value Engineering, 111—1
 Variable Message Signs, 112—1
 Vertical Wick Drains, 711—1
 Vibrating
 
 Concrete, 601—18
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—5
 Vibrators
 JPC Pavement, Base and Shoulders,
 501—2
 Vibratrors, Concrete, 601—4
 Vines. See Planting
 Vinsol Resin, 802—1
 Wage Requirements, 107—3
 Washers
 Steel, 813—1
 Timber Structures, 829—1
 Waste Areas, 204—2, 204—3, 205—1
 Waste Material
 Disposal, 204—3, 205—1
 Water, 803—1
 Construction Over, 107—5
 Pollution, 107—1
 Water Blasting Pavement Markings,
 717—3
 Water Jets, 604—1
 Water Pollution Control
 General, 213—1
 Inspection and Maintenance, 213—2
 Progress Requirements, 213—2
 Sedimentation Basins, 213—3
 Seeding and Protection, Permanent,
 212—1
 Seeding and Protection, Temporary,
 
 213—5
 Silt Fence, 213—4
 Silt Traps, 213—4
 Temporary Ditch, 213—4
 Temporary Measures, 213—3
 Temporary Mulch, 213—5
 Water Wells
 Plugging. See Plugging Abandoned
 Underground Structures
 Waterproofing Materials
 Asphalt Primer, 808—1
 Fiberglass Waterproofing Membrane,
 808—1
 Fiber-Reinforced Waterproofing
 Membrane, 808—1
 General, 808—1
 Mop Coat, 808—1
 Waterproofing Membranes
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—7
 Water-Reducing Admixtures, 802—1
 Water-Reducing and Accelerating
 Admixtures, 802—1
 Water-Reducing and Retarding
 Admixtures, 802—1
 
 Wearing Course
 Definition, 101—11
 Weather Limitations
 Bridge Restoration and Waterproofing
 with Concrete Overlays, 606—2
 Cement Treated Drainage Blanket,
 303—3
 Chemically Stabilized Roadbed, 208—
 1
 Concrete, 601—20
 Durable Pavement Striping, 714—3
 JPC Pavement, Base, and Shoulders,
 501—3
 Maintenance Cleaning and Painting
 Steel Bridges, 614—1
 Planting, 724—1
 Prestressed Concrete Products, 605—3
 Reinforced Concrete Bridge Slabs,
 609—5
 Thermoplastic Intersection Markings,
 717—2
 Web Plates
 Structural Steel Bridges, 607—12
 Weep Holes
 Box Culverts, 611—2
 Concrete Slope Walls, 703—1
 Retaining Walls, 613—2
 Weighing, 109—2
 Small Quantities, 109—6
 Weldable Steel, 811—1
 Welded Deformed Steel Wire Fabric,
 811—1
 Welded Steel Wire Fabric (WWF), 602—
 3
 Material Requirements, 811—1
 Welding
 Certification, 106—4
 Materials, Procedures, and Inspection,
 813—6
 Procedures for Structural Steel Bridges,
 607—2
 Structual Steel Bridges, 607—9
 Wells
 Filling and Capping. See Filling and
 Capping Abandonded Underground
 Structures
 Wells (Water)
 Plugging. See Plugging Abandoned
 Underground Structures
 Wet Curing Concrete, 601—30
 White Polyethylene Film, 823—1
 Wick Drains, 711—1
 Wiring
 Roadway Lighting, 716—5
 Splicing, 716—5, 723—4
 
 Witness Post, 726—1
 Wood Products
 Boards, 818—1
 Bridge Planking and Rough Local
 Hardwoods, 818—1
 Dimension Lumber, 818—1
 General, 818—1
 Inspection, Testing, and Acceptance,
 818—1
 Preservative Treatment, 818—2
 Structural Lumber, 818—1
 Timbers, 5-inch by 5-inch and larger,
 818—1
 Work
 Contractor's Responsibility, 107—6
 Definition, 101—14
 Failure to Complete on Time, 108—8
 Force Account, 109—7
 Prosecution of, 108—4
 Suspension of, 108—8
 Through National Forests and Parks,
 107—2
 
 Worker Safety, 107—1
 Workers
 Sufficient Quality and Quantity, 108—
 5
 Working Days, 108—4, 108—6
 Definition, 101—14
 Working Drawings, 105—2
 Definition, 101—14
 Woven Wire Fabric, Material
 Requirements, 816—1
 Woven Wire Fencing Material
 Barbed Wire, 816—1
 Brace Wire, 816—1
 Braces, 816—1
 Fabric Ties, 816—1
 Gates, 816—2
 General, 816—1
 Posts, 816—1
 Woven Wire Fabric, 816—1
 Written Narrative, 108—1
 
 