WEST VIRGINIA
 DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
 DIVISION OF HIGHWAYS
 
 2017 Edition
 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS
 ROADS AND BRIDGES
 
 Electronic copies of this book can be obtained via the Internet at
 www.Transportation.wv.gov
 
 TAKE ME HOME, COUNTRY ROADS
 Long before there was a State of West Virginia or even a Colony of Virginia, there were
 roads here. To a greater degree than in most other states, particularly those with flat topography,
 West Virginia’s roads are organic in nature. Herds of bison had carved trails that were used by
 prehistoric natives from the Adena and Fort Ancient cultures, and later the different tribes that
 traversed the region, such as the Shawnee, Cherokee, and Iroquois. In the 17th century, Europeans
 arrived and began dividing up spaces that had formerly known no boundaries. As they moved
 westward from the Atlantic coast and into the Appalachian Mountains, they found these bison &
 native trails to be useful in their own migration.
 Many of those same trails are still used today in the form of paved highways that evolved
 over the centuries. The Great Indian War & Trading Path of antiquity is now U.S. Route 219, and
 the famous Midland Trail is today’s U.S. Route 60, stretching from the state’s eastern border with
 Virginia to its western border with Kentucky. Where Native American hunters once pursued bison
 for sustenance, we now traverse the same roads to go to the grocery store, school, work, and all
 other activities.
 As the American colonies became the United States, it was necessary to invest in the new
 nation’s infrastructure. President Jefferson authorized the first federal highway, The National
 Road, to be built from Cumberland, Maryland to Wheeling. Not only did this highway bring new
 settlers to the Ohio Valley city, but it propagated the construction of the Wheeling Suspension
 Bridge in 1849, to allow the highway to extend to St. Louis. At that time it was the longest bridge
 in the world, and the first to extend over 1,000 feet. Still in use, it is known today as the “Father
 of American Bridges.”
 While West Virginia was a part of the Old Dominion, Virginia built The Northwestern
 Turnpike, now known as US50, and the Staunton-Parkersburg Turnpike, which follows present
 day US250/US33/WV47. As students of history know, the western portion of the state had more
 than its share of gripes with the mother state, especially over slavery, representation, taxation, and
 overall support. Hence, President Lincoln’s creation of the State of West Virginia in 1863, allowed
 the people who inhabited the land from the mountains over to the Ohio River to be in charge of
 their own destiny.
 The late 19th and early 20th century saw West Virginia and the rest of the nation begin to
 develop ideas and methodologies to improve our roadway systems. However, it wasn’t until 1917,
 with the creation of the State Road Commission, that West Virginia began road building in earnest.
 America’s entry into World War I and Henry Ford’s mass manufacturing of affordable
 automobiles ramped up the need for modern highways exponentially. The voters of West Virginia
 realized this need, and with the passage of two Good Roads Amendments in the 1920’s dirt and
 macadam gave way to paved roads with great alacrity.
 Steady improvements were not always possible during the Depression era, as the state
 assumed control of all roads but generally had inadequate funds to maintain or expand the roadway
 system. Although, with the advent of World War II, the importance of an efficient network to
 
 transport goods and services again came to the forefront. An influx of emergency wartime funding
 boosted the roadbuilding efforts in West Virginia and the conception of the Interstate System
 foreshadowed the era to come.
 In 1950, the state began construction of the West Virginia Turnpike, which would propel
 the economy of not just the region, but provide a much needed link from Midwestern markets to
 those in the South. Later in the 1950s, President Eisenhower authorized the Interstate Highway
 Act, and that vast ribbon of concrete and asphalt would eventually connect West Virginia and all
 of the 48 contiguous states.
 In the 1960’s, the Appalachian Development Highway System was authorized to provide
 economic growth to the Appalachian states including West Virginia by building better traversable
 highways throughout the mountainous terrain. In the decades to follow many Appalachian
 Corridors were constructed across the mountain state to provide its citizens a modern
 transportation system. This network of highways is constructed through narrow stream valleys and
 over mountaintops producing amazing views and engineering accomplishments such as the iconic
 New River Gorge Bridge. The 1960’s also encompassed the tragedy of the Silver Bridge collapse
 in Mason County. However, its legacy is not that of footnote wasted to history. Instead, it lead to
 the formation of the National Bridge Inspection Program which has served the nation hence.
 Throughout subsequent generations, the State Road Commission would evolve into the
 Division of Highways, and become part of the Department of Transportation that oversees all
 forms of travel in the Mountain State. Through its concerted efforts, West Virginia’s interstate
 system was driven to completion, and the Appalachian corridors vastly expanded and now endure
 with major works continuing to this day.
 Thanks to the evolution of trails and paths and roads, West Virginia has a modern system
 of connectivity. A place once known as a barrier to the nation’s growth, has become the home of
 the nation’s 6th largest roadway system. More than 36,000 miles and over 7,000 bridges create a
 network that serpentines hill, hollow, ridge and vale. Comprised not only of major river crossings,
 interstates and expressways, but also the many small structures and rural byways woven into the
 landscape are of vital importance to safety, commerce and quality of life of local communities
 throughout the state.
 Like the herds of bison that ran uninhibited in prehistory, West Virginia travelers can use
 these roads to celebrate our motto, Montani Semper Liberi: Mountaineers Are Always Free!
 
 A Century of Transformation
 1917-2017
 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS
 DIVISION 100-GENERAL PROVISIONS
 Section
 101
 102
 103
 104
 105
 106
 107
 108
 109
 110
 
 Definition of Terms
 Bidding Requirements and Conditions
 Award and Execution of Contract
 Scope of Work
 Control of Work
 Control of Materials
 Legal Relations and Responsibility to Public
 Prosecution and Progress
 Measurement and Payment
 Miscellaneous Provisions
 
 DIVISION 200-EARTHWORK
 201
 202
 203
 204
 206
 207
 211
 212
 217
 218
 219
 228
 229
 240
 
 Clearing and Grubbing
 Building Demolition, Well and Septic Tank Abandonment
 Dismantling Structures
 Mobilization
 Base Course Reinforcement Geogrid
 Excavation and Embankment
 Borrow Excavation
 Structure, Rock, and Wet Excavation
 Special Rock Fill
 Slope and Foundation Protection
 Controlled Low-Strength Material
 Subgrade Preparation
 Shoulders and Ditches
 Cleaning Culverts, Inlets and Manholes
 
 DIVISION 300-BASES
 307
 311
 
 Crushed Aggregate Base Course
 Open Graded Free Draining Base Course
 
 DIVISION 400-ASPHALT PAVEMENTS
 401
 402
 405
 408
 410
 412
 415
 
 Asphalt Base, Wearing, and Patching and Leveling Courses
 Asphalt Skid Resistant Pavement
 Surface Treatments
 Tack Coat
 Asphalt Base and Wearing Courses, Percent Within Limits (PWL)
 Winter Grade Asphalt Patching Mixture
 Milling of Asphalt Pavement Surfaces
 i
 
 DIVISION 500-RIGID PAVEMENT
 Section
 501
 502
 503
 504
 506
 507
 508
 510
 511
 512
 513
 514
 
 Portland Cement Concrete Pavement
 Approach Slabs
 Sealing Cracks in Concrete Pavement
 Bituminous Underseal for Concrete Pavement
 Concrete Pavement Repair
 Crack and Pothole Repair
 Diamond Grinding
 Re-Sealing Concrete Pavement Joints
 Dowel Bar Retrofit
 Concrete Slab Stabilization
 Concrete Pavement Cross Stitching
 Roller Compacted Concrete
 
 DIVISION 600-INCIDENTAL CONSTRUCTION
 601
 602
 603
 604
 605
 606
 607
 608
 609
 610
 611
 612
 614
 615
 616
 617
 618
 619
 620
 621
 622
 623
 624
 625
 626
 631
 632
 633
 634
 
 Structural Concrete
 Reinforcing Steel
 Prestressed Concrete Members
 Pipe Culverts
 Manholes and Inlets
 Underdrains
 Guardrail
 Right-of-Way Fence
 Sidewalks
 Curbs, Combination Curbs and Gutters and Medians
 Precast Concrete Traffic Dividers
 Tunnel Liner Plate Pipe
 Piling Walls
 Steel Structures
 Piling
 Railings
 Cast Bronze and Rolled Copper-Alloy Expansion Plates
 Waterproofing
 Three-Sided Reinforced Concrete Bridge/Culvert
 Steel Grid Flooring
 Timber Bridge Structures
 Pneumatically Applied Mortar
 Preformed Elastomeric Joint Sealer
 Drilled Caisson Foundations
 Retaining Wall Systems
 Electrical Work
 Horizontal Drains
 Concrete Gutter, Invert Pipe Gutter, or Dumped Rock Gutter
 Concrete Cribbing
 ii
 
 Section
 635
 636
 637
 638
 639
 640
 641
 642
 645
 651
 652
 653
 654
 655
 656
 657
 658
 659
 660
 661
 662
 663
 664
 665
 670
 675
 679
 681
 685
 687
 688
 689
 690
 
 Metal Cribbing
 Maintaining Traffic
 Water
 Project Markers, Right-of-Way Markers, Survey Markers, and Outlet Markers
 Construction Surveying
 Field Office and Storage Building
 Mitigation Devices
 Temporary Pollution Control
 Reinforced Soil Slopes
 Furnishing and Placing Topsoil
 Seeding and Mulching
 Vine and Ground Cover Planting
 Tree and Shrub Planting
 Matting for Erosion Control
 Seedling Planting
 Roadside Sign Supports
 Overhead Sign Structures
 Sign Lighting
 Traffic Signals
 Traffic Signs and Delineators
 Roadway Lighting
 Pavement Markings
 Traffic Safety Devices
 Plugging Gas, Oil, and Drilled Water Wells
 Waterline Installation
 Sanitary Sewers
 Overlaying of Portland Cement Concrete Bridge Decks
 Asbestos Abatement
 Bridge Cleaning
 Shop Painting Metal Structures
 Field Painting of Metal Structures
 Metalizing Steel
 Surface Preparation and Powder Coating of New Galvanized Steel for
 Highway Signing and Lighting Structures
 
 DIVISION 700-MATERIALS DETAILS
 701
 702
 703
 704
 705
 707
 708
 709
 710
 
 Hydraulic Cement
 Fine Aggregate
 Coarse Aggregate
 Stone and Crushed Aggregate
 Asphalt Materials
 Concrete Admixtures, Curing and Coating Materials
 Joint Materials
 Metals
 Wood Materials
 iii
 
 Section
 711
 712
 713
 714
 715
 716
 717
 718
 
 Paints, Coatings, Oils, and Inks
 Guardrail and Fence
 Metal Pipe
 Concrete, Clay, Fiber and Plastic Pipe
 Miscellaneous Materials
 Embankment and Subgrade Material
 Compaction Control of Base Course Material
 Sewer and Waterline Material
 
 iv
 
 DIVISION 100
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
 SECTION 101
 DEFINITION OF TERMS
 101.1-ABBREVIATIONS:
 Whenever the following abbreviations are used in these Specifications, Plans or Contract
 Documents, they are to be construed the same as the respective expressions represented:
 AAN
 AAR
 AASHTO
 AIA
 AISC
 AISI
 AMA
 AMS
 ANSI
 ARA
 AREA
 AREMA
 ASCE
 ASD
 ASLA
 ASTM
 ATSSA
 AWWA
 AWS
 FHWA
 FSS
 IEEE
 IPCEA
 ISA
 MIL
 MP
 NBFU
 NEC
 NEMA
 NFPA
 PEI-ALS
 UL
 SAE
 SSPC
 TTE-TTP
 
 American Association of Nurserymen
 Association of American Railroads
 American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
 American Institute of Architects
 American Institute of Steel Construction, Incorporated
 American Iron and Steel Institute
 Automotive Manufacturer's Association
 Aerospace Material Specification
 American National Standards Institute
 American Railway Association
 American Railway Engineering Association
 American Railway Engineering and Maintenance of Way Association
 American Society of Civil Engineers
 Aluminum Standards & Data-Aluminum Association
 American Society of Landscape Architects
 American Society for Testing and Materials
 American Traffic Safety Services Association
 American Water Works Association
 American Welding Society
 Federal Highway Administration
 Federal Specifications and Standards, General Services Administration
 Institute of Electronic and Electrical Engineers
 Insulated Power Cable Engineers Association
 Instrument Society of America
 Military Specification
 Materials Procedure
 National Board of Fire Underwriters
 National Electric Code
 National Electrical Manufacturer's Association
 National Fire Protection Association
 Porcelain Enamel Institute: Aluminum Standards
 Underwriters Laboratories
 Society of Automotive Engineers
 Society for Protective Coatings
 Federal Specifications and Standards
 
 1
 
 101.2-DEFINITIONS:
 Access Connection-Any roadway facility by means of which vehicles enter or leave arterial
 highways.
 Advertisements-The public announcement, as required by law, inviting bids for work to be
 performed, or material to be furnished.
 Arterial Highway-A general term denoting a highway primarily for through traffic.
 Auxiliary Lane-The portion of the roadway adjoining the traveled way for parking, speedchange or other purposes supplementary to through traffic movement.
 Award-The acceptance by the Division of a bid.
 Base Course-A layer or layers of specified material of designated thickness placed on a subbase
 or a subgrade to support a surface course or courses.
 Bidder-An individual, firm, corporation, or combination thereof, acting directly or through a
 duly authorized representative, and prequalified according to the requirements and provisions of
 the Division, submitting a bid for the proposed work.
 Bridge-A structure, including supports, erected over a depression or an obstruction, such as water,
 a highway or railway and having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads
 and having a length measured along the center of roadway of more than 20 ft. (6.1 meters) between
 under copings of abutments or extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes.
 The length of a bridge structure is the overall length measured along the line of survey stationing
 back to back of abutments if present, otherwise, end to end of the bridge floor, but in no case less
 than the total clear opening of the structure. Roadway width is the clear width measured at right
 angles to the longitudinal centerline of the bridge between the bottom of curbs.
 Calendar Day-Every day shown on the calendar.
 Certified Technician-A Certified Technician is an individual who has been examined by the joint
 Industry-Division Certification Board and deemed competent in the particular technical field for
 which the individual has been examined. This competency is documented by written notification
 and issuance of a certificate to the individual and remains in effect for a given period of time as
 determined by the regulations of the Board. Should any questions develop concerning the status
 of an individual, verification may be made through the Training section of the Personnel Division
 of the Division.
 Change Order-A general term referring to force account work orders, supplemental agreements,
 and work orders of the Contract.
 Channel-A natural or artificial water course.
 
 2
 
 City, Town or District-A subdivision of the county used to designate or identify the location of
 the proposed work.
 Commissioner-West Virginia Commissioner of Highways.
 Construction Limits-The physical limits of construction as described by designated lines drawn
 on the Plans.
 Contract-The written agreement between the Division and the Contractor covering the
 performance of the work, the furnishing of labor, equipment and materials, and the basis of
 payment. The Contract includes the invitation of bids, proposal, contract form, contract bond,
 specifications, supplemental specifications, special provisions, plans, notice to proceed, any
 change orders and supplemental agreements that are required to complete the construction of the
 work in an acceptable manner, including authorized extensions thereof, all of which constitute one
 instrument.
 Contract Bond-The approved form of security, executed by the Contractor and their surety,
 guaranteeing completion of the work and payment of all legal debts pertaining to the construction
 of the project.
 Contract Period-The period from the specified date of commencement of work to the specified
 date of completion of the work, both dates inclusive, as is specified in the Contract.
 Contract Time-The number of work or calendar days specified in the proposal, indicating the
 time allowed for the completion of the work contemplated, including authorized time extensions.
 Contractor-The individual, firm or corporation, party of the second part to the Contract, acting
 directly or through their agents, employees, or subcontractors.
 Control Of Access, Full-The condition where the right of owners or occupants of abutting land
 or other persons to access, light, air or view in connection with a highway is fully controlled by
 public authority. The authority to control access is exercised to give preference to through traffic
 by providing access connections with selected public roads only and by prohibiting crossings at
 grade or direct driveway connections.
 Control Of Access, Partial-The condition where the right of owners or occupants of abutting land
 or other persons to access, light, air or view in connection with a highway is partially controlled
 by public authority. The authority to control access is exercised to give preference to through
 traffic to a degree that, in addition to access connections with selected public roads, there may be
 some crossings at grade and some private driveway connections.
 County-The County or Counties of West Virginia in which the work is to be done.
 Culvert-Any structure not classified as a bridge which provides an opening under the roadway.
 Department-West Virginia Department of Transportation.
 3
 
 Division-West Virginia Division of Highways
 Divided Highway-A highway with separated roadways for traffic in opposite directions.
 Easement-A right acquired by one party to use land belonging to another party for a specified
 purpose.
 Embankment-The structure of soils, soils aggregate and broken rock between the embankment
 foundation and the subgrade.
 Embankment Foundation-The material below the original ground surface whose physical
 characteristics affect the support of the embankment.
 Employee-Any person working on behalf of the project who is under the direction of the
 Contractor or any subcontractor.
 Engineer-The State Highway Engineer of the Division, or an authorized representative, limited
 by the scope of duties assigned.
 Equipment-All machinery and equipment, together with the necessary supplies for upkeep and
 maintenance, and also tools and apparatus necessary for the proper construction and acceptable
 completion of the work.
 Estimates-The official written itemization of the value of materials in place and work performed.
 Expressway-A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or partial control of access
 and generally with grade separations at intersections.
 Extra Work-An item of work not provided for in the contract as awarded, but found essential to
 the satisfactory completion of the Contract within its intended scope. See further 104.3.
 Force Account Work Order-An order signed by the Engineer or an authorized representative,
 directing additional work to be performed, with payments based on labor, materials used,
 equipment cost, plus specified percentages.
 Freeway-An expressway with full control of access.
 Frontage Street or Road-A local street or road auxiliary to and located on the side of an arterial
 highway for service to abutting property and adjacent areas, and for control of access.
 Highway-The entire improvement comprising the entire right-of-way. See definition for Road in
 Section 101.
 Highway Grade Separation-Any structure carrying highway or street traffic over or under
 another highway or street.
 
 4
 
 Holidays-Official holidays are New Year's Day, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, President’s Day,
 Memorial Day, West Virginia Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veteran's Day,
 Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and any day in which an election (Primary or General) is held
 through the State and such other days as the President, Governor, or other duly constituted
 authority shall proclaim to be holidays. If a holiday falls of Sunday, the following Monday shall
 be observed in lieu thereof. If a holiday falls on a Saturday, the previous Friday shall be observed
 in lieu thereof.
 Inspector-The Engineer's authorized representative assigned to make any or all necessary
 inspection of the work as further described in 105.10.
 Instructions to Bidders-The notice to Contractors containing all necessary information as to
 provisions, requirements, date and time of submitting Proposals.
 Invitation for Bids-The advertisement for bids, as required by law, inviting bids for work to be
 performed or material to be furnished.
 Item-A specifically described unit of work for which a price is provided in the contract.
 Laboratory-The testing laboratories of the Division or any other testing laboratory designated by
 the Division.
 Lot-A lot is an isolated quantity of specified material from a single source or a measured amount
 of specified construction assumed to be produced by the same process.
 Materials-Any substances specified for use in the construction of the project and its
 appurtenances.
 Materials Procedure-A procedure defining standard methods or guidelines for the inspection,
 sampling, testing, evaluation, and documentation of the Material's Division activities relative to
 the quality assurance program for materials, products, and processes. Each Materials Procedure is
 identified by the letters MP followed by seven digits, (i.e. MP XXX.XX.XX).
 Median-The portion of a divided highway separating the traveled ways for traffic in opposite
 directions.
 Median Lane-A speed-change lane within the median to accommodate left-turning vehicles.
 Multiple Deficiency-A multiple deficiency is defined as a failure to meet specified requirements
 involving more than one characteristic of a material within the same lot.
 Notice To Proceed-Written notice to the Contractor to proceed with the contract work including,
 when applicable, the date of beginning of contract time.
 Parking Lane-An auxiliary lane primarily for the purpose of vehicular parking.
 
 5
 
 Parkway-An arterial highway for non-commercial traffic, with full or partial control of access,
 and usually located within a park or a ribbon of parklike development.
 Pavement Structure-The combination of subbase, base course, and surface course placed on a
 subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the roadbed.
 Plans-The approved Plans, profiles, typical cross sections, working drawings, standard drawings,
 and supplemental drawings, or exact reproductions thereof, which show the location, character,
 dimensions and details of the work to be done.
 Pre-Construction Conference-A conference normally called by the District Engineer, following
 award and prior to start of construction, to be attended by Division officials and by the responsible
 officials of the Contractor and other affected parties.
 Pre-Qualification Statement-The approved form or forms upon which Contractors shall furnish
 information as to their ability to perform work, their experience, personnel, equipment and
 financial condition.
 Profile Grade-The trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top surface of the proposed wearing
 surface, usually along the longitudinal centerline of the roadway. Profile grade means either
 elevation or gradient of such trace according to the context.
 Project-The specific section of the highway, together with all appurtenances and construction to
 be performed, under the Contract.
 Project Engineer or Project Supervisor-The representative of the Engineer on a project. See
 further 105.9.
 Proposal-The offer of a bidder, on the prescribed form, to perform the work and to furnish the
 labor and material at the prices quoted.
 Proposal Form-The approved form on which the Division requires a bid to be prepared and
 submitted for the work.
 Proposal Guaranty-The security furnished with a bid to guarantee that the bidder will enter into
 the Contract if their bid is accepted.
 Railway-Highway Separation-Any structure carrying highway traffic over or under the tracks of
 any railway.
 Ramp-A connecting roadway between two intersecting highways, usually at a highway grade
 separation.
 Right-Of-Way-A general term denoting land, property, or interest, usually in a strip, acquired for
 or devoted to a highway.
 
 6
 
 Road-A general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel, including the entire
 area within the right-of-way, or needed for the maintenance of travel. See West Virginia Code,
 Chapter 17, Article 1, Section 3.
 Roadbed-The grade portion of a highway, within top and side slopes, prepared as a foundation for
 the pavement structure and shoulders.
 Roadside-A general term denoting the area adjoining the outer edge of the roadway. Extensive
 areas between the roadways of a divided highway may also be considered roadside.
 Roadside Development-Those items necessary to the complete highway which provide for the
 preservation of landscape materials and features; the rehabilitation and protection against erosion
 of all areas disturbed by construction through seeding, sodding, mulching and the placing of other
 ground covers; such suitable planting and other improvements as may increase the effectiveness
 and enhance the appearance of the highway.
 Roadway-The portion of the highway within limits of construction.
 Seasonal Restrictions-Limitations imposed on the work which prohibit the Contractor from
 performing certain types of work during specific seasons of the year.
 Shoulders-The portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of
 stopped vehicles, for emergency use, and for lateral support of base and surface courses.
 Sidewalk-That portion of the roadway primarily intended for the use of pedestrians.
 Single Deficiency-A single deficiency is defined as a failure to meet specified requirements
 involving one characteristic of a material.
 Special Provisions-Additions and revisions to the Standard and Supplemental Specifications
 covering conditions peculiar to an individual project.
 Specialty Item-An item of work designated as “Specialty Item” in the proposal that is limited to
 work which requires highly specialized knowledge, craftsmanship, or equipment that is not
 ordinarily available in contracting organizations prequalified to bid and is usually limited to
 minor components of the overall Contract.
 Specifications-A general term applied to all directions, provisions, and requirements pertaining to
 performance of the work.
 State-The State of West Virginia.
 Street-A general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel, including the entire
 area within the right-of-way.
 
 7
 
 Structures-Bridges, culverts, catch basins, drop inlets, retaining walls, cribbing, manholes,
 endwalls, buildings, sewers, service pipes, underdrains, foundation drains, and other features
 which may be encountered in the work and not otherwise classed.
 Subbase-The layer or layers of specified or selected materials of designed thickness placed on a
 subgrade to support a base course.
 Subcontractor-An individual, firm, or corporation to whom the Contractor sublets part of the
 Contract.
 Subgrade-The upper portion of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are
 constructed.
 Substantial Completion or Substantially Complete-The work on the Contract will be
 considered substantially complete when the Project could be opened continuously for the safe,
 convenient, and unimpeded use of the traveling public, or the Project has met the intention of the
 plans, as reasonably determined by the Engineer.
 Substructure-All that part of the structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans,
 skewbacks of arches and tops of footings of rigid frames, together with the backwalls, wingwalls,
 and wing protection railings.
 Superintendent-The Contractor's authorized representative in responsible charge of the work.
 Superstructure-The entire structure except the substructure.
 Supplemental Agreement-A modification of the Contract covering changes in the Plans or
 quantities, or both, and establishing the basis of payment and time adjustment for the work
 necessitated by reason of the modification, requiring the signature of the Commissioner, the
 Contractor, and the Surety, or their authorized representatives.
 Supplemental Specifications-Additions to and revisions of the Standard Specifications that are
 approved subsequent to issuance of the printed book. Supplemental Specifications prevail over
 Standard Specifications when in conflict therewith.
 Surety-The corporation, partnership, or individual, other than the Contractor, executing a bond
 furnished by the Contractor.
 Temporary Structure-A structure required for the use of traffic or other purpose while
 construction is in progress and not to be retained as a part of the improvement.
 Titles-The titles or headings of the sections and subsections are intended for convenience of
 reference and shall not be considered as having any bearing on their interpretation except those
 titles and headings used in conjunction with the definition of terms.
 Traffic Lane-The portion of the roadway for the movement of a single line of vehicles.
 8
 
 Traveled Way-The portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles, exclusive of shoulders
 and auxiliary lanes.
 Work-Work shall mean the furnishing of all labor, materials, equipment, and other incidentals
 necessary or convenient to the successful completion of the project and the carrying out of all
 duties and obligations imposed by the contract.
 Working Day-Every day shown on the calendar, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and Holidays
 as set forth in definitions for Holidays in Section 101, on which weather and other conditions not
 under the control of the Contractor will permit construction operations to proceed for a minimum
 of five hours with normal working forces engaged in performing the controlling item or items of
 work.
 Working Drawings-The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer all stress sheets, shop drawings,
 erection plans, falsework plans, framework plans, cofferdam plans, bending diagrams for
 reinforcing steel, or any other supplemental plans or similar data for the Engineer’s use.
 Work Order-A written order, signed by the Engineer, requiring certain performance by the
 Contractor without negotiation. Such order shall not change quantities of major items beyond the
 twenty-five percent (25%) limitations, shall not create new items, nor make revisions to item
 prices.
 101.3-INTERPRETATIONS:
 In order to avoid cumbersome and confusing repetition of expressions in these
 Specifications, it is provided that whenever anything is, or is to be done, if, as, or, when, or where
 "contemplated, required, determined, directed, specified, authorized, ordered, given, designated,
 indicated, considered necessary, deemed necessary, permitted, reserved, suspended, established,
 approval, approved, disapproved, acceptable, unacceptable, suitable, accepted, satisfactory,
 unsatisfactory, sufficient, insufficient, rejected, or condemned," it shall be understood as if the
 expression were followed by the words "by the Engineer" or "to the Engineer".
 
 9
 
 SECTION 102
 BIDDING REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS
 102.1-PREQUALIFICATION OF BIDDERS:
 All bidders on projects let to contract by the Division shall be prequalified as provided for
 by rules or regulations, or both, of the Commissioner. A Certificate of Qualification will be issued
 by the Commissioner fixing the amount of incomplete work a Contractor may have under contract
 at any one time and the type of work for which the Contractor is qualified.
 To obtain a Certificate of Qualification, the Contractor must file a "Contractor's
 Prequalification Statement" containing the information as required based on the category of work
 for which prequalification is being requested.
 Application for qualification will be accepted by the Commissioner until 15 calendar days
 prior to the date set for receiving bids on projects on which the applicant may wish to submit a
 Proposal. Award of a certificate may be held in abeyance until such time as the Commissioner is
 able to verify all references and be satisfied as to the applicant's qualifications.
 No Contractor will be issued a Certificate of Qualification until the Division has had
 adequate time to review and verify the adequacy of the information provided in the "Contractor's
 Prequalification Statement".
 Additionally it is the Contractor’s responsibility to complete any Electronic Bidding
 registration from the Division, and acquire all the necessary software, hardware, and networking
 capabilities for the Electronic Bidding process.
 102.2-CONTENTS OF PROPOSAL FORMS:
 The proposal forms will show the location and description of the proposed work, the
 approximate estimates of the various quantities of work to be performed for materials to be
 furnished, the amount of the proposal guaranty, the number of working days or date on which the
 work is to be completed, and the date, time and place of opening of proposals. The form will also
 include any special provisions or requirements not contained in the Standard Specifications. All
 documents included in the electronic proposal form are considered a part thereof and must not be
 detached or altered.
 The Plans, Specifications, and other documents designated in the proposal form are
 considered a part of the proposal form whether attached or not attached.
 The Proposal documents, Plans, Specifications, and other documents designated in the
 proposal form can be viewed and purchased on the WVDOH Bid Express Website for Electronic
 Bidding purposes to those authorized participants.
 102.3-ISSUANCE OF PROPOSAL FORMS:
 Proposal forms, will be issued to Prequalified Contractors only or to their authorized
 representatives, or to Contractors who have filed on a Division standard form an application for
 prequalification 15 calendar days prior to the date set for receiving bids on projects on which the
 applicant desires to bid.
 
 10
 
 The Division may at its discretion issue to a Contractor a Proposal requiring
 prequalification in excess of the amount allotted the Contractor provided it considers that this
 Contractor is particularly fitted by reason of their experience or equipment, or both, to perform
 work of this type involved in an amount exceeding their prequalification limits and further
 provided that the prospective bidder furnish the Division with a letter from a reputable Surety
 advising of their willingness to furnish bond to the Contractor for the project.
 When more than one project is advertised, Proposals will be issued on as many projects as
 the Contractor requests, providing the Contractor is qualified as above for each individual project,
 but no contracts will be awarded exceeding the permissible limit of the Contractor's
 prequalification rating except as otherwise provided in 103.1.
 102.4-INTERPRETATION OF APPROXIMATE ESTIMATES:
 The quantities appearing in the proposal form are approximate only and are prepared for
 the comparison of bids. Payment to the Contractor will be made only for the work accepted, or
 for materials furnished in accordance with the Contract. If upon completion of the construction
 the actual quantities show either increase or decrease, the unit bid prices offered in the Proposal
 will prevail except as further provided.
 102.5-EXAMINATION OF PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS, AND SITE OF WORK:
 The bidder is required to examine carefully the Plans, Specifications, Supplemental
 Specifications, contract forms, and the site of the work contemplated. The submission of a bid
 shall be considered prima facie evidence that the bidder has made such examination and has judged
 for and satisfied themselves as to the character, quality, and quantity of work to be performed and
 material required to be furnished under the Contract.
 102.6-PREPARATION OF PROPOSAL:
 The bidders Proposal must be submitted through the Division’s Bid Express Website. The
 bidder must furnish a unit price or a lump sum price as called for in the Proposal, in numerical
 figures, for each pay item listed, except that in the case of alternates, the bid may be made on only
 one alternate if so desired.
 The Contractor or qualified and authorized agent shall use a digital signature as provided
 at law for the Proposal submission.
 The proposal shall comply with West Virginia Contractor Licensing Act, Chapter 21,
 Article 11 Code of West Virginia, except that on Federal-Aid Projects a Contractor’s license is not
 required at time of bid, but will be required before work can begin.
 102.7-IRREGULAR PROPOSALS:
 Proposals will be considered irregular and will be rejected for any of the following reasons:
 i. When the Proposal is on a form other than that furnished by the Division or if the form
 is altered. Use of a Division approved computer generated Schedule of Items shall not
 be considered an alteration of form or format within the meaning of these Specifications.
 ii. When there are unauthorized additions, conditional or alternate bids, or irregularities of
 any kind which may tend to make the Proposal incomplete, indefinite, or ambiguous as
 to its meaning. Also, when Division approved computer generated Schedule of Items
 show any alteration of format, additions or amendments not called for, errors or
 omissions in units of measure, or erasures.
 11
 
 iii.
 
 iv.
 v.
 vi.
 vii.
 
 When the bidder adds any provisions reserving the right to accept or reject an award, or
 to enter into a Contract pursuant to an award. This does not exclude a bid limiting the
 maximum gross amount of awards acceptable to any one bidder at any one bid letting,
 providing that any selection of awards will be made by the Division.
 Failure to sign or properly execute the Proposal.
 Failure to indicate a proposed goal in Section C, Item 3 of the Notice contained in the
 Proposal, when a Division determined goal is indicated in paragraph 5 of the Special
 Provision for Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Utilization.
 Failure to properly acknowledge receipt of amendment(s) in accordance with Section J
 of the notice contained in the proposal.
 Failure to show the West Virginia Contractor’s License Number when required in
 Section H of the notice contained in the proposal.
 
 102.8-PROPOSAL GUARANTY:
 No proposal will be considered unless accompanied by a digitally signed proposal guaranty
 bond in the form of a certified or cashier's check, or bid bond, in the amount specified in the
 Proposal, made payable to the West Virginia Division of Highways. Bid bonds will be accepted
 only if executed on the official form furnished by the Division, and any Proposal accompanied by
 a bond executed on a copy, duplicate, or facsimile will be rejected.
 102.9-DELIVERY OF PROPOSALS:
 Each Proposal shall be submitted electronically and must be received by the Bid Express
 website by the time designated in the proposal to proceed with the letting.
 Cashier’s Checks shall be submitted in an envelope and delivered prior to the date and time
 of letting. The Envelope and the Cashier’s Check shall each contain the following Information:
 Call Number
 Project Number
 
 Letting Date
 Contractor’s Name and Address
 
 Envelopes shall be addressed to the West Virginia Division of Highways, Charleston, West
 Virginia.
 102.10-WITHDRAWAL OF PROPOSALS:
 Bidders may withdraw Proposals in a manner approved by the electronic bidding service
 provider and the Division prior to the letting.
 On projects requiring prequalification, a bidder may alternatively request to withdraw its
 bid under the conditions and in the same manner as described for projects where Prequalification
 is waived provided the bidder provides written notice to the Division 2:00PM of the business day
 preceding the letting and the bidder receives confirmation from the Division stating the bidder will
 be allowed to do so.
 For projects where Prequalification is waived, and after the time provided for the opening
 of proposals, a bidder may withdraw its bid during the course of reading of bids prior to the actual
 reading of bids on the project for which the bid is withdrawn only by providing a written document
 at the site of the letting in the following form:
 “I, the undersigned, of ___________________________, Contractor(s)
 hereby acknowledge that I have this day withdrawn the sealed bid of
 _________________________________________, Contractor(s) on West
 Virginia Division of Highways Project No. _____________________.”
 12
 
 Contractors who are found to be low bidders on a number of projects of which the total
 exceeds the Contractor's rating may withdraw, with the approval of the Commissioner, bids on
 such project or projects as will bring the remaining total to within the limit of the rating. At their
 discretion, the Commissioner may award contracts for the project or projects on which bids have
 been so withdrawn to the next lowest qualified bidder.
 102.11-COMBINATION PROPOSALS:
 If the Division so elects, Proposals may be issued for projects in combination or separately,
 so that bids may be submitted either on the combination or on separate units of the combination.
 The Division reserves the right to make awards on combination bids or separate bids to the best
 advantage of the Division. No combination bids other than those specifically set up in proposals
 by the Division will be considered. Separate Contracts will be written for each individual project
 included in the combination.
 102.12-PUBLIC READING OF PROPOSALS:
 Proposals will be received, decrypted, and read publicly at the time and place indicated in
 the notice to Contractors. Bidders, their authorized agents, and other interested parties are invited
 to be present.
 102.13-DISQUALIFICATION OF BIDDERS:
 Either of the following reasons may be considered as being sufficient for the
 disqualification of a bidder and the rejection of their Proposal or Proposals.
 i. More than one Proposal for the same work from an individual, firm, or corporation under
 the same or different name.
 ii. Evidence of collusion among bidders. Participants in such collusion will receive no
 recognition as bidders for any future work of the Division until any such participant shall
 have been reinstated as a qualified bidder.
 102.14-MATERIAL GUARANTY:
 The successful bidder shall furnish a complete statement of the origin, composition and
 manufacture of all materials to be used in the construction of the work, together with samples when
 required. Samples may be subjected to the tests provided for in these Specifications to determine
 their quality and fitness for the work.
 102.15-FREE COMPETITIVE BIDDING AFFIDAVIT:
 Prior to the approval of Federal-Aid Contracts, a sworn statement in the form of an affidavit
 shall be executed by, or on behalf of, the person, firm, association, or corporation to whom such
 contract is to be awarded.
 The affidavit, with accompanying endorsement and acknowledgment sections, is contained
 in the contract Proposal.
 102.16-PRE-CONSTRUCTION DATA:
 Prospective bidders may review files at the West Virginia Division of Highways, Capitol
 Complex, Charleston, West Virginia. These files may contain additional information not included
 in the contract documents including, but not limited to, old plans, old shop drawings, geotechnical
 information, environmental documents, permit applications, permits, asbestos reports, hazardous
 waste reports and other data. Copies may be obtained upon request and payment of printing fees.
 13
 
 102.16.1-Questions Regarding Advertised Proposals: All projects advertised by the
 Division will require any questions to be asked using the Question and Answer feature of the
 electronic bidding service in accordance with any listed requirements. The various contact
 information required shall be filled out and completed with valid and applicable information
 which the Division may verify. If the contact information is unable to be verified then any
 questions associated with this information may not be answered.
 Questions and Answers are for informational purposes only. Any posted questions or
 answers do not alter the terms and conditions of the advertised Contract in question. Official
 changes to the Contract shall only be issued by the Division through an amendment to the
 applicable Contract.
 Potential Bidders may ask questions up until the time of the posted letting with no
 exceptions. However it should be noted that any questions that may necessitate a change to
 the Contract should be asked seven (7) days prior to the posted letting date to allow the Division
 to issue an amendment to modify the Contract, if necessary. Questions received three (3)
 working days or more in advance of a posted letting should be answered prior to the time of
 the posted letting. Questions received within three (3) working days of the posted time of
 letting may or may not be answered as time allows.
 102.17-CONTRACTOR’S DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE POLICY:
 Each Contractor submitting a bid must include with the bid, on a form provided by the
 Division, an affidavit that the Contractor implements and maintains a written drug-free workplace
 policy which meets the requirements of Article 1D, Chapter 21 of the Official Code of West
 Virginia, as amended. The successful bidder must submit a copy of its drug-free workplace policy
 within ten (10) days following the letting and prior to the awarding of the contract. Any successful
 bidder who fails to submit the policy within the specified time limit will risk forfeiture of his/her
 proposal guaranty bond.
 The successful bidder must also insure that its subcontractors implement and maintain a
 written drug-free workplace policy complying with Article 1D, a copy of which must be submitted
 to the Division by the Contractor prior to the start of the subcontract work. The contract may be
 terminated if the Contractor:
 1. Fails to implement its policy;
 2. Fails to provide information regarding implementation of the policy at the request of the
 Division; or;
 3. Provides to the Division false information regarding the policy.
 A clearly legible copy of the written drug-free workplace policy must be kept posted in a
 prominent and easily accessible place at the project site by each contractor subject to the provisions
 of Article 1D.
 Every contractor shall keep an accurate record showing the names, occupation and safetysensitive status of all employees, in connection with the construction on the project, and showing
 any drug tests or alcohol tests performed and employee education and supervisor training received,
 which record shall be open at all reasonable hours for inspection by the Division. The Contractor
 must preserve these records for three years after completion and acceptance of the project.
 All drug testing information specifically related to individual employee is confidential and
 should be treated as such by anyone authorized to review or compile program records.
 
 14
 
 SECTION 103
 AWARD AND EXECUTION OF CONTRACT
 103.1-CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSALS:
 After the Proposals are opened and read, they will be compared on the basis of the
 summation of the products of the approximate quantities shown in the bid schedule by the unit bid
 prices. The results of such comparisons will be made immediately available to the public. In the
 event of discrepancy between unit bid prices and extensions, the unit bid price shall govern.
 The right is reserved to reject any or all proposals, to waive technicalities or to advertise
 for new proposals if, in the judgment of the Commissioner, the best interests of the State will be
 promoted.
 If Proposals for more than one project are issued to a bidder, which projects individually
 would be within the bidder's qualification established provided in 102.1, but a combination of more
 than one, considering also the work under contract and incomplete, would be in excess of their
 qualification, the right is reserved to consider only such Proposal or Proposals as, in the opinion
 of the Commissioner, are most advantageous to the Division.
 Proposals containing Special Provisions for Disadvantaged Business Enterprises
 utilization, will be considered as follows:
 a) When the low bidder's goal submitted in Section C Item 3 - Contractor's Goal for DBE
 participation, of the Notice contained in the project proposal, meets or exceeds the
 contract DBE goals, and the Division considers the amount of the bid to be reasonable,
 such bidder will be the successful bidder.
 b) When the low bidder's goal submitted in Section C Item 3 - Contractor's Goal for DBE
 participation, of the Notice contained in the project proposal, does not meet the DBE
 contract goal and the Division considers the amount of the bid to be reasonable, the bid
 will be accepted if he or she can show that good faith efforts were made prior to the bid
 to meet the contract goals.
 c) When the low bidder cannot satisfy the Division that good faith efforts have been made,
 this bid may be rejected and the second low bid will be evaluated in the same manner.
 This procedure will continue, evaluating bids in the same manner, evaluating bids in
 ascending order, until either the contract DBE goal is attained or good faith efforts can
 be verified and that bid will be accepted provided the amount thereof is considered
 reasonable by the Division.
 103.2-AWARD OF CONTRACT:
 The award of Contract, if it be awarded, will be made within 30 calendar days after the
 opening of Proposals to the lowest responsible and prequalified bidder. The Commissioner may,
 with the agreement of the successful bidder, withhold award for any length of time. The successful
 bidder will be notified by letter, mailed to the address shown on their Proposal, that their bid has
 been accepted and that they have been awarded the Contract.
 103.2.1-Contractor’s Direct Deposit Requirements: The Contractor shall receive all
 payments electronically via Direct Deposit. Prior to Award of the Contract, the Contractor
 shall be approved and registered to accept payments through the West Virginia State Auditor’s
 Office electronically (www.wvsao.gov).
 
 15
 
 103.3-CANCELLATION OF AWARD:
 The Division reserves the right to cancel the award of any Contract at any time before the
 execution of the Contract documents by all parties without any liability against the Division.
 103.4-RETURN OF PROPOSAL GUARANTY:
 All proposal guaranties, except those of the two lowest bidders, will be returned
 immediately following the opening and checking of the Proposals. The retained proposal guaranty
 of the unsuccessful of the two lowest bidders will be returned within 10 days following the award
 of Contract, and that of the successful bidder will be returned after a satisfactory bond has been
 furnished and the Contract has been executed.
 103.5-REQUIREMENT OF CONTRACT BOND:
 At the time of the execution of the contract, the successful bidder shall execute and deliver
 to the Division a good and sufficient surety or collateral bond payable to the State of West Virginia.
 The successful bidder has the option of submission of the aforementioned bond in an
 amount equivalent to either 102 percent or 100 percent of the contract price.
 The submission of the aforementioned bond in an amount equivalent to 102 percent of the
 contract price by the successful bidder is the standard expectation of the Division in order to
 comply with the current Special Provision for Subcontractor Prompt Payment and does not
 necessitate the withholding of retainage by the Division from monies due on future progress
 voucher estimates payable under the terms of the contract. Further, the decision by a particular
 contractor to submit said bond in an amount equivalent to 102 percent of the contract price shall
 be consistent and applicable throughout the duration of the contract for which the bond is being
 submitted and shall be consistent and applicable to all contracts executed between the Division
 and that particular contractor.
 If the successful bidder elects to submit the aforementioned bond in an amount equivalent
 to 100 percent of the contract price, it is necessary that the bidder notify the Contract
 Administration Division in writing prior to the submission of the bond. Submission of a bond in
 an amount equivalent to 100 percent of the contract price does necessitate the withholding of
 retainage by the Division from monies due on future progress voucher estimates payable under the
 terms of the contract and as set forth in 109.6. Further, the decision by a particular contractor to
 submit said bond in an amount equivalent to 100 percent of the contract price shall be consistent
 and applicable throughout the duration of the contract for which the bond is being submitted and
 shall be consistent and applicable to all contracts executed between the Division and that particular
 contractor.
 As an alternate, the successful bidder may deposit with the State Treasurer cash bond,
 United States Treasury bonds, United States Treasury notes, United States Treasury Certificates
 of Indebtedness, United States Treasury bills or West Virginia Road Bonds in the amount of either
 102 percent or 100 percent of the contract amount. A safe keeping receipt from a bank located in
 the State of West Virginia may be deposited with the State Treasurer in lieu of any of the definitive
 securities.
 The State Treasurer shall, on a regular basis, collect all interest or income on the obligations
 so deposited and shall pay same, when and if collected, to the Contractor who deposited the
 obligations. If the deposit is in the form of coupon bonds, the State Treasurer shall deliver each
 coupon as it matures to the Contractor.
 
 16
 
 103.6-INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
 The Contractor shall be required, in addition to any other form of insurance or bonds
 required under the terms of the Contract and Specifications, to procure and maintain during the
 life of the Contract the following types of insurance in the amounts set forth:
 All such policies of insurance, except for Workers’ Compensation, shall name the Division
 as an additional insured and shall be occurrence policies and the Certificate of Insurance provided
 to the Division shall so specify. The policies must provide coverage for all damages arising out
 of injury to persons or property which allegedly occurred during the life of the contract regardless
 of when the claim is filed subject to statute of limitations.
 103.6.1-Contractor’s General Liability Insurance: The Contractor shall maintain
 commercial general liability (CGL) coverage with limits not less than:
 General Aggregate
 Products/Completed Operations Aggregate
 Personal & Advertising Injury
 Each Occurrence *
 Fire Damage
 Medical Expense Limit
 
 $2,000,000
 $2,000,000
 $1,000,000
 $1,000,000
 $50,000
 $5,000
 
 * Each Occurrence limit shall be $2,000,000 when performing any operations
 that are subject to 107.8 – Railway-Highway Provisions.
 
 The CGL shall be written on ISO occurrence form CG 00 01, or equivalent, and shall cover
 liability arising from premises-operations, independent contractors, products-completed
 operations, personal injury and advertising injury, and liability assumed under an insured
 contract. There shall be no endorsement or modification of the CGL limiting the scope of
 coverage for liability arising from explosion, collapse, or underground property damage
 whenever work involving these exposures are undertaken. The CGL policy shall include
 endorsements that amend the aggregate limits of insurance to be applicable to each
 construction project separately.
 Contractor shall furnish an ACORD Form 25-S Certificate of Insurance, or its equivalent,
 with a 30 day notice of cancellation provisions to evidence this CGL coverage.
 103.6.2-Workers’ Compensation–Insurance and Employer’s Liability Insurance:
 The contractor shall also give evidence for Workers’ Compensation Insurance and Employers
 Liability Insurance, with a 30-day notice of cancelation. The benefits provided under the
 Workers’ Compensation shall be benefits prescribed by West Virginia Code. The Employer’s
 Liability policy must include coverage to protect the contractor for claims brought under
 Section 23-4-2(d)(2)(ii) of West Virginia Code. The limits of insurance under this section shall
 be as follows:
 Each accident
 $1,000,000
 Each disease
 $1,000,000
 Each disease/employee
 $1,000,000
 Evidence of this coverage can be set forth on the ACORD Form 25-S as specified in
 Subsection 103.6.1 or approved form and shall indicate that West Virginia statutory Workers
 Compensation coverage is included.
 17
 
 103.6.3-Automobile Insurance: The Contractor shall furnish evidence, with a 30-day
 notice of cancellation, to the state that it maintains an Insurance Services Office Commercial
 Automobile Liability insurance policy Form CA0001 or its equivalent. The policy shall
 include coverage for owned, non-owned, and hired vehicles.
 The limits for liability insurance must be at least $1,000,000 combined single limit.
 Evidence for the coverage shall be set forth on an ACORD Form 25-S Certificate of Liability
 Insurance.
 103.6.4-Steam Boiler Insurance: In event steam boilers are used on the work, the
 Contractor shall furnish evidence that the Contractor carries in their own behalf standard Steam
 Boiler Insurance having an aggregate limit of not less than $250,000.
 The insurance specified shall be carried until all work required to be performed under the
 terms of the Contract is satisfactorily completed as evidenced by the formal acceptance of the
 State.
 103.6.5-Countersignature of West Virginia Agent: The policy or policies of Insurance
 required must be countersigned by an Agent Licensed in West Virginia, in accordance with the
 applicable statute of the State of West Virginia.
 All certificates of insurance used to verify the policies issued must be endorsed by an Agent
 Licensed in West Virginia. Such endorsement must include the printed name, street address,
 city, zip code and West Virginia license number of the Agent.
 103.7-SPECIAL BONDS AND INSURANCE:
 When the work is of such nature that special bond or insurance is required, the special
 requirements will be detailed and included in the Proposal for the project. This coverage could
 include, but not be limited to, builder’s risk, installation floater, maritime exposures,
 environmental exposures, and professional liability.
 103.8-EXECUTION OF CONTRACT:
 The Contract shall be executed by the bidder to whom the Contract has been awarded, the
 bond executed by the principal and the sureties, and the Contract and bond returned to the Division
 within 20 days after the date of the notice of the award.
 103.9-FAILURE TO EXECUTE CONTRACT:
 Failure by the bidder to execute the Contract and file acceptable bond within 20 days after
 notice of award shall be just cause for the annulment of the award; and it is understood by the
 bidder, in the event of such an annulment of award or the Contract, that the amount of the guaranty
 deposited with the Proposal will be retained by the Division and deposited in the Division of
 Highways Fund, not as a penalty, but as liquidated damages. Award may then be made to the next
 lowest responsible bidder, or the work may be readvertised and constructed under contract or
 otherwise, as the Division may decide.
 103.10-PRECONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE:
 As soon as possible after the award of each Contract a preconstruction conference will be
 arranged by the Division. The Contractor, their superintendent, or an authorized agent shall be
 present at the conference and shall present the proposed schedule of work, list of proposed
 subcontractors, if any, and a list of suppliers from whom materials are anticipated to be purchased.
 The information so presented shall be on forms submitted to the Contractor with the letter of
 contract award. The Division will make arrangements for utility representatives to be present.
 18
 
 SECTION 104
 SCOPE OF WORK
 104.1-INTENT OF CONTRACT:
 The intent of the Contract is to provide for the construction and completion in every detail
 of the work described. The Contractor shall furnish all labor, materials, equipment, tools,
 transportation, and supplies required to complete the work in accordance with the Plans,
 Specifications, and terms of the Contract.
 Should any misunderstanding arise as to the intent or meaning of the Contract, or any
 discrepancy appear, the decision of the Commissioner shall be final.
 104.2-ALTERATION OF PLANS OR CHARACTER OF WORK:
 Under no circumstances shall alterations of Plans or the nature of the work involve work
 beyond the termini of the proposed construction except as may be necessary to satisfactorily
 complete the project.
 In addition to the above, alterations in Plans or increased quantities of items may be made
 necessary at a time when the contract or the items involved in the operations are substantially
 completed, the related contractor organization demobilized, and related equipment essentially
 removed from the project. Under these circumstances, if it is demonstrated that the unit cost to
 the Contractor has increased, additional compensation may be allowed by the Engineer and the
 additional work performed as prescribed in 104.3 as "Extra Work."
 Any adjustment in compensation because of a change(s) resulting from one or more of the
 conditions described above will be made in accordance with the provisions of 109.3. Any
 adjustment in contract time because of such change(s) will be made in accordance with the
 provisions of 108.6.
 104.3-EXTRA WORK:
 The Contractor shall perform unforeseen work for which there is no price included in the
 Contract, whenever it is deemed necessary or desirable in order to complete fully the work as
 contemplated. The work shall be performed in accordance with the Specifications and as directed,
 and will be paid for as provided by a written supplemental agreement on a unit price or lump sum
 basis. In the event the Engineer and the Contractor are unable to agree upon the terms of the
 supplemental agreement, the Contractor shall proceed with the work and receive payment therefore
 in the manner and amount prescribed in 109.4.
 104.4-TEMPORARY STRUCTURES:
 In contracts for bridges only, the Contractor will not be required to construct or maintain
 temporary structures unless the construction and maintenance of such structures are stipulated in
 the Contract or ordered as extra work by the Engineer. If the building of temporary structures is
 included in the Contract, or added by extra work order, the responsibility of the Contractor for
 accidents to the public or to their employees, arising from their construction or maintenance, shall
 extend to such structure and its roadway approaches.
 
 19
 
 104.5-MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC:
 The Project, while undergoing improvement, shall be kept open to all traffic by the
 Contractor in such condition that both local and through traffic will be adequately and safely
 accommodated. All construction operations shall be scheduled to keep traffic delay to a minimum.
 The Division has adopted, and the Contractor shall follow the Standard, "Traffic Control for Street
 and Highway Construction and Maintenance Operations," published by the West Virginia Division
 of Highways.
 All expenses for the following items shall be borne by the Contractor without extra
 compensation except when the Proposal provides for payment under 636, Maintaining Traffic:
 i. The construction and maintenance of temporary detours, temporary structures,
 temporary approaches, crossings and intersections with streets and roads, including the
 furnishing and application of aggregates for maintenance of traffic and liquid asphalt
 oil, calcium chloride, or water for use as dust palliative.
 ii. The furnishing of flaggers and pilot trucks and drivers.
 iii. The furnishing, erection, and maintenance of warning devices, such as signs, auxiliary
 barriers, channelizing devices, hazard warning lights, barricades, flares and reflective
 markers.
 If actual field conditions are not illustrated in the Plans, engineering judgment and
 discretion shall be exercised to select devices that will be adaptable, but the general policies
 prescribed shall be adhered to. Final responsibility for the installation of adequate safety devices
 for the protection of the traveling public and employees, as well as for the safeguard of the work
 in general, shall rest with the Contractor.
 During any suspension of work, the Contractor shall make passable and shall open to traffic
 such portions of the project and temporary roadways or portions thereof as may be agreed upon
 between the Contractor and the Engineer for the temporary accommodation of necessary traffic
 during the anticipated period of suspension. Thereafter, and until an issuance of an order for the
 resumption of construction operations, the maintenance of the temporary route or line of travel
 agreed upon will be by and at the expense of the Division. When work is resumed, the Contractor
 shall replace or renew any work or materials lost or damaged because of such temporary use of
 the project and shall remove, to the extent directed by the Engineer, any work or materials used in
 temporary maintenance thereof by the Division and shall complete the project in every respect as
 though its prosecution had been continuous and without interference. All additional work caused
 by such suspensions, for reasons beyond the control of the Contractor, will be paid for by the
 Division at contract prices or by extra work.
 The Division will provide all necessary snow removal.
 104.6–RIGHTS IN AND USE OF MATERIALS FOUND ON THE PROJECT:
 The Contractor, with the approval of the Engineer, may use on the project such stone,
 gravel, sand, or other material determined suitable by the Engineer, as may be found in the
 excavation and will be paid both for the excavation of such materials at the corresponding contract
 unit price and for the pay item for which the excavated material is used. The Contractor shall
 replace at their own expense with other acceptable material all of that portion of the excavation
 material so removed and used which was needed for use in the embankments, backfills,
 approaches, or otherwise. No charge for the material so used will be made against the Contractor.
 The Contractor shall not excavate or remove any material from within the highway location which
 20
 
 is not within the grading limits, as indicated by the slope and grade lines, without written
 authorization from the Engineer.
 Unless otherwise provided in the Contract, the material from any existing old structures
 and pipes shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be removed from the project.
 104.7-FINAL CLEAN UP:
 Before final acceptance is made, the Contractor shall clear the highway, waste areas,
 borrow pits, and all ground occupied by the Contractor during the construction, of all rubbish,
 excess materials, temporary structures and equipment. The Contractor shall restore in an
 acceptable manner all property, both public and private, which has been damaged during the
 prosecution of the work; and shall leave the highway or bridge site, including streams and their
 banks, in a neat and presentable condition in accordance with applicable laws of the State. All
 excavated material or falsework placed in stream channels shall be removed, and all material from
 around piers and abutments shall be replaced and compacted to the level of the original surface.
 104.8-BRIDGE PLATE:
 A bronze plate, carrying the project number, the number of the bridge, and the year of the
 bridge construction, will be furnished and placed by the Contractor without extra compensation.
 The nameplate on through steel bridges shall be placed on the end posts about eight feet (2.5
 meters) vertically above the floor. On other bridges, they shall be placed in the railings as shown
 on the plans or as designated by the Engineer. The plate shall be a minimum of 8 inches by 10
 inches (200 by 250 mm) wide, with letters and numbers of 3/4 inch (20 mm) minimum height
 raised 1/8 inch (3 mm) above the surface of the plate. The information on the plate shall be
 arranged as follows:
 (Project No. on first line)
 Bridge No.
 Built
 (Year of construction)
 104.9-DIFFERING SITE CONDITIONS:
 During the progress of the work, if subsurface or latent physical conditions are encountered
 at the site differing materially from those indicated in the contract or if unknown physical
 conditions of an unusual nature, differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and
 generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for the contract, are encountered at the site,
 the party discovering such conditions shall promptly notify the other party in writing of the specific
 differing conditions before they are disturbed and before the affected work is performed.
 Upon written notification, the Engineer will investigate the conditions, and if the Engineer
 determines that the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or
 time required for the performance of any work under the contract, an adjustment, excluding loss
 of anticipated profits, will be made and the contract modified in writing accordingly. The Engineer
 will notify the Contractor of their determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is
 warranted.
 No contract adjustment which results in a benefit to the Contractor will be allowed unless
 the Contractor has provided the required written notice.
 The Contractor shall promptly notify the Engineer of alleged changes to the Contract due
 to differing site conditions, extra work, altered work beyond the scope of the Contract, or action(s)
 taken by the Division that changed the Contract terms and conditions.
 21
 
 A.
 B.
 
 C.
 
 No further work is to be performed or Contract item expense incurred with relation
 to the claimed change after the date the change allegedly occurred unless directed
 otherwise in writing or orally follow up in writing in 48 hours by the Engineer.
 Immediately notify the Engineer verbally of the alleged change or extra work
 occasioned by site conditions or actions by the Division, and in writing within five
 calendar days of the date the alleged change or action was noted. Thereafter, the
 Contractor shall provide the following information to the Engineer in writing within
 15 calendar days of the written notice:
 1.
 The date of occurrence and the nature and circumstances of the occurrence
 that constitute a change.
 2.
 Name, title, and activity of each Division representative knowledgeable of
 the claimed change.
 3.
 Identify any documents and the substance of any oral communication
 involved in the claimed change.
 4.
 Basis for a claim of accelerated schedule performance.
 5.
 Basis for a claim that the work is not required by the Contract.
 6.
 Particular elements of Contract performance for which additional
 compensation may be sought under this Section including:
 a. Pay item(s) that has been or may be affected by the claimed change.
 b. Labor or materials, or both, that will be added, deleted, or wasted by
 the claimed change and what equipment will be idled or required.
 c. Delay and disruption in the manner and sequence of performance that
 has been or will be caused.
 d. Adjustments to Contract price(s), delivery schedule(s), staging, and
 Contract time estimated due to the claimed change.
 e. Estimate of the time within which the Department must respond to the
 notice to minimize cost, delay, or disruption of performance.
 Following submission of the notification to the Engineer, and in the absence of
 directions received to the contrary from an authorized representative of the
 Division, the Contractor shall continue diligent prosecution of the work under the
 Contract to the maximum extent possible.
 Within 15 calendar days after receipt of the written notice and required information,
 the Engineer shall respond in writing to the Contractor to:
 1.
 Confirm that a change occurred and, when necessary, direct the method
 and manner of further performance, or
 2.
 Deny that a change occurred and, when necessary, direct the method and
 manner of further performance, or
 3.
 Advise the Contractor that adequate information has not been submitted to
 decide whether (1) or (2) applies, and indicate the needed information and
 date it is to be received by the Engineer for further review. The Division
 will respond to such additional information within 15 calendar days of
 receipt from the Contractor.
 
 22
 
 104.10-SUSPENSION OF WORK ORDERED BY THE ENGINEER:
 If the performance of all or any portion of the work is suspended or delayed by the Engineer
 in writing for an unreasonable period of time (not originally anticipated, customary or inherent in
 the construction industry) and the Contractor believes that additional compensation and/or contract
 time is due as a result of such suspension or delay, the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer in
 writing a request for adjustment within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of the notice to resume
 work. The request shall set forth the reasons and support for such adjustment.
 Upon receipt, the Engineer will evaluate the Contractor's request. If the Engineer agrees
 that the cost and/or time required for the performance of the contract has increased as a result of
 such suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the
 fault of the Contractor, its suppliers, or subcontractors at any approved tier, and not caused by
 weather, the Engineer will make an adjustment (excluding profit) and modify the contract in
 writing accordingly. The Contractor will be notified of the Engineer's determination whether or
 not an adjustment of the contract is warranted.
 No contract adjustment will be allowed unless the Contractor has submitted the request for
 adjustment within the time prescribed.
 No contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause to the extent that performance
 would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause, or for which an adjustment is provided
 or excluded under any other term or condition of this contract.
 104.11-SIGNIFICANT CHANGES IN THE CHARACTER OF WORK:
 The Engineer reserves the right to make, in writing, at any time during the work, such
 changes in quantities and such alterations in the work as are necessary to satisfactorily complete
 the project. Such changes in quantities and alterations shall not invalidate the contract nor release
 the surety, and the Contractor agrees to perform the work as altered.
 If the alterations or changes in quantities significantly change the character of the work
 under the contract, whether such alterations or changes are in themselves significant changes to
 the character of the work or by affecting other work cause such other work to become significantly
 different in character, an adjustment, excluding anticipated profit, will be made to the contract.
 The basis for the adjustment shall be agreed upon prior to the performance of the work. If a basis
 cannot be agreed upon, then an adjustment will be made either for or against the Contractor in such
 amount as the Engineer may determine to be fair and equitable.
 If the alterations or changes in quantities do not significantly change the character of the
 work to be performed under the contract, the altered work will be paid for as provided elsewhere
 in the contract.
 The term "significant change" shall be construed to apply only to the following
 circumstances:
 a) When the character of the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that
 involved or included in the original proposed construction; or
 b) When a major item of work, (any item having an original contract value in excess of
 10 percent of the original contract amount or $50,000 dollars), is increased in excess of
 125 percent or decreased below 75 percent of the original contract quantity. Any
 allowance for an increase in quantity shall apply only to that portion in excess of 125
 percent of original contract item quantity, or in case of a decrease below 75 percent, to
 the actual amount of work performed.
 
 23
 
 104.12-VALUE ENGINEERING CHANGE PROPOSAL AND PRACTICAL DESIGN
 CHANGE PROPOSAL:
 The Contractor may submit to the Engineer, in writing, Value Engineering Change
 Proposals (VECP) for modifying the plans, specifications or other requirements of the contract for
 the purpose of reducing the total cost of construction without reducing design capacity or quality
 of the finished product. If accepted by the Division, the cost savings difference between the
 original contract work being modified and the final cost of the proposed new work shall be shared
 between the Contractor and the Division on a fifty-fifty basis.
 The Contractor may submit to the Engineer, in writing, a Practical Design Change Proposal
 (PDCP) for modifying the plans, specifications or other requirements of the contract for the
 purpose of reducing the total cost of construction. A Practical Design Change Proposal may
 provide a finished product with a justifiably revised scope change, as compared to the as-bid
 product. The PDCP may modify construction sequences, re-use existing roadway elements or
 underrun contract items. The PDCP shall not adversely affect safety or function of the final
 product. The cost savings to the Division shall be negotiated to be at least 60% of the cost
 difference between the original contract work being modified and the final cost of the proposed
 new work listed in the change order for a PDCP.
 The contractor is encouraged to submit to the engineer, in writing, VECP’s and PDCP’s
 for modifying the plans, specifications or other requirements of the contract. Proposed
 modifications should not impair, in any manner, essential functions or characteristics of the
 project, including but not limited to, service life, economy of operation, ease of maintenance, and
 shall not impair design or safety standards, and shall not significantly delay the completion of the
 project.
 This subsection applies to all VECPs/PDCPs initiated and developed by the Contractor and
 which are identified as such by the Contractor at the time of their submission to the Engineer;
 however, nothing shall be construed as requiring the Engineer to consider or approve a
 VECP/PDCP submitted hereunder.
 As a minimum, the following information shall be submitted, in quadruplicate, with each
 VECP/PDCP along with all information additionally submitted in electronic format:
 i. A statement that this proposal is submitted as a VECP or PDCP;
 ii. A description of the difference between the existing contract requirements and the
 proposed change;
 iii. A statement concerning the basis for the VECP/PDCP and benefits to the Division
 together with an itemization of the contract items and requirements affected by the
 VECP/PDCP;
 iv. Separate detailed cost estimates for both the existing contract requirements and the
 proposed change;
 v. An itemization of plan details, design standards or specifications to be changed if the
 VECP/PDCP is adopted;
 vi. An estimate of the effect on collateral costs to the Division. Collateral costs are defined
 to be reduced costs of operation, maintenance or repair and extended useful service life;
 and
 vii. A statement of the time by which approval must be issued to obtain the total cost reduction
 during remainder of Contract, noting any effect on contract completion time or delivery
 schedule;
 
 24
 
 viii. A description of any previous use or submission of the same proposal by the Contractor,
 including dates, job numbers, results, and/or outcome of proposal if previously submitted;
 ix. Final submittals for VECPs and PDCPs shall be signed and sealed by a West Virginia
 Registered Professional Engineer, and that individual will become the Engineer of Record
 for the work described in the VECP/PDCP.
 It should be noted that on a case by case basis, the Contractor may be required to do
 presentations to the Division addressing the above issues and clarifying any additional information
 requested by the Division.
 If approved by the Division, the Division will process the VECP/PDCP in the same manner
 as prescribed for any other proposal which would necessitate issuance of a Contract change order.
 The Division may accept in whole or in part any VECP/PDCP by issuing a change order which
 will identify the VECP/PDCP on which it is based. The Division will not be liable to the
 Contractor for failure to accept or act upon any VECP/PDCP submitted pursuant to this provision
 nor for any delays to the work attributable to any such proposal. The Division has the right to
 reject any VECP/PDCP without explanation. Additionally there may be other regulatory agencies
 outside of the Division that may need to review the proposed VECP/PDCP and have the authority
 to reject/accept the proposed VECP/PDCP. The Division accepts no responsibility in delays or
 costs attributed to any such reviews by outside agencies and it is the responsibility of the Contractor
 to get approval from said organizations.
 Until a proposal is effected by change order, the Contractor shall remain obligated to the
 terms and conditions of the existing contract. When an executed change order has not been issued
 by the date upon which the Contractor's proposal specifies that a decision should be made, or such
 other date as the Contractor may subsequently have specified in writing, such proposal may be
 deemed rejected.
 The change order affecting the necessary Contract modification will establish the estimated
 savings agreed upon, will provide for adjustment in the Contract prices and will indicate the
 savings be divided between the Contractor and the Division as per the negotiated agreements. The
 Contractor shall absorb all costs incurred in preparing a VECP/PDCP for submission to the
 Division. All reasonably incurred costs of reviewing and administering the VECP/PDCP will be
 borne by the Division. The Division reserves the right to include in the change order any
 conditions it deems appropriate for consideration, approval and implementation of the proposal.
 The Contractor's share of the savings shall constitute full compensation for effecting all changes
 pursuant to the change order.
 Acceptance of the VECP/PDCP and performance of the work thereunder will not change
 the Contract completion date as a result of the VECP/PDCP, unless specifically provided for in
 the change order authorizing the VECP/PDCP.
 The Division expressly reserves the right to adopt a VECP/PDCP for general use in
 contracts administered by the Division when it determines the VECP/PDCP is suitable for
 application to other contracts without obligation or compensation of any kind to the Contractor.
 The Engineer shall be sole judge of the acceptability of a VECP/PDCP.
 When a VECP/PDCP is accepted by the Division, the provisions of 104.2 pertaining to
 adjustment of Contract unit price due to alterations of Contract quantities will not apply to the
 items adjusted or deleted as a result of affecting the VECP/PDCP by change order.
 The cost of the revised work, as determined in the value engineering change order, will be
 paid on current estimates.
 25
 
 In addition to such payment for VECP items, the Contractor will be paid, on a Lump Sum
 basis by a separate item, one half of the difference of the cost of the original contract work and the
 final cost of the new work listed in the change order In addition to such payment for PDCP items,
 the Contractor shall be paid on a Lump Sum basis by separate item the negotiated contractor
 portion of the savings.
 For VECP, one half of contractor portion of the estimated savings will be paid to the
 Contractor upon approval of the change order. For PDCP, one half of the negotiated contractor
 portion of the estimated savings will be paid to the Contractor upon approval of the change order.
 The remainder of the savings due the Contractor will be paid upon completion of all items of work
 included in the change order. This final Lump Sum payment will be determined by the actual
 quantities for items paid by the unit. Final payment for other lump sum or proposal quantity items
 will be the change order amount, subject to 109.2.
 104.13-FUNDING SOURCE IDENTIFICATION SIGNS:
 104.13.1-General: Funding Source Identification Signs shall be furnished by the
 Contractor if the Total Contract Bid Amount of the construction exceeds $500,000 or otherwise
 noted on the plans, and shall be erected during mobilization of the project. The cost of
 furnishing, erecting, maintaining, and removal of these signs shall be incidental to the cost of
 construction of the project.
 104.13.2-Location: Funding Source Identification Signs shall be located as directed by the
 Engineer. The Contractor shall promptly remove each sign at the completion of the project for
 which the sign was erected.
 104.13.3-Sign Content: The content of each sign and the size of letters and the size of
 board shall be as required by the Engineer. The funding agencies and the dollar amounts
 involved will be furnished to the Contractor by the Engineer.
 104.13.4-Sign Construction: The materials for Funding Source Identification Signs, such
 as for the sign panels, their supports, and for the legend and background, are to be of a type
 and method of fabrication that will be consistent with the conditions and estimated period of
 use. Signs shall have black letters for the legend on a white background. Reflective sheeting
 will be permitted, but not required. Mounting, transverse location, height, and similar features
 for Funding Source Identification Signs shall be consistent with practices used for the
 installation of other informational signs either on wooden or steel U-channel supports to
 comply with small sign support safety practices. The sign shall be mounted as directed by the
 Engineer.
 
 26
 
 SECTION 105
 CONTROL OF WORK
 105.1-AUTHORITY OF THE ENGINEER:
 The Engineer will decide all questions which may arise as to the quantity, quality, and
 acceptability of materials furnished and work performed, and as to the rate of progress of the work;
 all questions which may arise as to the interpretation of the Plans and Specifications; and all
 questions as to the acceptable fulfillment of the Contract on the part of the Contractor. The
 decision of the Engineer will be final.
 The Engineer will have the authority to suspend the work wholly or in part due to the failure
 of the Contractor to correct conditions unsafe for the employees or the general public, for failure
 to carry out orders, for such periods as the Engineer may deem necessary due to unsuitable weather,
 for conditions considered unsuitable for the prosecution of the work, or for any other condition or
 reason deemed to be in the public interest. All such suspension orders will be directed to the
 Contractor in writing.
 The Engineer is not authorized to increase the obligation of the Division to any Contract
 except as provided.
 105.2-PLANS AND WORKING DRAWINGS:
 Approved Plans will show the location, profile, typical cross section, structures, except as
 specified, incidental items, and a summary of all items appearing in the Proposal. Any deviations
 which may be required by the exigencies of the construction will be determined by the Engineer
 and authorized by the Engineer in writing. The Contractor shall keep one set of approved Plans
 available on the work at all times.
 Plans will show such details as are necessary to give a comprehensive idea of the
 construction contemplated. Any information which may be shown on drawings regarding results
 obtained from test piles or borings will be a record of conditions encountered at the place where
 such test piles were driven or borings were made, as nearly as these conditions could be interpreted
 by the Engineer observing the operations. The Contractor shall interpret the data in the light of
 their own experience. The Contractor is not bound to accept or rely on the data shown on the
 drawings, but may make such additional borings and investigations, including test piles, as the
 Contractor may desire in order to satisfy themselves concerning the lengths of piles and the
 conditions governing or entering into the construction of foundations.
 The Plans will show the foundation depths and dimensions on which the estimate of
 quantities is based. These depths and foundation dimensions, however, are subject to such
 variations as may be necessary to secure a foundation satisfactory to the Engineer, and the right is
 expressly reserved to increase or diminish the dimensions and depths of the foundations as the
 Engineer may determine.
 The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer all stress sheets, shop drawings, erection plans,
 falsework plans, framework plans, cofferdam plans, bending diagrams for reinforcing steel, or any
 other supplemental plans or similar data for the Engineers use.
 Working drawings for steel and timber structures shall consist of shop detail, erection and
 other working plans, showing details, dimensions, sizes of material, and other information
 necessary for complete fabrication and erection of the work. The Division will require shop lists
 for structural steel to be submitted in a format as set forth by the Engineer.
 
 27
 
 Working drawings for concrete structures shall consist of such detail plans as may
 reasonably be required for the successful prosecution of the work and which are not included in
 the Plans furnished by the Engineer. These may include plans for falsework, bracing, centering
 and formwork, masonry layout diagrams, and diagrams for bent reinforcement.
 The Contractor shall furnish the Engineer copies of the working drawing as may be
 required for approval and for construction purposes and upon completion of the work,
 reproducible, full-size tracings of the original drawings shall be delivered to the Engineer. The
 size of the original drawings shall be 22 inches by 36 inches (A1 metric paper), including margins,
 unless otherwise permitted. The working drawings submitted for approval may be reduced.
 It is expressly understood that the approval by the Engineer of the Contractor's working
 drawing relates to the requirements for strength and general arrangement, and such approval will
 not relieve the Contractor from responsibility for omissions, errors in dimensions, shop fits, field
 connections, etc., for quantity of materials, or from any of their responsibility under the Contract
 for the successful completion of the work.
 The Contract price shall include the cost of furnishing all working drawings, and the
 Contractor will be allowed no extra compensation for such drawings.
 It is the Contractor's responsibility to determine the exact location of each utility in project
 areas where these utilities would be interrupted or damaged by performing work. In the event of
 damage or disruption to utilities which are active and are to remain in service, the Contractor shall
 immediately notify the responsible official of the organization operating the utility that is
 interrupted. The Contractor shall assume all costs, charges or claims connected with the
 interruption and repair of any utility damaged by the Contractor.
 105.2.1-Shop Drawings: Shop Drawings shall be defined as those working drawings
 necessary for the fabrication and inspection of the work as may reasonable be required for the
 successful prosecution of the work and which are not included in the plans furnished by the
 Engineer.
 Any Contractor proposed changes to the contract document shall be submitted to the
 Division for approval prior to certification of the shop drawings. The Division will prepare
 and issue all revisions to the contract plans dictated by these approved changes.
 Shop drawings shall be submitted sufficiently in advance of the start of the work to allow
 time for distribution by the Engineer without delaying the work. Only certified copies of shop
 drawings that have been distributed by the Engineer shall be considered approved by the
 project personnel. Copies of the shop drawings which do not contain the certification stamp
 and have not been distributed by the Engineer and are used for construction of any part of the
 work shall be at the Contractor’s risk.
 Upon completion of the work, reproducible, full-size tracings of the original drawings shall
 be delivered to the Engineer. The size of the original drawings shall be 22 inches x 34 inches,
 including margins, unless otherwise permitted.
 Shop drawings shall give full detailed dimensions and sizes of component parts of the
 structure and details of all miscellaneous parts, such as pins, nuts, bolts, drains, reinforcing,
 inserts, strands, ducts, etc. Where specific orientation of parts is required, such as the rolling
 of plates, the direction shall be shown.
 Shop drawings shall specifically identify the AASHTO material designation for all
 component parts.
 
 28
 
 All working drawings shall be in same unites as those used in the plans. Use of dual (Metric
 and U.S. Customary) units is not allowed.
 Shop drawings shall give full detailed dimensions and sizes of component parts of the
 structure and details of all miscellaneous parts.
 Design camber for all members shall be shown on the shop drawings.
 Any time delays encountered due to incomplete or incorrect submittals shall be the
 Contractor’s responsibility. The time delay shall not be grounds for a claim to extend the
 contact completion date or a claim for costs incurred by the Contractor, his Subcontractors, or
 his Suppliers.
 There are two methods for the approval of Shop Drawings and catalog sheets the “Division
 Approval Method” and the “Contractor Approval Method”. The item of work shown in the
 shop drawing shall determine the required Approval Method. Most projects will contain items
 of work requiring each method. Design Directive 102 (DD-102) latest version at the time of
 the bid shall be used to determine which method to use for a particular item of work and where
 to send each required submission.
 105.2.1.1-“Division Approval Method”: The Contractor shall be responsible for the
 submission of all shop drawings and catalog sheets, and shall submit two (2) review copies
 as shown in DD-102. After the Division has approved the shop drawings the Contractor
 shall summit nine (9) copies of the shop drawings to the Engineer for verification and
 distribution.
 The review and approval or rejection of Division approved shop drawings will
 normally require 14 calendar days after receipt of the drawings.
 The verification and distribution of Division approved shop drawings will normally
 require seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the drawings.
 105.2.1.2-“Contractor Approval Shop Method”:
 The Contractor shall be
 responsible for the submission of al approved shop drawings and catalog sheets, and shall
 submit nine (9) copies of all approved shop drawings and catalog sheets to the Engineer
 for distribution. The Contractor’s Engineer shall be responsible for the preparation, review,
 and approval of all shop drawings and catalog sheets.
 Each page/sheet of all shop drawings submittals shall be signed by a Professional
 Engineer Registered in the State of West Virginia. The approving engineer’s signature
 block shall be per the following:
 “I do hereby certify that the details, materials, methods, and
 dimensions shown on this document meet the requirements for general
 arrangement and comply with the contract documents provided by the
 West Virginia Department of Transportation, Division of Highways for
 the project.
 This certification by the Contractor in no way shall relieve the
 Manufacturer, Supplier, Fabricator or Sub-Contractor of their Full
 Responsibility for the product or service provided.”
 Name
 
 Reg. No.
 
 29
 
 Date
 
 Each page/sheet of all catalog sheet submittals shall be signed by a Professional
 Engineer Registered in the State of West Virginia. The approving engineer’s signature
 block shall be per the following:
 “I do hereby certify that this product complies with the contract
 documents provided by the West Virginia Department of
 Transportation, Division of Highways for the project.
 This certification by the Contractor in no way shall relieve the
 Manufacturer, Supplier, Fabricator or Sub-Contractor of their Full
 Responsibility for the product or service provided.”
 Name
 
 Reg. No.
 
 Date
 
 The Contractor’s authorize representative may sign and approve catalog sheets when
 the item on the catalog sheets is identical in every way to the item identified in the approved
 contract plans, If the item is not identical then the catalog sheets must be signed by a
 Professional Engineer Registered in the State of West Virginia as stated above. The
 Contractor’s authorized representative must have the authority to sign legal binding
 contracts for the Prime Contractor. When the Contractors’ authorized representative signs
 the certification the following approving signature block shall be used:
 “I do hereby certify that this product complies with the contract
 documents provided by the West Virginia Department of
 Transportation, Division of Highways for the project and is the identical
 item shown in the approved plans.
 This certification by the Contractor in no way shall relieve the
 Manufacturer, Supplier, Fabricator or Sub-Contractor of their Full
 Responsibility for the product or service provided.”
 Name
 
 Reg. No.
 
 Date
 
 All nine (9) copies of each copy of each page/sheet shall be signed by the same engineer
 and shall contain the same date. Each revision to individual page/sheet shall be considered
 a new submittal and shall require nine (9) certified copies. The Division will verify the
 above requirements are met prior to distribution. The Division shall return all nine (9) sets
 on any submittal which does not comply with the requirements of this Special Provision.
 The verification and distribution or rejection of Contractor approved shop drawings will
 normally require seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the drawings.
 Additional certifications and/or slightly different wording of the above two certification
 may be used if approval is given by the Legal Division. This approval must be obtained
 prior to any submission of contractor approved shop drawings. This approval may take up
 to thirty (30) days to be obtained. If this approval is obtained, a copy of the approval letter
 must be submitted with the first submission of shop drawings for distribution.
 The Division shall reserve the right to review any submission of shop drawings or
 catalog sheets. This review shall not delay the contractor in the construction project or
 delay the distribution of the approved shop drawings or catalog sheets.
 30
 
 105.3-CONFORMITY WITH PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
 All work performed and all materials furnished shall be in reasonably close conformity
 with the lines, grades, cross sections, dimensions and material requirements, including tolerances,
 shown on the Plans or indicated in the Specifications.
 Should the Engineer determine the materials, or the finished product do not conform to the
 Specifications or the Plans, the Engineer will then make a determination if the work will be
 accepted and remain in place in accordance with 106.3.1 and 106.7. In this event, the Engineer
 will document the basis of acceptance by contract modification which will provide for an adjusted
 payment. All nonconforming material or construction judged to be inadequate for the use intended
 shall be either reworked or removed and replaced at no expense to the Division.
 The adjusted payment fall into one of two categories:
 a. Within Specification Limits. For price reductions that fall within the Price Adjustment
 Limits of the contract specifications, there is no administrative charge for processing
 this type of price reduction.
 b. Outside Specification Limits. A special evaluation of the non-conformance must be
 made if the non-conforming material is outside of the contract specifications. Price
 reductions that fall outside the Price Adjustment Limits require further effort by the
 Department because the amount of the price reduction is not covered in contract
 specifications.
 Thus, an additional two hundred dollar, for the Division’s
 administrative cost, must be added to each individual price adjustment.
 105.4-COORDINATION
 OF
 PLANS,
 SPECIFICATIONS,
 SUPPLEMENTAL
 SPECIFICATIONS, AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
 These Specifications, the Supplemental Specifications, the Plans, Special Provisions, and
 all Supplementary Documents are essential parts of the Contract, and a requirement occurring in
 one is as binding as though occurring in all. They are intended to be complementary and to
 describe and provide for a complete work. In case of discrepancy, calculated dimensions will
 govern over scaled dimensions; Supplemental Specifications will govern over Specifications;
 Plans will govern over Specifications and Supplemental Specifications; Special Provisions will
 govern over Specifications, Supplemental Specifications and Plans. When the plans provide that
 new work is to connect with existing structures, the Contractor must verify all dimensions with the
 Engineer before proceeding with the work.
 The Specifications, Supplemental Specifications, and Special Provisions are in dual units.
 The first Primary unit is in English with the Metric unit following in parentheses “( )”. The Metric
 values are considered replacements for the English units and they are not conversions.
 The Contractor shall take no advantage of any apparent error or omission in the Plans or
 Specifications. In the event the Contractor discovers such an error or omission, the Contractor
 shall immediately notify the Engineer. The Engineer will then make such corrections and
 interpretations as may be deemed necessary for fulfilling the intent of the Plans and Specifications.
 
 105.5-COOPERATION BY CONTRACTOR:
 The Contractor will be furnished one (1) complete set of plans and profile sheets, and one
 (1) set of Cross Sections upon request, without charge. The Contractor shall maintain on the
 Project at all times one complete set of Plans, Specifications, and Special Provisions.
 The Contractor shall give the work the constant attention necessary to facilitate the progress
 thereof, and shall cooperate with the Engineer, their inspectors, other Contractors, and utilities in
 every way possible.
 31
 
 The Contractor shall have on the work at all times, as an agent, a competent superintendent
 capable of reading and thoroughly understanding the Plans and Specifications, and thoroughly
 experienced in the type of work being performed, who shall receive instructions from the Engineer
 or an authorized representatives. The Superintendent shall have full authority to execute orders or
 directions of the Engineer without delay, and to promptly supply such materials, equipment, tools,
 labor, and incidentals as may be required. Such superintendence shall be furnished irrespective of
 the amount of work sublet.
 The Contractor shall furnish to the Engineer a list of addresses and telephone numbers of
 their personnel who may be reached in case of emergency during hours when no work is to be
 performed. On weekends, holidays, during suspensions of work, and during storms the Contractor
 shall alert certain of their personnel to stand by and shall inform the Engineer of arrangements so
 made.
 The Contractor shall provide all reasonable facilities and furnish the Division the
 information, assistance and samples required by the Engineer and Inspector for proper inspecting
 or testing of materials and workmanship.
 On some contracts it may be necessary, to insure proper coordination between the work of
 the Contractor and the work of various utilities, to hold a pre-construction utility meeting. The
 Division will arrange for the affected utilities to be present. The Contractor or their representative,
 authorized to make decisions for them in regard to the scheduling of the proposed work, is required
 to attend the meeting. A report of the pre-construction utility meeting will be prepared and
 distributed by the Engineer to all represented at the meeting.
 105.6-COOPERATION WITH UTILITIES:
 The Division will notify all utility companies, all pipe line owners, or other parties affected,
 and endeavor to have all necessary adjustments of the public or private utility fixtures, sewers,
 pipe lines, and other appurtenances within or adjacent to the limits of construction, made as soon
 as practicable.
 Water lines, gas lines, wire lines, sewer lines, service connections, water and gas meter
 boxes, water and gas valve boxes, light standards, cableways, signals, and all other utility
 appurtenances within the limits of the proposed construction which are to be relocated or adjusted
 are to be moved by the owners at their expense, except as otherwise provided for in the Special
 Provisions or as noted on the Plans.
 Should the Contractor desire temporary changes of location for their convenience of any
 utility appurtenances, the Contractor shall satisfy the Division that the proposed relocation does
 not interfere with its or other Contractors' operations or the requirements of the work and does not
 cause an obstruction or a hazard to traffic. The Contractor shall make their own request to the
 utility or other parties affected by such relocation work. Such relocation work shall be made solely
 at the Contractor's expense.
 Any work done under or within the right-of-way of a railroad shall be under the supervision
 and control of the Chief Engineer, or other designated officer, of the railroad to the extent necessary
 in the judgment of the Chief Engineer, or other designated officer, to insure safe and uninterrupted
 operation of its trains and the convenient conduct of its business. Any additional conditions or
 requirements for doing work within the railroad right-of-way will be set forth in the Contract.
 In general, it is to be understood that the Contractor has considered in their bid all of the
 permanent and temporary utility appurtenances in their present or relocated positions as shown on
 the Plans, and that no additional compensation will be made by the State for any delays,
 32
 
 inconvenience, or damage sustained by them due to interference from the utility appurtenances or
 the operation of moving them. The locations of the underground utilities shown on the Plans have
 been obtained by diligent field checks and searches of available records. It is believed that they
 are essentially correct, but the Division makes no guarantees as to their exact locations.
 It is the Contractor's responsibility to determine the exact location of each utility in project
 areas where these utilities would be interrupted or damaged by performing work. In the event of
 damage or disruption to utilities which are active and are to remain in service, the Contractor shall
 immediately notify the responsible official of the organization operating the utility that is
 interrupted. The Contractor shall assume all costs, charges or claims connected with the
 interruption and repair of any utility damaged by the Contractor.
 105.7-COOPERATION BETWEEN CONTRACTORS:
 The Division reserves the right at any time to contract for and perform other or additional
 work on or near the work covered by the Contract.
 When separate Contracts are let within the limits of any one project, each Contractor shall
 conduct their work so as not to interfere with or hinder the progress or completion of the work
 being performed by other Contractors. Contractors working on the same project shall cooperate
 with each other as directed.
 Each Contractor involved shall assume all liability, financial or otherwise, in connection
 with their Contract and shall protect and save harmless the Division from any and all damages or
 claims that may arise because of inconvenience, delay, or loss experienced by them because of the
 presence and operations of other Contractors working within the limits of the same project.
 The Contractor shall arrange their work and shall place and dispose of the materials being
 used so as not to interfere with the operations of the other Contractors within the limits of the same
 project. The Contractor shall join work with that of the others in an acceptable manner and shall
 perform it in proper sequence to that of the others.
 In the event the Engineer finds further coordination effort is necessary, the Engineer shall
 call a meeting of the Contractors involved. After the meeting has been held, the Engineer may
 notify the Contractors of the action required of each and the Engineer's decision shall be final.
 105.8-CONSTRUCTION STAKES, LINES AND GRADES:
 Except when "Construction Layout Stakes", is included in the Contract, the Engineer will
 set construction stakes establishing lines, slopes and continuous profile-grade, together with
 necessary reference stakes and bench marks. The Engineer will set sufficient right-of-way stakes
 to define the right-of-way limits. The Engineer will set stakes to mark centerline and establish
 bench marks for bridges and special structures as may be considered necessary.
 The stakes and marks in the paragraph above shall constitute field control by and in
 accordance with which the Contractor shall establish all additional stakes and marks necessary to
 secure a correct layout of all the work. All stakes, except those set by the Engineer, shall be
 furnished by the Contractor. The Contractor shall not engage the services of any person or person
 in the employ of the Division for the performance of any of the Contractor's layout work.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for having the finished work in reasonably close
 conformity with the lines, grades, elevations, and dimensions called for on the Plans or established
 by the Engineer. The Contractor shall be held responsible for the preservation of stakes, marks,
 and references, and shall have them reset at the Contractor's expense when they are damaged, lost,
 displaced, or removed.
 33
 
 105.9-AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF THE PROJECT ENGINEER OR PROJECT
 SUPERVISOR:
 The project Engineer or Supervisor has immediate charge of the engineering details of each
 construction project. The Engineer or Supervisor are responsible for the administration and
 satisfactory completion of the project.
 The Project Engineer or Supervisor has the authority to reject defective material and to
 suspend any work that is being improperly performed.
 The Project Engineer or Supervisor will have the authority to suspend the work wholly or
 in part due to the failure of the Contractor to correct conditions unsafe for the employees or the
 general public; for failure to carry out provisions of the Contract; for failure to carry out orders;
 for such periods as they may deem necessary due to unsuitable weather. All such suspension
 orders will be directed to the Contractor in writing. The suspension of the work for the above
 reasons does no relieve the Contractor of their responsibility according to 107.16.
 105.10-AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF THE INSPECTOR:
 Inspectors employed by the Division will be authorized to inspect all work done and
 materials furnished. Such inspection may extend to all or any part of the work and to the
 preparation, fabrication or manufacture of the materials to be used. The Inspector is not authorized
 to alter or waive the provisions of the Contract. The Inspector is authorized to call the attention of
 the Contractor to any failure of the work or materials to conform to the Specifications and Contract.
 The Inspector is authorized to reject materials which do not meet specification requirements or
 suspend the portion of the work involved until any question at issue can be referred to the Project
 Engineer or Project Supervisor. The Inspector is not authorized to issue instructions contrary to
 the Plans and Specifications. The Inspector shall not act as foreman or perform other duties for
 the Contractor, nor interfere with the management of the work by the latter.
 105.11-INSPECTION OF WORK AND MATERIALS:
 All materials and each part or detail of the work shall be subject to inspection by the
 Engineer. The Engineer or a representative shall be allowed access to all parts of the work and
 shall be furnished with such information and assistance by the Contractor as is required to make a
 complete and detailed inspection. To facilitate the inspection of materials, all delivery tickets shall
 contain as a minimum the information required in MP 700.00.01.
 At the Engineer's request, the Contractor, at any time before acceptance of the work, shall
 remove or uncover such portions of the finished work as may be directed. After examination, the
 Contractor shall restore said portions of the work to the standard required by the Specifications.
 Should the work thus exposed or examined prove acceptable, the uncovering, or removing, and
 the replacing of the covering or making good of the parts removed will be paid for as extra work;
 but should the work so exposed or examined prove unacceptable, the uncovering, or removing,
 and the replacing of the covering or making good of the parts removed shall be at the Contractor's
 expense.
 Any work done or materials used without supervision or inspection by an authorized
 Division representative may be ordered removed and replaced at the Contractor's expense. Failure
 to reject any defective material or work shall not in any way prevent later rejection when such
 defects are discovered, nor obligate the Division to final acceptance.
 When any unit of government or political subdivision or any railroad corporation is to pay
 a portion of the cost of the work covered by this Contract, its respective representatives shall have
 34
 
 the right to inspect the work. Such inspection shall in no sense make any unit of government or
 political subdivision or any railroad corporation a party to this Contract, and shall in no way
 interfere with the rights of either party hereunder.
 No work shall be done at night, Saturdays, Sundays, or Holidays without documented prior
 approval of the Engineer.
 105.12-REMOVAL OF UNACCEPTABLE AND UNAUTHORIZED WORK:
 Except as provided in 105.3, all work which does not conform to the requirements of the
 Contract will be considered as unacceptable work.
 Unaccepted work, whether the result of poor workmanship, use of defective materials,
 damage through carelessness or any other cause, found to exist prior to the final acceptance of the
 work, shall be removed immediately and replaced in an acceptable manner.
 Unacceptable material shall be removed from the job site.
 No work shall be done without lines and grades having been given or approved by the
 Engineer. Work done contrary to the instructions of the Engineer, work done beyond the lines
 shown on the Plans, or as given, except as specified, or any extra work done without authority,
 will be considered as unauthorized and will not be paid for under the provisions of the Contract.
 Work so done may be ordered removed or replaced at the Contractor's expense.
 Upon failure on the part of the Contractor to comply promptly with any order of the
 Engineer, made under the provisions of this Subsection, the Engineer will have authority to cause
 unacceptable work to be remedied or removed and replaced and unauthorized work to be removed,
 and to deduct the costs from any monies due or to become due the Contractor.
 
 105.13-LOAD RESTRICTIONS:
 The Contractor shall comply with all legal load restrictions in the hauling of materials on
 public roads. A special permit will not relieve the Contractor of liability for damage which may
 result from the moving of equipment.
 The operation of equipment of such weight or so loaded as to cause damage to structures
 or the roadway or to any other type of construction will not be permitted. Hauling of materials
 over the base course or surface course under construction shall be limited as directed. No loads
 will be permitted on a concrete pavement, base or structure before the expiration of the curing
 period. In no case shall legal load limits be exceeded unless permitted in writing. The Contractor
 shall be responsible for all damage done by their own equipment.
 105.14-MAINTENANCE DURING CONSTRUCTION:
 The Contractor shall maintain the work during construction and until the project is accepted
 except as otherwise provided in 105.16.1. This maintenance shall constitute continuous and
 effective work prosecuted day by day, with adequate equipment and forces to the end that the
 roadway and structures are kept in satisfactory condition at all times.
 In the case of a Contract for the placing of a course upon a course or subgrade previously
 constructed, the Contractor shall maintain the previous course or subgrade during all construction
 operations.
 All cost of maintenance work during construction and before the project is accepted shall
 be included in the unit prices bid on the various pay items, and the Contractor will not be paid an
 additional amount for such work except as otherwise provided in 104.5.
 
 35
 
 105.15-FAILURE TO MAINTAIN ROADWAY OR STRUCTURE:
 If the Contractor, at any time, fails to comply with the provisions of 105.14, the Engineer
 will immediately notify the Contractor of such non-compliance. If the Contractor fails to remedy
 unsatisfactory maintenance within 24 hours after receipt of such notice, the Engineer may
 immediately proceed to maintain the project, and the entire cost of maintenance will be deducted
 from monies due or to become due the Contractor on their Contract.
 105.16-ACCEPTANCE:
 105.16.1-Partial Acceptance: If at any time during the prosecution of the project, the
 Contractor completes a unit or portion of the project, such as a structure, an interchange, or a
 section of road or pavement, the Contractor may request the Engineer to make final inspection
 of that unit. If the Engineer finds upon inspection that the unit has been completed in
 compliance with the Contract, the Engineer may accept that unit as being completed and the
 Contractor may be relieved of further responsibility for that unit. Such partial acceptance shall
 in no way void or alter any of the terms of the Contract.
 105.16.2-Final Acceptance: Upon due notice from the Contractor of presumptive
 completion of the entire project, the Engineer will make an inspection. If all construction and
 other contractual requirements provided for and contemplated by the Contract is found
 completed to satisfaction, that inspection will constitute the final inspection. The Engineer
 will make the final acceptance and notify the Contractor in writing of this acceptance. Final
 acceptance will be the date the Contract Completion Report is fully executed by the Division.
 If, however, the inspection discloses any work, in whole in part, as being unsatisfactory,
 the Engineer will give the Contractor the necessary instruction for correction of same in
 writing, and the Contractor shall immediately comply with and execute such instructions.
 Upon correction of the work, another inspection will be made which will constitute the final
 inspection provided the work has been satisfactorily completed. In such event, the Engineer
 will make the final acceptance and notify the Contractor in writing of this acceptance. Final
 acceptance will be the date the Contract Completion Report is fully executed by the Division.
 105.17-CLAIMS FOR ADJUSTMENT AND DISPUTES:
 If additional compensation is considered due for work or material not covered in the
 Contract, written notification of the intent to make a claim under Subsection 104.9, shall be given
 to the Engineer before beginning or continuing the affected work.
 The Engineer will respond as described under Subsection 104.9 following notification.
 The Contractor shall provide necessary cooperation and information to the Engineer during the
 period of notification, review, and evaluation to provide possible resolution of the Contract
 question and avoid, if possible, further claim process actions.
 If notification is not given, or the Contractor does not afford the Engineer proper facilities
 for keeping strict account of actual costs, the Contractor waives any claim for additional
 compensation. Notice by the Contractor, and the fact that the Engineer has kept account of the
 costs shall not be construed as substantiating the validity of the claim. An equitable adjustment
 will be made to the Contract if the claim is found to have merit.
 
 36
 
 A. Claim submittals shall be in sufficient detail to enable the Engineer to determine the
 basis for entitlement and the resulting costs. The following information if available,
 should accompany each claim submitted:
 1. Detailed factual statement of the claim providing all necessary dates locations, and
 items of work affected by the claim.
 2. The date actions resulting in the claim occurred or conditions resulting in the claim
 became evident.
 3. A copy of the "Notice of Potential Claim" Form (available from the Division), filed
 by the Contractor for the specific claim.
 4. The name, title, and activity of each Department employee knowledgeable.
 5. The name, title, and activity of each Contractor employee knowledgeable about the
 facts that gave rise to such claim.
 6. The specific provisions of the Contract that support the claim, and a statement why
 the provisions support the claim.
 7. The identification of any pertinent documents, and the substance of any material
 communications relating to the claim.
 8. A statement whether the additional compensation or extension of time is based on
 the provisions of the Contract or an alleged breach of Contract.
 9. If an extension of time is also sought, the specific days for which it is sought and
 the basis for such claim as determined by an analysis of the construction schedule.
 10. The amount of additional compensation sought and a breakdown of that amount.
 B. Required Certification of Claims. The claim submittal shall include the Contractor's
 written certification, under oath, attesting to the following:
 1. The claim is made in good faith.
 2. Supportive data is accurate and compete to the Contractor's best knowledge and
 belief.
 3. The amount of the claim accurately reflects the Contractor's actual cost incurred.
 In complying with this requirement, the Contractor shall use the following
 certification:
 Under penalty of law for perjury or falsification, the undersigned
 ___________________ (Company), hereby certifies that the claim for extra
 compensation and time, if any, made herein for work on this Contract is a
 true statement of the actual costs incurred and time sought, and is fully
 documented and supported under the Contract between the parties this
 ________ day of ________________, ________.
 __________________________(Company)
 By_________________________________
 Its _________________________________
 ATTEST:
 By_________________________________
 Its _________________________________
 37
 
 C. Review of Claims. All claims filed will be subject to review by the Division at any
 time following the claim filing, whether or not the claim is part of a suit pending in the
 courts of this State. The review may begin upon submission. The Contractor,
 Subcontractor(s), or Supplier(s) shall cooperate with the Division and shall, at a
 minimum, provide access to the following documents of the Contractor,
 Subcontractor(s), its/their subsidiaries, separate divisions and affiliates if said
 documents are available:
 1. Daily time sheets and foreman's daily reports.
 2. Union agreements if any.
 3. Insurance, welfare, and benefits records.
 4. Payroll register.
 5. Earnings records.
 6. Payroll tax returns.
 7. Material invoices, purchases orders, and all material and supply Acquisition
 Contracts.
 8. Material cost distribution worksheets.
 9. Equipment records (list of company equipment, rates, etc.).
 10. Vendor rental agreements and subcontractor invoices.
 11. Subcontractor payment certificates.
 12. Canceled checks (payroll and vendors).
 13. Job cost report.
 14. Job payroll ledger.
 15. General ledger, general journal, (if used) and all subsidiary ledgers and journals
 together with all supporting documentation pertinent to entries made in these
 ledgers and journals.
 16. Cash disbursements journal.
 17. Depreciation records on all company equipment.
 18. All other documents used to develop costs for the Contractor's internal purposes in
 establishing the actual cost of owning and operating equipment.
 19. All documents related to the preparation of the Contractor's bid including the final
 calculations on which the bid was based.
 20. Worksheets used to prepare the claim, establishing the cost components for items
 of the claim including, but not limited to, labor, benefits and insurance, materials,
 equipment, subcontractors, and all documents that establish the time periods,
 individuals involved, the hours and the rates for the individuals.
 
 38
 
 SECTION 106
 CONTROL OF MATERIALS
 106.1-SOURCE OF SUPPLY AND QUALITY REQUIREMENTS:
 The material used on the work shall meet all quality requirements of the Contract. To
 expedite the inspection and testing of materials, the Contractor shall notify the Engineer of their
 proposed sources of materials as required in 103.10. At the option of the Engineer, materials may
 be approved at the source of supply before delivery is started. If it is found after trial that sources
 of supply for previously approved materials do not produce specified products, the Contractor shall
 furnish materials from other sources at no increase in cost to the Division.
 The Contractor shall provide and maintain a quality control system. This quality control
 system shall conform to all requirements of the Specifications.
 The Contractor shall maintain equipment and qualified personnel to perform all sampling
 and testing to determine the magnitude of the various properties of the materials during
 manufacturing and placement as governed by the Specifications and shall maintain those
 properties within the limits of the Specifications.
 The contractor shall design a quality control plan detailing the methods by which the
 quality program will be conducted.
 The quality control plan shall be in accordance with the applicable Specifications and
 Material Procedure(s) for the specified item. The plan should clearly describe the methods by
 which the Quality Control Program will be conducted. The Quality Control Plan shall be
 submitted to the Engineer at the Pre-Construction Conference. The work shall not begin on the
 applicable item(s) until the plan has been reviewed and found to be in conformance with the
 contract documents and accepted by the Engineer. Items that require testing by the Contractor,
 but stipulate that acceptance shall be based upon written certification, do not require Quality
 Control Plans.
 106.1.1-Domestic Aluminum, Glass, Steel and Iron in Public Works Project:
 106.1.1.1-Definitions: Unless the context in which used clearly requires a different
 meaning, as used in this section:
 "Public Works" includes roads, highways, streets, bridges, sidewalks, sewage systems,
 buildings, engineering and architectural works, and any other structure, facility or
 improvement constructed or undertaken by the Division. "Aluminum, glass, steel and iron
 products" means products rolled, formed, shaped, drawn, extruded, forged, cast, fabricated,
 or otherwise similarly processed from aluminum, glass, steel, and iron. "Domestic
 aluminum, glass, steel and iron products" means aluminum, glass, steel and iron products
 made in the United States.
 Buy America requirements apply to coating. Coating is considered a manufacturing
 process and is interpreted to mean all processes that protect or enhance the value of a
 material or product to which it is applied such as epoxy coatings, galvanizing or painting.
 106.1.1.2-Preference For Domestic Aluminum and Glass Products: The Division
 shall require that all aluminum or glass products to be supplied to purchase order or state
 and federal projects shall be domestic aluminum or glass products in compliance with
 Chapter 5, Article 19 of the West Virginia Code, unless the offered or bid price of the
 domestic aluminum or glass products is unreasonable or that the domestic aluminum or
 39
 
 glass products are not produced in sufficient quantities to meet the project requirements.
 The offered or bid price of domestic aluminum or glass products is not unreasonable unless
 it is more than 20 percent higher than the offered bid price of foreign made aluminum or
 glass products (including any applicable duty) if the aluminum or glass products to be
 supplied are produced in a "substantial labor surplus area" as determined by the United
 States Department of Labor, the offered or bid price of domestic aluminum or glass
 products is not unreasonable unless it is more than 30% higher than the offered or bid price
 of foreign-made aluminum or glass products (including any applicable duty). A listing of
 the "substantial labor surplus areas" can be obtained from the Division's Contract
 Administration Division. This Section does not apply to any state or federal project in an
 amount less than $50,000.00.
 106.1.1.3-Contract Payments; Recovery in Case of Violation of Section: The
 Division may not authorize or make any payments to a Contractor under a contract which
 contains or should contain the provision required by Section 106.1.1.2 unless such
 Contractor has fully complied with such Section. Prior to such payment, the Division will
 require the Contractor to furnish a certificate of compliance from each subcontractor and
 supplier. Payments made by the Division to any who did not comply with this section may
 be recovered by the Division.
 106.1.1.4-Procedures For Use of Foreign-Made Materials: If foreign-made
 aluminum, glass or steel (iron) products are supplied in compliance with this Section, the
 Contractor shall be responsible for providing procedures acceptable to the Division for
 determining that specification requirements are met, including all inspections at no
 additional cost to the Division. The use of foreign-made products will not be reason for
 granting an extension of time.
 106.1.1.5-Use of Domestic Steel Products: When steel or iron is used it shall be in
 compliance with Section 165 of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1982, the
 applicable provisions of Title 23 CFR, Section 635.410, as amended, entitled "Buy
 America Requirements," and Chapter 5A, Article 3, Section 56 and Chapter 5, Article 19
 of the West Virginia Code.
 Pig Iron and processed, pelletized, and reduced iron ore manufactured outside of the
 United States may be used in the domestic manufacturing process for steel and/or iron
 materials used in Federal-aid highway construction projects.
 The Division shall require that all steel products to be supplied to purchase order or
 state and federal projects shall be domestic steel products in compliance with Chapter 5A,
 Article 3, Section 56 of the West Virginia Code.
 These provisions may not prevent the minimal use of foreign steel provided the proper
 approval is obtained in writing per Chapter 5A, Article 3, Section 56, Subsection (b)(1) of
 the West Virginia Code.
 106.1.1.6-Domestic Steel Products: To be a Domestic Steel product all manufacturing
 processes, including application of a coating, for these materials must occur in the United
 States including all of its territories, continental, or insular, subject to the jurisdiction of
 the United States. Steel manufacturing processes shall include rolled, formed, shaped,
 40
 
 drawn, cast, fabricated or otherwise similarly processed, or processed by a combination of
 two or more such operations, from steel made by the open hearth, basic oxygen, electric
 furnace, Bessemer or other steel making process. Coating includes all processes that protect
 or enhance the value of the material to which the coating is applied.
 106.2-LOCAL MATERIAL SOURCES:
 106.2.1-Designated Sources: Possible sources of local materials may be designated in the
 contract documents. The quality of material in such deposits will be acceptable in general, but
 the Contractor shall determine for themselves the amount of equipment and work required to
 produce a material meeting the Specifications. It shall be understood that it is not feasible to
 ascertain from samples the limits for an entire deposit, and that variations shall be considered
 as usual and are to be expected. The Engineer may order procurement of material from any
 portion of a deposit and may reject portions of the deposit as unacceptable.
 The Division may acquire and make available to the Contractor the right to take materials
 from the sources designated in the contract documents together with the right to use such
 property as may be specified, for plant site, stockpiles, and haul roads.
 106.2.2-Contractor Furnished Sources: If the Contractor desires to use materials from
 sources other than those designated, the Contractor shall acquire the necessary rights to take
 materials from the sources and shall pay all costs related thereto, including any which may
 result from an increase in length of haul. All costs of exploring and developing such other
 sources shall be borne by the Contractor. The use of material from other than designated
 sources will not be permitted until representative samples taken by the Engineer have been
 approved and written authority is issued for the use thereof.
 When material deposits are not designated in the Contract, the Contractor shall provide
 sources of material acceptable to the Engineer.
 When sources of material or material deposits are provided by the Division, the Division
 will assume the cost of processing samples to determine the suitability of the material unless
 otherwise specified.
 Sites from which material has been removed shall, upon completion of the work, be left in
 a neat and presentable condition and shall be properly drained. Unless otherwise directed by
 the Engineer, they shall be seeded and mulched as provided in 652 without additional
 compensation. Where practicable, borrow pits, gravel pits, and quarry sites shall be located so
 they will not be visible from the highway.
 In accordance with the agreement between the Division of Highways and the Division of
 Environmental Protection, the Contractor cannot furnish material from borrow areas outside
 the right of way for any other public or private use.
 106.3-SAMPLES, TESTS, CITED SPECIFICATIONS:
 All materials will be inspected, tested and approved prior to incorporation into the work.
 Any work which incorporates materials prior to the above evaluation shall be performed at the
 Contractor's risk, and may subsequently be considered as unacceptable. Unless otherwise
 specified, the materials shall meet the applicable Standard or Interim Specifications of the
 American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, the Standard or Tentative
 Specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials, or Standards adopted by other
 specifying agencies, with preference given in the same order in which the above agencies are listed.
 41
 
 The specification which is current at the time of advertisement for bids shall govern, except that,
 with the approval of the Engineer, subsequent revisions or adoptions may govern. All materials
 being used are subject to inspection, testing or rejection at any time prior to final acceptance of the
 completed work.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the quality of construction and materials
 incorporated. When called for in the Specifications, the Contractor shall perform all necessary
 process control inspection, sampling and testing. All materials will be approved for acceptance
 through the Division's acceptance procedures. The Division has the exclusive right and
 responsibility for determining the acceptability of the construction and materials incorporated. The
 Division may use the results of the Contractor's inspection, sampling and testing for acceptance
 purposes.
 Lot or sublot sizes will normally be designated. In the event that operational conditions
 cause work to be interrupted, or only partially completed before the lot size designated has been
 achieved, the lot or sublot may be redefined by the Engineer as being either the amount of work
 accomplished within the day or that work partially completed combined with the next lot or sublot
 of work. It is the intent of these Specifications that the number of samples required to evaluate
 each lot or sublot will be unchanged even when the lot or sublot is redefined.
 When an acceptance plan is cited, it shall be in accordance with 106.3.1.
 106.3.1-Acceptance Plans:
 106.3.1.1-Percent Within Tolerance: The percentage of each lot or sublot of material,
 product, item of construction, or completed construction within the specified tolerances
 will be determined by the procedures as referenced by the specification requirements.
 When West Virginia AP-A is referenced, it will consist of Tables 106-1 to 106-5 inclusive,
 published in MP 106.00.20.
 106.3.1.2-Sampling of Reworked Lots or Sublots: It is the intent of these
 Specifications that lots or sublots of materials, products, items of construction or completed
 construction meet specification requirements at the time of submission. Lots or sublots
 generally will not be resampled unless reworked before submission. Sampling after
 reworking will be at the expense of the Contractor.
 106.4-PLANT INSPECTION:
 The Engineer may undertake the inspection of materials at the source.
 In the event plant inspection is undertaken, the following conditions shall be met:
 i. The Engineer shall have the cooperation and assistance of the Contractor and the
 producer with whom the Contractor has contracted for materials.
 ii. The Engineer shall have full entry at all times to such parts of the plant as may concern
 the manufacture or production of the materials being furnished.
 iii. Adequate safety measures are to be provided and maintained.
 The Division reserves the right to retest all materials, which have been tested and accepted
 at the source of supply, after the materials have been delivered to the project and prior to
 incorporation into the work and to reject all materials which, when retested, do not meet the
 requirements of these Specifications or those established for the specific project.
 
 42
 
 106.5-STORAGE OF MATERIALS:
 Materials shall be so stored as to assure the preservation of their quality and fitness for the
 work. Stored materials, even though approved before storage, may again be inspected prior to
 their use in the work. Stored materials shall be located so as to facilitate their prompt inspection.
 Approved portions of the right-of-way may be used for storage purposes and for the placing of the
 Contractor’s plant and equipment, but any additional space required therefore must be provided
 by them at their expense. Private property shall not be used for storage purposes without written
 permission of the owner or lessee, and if requested by the Engineer, copies of such written
 permission shall be furnished. All storage sites shall be restored to their original condition by the
 Contractor at their expense. This shall not apply to the stripping and storing of topsoil, or to other
 materials salvaged from the work.
 Care shall be exercised to protect finished concrete surfaces from being stained from
 storing or placing materials, including but not limited to reinforcing bars or mesh or unpainted
 structural steel, on same. Any such material so stored shall be adequately protected from weather.
 Any stains resulting from storage of materials on finished concrete surfaces shall be removed by
 the Contractor at their expense.
 Aggregate stockpiles may be made on ground that is denuded of vegetation, hard, and well
 drained. If necessary, the ground shall be covered with two inch (50 mm) plank. Different kinds
 and sizes of aggregates shall be kept separate during transportation, handling, and storage until
 batched. If necessary, partitions of suitable height and strength shall be constructed between
 stockpiles to prevent different materials from becoming mixed. Care must be taken to prevent
 segregation of the coarse and fine particles of aggregates from taking place during handling or
 hauling. The inclusion of foreign materials will not be permitted. Aggregates placed directly on
 the ground shall not be removed from the stockpiles within one foot (300 mm) of the ground until
 the final cleaning up of the work, and then only the clean aggregate will be permitted to be used.
 106.6-HANDLING MATERIALS:
 All materials shall be handled in such manner as to preserve their quality and fitness for
 the work. Aggregates shall be transported from the storage site to the work in tight vehicles, so
 constructed as to prevent loss or segregation of materials after loading and measuring, in order that
 there may be no inconsistencies in the quantities of materials intended for incorporation in the
 work as loaded and the quantities as actually received at the place of operations.
 106.7-UNACCEPTABLE MATERIALS:
 106.7.1-Acceptance or Rejection: Following the application of the appropriate
 acceptance plan, the decision of the Engineer will be final as to the acceptance, rejection, or
 acceptance at an adjusted price of sampled lots or sublots.
 106.7.2-Disposition of Lots or Sublots: Lots or sublots not conforming to specification
 requirements may be reworked or removed and replaced and resubmitted for acceptance. All
 nonconforming lots or sublots evaluated as unsatisfactory for the use intended shall be
 reworked or removed and replaced and resubmitted for acceptance. When the evaluation
 indicates the lots or sublots may satisfactorily remain in place, acceptance will be an adjusted
 price as stated in the Specifications or as directed by the Engineer.
 
 43
 
 106.8-DIVISION-FURNISHED MATERIAL:
 The Contractor shall furnish all materials required to complete the work, except those
 specified to be furnished by the Division.
 Materials furnished by the Division will be delivered or made available to the Contractor
 at the points specified in the Contract.
 The cost of handling and placing all materials after they are furnished to the Contractor
 shall be considered as included in the contract price for the item in connection with which they are
 used.
 The Contractor will be held responsible for all material delivered to them, and deductions
 will be made from any monies due the Contractor to make good any shortages and deficiencies,
 from any cause whatsoever, and for any damage which may occur after such delivery, and for any
 demurrage charges.
 106.9-SILENCE OF SPECIFICATIONS:
 The apparent silence of these Specifications, Supplemental Specifications, plans and
 Special Provisions as to any detail, or the apparent omission from them of a detailed description
 concerning any point shall be regarded as meaning that only material and workmanship of
 acceptable quality are to be used.
 
 44
 
 SECTION 107
 LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO PUBLIC
 107.1-LAWS TO BE OBSERVED:
 The Contractor shall keep fully informed of all Federal and State laws, all local laws,
 ordinances, and regulations and all orders and decrees of bodies or tribunals having any jurisdiction
 or authority, which in any manner affect those engaged or employed on the work, or which in any
 way affect the conduct of the work. The Contractor shall at all times observe and comply with all
 such laws, ordinances, regulations, orders and decrees; and shall protect and indemnify, defend
 and hold DOH harmless from any and all claims, liabilities and causes of action for any fines or
 penalties imposed on DOH by any state or federal agency because of violation by Contractor or any
 of its subcontractors and/or consultants of any state or federal law or regulation.
 107.2-PERMITS, LICENSES AND TAXES:
 The Contractor shall procure all permits and licenses, pay all charges, fees, and taxes, and
 give all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the work.
 The Contractor shall provide the Division with sufficient documentation that all applicable
 taxes have been paid within 120 days of the project acceptance as provided for in 105.16. The
 Division shall have the right to revoke the Contractor’s Prequalification until the Contractor
 provides sufficient documentation that all taxes have been paid or are the subject of a timely filed
 dispute currently pending in a court or other body having legal authority and jurisdiction to hear
 the dispute.
 107.3-PATENTED DEVICES, MATERIALS, AND PROCESSES:
 If the Contractor employs any design, devise, material, or process covered by letters of
 patent or copyright, the Contractor shall provide for such use by suitable legal agreement with the
 patentee or owner. The Contractor and the surety shall indemnify and save harmless the Division,
 and affected third party, or political subdivision from and claims for infringement by reasons of
 the use of any such patented design, device, material or process, or any trademark or copyright,
 and shall indemnify the Division for any costs, expenses, and damages which it may be obligated
 to pay by reason of any infringement, at any time during the prosecution or after the completion
 of the work.
 107.4-RESTORATION OF SURFACES OPENED BY PERMIT:
 The right to construct or reconstruct any utility service in the highway or street or to grant
 permits for same, at any time, is expressly reserved by the Division for the proper authorities of
 the municipality in which the work is done, and the Contractor shall not be entitled to any damages
 either for the digging up of the street or for any delay occasioned.
 Any individual, firm, or corporation wishing to make an opening in the highway must
 secure a permit from the Division. The Contractor shall allow parties bearing such permits, and
 only those parties, to make openings in the highway. The Contractor shall, when ordered by the
 Engineer, make in an acceptable manner all necessary repairs due to such openings and such
 necessary work will paid for as "Extra Work", or as provided in these Specifications, and will be
 subject to the same conditions as original work performed.
 
 45
 
 107.5-FEDERAL-AID PROVISIONS:
 When the United States Government pays any portion of the cost of a project, the Federal
 Laws and the Rules and Regulations made pursuant to such laws must be observed by the
 Contractor, and the work shall be subject to the inspection of the appropriate Federal Agency.
 Such inspection shall in no sense make the Federal Government a party to the Contract and
 will in no way interfere with the rights of either party hereunder.
 107.6-SANITARY PROVISIONS:
 The Contractor shall provide and maintain in a neat, sanitary condition such
 accommodations for the use of their employees as may be necessary to comply with the
 requirements of the State and local Boards of Health, or of other bodies or tribunals having
 jurisdiction. The Contractor shall not create, commit, or maintain a public nuisance.
 107.7-PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND SAFETY:
 The Contractor shall at all times so conduct their work as to assure the least possible
 obstruction to traffic. The safety and convenience of the general public and the residents along
 the highway and the protection of persons and property shall be provided for by the Contractor as
 specified under 104.5.
 The Contractor shall comply with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws governing
 safety, health and sanitation. The Contractor shall provide all safeguards, safety devices and
 protective equipment and take any other needed actions, on their own responsibility, or as the
 Engineer may determine, reasonable necessary to protect the life and health of employees on the
 job and the safety of the public and to protect property in connection with the performance of the
 work covered by the Contract.
 The Contractor and any subcontractor shall not require any laborer or mechanic employed
 in performance of the Contract to work in surroundings or under working conditions which are
 unsanitary, hazardous, or dangerous to their health or safety, as determined under construction
 safety and health standards (Title 29, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1926, formerly Part 1518,
 as revised from time to time). promulgated by the United States Secretary of Labor, in accordance
 with Section 107 of the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (83 Stat. 96).
 107.7.1-Safety Plan: The Contractor shall comply with this subsection if the Total
 Contract Bid Amount exceeds $2,000,000 or is otherwise noted on the plans. The contractor
 will provide a copy of the company comprehensive safety and health program and the name of
 the company safety officer at the preconstruction conference or prior to start of work. A copy
 of the comprehensive safety and health program for each subcontractor and the name of the
 company safety officer must be submitted with the request for subcontract approval. The
 company comprehensive safety and health program should be in accordance with ANSI
 A10.38-1991, “Basic Elements of an Employer Program to Provide a Safe and Healthful Work
 Environment” or equivalent.
 A site specific safety plan covering the work of the prime contractor and all known
 subcontractors must be prepared and submitted at the preconstruction conference or prior to
 the start of work. The site specific plan must include the name of the competent person(s)
 responsible for safety at the project site. As additional subcontracts are negotiated the site
 specific safety plan for that work can be submitted with the subcontract request.
 
 46
 
 Contractor employees shall be provided hazard recognition and avoidance training.
 Further, newly employed workers shall be provided safety orientation training prior to being
 assigned any task. This training can be provided by the contractor or the contractor’s
 representative. Likewise, training provided by other sources based on an employee’s initiative
 or his or her affiliation with the other groups is permissible. All training should be current and
 up to date with appropriate refresher courses provided if previous training was not within the
 last three years.
 All contractor safety training shall be administered or monitored by the contractor’s
 qualified representative, known as the company safety officer. “Qualified” means one who,
 by possession of a recognized degree, certificate, or professional standing, or who by extensive
 knowledge, training and experience, has successfully demonstrated his or her ability to solve
 or resolve problems relating to the subject matter, the work or the project. Acceptable training
 for this individual to be considered qualified includes, but is not limited to, completion of the
 30-hour OSHA 500 Trainer Course in Occupational Safety and Health Standards for the
 Construction Industry or its equivalent.
 The Contractor or Subcontractor working on the project will conduct weekly safety “tool
 box” talks to discuss relevant safety issues and this meeting will be open to attendance and
 active participation by the on-site Division of Highways Staff.
 107.8-RAILWAY-HIGHWAY PROVISIONS:
 The Contractor shall comply with the following provisions when performing any
 operations within the existing right of way of the Railroad or when railroad protective insurance
 is required by the contract documents. Railroad Protective insurance shall include all of the work
 set forth in 107.8 with exception of the provisions of sections 107.8.7 and 107.8.8.
 107.8.1-Notice of Starting Work: The Contractor shall not start any work on Railroad
 right of way until he has complied with the following conditions:
 (a) Give the Railroad's Chief Engineer written notice at least ten days in advance of the
 date he proposes to begin work on or adjacent to the Railroad right of way.
 (b) Obtain written approval from the Railroad of the Railroad Protective Insurance
 coverage as required herein.
 (c) Obtain written authorization from the Railroad to begin work on Railroad right of
 way. This authorization can be expected within two weeks after insurance has been
 approved.
 107.8.2-Insurance: The Contractor shall secure and provide, until all work under the
 terms of the project is satisfactorily completed and accepted, the following types of insurance
 in the amounts and form as hereinafter set forth:
 107.8.2.1-Contractor's Public Liability Insurance and Protective Public Liability
 Insurance: CGL coverage as required by Section 103.6.1 shall be written with a
 $2,000,000 Each Occurrence Limit. This limit may be single limit of primary coverage or
 a combination of primary and excess coverage which will meet the $2,000,000
 requirement. A certificate of insurance shall be provided to the Railroad before work
 begins and said certificate shall provide the Railroad thirty (30) days advance written notice
 of cancellation or material change in insurance coverage. If any part of the work is sublet,
 47
 
 Commercial General Liability Insurance and evidence thereof in the same amounts as
 required of the Prime Contractor, shall be provided by or in behalf of the subcontractor to
 cover his operations on railroad right of way.
 107.8.2.2-Railroad Protective Liability Insurance: With respect to the operations
 performed by the Contractor or subcontractors of any tier the Contractor must provide in
 the name of Railroad. This policy shall be written on the ISO/RIMA Form of Railroad
 Protective Insurance (ISO Form CG00350690) with Pollution Exclusion Amendment ISO
 Form CG 28311185 or their equivalents). The policy of insurance specified in this section
 shall be countersigned by a resident agent of the State of West Virginia in accordance with
 Section 103.6.5. The original of the policy shall be submitted to and approved by the
 Railroad before work is commenced on its right of way or within 200 feet of the nearest
 track or 1000 feet if blasting is required for the construction.
 107.8.2.2.1-Railroad Protective Liability Insurance Limits for Non-Passenger
 Railway Facilities: A policy providing a limit of $2,000,000 per occurrence for bodily
 injury and property damage combined. Said insurance shall be furnished with an aggregate
 of $6,000,000 applying separately to each annual period.
 107.8.2.2.2-Railroad Protective Liability Insurance Limits for Passenger Railway
 Facilities: A policy providing a limit of $5,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and
 property damage combined. Said insurance shall be furnished with an aggregate of
 $10,000,000 applying separately to each annual period.
 107.8.3-Use of Grade Crossings: If the Contractor desires a temporary grade crossing of
 the Railroad's tracks other than that shown in the project plans; to use an existing private grade
 crossing; or to use an existing public grade crossing with unlicensed construction equipment,
 the Contractor shall make arrangements in writing with the Railroad and will be required to
 bear all costs, including flagging, incidental to such crossings.
 107.8.4-Interference with Railroad Operations: All work to be performed by the
 Contractor shall be performed in a manner agreeable to the Railroad's Chief Engineer. The
 Contractor shall use reasonable care and diligence and cooperate with officials of the Railroad
 in order to avoid accidents, damages or unnecessary delay to, or interference with train
 movement of the Railroad.
 When work within Railroad right of way is of a nature that it impedes Railroad operations
 such as, but not limited to, use of runaround tracks or the necessity for reduced speed, the
 Contractor shall schedule and conduct his operations so that such impediment is reduced to the
 absolute minimum.
 Any cost incurred by the Railroad for repairing damages to its property or to property of
 its tenants, caused by or resulting from the operations of the Contractor, shall be paid directly
 to the Railroad by the Contractor.
 The Contractor shall assume all liability for any and all damages to his work, employees,
 subcontractor, equipment and materials caused by Railroad traffic.
 No charge or claim of the Contractor against either the Division or the Railroad will be
 allowed for hindrance or delay on account of train traffic, work done by Railroad, delay
 48
 
 incident to or necessary for safe operation and maintenance of the railroad or any delays due
 to compliance with these special provisions.
 107.8.5-Construction Procedures: It shall be the Contractor's responsibility to arrange a
 schedule with the Railroad for accomplishing his work and the Railroad’s or its tenants work.
 The Contractor in arranging a schedule shall ascertain, from the Railroad, the lead time
 required for assembling crews and materials and shall make due allowance therefor.
 The Contractor shall submit to the Railroad's Chief Engineer, with a copy to the Division
 of Highways, work schedule and information regarding methods and procedures for
 performing work, e.g., plans and specifications for shoring and sheeting, and for protective
 shields covering all Railroad facilities. The Contractor shall obtain Railroad approval before
 commencing said work.
 The Contractor shall take special precaution and care when excavating for shoring pits and
 footers adjacent to tracks and in driving piles to always provide adequate lateral support for
 the tracks and the loads which they carry, so as not to disturb the track alignment and surface
 and to avoid obstructing track clearances with working equipment, tools or materials.
 A copy of the Contractor's blasting sequence will be provided to the railroad for their
 information prior to any blasting. The Contractor shall obtain specific approval of the
 Railroad's Chief Engineer for use of explosives on Railroad property.
 All construction equipment that is parked near the track shall be effectively immobilized
 so that it cannot be moved by unauthorized persons.
 Materials and equipment shall not be stored where they will interfere with Railroad
 operations, nor on the right of way of the Railroad without first having obtained written
 permission from the Railroad's Chief Engineer.
 The Contractor will be required to maintain all ditches and drainage structures and keep
 them free of silt or other obstructions, to promptly repair eroded areas within Railroad right of
 way and to repair any other damage to the property of the Railroad or its tenants which may
 be the results of their operations.
 Upon completion of the work, the Contractor shall remove from within the limits of the
 Railroad's right of way, all machinery, equipment, surplus materials, falsework, rubbish or
 temporary buildings which belong to the Contractor and leave said right of way in a condition
 satisfactory to the Railroad's Chief Engineer.
 107.8.6-Track Clearances: The minimum track clearances to be adhered to by the
 Contractor during construction will be 15 feet (3 m) from centerline of the track or as approved
 by the Railroad’s Chief Engineer. However, before undertaking any work within Railroad
 right of way or before placing any obstruction over any track, the Contractor shall:
 a) Notify the Railroad's Chief Engineer at least 72 hours in advance of work.
 b) Receive assurance from the Railroad's Chief Engineer that arrangements have been
 made for any flagging services necessary.
 c) Receive permission from the Railroad's Chief Engineer to proceed with the work.
 107.8.7-Flagging Services: Under the terms of the agreement between the Division and
 the Railroad, the Railroad has sole authority to determine the need for flagging required to
 protect its operations.
 
 49
 
 In general, the services of Railroad flaggers will be requested when the Contractor's
 operations will be on or over the Railroad's right of way: (a) during the excavation, placing
 and removal of cofferdams, sheeting, shoring, driving of piling or placing of concrete footers
 adjacent to the track; (b) driving of pile bents adjacent to the track; (c) construction of the
 permanent structure including erection and removal of falsework, bracing or forms over or
 adjacent to the track; (d) transporting material or equipment across the track; (e) any operations
 involving direct interference with and/or coming in the close vicinity of power lines or Railroad
 signal and communication lines, underground cables, fuel oil facilities or pipelines which
 might result in fire or damage to such facilities to endanger Railroad operations or to endanger
 the public in the transacting of business on Railroad right of way; (f) fouling of operating
 clearances or reasonable probability of accidental hazard to Railroad traffic; (g) during removal
 of portions of existing structures immediately over or adjacent to a track; and (h) at all other
 times when the Railroad's Chief Engineer has determined conditions require such protection.
 Flagging hours shown in the plans shall be reviewed by the Contractor and will be used as
 the approved flagging hours. If the Contractor feels that the hours shown in the plans are not
 correct, he shall submit to the Engineer, in writing within 60 days of the award of the project,
 his estimate for review and approval. The Department shall have 30 days to approve the
 revised flagging hours. Additional hours may be permitted per Section 104.9.
 Additionally, all flagging charges resulting from any work done solely for the benefit of
 the Contractor will be deducted from the current estimate, due the Contractor.
 If the Contractor works within distances that violate instructions given by the Railroad's
 Chief Engineer or performs work that has not been coordinated with the Railroad's Chief
 Engineer, a flagman may be required full time at Contractor's expense until the project has
 been completed.
 Any work to be performed by the Contractor which requires flagging service or inspection
 service (watchman) shall be deferred by the Contractor until the flagging service or inspection
 service required by the Railroad is available at the job site.
 The Contractor shall furnish to the Railroad and the Division of Highways a schedule for
 all work required to complete the portion of the project within Railroad right of way and
 arrange for a job site meeting between the Contractor, the Division of Highways, and the
 Railroad's Chief Engineer. A flagman may not be provided until the job site meeting has been
 conducted and the Contractor's work schedule provided.
 The Contractor will be required to give the Railroad's Chief Engineer at least ten working
 days of advance written notice of his intent to begin work within Railroad right of way. Once
 work is begun, and is then suspended at any time for any reason, the Contractor will be required
 to give the Railroad's Chief Engineer at least three working days advance notice before
 resuming work on Railroad right of way. Such notice shall include sufficient details of the
 proposed work to enable the Railroad representative to determine if flagging will be required.
 Initially, it may take up to 30 days to obtain flagging from the Railroad. When flagging begins,
 the flagman is usually assigned by the Railroad to work at the project site on a continual basis
 until no longer needed. A flagman cannot be called for on a spot basis. If flagging becomes
 unnecessary and is suspended, it may again take up to 30 days to obtain a flagman from the
 Railroad. Due to Railroad labor agreements, it may be necessary to give five working days
 notice before flagging service may be discontinued and responsibility for payment stopped.
 The Division of Highways will reimburse the Railroad directly for all costs incurred for
 flagging services by Railroad personnel, including any temporary grade crossing shown in the
 50
 
 project plans up to the amount of hours shown on the Division's Project plans. In the event the
 Division of Highways is required to reimburse the Railroad for flagging service in excess of
 the approved flagging hours, such excess cost will be deducted from the monthly and/or final
 statements of money due the Contractor.
 The Railroad flagman assigned to the project will be responsible for notifying the Project
 Engineer upon arrival at the job site on the first working day that flagging services begin and
 on the last day that he performs such services. This will be required for each separate period
 that services are provided. The Project Engineer will document such notification in the project
 records. When requested, the flagman will also sign the Inspector's daily report form showing
 daily time spent and activity performed at the project site.
 The Contractor and Division of Highways will review and sign the Railroad flagman's time
 sheet, attesting that the flagman was present during the time recorded. Flagman may be
 removed by Railroad if form is not signed. If flagman is removed, the Contractor will not be
 allowed to work on or re-enter the Railroad right of way until the issue is resolved.
 107.8.8-Failure to Comply: In the event the Contractor violates or fails to comply with
 any of the requirements of these provisions:
 a) The Railroad's Chief Engineer may require that the Contractor vacate Railroad property.
 b) The Division may stop all work adjacent to the Railroad.
 Any such orders shall remain in effect until the Contractor has remedied the situation to
 the satisfaction of the Railroad's Chief Engineer and the Division of Highways.
 All costs incurred resulting from compliance with these provisions shall be incidental to
 the items in the contract and no separate payment shall be made.
 107.9-BRIDGES OVER NAVIGABLE WATERS:
 All work on navigable waters shall be so conducted that free navigation of the waterways
 will not be interfered with and that the existing navigable depths and vertical clearances will not
 be impaired except as by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or the U.S. Coast Guard.
 107.10-BARRICADES AND WARNING SIGNS:
 The Contractor shall provide, erect, and maintain all necessary barricades, suitable and
 sufficient lights, danger signals, signs, and other traffic control devices, except as provided by
 104.5, and the Contractor shall take all necessary precautions for the protection of the work and
 safety of the public. Highways closed to traffic shall be protected by effective barricades, and
 obstructions shall be illuminated during hours of darkness. Suitable warning signs shall be
 provided to properly control and direct traffic.
 The Contractor shall erect warning signs in advance of any place on the project where
 operations may interfere with the use of the road by traffic and at all intermediate points where the
 new work crosses or coincides with an existing road. Such warning signs shall be erected in
 accordance with the Plans furnished.
 All barricades, warning signs, lights, temporary signals, and other protective devices must
 conform with the Standard "Traffic Control for Street and Highway Construction and Maintenance
 Operations," Published by the West Virginia Division of Highways, and the provisions of 715.9.
 
 51
 
 107.11-USE OF EXPLOSIVES:
 When the use of explosives is necessary for the prosecution of the work, the Contractor
 shall exercise the utmost care not to endanger life or property, including new work. The Contractor
 shall be responsible for any and all damage resulting from the use of explosives.
 All explosives shall be stored in a secure manner, in compliance with all laws and
 ordinances, and all such storage places shall be clearly marked. Where no local laws or ordinances
 apply, storage shall be provided satisfactory to the Engineer and in general not closer than 1,000
 ft. (305 meters) from the road or from any building or camping area or place of human occupancy.
 The Contractor shall notify each public utility company, having structures in proximity to
 the site of work, of their intention to use explosives and such notice shall be given sufficiently in
 advance to enable the companies to take such steps as they may deem necessary to protect their
 property from injury.
 107.12-PROTECTION AND RESTORATION OF PROPERTY AND LANDSCAPE:
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the preservation of all public and private property
 and shall protect carefully from disturbance or damage all land monuments and property marks
 until the Engineer has witnessed or otherwise referenced their location and shall not move them
 until directed.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for all damage or injury to property of any character,
 during the prosecution of the work, resulting from any act, omission, neglect, or misconduct in the
 Contractor's manner or method of executing the work, or at any time due to defective work or
 materials, and this responsibility will not be released until the project shall have been completed
 and accepted.
 When or where and direct or indirect damage or injury is done to public or private property
 by or on account of any act, omission, neglect, or misconduct in the execution of the work, or in
 consequence of the nonexecution thereof by the Contractor, the Contractor shall restore, at their
 own expense, such property to a condition similar or equal to that existing before such damage or
 injury was done, by repairing, rebuilding, or otherwise restoring as may be directed, or the
 Contractor shall make good such damage or injury in as acceptable manner.
 107.13-FOREST PROTECTION:
 In carrying out work within or adjacent to State or National Forests, the Contractor shall
 comply with all regulations of the State Fire Marshall, Division of Natural Resources, or any other
 authority having jurisdiction, governing the protection of forests and the carrying out of work
 within forests, and shall observe all sanitary laws and regulations with respect to the performance
 of work in forest areas. The Contractor shall keep the areas in an orderly condition, dispose of all
 refuse, and obtain permits for the construction and maintenance of all construction camps, stores,
 warehouses, residences, latrines, cesspools, septic tank, and other structures in accordance with
 the requirements of the Forest Supervisor.
 The Contractor shall take all reasonable precaution to prevent and suppress forest fires and
 shall require their employees and subcontractors, both independently and at the request of forest
 officials, to do all reasonably within their power to prevent and suppress and to assist in preventing
 and suppressing forest fires and to make every possible effort to notify a forest official at the
 earliest possible moment of the location and extent of any fire seen by them.
 
 52
 
 107.14-RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGE CLAIMS:
 The Contractor shall indemnify and save harmless the Division, its officers and employees,
 from all suits, actions, or claims of any character brought because of any injuries or damage
 received or sustained by any person, persons, or property on account of the operations of the
 Contractor, its subcontractors and/or consultants; or on account of or in consequence of any neglect
 in safeguarding the work; or through use of unacceptable materials in constructing the work; or
 because of any act or omission, neglect, or misconduct of the Contractor its subcontractors and/or
 consultants; or because of any claims or amounts recovered from any infringements of patent,
 trademark, or copyright; or from any claims or amounts arising or recovered under the "Worker's
 Compensation Act," or any other law, ordinance, order, or decree; and so much of the money due
 the Contractor under and by virtue of their Contract as may be considered necessary by the
 Division for such purpose may be retained for the use of the Division or, in case no money is due,
 their surety may be held until such suit or suits, action or actions, claim or claims for injuries or
 damages as aforesaid shall have been settled and suitable evidence to that effect furnished to the
 Division; except that money due the Contractor will not be withheld when the Contractor produces
 satisfactory evidence that the Contractor is adequately protected by public liability and property
 damage insurance.
 107.15-OPENING SECTIONS OF PROJECT TO TRAFFIC:
 At the option of the Engineer, certain sections of the work may be opened for traffic. Such
 opening will not constitute acceptance of the work, or any part thereof, or a waiver of any
 provisions of the Contract; provided however, that on such portions of the project as are accepted
 for use of traffic, the Contractor shall not be required to assume any expense entailed in
 maintaining the roadway for traffic. Such expense will be borne by the Division or will be
 compensated for in the manner provided in 109.4. Any damage to the highway not attributable to
 traffic which might occur on such section, except slides, shall be repaired by the Contractor at their
 expense. The removal of slides shall be performed by the Contractor and payment will be in
 accordance with 104.3.
 If the Contractor is dilatory in completing shoulders, drainage structures, or other features
 of the work, the Engineer may order all or a portion of the project open to traffic, but in such event
 the Contractor shall not be relieved of their liability and responsibility during the period the work
 is so opened prior to final acceptance. The Contractor shall conduct the remainder of their
 construction operations so as to cause the least obstruction to traffic.
 107.16-CONTRACTOR'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR WORK:
 Until final written acceptance of the project by the Engineer, the Contractor shall have the
 charge and care thereof and shall take every precaution against injury or damage to any part thereof
 by the action of the elements, or from the nonexecution of the work. The Contractor shall rebuild,
 repair, restore, and make good all injuries or damages to any portion of the work occasioned by
 any of the above causes before final acceptance and shall bear the expense thereof except damage
 to the work due to unforeseeable causes beyond the control of and without the fault of or
 negligence of the Contractor, including but not restricted to acts of God, of the public enemy or
 governmental authorities.
 In case of suspension of work from any cause whatever, the Contractor shall be responsible
 for the project and shall take such precautions as may be necessary to prevent damage to the
 project, provide for normal drainage and to erect any necessary temporary structures, signs, or
 53
 
 other facilities at their expense. During such period of suspension of work, the Contractor shall
 properly and continuously maintain in an acceptable growing condition all living material in newly
 established plantings, seeding, and sodding furnished under their Contract, and shall take adequate
 precautions to protect new tree growth and other important vegetative growth against injury.
 107.17-CONTRACTOR'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR UTILITY PROPERTY AND
 SERVICES:
 At points where the Contractor's operations are adjacent to properties of railway, telegraph,
 telephone, and power companies, or are adjacent to other property, damage to which might result
 in considerable expense, loss, or inconvenience, work shall not be commenced until all
 arrangements necessary for the protection thereof have been made.
 The Contractor shall cooperate with the owners of any underground or overhead utility
 lines in their removal and rearrangement operations in order that these operations may progress in
 a reasonable manner, that duplication of rearrangement work may be reduced to a minimum, and
 that services rendered by those parties will not be unnecessarily interrupted.
 In the event of interruption to water or utility services as a result of accidental breakage, or
 as a result of being exposed or unsupported, the Contractor shall promptly notify the proper
 authority and shall cooperate with such authority in the restoration of service. If water service is
 interrupted, repair work shall be continuous until the service is restored. No work shall be
 undertaken around fire hydrants until provisions for continued service have been approved by the
 local fire authority.
 107.18-FURNISHING RIGHT-OF-WAY:
 The Division will be responsible for securing all necessary right-of-way in advance of
 construction. Any exceptions will be indicated in the Contract.
 107.19-PERSONAL LIABILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
 In carrying out any of the provisions of these Specifications, or is exercising and power or
 authority granted to them by or within the scope of the Contract, there shall be no liability upon
 the Commissioner, Engineer, or their authorized representatives, either personally or as officials
 of the State, it being understood that in all such matters they act solely as agents and representatives
 of the Division.
 107.20-NO WAIVER OF LEGAL RIGHTS:
 The Division shall not be precluded or estopped by any measurement, estimate, or
 certificate made either before or after the completion and acceptance of the work and payment
 therefor, from showing the true amount and character of the work performed and materials
 furnished by the Contractor, nor from showing that any such measurement, estimate or certificate
 is untrue or is incorrectly made, nor that the work or materials do not in fact conform to the
 Contract. The Division shall not be precluded or estopped, notwithstanding and such
 measurement, estimate, or certificate and payment in accordance therewith, from recovering from
 the Contractor or sureties, or both, such damage as it may sustain by reason of their failure to
 comply with the terms of the Contract. Neither the acceptance by the Division or any
 representative of the Division, nor any payment for or acceptance of the whole or any part of the
 work, nor any extension of time, nor any possession taken by the Division, shall operate as a waiver
 
 54
 
 of any portion of the Contract or of any power reserved or of any right to damages. A waiver of
 any breach of the Contract shall not be held to be a waiver of any other or subsequent breach.
 107.21-PROTECTION OF RIVERS, STREAMS, AND IMPOUNDMENTS:
 107.21.1-Erosion and Sedimentation Control: The Contractor shall be responsible for
 water quality throughout the duration of construction in accordance with the National Pollutant
 Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit registration with the West Virginia
 Department of Environmental Protection Agency (WVDEP). The Contractor will responsible
 for the following:
 i.
 Developing and implementing an effective erosion and sediment control plan.
 ii.
 Directing the construction, operation, maintenance and dismantling of temporary
 erosion and sediment control features.
 iii. Implementing remedial action to correct and/or repair failing erosion and sediment
 control features.
 iv.
 Implementing storm and winter shutdown procedures.
 v.
 Shaping the earthwork prior to the suspension of grading operations each day in a
 manner that will permit storm runoff with minimum erosion.
 vi.
 Installing, operating and maintaining erosion and sediment control features in an
 acceptable condition.
 vii.
 Cleaning out and restoring to original conditions any erosion or sediment control
 feature that has reached half of its capacity. For sediment basins, one half of its
 capacity is considered as wet volume storage.
 The Contractor shall prepare a Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasures (SPCC) plan
 that itemizes specific measures that will be implemented to prevent and clean up chemical and
 petroleum product spills that may occur during all phases of construction. Fuel storage and
 refueling activities, equipment maintenance activities and equipment washing will be kept at
 least 500 feet away from any watercourse or wetland.
 Any details not shown in the plans shall be in accordance with the latest version of the
 West Virginia Division of Highways Erosion and Sediment Control Manual. In the event that
 temporary erosion and sediment control measures are necessary due to the Contractors
 negligence, carelessness or failure to install permanent controls as part of the work as
 scheduled, such work shall be performed by the Contractor at his own expense.
 In addition to the above, the Contractor shall make themselves familiar with all
 requirements contained within the WVDEP’s General Water Pollution Control Permit,
 Stormwater Associated with Construction Activities Permit Number WV0115924. A copy of
 this permit can be found at the following internet address:
 http://www.dep.wv.gov/WWE/Programs/stormwater
 Noncompliance with permit conditions constitutes a violation of the Clean Water Act and
 State Code and is subject to enforcement action by the WVDEP.
 At the Project’s Pre-Construction Conference, the Contractor shall submit to the
 Department in addition to the appropriate number of Erosion and Sediment Control Plans, the
 Co-Applicant #1 signature page (Exhibit 1) and the Contractor’s E&S Manager Contact.
 The Contractor’s E&S Contact shall contain the following information: the name, title,
 mailing address and telephone number of the person who will be responsible for the Erosion
 and Sediment Control plans, implementation, maintenance, etc., for the life of the NPDES
 registration.
 55
 
 Upon completion of the Pre-Construction Conference, the Department will modify the
 existing NPDES registration for this project to make the Contractor the number one CoApplicant to the permit. Once this has been completed, the Contractor shall be responsible for
 any and all fees, violations and fines assessed against the project that is a result of the
 Contractor’s negligence, carelessness, or failure to install permanent controls as part of the
 work as scheduled.
 Once the project is complete, the Contractor will still bear responsibility for the NPDES
 registration until either a Notice of Termination (NOT) is received from the WVDEP or the
 Contractor has received final payment for the project. If an NOT has not been received by the
 time the final payment is made, the Department will modify the NPDES registration to remove
 the Contractor’s name from the registration.
 Exhibit 1 can be located online at:
 http://www.transportation.wv.gov/highways/contractadmin/specifications/107.21.1EnSExhib
 it1/Pages/default.aspx
 107.21.2-Pollution: The Contractor shall exercise every reasonable precaution throughout
 the life of the Project to prevent pollution of rivers, streams, or impoundments. Pollutions such
 as chemicals, fuels, lubricants, bitumen, raw sewage, products associated with bridge cleaning
 and painting, and other harmful wastes shall not be discharged into or alongside of rivers,
 streams, impoundments, or into natural or man-made channels leading thereto. The quality of
 the surface waters affected by construction shall meet the requirements of the West Virginia
 Code, Volume 8A, Chapter 22, Article 11.
 The manual entitled, "West Virginia Division of Highways, Best Management Practice for
 Containment/Disposal of Waste Products Generated during Bridge Cleaning and Painting
 Activities”. Latest addition, as amended is made part of the contract as a guide to follow for
 containment/disposal activities.
 107.21.3-Basis of Payment: Except when pay items are specifically described and
 furnished as pay items in 642, Temporary Pollution Control, the water pollution and erosion
 and siltation control requirements set forth shall be at the expense of the Contractor.
 107.22-PLANT PEST REGULATIONS:
 The indiscriminate movement of nursery stock, hay or straw mulch, equipment and soil
 samples into and out of West Virginia constitutes a potential hazard to State and National
 Agriculture. Therefore, it shall be the responsibility of the prime Contractor to comply with all
 applicable State and Federal Plant Pest Regulations in the fulfillment of this contract.
 Information regarding these regulations may be obtained from Plant Pest Control Division,
 West Virginia Department of Agriculture, Charleston, West Virginia 25305, or United States
 Department of Agriculture, Agriculture Research Service, Plant Pest Control Division, P.O. Box
 1257, Roanoke, Virginia 24001.
 107.23-AIR POLLUTION CONTROL:
 The Contractor shall exercise every reasonable precaution throughout the life of the project
 to keep air pollution to a minimum. The Contractor shall also comply with the applicable
 regulations of the West Virginia Air Pollution Control Commission. During times of limited
 dispersion, construction operations may be suspended.
 56
 
 All plants in West Virginia producing bituminous concrete for the Division shall obtain a
 permit or certification from the West Virginia Air Pollution Control Commission.
 107.24-CLEAN WATER ACT/WETLANDS:
 The Contractor will comply with all aspects of Section 404 of the Clean Water Act
 including any and all regards to wetlands on all work associated with the project. A wetland will
 not be filled or disturbed on the project or any work related to the project such as a haul road, waste
 area, borrow pit or any other activity without a permit.
 107.25-LEAD EXPOSURE IN CONSTRUCTION:
 The Contractor will comply with all aspects of 29 CFR, Part 1926, Lead Exposure in
 Construction, by the United States Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health
 Administration.
 107.26-NOTIFICATION OF ABATEMENT, DEMOLITION OR RENOVATION:
 The notification for projects involving abatement, demolition, or renovation will conform
 to this section. The Project Engineer will have a copy of all asbestos inspection reports available
 at the field office. The Contractor shall provide copies of all notifications and correspondence to
 the Project Engineer.
 107.26.1-Abatement: Abatement activities shall conform to section 681.
 107.26.2-Demolition:
 107.26.2.1-Asbestos Containing Materials Reported: Notifications will be in
 accordance with 107.26.4.
 107.26.2.2-No Asbestos Containing Materials Reported: For buildings or bridges
 that do not contain asbestos, only the notification form must be submitted to the West
 Virginia Division of Environmental Protection (DEP) and the United States Environmental
 Protection Agency (EPA) at the address given in 107.26.4.
 If an asbestos inspection report indicates that there is no asbestos present on a bridge
 scheduled for demolition or renovation, the need for a trained individual to be on site during
 either process is waived. However, the Contractor shall have an individual trained in
 accordance with the provisions as set forth in 40 CFR Part 61, Subpart M on site to observe
 building demolition and file a report with the Project Engineer indicating if any suspect
 (asbestos containing) material was encountered during demolition. A copy of the
 individual's current training certification must be attached to this report.
 107.26.3-Renovation:
 107.26.3.1-Asbestos Containing Materials Reported: For projects involving the
 renovation of a bridge or building, that has asbestos containing materials, the Contractor
 shall submit a “Notification of Abatement, Demolition or Renovation” in accordance with
 107.26.4.
 107.26.3.2-No Asbestos Containing Materials Reported: Structures that are being
 renovated and are free of asbestos, per the inspection report, do not require submittal of the
 “Notification of Abatement, Demolition or Renovation”.
 57
 
 107.26.4-Notifications: In accordance with state and federal regulations, the Contractor
 shall submit a “Notification of Abatement, Demolition or Renovation” to the address shown
 below prior to the commencement of demolition of any building or bridge (regardless of the
 presence of asbestos). All notifications must be made a minimum of 10 working days prior to
 the commencement of demolition or renovation operations. Particular attention is to be made
 to the “Schedule” section of the form. If for any reason, demolition or renovation cannot begin
 on the date as submitted, the DEP, Division of Air Quality must be notified at the address
 below:
 West Virginia Division of Environmental Protection
 Division of Air Quality
 601 57th Street S.E.
 Charleston, West Virginia 25304
 Attn: Asbestos Coordinator
 Telephone: (304) 926-0499
 Fax: (304) 926-0478
 United States Environmental Protection Agency-Region 3
 1650 Arch Street
 Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103
 Attn: Stephen Forostiak, 3WC32
 Asbestos Coordinator
 Telephone: (215) 814-2100
 Forostiak.stephen@epa.gov
 If a building or bridge contains asbestos, the notification process as outlined in Section
 681, Asbestos Abatement shall be followed.
 107.27-CONSTRUCTION ACCESS AND ENVIRONMENTAL PERMITS:
 The Division has obtained permits for activities shown in the contract documents. The
 anticipated Temporary Construction Access (TCA) methods are included, if a TCA is not shown in
 the plans, or the permit, it has been determined that at least one TCA method exists that does not
 require a permit. A copy of these permits is in the contract documents.
 The contractor must comply with the approved permits and exercise best environmental
 management practices at no additional cost to the Division.
 The permits do not cover waste or borrow sites, haul roads, storage sites, staging areas or
 activity not shown in the contract documents or permits. These permits are to be handled in
 accordance with Section 107.2.
 107.27.1-Temporary Construction Accesses: A Temporary Construction Access is any
 road, cofferdam, causeway and/or stream crossing, access fill, dike, channel retaining structure,
 etc. that may be required to access the work. This work shall consist of the construction of all
 temporary construction access required for the project and shall include, but is not limited to,
 all culverts, structures, excavation, rock borrow and incidental construction as required to
 construct the access. This work shall also include all necessary work required to maintain and
 remove the temporary construction access and to restore the area to its original condition. All
 of the work shall be in accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity
 with the contract documents, approved permits, or as established by the Engineer.
 58
 
 No payments shall be made for the Temporary Construction Access unless otherwise stated
 in the plans.
 107.27.1.1-Changing Temporary Construction Accesses: The Contractor may elect
 to utilize alternate temporary construction access methods from those shown in the contract
 documents. If the Contractor proposes alternate temporary construction access methods, he
 shall obtain written approval from all affected landowners and shall provide to the Engineer
 all of the permit documents required to obtain additional or revised permits. The Division
 will submit the permit documents to the appropriate agencies for approval. Acceptance of
 the permit documents by the Engineer or forwarding them to the permitting agency does not
 guarantee or constitute approval of the permit. No work shall be performed on a permittable
 activity until a copy of all the appropriate approvals and permits are received by the
 Engineer. No time extensions or additional payments will be made for the contractor to
 obtain additional approvals or permits or for changes to the design of the temporary
 construction access.
 107.27.1.2-Excavated Material: The excavated material, unless otherwise directed by
 the Engineer, shall be utilized for backfill or embankments. Surplus material shall be
 disposed in accordance with section 207.6 and in such a manner that the efficiency or
 appearance of the structure shall not be impaired, and the stream shall not be obstructed or
 excess sediment introduced into the stream.
 107.27.2-Corps of Engineers Permit: If this project has been determined to involve
 activities, which are regulated by the Department of the Army, Corps of Engineers a permit
 has been included in the contract documents. These activities involve the discharge of dredge
 or fill materials into the Waters of the United States as regulated by Section 404 of the Clean
 Water Act or the obstruction or alteration of Navigable Waters of the United States regulated
 by Section 10 of the River and Harbor Act of 1899.
 The Engineer will decide all questions that may arise as to the interpretation or violation of
 these conditions. The Contractor shall comply with the conditions of the Permits and the
 following:
 1. Material will not be stockpiled in the watercourse.
 2. Bilge, ballast or wash water pumped from barges or out of cofferdams will not be
 discharged into the watercourse without acceptable removal of solids, oils and/or toxic
 compounds.
 3. Discharges shall be avoided during fish spawning seasons to the maximum extent
 practicable unless a note prohibiting such discharge is included in the construction plans.
 
 59
 
 SECTION 108
 PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS
 108.1-SUBLETTING OF CONTRACT:
 The Contractor shall not sublet, sell, transfer, assign, or otherwise dispose of the Contract
 or Contracts or any portion thereof, or of their right, title, or interest, without written approval of
 the Engineer prior to any of the subject work being performed. The Contractor will be permitted
 to sublet a portion thereof but shall perform, with his/her own organization, work amounting to
 not less than 30 percent of the total contract cost, except that any items designated in the Contract
 as "specialty items" may be performed by subcontract and the cost of any such specialty items so
 performed by subcontract may be deducted from the total cost before computing the amount of
 work required to be performed by the Contractor with his/her own organization. No subcontracts,
 or transfer of contract, shall in any case release the Contractor of his/her liability under the Contract
 and Bonds.
 The Contractor shall request the approval of each subcontractor, including lower-tier
 subcontractors. No work shall be performed by a subcontractor until the subcontractor has been
 approved. Each subcontract, including lower-tier subcontracts, shall be in writing and shall
 physically contain all of the applicable provisions, requirements, specifications, and safety plans.
 The Contractor may certify that a copy of all the applicable provisions, requirements,
 specifications, and safety plans has been provided and is physically incorporated in each
 subcontract including lower-tier subcontracts. Requests for approval of DBE subcontractors,
 however, shall also be accompanied by a copy of the proposed subcontract without the required
 attachments.
 The Contractor shall maintain a complete subcontract file including lower-tier
 subcontractors at the home office, which shall be available to authorized personnel for review
 without notice, or at any other appropriate location as determined by the Division after a five day
 notice. Such file may contain a single copy of all the applicable provisions, requirements and
 specifications in lieu of individual subcontract files containing the applicable attachments.
 108.1.1-Subletting Of Contract Materials: Roadside production of materials is
 construed to be the production of crushed stone, gravel, or other materials with portable or
 semi-portable crushing, screening, or washing plants established or re-opened in the vicinity
 of the work for the purpose of supplying materials to be incorporated into the work on a
 designated project or projects, and in all cases, unless performed by the Contractor, shall be
 considered as subcontracting.
 The purchase of sand, gravel, crushed stone, crushed slag, batched concrete aggregates,
 ready mixed concrete, or any other materials produced at and furnished from established and
 recognized commercial plants, together with the delivery of such materials to the site of work
 by means of vehicles owned or operated by such plants or by recognized commercial hauling
 companies, shall not be considered as subcontracting under these provisions. Except as stated,
 all hauling of materials from roadside production sources or from railroad or water delivery
 points to batching plants, mixing plants, or directly to their place of use in the road, and all
 hauling of materials from batching plants and mixing plants to their place of use in the road,
 unless done by the Contractor's own equipment or by recognized hauling companies, shall be
 considered as subcontracting under these provisions. If batching plants or mixing plants are
 set up at rail or water delivery points and materials in part supplied to such plants by rail or
 60
 
 water transportation companies, the remaining materials required at such batching or mixing
 plants may be hauled to such plants without such hauling being considered as subcontracting.
 108.2-NOTICE TO PROCEED:
 The Notice to Proceed will stipulate the date on which it is expected the Contractor shall
 begin work and from which date Contract time will be charged. In the event a Notice to Proceed
 cannot be issued, a Conditional Notice to Proceed may be issued upon the mutual agreement of
 the Division and the Contractor. The Conditional Notice to Proceed will be used to allow the
 Contractor to begin work on a portion of the project not impacted by the issue that created the need
 for the Conditional Notice to Proceed.
 108.3-PROSECUTION OF THE WORK:
 108.3.1-General: The Contractor shall provide sufficient resources (materials, equipment,
 and labor, etc.) to guarantee the completion of the project in accordance with the Plans and
 Specifications within the time set forth in the Proposal.
 The Contractor shall submit a Detailed Construction Schedule and any subsequent
 schedules, as required by this specification, in the form more clearly defined in section 108.3.2
 with all graphic and tabular supporting documentation, hereinafter referred to as "Schedule.”
 Schedules will be required for all projects where the Contract Bid Amount is greater than
 $2,000,000. Additionally any Project that contains an Incentive/Disincentive clause, and all
 Design Build projects and Public Private Partnership projects shall require a Schedule.
 Unless otherwise specified, Schedules will not be required for projects on which the major
 portion of the work is resurfacing, landscaping, signing, lighting, installing signals, guardrail
 or bridge painting, or on which the Contract Bid Amount is $2,000,000 or less.
 The submitted Schedule shall include a written certification on the face of the Schedule, as
 well as on any diagrams and drawings, stating that the Schedule is within the contractual limits
 and that the submitted Schedule is the only Schedule the Contractor will use for all critical
 work activities, interdependent work activities, phase construction, stage construction,
 resource needs, transmittals for Contractor designs, drawings and other submissions, activities
 for subcontractors, vendors, and suppliers, and all other controlling and subsequent activities.
 This same written certification shall be included on all Schedule updates and revisions.
 The Schedule shall show the interdependent and logical sequence of construction activities.
 The Schedule shall reflect that all contract time requirements are essential conditions of the
 Contract and shall also include allowances for seasonal weather conditions, the influence of
 high or low ambient temperatures, as well as any extra shifts, overtime, or additional manpower
 and equipment necessary to complete the critical and non-critical activities within the allotted
 Contract time without additional cost to the Division.
 The Contractor shall provide a milestone that designates the substantial completion date of
 the project. Except as noted below, the substantial completion date shall equal the contract
 completion date. Additional activities that do not impact the project’s substantial completion
 may be included in the Schedule subsequent to the contract completion date. However, these
 additional activities shall not impact the float of any preceding portion of the Schedule.
 The Contractor may submit a Schedule with a Substantial Completion date earlier than the
 Contract Completion Date set forth in the Proposal. However, the Division will not be liable
 in any way for the Contractor’s failure to complete the Project prior to the specified Contract
 Time except as when provided in Section 108.6. Any additional cost, including extended
 61
 
 overhead incurred between the Contractor’s scheduled completion date and the Contract
 Completion Date set forth in the Proposal, shall be the responsibility of the Contractor.
 Should the Schedule indicate an earlier completion date than the time for completion set
 forth in the Contract, the Schedule shall define any positive float developed between an early
 completion point and the Contract Completion Date as part of the overall project float. It is
 understood by the Contractor and the Division that positive float is a shared commodity, not
 for the exclusive use or benefit of either party. Either party has the full use of the positive float
 until it is depleted.
 The Division's review of the Schedule does not represent approval of the Contractor's
 estimate of resources (labor, material and equipment), method of operation, or production
 rates.
 108.3.1.1-Submission of Construction Schedules: The Contractor shall designate a
 competent representative, hereinafter referred to as Construction Coordinator, who shall
 have the decision-making authority for the Contractor to control the work in accordance
 with the Schedule(s) for the duration of the Contract.
 With the exception of the following preliminary items: establishing the field office,
 setting up traffic control, and mobilizing equipment, no item of work under the contract
 may be pursued following the Notice to Proceed or the Conditional Notice to Proceed until
 a Preliminary Construction Schedule or Detailed Construction Schedule has been
 submitted by the Contractor and reviewed by the Engineer. The Engineer may withhold
 estimates until such time as a Schedule has been received and reviewed.
 108.3.1.2-Preliminary Construction Schedule: Within thirty (30) calendar days of
 the contract award date, the Contractor may submit a sixty (60) calendar day Preliminary
 Construction Schedule for review by the Engineer. The Preliminary Schedule shall include
 a generalized project schedule for the balance of the work in summary form indicating the
 contract completion date. The Contractor shall maintain and submit monthly a sixty (60)
 calendar day Preliminary Construction Schedule until the Schedule is submitted by the
 Contractor and reviewed by the Engineer.
 108.3.1.3-Detailed Construction Schedule (Schedule): The detailed construction
 Schedule shall include a report system that is maintained throughout the life of the project
 to measure all factors that affect the completion date. Within sixty (60) calendar days of
 the contract award date, the Contractor shall submit a Schedule indicating the contract
 completion date for review by the Engineer.
 The Engineer will review the Schedule and supporting documentation for compliance
 with the Contract within fourteen (14) calendar days after receipt in accordance with
 provision 108.6.2. The Contractor shall provide the Engineer with a revised Schedule
 incorporating any compliance recommendations made in the Engineer's review. This
 schedule shall become the official Schedule and shall be used by the Contractor. The
 official Schedule must be completed within ninety (90) calendar days of the Contract award
 date. The Engineer may withhold estimate payments for any item of work under the
 Contract after ninety (90) calendar days until the Contractor's Schedule has been reviewed
 and all comments have been addressed.
 
 62
 
 108.3.1.4-Construction Schedule Requirements: The Preliminary Schedule and the
 official Schedule shall be submitted in electronic /digital format (.XER file) and in hard
 copy and shall include a legend for symbols and abbreviations used. Activities with
 duration times in excess of fifteen (15) working days, except for non-construction
 activities, shall be kept to a minimum and be subject to review by the Engineer. The
 Schedule shall provide a minimum of ten (10) activities or categories, hereafter referred to
 as "Activities," per million dollar value of the Contract and a maximum of three hundred
 (300) activities or as directed by the Engineer.
 The Schedule shall indicate the interdependence of Activities (how the start of a given
 activity depends on the completion of preceding Activities) and the sequence of work (how
 failure to complete a given activity may restrain the start of successive activities).
 The Schedule shall include the Contract completion date and any interim completion
 dates contained in the Contract, as well as any coordination and cooperation requirements,
 construction restrictions, or other requirements of the Contract.
 The Schedule shall include Activities for all work required by the Contract, including
 Activities for subcontractors, vendors, and suppliers. In addition to construction activities,
 the Schedule shall include as a minimum the procurement, fabrication, and delivery of
 critical or special materials and equipment, as well as submission and review of all
 shop/work drawings, Contractor designs, and all other submissions required by the
 Contract.
 The Activities are to be described by Contract item number, location, phase, and
 sequence so that the work is readily identifiable and the progress of each Activity can be
 measured. For Schedules requiring resource loading, the Contractor shall provide the labor
 and equipment involved with each Activity.
 For all Schedules, each Activity will have an associated dollar amount documented on
 the Schedule. This Activity dollar amount will be in direct relation to the bid items and
 quantity of work included in the Activity. Activity duration shall be logical and consistent
 with the Contract documents and shall be based on realistic and available resources of the
 Contractor. The above requirements are applicable for all Schedules, including the official
 Schedules, required updates, and any revised Schedules.
 Requiring the Contractor to submit Schedules allocating resources to project Activities
 does not imply acceptance, approval, or agreement by the Division that the Contractor's
 scheduled allocation of resources is sufficient to complete either the project or a scheduled
 activity in a scheduled time.
 The Division’s review and acceptance of the Schedule and progress updates does not
 preclude a later review of any previously submitted Schedule. If upon later review the
 Division discovers an issue of non-compliance with the specification or a discrepancy in
 the Schedule that is skewing the logic calculations and schedule results, the Division
 reserves the right to request a revised Schedule as per Section 108.3.5.
 108.3.2-Detailed Construction Schedule (Schedule): The Schedules shall be prepared
 using scheduling software Primavera Project Manager P6 version 6.0 or higher. The following
 criteria shall apply to the development and maintenance of the Schedule:
 1. All Resources shall be grouped in a Project Resource Tree. This tree structure shall
 have one main heading name that begins with the Project's specific 7 digit Contract ID
 Number followed by an underscore, followed by the Project Name.
 63
 
 2. Individual Resource names shall be shown as a sublevel to the main heading name. The
 Individual Resource names shall begin with the Project's specific 7 digit Contract ID
 Number followed by an underscore, followed by the Project Name. Any additional
 description may follow the underscore.
 3. The use of Project Codes is prohibited.
 4. The use of Global Activity Codes are prohibited, however, Project Activity Codes may
 be used. The Project Activity Code names shall begin with the Project's specific seven
 (7) digit Contract ID Number followed by an underscore. Any additional description
 may follow the underscore.
 5. Global Calendars are prohibited (except as noted below in section 7). However, Project
 Calendars may be used. The Project Calendar names shall begin with the project's
 specific seven (7) digit contract number, followed by an underscore. Any additional
 description may follow the underscore. In addition, the Project Default Calendar shall
 be assigned as a Project Calendar.
 6. The use of Cost Accounts is not required. However if the Contractor elects to use them,
 then all Cost Account names shall be grouped in a Project Cost Accounts Tree. This
 tree structure shall have one main heading name that begins with the project's specific
 7 digit Contract ID Number followed by an underscore, followed by the Project Name.
 a. Individual cost account names shall be shown as a sublevel to the main heading
 name. The individual cost account names shall begin with the Project's specific
 seven (7) digit Contract ID Number, followed by an underscore. Any additional
 description may follow the underscore.
 7. The Contractor Resource Calendar shall be linked to the WVDOT Standard
 Calendar. The WVDOT Standard Calendar shall be assigned to each resource and shall
 be allowable as the only calendar for all Schedule Resources. This shall be
 accomplished by creating a Global Calendar named and formatted exactly as follows:
 a. WVDOT Standard 5 Day Workweek with holidays.
 b. The first activity on the Schedule shall be Contract letting which shall be designated
 as a milestone starting on the actual contract letting date.
 c. The second activity on the Schedule shall be Project Award which shall be
 designated as a milestone with a 30 day lag from the Contract Letting milestone.
 d. The third activity on the Schedule shall be Notice to Proceed which shall be
 designated as a milestone with a 30 day lag from the Project Award milestone (or
 with a 7 day lag from Project Award on projects with an Incentive/Disincentive
 clause).
 e. Subsequent to the Notice to Proceed milestone, the logic and duration of remaining
 activities shall be developed and tied to the Substantial Completion milestone
 described in Section 108.3.1.
 f. Schedule calculation will be computed by Retained Logic method.
 g. Only contractual Constraints can be used on activities when preparing the Schedule,
 otherwise the use of Constraints is prohibited.
 h. All Actual Start Dates and Actual Finish Dates shall be reasonably captured in
 updated schedules.
 i. The activity costs described in Section 108.3.4 shall be incorporated into the
 Schedule via Resource Section. The use of Expenses for costs is prohibited
 
 64
 
 The Schedule shall be submitted on standard D size sheets (24" x 36"). The critical path
 shall be distinguished from other paths on the Schedule. All back-up data used to generate the
 Schedule shall be submitted in digital form on acceptable media that is compatible with the
 computer system.
 The submitted Print Out of the Schedule shall include the following data for each activity
 in the initial submittal and in all updates and revisions:
 1. Activity number, as well as preceding and following activity numbers;
 2. Activity description;
 3. Duration of activity, in working days;
 4. All quantities in accordance with pay items;
 5. Dollar value of activity;
 6. Remaining duration of activity, in working days;
 7. Earliest start date, by calendar date;
 8. Earliest finish date, by calendar date;
 9. Actual start date, by calendar date;
 10. Actual finish date, by calendar date;
 11. Latest start date, by calendar date;
 12. Latest finish date, by calendar date;
 13. Total float for activity;
 14. Free float for activity;
 In addition to the above, the following information and data shall be included with the
 submission of the digital form to the Division:
 15. Number of shifts per work day, hours per shift for activity;
 16. Number of work days per week for activity;
 17. Major equipment and corresponding hours for activity;
 18. Manpower by Trade or entity and corresponding hours for activity;
 19. Activity Usage Profile Cost of Contractor’s Income.
 108.3.3-Schedule Resource Loading Criteria: The following criteria shall be
 incorporated in the development and maintenance of Schedules and Schedule updates:
 108.3.3.1-Non-Resource Loaded Schedules: For projects where the Contract Bid
 Amount is between $2,000,000 and $7,500,000, the Schedule shall meet the requirements
 of a Schedule as described in Section 108.3.2 with the exception of Bullet 17 (Major
 equipment and corresponding hours for activity) and Bullet 18 (Manpower by Trade or
 entity and corresponding hours for activity).
 108.3.3.2-Resource Loaded Schedules: Schedule resource loading will be required
 for all projects on which the Contract Bid Amount is equal to or exceeding $7,500,000.
 Additionally all Design Build Projects and Public Private Partnerships will require
 Schedule resource loading regardless of the Contract Bid Amount.
 The Contractor is advised that the specific details of Major Equipment (bullet #17) and
 Manpower (bullet #18) may be provided on a separate attachment to the Schedule.
 However this information must be referenced to the Schedule so that in the determination
 of the Engineer relevant resource evaluation can be ascertained.
 65
 
 108.3.4-Progress Reporting and Schedule Updating: The Contractor shall submit
 weekly a summary of work force by Trade including all workmen and subcontractors together
 with a weekly summary of all equipment used on the project. The Division shall maintain the
 Contractor's resource information in a confidential manner. The Contractor’s certified payrolls
 may be a substitute for the work force summary. A Project Control Meeting shall be held
 monthly by the Engineer with the Contractor's Construction Coordinator to review actual
 progress, planned progress for the next period, and any changes since the previous update(s).
 Non-Resource Loaded Projects as described in 108.3.3 that require a Schedules may hold
 Project Control Meetings less frequently if deemed appropriate by the Regional Engineer, but
 not less than quarterly.
 For projects where the Contract Bid Amount is greater than or equal to $7,500,000 that
 require a Schedule, at least five (5) working days before the meeting, the Construction
 Coordinator shall provide the Engineer with a complete update of all schedule activity
 information included in 108.3.2. The Engineer may withhold estimate payments until the
 Contractor submits a Schedule update five (5) working days prior to the next Project Control
 meeting.
 For projects that require Non-Resource Loaded Schedules as described in 108.3.3, the
 Construction Coordinator shall provide the Engineer with a complete update of all Schedule
 activity information included in 108.3.2 and 108.3.3 within five (5) working days after the end
 of the month. The Engineer may withhold estimate payments until the Contractor submits a
 Schedule update within five (5) working days after the end of the month.
 The Contractor shall submit with the monthly update a narrative report which shall include,
 but not be limited to, a description of progress along the critical path in terms of days ahead or
 behind the Schedule dates, any problem areas (current and anticipated), any delaying factors
 and their impact, and an explanation of any corrective actions taken or proposed. The narrative
 report shall state any and all changes made in the Schedule since the previous update(s) and
 detail all activities or portions of activities, including dollar value, completed during the update
 period.
 The original accepted Schedule shall have the sum of all activity costs equal to the Contract
 Bid Amount. Change Orders, Value Engineering and other required project modifications
 shall be incorporated into the Schedule as necessary to reflect the actual cost and scope of work
 being performed. Total Project costs expended and remaining should be ostensibly accurate
 on Schedule updates. However, the Schedule updates shall be maintained in such a way as to
 accurately reflect the progress of the project by the duration of remaining work.
 Extension of Interim Completion Dates, the Contract Completion Date, or the revised
 Contract Completion Date will be governed by the provisions of 108.6.
 If the Division revises work which would affect the sequence of operations or duration of
 time on work activities, the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer, within seven (7) calendar
 days after receipt of the revision, a written report in accordance with 108.6 outlining the effect
 on work time and cost that the revision is expected to have on the Schedule.
 108.3.5-Submission of Revised Construction Schedule: The Engineer shall request the
 Contractor to submit a revised Schedule when any one of the following conditions is reflected
 by the latest Schedule:
 
 66
 
 1. A delay greater than ten (10) calendar days in the completion of any critical activity;
 2. The performance of any work in a sequence or manner which varies from that
 represented on the Schedule;
 3. The addition, deletion, or revision of activities required by Contract modification.
 The revised Schedule shall indicate all the requirements described in Section 108.3.2 and
 shall include all additional resources (labor, material, and equipment) and modification(s) of
 operations necessary to meet the contract time requirements.
 The Engineer will review the revised Schedule and supporting documentation for
 compliance with the Contract. The Contractor shall incorporate any compliance
 recommendations made in the Engineer's review. Should the Contractor fail to submit a
 revised Schedule within seven (7) calendar days of the Engineer's written request, the Engineer
 may withhold estimate payments for any item of work under the Contract until such Schedule
 is submitted.
 108.4-LIMITATION OF OPERATIONS:
 The Contractor shall conduct the work at all times in such manner and in such sequence as
 will assure the least interference with traffic. The Contractor shall have due regard to the location
 of detours and to the provisions for handling traffic. The Contractor shall not open up work to the
 prejudice or detriment of work already started, and the Engineer may require the Contractor to
 finish a section on which work is in progress before work is started on any additional sections if
 the opening of such section is essential to public convenience.
 108.5-CHARACTER OF WORKERS; METHODS AND EQUIPMENT:
 The Contractor shall at all times employ sufficient labor and equipment for prosecuting the
 several classes of work to full completion in the manner and time required by these Specifications.
 All employees shall have sufficient skill and experience to perform properly the work
 assigned to them. Employees engaged in special work or skilled work shall have sufficient
 experience in such work and in the operation of the equipment required to perform all work
 properly and satisfactorily.
 Any person who, in the opinion of the Engineer, does not perform his/her work in a proper
 and skillful manner or is intemperate or disorderly shall, at the request of the Engineer, be removed
 forthwith. Any Contractor or his/her subcontractor employing such person shall not reemploy
 such person on the project without the written approval of the Engineer. Should a Contractor fail
 to remove such a person or persons as required above or fail to furnish suitable and sufficient
 personnel for the proper prosecution of the work, the Engineer may suspend the work by written
 notice until such order is complied with.
 All equipment which is proposed to be used on the work shall be of sufficient size and in
 such mechanical condition as to meet requirements of the work and to produce a satisfactory
 quality of work. Equipment used on any portion of the project shall be such that no damage to the
 roadway, adjacent property, or other highways will result from its use.
 When the methods and equipment to be used by the Contractor in accomplishing the
 construction are not prescribed in the Contract, the Contractor is free to use any methods or
 equipment that the Contractor demonstrates will accomplish the Contract work in conformity with
 the requirements of the Contract.
 
 67
 
 When the Contract specifies that the construction be performed by the use of certain
 methods and/or equipment, such methods and/or equipment shall be used unless others are
 authorized by the Engineer. Should the Contractor desire to use a method or type of equipment
 other than specified in the Contract, the Contractor shall request authority from the Engineer to do
 so. The request shall be in writing and shall include a full description of the methods and
 equipment proposed to be used and an explanation of the reasons for desiring to make the change.
 If approval is given, it will be on the condition that the Contractor shall be fully responsible for
 producing construction work in conformity with Contract requirements. If, after trial use of the
 substituted methods or equipment, the Engineer determines that the work produced does not meet
 Contract requirements, the Contractor shall discontinue the use of the substitute methods or
 equipment and shall complete the remaining construction with the specified methods or equipment.
 The Contractor shall remove the deficient work and replace it with work of specified quality, or
 take such other corrective action as the Engineer may direct. No change will be made in basis of
 payment for the construction items involved nor in Contract time as a result of authorizing a change
 in method or equipment under these provisions.
 108.6-DETERMINATION AND EXTENSION OF CONTRACT TIME:
 108.6.1-General: The Division shall determine and specify in the Contract the number of
 working days and/or a fixed calendar date allowed for completion of the Work, hereinafter
 called Contract Time.
 A potential working day is every day on the calendar except Saturday, Sunday and holidays
 as set forth in 101.2.
 When the Contract Time is specified on a working day basis, the Engineer will inform the
 Contractor weekly, by written statement, of the number of working days charged for the
 preceding week, the accumulated number of working days charged against the Contract, and
 the number of working days remaining for completion of the Contract. The Contractor shall
 submit in writing to the Engineer any protest concerning the weekly statement within seven
 (7) calendar days after receipt of the statement. The written protest shall set forth what the
 Contractor considered incorrect, along with supporting information; otherwise, the statement
 shall be deemed to have been accepted by the Contractor as correct. The Engineer shall review
 any such protest and supporting information and shall render a decision either affirming or
 correcting the number of working days previously reported for the contested week, within
 fourteen (14) calendar days after receipt of the written protest.
 When the Contract Time is specified on a fixed calendar date basis, it will consist of the
 number of calendar days counting from the effective date of the Engineer’s issuance of the
 Notice to Proceed or Conditional Notice to Proceed to the calendar date specified for
 completion of the project, including all Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, and non-working days.
 All calendar days elapsing between the effective dates of any orders of the Engineer to suspend
 work and to resume work for suspensions not the fault of the Contractor shall be excluded.
 The work on the Contract will be considered substantially complete when the Project could
 be opened continuously for the safe, convenient, and unimpeded use of the traveling public, or
 the Project has met the intention of the plans, as reasonably determined by the Engineer. When
 the Project is considered substantially complete, the Contract time charges shall be
 discontinued prior to final acceptance being made by the Engineer as prescribed in 105.16.
 
 68
 
 108.6.2-Extension of Contract Time: The Contractor shall be responsible for any delays
 caused by failing to start a work activity on the earliest date any activity can begin after its
 predecessors have been completed, unless the activity has float. The Contractor shall also be
 responsible for any delays caused by lack of continuous effort, inadequate allocation and
 scheduling of resources and coordination of the work, inadequate or insufficient application of
 resources, or inability to meet interim completion dates due to Contractor's approach to the
 work. Such delays shall not be considered for an extension of Interim Completion Dates,
 Contract Completion Date, or the Revised Contract Completion Date.
 If the Contractor finds it impossible for reasons beyond his control to complete an activity
 or the work within the Contract time as specified or as extended according to the provisions of
 this Section, the Contractor shall notify the Engineer, in writing, within seven (7) calendar days
 of the Contractor becoming aware of the following:
 1) a problem that develops requiring direction to the Contractor by the Engineer;
 2) the occurrence of any delay including delays in critical path activities;
 3) in the absence of a Schedule, delays in the controlling operation during the prosecution
 of Work that the Contractor believes may warrant revision of an Interim Completion
 date or the Contract Completion Date.
 The notification shall set forth the reasons that shall justify the granting of the request, and
 as a minimum, identify the cause(s) for the delay, the particular critical path activity(s) or
 controlling operation(s) affected, the effect of any Division act or omission on each activity or
 operation delayed, and the significant dates that encompass the periods of delay. On projects
 with Schedules, the Contractor shall submit a Schedule update within seven (7) calendar days
 of becoming aware of the delay and another Schedule update when the Contractor indicates or
 the Engineer believes the delay has been resolved. In instances where controlling or critical
 path activities are claimed by the Contractor or determined by the Division to be delayed, the
 notification and Schedule update shall be considered by the Division as a request by the
 Contractor for a Contract time extension. If the Schedule updates relating to the delays, are
 not received as mentioned above, the Contractor forfeits his rights to any claims or time
 extensions.
 In the absence of a Schedule, the controlling item will be determined from the Division’s
 records. The Engineer will inform the Contractor weekly, by written statement, of controlling
 items identified for the previous week. The Contractor shall submit in writing to the Engineer
 any protest concerning the weekly statement within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the
 statement. The written protest shall set forth what the Contractor considered incorrect, along
 with supporting information; otherwise, the statement shall be deemed to have been accepted
 by the Contractor as correct. The Engineer shall review any such protest and supporting
 information and shall render a decision either affirming or correcting the controlling items
 reported for the contested week.
 If notification is not given by the Contractor within the prescribed time of the Contractor
 becoming aware of any delay, or if, having given notification as provided herein, the
 Contractor does not afford the Engineer proper facilities for keeping strict account of actual
 costs and loss of time, the Contractor waives any claim for additional compensation and
 Contract time extension. Delay costs allegedly incurred more than the allowable seven (7)
 days before the Contractor notifies the Engineer in accordance with this provision shall not be
 allowed.
 69
 
 If the Engineer determines that the Work was delayed because of conditions beyond the
 control of and without the fault or negligence of the Contractor, the Engineer may extend the
 time for project completion as the conditions justify.
 Only delays in the activities on the critical path, or in the absence of scheduling
 requirements, delays in the controlling operation will be considered for a Contract time
 extension, provided when required, the Contractor has submitted proper notification and
 supporting documentation justifying the request. For projects with Schedule requirements,
 Time Extension reviews will be evaluated along the critical path, as determined by the project’s
 longest path. Time Extension reviews will consider the free float and total float of all relevant
 activities in determining the actual project delay. The Engineer shall within fourteen (14)
 Calendar Days advise the Contractor in writing of the approval or rejection of the time
 extension request. If approved, the extended time for completion shall then be in full force
 and effect the same as though it were the original time for completion.
 108.6.2.1-Excusable Noncompensable Delays: An excusable noncompensable delay
 is a delay in the critical path activity, or in the absence of a project Schedule, a delay in the
 controlling operation that was beyond the Contractor's control and not caused by the
 Contractor's fault or negligence. Consideration may be given to an adjustment in Contract
 time, but no consideration shall be given for additional monetary compensation. Excusable
 noncompensable delays include, but are not limited to:
 1.
 Delay of Notice to Proceed or Conditional Notice to Proceed of more than thirty
 (30) calendar days after the contract award date for reasons beyond the control of
 and without the fault or negligence of the Contractor. Consideration for an
 adjustment of Contract time will be limited to the number of calendar days in excess
 of thirty (30) calendar days, counting from the Contract award date to the effective
 date of the Engineer's issuance of the Notice to Proceed.
 2.
 Delay of the Notice to Proceed more than seven (7) calendar days after the contract
 award date for contracts with Incentive/Disincentive clauses, as long as the reasons
 are beyond the control of and without the fault or negligence of the Contractor.
 Consideration for an adjustment of Contract time will be limited to the number of
 calendar days in excess of seven (7) calendar days on contracts with
 Incentive/Disincentive clauses, counting from the Contract award date to the
 effective date of the Engineer's issuance of the Notice to Proceed.
 3.
 Delays due to acts of God, labor strikes (not within the Contractor's power to settle)
 freight embargoes, states of national emergency, or other reasons beyond the
 control of the Contractor. Consideration for an adjustment of contract time shall
 be limited to the number of potential working days lost as determined by the
 Engineer.
 4.
 Delays in obtaining materials due to extraordinary market conditions caused by
 industry-wide strike, natural disaster, area-wide shortage, official federal
 declaration that a material is critical due to national defense efforts, or for other
 reasons beyond the control of the Contractor. Consideration for an adjustment of
 contract time shall be limited to the number of potential working days lost as
 determined by the Engineer.
 
 70
 
 5.
 
 Delays due to adverse weather. Lost days due to adverse weather may include:
 (1) Days with inclement weather or conditions beyond the Contractor’s control that
 prevent the involvement of their normal working forces engaged in performing
 critical or controlling item(s) of work for at least sixty (60) percent of the total
 scheduled daily hours, and
 (2) Days when weather conditions prevent work from beginning at the regular time
 and the crew is dismissed, regardless of whether or not conditions improve for
 the rest of the day.
 An adjustment of Contract time shall not be considered for loss of time due to
 adverse weather:
 a. before the start of construction operations;
 b. during periods when no on site- work on a controlling operation or critical
 path activity occurs;
 c. after November 30 and before April 1 of the following year;
 d. after the Contract completion date or the Revised Contract completion date.
 
 6.
 
 Consideration for an adjustment of contract time shall be limited to the number of
 potential working days lost each month, as determined by the Engineer.
 Notification by the Contractor of weather related delays may be consolidated into
 a single request that shall be included in the narrative letter transmitting the monthly
 Schedule update. In addition, only weather related delays that correspond to an
 actual project delay will be allowable for consideration.
 On projects that do not require Schedules, the request shall be received within seven
 (7) calendar days of the end of the month in which the weather delays occurred. If
 a Schedule is not required for the project, any time extensions granted by the
 Engineer shall be on the basis of an additional working day for each potential
 working day lost.
 
 The allowable time required for the Division to take action on properly prepared
 submissions shall be fourteen (14) calendar days after receipt unless otherwise specified in
 the Contract documents.
 108.6.2.2-Excusable Compensable Delays: An excusable compensable delay is a
 delay in the critical path activity, or in the absence of a project Schedule, a delay in the
 controlling operation that was caused solely by the Department. An adjustment in Contract
 time may be considered along with additional monetary compensation, if entitled.
 Excusable compensable delays include:
 1.
 Delays in a critical path activity, or in the absence of a project Schedule, a delay in
 the controlling operation due to contract modifications resulting in the performance
 of added work, revised work, or work in greater quantities than those set forth in
 the Proposal except as provided in 104.11. The Division reserves the right to
 negotiate unit prices that include the cost for additional resources (labor, material
 and equipment) required to complete added work, revised work, or work in greater
 
 71
 
 quantities within the originally scheduled dates, thereby negating the need for a
 Contract time adjustment.
 Should a substantial delay be anticipated, the Department may request the Contractor
 to submit his/her costs and conditions for demobilization and remobilization. The
 Department may pay the Contractor for demobilization/remobilization expenses in lieu of
 further idle equipment costs.
 Consideration for adjustment of Contract time for added or revised work shall be
 limited to the extra time allowances as agreed on and specified in the Change Order that
 covers the added or revised work. Mark-up for the added or revised work will be negotiated
 and specified in the Change Order. The adjustment of contract time and the allowable
 mark-up will be full and just compensation for any and all claims that the Contractor
 may have regarding the added or revised work. No additional consideration will be given
 for Home office overhead and/or Field office overhead.
 Any adjustment of Contract time for Work authorized in accordance with 104.11 that
 requires the performance of work in greater quantities than those specified in the Contract
 shall be made at the discretion of the Engineer in accordance with one of the two options
 below:
 a. The extra time allowances as agreed on and specified in the Change Order that
 covers the additional or increased work; or
 b. The same ratio that the total cost of the added or increased work shall bear to
 the total contract bid amount, provided the added or increased work is judged
 to be a critical path activity or, in the absence of a project Schedule, a
 controlling operation.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 
 Loss of time due to differing site conditions. Consideration for adjustment of
 Contract time shall be according to Section 104.9.
 Loss of time due to any written orders of the Engineer suspending work or delaying
 critical path activities on the project not the fault of the Contractor. Consideration
 for adjustment of Contract time shall be according to Section 104.10.
 Loss of time due solely to acts or omissions by the Division and not caused or
 contributed to by the Contractor's fault or negligence.
 
 The allowable time required for the Division to take action on properly prepared
 submissions shall be fourteen (14) calendar days after receipt unless otherwise specified in
 the Contract documents.
 Consideration for an adjustment of Contract time shall be limited to the number of
 potential working days lost as determined by the Engineer.
 108.7-COMPLETION DATES:
 108.7.1-Failure to Complete on Time and Liquidated Damages: Time is an essential
 element of the Contract, and it is important that the work be completed within the time
 specified. The cost to the Division for the administration of the Contract, including
 engineering, inspection, and supervision, will increase as the time required to complete the
 work is increased.
 
 72
 
 Therefore, for each calendar day the project is deemed not to be Substantially Complete
 after the Contract Time specified for completion of the work, subject to such extensions of
 contract time required or permitted in 108.6, the Division will assess liquidated damages
 against the Contractor. Daily charges will be deducted for each calendar day, as defined in
 101.2, on all contracts, except daily charges will not be deducted between November 30 and
 April 1. The total amount of daily charges will be deducted from any monies due the
 Contractor, not as a penalty but as liquidated damages. Unless specified elsewhere in the
 Contract, the amount of the daily charge will be calculated from the table posted at the
 WVDOH Contract Administration’s Specifications and Documents website:
 http://www.transportation.wv.gov/highways/contractadmin/specifications/Pages/LiquidDated
 Damages.aspx
 on the date the project is first advertised.
 108.7.2-Interim Completion Date: When an interim completion date has been specified
 in the Contract documents for the Contractor to complete a specific amount of work, pay item,
 or structure, and if the Contractor fails to meet the interim date, the Division will assess a per
 calendar day charge as liquidated damages, as specified elsewhere in the Contract documents
 until such amount of work, pay item, or structure has been completed. Extension of interim
 completion dates will be governed by the provisions of 108.6. The liquidated damages
 provided for in this subsection are in addition to those provided for elsewhere in this Section.
 108.7.3-Incentive/Disincentive for Early Completion: When an Incentive/Disincentive
 (I/D) provision has been included in the Contract documents, Subsection 108.7.1 relating to
 liquidated damages remains in effect and is applicable to the total Contract time; however,
 there will be concurrent assessment of liquidated damages with disincentive assessments.
 Extension of the date(s) established for completion of work stages covered by the I/D provision
 and/or the Contract completion date will be governed by the provisions of 108.6.
 108.8-DEFAULT AND TERMINATION OF CONTRACT:
 If the Contractor:
 1. Fails to begin work under the Contract within the time specified in the "Notice to
 Proceed"; or
 2. Fails to perform the work with sufficient employees and equipment or sufficient
 materials to assure the prompt completion of the work; or
 3. Performs the work unsuitably or neglects or refuses to remove materials or to
 perform anew such work as may be rejected as unacceptable and unsuitable;
 4. Discontinues the prosecution of the work; or
 5. fails to resume work which has been discontinued within a reasonable time after
 notice to do so; or
 6. Becomes insolvent or is declared bankrupt or commits any act of bankruptcy or
 insolvency; or
 7. Allows any final judgment to stand against the Contractor unsatisfied for a period
 of ten (10) days; or
 8. Makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors; or
 
 73
 
 9. For any other cause whatsoever, fails to carry out the Contract terms in an
 acceptable manner; the Engineer will give notice in writing to the Contractor and
 his/her Surety of such delay, neglect or default.
 If the Contractor or Surety, within a period of ten (10) days after such notice, shall not
 proceed in accordance therewith, the Division will, upon written notification from the Engineer of
 the fact of such delay, neglect, or default and the Contractor's failure to comply with such notice,
 have full power and authority, without violating the Contract, to terminate the Contract. The
 Division may appropriate or use any or all materials and equipment on the ground as may be
 suitable and acceptable and may enter into an agreement with another contractor for the completion
 of the Contract according to the terms and provisions thereof, or use such other methods as in the
 opinion of the Engineer will be required for the completion of the Contract in an acceptable
 manner.
 All cost charges incurred by the Division, together with the cost of completing the work
 under Contract, will be deducted from any money due or which may become due the Contractor.
 If such expense exceeds the sum which would have been payable under the Contract, then the
 Contractor and the surety shall be liable and shall pay to the Division the amount of such excess.
 108.9-TERMINATION OF CONTRACT FOR CONVENIENCE OF THE STATE:
 The Division may terminate the entire Contract or any portion thereof, if the Engineer
 determines that a termination is in the Division’s interest. The Engineer will deliver to the
 Contractor a Notice of Termination specifying the extent of termination and the effective date.
 1. Submittals and Procedures. After receipt of a Notice of Termination, the Contractor
 shall immediately proceed with the following obligations:
 a. Stop work as specified in the notice.
 b. Place no further subcontracts or orders for materials, services, or facilities for the
 terminated portion of the Contract.
 c. Terminate all subcontracts that relate to the work terminated.
 d. Settle all outstanding liabilities and termination settlement Proposals arising from
 the termination of the contract or portion thereof.
 e. Transfer title and deliver to the Division (1) fabricated, partially fabricated, or
 unfabricated parts, work in process, completed work, supplies, and other material
 produced or acquired for the work terminated, and (2) the completed or partially
 completed plans, drawings, information, and other property that, if the Contract had
 been completed, would be required to be furnished to the Division.
 f. Complete performance of the work not terminated.
 g. Acceptable materials obtained by the Contractor for the Project that have not been
 incorporated in the work shall be inventoried in conjunction with the Engineer at a
 date identified by the Engineer.
 h. Take any action necessary, or that the Engineer may direct, for the protection and
 preservation of the property related to the Contract that is in the possession of the
 Contractor and in which the Division has or may acquire an interest.
 2. Settlement Provisions. When the Division orders termination of all or a part of the
 Contract effective on a certain date, completed items of work as of that date will be
 74
 
 paid for at the Contract bid price. Payment for partially completed work will be made
 either at agreed prices or under the provisions below. Items that are eliminated in their
 entirety by such termination shall be paid for as provided in Subsection 109.5.
 a. Additional Costs. Within sixty working days of the effective termination date, the
 Contractor shall submit a claim for additional damages or costs not covered above
 or elsewhere in the Contract. Such claim may include such cost items as reasonable
 idle equipment time, mobilization efforts, bidding and project investigative costs,
 overhead expenses attributable to the project terminated, legal and accounting
 charges involved in claim preparation, subcontractor costs not otherwise paid for,
 actual idle labor cost if work is stopped in advance of termination date, guaranteed
 payments for private land usage as part of the original Contract, and any other cost
 or damage for which the Contractor feels reimbursement should be made.
 The Contractor and the Division may agree upon the whole or any part of the
 amount to be paid because of the termination. The amount may include a
 reasonable allowance for profit on work done. Anticipated profits will not be
 considered as part of any settlement. The agreed amount may not exceed the total
 Contract price as reduced by the amount of payments previously made, and the
 Contract price of work not terminated. The Contract shall be amended, and the
 Contractor paid the agreed amount.
 b. Additional Cost Review. If the Contractor and the Division fail to agree on the
 whole amount to be paid the Contractor because of the termination of work, the
 Division will pay the amounts determined as follows, but without duplication of
 any amounts agreed upon above:
 i. For Contract work performed before the effective date of termination, the total
 (without duplication of any items) of:
 1) The cost of work performed;
 2) The cost of settling and paying termination settlement Proposals under
 terminated subcontracts that are properly chargeable to the termination
 portion of the Contract if not included in subparagraph 1 above; and
 3) A sum, as profit on (1) above determined by the Division to be fair and
 reasonable. The Division shall allow no profit under this subdivision if the
 Contractor’s costs incurred on work performed exceed the bid item
 payments made.
 ii. The reasonable costs of settlement of the work terminated, including:
 1) Accounting, legal, clerical, and other expenses reasonably necessary for the
 preparation of termination settlement proposals and support data;
 2) The termination and settlement of subcontracts (excluding the amounts of
 such settlements); and
 3) Storage, transportation, and other costs incurred, reasonably necessary for
 the preservation, protection, or disposition of the termination inventory.
 iii. Except for normal spoilage, and to the extent that the Division expressly accepts
 the risk of loss, Division will exclude from the fair value, all that is destroyed,
 lost, stolen, or damaged so as to become undeliverable to the Division or to the
 buyer.
 
 75
 
 iv. In arriving at the amount due the Contractor under this clause, there will be
 deducted the following:
 1) All unliquidated advance or other payments to the Contractor under the
 terminated portion of the Contract;
 2) Any claim that the Division has against the Contractor under the Contract;
 and
 3) The agreed price for or the proceeds from the sale of materials, supplies, or
 other things acquired and sold by the Contractor not recovered by or
 credited to the Division.
 If termination is partial, the Contractor may file a Proposal with the Division for an
 equitable adjustment of the price(s) of the continued portion of the Contract. The Division will
 make any equitable adjustment agreed upon. Any Proposal for an equitable adjustment under this
 clause shall be requested within sixty (60) working days from the effective date of termination
 unless extended in writing by the Engineer.
 The Division may, under the terms and conditions it prescribes, make partial payments and
 payments against costs incurred by the Contractor for the termination portion of the Contract, if
 these payments will not exceed the amount to which the Contractor is entitled.
 The Contractor shall maintain and make available all project cost records to the Division
 for audit to the extent necessary to determine the validity and amount of each item claimed. This
 includes all books and other evidence bearing on the Contractor’s costs and expenses under the
 Contract. These records and documents shall be made available to the Division at the Contractor’s
 office, at all reasonable times, without any direct charge. If approved by the Division, photographs,
 microphotographs, or other authentic reproductions may be maintained instead of original records
 and documents.
 Termination of the Contract or portion thereof shall not relieve the Contractor of
 contractual responsibilities of the work completed, nor shall it relieve the Surety of its obligation
 for and concerning any just claim arising out the work performed.
 108.10-FIELD OFFICE OVERHEAD:
 The Division may consider compensating the Contractor for field office overhead costs as
 long as the Contractor can provide documentation that the field office overhead costs are not
 covered by the project bid items.
 108.11-HOME OFFICE OVERHEAD:
 The Department shall consider payment to the Contractor for any unabsorbed or extended
 home office overhead costs for which payment is not previously provided for if all of the following
 criteria are met:
 (1) The Contractor has incurred an excusable, compensable delay that delays the Work at
 least forty five (45) Calendar Days beyond the Scheduled Contract Completion Date or
 the Revised Completion Date. These days are cumulative throughout the project.
 (2) The delay for which payment of home office overhead is sought is only due to delays
 defined in 108.6.2.2.
 Payment will be considered for every eligible day beyond the Scheduled or Revised
 Contract completion date at the rate determined below up to substantial completion, as determined
 by the Engineer.
 76
 
 108.11.1-Home Office Overhead Rate: Calculate the home office overhead daily rate
 using the following formula:
 (A ÷ B) x C = D
 Then
 (D ÷ E) = F
 Then
 (F x G) = Amount Claimed
 Where:
 A
 B
 C
 D
 E
 F
 G
 
 =
 =
 =
 =
 =
 =
 =
 
 Contract billing amount
 Contractor’s total billings for Contract period
 Contractor’s total overhead for contract period
 overhead allocable to Contract
 days of performance
 daily contract overhead
 number of days of delay
 
 Contract duration term, E, includes every Calendar Day from the execution of the Contract,
 unless otherwise specified by the Engineer, to the Scheduled Contract Completion Date or
 Revised Contract Completion Date.
 When the Contractor requests home office overhead compensation for a subcontractor, use
 the above formula to calculate the subcontractor’s daily home office overhead rate; however,
 in the subcontractor calculation, A is equal to the subcontractor’s portion of the original
 contract amount as determined by the sum of all approved subcontracts issued for each
 individual subcontractor.
 Formula items B and C are subject to verification by audit at the election of the Engineer.
 Any and all costs associated with the audit will be the sole responsibility of the Contractor.
 Information obtained through any such audit shall, if requested by the Contractor, be treated
 as a trade secret for purposes of exemption from disclosure under the West Virginia Freedom
 of Information Act.
 
 77
 
 SECTION 109
 MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
 109.1-MEASUREMENT OF QUANTITIES:
 All work completed under the Contract will be measured by the Engineer according to
 United States standard measure.
 The method of measurement and computations to be used in determining of quantities of
 materials furnished and of work performed under the Contract will be those methods generally
 recognized as conforming to good engineering practice.
 Unless otherwise indicated, the requirements prescribed shall govern.
 Earthwork will be computed by the average end area method, using the horizontal length
 measured along the centerline as the distance between sections, applying corrections for curvature
 where the apparent error exceeds 25 percent of the volume in any one cut. Other acceptable
 methods may be used.
 Unless otherwise specified, longitudinal measurements for area computations will be made
 horizontally and no deductions will be made for individual fixtures having an area of nine square
 feet (one square meter) or less. Unless otherwise specified, transverse measurements for area
 computations will be the neat dimensions shown on the Plans or ordered in writing by the Engineer.
 Structures will be measured according to neat lines shown on the Plans or as altered to fit
 field conditions.
 All items which are measured by the linear foot (meter), such as pipe culverts, guardrail,
 underdrains, etc., will be measured parallel to the base or foundations upon which such structures
 are placed.
 The term "gage" when used in connection with the measurements of plates, will mean the
 U.S. Standard Gage.
 The galvanized sheet thicknesses to be used in the manufacture of metal cribbing,
 corrugated steel culvert pipe, underdrain pipe, plate pipe, pipe arches, plate pipe arches and plate
 arches shall be as specified in AASHTO M 36 or AASHTO M 167. The sheet thicknesses to be
 used in the manufacture of corrugated aluminum alloy culvert pipe, underdrain pipe, plate pipe,
 pipe arches, plate pipe arches and plate arches shall be as specified in AASHTO M 196 or
 AASHTO M 219.
 The "size number" used in the measurement of wire will be as specified in AASHTO M 32
 or AASHTO M 225.
 The term ton will mean the short ton consisting of 2,000 lb (The term megagram is defined
 as a mass of 1,000 kg). All materials which are measured or proportioned by weight shall be
 weighed on approved scales by competent, qualified personnel. Scales for weighing shall be of
 either the beam type, springless-dial type or digital recorder type. All plant and truck scales and
 metering devices shall be inspected, approved and sealed in accordance with the requirements of
 the West Virginia Division of Labor, Bureau of Weights and Measures, or other appropriate
 agencies of the State or its political subdivisions. Poises shall be designed to be locked in any
 position to prevent unauthorized changes. When the beam type scales are used, provisions for a
 "telltale" dial shall be made for indicating to the operator that the required load in the weighing
 hopper is being approached. A device on the weighing beams shall clearly indicate the critical
 position.
 Truck scales shall be provided by the producer or Contractor, except that truck scales are
 not required where the material is weighed at properly calibrated automatic batching plant facilities
 78
 
 which are equipped with digital print-out equipment. The scales shall be of sufficient size and
 capacity to weigh the heaviest loaded trucks that are used for delivery of the material. All truck
 scales shall be mounted on solid foundations which will ensure their remaining plumb and level.
 A weigh person shall be provided by the producer. The weigh person shall certify that the
 weight of the material, as determined either by the truck scales or from the digital print-out of the
 weights, is correct. To signify the certification of weight the weigh person must either sign their
 full name on each ticket, or if the ticket printer prints the weigh person’s full name they must at
 least initial each ticket.
 Each truck shall be weighed empty prior to each load, except at automatic batch plants
 approved to operate without truck scales. A digital recorder shall be required on all truck scales.
 The digital recorder shall produce a printed record of the gross, tare and net weights, and the time,
 date, truck identification and project number. Provision shall be made for constant zero
 compensation and further provision shall be made so that the scales may not be manually
 manipulated during the printing process. The system shall be interlocked so as to allow printing
 only when the scale has come to rest.
 In case of a breakdown of the automatic equipment, the Engineer may permit manual
 operation for a reasonable time, normally not to exceed 48 hours, while the equipment is being
 repaired.
 If material is shipped by rail, the car weight may be accepted provided the actual weight of
 material only will be paid for. However, car weights will not be acceptable for material to be
 passed through mixing plants.
 Devices, used to meter or measure component or other materials in a simultaneous manner,
 shall be located so as to be readily accessible and visible to a single Inspector, unless otherwise
 directed by the Engineer.
 Materials to be measured by volume in the hauling vehicle shall be hauled in approved
 vehicles and measured at the point of delivery. Vehicles for this purpose may be of any size or
 type acceptable to the Engineer, provided that the body is of such shape that the actual contents
 may be readily and accurately determined. All vehicles shall be loaded to at least their water level
 capacity, and all loads shall be leveled when the vehicles arrive at the point of delivery.
 When approved by the Engineer, material specified to be measured by the cubic yard
 (meter) may be weighed and these weights converted to cubic yard (meter) for payment purposes.
 Further, when it is impractical to measure the material by weighing, or in its original position, the
 material will be measured in its final position and adjusted by a volume change factor. These
 conversion factors will be determined by the Engineer and shall be agreed to by the Contractor
 before these methods of measurement are used.
 When bituminous material is measured by volume, the measured volume at loading
 temperature shall be converted to volume at 60° F (15° C) using the temperature correction factors
 in 705 for asphaltic materials and 706 for tar materials, except that when volume is measured by
 an approved temperature compensated metering device, no further volume correction for
 temperature shall be required. When bituminous material is measured by weight, the actual
 specific gravity, API gravity, or weight per gallon (liter) of the material shall be used to convert
 the measured weight to volume at 60° F (15° C). The Contractor shall furnish all information
 necessary as determined solely by the Division to determine the amount of bituminous material
 actually incorporated into the project.
 
 79
 
 Net certified scale weights or weights based on certified volumes in the case of rail
 shipments will be used as a basis of measurement, subject to correction when bituminous material
 has been lost from the car or the distributor, wasted, or otherwise not incorporated in the work.
 When bituminous materials are shipped by truck or transport, net certified weights or
 volume, subject to correction for loss or foaming may be used for computing quantities.
 Cement will be measured by the cwt (hundredweight = 100 lb) (kilogram). For the purpose
 of determining the total amount used in the mixture, one bag of cement shall be considered as
 weighing 0.94 cwt (42.64 kg), and one barrel of cement shall be considered as weighing 3.76 cwt
 (175.55 kg).
 Timber will be measured by the thousand feet board measure (mfbm) (cubic meters)
 actually incorporated in the structure. Measurement will be based on nominal widths and
 thicknesses and the extreme length of each piece.
 The term "lump sum" when used as an item of payment will mean complete payment for
 the work described in the Contract.
 When a complete structure or structural unit (in effect, "lump sum" work) is specified as
 the unit of measurement, the unit will be construed to include all necessary fittings and accessories.
 When standard manufactured items are specified such as fence, wire, plates, rolled shapes,
 pipe conduit, etc., and these items are identified by gage, unit weight, section dimensions, etc.,
 such identification will be considered to be nominal weights or dimensions. Unless more
 stringently controlled by tolerances in cited specifications, manufacturing tolerances established
 by the industries involved will be accepted.
 109.2-SCOPE OF PAYMENT:
 The Contractor shall receive and accept compensation provided for in the Contract as full
 payment for furnishing all materials and for performing all work under the Contract in a complete
 and acceptable manner and for all risk, loss, damage, or expense of whatever character arising out
 of the nature of the work or the prosecution thereof, subject to the provisions of 107.20.
 If the "Basis of Payment" clause in the Specifications relating to any unit price in the bid
 schedule requires that the unit price cover and be considered compensation for certain work or
 material essential to the item, this work or material will not also be measured or paid for under any
 other pay item which may appear elsewhere in the Specifications, except as provided in 104.6.
 When the Contract specifies payment of an item or a portion of an item on a plan quantity
 basis, the quantities for payment will be those shown on the Plans with deductions from or
 additions to such quantities resulting from authorized deviations from the Plans.
 If the Contractor believes that a quantity which is specified for payment on a plan quantity
 basis is incorrect, the Contractor may request the Division in writing to check the questionable
 quantity. The request shall be accompanied by calculations, drawing, or other evidence indicating
 why the plan quantity is believed to be in error. If the plan quantity is found to be in error, payment
 will be made in accordance with the corrected plan quantity.
 The Division reserves the right to check the quantity of an item which is specified for
 payment on a plan quantity basis if there is reason to believe that it is inaccurate. If the quantity
 is found to be in error, payment will be made in accordance with the corrected plan quantity.
 Should the Division determine during construction that conditions have varied from those
 anticipated in design to the extent that actual measurement of a plan quantity item is warranted,
 the Division will make such measurement, and payment will be based in lieu of the plan quantity.
 
 80
 
 109.2.1-General Basis of Adjusted Payment:
 109.2.1.1-Single Deficiency: In the case of the single characteristic deficiency, the
 resulting deficiency shall be used directly to determine an adjusted price.
 109.2.1.2-Multiple Deficiency: In the case of a multiple deficiency, the related
 adjusted percentage of contract price as determined by the acceptance plan for each
 characteristic shall be determined and the resulting percent of contract price to be paid shall
 be the product of these related adjusted percentages.
 109.2.2-Basis of Charges for Additional Testing: When additional acceptance testing is
 performed by the Division for reworked lots or sublots in accordance with 106.3.1.2, the cost
 of such testing will be deducted on current estimates from the amount due the Contractor by
 the Division. The cost of such testing will be determined in accordance with the unit costs per
 test as shown in Table 9-1, published in MP 109.00.20.
 109.3-COMPENSATION FOR ALTERED QUANTITIES:
 When the accepted quantities of work vary from the quantities in the bid schedule, the
 Contractor shall accept as payment in full, so far as contract items are concerned, payment at the
 original contract unit price for the accepted quantities of work done. No allowance except as
 provided in 104.2 will be made for any increased expense, loss of expected reimbursement, or loss
 of anticipated profits suffered or claimed by the Contractor resulting either directly from such
 alterations of indirectly from unbalanced allocation among the contract items of overhead expense
 on the part of the bidder and subsequent loss of expected reimbursements therefore or from any
 other cause.
 Increased work involving supplemental agreements will be paid for as stipulated in such
 agreements. The Contractor shall furnish substantiating data required in the preparation of these
 agreements.
 109.4-FORCE ACCOUNT WORK:
 If directed by the Division, as provided for in 104.3, the Contractor shall perform extra or
 unforeseen work on a force account basis and shall be compensated in the following manner:
 109.4.1-Labor: For all labor and for foremen and superintendence in direct charge of the
 specific force account operations, the Contractor or subcontractor shall receive the actual
 current local rate of wage, agreed to in writing before beginning work, paid for each and every
 hour that the labor and foremen are actually engaged in the work.
 The Contractor or subcontractor shall also receive the actual costs paid to, or in behalf of,
 workmen by reason of subsistence and travel allowances, Worker's Compensation insurance
 premiums, unemployment insurance contributions, Social Security and Medicare taxes, health
 and welfare benefits, and pension fund benefits when such amounts are required by
 employment contract generally applicable to the classes of labor employed on the work. The
 Contractor or subcontractor shall furnish satisfactory evidence of the rate or rates and the
 amount paid for insurance premiums and taxes.
 For overhead and profit, an amount equal to sixteen percent of the sum of the above labor
 costs shall also be paid to the Contractor or subcontractor.
 
 81
 
 109.4.2-Materials: For all materials used in the specific force account operation and
 incorporated into the project, the Contractor or subcontractor shall receive the actual cost of
 materials delivered including labor charges for employees of the material supplier who are
 required to perform an incidental amount of work in conjunction with the material furnished
 and freight charges paid exclusive of equipment rentals as hereinafter set forth. The Contractor
 or subcontractor shall furnish invoices to document actual materials costs; however, if
 materials used on the force account work are not specifically purchased for such work but are
 taken from the Contractor's or subcontractor's inventory, then in lieu of the invoices the
 Contractor or subcontractor shall furnish an affidavit certifying that such materials were taken
 from inventory, that the quantity claimed was actually used, and that the price and freight
 claimed represent the Contractor's or subcontractor's actual cost.
 For overhead and profit, an amount equal to sixteen percent of the sum of the above
 materials costs shall also be paid to the Contractor or subcontractor. All materials paid for will
 become the property of the Division.
 109.4.3-Equipment: The movement of equipment to and from the specified force account
 operation shall be as directed by the Engineer. All equipment must be in good operating
 condition to qualify for rental payment. For all Contractor or subcontractor equipment either
 rented or owned, the rental rates and operating costs include full compensation for major
 repairs, repairs due to normal wear and tear, labor and parts needed for routine daily servicing
 of the equipment, operating expendables such as fuel, lubricants, tires and ground engaging
 components, and the percentage of mechanic's wages and related maintenance vehicles
 chargeable to preventive and field maintenance.
 Payable time periods shall not include time elapsed before the Engineer has advised the
 Contractor or subcontractor that the equipment is required for use in the force account or time
 elapsed after the Engineer has advised the Contractor or subcontractor that the equipment is no
 longer needed exclusive of costs for transportation, assembly and disassembly set forth in
 109.4.3.4, time elapsed while equipment is broken down or time spent repairing equipment.
 No separate payment will be made for any type of repairs to equipment.
 When equipment is rented from a rental agency which the Contractor or subcontractor
 owns or is part owner, the equipment shall be treated as owned equipment and rental rates
 determined accordingly.
 109.4.3.1-Rented Equipment: For required equipment which is not owned and must
 be obtained by rental, the Contractor or subcontractor shall be paid the actual rental cost
 for the equipment for the time that the equipment is required solely for use in the force
 account work. The Contractor or subcontractor shall furnish invoices to document actual
 equipment rental costs. Estimated operating costs shall also be paid for each hour the rented
 equipment is actually operated in the force account work, not to exceed the estimated
 operating cost per hour set forth for the equipment in the current Rental Rate Blue Book
 for Construction Equipment published by Dataquest, Inc.
 For overhead and profit, an amount equal to sixteen percent of the sum of the above
 costs for rented equipment shall also be paid to the Contractor or subcontractor.
 
 82
 
 109.4.3.2-Owned Equipment: For owned equipment, other than small tools costing
 less than $500 each, the Contractor or subcontractor shall be paid a rental rate determined
 from the current Rental Rate Blue Book for Construction Equipment published by
 Dataquest, Inc. The hourly rate shall be determined by dividing the monthly rate set forth
 in the Rental Rate Blue Book by 176 with appropriate adjustments made for age and region.
 The hourly rate for overtime work shall be determined by dividing the monthly rate set
 forth in the Rental Rate Blue Book by 176 with appropriate adjustments made for age and
 region. The estimated operating cost per hour set forth in the Rental Rate Blue Book shall
 also be paid for each hour the equipment is actually operated in the force account work.
 If the owned equipment is not referred to in the current Rental Rate Blue Book, the
 hourly rental rate will be an agreed amount not to exceed the hourly rate computed as
 follows: A monthly rental rate equivalent to six percent of the Contractor's or
 subcontractor's original acquisition cost of the equipment shall be established. The hourly
 rental rate shall then be determined by dividing this monthly rental rate by 176. Operating
 costs in such cases shall be a reasonable agreed-upon amount for each hour the equipment
 is actually operated in the force account work.
 For overhead and profit, an amount equal to sixteen percent of the sum of the above
 costs for owned equipment shall also be paid to the Contractor or subcontractor.
 109.4.3.3-Idle Equipment: For required equipment held on the site of force account
 work on an idle basis at the request of the Engineer, the Contractor or subcontractor shall
 be paid for such idle time at an adjusted hourly rental rate exclusive of estimated operating
 costs. For owned equipment, such payment shall be made at one-half (1/2) the hourly rate
 determined by dividing the monthly rate set forth in the Rental Rate Blue Book by 176
 with appropriate adjustments made for age and region.
 Payment of idle time for owned equipment on force account work shall not exceed
 eight (8) hours each day less the hours the equipment operates that day. Payment for idle
 time shall not be made on Saturday, Sunday, holidays set forth in 101.2, when equipment
 is operated more than eight (8) hours per day or forty (40) hours per week, when equipment
 is idle due to the Contractor's or subcontractor's decision not to work on potential working
 days or when equipment is idle due to weather.
 For overhead and profit, an amount equal to sixteen percent of the sum of the above
 costs for idle owned equipment shall also be paid to the Contractor or subcontractor.
 109.4.3.4-Miscellaneous: Transportation charges for owned or rented equipment to
 and from the site of the force account work shall be paid provided the equipment is obtained
 from the nearest approved source, the return charges do not exceed the delivery charges,
 haul rates do not exceed the established rates of licensed haulers, and charges are restricted
 to those units of equipment not already available and not on or near the project. In the case
 of owned equipment, the Contractor or subcontractor shall be paid idle time rates for the
 equipment being hauled in addition to the applicable rental rates for the hauling equipment.
 All costs associated with the assembly and disassembly of the equipment for transport shall
 also be paid. All charges by persons or firms other than the Contractor or subcontractor
 shall be supported by satisfactory invoices.
 
 83
 
 109.4.4-Taxes: When the work is done by the Contractor, the amount of State and
 municipal taxes related to the force account work required to be paid by the Contractor will be
 reimbursed to the Contractor. For work performed by a subcontractor, the amount of extra cost
 paid by both the Contractor and the subcontractor for corporate and business taxes levied by
 the State and municipalities due to the force account work shall be paid to the Contractor.
 For overhead and profit, an amount equal to sixteen percent of the sum of the above costs
 for State and municipal taxes shall also be paid to the Contractor or subcontractor.
 For work performed by a subcontractor, the amount of extra cost incurred by the Contractor
 for increased business and corporate taxes shall be computed on the gross amount of the force
 account work, exclusive of the increased corporate and business taxes incurred by the
 subcontractor.
 109.4.5-Contract Bond: The cost of premiums for contract bond required by 103.5 which
 is extra cost and related to the force account work will be paid to the Contractor.
 For overhead and profit, an amount equal to sixteen percent of the sum of the above costs
 for contract bond shall also be paid to the Contractor or subcontractor.
 109.4.6-Insurance: The cost of premiums for Contractor's Public Liability and Property
 Damage Liability Insurance required by 103.6.1 and Contractor's Protective Public Liability
 and Property Damage Liability Insurance required by 103.6.2 which is extra cost and related
 to the force account work will be paid to the Contractor.
 For overhead and profit, an amount equal to sixteen percent of the sum of the above costs
 for insurance shall also be paid to the Contractor or subcontractor.
 When the force account work involves a railroad and the Contractor is required to carry
 Railroad's Protective Public Liability Insurance or Railroad's Protective Property Damage
 Liability Insurance, or both, the cost of premiums for this insurance which is extra cost and
 related to the force account work will be paid to the Contractor.
 For overhead and profit, an amount equal to sixteen percent of the sum of the above costs
 for railroad insurance shall also be paid to the Contractor or subcontractor.
 109.4.7-Administrative Allowance: For force account work performed by an approved
 subcontractor, the Contractor shall be paid an administrative allowance equal to sixteen
 percent of the total amount paid for all work performed by the subcontractor on the specific
 force account operation exclusive of additives paid for overhead and profit.
 109.4.8-Records: The Contractor's representative and the Engineer shall compare records
 daily of the cost of work done as ordered on a force account basis, and shall indicate agreement
 by signature on such records.
 No payment will be made for work performed on a force account basis until the Contractor
 has furnished the Engineer an itemized statement of the cost of such force account work
 detailed as follows:
 a. Name, classification, date, daily hours, total hours, wage rate, fringe benefit rate
 and extended amounts for each laborer and foreman.
 b. Quantities of materials, unit prices and extended amounts.
 c. Transportation of materials.
 
 84
 
 d. Designation, dates, daily hours, total hours, rental rate/hour, operating cost/hour,
 and extended amount for each unit of equipment.
 e. Transportation of equipment.
 f. Rates for property damage insurance, liability insurance, bond, municipal tax,
 subsistence and travel allowance, Worker's Compensation insurance,
 unemployment insurance, Social Security and Medicare taxes.
 The Contractor must also furnish satisfactory evidence of the actual cost for each of the
 charges listed on the itemized statement (excluding those charges for owned equipment
 determined from the Rental Rate Blue Book).
 109.4.9-Basis of Payment: The compensation provided in 109.4.1 to 109.4.7, inclusive,
 shall be received by the Contractor as payment in full for extra work done on a force account
 basis, including all labor, materials, equipment, fuel, lubricants, maintenance of equipment,
 administration, overhead, use of small tools and equipment for which no rental is allowed,
 profit, taxes, bond costs, insurance premiums, unemployment contributions and any other
 expense arising from the performance of the force account work.
 109.5-ELIMINATED ITEM:
 Should any items contained in the proposal be found unnecessary for the proper completion
 of the work, the Engineer may, upon written order to the Contractor, eliminate such items from
 the Contract, and such action will in no way invalidate the contract. When a Contractor in notified
 of the elimination of items, the Contractor will be reimbursed for actual work done and all costs
 incurred, including mobilization of materials prior to the notification.
 109.6-PARTIAL PAYMENTS:
 The Engineer will make current estimates in writing, once each month on or before the date
 set by the Engineer at the time of starting the work, or from time to time as the work progresses,
 of the materials complete in place and the amount of work performed in accordance with the
 Contract, during the preceding month or period and the value thereof figured at the unit prices
 contracted. Current estimates may be prepared for payment on a semi-monthly basis at the
 discretion of the Engineer when the amount due the Contractor for work during the semi-monthly
 period exceeds $10,000. Should there be any doubt by the Engineer as to the integrity of any part
 of the completed work, the estimates for that portion will not be allowed until the cause for such
 doubt has been removed.
 As set forth in 103.5, paragraph four, if the successful bidder submits a good and sufficient
 surety or collateral bond payable to the State of West Virginia in an amount equivalent to 100
 percent of the contract price, an amount equivalent to two percent of the whole will be deducted
 from the total of the amounts ascertained as payable and will be retained by the Division until the
 completion of the entire Contract in an acceptable manner. The balance, or an amount equivalent
 to 98 percent of the whole, less all previous payments, will be certified for payment.
 When the work under contract has been completed and its acceptance is recommended by
 the Engineer, and upon written request by the Contractor accompanied by proper release by the
 Contractor's surety, a part of the two percent retained as outlined above, in an amount determined
 by the Engineer, may be released and paid the Contractor. A minimum of 0.5% (zero point five
 percent) of the approximate total final contract amount will be retained until payment of the final
 estimate.
 85
 
 Unless otherwise requested by the Contractor in writing, all amounts retained by the
 Division will be invested in the Consolidated Investment Fund of the State of West Virginia with
 interest accrued in the name of the Contractor. Dividends will be paid annually and a service fee
 as determined by the Fund will be deducted from the interest earned.
 Substitution of Securities for Retainages:
 i The Contractor may, from time to time, withdraw the whole or any portion of the
 amount retained for payments to the Contractor, under the Contract, with the written
 release from Contractor's surety, pursuant to the terms of the Contract, notwithstanding
 the provisions above, upon depositing with the State Treasurer, United States treasury
 bonds, United States treasury notes, United States treasury certificates of indebtedness
 or United States treasury bills, or bonds or notes of the State of West Virginia. A safe
 keeping receipt from a bank located in the State of West Virginia may be deposited
 with the State Treasurer in lieu of any of the definitive securities. No amount shall be
 withdrawn in excess of the market value of the securities at the time of deposit or of
 the par value of the securities, whichever is lower.
 ii The State Treasurer shall on a regular basis, collect all interest or income on the
 obligations so deposited and shall pay the same, when and as collected, to the
 Contractor who deposited the obligations. If the deposit is in the form of coupon bonds,
 the State Treasurer shall deliver each coupon as it matures to the Contractor.
 iii Any amount deducted by the State, or by any public department or official thereof,
 pursuant to the terms of the Contract, from the retainages due the Contractor, shall be
 deducted, first from that portion of the retainages for which no security has been
 substituted then from the proceeds of any deposited security. In the latter case, the
 Contractor shall be entitled to receive interest, coupons or income only from those
 securities which remain after such amount has been deducted.
 iv Any Contractor who has substituted a security or securities for retainages and the same
 matures before the completion and finalling of the Contract for which the security or
 securities were substituted for retainages may, from time to time, substitute another
 security or securities for the one or ones having so matured in the same manner that the
 original security or securities were substituted so long as the substituted security or
 securities are of a kind designated in (i) above, of equal value to the matured security
 or securities for which it is substituted. All interest and income accruing on such
 substituted security or securities shall be collected and paid and the security or
 securities themselves shall be held, handled and delivered by the State Treasurer in the
 same manner, as is provided in (ii) and (iii) above, for the original security or securities
 deposited.
 109.7-PAYMENT FOR MATERIAL ON HAND:
 Partial payment may be made to the extent of the delivered costs of material to be
 incorporated into the work, provided the material meets the requirements of the Plans and
 Specifications when delivered in the vicinity of the project or at approved off-site locations. In
 any event, partial payment for material on hand will not exceed the bid price. Such material shall
 be stored in acceptable storage places, and the Contractor shall furnish evidence of payment for
 the delivered cost of the material within 90 days of the cut-off date of the estimate on which this
 material was paid.
 
 86
 
 109.8-ACCEPTANCE AND FINAL PAYMENT:
 When the project has been accepted, as provided in 105.16, the Engineer will prepare the
 final estimate of the quantities of the various classes of work performed. Before the final payment
 is made, the Contractor shall execute the Statement of Acceptance on the back of the final estimate.
 After the Contractor executes such final estimate or if the Contractor fails or declines to execute
 the final estimate within 30 days after receipt, the Division will consider the estimate approved
 and accepted and he will be paid the entire sum found to be due after deducting all previous
 payments and all amounts to be retained or deducted under the provisions of the Contract. Upon
 written request from the Contractor received within 30 days of his receipt of the final estimate, the
 time for review and execution of the final estimate will be extended up to 60 additional calendar
 days. Should the Contractor desire to reserve the right to file a claim with the State Court of Claims
 for any sum or compensation not included in the final estimate, growing out of the Contract, then
 a Reservation of Right stipulating the nature, each item and the amount claimed shall be added at
 the end of the acceptance statement. This claim must be filed with the State Court of Claims within
 120 days of execution of the final estimate. If any monies owed the Division are not paid within
 120 days of the execution of the final estimate, the Division shall have the right to revoke the
 Contractor’s Prequalification until the monies are paid.
 All prior partial estimates and payments will be subject to correction in the final estimate
 and payment.
 109.9-PRICE ADJUSTMENT OF FUELS:
 Because of the uncertainty in estimating the cost of diesel fuel that will be used during the
 life of this contract, adjustment in compensation for certain contract items is provided for as
 follows:
 Product price quotations for Fuel Oil No. 2 (diesel fuel) as published by the Oil Price
 Information Service (OPIS) will be utilized to establish the Contract Base Price (Cbp) as well as
 the Monthly Base Price (Mbp) thereafter. These prices will be the average of the individual prices
 for the following locations: Charleston, West Virginia; Ashland, Kentucky; Pittsburgh,
 Pennsylvania; Roanoke, Virginia; and Marietta, Ohio as published on the Wednesday prior to the
 first day of the month, with the effective date of the index being the first day of the month. If the
 Wednesday prior to the first day of the month falls on a holiday or the price is otherwise not
 published for that date, the index prices will be based on the next earliest date as published by
 OPIS.
 The contract base price (Cbp) and the monthly base price (Mbp) may be found posted on
 Contract Administration’s website for Fuel and Asphalt Prices at the following link:
 http://www.transportation.wv.gov/highways/contractadmin/Lettings/Pages/FuelandAsphaltPrices
 .aspx
 Any dispute concerning the (Cbp) shall be resolved during the first voucher estimate
 review.
 The portion of the contract unit price which reflects the cost of the specified material will
 be adjusted for the change in accordance with the following formula:
 
 87
 
 Pa = [(Mbp ÷Cbp) – 1.00] x Cbp x C x Q
 Where:
 Pa
 Mbp
 Cbp
 C
 Q
 
 =
 =
 =
 =
 
 Price Adjustment
 Monthly base price at time of placement
 Contract Base Price at time of bidding
 Cost Adjustment Factors per Unit of Contract Item Bid
 as outlined in chart below
 = ‘As Constructed’ Quantity
 
 Adjustments in compensation for any period may be either plus or minus. If (Mbp) is
 greater than (Cbp), the adjustment will be plus. If (Cbp) is greater than (Mbp), the adjustment will
 be minus.
 The adjustment in compensation for diesel fuel used for the listed items will be made on
 the separate items on the basis of the average diesel fuel requirements for processing a unit of the
 item as shown in the table below.
 The gallons (liters) of diesel fuel for price adjustment will be determined by multiplying
 the usage factors listed in the table below by the amount of acceptable work performed on the
 separate adjustable items during an estimate period.
 All adjustments will be made based on the gallons (liters) of diesel fuel indicated in the
 table below and no changes will be made for variations between these usage factors and the actual
 factors.
 TABLE OF MATERIALS TO BE ADJUSTED AND
 COST ADJUSTMENT FACTORS FOR DIESEL FUEL USAGE
 UNITS
 FACTOR
 Class 1:
 
 Class 2:
 
 Class 3:
 
 Class 4:
 
 Excavation under
 Sections 207 and 211
 Crushed aggregate
 under Sections 307,
 311, and 405
 Bituminous concrete
 under Sections 401 and
 402
 Rigid concrete
 pavement under
 Sections 501 and 502
 
 Gallons per cubic yard
 (Liters per cubic meter)
 
 0.25
 (1.24)
 
 Gallons per ton**
 (Liters per megagram)
 
 0.62
 (2.59)
 
 Gallons per ton**
 (Liters per megagram)
 
 1.06
 (4.43)
 
 Gallons per cubic yard
 (Liters per cubic meter)
 
 0.76
 (3.77)
 
 ** Where the pay item for aggregate is in cubic yards (meters), conversion to tons (megagrams)
 for the purpose of diesel fuel price adjustment will be made on the basis that one cubic yard
 (meter) equals 1.75 tons (2.08 megagrams).
 
 Any difference between the checked final quantity and the sum of quantities shown on the
 monthly estimates for any item will be adjusted by the following formula:
 
 88
 
 FA = (FCQ ÷ PRQ) x EA
 Where:
 FA
 FCQ
 PRQ
 EA
 
 =
 =
 =
 =
 
 Final Adjustment (dollars) for the item which increased or decreased
 Final Checked Quantity of the item which increased or decreased
 Total Quantity of said item previously reported on the most recent estimate
 Total adjustment in dollars of said item shown on most recent estimate
 
 The monthly base price for determining price adjustments for all work performed after the
 contract completion date, as revised by approved time extensions, will be the monthly base price
 (Mbp) at the time of the contract completion date (as extended) or at the time the work was
 performed, whichever is less.
 The final adjustment will take into consideration any error(s) that may have been made in
 the computation of any prior monthly adjustments.
 109.10-PRICE ADJUSTMENT OF ASPHALT BINDER:
 Because of the uncertainty in estimating the cost of petroleum products that will be used
 during the life of this contract, adjustment in compensation for certain contract items is provided
 for as follows:
 The contract items listed in Table 109.10.1, will be adjusted in accordance with the
 Division’s indices for asphalt binder. The bidding index (Ib) for asphalt binder will be equal to
 the placement index as listed on the Contract Administrations website for Fuel and Asphalt
 adjustments for the Wednesday prior to the first day of the month, with the effective date of the
 index being the first day of the month. If the Wednesday prior to the first day of the month falls
 on a holiday or the price is otherwise not published for that date, the index will be based on the
 next earliest date as reported. The placement index (Ip) will be the price in effect on the first of
 the month in which the specific adjustable material was actually placed. Both the bidding index
 (Ib) and the placement index (Ip) will be based on the average of the posted prices of PG 64-22
 asphalt binder per ton/megagram as reported from the following sources on the Wednesday prior
 to the first day of each calendar month:
 Marathon Petroleum Company, LLC, Catlettsburg, Kentucky
 Marathon Petroleum Company, LLC, Floreffe, Pennsylvania
 Asphalt materials, Inc., Marietta, Ohio
 NuStar Asphalt Refining Company, Baltimore, Maryland
 Associated Asphalt, Martinsburg, West Virginia
 If one of the sources listed above changes ownership and/or name the posted price for that
 terminal will continue in use as though the ownership and/or name change had not occurred.
 If one of the sources used for determining either the bidding index or the placement index
 goes out of business, any future index will be based on the average of the remaining sources. Thus,
 the bidding index (Ib) could be based on the average of five sources and the placement index (Ip)
 on the average of four sources or vice-versa. If a source that goes out of business reopens at a later
 date, the placement index would once again be based on the average of five sources as indicated
 above.
 The posted price for each source will be compared to the average of all sources. If the
 difference between the average and the individual price is greater than 25 % of the average, that
 individual source will be excluded from the calculation of the average price (Ib) or (Ip) and a new
 average will be calculated using the remaining sources.
 89
 
 Sources chosen for the index are required to report their posting to the Division no later
 than the Wednesday prior to the first day the month. Failure to report in a timely manner may
 impact source approval.
 The portion of the contract unit price which reflects the cost of the specified material will
 be adjusted for the change in accordance with the following formula:
 Pa = Q*AC*(Ip – Ib)
 Where:
 Pa
 Ip
 Ib
 AC
 Q
 
 =
 =
 =
 =
 =
 
 Price Adjustment
 Price Index at time of placement
 Price Index for Bidding
 Asphalt Content (see Table 109.10.1)
 ”As Constructed” Quantity
 
 The price index for determining price adjustments for all work performed after the contract
 completion date, as revised by approved time extensions, will be determined as follows: The price
 index (Ip) shall be for the month in which the contract completion date (as extended) falls, or the
 price index for the month in which the work was performed, whichever is less.
 TABLE 109.10.1-Table of Materials to be Adjusted for
 Price of Asphalt at the Time of Placement (English & Metric)
 Item
 Number
 
 Asphalt
 Content (%)
 
 Item
 Number
 
 Asphalt
 Content (%)
 
 Item
 Number
 
 Asphalt
 Content (%)
 
 Item
 Number
 
 Asphalt
 Content (%)
 
 -311006-001
 401001-020
 401001-021
 401001-022
 401001-023
 401001-024
 401001-025
 401001-030
 401001-031
 401001-032
 401001-033
 401001-034
 401001-035
 401001-040
 401001-041
 401001-042
 401001-043
 401001-044
 401001-045
 401001-046
 401001-047
 401001-050
 401001-051
 401001-055
 401001-056
 401002-020
 
 -3.2%
 3.9%
 3.9%
 3.9%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 3.9%
 3.9%
 3.9%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 4.5%
 4.5%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 4.5%
 4.5%
 4.1%
 4.1%
 4.1%
 4.1%
 5.7%
 
 401002-021
 401002-022
 401002-023
 401002-024
 401002-025
 401002-026
 401002-027
 401002-028
 401002-029
 401002-030
 401002-031
 402001-035
 402001-036
 402001-037
 401002-040
 401002-041
 401002-042
 401003-001
 401003-002
 401003-003
 401003-006
 401003-007
 401003-008
 401003-011
 401003-012
 401003-013
 401003-014
 
 5.7%
 5.7%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 5.7%
 5.7%
 5.7%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 4.9%
 4.9%
 4.9%
 4.9%
 4.9%
 4.9%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 
 401003-015
 401007-020
 401007-021
 401007-022
 401007-023
 401007-024
 401007-025
 401007-030
 401007-031
 401007-032
 401007-033
 401007-034
 401007-035
 401007-040
 401007-041
 401007-043
 401007-044
 401007-050
 401007-051
 401007-053
 401007-054
 402001-020
 402001-021
 402001-022
 402001-023
 402001-024
 402001-025
 
 5.0%
 5.7%
 5.7%
 5.7%
 5.7%
 5.7%
 5.7%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 6.0%
 6.0%
 6.0%
 6.0%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 6.2%
 6.2%
 6.2%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 
 402001-026
 402001-027
 402001-028
 402001-029
 402001-030
 402001-031
 402001-032
 402001-033
 402001-034
 402001-035
 402001-036
 402001-038
 402001-039
 402001-040
 402001-041
 402001-045
 402001-046
 402001-050
 402001-051
 402001-055
 402001-056
 402001-060
 402001-061
 402001-065
 402001-066
 402001-070
 402001-071
 
 4.9%
 4.9%
 4.9%
 6.7%
 6.2%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 4.9%
 5.2%
 5.0%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 6.0%
 6.0%
 5.5%
 5.5%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 7.6%
 7.6%
 6.0%
 6.0%
 5.5%
 5.5%
 5.0%
 5.0%
 
 The bidding Indexes (Ib) and the placement indexes (Ip) may be found posted on Contract
 Administrations website for Fuel and Asphalt Prices at the following link:
 http://www.transportation.wv.gov/highways/contractadmin/Lettings/Pages/FuelandAsphaltPrices
 .aspx
 90
 
 The bidding index (Ib) for asphalt binder will be listed on the Contract Administrations
 website for Fuel and Asphalt adjustments for the Wednesday prior to the first day of the month,
 with the effective date of the index being the first day of the month for which the contract is let.
 Any dispute concerning the bidding index shall be resolved during the first voucher
 estimate review.
 109.11-SQUARE YARD PAVING ADJUSTMENTS:
 For the purposes of Square Yard paving the value of Q the “As Constructed” Quantity in
 Sections 109.9 and 109.10 shall be calculated using the following formula.
 Q = Quantity as per plan thickness calculated by:
 Q=(L x W x 32.27) x T
 Where:
 L
 W
 T
 
 =
 =
 =
 
 Length (mi)
 Width (ft)
 Plan Thickness (in)
 
 109.12 through 109.19-BLANK
 109.20-LOAD LIMIT VIOLATIONS AND WEIGH TICKETS:
 The Allowable Gross Weight for any vehicle being used to haul materials on publicly
 maintained highways under the terms of this contract shall be as follows.
 Title 23 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 658.17, establishes maximum allowable
 gross weight on the Interstate System. The maximum allowable gross weight on WV and US
 Routes will be as established in Chapter 17C, Articles 17 and 17A of the Official Code of West
 Virginia, as amended. The Public Service Commission, Weight Enforcement Section is
 responsible for the enforcement of these provisions.
 A weigh ticket shall be required with each load of material from a commercial source which
 would normally have truck scales. This includes, but is not limited to, all asphalt paving materials
 and all aggregates regardless of the contract pay unit. The weigh ticket shall include gross, tare,
 and net weights, time and date of loading, Item Number or Description of Materials, Contract
 Number or Project Number, number of axles on haul unit, license number of haul unit, and
 signature of the weigher certifying that all information on the ticket is correct. If the weigher’s
 name is printed by the computer on the ticket, then it only needs to be initialed by the weigher.
 For material from a commercial source or a batch plant, which would not normally have
 truck scales, a weigh ticket documenting the tare weight, number of axles on the haul unit, license
 number of haul unit, date weighed, location of scales, and signature of the weigher certifying that
 all information on the ticket is correct, may be supplied for each haul unit as an alternate to the
 ticket required in the previous paragraph. The tare weight ticket shall be supplied for each contract
 on a yearly basis and when modifications are made to the vehicle or combination of vehicles. The
 weight of the material delivered shall be calculated and furnished by the vendor/supplier shipping
 the material to the project site or DOH facility. This includes, but is not limited to, concrete,
 structural steel, piling, reinforcing steel and all prepackaged material of known weight, such as
 cement, grout, fertilizer, lime, abrasives, etc.
 If the haul unit is a combination of vehicles, the license number shall be supplied for each
 component. The tare weight shall be for the complete haul unit.
 91
 
 All weighing shall be done on scales approved and sealed by the West Virginia Division
 of Labor, Bureau of Weights and Measures. If the scales are moved or upon the request of the
 Engineer, the scales shall be reapproved and sealed. The Engineer shall be notified of any scale
 malfunctions. The Division of Highways may, at its option, accept inspection and sealing by out
 of state agencies when the material is being loaded outside West Virginia.
 Any material, covered by this provision, which is delivered without the proper weigh ticket
 shall not be accepted by the Division of Highways.
 Nothing in this provision relieves any party from compliance with the State Law on load
 limits or any fines which may be assessed for violation of said law.
 
 92
 
 SECTION 110
 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
 110.1-COMMON CARRIER RATES:
 The common carrier rates and taxes which are current on the date of opening the bids shall
 be considered as applicable to all items subject to transportation charges there under.
 If such rates or taxes are thereafter increased by public authority on any materials entering
 into and forming a part of the Contract, an amount equal to the sum of all such increases, when
 evidenced by receipted common carrier bills, will be paid to the Contractor by the Division. All
 claims for such payments shall be made within sixty (60) days after final acceptance of the work.
 If such rates or taxes are thereafter reduced by public authority on any materials entering
 into and forming a part of the Contract, an amount equal to the sum of all such decreases, when
 evidenced by receipted common carrier bills, will be deducted by the Division from the monies
 due the Contractor on the work performed under the Contract.
 When deliveries of materials are performed by means other than common carriers, an
 increase or decrease in price will not be allowed or charged for changes in rates or methods of
 delivery.
 110.2-MINIMUM WAGE DETERMINATIONS:
 The Contractor shall comply with the requirements of the Davis-Bacon Act on all Federalaid construction projects, as applicable.
 110.3-NONDISCRIMINATION OF EMPLOYEES (GOVERNOR'S EXECUTIVE
 ORDER):
 During the performance of this Contract for public work or for goods or services, the
 Contractor agrees as follows:
 The Contractor and subcontractors shall provide equal employment opportunity for all
 qualified persons and shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment
 because of race, creed, color, or national origin.
 Contractors and subcontractors are required to give written notice to any labor union with
 which they have a collective bargaining or other agreement, that they have complied with the
 requirements of the Executive Orders by the Governor of the State of West Virginia, dated October
 16, 1963, and December 15, 1965. These provisions shall be fully and effectively enforced and
 any breach of them will be regarded as a material breach of the Contract.
 
 93
 
 94
 
 DIVISION 200
 EARTHWORK
 
 SECTION 201
 CLEARING AND GRUBBING
 201.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of clearing, grubbing, removing, and disposing of all vegetation
 and debris within the construction limits and in other areas within the right-of-way or easement
 limits, as set forth in the Contract or as designated by the Engineer, including selective clearing of
 areas; site grading of public and private roadways, lanes, vehicular paths or any other existing man
 made improvements which lie between the construction and right-of-way limits; except such
 objects as are designated to remain or to be removed in accordance with other sections of these
 Specifications. This work shall also include preservation from injury or defacement of all
 vegetation and objects to remain.
 201.2-MATERIALS:
 Asphaltum base paint for tree surgery shall conform to the requirements of 715.36.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 201.3-GENERAL:
 The Engineer will designate the trees, shrubs, plants and other items to be removed or to
 remain. All items designated to remain shall be preserved by the Contractor. Alignment stakes,
 grade stakes, guard stakes, boundary markers, bench marks and tie points shall be preserved until
 such time as their usefulness has ceased and permission for their destruction is given by the
 Engineer.
 201.4-CLEARING:
 Areas indicated on the Plans, and borrow and waste sites furnished by the Division, shall
 be cleared of the obstructions described. In areas where the proposed embankment is to be 5 ft.
 (1.5 meters) or more in depth, measured below the subgrade, all stumps shall be cut off as close to
 the ground as is practicable but not to exceed 6 inches (150 mm) above the ground surface at the
 base of the stumps. When stumps are located in the area of the backslope rounding of cut sections,
 they are to be cut flush with or below the final slope line. Areas where the proposed embankment
 is to be less than 5 ft. (1.5 meters) shall be treated as prescribed in 201.6.
 All merchantable timber and wood in the clearing area, except trees designated to remain,
 which has not been removed from the right-of-way prior to the date of advertising for bids shall
 become the property of the Contractor, unless otherwise provided.
 Unsound or unsightly branches of trees and shrubs which are designated to remain, and are
 not specified to be removed under another item, shall be removed as directed. Branches of trees
 extending over the area occupied by the roadbed shall be trimmed to give a clear height of 20 ft.
 (6 meters) above the road and shoulder pavement surface. All trimming shall be done by skilled
 workers and in accordance with good tree surgery practices.
 In all areas where stumps and shrubs are to remain, the surface of the ground shall not be
 unduly disturbed or compacted. Existing ground cover shall be preserved insofar as possible, and
 the area shall be left neat and clear and in a condition which is reasonably consistent with the
 surroundings.
 
 95
 
 All abandoned utility poles within the limits of the right-of-way shall be removed and
 disposed of by the Contractor. The removal shall be treated in a similar manner as the clearing
 and grubbing of trees. The poles to be abandoned will be marked by the Project Engineer.
 201.5-SELECTIVE CLEARING AND THINNING:
 In order that the trees may be properly marked in advance of thinning operations, the
 Contractor shall give the Engineer at least two weeks’ notice prior to starting work or prior to
 resuming work after suspending operations. Trees or bushes not designated to remain shall be cut.
 In no event shall selective clearing and thinning operations begin until the Engineer has given
 approval.
 All dead or diseased trees or shrubs, junk, trash, litter, or foreign matter of any kind shall
 be removed from the areas to be treated. This shall include uprooted stumps and all branches,
 tops, trunks, and dead wood resulting from woodcutting operations or from any other causes.
 Trees and shrubs to be preserved shall be carefully pruned to remove all dead wood and
 diseased or injured tops or branches. In addition, in certain areas the Engineer may require the
 branches of designated trees to be removed to a height of 20 ft. (6 meters) above ground as directed
 in order to improve sight distance, provide head clearance, open vistas, or improve appearance of
 the tree. Complete clearing may be required in certain areas for the purpose of removing shade
 hazards, improving sight distances, or improving appearance. Such clearing shall be included
 under this Section.
 The Contractor shall avoid disturbing or compacting the existing ground surface, as well
 as avoid damage to plant growth. The use of tractors, cranes, winches, or any other heavy
 equipment, operating anywhere within the area to be selectively thinned, will not be allowed unless
 exceptions are specifically authorized.
 Any injury to trees and shrubs which are to be preserved shall be carefully repaired.
 Disturbed ground surface shall be restored as nearly as possible to natural condition.
 All pruning and repair to live trees and shrubs shall be done by skilled workers according
 to approved arboricultural practice. All pruning scars and all cuts and wounds 1 inch (25 mm) in
 diameter or over shall be painted with an asphaltum base paint. The Engineer may permit such
 cuts on evergreen trees to remain unpainted. All stumps, new or old, shall be cut to a maximum
 height of 6 inches (150 mm) above the surrounding ground or as directed by the Engineer.
 Undesirable trees leaning or falling over the highway right-of-way from outside shall be cut at the
 property line.
 201.6-GRUBBING:
 In areas where embankments are to be constructed less than 5 ft. (1.5 meters) in depth,
 measured below the subgrade, complete grubbing of all trees, stumps, roots, bushes or hedge
 fences shall be accomplished.
 In areas where embankments are to be constructed 5 ft. (1.5 meters) or more in depth,
 measured below the subgrade, stumps which have not been loosened by clearing and grubbing
 operations, and nonperishable solid objects, need not be grubbed or removed provided they are cut
 off so as not to protrude more than 6 inches (150 mm) above the original ground surface. Near the
 toe of embankment slopes no stump shall extend above a point 1 ft. (300 mm) beneath the
 embankment slope surface.
 In areas not included within construction limits or selective clearing areas, all stumps shall
 either be grubbed or cut flush with or below the original ground line. Brush, shrubs, down timber,
 96
 
 rotten wood, rubbish and other objectionable objects and vegetation shall be cleared flush with the
 ground. Such areas will be clearly indicated on the Plans.
 201.7-DISPOSAL:
 All wood, trash, debris, stumps, and other foreign matter shall be removed and disposed of
 by the Contractor. Material may be disposed of at approved waste areas or in accordance with the
 provisions prescribed. Non-combustible material may be disposed of in embankments in
 accordance with the applicable provisions.
 All burning of vegetative material shall be done in accordance with the applicable laws,
 ordinances, regulations, and requires an approval from the West Virginia Department of
 Environmental Protection, Division of Air Quality (DEP) as defined in the Code of State Rules,
 Title 45, Series 6. If the Contractor plans to burn during Forest Fire Season (March 1-May 31 and
 October 1-December 31) a permit is also required from the West Virginia Division of Forestry (No
 permit from the West Virginia Division of Forestry is required for burning between 4:00PM and
 before nightfall during Forest Fire Season). Copies of these approvals and permits are to be
 provided to the Engineer.
 Open burning shall be extinguished prior to nightfall unless previously approved by DEP,
 Division of Air Quality. It is the intent of this Specification that the health, safety, comfort, and
 the property of persons in the vicinity are protected from the effects of such burning. Open burning
 of Construction/Demolition Waste as defined in Section 207.6.5 will not be allowed. The disposal
 of Construction/Demolition Waste Materials shall be in accordance with Section 207.6.5.
 Clearing and grubbing materials (vegetative material only) shall be disposed of by chipping
 or burning using a pit burner/air curtain. Vegetative material may also be used in conjunction with
 erosion and sediment control features.
 If the Contractor chooses the chipping option, vegetative material may be reduced to chips
 of a maximum size of 2 inch (50 mm). The chips may be disposed of in areas where erosion control
 is required, as a substitute for straw mulch in accordance with the applicable provisions of 642 and
 652, or between slope lines and right-of-way lines in areas/locations as determined by the
 Engineer.
 When the pit burner/air curtain method of disposing of vegetative material is utilized, the
 Contractor will have two options. The first being an above ground fire box. If this option is
 chosen, the Contractor shall follow the manufactures recommendations.
 The second option is an in ground trench. If this option is chosen, the Contractor shall
 construct a minimum trench of 20ft (6m) in length X 10ft (3m) wide X 10ft (3m) deep with vertical
 walls . The air curtain shall be sufficient that post burn vegetated material will be no larger than
 6 inches (150mm) in any direction. The air curtain shall have a flow of air in order to prevent
 continuous smoke pillars from escaping the trench.
 The in ground trench is to be placed outside the roadway prism, unless otherwise approved
 by the Engineer. If the trenches are not to be eliminated in the subsequent excavation operation,
 they shall be backfilled. All backfill within the roadway prism shall be accomplished in
 accordance with the requirements of Section 207. Compaction of backfill outside the roadway
 prism shall be performed so as to obtain a minimum density equal to that of the surrounding
 ground.
 The prevailing winds during open burning should be away from any roadway, airport, city,
 or occupied residence likely to be affected by the smoke to the best extent possible. Open burning
 of vegetative material shall not be allowed during periods of air stagnation advisories or alerts.
 97
 
 The Contractor will be held responsible for any damage caused by fires. The Contractor
 shall remove and dispose of burned material; replace trees, shrubs, fences or other objects
 designated or described to remain, but which have been damaged; and seed burned areas beyond
 construction limits; all in an acceptable manner. Upon completion of the work, nothing shall
 remain within the right-of-way limits, nor along the land adjacent thereto, which was deposited by
 the Contractor as the result of any of the operations of construction unless approved by the
 Engineer.
 201.8-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done, will be on a lump sum basis.
 Clearing and grubbing for waste sites or borrow pits furnished by the Contractor shall be
 included in the bid price for Item 207001-*, "Unclassified Excavation"; Item 211001-*,
 "Unclassified Borrow Excavation"; Item 211002-*, "Rock Borrow Excavation"; or Item 211003*, "Select Borrow Excavation".
 The removal of trees outside of clearing and grubbing and selective clearing areas
 designated on the Plans shall be accomplished under the provisions of 109.4.
 201.9-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, shall be paid for at the contract price bid for
 the item listed below, which price and payment shall be full compensation for doing all the work
 prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor, materials, tools,
 equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work. The lump sum bid price will
 be full compensation for the estimated quantities shown in the Plans. Any increase or decrease
 from estimated quantities will be adjusted for total compensation on a prorate basis consistent with
 areas that have been added or deleted.
 All salvable material including merchantable timber shall become the property of the
 Contractor unless otherwise indicated on the Plans or in the Proposal, and any salvage expected
 shall be computed as a credit before arriving at the bid price for this item.
 201.10-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 201001-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Clearing And Grubbing
 
 * Sequence number
 
 98
 
 UNIT
 Lump Sum
 
 SECTION 202
 BUILDING DEMOLITION, WELL AND SEPTIC TANK ABANDONMENT
 202.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the demolition of buildings and the abandonment of Septic
 Tanks, Water Wells, Gas Wells, Oil Wells and appurtenances as are specifically designated on the
 Plans. It shall include rodent control, disconnecting utilities, salvaging and disposing of the
 resulting materials in the manner and subject to the conditions and regulations prescribed.
 The Contractor shall obtain all necessary permits, bonds and licenses required for this work
 and must provide them to the Engineer prior to commencing the work
 202.2-UTILITIES:
 The Contractor shall be solely responsible for making all necessary arrangements and for
 performing any necessary work to the satisfaction of the utility companies and municipal
 departments involved in connection with the discontinuance or interruption of all public utilities
 or services, such as gas, water, sewage, electricity, and telephone, which may be affected by the
 work to be done under the demolition specified.
 202.3-DISPOSAL OF MATERIALS:
 Materials resulting from demolition shall be disposed of by the Contractor at a West
 Virginia Division of Natural Resources approved landfill. Any material that is considered
 hazardous material must be disposed of at an approved site.
 202.4-BUILDINGS:
 The demolition shall conform to the schedule of construction set up for the project.
 Buildings and appurtenances shall be removed to the existing ground level, which operation
 shall include removal of concrete slabs or any other type of floor resting upon the ground.
 Basements shall be cleared of all debris, appliances, wood or metal partition walls, wood floors,
 etc., so that only the foundation walls and basement floor remain. The basement floors shall be
 shattered. If pits, trenches, holes, or basements are not to be eliminated in subsequent excavation
 operation, they shall be backfilled. All backfill within the roadway prism shall be accomplished
 in accordance with the requirements of Section 207. Compaction of backfill outside the roadway
 prism shall be performed so as to obtain a minimum density equal to that of the surrounding
 ground.
 202.4.1-Rodent Control: When specified in the Contract, the following rodent control
 provisions shall apply.
 202.4.1.1-General: The Contractor shall furnish and place suitably prepared bait
 containing rodenticide in and around buildings to be demolished and shall also furnish and
 place insecticide for control of ectoparasites. Two rodenticide treated baits differing in
 content and method of placement will be required within 24 hours after receipt of
 notification to proceed. The Contractor shall place rodenticide treated bait within the
 building demolition area.
 
 99
 
 If the rodent control measures are not promptly furnished by the Contractor, the
 Division may provide the measures as required and deduct the cost from the money due
 the Contractor.
 202.4.1.2-Materials: The rodenticide treated bait shall consist of the following:
 1. Type I Bait-An anticoagulant, 0.5% concentrate, such as warfarin, pival, fumarin,
 PMP, etc., mixed with cereals and other rodent attractants in the following
 proportions by weight:
 One part anticoagulant to seven parts coarse yellow corn meal; five parts rolled
 oats; one part granulated sugar; one part corn oil.
 In the event rodents do not accept this formula chopped fruit may be substituted
 for the rolled oats in the same proportion.
 2. Type II Bait-Zinc phosphide, 100% concentrate (94 % minimum assay), mixed in
 the proportion of 1:96 (one ounce to six pounds) of ground meat or canned dog
 food.
 All rodenticides shall be handled and mixed in the bait in accordance with the
 manufacturers' instructions.
 3. Insecticide-Two percent Diazinion Dust, or five percent Malathion Dust, or ten
 percent Carbaryl Dust, or two to five percent Chlordane Dust.
 202.4.1.3-Rodent Control Operations: Type I bait containing anticoagulant shall be
 placed in shallow bait containers fastened to the floor surface of buildings or in shallow
 containers heavy enough to prevent overturning or removal to burrows. The containers
 shall be protected from domestic animals and weather and shall be distinctly labeled with
 the word Poison and symbol thereof. The initial rate of application shall not be less than
 four pounds of bait per 1,000 sq. ft. (2 kg per 100 square meters) of building area.
 Type II bait containing zinc phosphide shall be wrapped in paper squares
 approximately 4 inches by 4 inches (100 by 100 mm) in size. Bait should be placed out of
 reach of children or pets and should be tossed in otherwise inaccessible places. Initial rate
 of application shall be a minimum of 20 baits per residential building and 40 baits per
 commercial building.
 Bait shall be placed near burrows, runways, or other areas showing rodent signs. A
 shallow pan containing water shall be placed in each building.
 At the time the bait is set out, the Contractor shall treat all runways, burrow entrances,
 nests and vertical surfaces against which the rodents may brush with the insecticide dust at
 a rate of 2 pounds (1 kg) per residential building and 4 pounds (2 kg) per commercial
 building.
 Location of all bait, bait containers and water containers shall be noted and bi-weekly
 inspection and replacement of bait and water shall be made. In the event bait is not touched
 for several days, the bait shall be moved to other areas in the building. Moldy, wet, caked
 or insect infested bait shall be replaced. Insecticide dusting shall be repeated once per
 month.
 Baiting and insecticide dusting shall continue until all buildings and rubble are removed
 from the building demolition area.
 
 100
 
 A sign shall be posted at the front and rear of each building treated for rodent control.
 The sign shall be a minimum size of 30 inches by 30 inches (750 by 750 mm) with red
 lettering and poison symbols on a contrasting background.
 Wording of the sign shall be as follows:
 THIS BUILDING
 TREATED
 FOR RODENT CONTROL
 POISON
 NO ADMITTANCE
 Minimum size lettering of the word POISON and symbols thereof shall be 6 inches
 (150 mm). All other lettering shall be a minimum of 4 inches (100 mm). The sign shall be
 made of weather resistant materials such as plastic or exterior plywood and shall be
 securely fastened to the building.
 Where buildings to be demolished have had exterior poison warning signs placed upon
 them during the Division’s phase of the rodent control program, the signs remaining on the
 buildings to be demolished will serve as adequate warning and the signing requirement of
 this Section is waived.
 Exterior poison warning signs previously placed by the Division shall, upon demolition
 of the buildings, remain Division property and shall be stored on the project for removal
 by the Division.
 Dead rodents shall be removed from the building demolition area daily and shall be
 buried at a minimum depth of 2 ft. (600 mm). The disposal area shall be provided by the
 Contractor and shall be subject to approval by the Engineer.
 202.4.2-Insurance Requirements: In addition to the insurance required of the Contractor
 on all Division Contracts, the Contractor is required to maintain Liability Insurance for this
 work in the amounts and form as set forth below for the duration of the work:
 Public Liability
 Products Liability
 Owner Liability
 
 $1,000,000
 $1,000,000
 $1,000,000
 
 The above insurance shall be purchased by the Contractor on behalf of the Division from
 a company authorized to do business in the State of West Virginia.
 202.5-WELLS:
 The Contractor shall plug the well prior to starting any other construction in the vicinity of
 the well.
 202.5.1-Materials: Materials for plugging water wells shall meet the requirements of
 Division 700 as follows:
 MATERIAL
 Bentonite
 ** Concrete
 
 SUBSECTION
 715.45
 601
 
 ** Class D with or without air entrainment at the option of the Contractor.
 
 101
 
 202.5.2-Gas and Oil Wells: The well shall be plugged using bentonite and cement as
 provided for by law, and the work shall be accomplished by a qualified service company
 meeting the approval of the Department of Environmental Protection office of Oil and Gas.
 All work pertaining to plugging the well must be performed under the supervision of the
 representative of the DEP office of Oil and Gas. The Contractor shall notify the Project
 Engineer and the DEP office of Oil and Gas at least 14 days in advance of the date on which
 the Contractor intends to begin work.
 The Division will make available upon request copies of regulation Title 35 Series 4 and
 Article 6, Chapter 22 of the Gas and Oil Laws. The Contractor shall obtain a permit from DEP
 office of Oil and Gas and must follow all procedures prescribed in the permit.
 202.5.3-Water Wells: The Contractor shall plug all drilled water wells within the right-ofway limits prior to starting any other work in the vicinity of the wells. The well casing shall
 be pulled as much as practical and then filled from the bottom to the top with bentonite,
 concrete or a mixture of concrete and 5% bentonite to the ground surface. This operation shall
 be continuous.
 The Contractor shall obtain a permit to abandon a water well from the County Sanitarian
 or State Health Department and must follow all procedures prescribed in the permit.
 202.6-SEPTIC TANKS:
 A septic tank that serves a building that is being demolished shall be abandoned as follows:
 The contents of the septic tank shall be removed by a licensed septic tank cleaner and the tank
 removed and disposed of at an approved landfill. The excavation made to remove the tank shall
 be backfilled with material free of sod, trash, organic substances and muck. The backfill shall be
 compacted as outlined in 202.4.
 202.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The unit of measurement will be lump sum value as determined for each building to be
 demolished and removed, each water well abandonment, each septic tank abandonment, each gas
 well abandonment, or each oil well abandonment.
 202.8 through 202.9-BLANK
 202.10-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The Building Demolition shall constitute full compensation for performing all of the
 requirements of this item, including furnishing all material, labor, tools, equipment, supplies,
 rodent control and incidentals thereto. Salvageable materials shall become the property of the
 Contractor, unless otherwise indicated on the Plans or in the Proposal.
 The water wells, gas wells, oil wells, or septic tanks abandoned as provided above will be
 paid for at the contract price per each and shall be full compensation for performing all of the
 requirements of the item, including furnishing all material, labor, tools, equipment, supplies,
 permits, and incidentals thereto.
 
 102
 
 202.11-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 202001-*
 202002-*
 202003-*
 202004-*
 202005-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Building Demolition Number, “x” / ”y”
 Water Well Abandonment Number, “x” / ”y”
 Septic Tank Abandonment Number, “x” / ”y”
 Gas Well Abandonment Number, “x” / ”y”
 Oil Well Abandonment Number, “x” / ”y”
 
 * Sequence number
 x = parcel number
 y = building, well, or septic tank number
 
 103
 
 UNIT
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 
 SECTION 203
 DISMANTLING STRUCTURES
 203.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of dismantling such structure or structures specifically designated
 on the Plans for removal, match marking, handling and storage if called for, or disposal if required.
 The Contractor is responsible for determining the current condition of the structure (s) and
 shall use methods and procedures for dismantling the structures in a safe and efficient manner.
 Bridge inspection reports are available for informational purposes and may be viewed at
 the following location:
 West Virginia Division of Highways
 1900 Kanawha Boulevard East
 Building 5, Room A-350,
 Maintenance Division
 Charleston, West Virginia 25305
 The work shall also include the preparation of a demolition/dismantling plan by the
 contractor. The plan shall be prepared and sealed by a Professional Engineer registered in the
 State of West Virginia, experienced in structural analysis of bridges.
 The plan shall include a complete structural analysis for all phases of the
 demolition/dismantling with due regard to the existing condition of the structure at the time the
 work is performed. Additionally, the analysis shall show that the structure meets the design criteria
 of the latest edition, including all Interims, of the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway
 Bridges, or the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications during all phases of
 demolition/dismantling. The design loads shall match those applied to the structure by the
 contractor’s “means and methods” of demolition/dismantling.
 The demolition/dismantling plan shall be provided to the Division’s Project Supervisor at
 least seven calendar days prior to the beginning of any demolition/dismantling work. Receipt of
 the demolition/dismantling plan does not constitute review or approval or relieve the Contractor
 of his/her responsibility to satisfactorily demolish/dismantle the structure specified.
 203.2-MATERIALS:
 Not specified.
 203.3-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 The work shall include dismantling and storing, or disposing of designated structures by
 such methods as specified on the Plans. If the old structure is remain the property of the Division,
 it shall be carefully dismantled without unnecessary damage, the parts match marked, and carefully
 stored or erected as required by the Plans or as directed by the Engineer.
 Unless otherwise noted in the plans, all material removed shall become the property of the
 contractor and shall be removed. Disposal, if required, shall be accomplished in accordance with
 the provisions of 201. The final ground around dismantled structures shall conform to the final
 grading plan or shall be graded to drain as directed by the Engineer. The bridge may contain lead
 base paint and the Contractor shall provide protection for their Workers as per the requirements of
 29 CFR 1926.62.
 
 104
 
 203.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 "Dismantling Structures" will be measured as a complete unit and shall include the
 complete execution of the work of dismantling, handling, storing, or removing all of the structures
 so designated.
 203.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract lump sum price
 bid for this item, which price and payment shall be full compensation for completing the item,
 including removal and disposition of all falsework, debris and refuse resulting from the work,
 leaving the premises in good condition.
 The cost of preparation and transmittal of the demolition/dismantling plan shall be included
 in the lump sum bid for Item 203001-*.
 203.6-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 203001-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Dismantling Structure
 
 * Sequence number
 
 105
 
 UNIT
 Lump Sum
 
 SECTION 204
 MOBILIZATION
 204.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the performance of construction preparatory operations,
 including the movement of personnel and equipment to the project site and for the establishment
 of the Contractor's offices, buildings and other facilities necessary to begin work on a substantial
 phase of the contract. The bid for mobilization shall be a lump sum. When Item 204001-*,
 "Mobilization", is not included as a separate bid item it is specifically understood that the cost of
 mobilization will be included in the unit bid price for each individual item.
 204.2-MATERIALS:
 Not specified.
 204.3-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 Not Specified.
 204.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The method of measurement will be a lump sum.
 204.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 Partial payments will be made as the work progresses in accordance with the following
 schedule.
 i. 2.5% of the original contract amount or 50% of the amount bid for mobilization, whichever
 is less, will be released to the Contractor as the first estimate payable, not less than 15 days
 after the start of work at the project site.
 ii. 2.5% of the original contract amount or the remaining 50% of the amount bid for
 mobilization, whichever is less, shall be released with the estimate payable 30 days after
 the first estimate.
 Upon completion of all work on the project, payment of any amount bid for mobilization
 in excess of 5% of the original contract amount will be released.
 Nothing herein shall be construed to limit or preclude partial payments otherwise provided
 for by the contract.
 No deduction will be made, nor will any increase be made, in the lump sum mobilization
 item amount regardless of decreases or increases in the final total contract amount or for any other
 cause.
 204.6-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 204001-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Mobilization
 
 UNIT
 Lump Sum
 
 * Sequence number
 
 SECTION 205-BLANK
 106
 
 SECTION 206
 BASE COURSE REINFORCEMENT GEOGRID
 206.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing, testing and installing base reinforcement geogrid
 elements in accordance with these specifications and in reasonable close conformity with the lines,
 grades and dimensions shown on the plans or established by the Engineer. Design details for base
 reinforcement geogrid such as geogrid type, base aggregate minimum thickness, asphalt thickness
 and associated details shall be shown on the plans.
 206.2-REFERENCE DOCUMENTS:
 ASTM Standards:
 D1388
 Flexural Rigidity
 D4355
 Practice of Sampling of Geosynthetics for Testing
 D4595
 Test Method of Tensile Properties of Geotextiles by the Wide
 Width Strip Method
 Corps of Engineers:
 COE
 CW02215 Percent open area
 Geosynthetic Research Institute:
 GG1
 Standard Test Method for Geogrid Rib Tensile Strength
 GG2
 Standard Test Method for Geogrid Junction Strength
 206.3 - GEOGRID MATERIAL:
 206.3.1-General: The Contractor shall be responsible for obtaining the geogrid
 reinforcement materials and associated components that meet all requirements of the
 Specification.
 Geogrid reinforcement elements shall consist of a regular network of integrally connected
 longitudinal and transverse polymer tensile elements with aperture geometry sufficient to
 permit significant mechanical interlock with the surrounding soil, aggregate or other material.
 206.3.2 - Certification of Materials and Submittals:
 206.3.2.1-Specification Compliance Certification: Prior to construction the
 Contractor shall submit to the Engineer the Manufacturer’s certification that the geogrid
 has been evaluated in full compliance with this Specification. The Contractor’s submittal
 package shall include; but not be limited to; the Manufacturer's written certification that all
 resin used to produce the geogrid is virgin and classified as polypropylene or high
 molecular weight polyester.
 206.3.2.2-Fitness for Use: The Manufacturer of the base reinforcement geogrid
 shall supply written certification that the resin and additives used in manufacture of the
 geogrid (including coating materials, if applicable) and that the Manufactured geogrid
 product has been evaluated in accordance with this specification and is durable in a soil
 environment. Certification shall be notarized and signed by an officer of the manufacturing
 company.
 
 107
 
 206.3.3-Base Course Reinforcement Geogrid: The geogrid shall be a biaxial geogrid
 and shall have aperture geometry and rib and junction cross-sections sufficient to permit
 significant mechanical interlock with the material being reinforced. The geogrid shall have
 high flexural rigidity and high tensile strength at ribs and junctions of the grid structure. The
 geogrid shall maintain its reinforcement and interlock capabilities under repeated dynamic
 loads while in service and shall also be resistant to ultraviolet degradation, to damage under
 normal construction practices, and to all forms of biological or chemical degradation normally
 encountered in the material being reinforced.
 The geogrid shall also conform in all respects to the property requirements outlined below:
 PROPERTY
 
 TEST METHOD
 UNITS
 Interlock
 
 TYPE I
 
 TYPE 2
 
 in
 in
 %
 
 1.0 (nom)
 1.3 (nom)
 70 (min)
 
 1.0 (nom)
 1.3 (nom
 70 (min)
 
 in
 in
 
 0.03 (nom)
 0.11 (nom)
 
 0.05 (nom)
 0.16 (nom)
 
 cm-kg/deg
 
 3.2
 
 6.5
 
 mg-cm
 lb/ft
 
 250,000 (min)
 15,000 (min)
 
 750,000 (min)
 32,000 (min)
 
 1b/ft
 
 280 (min)
 
 410 (min)
 
 ASTM D45957
 
 1b/ft
 
 580 (min)
 
 810 (min)
 
 GRI GG2-878
 
 lb/ft
 
 765 (min)
 
 1080 (min)
 
 Aperture Size1
 MD
 CMD
 Open Area
 Thickness
 Ribs
 Junctions
 Secant Aperture
 Stability Modulus
 @20 cm-kg
 
 I.D. Calipered2
 
 Flexural Rigidity
 True Initial Modulus
 Tensile Strength
 @ 2% strain
 Tensile Strength
 @ 5% strain
 Junction Strength
 
 ASTM D1388-645
 GRI GG1-876
 ASTM D45957
 
 COE Methold3
 ASTM D1777-64
 Grid Aperture Test
 Univ. of Alaska,
 Fairbanks 4
 
 Reinforcement
 
 *All values listed are RV’s (Minimum Average Roll Values.)
 Notes:
 1. MD dimension is along roll length, CMD dimension is across roll width.
 2. Maximum inside dimension is each principal direction measured by calipers.
 3. Percent open area measured without magnification by Corps of Engineers method as specified
 in CW 02215 Civil Works Construction Guide, November 1977.
 4. Grid Aperture Stability Test developed by Dr. T. Kinney at the University of Alaska,
 Fairbanks.
 5. ASTM D1388-64 modified to account for wide specimen testing.
 6. True resistance to elongation when initially subjected to a load measured via GRI-GG1 without
 deforming test materials under load before measuring such resistance or employing “secant” or
 “offset” tangent methods of measurement so as to overstate tensile properties.
 7. True tensile strength at indicated strain levels measured via GRI-GG1 without deforming test
 materials under load before measuring their tensile strength so as to overstate tensile
 properties.
 8. Geogrid junction strength as measured by Geosynthetic Research Institute test method GG2-87
 “Geogrid Junction Strength”.
 
 108
 
 206.3.4-Alternate Material: Alternate geogrid materials will be considered. However,
 the material properties of the geogrid must be evaluated based on testing the total structure and
 not based on simply adding the values of the individual components/layers together. Also, no
 preloading or strain “offset” is permitted when reporting True Initial Modulus values as
 outlined in the table found in section 3.3 Base Course Reinforcement Geogrid. Such materials
 must be pre-approved in writing by the Engineer prior to bid date. Alternate material packages
 must be submitted to the Engineer a minimum of 15 days prior to bid date. Submittal packages
 must include the following as a minimum:
 1. Full–scale laboratory testing and in-ground testing of pavement structures reinforced
 with the specific geogrid which quantifies the structural contribution of the geogrid to
 the pavement structure. The increase in the structural layer coefficient of the base
 course must meet or exceed that of the design geogrid.
 2. Independent certified test results stating that the alternate geogrid has a secant aperture
 stability modulus at 20 cm-kg, when tested in accordance with the “Grid Aperture
 Stability by In-Plane Rotation” test of 3.2 or greater for Type 1 and 6.5 or greater for
 Type 2.
 3. A list of 5 comparable projects, in terms of size and applications, in the United States,
 where the results of the specific alternate geogrid’s use can be verified after a minimum
 of one year of service life.
 4. A sample of the geogrid and certified specification sheets.
 5. Recommended installation instructions.
 The burden of proof that the alternate material is equal to the specified material is the
 responsibility of the alternate geogrid material supplier. The Engineer will be the sole judge
 of the adequacy of the proposed alternate geogrid.
 206.4-MANUFACTURING QUALITY CONTROL:
 Conformance testing shall be performed as part of the manufacturing process. If the
 Manufacturer has an established quality control program, then documentation describing the
 program shall be submitted to the Engineer for review. As a minimum, the Manufacturer shall
 conduct quality control testing as outlined below:
 Test
 Flexural Rigidity
 Tensile Modulus
 Junction Strength
 
 Test Procedure
 ASTM D1388
 GRI GG1
 GRI GG2
 
 Testing Frequency (SF)
 100,000 (9 290 m²)
 100,000 (9 290 m²)
 100,000 (9 290 m²)
 
 The Manufacturer shall perform these tests. Samples not satisfying the specifications shall
 result in the rejection of the applicable rolls at no cost to the owner. At the Manufacturer’s
 discretion and expense, additional testing of individual rolls may be performed to more closely
 identify the noncomplying rolls and/or to qualify individual rolls.
 The Manufacturer shall certify the quality of the rolls of geosynthetic reinforcement. As a
 minimum, the Manufacturer shall provide quality control certificates for each batch of resin and
 each shift’s production. These quality control certificates shall be signed by an office of the
 Manufacturer and supplied to the Engineer at least fourteen (14) days prior to installation of the
 base reinforcement geogrid.
 109
 
 The quality control certificate shall include:
 1. Roll numbers and identification.
 2. Sampling procedures.
 3. Result of quality control tests, including a description of test methods used.
 206.5-TRANSPORTATION, HANDLING AND STORAGE:
 The Contractor shall check the geogrid upon delivery to ensure that the proper material has
 been received. During all periods of shipment and storage, the geogrid shall be protected from
 temperatures greater than 140º F (60° C) and all deleterious materials that might otherwise become
 affixed to the geogrid and adversely affect its performance.
 Follow Manufacturer’s
 recommendations in regards to protection from direct sunlight.
 All tears, cracks, punctures or flaws to the base reinforcement geogrid coating, if
 applicable, shall be repaired by placing a suitable patch over the defective area as approved by the
 Engineer. If the substrate of a coated geogrid is exposed at roll ends or as a result of cuts, cracks,
 punctures or flaws, the exposed area shall be sealed with a coating solution identical to the original
 coating. The coating solution shall be applied by dip coating or spread coating with an applicator.
 The area shall be thoroughly clean and dry, and working temperatures shall not be below 32° F (0°
 C). All exposed substrate or repair patches shall be treated in the same manner.
 206.6-CONSTRUCTION:
 A qualified and experienced representative of the geogrid manufacturer or its supplier shall
 be on site, for a minimum of one day at the start of installation, to assist the Contractor and the
 Engineer in the proper construction/installation techniques. Thereafter, the representative shall be
 available on an as needed basis, as requested by the Engineer, during the construction of the
 remainder of the project.
 A quality assurance program shall be conducted by the owner’s representative verifying
 that the product supplied to the jobsite meets the design requirements. Independent testing of field
 samples shall be conducted at the frequencies outlined below.
 Property
 Flexural Rigidity
 Tensile
 Junction Strength
 
 Method
 ASTM D1388
 GR1 GG1
 GR1 GG2
 
 Frequency (Sy)
 150,000 (13 935 m²)
 150,000 (13,935 m²)
 150,000 (13,935 m²)
 
 Foundation soil shall be excavated to the lines and grades as shown on the drawings or as
 directed by the Engineer.
 Geogrid shall be laid at the proper elevation and orientation as shown on the construction
 drawing or as directed by the Engineer. Correct orientation (roll direction) of the geogrid shall be
 verified by the Contractor. Geogrid may be temporarily secured in-place with staples, pins, sand
 bags or backfill as required by fill properties, fill placement procedures, or weather conditions, or
 as directed by the Engineer.
 Base course aggregate material shall be placed in lifts and compacted as directed under
 Section 307. Base course aggregate shall be placed, spread and compacted in such a manner that
 minimizes the development of wrinkles in and/or movement of the geogrid. Tracked construction
 equipment shall not be operated directly upon the geogrid. A minimum fill thickness of 4 inches
 (100 mm) is required prior to operation of tracked vehicles over the geogrid. Turning of tracked
 vehicles should be kept to a minimum to prevent tracks from displacing the fill and damaging the
 110
 
 geogrid. Rubber tired equipment may pass over the geogrid reinforcement at slow speeds, less
 than 10 mph (16 km/h). Sudden braking and sharp turning shall be avoided.
 Any geogrid damaged during installation shall be replaced by the Contractor at no
 additional cost to the Division.
 206.7-MEASUREMENT/PAYMENT:
 Measurement of geogrid reinforcement is on a square yard (meter) basis and will be
 computed on the total area of geogrid shown on the construction drawings.
 The quantity of geogrid, acceptably placed, measured as noted above, will be paid for at
 the contract unit price per square yard which shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials,
 labor, equipment, tools, and incidentals necessary to complete these items of work.
 206.8-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 206002-* Base Reinforcement Geogrid, Type “type”
 * Sequence number
 
 111
 
 UNIT
 Square Yard (Meter)
 
 SECTION 207
 EXCAVATION AND EMBANKMENT
 207.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of excavation for the roadway and channel changes including the
 removal and hauling of all material, of whatever character encountered, not being removed under
 some other item; preparing areas upon which embankments are to be placed, and constructing
 embankments with excavated material; disposing of unsuitable and surplus material; preparing the
 subgrade; finishing shoulders, slopes, ditches and drains; constructing benches and removing
 slides as may be required by the Plans or as directed by the Engineer; all in accordance with these
 Specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines, grades, thicknesses and cross
 sections shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 The compaction of embankments and subgrades will be accepted in accordance with these
 Specifications and the applicable requirements of 105, 106, and 109.
 207.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall meet the requirements specified in 715.11 and 716.
 207.2.1-Quality Control Testing: Quality control of the embankment and subgrade
 material is the responsibility of the Contractor as specified in 106.1.
 The Contractor shall maintain necessary equipment and qualified personnel to perform all
 sampling and testing necessary to determine the magnitude of the various properties of the
 material governed by the Specifications and shall maintain these properties within the limits
 of the Specifications.
 The Contractor shall notify the Engineer prior to construction of the test strip data for all
 compaction testing on the forms as set forth in MP 700.00.24 and maintain records of the
 necessary equipment used to compact the material in accordance with 716.3.2.3. Completed
 test data forms shall be provided to the Engineer at or immediately after the time of testing.
 The Contractor shall submit a quality control plan detailing the methods by which the
 quality control program will be conducted. This plan, prepared in accordance with the
 guidelines set forth in the appropriate portions of MP 307.00.50 and MP 717.04.21, shall be
 submitted to the Engineer at the preconstruction conference. The work shall not begin until
 the plan is reviewed for conformance with the contract documents.
 207.2.2-Sampling and Testing: Frequency of sampling and testing shall be in accordance
 with the contractor’s quality control plan. The minimum sampling and testing frequencies for
 gradation shall be as indicated in Attachment 1 of MP 307.00.50. The material shall be
 sampled in accordance with MP 700.00.06. The minimum sampling and testing frequency for
 compaction will be in accordance with MP 717.04.21.
 207.2.2.1-Compaction: Compaction of embankment and subgrade shall meet the
 requirements set forth in 207 and 716.
 207.2.2.2-Gradation: Acceptance for gradation shall be on the basis of test results on
 consecutive random samples from a lot. A lot shall be considered the quantity of material
 represented by an average test value, not to exceed five sublots. Generally at the beginning
 112
 
 of the project, the average shall be started on the second sample in accordance with
 MP 300.00.51. A sublot is the quantity of material represented by a single gradation test.
 In the case where only one sample is taken, this sublot shall be considered the lot. When
 the average, or when the most recent three consecutive individual test values fall outside
 the limits specified in 716.1 and 716.1.1.2, the lot of material represented will be
 considered nonconforming to the extent that the last of its sublots is nonconforming. When
 this occurs, the last sublot shall have its price adjusted in accordance with Table 207.16.1.
 In the case where the average is nonconforming and the last sublot contained is conforming,
 then there would be no price adjustment. In no event, however, shall a sublot of material
 have its price adjusted more than once, and the first adjustment, which is determined, shall
 apply.
 207.2.2.3-Degree of Nonconformance: When a sublot of material is to have its price
 adjusted, the percentage point difference between the nonconforming test value and the
 specification limit shall be determined for each sieve size determined to be nonconforming,
 and this value shall be multiplied by its appropriate multiplication factor as set forth in
 Table 207.2.2.3 to determine the degree of nonconformance of that sieve.
 TABLE 207.2.2.3
 Nonconforming Sieve Size
 Multiplication Factor
 3 in. (75 mm)
 1.0
 No. 200 (75 µm)
 1.0
 The total measure of nonconformance of an individual sublot is the sum of all
 nonconformance of an individual sieve sizes of that sublot.
 When the total degree of nonconformance has been established and it is 12.0 or less,
 the material will be paid for at an adjusted contract price as specified in Table 207.16.1.
 When the degree of nonconformance is greater than 12.0, the nonconforming sublot
 shall be resolved on an individual basis, requiring a special investigation by the Engineer
 to determine the appropriate course of action to be followed. Pending resolution of the
 matter, additional lifts of select material for backfill shall not be placed over the
 nonconforming material
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 207.3-ROADWAY EXCAVATION:
 207.3.1-Slopes: Slope lines shall conform to the lines and grades shown on the Plans or
 established by the Engineer within the following tolerances: For all slopes back of the ditch
 line a construction tolerance of plus or minus 1 ft. (300 mm), measured in a horizontal plane,
 will be permitted. No change will be permitted in the width, grade or dimensions of the
 roadway ditch due to the tolerance. The slope may be varied only by permission of the
 Engineer. Slopes shall be trimmed neatly to present a uniform surface, free from hollows or
 protrusions and loose or overhanging rocks. Slopes shall not be undercut. The tops of all
 slopes, except where the material is of solid rock, shall be rounded as shown on the Plans.
 The Contractor shall take precautions by benching or other methods, as directed by the
 Engineer, to prevent slides and slipouts.
 113
 
 In all roadway cuts, including areas where ledges of rock or hard shale, boulders, coal or
 other solid formations are encountered at or near subgrade elevation, the excavation shall be
 carried to a minimum depth of 6 inches (150 mm) below the surface of the subgrade for the
 full cross section width of the roadway between the ditches. The surface of all areas excavated
 below subgrade elevation shall be graded in such a manner that undrained pockets are
 eliminated before placing subgrade material. Excavation to the 6 inches (150 mm) limit will
 be paid for at the contract unit price bid for "Unclassified Excavation". Excavation made below
 this 6 inches (150 mm) limit will not be paid for.
 207.3.2-Use of Explosives: The provisions of 107.11 will be enforced. The Contractor
 shall not employ any method of blasting which will result in breakage beyond the slope line,
 or which is dangerous to the public or destructive to property. Excessive blasting or "overshooting" will not be tolerated. Any material outside the authorized cross section which
 becomes shattered or loosened by blasting shall be removed without compensation if so
 ordered by the Engineer.
 207.3.3-Rock Excavation:
 207.3.3.1-Presplitting Technique: When explosives are used in excavation, he
 presplit technique shall be used except for fill bench construction and where slopes flatter
 than 1 to 1 are designed. This involves a single row of holes drilled along the neat
 excavation line and the blasting charge fired before any adjoining main excavation area is
 blasted. Depending on the type of rock, the drill holes for the presplitting shall be on
 centers from 2 ft. to 5 ft. (0.6 to 1.5 meters) as determined by field demonstration.
 The holes to be loaded for presplitting shall be string loaded as recommended by the
 manufacturer of the explosives. The presplitting may be accomplished during the primary
 blast by delaying the primary holes so the presplitting holes will fire ahead of them. The
 end result is intended to yield a minimum of breakage outside the neat line of the plan cross
 sections. The Contractor shall make available upon request a record of the spacing and the
 amount and type of explosives used in the presplit operation.
 207.3.4-Archeological and Historical Findings: Should the Contractor's excavation
 operations encounter remains of prehistoric people's dwelling sites or artifacts of historical or
 archeological significance, the operation in that locality shall be temporarily discontinued. The
 Engineer will contact appropriate authorities to determine the disposition thereof. When
 directed by the Engineer, the Contractor shall excavate the site in such manner as to preserve
 the artifacts encountered and shall remove them for delivery to the custody of the proper State
 authorities. Such excavation will be considered and paid for as defined by 104.3.
 207.4-BENCHES:
 Benches to be constructed either above or below the profile grade shall conform to the
 dimensions shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer. Necessary drainage shall be placed
 as directed before backfilling. The Contractor shall arrange benching operations to allow sufficient
 time for the Engineer to complete all cross sections before placing embankment material.
 
 114
 
 207.5-DITCHES:
 Ditches, drains, channels, and stream changes, including inlet and outlet ditches for
 culverts, shall be constructed where shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer. Diversion
 ditches, where specified, shall be cut beyond the rounded edges of slopes. Ditch slopes shall be
 rounded and trimmed neatly to line, and flow lines shall be trimmed of irregularities in the grade
 which might cause surface water pockets.
 207.6-DISPOSAL OF MATERIAL:
 207.6.1-Suitable Material: All suitable material excavated as above provided shall be
 used for forming embankments for the roadways, connecting roads, ramps and approaches; for
 constructing subgrade and shoulders; around structures and buildings; or for any other purpose
 necessary for the completion of the project as shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer.
 Random material, hard shale and rock, as defined in 716, are suitable for use in
 embankments Within soil groups, preference shall be given to the more granular soils which
 have greater dry weights, greater percentages of coarse and fine aggregate, and lower liquid
 limits.
 Where the quantity of suitable material for certain work is limited, such material shall be
 reserved for the purpose as directed by the Engineer. Should the Contractor fail to reserve
 such available material when so directed, replacement shall be made by the Contractor at no
 additional cost to the Division.
 207.6.2-Unsuitable Material: Materials which cannot be satisfactorily placed and
 compacted to a stable and durable condition may be designated as unsuitable by the Engineer.
 Sod, trash, organic substances, and muck are considered unfit for use in embankments.
 Soil to be excavated, or being excavated, that contains excessive moisture shall also be
 considered unsuitable for use in embankments. However, the Contractor may at their option
 dry the material and use it in the construction of embankments. Aeration, or other drying
 method, shall be at the expense of the Contractor. If the Contractor elects to waste rather than
 dry, suitable replacement material, if needed to complete embankments or otherwise fulfill the
 intent of the Plans, shall be furnished and placed by the Contractor at their expense. Any
 material borrowed to obtain necessary replacement material shall be accomplished in
 accordance with the provisions of 211.
 207.6.3-Waste: The Contractor shall locate and furnish all sites for disposal of any waste
 and surplus material. The Contractor will have the option to waste within the WVDOH rightof-way limits (R/W) or on private property located outside the right-of-way limits. If the
 Contractor chooses to waste within the R/W, and the proposed waste site becomes a structural
 component of the roadway template, it shall be treated as a roadway embankment in
 accordance with Section 207.7. The following procedure is to be followed before any waste
 will be allowed:
 207.6.3.1-Waste within WVDOH Right-Of-Way Limits: The Contractor shall
 submit copies of a site plan for any waste to be placed within the R/W as per Section
 105.2.1.2 and each page/sheet of all submittals shall be signed by a professional Engineer
 Registered in the State of West Virginia. The approving Engineer’s signature block shall
 be as per section 105.2.1.2 for shop drawing submittals.
 115
 
 The plan for the site shall include, but not be limited to:
 1. The location and approximate boundaries of the waste site;
 2. Topographical features including existing and final ground slopes, drainage
 structures, etc;
 3. Streams, storm water features, roads, access to properties, utilities, etc;
 4. An erosion and sediment control plan utilizing the best management practices
 consistent with all phases of operation of the waste site;
 5. Restoration or cover vegetation plan of the site;
 6. If the waste site requires the modification of an existing US Army Corps of
 Engineers permit, the Contractor shall provide the necessary revised permit
 drawings to show the proposed changes to the DOH in order to modify the
 existing 404 permit and to obtain a 401 Water Quality Certification if
 necessary. A minimum of 2 months may be required to get approval.
 7. If the Contractor proposes to dispose of any Construction/Demolition Waste
 Material within the waste site, the criteria as set forth in subsection 207.6.5Construction/Demolition Waste Material must be followed and a copy of the
 notification sent to the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection.
 If the Contractor has unsuitable waste material and they choose to waste within the
 R/W, the waste site shall not be a structural component of the roadway and must follow
 the guidelines as outlined above. The waste site shall have equipment compaction.
 The following will not be allowed for waste sites within the R/W:
 1. Steepening of slopes (without a geotechnical analysis);
 2. Placement above roadway grade (without a geotechnical analysis);
 3. Fill within the 100 year floodplain.
 Upon receipt of the Contractor’s complete waste site submission, the Engineer shall
 follow the guidelines as set forth in the latest edition of the Erosion and Sediment Control
 Manual for review and acceptance by the Division. The Contractor may be required to
 revise the site plan prior to acceptance by the Division. The Contractor’s waste site plan
 must be approved as per section 105.2.1.2 and the West Virginia Department of
 Environmental Protection before any waste material can be placed in the site.
 The DOH will bear the cost of all features associated with the waste site except for
 necessary revisions to drainage structures (ie. lengthening of culverts, etc.).
 Upon completion of work, all waste sites shall be neatly trimmed and drained and all
 debris and spoil disposed of in accordance with the approved plan. No material shall be
 wasted at places other than those approved, except as provided, nor shall any material be
 wasted above established grades of any road unless authorized by the Engineer in writing.
 Slopes shall be trimmed neatly to present a uniform surface, free from hollows or
 protrusions and loose or overhanging rocks. The Contractor shall take precautions by
 benching or other methods to prevent slides and slip outs. Waste areas shall be graded by
 the Contractor then fertilized, seeded and mulched in accordance with the applicable
 Specifications and will be paid for in accordance with the pay items within the contract.
 For waste sites not to exceed 300 cy (230 m3) and within the R/W, the Contractor shall
 prepare a plan to include erosion and sedimentation control features to be approved by the
 District Environmental Coordinator. No plan will be approved if it is within a floodplain.
 116
 
 For these waste sites, the Contractor shall comply with existing laws and/or regulations
 and save the State harmless from any claims for damages which may result from the waste.
 The Contractor shall minimize pollution or sedimentation of rivers, streams, lakes,
 ponds, and other bodies of water while conducting all wasting operations.
 207.6.3.2-Waste outside of WVDOH Right-Of-Way Limits: For waste sites outside
 the R/W, the Contractor and/or property owner shall bear all costs and responsibilities
 associated with erosion and sediment control, stability, permitting, mitigation, etc.
 Appropriate Traffic Control items within the Project Limits will be paid accordingly. The
 Contractor and/or property owner shall comply with existing laws and/or regulations and
 save the State harmless from any claims for damages which may result from the waste.
 The Contractor shall minimize pollution or sedimentation of rivers, streams, lakes,
 ponds, and other bodies of water while conducting all wasting operations.
 207.6.4-Conduit: Conduit designated to be re-laid shall be removed with care and stored
 where it can be protected from damage until reused. The Contractor shall replace sections lost
 from storage, damaged by negligence, or used in an improper manner.
 207.6.5-Construction/Demolition Waste Material: The Code of State Rules for the West
 Virginia Department of Environmental Protection Title 33 Series 1 Section 2.38 defines
 "Construction/Demolition Waste" as waste building materials, packaging, and grubbing waste,
 resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on houses,
 commercial and industrial buildings, including, but not limited to, wood, plaster, bricks, blocks
 and concrete, and other masonry materials, but does not include asbestos-containing materials,
 household furnishings, burnt debris, material containing lead-based paint, pressure-treated
 wood, contaminated solid waste, yard waste or waste tires, and other items listed in subdivision
 5.4.a of the Title 33, Series 1, in the Code of State Rules.
 The Code of State Rules for the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection
 Title 33 Series 1 Section 3.16.e.2.C. provides a One-Half Acre Exemption for Division of
 Highways Projects. The Division of Highways or its contractors working on highway
 construction that dispose of construction/demolition waste material, which, for the purpose of
 this paragraph, includes Category I Nonfriable Roofing, are exempt from the permitting
 requirements of the rule, provided that the disposal area does not exceed one-half acre, does
 not fill natural wetlands, adheres to best management practices for construction, maintains
 cover over the material, and the parties are obligated by contract to comply with all disposal
 provisions specified by the West Virginia Division of Highways Standard Specifications,
 Roads and Bridges, including Supplemental Specifications published by the Division of
 Highways (Standard Specifications). This exemption does not apply to multiple one-half acre
 sites on the same parcel of land, or to disposal of material not generated by the highway project.
 Eligibility for this exemption requires the Division of Highways or its contractors provide the
 Secretary for the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection with seven (7) days’
 notice prior to disposal and a copy of the landowner agreement. Eligibility also requires proper
 management of the site by the Division of Highways.
 Hazardous Waste disposal shall be conducted in accordance with State and Federal Laws
 and Regulations. Hazardous Waste shall be taken to an EPA approved Hazardous Waste
 Disposal facility.
 117
 
 The legitimate beneficial reuse of clean bituminous (asphaltic) concrete, Portland cement
 concrete and other clean masonry substances for the purpose of fill, riprap, road surfacing or
 road base material is exempt from the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection
 permitting requirements of the rule, provided that any such fill will not be placed in natural
 wetlands, adheres to the best management practices for construction and maintains cover over
 the material when used as a structural component of a fill, and provided further that bituminous
 (asphaltic) concrete may not be used for riprap material.
 For the purpose of the above paragraph, “clean” will be defined as uncontaminated
 bituminous (asphaltic) concrete, Portland cement concrete, or masonry material that does not
 have protruding metal prior to its reuse. In cases where Portland cement concrete is used as
 riprap and that concrete contains metal, the Secretary of the West Virginia Department of
 Environmental Protection will decide on a case-by-case basis whether this reuse is eligible for
 an exemption under this rule.
 Concrete, stone, brick, and other masonry materials which have been broken into pieces
 not exceeding 2 ft. (600 mm) in any dimension may be permitted in embankments but not
 within 2 ft. (600 mm) of the subgrade 1 ½ ft. (450 mm) of the top of the side slopes. Material
 such as wood, steel, and broken concrete matted together by steel reinforcement will not be
 permitted in any portion of the embankment. All voids shall be completely filled with suitable
 material and compacted to the density specified in 207.
 Portland cement concrete and bituminous (asphaltic) concrete removed from a project may
 be used as fill in a waste site provided the placement is in accordance with Section 207.7.3.2.3Rock. All Portland cement concrete and bituminous (asphaltic) concrete in the waste site shall
 be covered with a minimum of 2 ft. (600 mm) of soil. The fill area of Portland cement concrete
 and bituminous (asphaltic) concrete shall not be within 300 feet (91m) of a wetland, a perennial
 stream, or within the 100-year floodplain.
 The Contractor shall take all precautions for the stability of slopes in any waste site
 containing Construction/Demolition waste by benching or other methods to prevent slides and
 slip outs. It may be necessary to compact the Construction/Demolition waste to ensure
 stability.
 Construction/Demolition
 waste
 materials
 shall
 not
 be
 burned.
 Construction/Demolition waste materials which do not qualify for the Exemptions in the Code
 of State Rules for the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection Title 33 Series
 1 must be recycled or disposed of in a DEP approved landfill.
 The Contractor shall not allow any temporary disposal sites on the right-of-way to remain
 after construction is completed and must dispose of all Construction/Demolition waste in
 accordance with this section.
 207.7-FORMING AND COMPACTING EMBANKMENT:
 Slope lines for all embankments shall conform to the lines shown on the Plans or
 established by the Engineer, except that a construction tolerance of plus or minus 1 ft. (300 mm),
 measured in a horizontal plane, will be permitted, except further that the roadbed width due to the
 tolerance shall not be less than plan width. The slopes may be varied only by permission of the
 Engineer. Slopes shall be trimmed to present a neat and uniform surface, free from hollows or
 protrusions. The tops of all slopes shall be rounded as shown on the Plans.
 207.7.1-Preparation: When fills are 5 ft. (1.5 meters) or less in depth, the top soil and sod
 shall be stripped to the depth specified by the Engineer, and the top 8 inches (200 mm) of the
 118
 
 embankment foundation shall be scarified and compacted to the density requirements
 specified.
 If the required density is unobtainable due to excessive moisture, organic substances, or
 other causes, the Contractor may be required, as directed by the Engineer, to remove and waste
 the in-place material to a depth prescribed by the Engineer before starting embankment; or to
 place an initial layer of rock, hard shale, or granular material, thickness to be prescribed by the
 Engineer; or both.
 When embankments of less than 3 ft. (1 meter) in depth are to be placed upon old concrete
 pavements or pavements with concrete base, the pavements or base shall be removed and
 disposed of unless otherwise directed by the Engineer. When embankments of 3 ft. (1 meter)
 or more in depth are to be placed on old concrete pavements, the pavements shall be broken
 up in pieces not to exceed one square foot (90000 square mm) and may be left under the new
 embankments, unless otherwise directed by the Engineer. When embankments are to be placed
 upon other than rigid types of pavement, the pavements, shall first be scarified to their full
 depth and recompacted.
 All existing slopes, other than rock, against which embankments are to be placed shall be
 plowed or deeply scarified so as to allow blending of the in-place material with the
 embankment material. When specified in the Contract or directed by the Engineer, the slopes
 shall be benches before the embankment is placed.
 Prior to the commencement of excavation and embankment, when called for in the
 Contract, top soil shall be salvaged and stockpiled at the locations designated by the Engineer.
 Construction and payment procedures shall be in accordance with 651.
 207.7.2-Materials for Formation and Compaction of Embankments: Embankment
 materials, test methods and the Contractor's quality control requirements shall conform to be
 applicable provisions of 716.
 207.7.3-Placing Embankment:
 207.7.3.1-General: No embankment shall by placed on frozen material. During the
 process of excavation and embankment construction, the roadway shall be maintained in
 such a condition that it will be well drained at all times. Depositing and compacting
 embankment in layers shall be started at the lowest point of the fill below grade, at the
 bottom of ravines, and at the foot of slopes on side hills. Unconsolidated soil or random
 material, unless removed under other provisions of the Specifications, shall be removed as
 directed by the Engineer, replaced and compacted as specified before placing embankment
 thereon. The layers shall be constructed approximately parallel with finished grade. Each
 layer, before starting the next, shall be leveled and smoothed by means of power driven
 graders, dozers or other suitable equipment with adequate weight, capacity and power to
 do the work. Layers shall be extended across the entire fill at the level of deposition unless
 otherwise authorized by the Engineer. Each layer, before starting the next, shall be
 compacted.
 Materials to be used in any area of an embankment shall be free from stumps and
 spongy or frozen soil. The amount of organic material shall be no greater than that
 specified in the applicable provisions of 716.
 Soil having organic material greater than that specified in 716 shall be disposed of as
 directed in 207.6.3. Embankments at bridge abutments shall be free of rock in the area
 119
 
 where piles are to be driven, unless otherwise specified. Where rock is required for the
 entire embankment at bridge abutments, the piles will require predrilling. Predrilling may
 be required for other embankments where the depth, density of material, or negative skin
 friction require it. When embankment is being formed around structures, the material shall
 be deposited on both sides of the structure in approximately level layers and in accordance
 with 212.10.
 The plan and sequence of operations shall make use of all the rock obtained from the
 excavation or borrow in accordance with the following provisions.
 Rock occurring in the excavation shall be placed to form the base for embankments, to
 form select embankment layers, to form drainage systems, to form the outer edges of
 embankments under construction or to widen previously constructed embankments. In all
 rock slopes, the large rocks shall be placed at the outer face and the smaller rocks and spalls
 near the center. The rock shall not be dumped in place but shall be distributed and placed
 the full width of the lift being formed by blading or dozing in a manner to assure proper
 placement in the final position in the embankment. The larger rock shall be well distributed
 and the voids, pockets, and bridging reduced to insure minimum deformation and still
 permit drainage where required. When there is insufficient material, other than rock,
 encountered in the excavation to permit the other material being properly compacted in
 layers, the other material will be reserved to be placed as directed by the Engineer. Material
 that is too wet to be properly compacted shall not be used to fill the voids of previously
 placed rock. Random material that meets moisture requirements may be blended with rock
 and shall be placed in the embankment in lift thickness as prescribed.
 To the extent that it is available and needed, sufficient suitable material shall be
 reserved from the unclassified excavation for use in filling voids in the top of the rock fill.
 Where rock is placed on an embankment of other material, the top of the other material
 shall be sloped from the center to the sides at a rate of approximately four percent.
 207.7.3.2-Lift Thickness: The Contractor shall record material type and the lift
 thickness for all types of embankment.
 When embankments are to be constructed across low swampy grounds which will not
 support the weight of trucks or hauling equipment, the lower part of the fill may be
 constructed by dumping successive vehicle loads of rock, hard shale or granular material
 in a uniformly distributed layer. The thickness of a layer shall not be greater than that
 necessary to support the vehicle placing subsequent layers, after which the remainder of
 the embankment shall be constructed in layers and compacted as specified.
 In places inaccessible to a roller, such as adjacent to culverts, retaining walls and other
 structures, the fill material shall be placed in 4 inches (150 mm) compacted layers,
 uniformly compacted with approved tampers.
 207.7.3.2.1-Random Material (Soil, Granular Material and Soft Shale): Random
 material as defined in 716 shall be placed in embankments in successive layers not to
 exceed 6 inches (150 mm) in thickness after compaction.
 207.7.3.2.2-Hard Shale: This material is defined in the applicable provisions of 716.
 When suitable random material is to be mixed with hard shale, this mixture shall be placed
 in the embankment in lift thicknesses prescribed. Mixtures which contain 66 percent or
 120
 
 more of suitable random material shall be placed in lifts not to exceed 6 inches (150 mm)
 in thickness after compaction. Mixtures which contain 35 to 65 percent (by visual
 inspection) of suitable random material shall be placed in lifts not to exceed 12 inches (300
 mm) before compaction. Mixtures which contain from zero to 35 percent (by visual
 inspection of suitable random material shall be placed in lifts not to exceed 24 inches (600
 mm). The lift thickness shall be as thin as the excavated material will permit.
 207.7.3.2.3-Rock: This material, as defined in 716, shall be placed in the embankment
 in layers of thickness as prescribed.
 Mixtures which contain 66 percent or more (by visual inspection) of suitable random
 material shall be placed in lifts not to exceed 6 inches (150 mm) after compaction.
 Mixtures which contain 35 to 65 percent (by visual inspection) of suitable random material
 shall be placed in lifts not to exceed 12 in (300 mm) before compaction. Mixtures which
 contain zero to 35 percent (by visual inspection) of suitable random material shall be placed
 in lifts not to exceed 36 in (900 mm). The lift thickness shall be as thin as the excavated
 material will permit.
 Rock lifts that are designated as Select Embankment shall contain no more than 15
 percent of other suitable embankment material (by visual inspection). The dominant rock
 size shall be 6 inches, (150 mm) and greater. During excavation and handling, the
 Contractor shall avoid contaminating the Select Embankment with other embankment
 materials. Rock for Select Embankment shall be reserved from the excavation up to the
 plan quantity required. If Select Embankment from the excavation is wasted prior to
 meeting the plan quantities, the Contractor shall be responsible, and bear the expense, for
 replacing the material wasted up to the plan quantity. Rock lifts in embankment shall be
 placed in approximately level layers of uniform thickness. The size of the rock lifts shall
 not exceed 36 inches (900 mm). The rock shall not be greater in any dimension than 36
 inches (900 mm).
 When rock is used as a lining for drainage channels, it shall be placed to the thickness
 called for on the plans or cross sections. The dimensions of the rock may be as large as the
 thickness of the blanket will permit.
 207.7.4-Compaction of Embankments: Embankment material consisting of random
 material and hard shale as described in 716, which does not contain sufficient moisture to be
 compacted to the requirements specified, shall receive applications of water necessary for
 compaction. Water shall be applied with suitable sprinkling devices and shall be thoroughly
 incorporated into the material which is to be compacted. Embankment and subgrade materials
 which contain excess moisture shall be dried, prior to or during compaction, as necessary to
 obtain satisfactory compaction.
 Layers of soil shall be moistened or dried to the tolerance specified in 716.3.1 at the time
 compactive effort is applied. Water shall be added to or excess moisture removed from soils
 by the use of plows, discs, or other methods.
 Each layer of embankment shall be uniformly compacted to the applicable requirements
 specified in 716.
 Hard shale shall be broken down in placing by manipulating with tractors, bulldozers,
 power graders, rollers, or other approved devices until voids between particles are substantially
 
 121
 
 filled. This material shall be compacted and shall be at a moisture content that will provide
 proper compaction.
 Rock shall be placed as required under 207.7.3 and compacted, using the equipment
 specified in 207.7.5, to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
 207.7.5-Compaction Equipment: Sufficient leveling and compacting equipment shall be
 provided to do the work of leveling and compacting without delay after the material has been
 deposited. When the equipment is inadequate for the rate of depositing, the rate of excavation
 and placement of fill shall be reduced to a rate not to exceed the capacity of the leveling and
 compacting equipment, with particular attention to the loss of moisture during the delay. When
 two or more fills are being constructed and are so isolated from one another that one roller
 cannot compact the fills satisfactorily, additional rollers shall be provided as ordered by the
 Engineer.
 Vibratory compactors, grid, paddle-foot, or vibratory rollers, or other compacting
 equipment approved by the Engineer, shall be used for fills constructed of materials which are
 predominately rock or hard shale.
 Approved pneumatic or power driven backfill tampers shall be used in areas inaccessible
 to rollers.
 Three-wheel rollers shall weigh not less than 10 tons (9 Mg). They shall be of sturdy
 construction and especially designed for heavy work. They shall be in good mechanical
 condition and have sufficient power to travel over rough surfaces and steep grades.
 Pneumatic tired rollers shall operate on two axles in such manner that the rear group of
 tires will not follow in the tracks of the forward group. They shall be mounted on a rigid frame
 and have a loading platform or body suitable for ballast loading. The pneumatic tired rollers,
 under working conditions, shall have a minimum rolling width of 60 inches (1.5 meters) and
 shall give a minimum compression of 325 lb. per inch (2.24 KN/mm) of width of tire tread.
 Single axle pneumatic rollers of an approved type may be used, providing the requirements
 as to width and compression per inch (mm) of width of tire tread are met.
 Tamping rollers shall consist of metal rollers, drums, or shells surmounted by metal studs
 with self-cleaning tamping feet. The cross sectional area and spacing of tamping feet and the
 weight of the roller shall be such that the compaction or density for the particular material shall
 be obtained as specified. Each tamping roller shall consist of at least two sections not rigidly
 joined.
 Grid rollers shall consist of drums at least 5 ft. (1.5 meters) in diameter whose cylindrical
 faces present the appearance of an open woven bar mesh. Each drum shall be at least 2-1/2 ft.
 (750 mm) long and they shall be independently mounted close together on the same axle. The
 complete roller, when operating without ballast, shall weigh not less than six tons or 200 lb.
 per in (5.4 Mg or 1.38 KN/mm) of length of roller drum.
 Arrangements shall be provided for adding ballast, as directed by the Engineer, to such an
 extent that the total weight of the unit can be increased to at least 15 tons and 500 lb. per inch
 (13.5 Mg and 3.45 KN/mm) of length of roller drum. Grid rollers shall make at least three
 complete coverages of each layer or until the required density is obtained.
 The use of trucks, carryalls, scrapers, tractors, tractor wagons, or other haulage equipment
 shall not be considered in lieu of compacting equipment prescribed, but the traffic of such
 hauling equipment shall be distributed over the fill in such a manner as to make use of the
 compaction afforded as an addition to compaction by rolling or vibrating.
 122
 
 207.8-FINISHING EARTH ROADS:
 When no pavement or surfacing is included in the Contract, the roadway shall be finished
 as a graded earth road. The roadway, shoulders, and superelevated curves shall be constructed
 simultaneously to the required cross section and grade. Unsatisfactory or unsuitable material shall
 be removed and replaced as specified in 207.9. The entire surface shall be brought to a smooth
 condition by repeated use of an approved power grader and continuously maintained in a condition
 suitable for traffic until final completion and acceptance of the work. When grading work is being
 done simultaneously on more than one section of a Contract, an approved grader shall be furnished
 on each section if so required by the Engineer.
 207.9-SUBGRADE:
 The subgrade shall be constructed in accordance with these Specifications, in substantial
 conformity with lines, grades, and cross sections shown on the Plans or established by the
 Engineer.
 The subgrade shall be 6 inches (150 mm) compacted thickness for all embankment and
 excavation sections and shall be constructed out of suitable material free of particles larger than 3
 inches (75 mm) and consisting of granular material, conforming to the requirements of 716.1.1.2,
 that can be satisfactorily compacted to a stable condition. The tolerance set forth in section 207.9.1
 shall apply. Excavation made below this 6 inches (150 mm) limit in cut sections will not be paid
 for, except, when unsuitable material is removed as specified below, payment will be made for
 removal to an additional depth of 12 inches (300 mm) of this unsuitable material with the actual
 locations and depth of removal established by or acceptable to the Engineer.
 The subgrade layer or layers shall be moistened or dried to a uniform moisture content suitable for
 maximum compaction and brought to a firm unyielding condition by compaction. The subgrade
 shall be uniformly compacted to the applicable requirements specified in 716.
 The surface of the subgrade shall be maintained in such condition that it will drain at all
 times.
 When trenching is done for narrow base widening, ditches of an adequate depth shall be
 constructed across the shoulders at sufficient intervals to permit a free outlet of water. Equipment
 or vehicles shall not be allowed to travel in a single track and form ruts in the subgrade. Any ruts
 or irregularities formed in the subgrade shall be scarified and recompacted.
 When the construction of a base, pavement, or surface is included in the Contract, or is so
 provided on the Plans, the profile grade of the subgrade shall be such that the specified thickness
 of the base course, pavement and surface will be obtained within limits of final surface grade. Any
 grade revision necessitated shall be called to the attention of the Engineer.
 When unsuitable material is encountered at the subgrade elevation, it shall be removed to
 a depth of 12 inches (300 mm) and replaced with suitable material.
 When so designated, engineering fabric for subgrade stabilization, conforming to 715.11,
 shall be installed over the area which shall be relatively smooth, free of sharp protrusion,
 depressions or debris. The fabric shall be placed with the machine direction of the fabric parallel
 with the alignment and shall be relatively smooth and free from creases. The joining of fabrics
 shall be accomplished by sewing (either in the field by portable sewing machine or during
 manufacture of the fabric) as outlined in 715.11.3 or shall be installed so any splice joints have a
 minimum overlap of 3 ft. (900 mm) or as directed by the Engineer.
 Once the fabric is placed, cover material shall be brought to the working face, dumped and
 spread with equipment exerting the minimum ground pressure possible. Construction equipment
 123
 
 shall not operate directly on the fabric. A minimum of 6 inches (150 mm) of cover material shall
 be maintained between the construction equipment and the fabric.
 Compaction shall be accomplished by conventional methods after the cover material is
 spread. Sheepsfoot rollers will not be permitted.
 The completed subgrade shall present a uniform appearance and shall be checked for
 conformity to the lines, grades, and dimensions shown on the Plans.
 When the Plans require engineering fabric for subsurface drainage or separation, the
 material shall conform to 715.11 and be placed as fabric for stabilization except the fabric may be
 joined by overlapping so the splice joints have a two foot (600 mm) minimum overlap.
 Construction equipment is permitted on the fabric provided all damage is repaired as specified in
 715.11.3. When the fabric is placed in structure backfill applications, such as bridge abutments,
 the orientation of the fabric will be directed by the Engineer.
 207.9.1-Tolerance: The completed surface shall not vary more than ½ inch (13 mm) above
 or below plan grade. Deviations shall be corrected by scarifying, adding additional approved
 aggregate if necessary, and recompacting.
 The subbase course shall be checked for proper thickness after final compaction. The
 Contractor shall refill all test holes with approved material and adequately recompact the
 material.
 Any deficiency in total thickness of the subbase in excess of 1 inch (25mm) shall be
 corrected.
 207.10-SHOULDERS:
 Before any base or pavement may be placed upon the subgrade, the shoulders along and
 adjacent thereto shall be built to the dimensions shown on the cross section. In order to provide
 adequate side support for macadam or other stone types of base or surface, shoulders shall be
 constructed full width, substantially to line and grade and to the depth of the course being
 constructed, and compacted with at least a 10 ton (9 Mg) roller, and then trimmed to the required
 line. When concrete base or pavement is being constructed, or where the shoulders are to be built
 of stabilized material, these requirements may be waived by the Engineer.
 Upon completion of the base, pavement, or surfacing, the shoulders shall be finally shaped,
 dressed, and compacted to conform to the dimensions shown on the Plans. No stone exceeding 3
 inches (75 mm) in maximum dimension will be permitted within 3 inches (75 mm) of the surface.
 The outer edge of the shoulder shall be trimmed to a neat line parallel with the centerline of the
 roadway, and the entire surface rolled to within 12 inches (300 mm) of the outside edge, refilling
 and rerolling any depressions that develop. Ditches and back slopes shall be finally cleaned and
 trimmed to line upon completion of the shoulder work.
 The in-place density of shoulders shall be as specified for the subgrade in 716.
 207.11-DRAINAGE:
 When grading, subgrading, constructing shoulders, or placing base or pavement is
 suspended because of unsuitable weather or any other reason, suitable provisions shall be made to
 drain the grade, subgrade or shoulders by means of the construction of adequate side ditches and
 drains. The ditches and drains shall be kept open and maintained during the period of suspension,
 including the removal of slides. Upon failure of the Contractor to construct and maintain the
 temporary drains prior to the acceptance of the work, the Engineer may cause such work to be
 done by others, and the cost will be deducted from moneys due the Contractor.
 124
 
 Upon completion of the subgrade or shoulders and before any base on pavement is placed,
 subgrade drains or weeps shall be placed as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer in
 accordance with 606.
 207.12-TEMPORARY SURCHARGE:
 When shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer, a temporary surcharge composed of
 suitable compacted material from the "Unclassified Excavation" or "Unclassified Borrow
 Excavation" shall be placed after completion of the embankment to the elevations of the base of
 the subgrade. The temporary surcharge shall be placed in accordance with location limits and
 elevations shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer. Surcharge material shall be placed
 in accordance with the provisions of 207.7. The first 5 ft. (1.5 meters) of the surcharge shall be
 compacted as specified for embankment in the applicable provisions of 716. The remaining
 surcharge shall be compacted as specified above except that the target percentage of dry density
 shall be 90 percent.
 The surcharge shall be maintained for the period indicated on the Plans or directed by the
 Engineer.
 207.13-PROTECTION OF CURTAIN WALLS:
 All bridges which will be used for permissible haulage, but which do not have the approach
 slabs constructed, shall have the pavement notch of the curtain walls built up to final grade by the
 use of timber to eliminate the possibility of damage to the curtain walls.
 207.14-SLIDES AND SLIPOUTS:
 Material outside the planned roadway or ditch slopes which, in the opinion of the Engineer,
 is unstable and constitutes a potential slide area, material from slides which has come into the
 roadway or ditch, and material which has slipped out of new or old embankments shall be
 excavated to designated lines or slopes either by benching or in such manner as directed by the
 Engineer. Such material shall be used in the construction of the embankments and in flattening of
 slopes, or disposed of as directed by the Engineer.
 Erosion, regardless of amount or extent, caused by the action of the elements and which
 results in damage to the work or materials shall in no case be considered a slide or slipout.
 207.15-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be measured in cubic yards (cubic meters) for Item 207001*, "Unclassified Excavation", which shall be the material actually moved and disposed as herein
 prescribed, measured in its original position and determined from the cross sections by the method
 of average end areas. The quantity of unclassified excavation for payment will be the number of
 cubic yards (meters) as further described. The quantities shall be computed using the cross section
 areas shown on the Plans with deductions from or additions to such cross section areas in
 accordance with 109.2 and authorized deviations. The quantity for payment will be to plan lines
 for material excavated in accordance with the construction tolerance set forth in 207.3.1 except as
 provided. In no case where the tolerance line has not been reached will the quantity for payment
 exceed the quantity actually excavated; unless otherwise authorized, the Contractor will be
 required to continue or resume excavation until within tolerance rather than receive payment for a
 lesser (out-of-tolerance) excavated quantity.
 
 125
 
 No material removed beyond the slope lines or below the grade line shown on the Plans,
 except as provided in 207.3.4 and 207.9, will be included for payment unless authorized in writing
 by the Engineer. Slides and material removed from beyond the slope lines, not attributable to
 carelessness, overshooting, or unsuitable construction methods on the part of the Contractor, will
 be included only when so authorized.
 Excavation below grade, including undercutting, as shown on the Plans or as directed by
 the Engineer; ditches to divert water from the slopes of cuts; inlet and outlet ditches for drainage
 structures; other ditches as authorized be the Engineer; removal of topsoil, sod, old pavement,
 boulders, walls, and other unsuitable material within the areas upon which the embankment is to
 be placed; benching; and all other excavation authorized but not shown by the cross sections, will
 be measured separately and included for payment.
 Where stone base or concrete pavements have been scarified or broken but not removed,
 or slopes other than rock upon which embankments are to be made are plowed or scarified and the
 loose soil has been manipulated and compacted but not removed, such work and all the work of
 placing and compacting all embankments, widenings or waste pits, placing and consolidating
 rockfills, will be considered as a necessary part of manipulation, the cost of which is included in
 the price bid per cubic yard (meter) for "Unclassified Excavation".
 Payment for placing of temporary surcharge will be included in the contract unit price for
 "Unclassified Excavation" or "Unclassified Borrow Excavation", as the case may be. Removal of
 temporary surcharge will be paid at the contract unit price for "Unclassified Excavation".
 The removal and disposal of slide and slipout material in accordance with 207.14 will be
 paid for at the contract price for "Unclassified Excavation", unless the Engineer, prior to the
 removal of such material, orders the slide or slipout material to be removed and disposed of as
 "Extra Work", or the Contractor, prior to performing any such work, requests in writing that the
 removal and disposal of any such slide or slipout material be paid for as "Extra Work", and the
 Engineer approves.
 The cost of any work outside the limits of the slide necessary to make slide or slipout areas
 accessible to normal excavation equipment will be paid for as "Extra Work".
 The above provisions shall not be so construed as to relieve the Contractor from the duty of
 maintaining all slopes true and smooth.
 The quantity of subgrade work done under this item will be the number of cubic yards
 (meters) of "Subgrade" established in the Proposal, subject to adjustment as provided for in 104.2
 and 109.2. Any additional work beyond the scope of the original Plans but authorized by the
 Engineer will be measured in cubic yards (meters), compacted in place, and paid for at the unit
 bid price for subgrade, subject to the provisions of 104.2.
 The quantity of subgrade work done under Item 207002-* will be the number of cubic
 yards (meters) measured and compacted in place, subject to adjustment as provided for in 104.2
 and 109.2. Any additional work beyond the scope of the original Plans but authorized by the
 Engineer will be measured in cubic yards (meters), compacted in place, and paid for at the unit bid
 price for subgrade.
 Measurement and payment for subgrade drains will be in accordance with the provisions
 of 606.
 
 126
 
 207.16-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for these items, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for doing all the work
 prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor, tools, equipment,
 supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 The cost of unclassified excavation including the hauling of all material, any reserving and
 rehandling of unclassified excavation material, embankment construction including compaction,
 furnishing and applying water as an aid to embankment compaction, and the cost of furnishing
 additional waste sites, grading, fertilizing, and seeding and mulching of all waste sites, shall be
 included in the unit price bid for "Unclassified Excavation".
 The cost of furnishing all materials, including furnishing and applying water necessary as
 an aid to subgrade compaction, shall be included in the unit price bid for "Subgrade".
 207.16.1-Price Adjustment: Subgrade material not conforming with the gradation
 requirements as described in 207.2.2.3 will be paid for at the adjusted contract price base on
 the degree of nonconformance as specified in Table 207.16.1
 TABLE 207.16.1
 Adjustment of Contract Price for
 Gradation not Within Specifications
 Degree of
 Percent of Contract
 Nonconformance
 Price to be Reduced
 1.0 to 3.0
 2
 3.1 to 5.0
 4
 5.1 to 8.0
 7
 8.1 to 12.0
 11
 Greater than 12
 *
 * The Division will make a special evaluation of the material
 and determine the appropriate action.
 
 207.17-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 207001-*
 Unclassified Excavation
 207002-*
 Subgrade
 207032-*
 Fabric For Subsurface Drainage
 207033-*
 Fabric For Subgrade Stabilization
 207034-*
 Fabric For Separation
 
 UNIT
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Square Yard (Meter)
 
 * Sequence number
 
 SECTION 208 THROUGH SECTION 210-BLANK
 
 127
 
 SECTION 211
 BORROW EXCAVATION
 211.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing, excavating, transporting, placing, compacting, and
 furnishing material required to complete the roadway and embankments;
 211.2-MATERIALS:
 211.2.1-Unclassified Borrow Excavation: Materials shall be obtained which are suitable
 for the particular purpose for which unclassified borrow excavation is authorized.
 211.2.2-Rock Borrow Excavation: Material shall meet the requirements specified for
 Rock in 207.7.3.2.3.
 211.2.3-Select Borrow Excavation: Material shall consist of a granular material as
 defined in 716.1.1.2 unless otherwise specified in the Contract.
 211.2.4-Impervious Core: Materials shall meet the requirements specified in Section
 211.3.3.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 211.3-GENERAL:
 The Contractor shall locate and furnish all borrow sites to obtain materials in the amounts
 directed, by the methods and subject to the same provisions as prescribed in 207 except as modified
 or amended within. Borrow excavation should not be obtained or placed until after all available
 roadway excavation has been utilized in the embankments and there is no likelihood of slip or
 excess material. The Contractor will have the option to borrow within the WVDOH right-of-way
 limits (R/W) or on private property located outside the R/W. If the Contractor chooses to borrow
 within the R/W, the following procedure must be adhered to before any borrow will be allowed:
 211.3.1-Borrow within WVDOH R/W Limits: The Contractor shall submit copies of a
 site plan for any borrow within the R/W and each page/sheet of all submittals shall be signed
 by a professional Engineer Registered in the State of West Virginia. The submittals and the
 approving Engineers’ signature block shall be as per Section 105.2.1.2 for shop drawing
 submittals.
 The plan for the site shall include, but not be limited to:
 1. The location and approximate boundaries of the borrow site, including any adjacent
 landowner property information;
 2. Topographical features including existing and final ground slopes, drainage structures,
 etc.;
 3. Storm water features, roads, access to properties, utilities, etc.;
 4. An erosion and sediment control plan utilizing the best management practices
 consistent with all phases of operation of the borrow site;
 5. Restoration or cover vegetation plan of the site;
 
 128
 
 6. If the borrow site requires the modification of an existing US Army Corps of Engineers
 permit, the Contractor shall provide the necessary revised permit drawings to show the
 proposed changes to the DOH in order to modify the existing 404 permit and to obtain
 a 401 Water Quality Certification if necessary. A minimum of 2 months may be
 required to get approval.
 Steepening of slopes will not be allowed for borrow sites within the R/W without a
 geotechnical analysis.
 Upon receipt of the Contractor’s complete borrow site submission, the Engineer shall
 follow the guidelines as set forth in the latest edition of the Erosion and Sediment Control
 Manual for review and acceptance by the Division. The Contractor may be required to revise
 the site plan prior to acceptance by the Division. The Contractor’s borrow site plan must be
 approved as per section 105.2.1.2 and the West Virginia Department of Environmental
 Protection before any borrow material can be obtained from the site.
 The DOH will bear the cost of all features associated with the borrow site except for
 necessary revisions to drainage structures (i.e. lengthening of culverts, etc.).
 Upon completion of work, all borrow sites shall be neatly trimmed and drained and all
 debris and spoil disposed of in accordance with the approved plan. No material shall be
 borrowed from places other than those approved, except as provided. Slopes shall be trimmed
 neatly to present a uniform surface, free from hollows or protrusions and loose or overhanging
 rocks. The Contractor shall take precautions by benching or other methods to prevent slides
 and slip outs. Borrow areas shall be graded by the Contractor then fertilized, seeded and
 mulched in accordance with the applicable Specifications and will be paid for in accordance
 with the pay items within the contract.
 The Contractor shall minimize pollution or sedimentation of rivers, streams, lakes, ponds,
 and other bodies of water while conducting borrow operations.
 211.3.2-Borrow outside of WVDOH R/W Limits: For borrow sites outside the R/W, the
 Contractor and/or property owner shall bear all costs and responsibilities associated with the
 site. Appropriate Traffic Control items within the Project Limits will be paid accordingly. The
 Contractor and/or property owner shall comply with existing laws and/or regulations to include
 approval from the State Historic Preservation Officer and save the State harmless from any
 claims for damages which may result from the borrow.
 The Contractor shall minimize pollution or sedimentation of rivers, streams, lakes, ponds,
 and other bodies of water while conducting borrow operations.
 Borrow pits shall not be excavated below the level of the natural drainage for the area, and
 the drainage ditches required to keep the pit free from standing water during the progress of
 the work and upon completion and shall be constructed without extra compensation.
 211.3.3-Impervious Core: Imperious cores shall be constructed for all sediment dams
 built of rock, gravel, and pervious soils.
 The impervious core shall have a minimum dimensions as set forth in Item 5, par.
 20.3.4.3.1 Erosion and Sediment Control Manual, West Virginia Division of Highways, latest
 edition.
 When a key is necessary for the sediment dam, the impervious core shall be made an
 integral part of the key. When the impervious core is not constructed of soil, the core shall be
 anchored into the key by trenching for a minimum depth of 2 feet (610 mm).
 129
 
 The impervious core may be constructed using one of the following methods:
 a) Soil Impervious Core: Soil impervious cores may be shaped to facilitate placement
 and compaction. The coefficient of permeability of the soil used for the impervious
 core must be 10-4 cm per sec or less. A key, a minimum of 4 feet (1.2 m) in depth, must
 be constructed into the original ground. The compaction of the impervious core shall
 be as in accordance with Section 716.3.
 b) Concrete Impervious Core: When concrete is used for the impervious core, Class B
 Concrete shall be used. The requirements of Section 601, Structural Concrete shall
 control the mixture and placement of the concrete. The Engineer may waive the testing
 of the Class B Concrete if the concrete is from an approved plant.
 c) HDPE or LLDPE Impervious Core: When the impervious core is constructed of
 High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) or Low Linear Density Polyethylene (LLDPE), the
 liner shall be manufactured to be suitable for buried conditions and may be either
 smooth or textured. The Contractor shall obtain recommendations from a liner
 manufacturer for the material best suited for impervious cores, handling, storage, and
 construction procedures. The manufacturer of the liner shall furnish the Engineer a
 Letter of Certification stating the liner is suitable for the intended use.
 d) Other Methods for an Impervious Core: The Contractor may design and use other
 methods of preventing the seepage of water from the wet area. The Engineer must
 approve the design of the alternative method.
 When the impervious core is not constructed used the Soil Impervious Core method the
 Contractor shall submit a plan containing construction details and materials to be used for the
 impervious core(s) for the approval of the Engineer prior to the start of work and the purchase
 of any materials. This submittal will be part of the temporary and permanent pollution control
 schedules and methods required by Section 642.3-Preconstruction Conference, Construction
 Methods, Section 642, Temporary Pollution Control, of the West Virginia Division of
 Highways Standard Specifications Roads and Bridges, latest edition.
 211.4-UNCLASSIFIED BORROW EXCAVATION:
 Unclassified borrow excavation shall consist of material, as prescribed, incorporated into
 embankments, backfill, shoulders, or any other type of work shown on the Plans or designated by
 the Engineer. The method of placement, compaction and density shall be in accordance with the
 applicable requirements of 207.7.
 211.5-ROCK BORROW EXCAVATION:
 Rock borrow excavation shall consist of materials, as prescribed, incorporated into
 embankments in accordance with the provisions of 207.7 covering the construction of rock fills.
 Stones used for scour protection shall be in accordance with section 218.4.1.
 211.6-SELECT BORROW EXCAVATION:
 Select borrow excavation shall consist of material as prescribed, incorporated into
 embankments, backfills, shoulders, or any other type of work shown on the Plans or designated by
 the Engineer. The method of placement, compaction and density shall be in accordance with the
 applicable requirements for granular material as prescribed under 207.7.
 
 130
 
 211.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 211.7.1-Cubic Yard (Meter) Measurement: The quantity of work done will be measured
 in cubic yards (cubic meters) actually obtained and incorporated in the work, determined in its
 original position from cross sections by the average end areas.
 The method of measurement may also be calculated as 80 percent of the truck load volume
 of each truck used to haul the material. The measurement of the load will be taken inside each
 bed and will include length, width and average height to the top of the load. However, the
 measurement will exclude the hoist housing. When Rock Borrow is obtained from a
 commercial source payment may be per cubic yard by converting 1.65 tons (2 Mg) to equal 1
 cubic yard (cubic meter).
 If the borrow is obtained in such quantity or in such manner that a waste of unclassified
 excavation, slips, or excess material is caused, the amounts of such waste shall be deducted
 from the borrow volume. In determining the amount of material to be developed due to
 unauthorized placement of borrow material or unclassified excavation material in the
 embankments, the quantity outside the construction tolerance will be measured and deducted
 from borrow on a yard-to-yard (meter to meter) basis without adjustment due to shrinkage or
 swelling.
 211.7.2-Ton (Megagram) Measurement: The quantity of work done will be measured
 in tons (megagrams) actually obtained and incorporated in the work, determined by the total
 of the weights shown on receipted railroad freight bills when materials are shipped by rail, by
 actual measured displacement of barges certified by the Producer when water shipments are
 made, providing materials delivered by the aforementioned methods are not stockpiled or
 stared; or determined by the Contractor from the total of weigh slips for each vehicle load
 weighed on an approved truck scale, and certified by the Contractor to be correct.
 The Producer or Contractor shall provide truck scales. The scales shall be of sufficient size
 and capacity to weigh the heaviest loaded trucks that are used for delivery of the material.
 All truck scales shall be mounted on solid foundations, which will insure their retaining
 plumb and level. All truck scales shall be inspected and sealed by the West Virginia
 Department of Labor, Bureau of Weights and Measures, or other appropriate agencies of the
 State or its political subdivisions. The Department may, at its option, accept inspection and
 sealing by out of state agencies when the material is weighed outside West Virginia.
 A digital recorder shall be required on all truck scales. The digital recorder shall produce
 a printed record of the gross, tare and net weights, and the time, date, truck identification and
 project number. Provision shall be made for constant zero compensation and further provision
 shall be made so the scales may not be manually manipulated during the printing process. The
 system shall be interlocked so as to allow printing only when the scale has come to rest. In
 case of a breakdown of the automatic equipment, the Engineer may permit manual operation
 for a reasonable time, normally not to exceed 48 hours, while the equipment is being repaired.
 A weighman shall be provided by the Producer/Supplier. The weighman shall certify that
 the weight of the material, as determined either by the scales or from the digital printout of the
 weights, is correct.
 Each truck shall be weighed empty prior to each load.
 211.7.3-Square Foot (Meter) Measurement: The measurement of the Impervious Core
 will be by the square foot (meter) of core placed and accepted by the Engineer. The area of
 131
 
 measurement shall be calculated from the surface of a vertical plane through the centerline of
 the impervious core.
 211.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for these items, which unit prices and payments shall be full compensation for doing all the work
 prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor, tools, equipment,
 supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work. There will be no additional
 compensation for furnishing, grading, fertilizing, seeding and mulching of borrow pits.
 211.9-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 211001-*
 211002-*
 211003-*
 211007-*
 211008-*
 211009-*
 211017-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Unclassified Borrow Excavation
 Rock Borrow Excavation
 Select Borrow Excavation
 Unclassified Borrow Excavation
 Rock Borrow Excavation
 Select Borrow Excavation
 Impervious Core
 
 * Sequence number
 
 132
 
 UNIT
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Ton (Megagrams)
 Ton (Megagram)
 Ton (Megagram)
 Square Foot (Meter)
 
 SECTION 212
 STRUCTURE, ROCK, AND WET EXCAVATION
 212.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the excavation and backfill or disposal of all materials required
 to be removed for the construction of retaining walls, box culverts, catch basins, drop inlets,
 manholes, bridge foundations, and other structures for which excavation is not otherwise provided;
 the removal of all old structures, including abutments, piers and wingwalls, unless otherwise
 specified or directed; in accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity
 with the lines, grades and typical cross sections shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 It shall include pumping, draining, sheeting, and constructing cribs and cofferdams if necessary.
 212.2-MATERIALS:
 Select material for backfilling shall be crushed stone, gravel, slag, or any combination
 thereof meeting the requirements of 703. The grading shall be such that 100 percent of the material
 passes the 2 inch (50 mm) sieve and 0 to 5 percent passes the No. 16 (1.18 mm) sieve. Any of the
 standard coarse aggregate sizes from AASHTO No 4 through AASHTO No. 8, as shown in
 Table 703.4, would comply with the above gradation requirement.
 Controlled low strength material shall meet the requirements of 219.
 Quality Control of select material for backfilling is the responsibility of the Contractor as
 specified in 106.1.
 Engineering fabric shall be fabric for subsurface drainage or separation meeting 715.11.
 212.2.1-Quality Control Testing: Quality control of the select material for backfill is the
 responsibility of the Contractor as specified in 106.1.
 The Contractor shall maintain necessary equipment and qualified personnel to perform all
 sampling and testing necessary to determine the magnitude of the various properties of the
 material governed by the Specifications and shall maintain these properties within the limits
 of the Specifications.
 The Contractor shall submit a quality control plan detailing the methods by which the
 quality control program will be conducted. This plan, prepared in accordance with the
 guidelines set forth in the appropriate portions of MP 307.00.50 and MP 717.04.21, shall be
 submitted to the Engineer at the preconstruction conference. The work shall not begin until
 the plan is reviewed for conformance with the contract documents.
 212.2.2-Acceptance Testing: Quality control sampling and testing performed by the
 Contractor shall be used by the Division for acceptance
 212.2.3-Sampling and Testing: Frequency of sampling and testing shall be in accordance
 with the Contractor’s quality control plan. The minimum sampling and testing frequencies for
 gradation shall be as indicated in Attachment 1 of MP 307.00.50. The material shall be
 sampled in accordance with MP 700.00.06. The minimum sampling and testing frequency for
 compaction will be in accordance with MP 700.00.24.
 
 133
 
 212.2.4-Acceptance Procedure: Material conforming to the specification requirements
 will be accepted at full contract price. Material failing to comply with the quality requirements
 of Table 704.6.2B shall not be incorporated into the work.
 Acceptance of the material for compaction and for gradation shall be in accordance with
 212.2.1.
 212.2.5-Acceptance Plan:
 212.2.5.1-Compaction: Compaction of random material and select backfill material
 shall meet 212.10.
 212.2.5.2-Gradation: Acceptance for gradation shall be on the basis of test results on
 consecutive random samples from a lot. A lot shall be considered the quantity of material
 represented by an average test value, not to exceed five sublots. Generally at the beginning
 of the project, the average shall be started on the second sample in accordance with
 MP 300.00.51. A sublot is the quantity of material represented by a single gradation test.
 In the case where only one sample is taken, this sublot shall be considered the lot. When
 the average, or when the most recent three consecutive individual test values fall outside
 the limits specified in 212.2, the lot of material represented will be considered
 nonconforming to the extent that the last of its sublots is nonconforming. When this occurs,
 the last sublot shall have its price adjusted in accordance with Table 212.12.1. In the case
 where the average is nonconforming and the last sublot contained is conforming, then there
 would be no price adjustment. In no event, however, shall a sublot of material have its
 price adjusted more than once, and the first adjustment, which is determined, shall apply.
 212.2.5.3-Degree of Nonconformance: When a sublot of material is to have its price
 adjusted, the percentage point difference between the nonconforming test value and the
 specification limit shall be determined for each sieve size determined to be nonconforming,
 and this value shall be multiplied by its appropriate multiplication factor as set forth in
 Table 212.2.5.3 to determine the degree of nonconformance of that sieve.
 TABLE 212.2.5.3
 Nonconforming Sieve Size
 Multiplication Factor
 2 in. (50 mm)
 1.0
 No. 16
 1.0
 The total measure of nonconformance of an individual sublot is the sum of all
 nonconformance of an individual sieve sizes of that sublot.
 When the total degree of nonconformance has been established and it is 12.0 or less,
 the material will be paid for at an adjusted contract price as specified in Table 212.12.1.
 When the degree of nonconformance is greater than 12.0, the nonconforming sublot
 shall be resolved on an individual basis, requiring a special investigation by the Engineer
 to determine the appropriate course of action to be followed. Pending resolution of the
 matter, additional lifts of select material for backfill shall not be placed over the
 nonconforming material.
 
 134
 
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 212.3-GENERAL:
 The foundation pits shall be excavated according to the outlines of footings as shown on
 the Plans and shall be of sufficient size to permit the placing of the full width and length of the
 footing. The Engineer may order, in writing, such changes in dimensions or footing elevations as
 may be necessary to secure a satisfactory foundation.
 Structural excavation for pipe culverts and underdrains shall be accomplished in
 accordance with the sections covering pipe culverts and underdrains.
 All foundation excavation adjacent to the tracks of any railroad shall be shored, braced and
 supported as required by the railroad company or the Engineer, and the Contractor will be held
 responsible for securing such information and complying. Plans for this shoring, bracing, and
 supporting shall be submitted to and shall meet with the approval of the Chief Engineer of the
 railway company before starting excavation. Bracing, shoring, and supporting excavation at
 structures other than railroad tracks shall meet with the approval of the Engineer.
 212.4-DISPOSAL OF MATERIAL:
 The excavated material, unless otherwise directed by the Engineer, shall be utilized for
 backfill or embankments. Surplus material shall be disposed of in such a manner that the efficiency
 or appearance of the structure shall not be impaired, and the stream not muddied or obstructed.
 212.5-COFFERDAMS:
 The term cofferdam designates any barrier system that provides a dry, watertight as
 practicable, area for excavation, inspection or placing concrete. Subject to other requirements in
 these Specifications, a cofferdam may be constructed of materials including sheet piling, wood,
 sand bags, earth embankment, etc. or a combination of any of these.
 Cofferdams shall, in general, be carried well below the bottom of the footings and shall be
 well braced and as watertight as practicable. The interior dimensions of cofferdams shall be
 sufficient to give adequate clearance for the construction of forms and to permit pumping from
 outside of the forms. When sandy or porous material is encountered in the foundation which
 renders it impracticable to dewater the excavation before placing masonry, the bottom may be
 sealed with concrete placed by the tremie method, after which the remainder of the work shall be
 carried on in the dry.
 No bracing of any kind shall be left in cofferdams in such a way as to extend in to the
 substructure masonry without the written permission of the Engineer.
 Cofferdams shall be removed by the Contractor upon completion of the substructure.
 212.6-PUMPING:
 Pumping from the interior of any foundation enclosure shall be done in such a manner as
 to preclude the possibility of the passage of water through fresh concrete. No pumping will be
 permitted during the placing of concrete, or for a period of at least 24 hours, unless it is done with
 a suitable pump separated from the concrete by a water-tight wall.
 212.7-INSPECTION:
 After an excavation is completed, the Contractor shall notify the Engineer, and no footing,
 pipe, or other structure shall be placed until the Engineer has approved the depth of excavation,
 135
 
 the character of foundation material encountered, and has obtained the necessary foundation
 measurements.
 212.8-PREPARATION OF FOUNDATIONS:
 Rock or other hard foundation material shall be free from all loose material, cleaned and
 cut to a firm surface, stepped or serrated as directed by the Engineer. All seams shall be cleaned
 and filled with concrete, mortar, or grout. Excavation in rock shall be made to the neat lines of the
 footing as nearly as practicable and the concrete placed against the rock without forming.
 When masonry is to rest on an excavated surface other that rock, special care shall be taken
 not to disturb the bearing surface, and the final removal of foundation material shall not be made
 until just before masonry is to be placed.
 212.9-DRAINAGE:
 Adequate drainage for the backs of retaining walls, abutments and wing walls shall be
 provided by outlet tile or pipe drains extending through the walls at the ground line or as indicated
 on the Plans. In case the outlet end of these drains is below the ground line or would be covered
 by fill material, the drains shall connect to pipe outlets or be extended to the toe of the slope of the
 fill. When drain pipes are not called for or indicated on the Plans for these drains, the drains shall
 be constructed to a minimum sectional area of 24 by 24 inches (600 by 600 mm) and shall consist
 of sand, crushed stone, or gravel. Excavation and backfilling shall conform to the requirements of
 this Specification.
 When underdrains with pipe are shown or indicated on the Plans and there are bid items
 for the same, they shall conform to the applicable requirements of 606.
 The back of retaining walls, abutments and wing walls shall have porous drains, 1 ft. (300
 mm) thick or as shown on the Plans, placed on the back side of the walls and abutments for the
 entire length and height of the same, beginning at the elevation of the outlet drains.
 212.10-BACKFILLING:
 Backfill material shall be suitable random material, controlled low strength material or
 select backfill material. Random material shall be free from particles larger than 3 inches (75 mm),
 frozen lumps, wood, or other extraneous material. Unless otherwise specified in the plans, any of
 the types of controlled low strength material may be used and shall be an alternative to random
 material at the contractor’s option. Select backfill material shall be in accordance with 212.
 Controlled low strength material shall be in accordance with 219.
 All spaces excavated and not occupied by abutments, piers, or other structures shall be
 backfilled to the surface of the surrounding ground. All backfill, except controlled low strength
 material, shall be thoroughly compacted by rolling or tamping as prescribed below and the top
 surface neatly graded.
 Random material and select backfill material behind and around abutments, wingwalls,
 piers, bents, pedestals and all other structures, including those inaccessible to a roller, shall be
 compacted in layers not to exceed 4 inches (100 mm) after compaction. Controlled low strength
 material shall be placed according to 219.
 The quality control and acceptance of controlled low strength material shall be in accordance with
 219.
 The quality control and acceptance for compaction of random material shall be in
 accordance with applicable sections of 207 and 716. Five density tests shall be performed for
 quality control. The target percentage of dry density shall be 95%.
 136
 
 Special precautions shall be taken to prevent any wedging action against the masonry and
 the slope bounding the excavation for abutments and walls. Such condition shall be prevented by
 stepping or serrating to destroy wedge action. Jetting of fill behind retaining walls, abutments,
 and wing walls will not be permitted. Backfill over and around abutments, culverts, arches, and
 columns shall be brought up uniformly to avoid bending or distortional stresses in the structures,
 shall be made as soon as practicable after forms are removed, and shall be sloped to drain. The 4
 inch (100 mm) layer requirement and compaction for backfill in water will be waived. The testing
 of backfill compaction, at piers or other structures, which will not become part of an embankment
 or highway pavement or shoulder area will be waived.
 Select backfill material shall be placed behind abutments, wingwalls, retaining walls, and
 box culverts to the dimensions shown on the Plans. The material shall be placed in horizontal
 layers not to exceed 4 inches (100 mm) compacted.
 The quality control testing and acceptance for the select backfill material shall be in accordance
 with applicable sections of 207 and 716.
 A lot shall normally consist of the quantity of backfill material required to fill behind and
 around abutments, wingwalls, piers, bents, pedestals and all other structures as approved by the
 Engineer.
 The select backfill materials shall be tested according to MP 700.00.24. Five density tests
 shall be performed for quality control. The target percentage of dry density shall be 95%.
 In all areas where select backfill will contact random material, engineering fabric shall be
 placed in accordance with the last paragraph of 207.9.
 212.11-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done for Item 212001-*, "Structure Excavation", Item 212002-*, "Wet
 Excavation", Item 212003-*, "Rock Excavation" and Item 212005-*, "Select Material for
 Backfilling", will be the number of cubic yards (meters) measured. Any additional work beyond
 the scope of the Plans, authorized by the Engineer, will be measured in cubic yards (meters) for
 the excavated material removed or Select Backfill in place and paid for in accordance with the
 Subsection and 109.2. Measurement for "Structure Excavation" and "Wet Excavation" will be
 limited to the volume bounded by vertical planes 18 in. (450 mm) outside the neat line of footings
 and parallel thereto; "Rock Excavation" will be limited to the volume bounded by the neat lines of
 the footings.
 When an increase in depth of foundation has been ordered by the Engineer, the excavation
 for the first 5 ft. (1.5 meters) or fraction thereof below the elevation shown on the Plans will be
 paid at the unit bid price. The Engineer may require the Contractor to make excavation to a depth
 greater than 5 ft. (1.5 meters) below Plan elevation in accordance with 104.3.
 All excavation performed under this section will be classified as "Structure Excavation",
 except as stated. When the Plans specify "Rock Excavation", all material encountered in the
 excavation requiring blasting for its removal and all boulders greater the 1/2 cu. yd. (0.4 cubic
 meters) in volume will be considered as "Rock Excavation" and be paid for as such. When a
 quantity of "Wet Excavation" is shown on the Plans, and a normal pool elevation is indicated,
 excavation below the normal pool elevation, except that classified as "Rock Excavation", will be
 considered "Wet Excavation" and will be measured below normal pool elevation from the stream
 bed to the bottom of the footings.
 The cost of bracing, shoring and supporting excavation adjacent to railroad tracks and other
 structures shall be included in the unit price bid for "Structure Excavation", "Wet Excavation", or
 "Rock Excavation".
 137
 
 Structural excavation for old structures requiring removal will be limited to the outside
 dimensions of the structure.
 Excavation for the drains specified in 212.9 will be paid as Item 212001-*, "Structure
 Excavation", and the cost of backfilling drains with sand, crushed stone or gravel shall be included
 in the price bid for "Structure Excavation".
 Clearing of right-of-way within the construction limits of piers, abutments, retaining walls,
 etc., and backfilling to the level of the original ground will be included in unit prices bid for
 "Structure Excavation", except that select material for backfilling will be paid for under Item
 212005-*. If backfill above original ground is required, material for the backfill will be measured
 and paid for as prescribed under 207 or 211.
 The measurement and payment for engineering fabric will be included in the unit price bid
 for "Select Material for Backfilling".
 Item 212004-* "Cofferdams", will be measured and paid for each unit complete in place, including
 their removal, and shall include all labor, materials, and equipment incidental to the construction,
 pumping and removal. Progress payments, determined by the Engineer, may be made.
 212.12-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, measured as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for these items, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials
 and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor,
 tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work, and also including cost
 of cofferdams and their removal, except when a separate bid item is provided for Item 212004-*,
 "Cofferdams".
 212.12.1-Price Adjustment: Select material for backfill not conforming with the
 gradation requirements as described in 212.2.5.3 will be paid for at the adjusted contract
 price base on the degree of nonconformance as specified in Table 212.12.1.
 TABLE 212.12.1
 Adjustment of Contract Price for
 Gradation not Within Specifications
 Degree of
 Percent of Contract
 Nonconformance
 Price to be Reduced
 1.0 to 3.0
 2
 3.1 to 5.0
 4
 5.1 to 8.0
 7
 8.1 to 12.0
 11
 Greater than 12
 *
 * The Division will make a special evaluation of the material
 and determine the appropriate action.
 
 138
 
 212.13-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 212001-*
 Structure Excavation
 212002-*
 Wet Excavation
 212003-*
 Rock Excavation
 212004-*
 Cofferdam
 212005-*
 Select Material For Backfilling
 
 UNIT
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Each
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 
 * Sequence number
 
 SECTION 213 THROUGH SECTION 216-BLANK
 
 139
 
 SECTION 217
 SPECIAL ROCK FILL
 217.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing and placing at the foot of embankments, inside or
 outside the neat line, where called for on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer, durable rock in
 accordance with the Specifications and in reasonably close conformity to the lines, grades,
 dimension and sections shown on the Plans
 217.2-MATERIALS:
 The rock for special rock fill shall meet the requirements specified in 704.5.
 217.3-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 Where possible, the material shall be handled as ordinary rock embankment as prescribed
 in 207.7.3; however, if the location for the special rock fill is not accessible to ordinary placing,
 the material may be placed by other methods.
 Foundation trenches and other necessary excavations shall be excavated by the Contractor,
 in accordance with the applicable provision of 212, and approved by the Engineer before the
 placing of the special rock fill is begun. Unless otherwise shown on the Plans or directed by the
 Engineer, the rock fill shall extend approximately 2 ft. (600 mm) below the bed of the stream.
 217.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be measured in cubic yards (meters) of "Special Rock Fill",
 complete in place and accepted, determined by the method of average end areas.
 217.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for this item, which price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all the material
 and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor,
 tools, equipment, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 217.6-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 217001-*
 Special Rock Fill
 * Sequence number
 
 140
 
 UNIT
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 
 SECTION 218
 SLOPE AND FOUNDATION PROTECTION
 218.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the construction of revetments of stone or concrete, with or
 without engineering fabric, to prevent erosion of slopes or banks, or to protect foundations, at
 places indicated on the Plans or where designated by the Engineer, all in accordance with these
 Specifications and in reasonable close conformity with the lines, grades, dimension, and cross
 sections shown on the Plans.
 218.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sub-sections of Division
 700:
 MATERIALS
 Cement for Grout
 Engineering Fabric for Erosion Control
 Gabions
 Reinforcement
 Sand for Grout
 Shot Rock
 Stone for Gabions
 Stone for Riprap
 
 SUBSECTION
 701.1 or 701.3
 715.11
 715.23
 709.3, 709.4
 702.1.1 through 702.1.5
 and 702.6, or 702.2
 704.8
 704.3
 704.2
 
 The stone for crushed rock slope protection shall meet the requirements of 704.6, Class 7,
 except 704.6.3. Acceptance for Gradation of Class 7 aggregate shall be by visual inspection; a
 written explanation of the manufacturing process shall be provided if requested by the Engineer.
 Class 7 from a non-approved source, shall not exceed a weighted loss of 30 percent when subjected
 to five cycles of the Sodium Sulfate Soundness Test, will be acceptable.
 An alternate to this gradation shall be AASHTO size No. 1. Certified test data from the
 producer showing the AASHTO No. 1 material meets the gradation requirements of 703.4.
 Stone for foundation protection shall conform to the requirements of riprap stone, except
 for size and shape.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 218.3-SLOPE PROTECTION:
 218.3.1-General: The slopes to be revetted shall reasonably conform to the lines, grades,
 dimensions, and cross sections as shown on the Plans, unless otherwise directed.
 The placing of riprap or grouted riprap shall start in a trench, the invert of which is parallel
 to and 2 ft. (600 mm) below the toe of the slope, and the trench shall be 2 ft. (600 mm) in
 width. The construction shall progress from the invert of the trench up the slope to conform
 to the requirements specified.
 Slope protection with crushed rock, concrete slabs, or precast concrete blocks shall start at
 a concrete bottom sill, shall be included within side sills, and shall progress upward to the berm
 141
 
 in front of the abutment. The design and dimensions of the sills shall be as shown on the Plans.
 The area of the sills shall be considered a part of the area of the slope protection. The concrete
 sills may be precast or cast-in-place and shall be placed in a trench excavated to receive them.
 Concrete used in the sills shall meet the requirements specified in 218.3.6.2.
 Construction equipment shall not operate directly on engineering fabric. The fabric shall
 be protected from detrimental contamination by surface runoff. Any fabric so contaminated
 shall be removed and replaced with uncontaminated fabric.
 Weep holes shall be provided as directed by the Engineer when grouted riprap, concrete
 slab, or concrete block slope protection is specified.
 218.3.2-Riprap: Riprap shall be composed of stones having the dimensions specified,
 each stone being firmly bedded on the slope in such a manner that it abuts against other stones
 to form a layer, the interstices of which are filled with suitably sized spalls. The dimensions
 of each stone in a plane parallel to the plane of the slope shall be not less than 3 inches by 12
 inches (75 by 300 mm) Unless otherwise specified, the longer dimension shall be placed
 horizontally. The surface of each stone shall not vary more than 3 inches (75 mm) from the
 specified surface plane. Abutting stones shall have depths not different by more than 1-1/2
 inches (40 mm). The average depth of the stone placed in the riprap shall be not less than the
 specified depth of the riprap. The first row of stone shall be firmly bedded on the invert of the
 trench so as to form a firm foundation, and the construction shall progress up the slope by
 fitting additional and abutting stones with well broken joints and in such a manner that the
 most compact mass of riprap is developed.
 218.3.3-Grouted Riprap: Grouted riprap shall be as defined in 218.3.2 with the interstices
 filled with spalls and grouted with cement grout. The grout filler shall be composed of a
 mixture of one part Portland cement and three parts sand, mixed with water to produce a
 workable consistency. The amount of water shall be that designated by the Engineer. The
 stone shall be thoroughly wet immediately before grout is applied. As soon as the grout is
 deposited on the surface, it shall be thoroughly worked into the joints. The stones shall then
 be brushed so that their top surfaces are exposed.
 Grouted riprap shall be cured in accordance with any of the methods specified in 501.15,
 with a blanket of earth kept wet for 72 hours, or by sprinkling with a fine spray of water every
 two hours during the day-light hours for a period of three days.
 218.3.4-Gabions: Gabions, consisting of galvanized wire mesh baskets filled with rocks,
 shall conform to these Specifications and the dimensions shown on the Plans.
 Assembling of the gabion units and their filling with rock shall be carried out as directed
 by the Engineer. The visible faces of the baskets shall be hand placed to insure an attractive
 appearance, and the core of the baskets may be filled by mechanical equipment.
 218.3.5-Crushed Rock Slope Protection: The thickness of crushed rock slope protection
 shall be as indicated on the Plans. The rock shall be raked in place to obtain a reasonably
 smooth and continuous surface conforming to the thickness and slope lines indicated on the
 Plans.
 
 142
 
 218.3.6-Concrete Slope Protection:
 218.3.6.1-General: Concrete slope protection may be by cast-in-place concrete slab
 or precast concrete blocks; only one method shall be used at any one bridge.
 218.3.6.2-Cast-in-Place Concrete Slab: Concrete slabs shall be not less than 6 inches
 (150 mm) thick, shall be reinforced with Type B Fabric, and shall conform to the applicable
 provisions of 501, unless otherwise indicated. Transit mix concrete will be permitted. A
 wood float finish will be acceptable. Construction joints shall be provided at intervals of
 10 ft. (3 meters) in both directions. Class B Concrete, meeting the requirements of 601
 may be used in lieu of the concrete provided above.
 218.3.6.3-Precast Concrete Blocks: Precast concrete blocks shall conform to the
 applicable provisions of 601 and shall be made of Class B concrete, reinforced with Type
 B fabric. The blocks shall be 3 by 1- ft. and 4 in (1000 by 500 by 100 mm) thick. The
 longer dimension shall be placed on a horizontal plane. The blocks shall be firmly
 embedded against the slope and against adjoining blocks, with the ends in contact. The
 finished surface shall present an even, tight surface, reasonably true to line, grade, and
 section.
 218.3.7-Engineering Fabric:
 218.3.7.1-Fabric Placement: The area in which the fabric is to be installed shall be
 prepared in a relatively smooth state, free of sharp protrusions, depressions and debris. The
 machine direction of the fabric shall generally be placed parallel with the direction of major
 water flow, i.e., parallel to the stream or as authorized by the Engineer. The fabric shall be
 placed in a relatively loose and unstretched condition such that the fabric and underlying
 material deforms slightly under riprap weight when placed. Fastener pins shall be placed
 to prevent displacement of the fabric.
 The fabric shall be field sewn as described in 715.11.3 or overlapped. When the
 overlapping technique is used, an overlap of 3 ft. (900 mm) shall be maintained so the
 upgrade fabric shall always be lapped over the downgrade fabric.
 218.3.7.2-Cover Material Placement: Extreme care shall be exercised in placing
 cover material over the fabric, especially when riprap is used. Under no circumstances
 shall heavy angular stone, such as riprap, be dropped on the fabric from more than 1 ft.
 (300 mm) in height. A cushioning layer of sand or gravel may be placed between the fabric
 and riprap, providing this material does not inhibit free drainage of the slope.
 All cover material shall be placed from downslope to upslope in such a manner as to
 prevent slippage of the cover material off the fabric.
 218.4-FOUNDATION PROTECTION:
 The area around piers, abutments or other foundations shall be excavated to a depth and
 width indicated on the Plans, or as otherwise directed.
 Stone for foundation protection shall be largely equidimensional, angular, and generally
 ranging in size between one cubic foot (300 cubic millimeters) and one cubic yard (meter). The
 stone need not be placed, but may be dumped from trucks or bulldozed in place. The stone shall
 be placed where indicated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer.
 143
 
 218.4.1-Scour Protection: Stones used for scour protection shall be well graded
 throughout the thickness as determined by Engineer via visual inspection. Stones smaller than
 the specified lowest gradation as specified in the plans are not allowed in an amount exceeding
 20% by weight. Material quality shall be satisfactory to Engineer. The use of shale is not
 permitted.
 218.5-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Except for "Shot Rock" which will be measured in tons (Mg), the quantity of work done
 under Slope Protection will be measured in cubic yards (meters) of "Riprap", "Grouted Riprap",
 or "Gabions", and in square yards (meters) of "Crushed Rock Slope Protection", "Concrete Slope
 Protection" or "Fabric for Erosion Control", excluding overlaps.
 The number of tons (Mg) of "Shot Rock" shall be determined by the total of the weights
 shown on receipted railroad freight bills when materials are shipped by rail; by actual measured
 displacement of barges certified by the producer when water shipments are made, providing
 materials delivered by the methods are not stockpiled or stored; or determined by the Contractor
 from the total of weigh slips for each vehicle load weighed on an approved truck scale, and certified
 by the Contractor to be correct.
 Truck scales shall be provided by the producer or Contractor. The scales shall be of
 sufficient size and capacity to weigh the heaviest loaded trucks that are used for delivery of the
 material.
 All truck scales shall be mounted on solid foundations which will insure their remaining
 plumb and level. All truck scales shall be inspected and sealed by the West Virginia Division of
 Labor, Bureau of Weights and Measures, or other appropriate agencies of the State or its political
 subdivisions. The Division may, at its option, accept inspection and sealing by out of state
 agencies when the material is weighed outside West Virginia.
 A digital recorder shall be required on all truck scales. The digital recorder shall produce
 a printed record of the gross, tare and net weights, and the time, date, truck identification and
 project number. Provisions shall be made for constant zero compensation and further provision
 shall be made so that the scales may not be manually manipulated during the printing process.
 The system shall be interlocked so as to allow printing only when the scale has come to
 rest. In case of a breakdown of the automatic equipment, the Engineer may permit manual
 operation for a reasonable time, normally not to exceed 48 hours, while the equipment is being
 repaired.
 Each truck shall be weighed empty prior to each load.
 A weigh person shall be provided by the producer. The weigh person shall certify that the
 weight of the material, as determined either by the truck scales or from the digital printout of the
 weights, is correct.
 Area dimensions will be based on slope measurement; concrete sills will be included in the
 area measurement for crushed rock or concrete slope protection. Volumes may be determined by
 verified plan dimensions or from measurements of the completed work, as authorized by the
 Engineer. The quantity of work done under "Foundation Protection" will be measured in cubic
 yards (meters), actually produced and incorporated in the work, determined in its original position
 from cross sections by the method of average end areas, unless otherwise authorized by the
 Engineer.
 
 144
 
 218.6-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for these items, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for excavating and
 preparing the embankment or slope, footing and sill trench; furnishing all the materials, including
 steel reinforcement; and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner,
 including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 218.7-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 218001-*
 Riprap
 218002-*
 Grouted Riprap
 218003-*
 Gabion
 218004-*
 “thickness” Crushed Rock Slope Protection
 218005-*
 Concrete Slope Protection
 218006-*
 Foundation Protection
 218007-*
 Fabric For Erosion Control
 218008-*
 Shot Rock
 * Sequence number
 
 145
 
 UNIT
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Ton (Megagram)
 
 SECTION 219
 CONTROLLED LOW-STRENGTH MATERIAL
 219.1-DESCRIPTION:
 A Controlled Low Strength Material (CLSM) is a non-compacted, cementitious material used
 primarily as a backfill in lieu of a compacted material.
 This work shall consist of furnishing and placing CLSM as a backfill material in accordance
 with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines, grades, thicknesses and
 cross sections shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 219.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Section 700.
 MATERIAL
 Admixtures
 Aggregate
 Bottom Ash
 
 SUBSECTION
 707
 703.3.3 (except with the following gradation
 and a maximum loss on ignition of 12%):
 Sieve Size
 3/4 inch (19 mm)
 3/8 inch (9.5 mm)
 #100 (150 m)
 
 Fine Aggregate
 
 702.1.1–702.1.5 with the following gradation:
 Sieve Size
 3/8 inch (9.5 mm)
 #200 (150 m)
 
 Flyash
 Portland Cement
 Water
 
 Percent Passing by Weight:
 95%
 85-100%
 0-25%
 
 Percent Passing by Weight:
 100%
 0-10%
 
 707.4.1 (except with a maximum loss on
 ignition of 12%)
 701.1 or 701.3
 715.7
 
 219.3-PROPERTIES:
 Type
 A
 B
 C
 
 28 Day Compressive Strength
 50 psi min./150 psi max. (345 kPa min./1035 kPa max.)
 50 psi min. (345 kPa)
 1000 psi min. (6900 kPa)
 
 pH:
 5.0-13.0
 Flow: Minimum spread of 6 inches (152 mm)
 
 146
 
 219.4-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 219.4.1-Proportioning: Prior to the start of construction, the Contractor shall design and
 submit to the Engineer for approval the proportions of materials, including admixtures, to be
 used which will result in a workable, CLSM mixture having the desired properties.
 A mix design shall be required for each type of CLSM to be used in the work. The mix
 design shall be accompanied by a statement giving the source of materials and certified test
 data demonstrating the adequacy of the mix design.
 The results of the mix design testing shall include a listing of the components used in the
 mix, the results of unconfined compressive strength tests, pH, and flow.
 The unconfined compressive strength test specimens for mix design approval shall consist
 of two sets (3 cylinders per set) of standard 6 inch (152 mm) by 12 inch (304 mm) cylinders.
 Both sets of cylinders shall be molded, cured, and tested at an age of 28 days in accordance
 with ASTM D4832. Both sets of cylinders shall meet the strength requirements specified in
 section 219.3.
 The mix shall have a consistency that will allow the material to fill all voids during
 placement without vibration or other consolidation methods.
 219.4.2-Testing: Material shall be sampled in accordance with ASTM D5971. Flow tests
 shall be conducted in accordance with ASTM D6103. Compressive strength tests shall be
 conducted in accordance with ASTM D4832.
 The Contractor shall determine the flow, and shall mold one set (3 cylinders) of standard
 6 inch (152 mm) by 12 inch (304 mm) compressive strength specimens for every 100 cubic
 yards (75 cubic meters), or fraction thereof, of material that is placed. These cylinders shall
 be cured and tested in accordance with ASTM D4832 except that they shall be stored at the
 construction site in the storage container until the fourteenth day after preparation. After the
 fourteenth day, they shall be transported to the site of the curing environment, specified in
 ASTM D4832, where they will be cured for the remainder of the 28 day period. The average
 compressive strength at 28 days shall meet the strength requirements listed in section 219.3.
 Material not meeting the minimum compressive strength at 28 days shall be removed at the
 Contractor's expense. The Division shall evaluate Type A material that exceeds the maximum
 compressive strength.
 Report all test results, in written form, to the Engineer within 24 hours after completion of
 each test.
 Contractor’s Quality Control: Quality control of the CLSM is the responsibility of the
 Contractor. The Contractor shall maintain equipment and certified Portland cement concrete
 inspector(s) who shall maintain equipment and direct all field inspection, sampling and testing
 necessary to determine the magnitude of the various properties of the CLSM governed by the
 Specifications and shall maintain these properties within the limits of this Specification. A
 Quality Control Plan prepared according to MP 601.03.50 shall be submitted to the Engineer
 at the pre-construction conference.
 Acceptance Testing: Acceptance sampling and testing of CLSM is the responsibility of the
 Division.
 Quality control sampling and testing performed by the Contractor may be used by the
 Division for acceptance.
 219.4.3-Equipment and Tools: Equipment shall be according to 601.5.
 147
 
 219.4.4-Site Preparation: The Contractor shall provide the necessary barriers to confine
 the CLSM. Pipe culverts and any other items to be backfilled that could move or float during
 backfilling, shall be secured by the Contractor to prevent movement.
 219.4.5-Mixing: The mixing shall be in accordance with 601.7 except that CLSM shall be
 delivered in a truck mixer. Mixing and delivery is also permitted using volumetric batching
 and mixing equipment in accordance with AASHTO M241. Volumetric mixers shall be
 properly calibrated and shall sufficiently mix the materials to produce a uniform product. The
 limitation on the total number of drum revolutions is waived. Sufficient drum revolutions shall
 be used just prior to discharge to insure a homogeneous slurry.
 219.4.6-Placement: The drop height for the CLSM shall be limited to the minimum
 necessary by using chutes or other devices.
 CLSM shall be brought up evenly by moving the discharge points or by spreading the
 backfill manually. For backfilling around pipes, the backfill shall be placed evenly on both
 sides of the trench to avoid overstressing the pipe.
 The lift thickness shall be limited to that shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer
 to avoid overstressing the pipe, forms, structures or to avoid floating the pipe. Prior to
 placement of successive lifts, the CLSM shall be allowed to cure until it is self-supporting.
 CLSM shall not be finished between lifts. The top of a lift shall be cleaned, if necessary,
 to insure bonding with the next lift.
 219.5-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 219001-* Controlled Low Strength Material, Type “type”
 
 UNIT
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 
 * Sequence number
 
 SECTION 220 THROUGH SECTION 227-BLANK
 
 148
 
 SECTION 228
 SUBGRADE PREPARATION
 228.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of preparing the subgrade for the placing of base or subbase in
 accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines, grades,
 dimensions and cross section shown on the Plans.
 This item is intended to be used for any project or portion thereof where the Contract is for
 paving without grading.
 228.2-MATERIALS:
 Not specified.
 228.3-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 All work shall be performed in accordance with the applicable provisions of 207 and 211.
 Subgrade preparation shall include the entire width of the subgrade. Excavation material
 shall be used to bring eroded areas to the plan cross section. If sufficient material is not obtained
 from the subgrade preparation, additional suitable material shall be obtained by the Contractor.
 228.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be measured in square yards (meters) of "Subgrade
 Preparation" as determined from lines and dimensions shown on the Plans.
 When borrow is necessary to complete the subgrade preparation item, it will be measured
 and paid for under the provisions of 211.
 228.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price for
 the item listed below, which price and payment shall be full compensation for doing all the work
 prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor, tools, equipment, and
 incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 228.6-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 228001-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Subgrade Preparation
 
 * Sequence number
 
 149
 
 UNIT
 Square Yard (Meter)
 
 SECTION 229
 SHOULDERS AND DITCHES
 229.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of trimming, sloping, shaping, grading, subgrading, scarifying, and
 compacting existing shoulders and ditches including inlets and outlets to pipe culverts, and
 constructing new shoulders and ditches where necessary, in accordance with these Specifications
 and in reasonably close conformity with the lines, grades, and cross sections shown on the Plans
 or established by the Engineer.
 229.2-MATERIALS:
 Not Specified.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 229.3-SHOULDERS:
 Shoulders shall be formed and compacted as soon as possible after the surfacing item is
 completed, or as directed by the Engineer, to the grade and cross section shown on the Plans.
 Needed material shall be furnished by the Contractor.
 The character and operation of the equipment shall be such that the pavement will not be
 damaged. Pavement damage by these operations shall be repaired, or removed and replaced by
 the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Engineer, without extra compensation. Upon evidence of
 such damage, the Engineer may require the discontinuance of the methods used and the work to
 be done by other methods. The final dressing shall be by hand methods if so required. Shoulders
 shall be constructed of suitable material obtained on the project or of selected material as
 designated on the Plans. Surplus or unsuitable material shall be removed and disposed of as
 directed, which shall include shaping shoulders under existing guardrail to edge of the fill.
 The entire shoulder area shall be uniformly compacted by rollers, mechanical tampers, or
 hand methods, and finally dressed to true section.
 229.4-DITCHES:
 Existing ditches shall be trimmed, sloped, and cleaned, and inlets and outlets to existing
 structures opened and shaped to a uniform grade as directed by the Engineer.
 229.5-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be the number of linear miles (kilometers), or portion
 thereof measured. Any additional work beyond the scope of the original Plans but authorized by
 the Engineer will be measured in linear miles (kilometers) and paid at the unit bid price for this
 item.
 229.6-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for this item, which price and payment shall be full compensation for doing all the work prescribed
 in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor, tools, equipment, material, and
 incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 Stabilizing material when specified on the Plans will be measured and paid for separately.
 150
 
 229.7-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 229001-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Shoulders And Ditches
 
 UNIT
 Mile (Kilometer)
 
 * Sequence number
 
 SECTION 230 THROUGH SECTION 239-BLANK
 
 151
 
 SECTION 240
 CLEANING CULVERTS, INLETS AND MANHOLES
 240.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of complete removal of obstructions and thorough cleaning of trash,
 dirt and other debris from culverts, and their appurtenant structures; e.g., inlets, manholes, etc.;
 when appropriate or so designated, in a manner determined by the Contractor and acceptable to
 the Engineer.
 240.2-MATERIALS:
 Not Specified.
 240.3-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 Methods employed and equipment utilized by the Contractor for cleaning culverts and their
 appurtenant structures; e.g., inlets, manholes, etc.; shall be acceptable to the Engineer.
 Cleaning procedures employed shall insure that the removal and disposal of obstructions,
 trash, and debris be accomplished such that the existing structure being cleaned is not damaged
 and deposition on, or damage to, adjacent and downstream property will be avoided. Likewise,
 the cleaning methods shall minimize as much as practicable, pollution and sedimentation of
 receiving streams, rivers, or other bodies of water and clogging of, or damage to, downstream
 drainage structures.
 240.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 "Cleaning Culverts" will be measured by the linear foot (meter) of each size of culvert
 cleaned, the measurement being considered along the centerline of each culvert. The lengths for
 branch connections, tees, wyes and elbows will be considered along their centerlines and those
 values included in the total lengths of the appropriate culvert. Measured values for culverts with
 sloped or skewed ends will be the length along the invert. The portion of culverts extending
 through to the inside face of headwalls, wingwalls, manholes, inlets, boxes or other structures shall
 be included in the measurement.
 "Cleaning Inlets" and "Cleaning Manholes" will be measured by the unit and will be the
 number of such structures that are actually cleaned.
 240.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for doing the work
 prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies
 and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 Payment for any maintenance of traffic necessary in connection with the work shall be
 included in the appropriate 636 items of the specifications.
 240.6-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 240001-*
 240002-*
 240003-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Clean Culvert
 Clean Inlet
 Clean Manhole
 
 * Sequence number
 
 152
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 
 DIVISION 300
 BASES
 
 SECTION 301 THROUGH SECTION 306-BLANK
 SECTION 307
 CRUSHED AGGREGATE BASE COURSE
 307.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing, spreading, and compacting one or more courses of
 crushed aggregate on a prepared surface in accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably
 close conformity with the lines, grades, thicknesses, and typical cross sections shown on the Plans
 or established by the Engineer.
 307.2-MATERIALS:
 The crushed aggregate base course shall be composed of materials meeting the
 requirements of 704.6 for the class shown on the Plans except that 704.6.3 shall not apply.
 307.2.1-Quality Control Testing: Quality control of the crushed aggregate base course
 is the responsibility of the Contractor as specified in 106.1.
 The Contractor shall maintain necessary equipment and qualified personnel to perform all
 sampling and testing necessary to determine the magnitude of the various properties of the
 material governed by the Specifications and shall maintain these properties within the limits
 of the Specifications.
 The Contractor shall submit a quality control plan detailing the methods by which the
 quality control program will be conducted. This plan, prepared in accordance with the
 guidelines set forth in the appropriate portions of MP 307.00.50 and MP 717.04.21, shall be
 submitted to the Engineer at the preconstruction conference. The work shall not begin until
 the plan is reviewed for conformance with the contract documents.
 307.2.2-Acceptance Testing: Acceptance sampling and testing of crushed aggregate base
 course is the responsibility of the Division, except for furnishing the necessary materials.
 Quality control sampling and testing performed by the Contractor may be used by the Division
 for acceptance.
 307.2.3-Sampling and Testing: Frequency of sampling and testing shall be in accordance
 with the Contractor's quality control plan. The minimum frequencies shall be as indicated in
 applicable portions of MP 307.00.50. Crushed aggregate shall be sampled in accordance with
 MP 700.00.06, Aggregate Sampling Procedures.
 307.2.4-Acceptance Procedure: Material conforming to the specification requirements
 will be accepted at full contract price. Material failing to comply with the quality requirements
 of Table 704.6.2B shall not be incorporated into the work.
 Acceptance of crushed aggregate base course for compaction and for gradation shall be in
 accordance with appropriate portions of 307.2.4.1.
 
 153
 
 307.2.4.1-Acceptance Plan:
 307.2.4.1.1-For Compaction: Acceptance for compaction shall be on a lot by lot basis.
 A lot shall consist of a single layer of not more than 2,000 linear ft. (600 meters) per width
 being placed. A lot shall be divided into five approximately equal sized sublots. One
 nuclear moisture and density measurement in accordance with applicable portions of 717
 shall be made at a random location within each of the five sublots. The random locations
 shall be determined in accordance with MP 712.21.26. If the result of five density tests on
 a lot indicates that at least 80 percent of the material, in accordance with 106.3.1 (West
 Virginia AP-A), has been compacted to the specified target percentage of dry density, the
 lot will be accepted. If less than 80 percent has been compacted to the specified target
 percentage of dry density, no additional material shall be placed on that layer until it has
 been reworked to meet the specified requirements. Reworking and retesting shall be at the
 expense of the Contractor. When the Division performs the testing in the evaluation of
 reworked lots, the testing will be at the expense of the Contractor at the unit cost specified
 in 109.2.2.
 Compaction of shoulder aggregate on resurfacing projects adjacent to asphalt or
 concrete pavement shall be based on visual inspection to assure that the surface of the
 shoulder has been compacted to the level of the finished pavement surface.
 Compaction of Class 7 aggregate shall be based on visual inspection to assure that the
 aggregate particles are arranged in a stable manner.
 307.2.4.1.2-For Gradation: Acceptance for gradation shall be on the basis of test
 results on consecutive random samples from a lot. A lot shall be considered the quantity
 of material represented by an average test value, not to exceed five sublots. Generally at
 the beginning of the project, the average shall be started on the second sample in
 accordance with MP 300.00.51. A sublot is the quantity of material represented by a single
 gradation test. In the case where only one sample is taken, this sublot shall be considered
 the lot. The material shall be sampled and tested in accordance with 307.2.3. The gradation
 test results shall be plotted on a control chart in accordance with MP 300.00.51. When the
 average, or when the most recent three consecutive individual test values fall outside the
 limits of Table 704.6.2A the lot of material represented will be considered nonconforming
 to the extent that the last of its sublots is nonconforming. When this occurs, the last sublot
 shall have its price adjusted in accordance with Table 307.9.1. In the case where the
 average is nonconforming and the last sublot contained is conforming, then there would be
 no price adjustment. In no event shall a sublot of material have its price adjusted more
 than once, the first adjustment shall apply.
 Acceptance for Gradation of Class 7 aggregate shall be by visual inspection; a written
 explanation of the manufacturing process shall be provided if requested by the Engineer.
 Class 7 from a non-approved source, shall not exceed a weighted loss of 30 percent when
 subjected to five cycles of the Sodium Sulfate Soundness Test, will be acceptable.
 307.2.4.2-Degree of Nonconformance: When a sublot of material is to have its price
 adjusted, the percentage point difference between the nonconforming test value and the
 specification limit shall be determined for each sieve size determined to be nonconforming,
 and this value shall be multiplied by its appropriate multiplication factor as set forth in
 Table 307.2.4.2 to determine the degree of nonconformance on that sieve.
 154
 
 TABLE 307.2.4.2
 Nonconforming Sieve Size
 Multiplication Factor
 2 in. (50 mm)
 1.0
 1 ½ in. (37.5 mm)
 1.0
 ¾ in. (19 mm)
 1.0
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 1.0
 No. 40 (425 μm)
 1.5
 No. 100 (150 μm)
 2.0
 No. 200 (75 μm)
 2.5
 The total measure of nonconformance of an individual sublot is the sum of all
 nonconformances on the various sieve sizes of that sublot.
 When the total degree of nonconformance has been established and it is 12.0 or less,
 the material will be paid for at an adjusted contract price as specified in Table 307.9.1.
 When the degree of nonconformance is greater than 12.0, the nonconforming sublot
 shall be resolved on an individual basis, requiring a special investigation by the Engineer
 to determine the appropriate course of action to be followed. Pending resolution of the
 matter, additional lifts of base or pavement shall not be placed over the nonconforming
 material.
 307.2.5-Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement: Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement (RAP) may be
 substituted for Class 10 Shoulder Stone material on roadways where edge line pavement
 markings exist or are installed. Materials testing will be waived, however the Top Size
 gradation shall not exceed 1 ½ inches (37 mm) or the maximum shoulder placement thickness
 as defined on the Plans (whichever is less). Approval shall be by visual inspection by the
 Engineer.
 Payment for RAP shoulder material substitution shall be at the same unit bid price for
 Shoulder Stone Material in the Contract documents.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 307.3-EQUIPMENT:
 Any machine, combination of machines, or equipment which will handle the material
 without undue segregation and produce the completed base course meeting these Specifications
 for handling, spreading, moistening, mixing and compacting may be used when approved by the
 Engineer.
 307.4-PLACING:
 Prior to the placing of any base course material on the subgrade, the subgrade shall meet
 the applicable requirements of 207.9 or 228. The profile grade of the subgrade shall be such that
 the specified thickness of the base course may be obtained. No base shall be placed when the
 subgrade is frozen or when it is sufficiently wet that its surface can be marred by construction
 equipment.
 The base course shall be placed and shaped on the prepared surface in layers to achieve the
 compacted thickness shown on the Plans. When more than one layer is required, each layer shall
 be shaped and compacted to the required density before the succeeding layer is placed. Each layer
 155
 
 shall be kept at least 500 ft. (150 meters) ahead of the succeeding layer. Tailgating will not be
 permitted. If power graders are used for spreading, the material shall be placed in windrows and
 uniformly and thoroughly mixed prior to final spreading and compaction.
 On resurfacing projects the existing shoulders shall be scarified to a depth of 2 inches (50
 mm) or as shown on the Plans. Subgrade soil or ditch soil shall not be mixed with the loosened
 material. The loosened material shall then be broken and reshaped to form a uniform grade and
 cross section.
 Aggregate for shoulders on resurfacing projects shall be spread over the prepared surface
 to a width as specified in the Plans and to a depth sufficient to bring the uncompacted surface to a
 height of at least 1 inch (25 mm) above the finished pavement edge elevation. For compacted
 shoulder thicknesses exceeding 3 inches (75 mm), the differential from the pavement edge
 elevation must be increased to assure that the loose aggregate thickness is approximately equal to
 1-1/3 times the compacted thickness. The loose aggregate is then to be shaped to proper grade and
 cross section maintaining the height differential.
 307.5-COMPACTING:
 Each layer shall be compacted. The moisture content shall be maintained at a level
 sufficient to facilitate compaction. Required density and testing shall be in accordance with the
 provisions of the appropriate portions of 717. The surface of each layer shall be maintained during
 the compaction operations in such a manner that a uniform texture is produced and the aggregates
 firmly keyed. The surface of the top layer of the base course shall be carefully trued by blading if
 necessary.
 Shoulder aggregate adjacent to concrete or asphalt pavement shall be compacted by
 pneumatic tire rollers when the drum roller is wider than the shoulder width or as directed by the
 engineer.
 307.6-TOLERANCE:
 307.6.1 Surface Tolerance: The completed surface shall not vary more than 3/8 inch (10
 mm) above or below Plan grade, nor more than 3/8 inch (10 mm) from a straightedge 10 ft. (3
 m) long applied parallel to the centerline of the pavement. Deviations shall be corrected by
 scarifying, adding additional approved aggregate if necessary, reshaping, and recompacting.
 Shoulder surfaces on resurfacing projects adjacent to concrete or asphalt pavement do not
 need to be checked with a straightedge.
 307.6.2-Thickness Tolerance: The base course shall be checked for proper thickness after
 final compaction. The Contractor shall refill all test holes with approved base course material
 and adequately recompact the material.
 Any deficiency in total thickness of the base course in excess of ½ in. (13 mm) shall be
 corrected.
 307.7-MAINTENANCE:
 The surface of the completed base shall be protected against the loss of fine material by the
 addition of moisture when necessary, and it shall be maintained in a satisfactory and smooth
 condition until such time that it is surfaced or finally accepted.
 
 156
 
 307.8-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 307.8.1 Cubic Yard (Meter) Measurement: The quantity of work done will be the
 number of cubic yards (meters) measured in place. Any additional work beyond the scope of
 the original Plans but authorized by the Engineer will be measured in cubic yards (meters) in
 place and paid for at the unit bid price for this item, subject to the provisions of 104.2 and
 109.2.
 Base course constructed outside the lines, dimensions, and cross sections shown on the
 Plans or designated will not be measured for payment.
 307.8.2-Ton (Mg) Measurement: The quantity of work done will be the number of tons
 (Mg) of material complete in place and accepted.
 The number of tons (Mg) shall be determined by the total of the weights shown on receipted
 railroad freight bills when materials are shipped by rail; by actual measured displacement of
 barges certified by the producer when water shipments are made, providing materials delivered
 by the methods are not stockpiled or stored; or determined by the Contractor from the total of
 weigh slips for each vehicle load weighed on an approved standard scale or from digital
 printout slips from an automatic batching plant, and certified by the Contractor to be correct.
 Truck scales shall be provided by the producer or Contractor, except that truck scales are
 not required where the material is weighed at properly calibrated automatic batching plant
 facilities which are equipped with digital print-out equipment. The scales shall be of sufficient
 size and capacity to weigh the heaviest loaded trucks that are used for delivery of the material.
 All truck scales shall be mounted on solid foundations, which will insure their remaining
 plumb and level. All truck scales shall be inspected and sealed by the West Virginia Division
 of Labor, Bureau of Weights and Measures, or other appropriate agencies of the State or its
 political subdivisions. The Division may, at its option, accept inspection and sealing by out of
 state agencies when the material is weighed outside West Virginia.
 The producer shall provide a weigh person. The weigh person shall certify that the weight
 of the material, as determined either by the truck scales or from the digital printout of the
 weights, is correct.
 Each truck shall be weighed empty prior to each load, except at automatic batch plants
 approved to operate without truck scales. A digital recorder shall be required on all truck
 scales. The digital recorder shall produce a printed record of the gross, tare and net weights,
 and the time, date, truck identification and project number. Provision shall be made for
 constant zero compensation and further provision shall be made so that the scales may not be
 manually manipulated during the printing process. The system shall be interlocked so as to
 allow printing only when the scale has come to rest.
 In case of a breakdown of the automatic equipment, the Engineer may permit manual
 operation for a reasonable time, normally not to exceed 48 hours, while the equipment is being
 repaired.
 When reconditioning surface with aggregate is specified it shall include the cost of all
 surface reconditioning work.
 
 157
 
 307.9 BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the items listed below, which price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all
 the materials including water for compaction, scarification and manipulation of existing surface,
 and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor,
 tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 307.9.1-Price Adjustment: Aggregates not conforming with the gradation requirements
 as described in 307.2.4.1 will be paid for at the adjusted contract price based on the degree of
 nonconformance as specified in Table 307.9.1.
 TABLE 307.9.1
 Adjustment of Contract Price for
 Gradation not Within Specifications
 Degree of
 Percent of Contract
 Nonconformance
 Price to be Reduced
 1.0 to 3.0
 2
 3.1 to 5.0
 4
 5.1 to 8.0
 7
 8.1 to 12.0
 11
 Greater than 12
 *
 * The Division will make a special evaluation of the material
 and determine the appropriate action.
 
 307.10 PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 307001-*
 Aggregate Base Course, Class “class”
 Aggregate Base Course, “aggregate type”,
 307005-*
 Class “class”
 
 UNIT
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Ton (Megagram)
 
 * Sequence number
 “aggregate type” shall be either stone and gravel, slag or steel slag
 “class” From Table 704.6 2 A and B
 
 SECTION 308 THROUGH SECTION 310-BLANK
 
 158
 
 SECTION 311
 OPEN GRADED FREE DRAINING BASE COURSE
 311.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of constructing a base course of coarse stabilized aggregate spread
 and compacted on a prepared surface in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably
 close conformance with the lines, grades, thickness, and typical cross sections as shown on the
 Plans or as established by the Engineer. It is the intent to allow the Contractor a choice between
 asphalt stabilizer and Portland cement stabilizer.
 311.2-MATERIALS:
 Depending on the alternative chosen, (asphalt or Portland cement) the materials shall
 conform to the requirements of the following subsections of Division 700.
 MATERIAL
 Aggregate*
 Curing Material***
 Performance Graded Binders**
 Portland cement***
 Water***
 *
 **
 ***
 
 SUBSECTION
 703.1, 703.2,
 703.3, 703.4
 707.10
 705.5
 701.1
 715.7
 
 UNIT
 AASHTO 57, 67, 357,
 or 467
 Standard grade for area
 Type 1
 
 If river gravel is used, the crushed particle requirement shall be 100% two face fracture.
 Asphalt stabilized applications only.
 Portland cement applications only.
 
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 311.3-GENERAL:
 General requirements shall comply with the applicable portion of 401.3 of the
 Specifications.
 311.4-COMPOSITION OF OPTIONAL STABILIZING MIXTURES:
 If the asphalt stabilized alternative is used, the asphalt cement shall be confined to 2.0%,
 plus or minus 0.5% by weight of the mix if Blast Furnace Slag is used the asphalt cement may be
 increased.
 If the Portland cement stabilized alternative is chosen, the cement shall be Type 1 and shall
 have a minimum cement content of 150 ± 5 pounds per cubic yard (90 ± 2 kg per cubic meter).
 This base course shall be capable of withstanding construction operations without showing any
 detrimental effects.
 311.5-TESTING:
 311.5.1-Quality Control Testing: Quality control is the responsibility of the Contractor
 as specified in 106.1.
 The contractor shall design a quality control plan detailing the methods by which the
 quality program will be conducted. The Contractor shall conduct one test daily to determine
 mix properties in accordance with 311.4. Frequency will be one test per day. Acceptance for
 159
 
 gradation will be in accordance with section 703.6. If gravel is used for the coarse aggregate
 a crushed particle analysis, in accordance with Section 311.2 will be conducted before
 placement and every 10,000-ton (9000-mg) thereafter. Unless otherwise specified compaction
 testing shall be waived.
 311.5.2-Acceptance Testing: Acceptance sampling and testing of aggregates is the
 responsibility of the Division, except for furnishing the necessary materials. The Division may
 use quality control sampling and testing performed by the Contractor for Acceptance.
 311.6-WEATHER AND SEASONAL LIMITATIONS:
 Weather and seasonal limitations shall be in accordance with 401.8 for asphalt applications.
 Portland cement base shall not be mixed or placed while the temperature of the course on which
 the material is to be placed is below 40° F (4° C). When conditions indicate that the temperature
 of the in-place material may fall to less than 35° F (2° C) within 24 hours, adequate means
 satisfactory to the Engineer shall be provided for the protection of the work. In no instance shall
 the mix be placed on frozen subgrade.
 311.7-EQUIPMENT:
 Depending on the alternative used, equipment shall meet the applicable requirements of
 401.9 or 501.5 – whichever is appropriate.
 311.8-PREPARATION AND BATCHING OF MATERIALS:
 All aggregate shall be dried until it has no surface moisture and not more than 0.5 percent
 of absorbed moisture. Mixing temperature of aggregate shall be as directed and shall range
 between 225° - 300° F (107° -149° C).
 Bituminous material shall be heated in melting kettles or tanks designed to secure even
 heating of the mass. Heating temperatures shall be as directed and shall range between 250° - 275°
 F (120° - 135° C).
 The temperature of the mix shall be within the range of 200° - 250° F (95° - 120° C).
 Preparation of materials for Portland cement applications shall conform to the requirements
 of 501.7.
 311.9-MIXING AND TRANSPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
 The materials used in asphaltic mixes shall be mixed in an asphalt concrete mixing plant
 that has been inspected and approved by the Division. Transportation of such mixes shall be in
 accordance with 401.09.7 of the Specifications.
 The materials used in Portland cement mixes may be mixed at a central mix plant, in a
 transit mix truck or a pugmill type mixer. Regardless of which type of equipment is used, the
 mixing time shall be a minimum of two minutes once all component materials are batched.
 311.10-PLACING, SPREADING, AND/OR COMPACTING:
 Placement of the stabilized material shall be by acceptable spreading equipment to the
 appropriate line, grade and thickness. Acceptable equipment includes asphalt pavers for asphalt
 stabilized bases and spreader boxes, self-propelled spreaders or conventional concrete placing
 equipment for Portland cement stabilized bases.
 
 160
 
 A four to ten ton (3.6 to 9.1 Mg) steel wheel tandem roller shall be used to compact the
 asphalt stabilized free draining base material. The number of roller passes shall be two or three
 unless otherwise directed. In the case of the asphalt stabilized aggregate, the mat temperature, at
 the time of initial rolling, shall be between 150 and 175 F (65 and 80 C) unless otherwise
 directed. In the case of the asphalt stabilized aggregate, the purpose of the rolling is to compact
 the base sufficiently to support the weight of the equipment that will place the next layer or
 pavement. The compacted base is to be porous so that water will drain through it. The base is not
 to be compacted to the point that it is not free draining or that the aggregate is crushed.
 311.11-CURING:
 No curing is required for Portland cement stabilized based.
 311.12-TOLERANCE:
 Thickness tolerance shall meet the requirements of 307.6.2.
 311.13-MAINTENANCE:
 The Contractor shall maintain the base course porous and free from being contaminated or
 clogged by deleterious material, transported and deposited by construction equipment, traffic, etc.,
 until the next layer of the pavement is placed. The Contractor shall also maintain the final surface
 of the base course true to specified line, grade and cross section until such time that the pavement
 is placed.
 311.14-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be the number of cubic yards (meters) measured in place.
 Any additional work beyond the scope of the original plans but authorized by the Engineer will
 be measured in place and paid at the unit bid price, subject to the provisions of 104.2 and 109.2.
 Base course constructed outside the lines, dimensions and cross sections shown on the
 Plans or designated will not be measured for payment.
 311.15-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the item below, which price and payment shall constitute full compensation for furnishing all
 the materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including
 labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 311.16-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 311006-* Open Graded Free Draining Base Course
 * Sequence number
 
 161
 
 UNIT
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 
 162
 
 DIVISION 400
 ASPHALT PAVEMENTS
 
 SECTION 401
 ASPHALT BASE, WEARING, AND
 PATCHING AND LEVELING COURSES
 401.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of constructing one or more courses of hot-mix asphalt (HMA) or
 warm-mix asphalt (WMA), mixed mechanically in a plant, composed of aggregate and asphalt
 material designed in accordance with either the Marshall or Superpave Design System as specified
 in the contract documents, on a prepared foundation in accordance with these specifications and
 in reasonable close conformity with the lines, grades, weights or thicknesses, and cross sections
 shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 The unit of measurement for HMA or WMA will be by the ton (megagram), square yard
 (square meter) or cubic yard (cubic meter).
 The work will be accepted in accordance with these Specifications and the applicable
 requirements of Sections 105, 106, and 109.
 401.2-MATERIALS:
 The materials shall conform to the following requirements:
 MATERIAL
 Coarse Aggregate
 
 Fine Aggregate
 Mineral Filler
 Performance
 Graded Binders
 Note 1
 Note 2
 Note 3
 
 SUBSECTION
 703.1 thru 703.3 Note 1 and Note 3
 (See MP 401.02.28 for
 exceptions and additions required
 for Superpave Items.)
 702.3
 (See MP 401.02.28 for additions
 required for Superpave Items)
 702.4
 
 PG BINDER GRADE
 PG 70-22 Note 2 shall be
 used on projects
 specified with over 20
 million ESALs.
 Any deviation from the
 above criteria will be
 specified in contract
 documents.
 Standard grade shall be a
 PG 64-22.
 
 705.5
 
 The total shale, coal and other lightweight deleterious material and friable particles shall not
 exceed 3%.
 PG 64-22 Binder may be used in asphalt placed below the top two lifts. Scratch course and
 patching-and-leveling are not identified as lifts
 When slag is specified in the contract, the coarse aggregate shall be slag which meets the
 requirements of 703.3, except as amended in this subsection
 
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 401.3-GENERAL:
 Construction methods to be used in performing the work shall be submitted to the Engineer
 for review prior to the start of work. This review may require modification of the proposed
 methods to provide the desired end product. All equipment, tools, machinery, and plant shall be
 maintained in a satisfactory working condition.
 163
 
 401.4-COMPOSITION OF MIXTURES:
 401.4.1-General: The aggregate for use in the designated mixture shall consist of a
 mixture of aggregate (coarse, fine, reclaimed asphalt pavement (RAP) if desired, or mixture
 thereof) and mineral filler if required. It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to
 determine the percentage of RAP to be used in the mix. The amount and grade of virgin PG
 Binder to be used in the RAP designs shall be determined in accordance with Materials Procedure
 (MP) 401.02.24.
 401.4.2-Job Mix Formula: Job Mix Formula (JMF) is the specification for a single mix
 produced at a single plant. This mix may be specific to a single project or be used on multiple
 projects if the basic design criteria (design compaction level and PG Binder grade) are the
 same.
 The Contractor shall submit a proposed JMF for each combination of aggregate and asphalt
 material for each type of HMA to be produced. Depending on the design type, the JMF
 gradations shall be within the tolerances set forth in either Table 401.4.2A or Table 401.4.2B.
 Marshall mix designs shall be developed in accordance with MP 401.02.22. Superpave mix
 designs shall be developed in accordance with MP 401.02.28.
 Each proposed JMF must be documented on the Division Form T400 or T400SP and the
 entire JMF package shall be forwarded for review to the District Materials
 Engineer/Supervisor. The T400/T400SP and JMF package shall then be transmitted to the
 Materials Control, Soils and Testing Division for final review. If the JMF requires revision, it
 will be returned to the designer through the District. The T400/T400SP Form shall contain the
 following information:
 i.
 Identification of the source and type of materials used in the design.
 ii.
 The aggregate blend percentages and the percentage for each sieve fraction of
 aggregate considered the desirable target for that fraction.
 iii. The percentage of asphalt binder representing the optimum asphalt content for the
 JMF submitted, which is to be considered the desirable target percentage.
 iv.
 The temperature of the completed mixture at the plant which shall be within ± 25°
 F (± 14° C) of the median mix temperature established by the temperature-viscosity
 chart or as recommended by the asphalt supplier.
 v.
 The ratio (calculated to the nearest one-tenth percent) of the Fines to Asphalt (FA).
 For Marshall mixes the ratio is defined as the percentage of aggregate passing the
 No. 200 (75 µm) sieve, divided by the percentage of asphalt content calculated at
 the percentage optimum asphalt content of the design. For Superpave mixes the
 ratio is defined as the percentage of aggregate passing the 75 µm (No. 200) sieve,
 divided by the percentage of effective asphalt content calculated at the percentage
 optimum asphalt content of the design.
 
 164
 
 TABLE 401.4.2A
 Design Aggregate Gradation Requirements for Marshall Mix Designs
 Base-II
 Wearing-I Wearing-III
 Type of
 Wearing
 Base-I
 (Patch
 (Scratch-I) (Scratch-III)
 Mix
 IV
 & Level)
 Nominal Maximum Size
 Sieve
 1 ½ in
 ¾ in
 ¾ in
 3/8 in
 No. 4
 Size
 (37.5 mm) (19 mm)
 (19 mm)
 (9.5 mm)
 (4.75 mm)
 –
 2 in (50 mm)
 100
 –
 –
 –
 1 ½ in (37.5 mm)
 
 90-100
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 1 in (25 mm)
 
 90 max
 
 100
 
 100
 
 –
 
 –
 
 ¾ in (19 mm)
 
 –
 
 90-100
 
 90-100
 
 –
 
 –
 
 ½ in (12.5 mm)
 
 –
 
 90 max
 
 90 max
 
 100
 
 –
 
 3/8 in (9.5 mm)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 85-100
 
 100
 
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 47 min
 
 80 max
 
 90-100
 
 No. 8 (2.36 mm)
 
 15-36
 
 20-50
 
 20-50
 
 30-55
 
 90 max
 
 No. 16 (1.18 mm)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 40-65
 
 No. 30 (600 µm)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 No. 50 (300 µm)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 No. 200 (75 µm)
 
 1-6
 
 2-8
 
 2-8
 
 2-9
 
 3-11
 
 165
 
 TABLE 401.4.2B
 Design Aggregate Gradation Requirements for Superpave Mix Designs
 19 Note 1
 9.5
 4.75
 Type of Mix
 37.5
 25
 (Patch &
 12.5
 (Scratch) (Scratch)
 Level)
 Standard
 Sieve Size
 
 Nominal Maximum Size
 19 mm
 12.5 mm
 9.5 mm
 (3/4 inch) (1/2 inch) (3/8 inch)
 
 37.5 mm
 (1 ½ inch)
 
 25 mm
 (1 inch)
 
 100
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 37.5 mm (1½”)
 
 90-100
 
 100
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 25 mm (1”)
 
 90 max
 
 90-100
 
 100
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 19 mm (3/4”)
 
 –
 
 90 max
 
 90-100
 
 100
 
 –
 
 –
 
 12.5 mm (1/2”)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 90 max
 
 90-100
 
 100
 
 100
 
 9.5 mm (3/8”)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 90 max
 
 90-100
 
 95-100
 
 4.75 mm (No.4)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 90 max
 
 90-100
 
 2.36 mm (No.8)
 
 15-41
 
 19-45
 
 23- 49
 
 28-58
 
 32-67
 
 1.18 mm (No.16)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 30-60
 
 600 µm (No.30)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 300 µm (No. 50)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 75 µm (No.200)
 
 0-6
 
 1-7
 
 2-8
 
 2-10
 
 2-10
 
 6-12
 
 50 mm (2”)
 
 Note 1
 
 4.75
 (No. 4)
 
 When a 19 mm mix is specified for use as a heavy duty surface mix, it shall be designed as a fine
 graded mix with the additional requirement of a minimum of 47% passing the 4.75 mm (No.4)
 screen.
 
 If it becomes necessary to change aggregate sources, a new mix design shall be developed
 and submitted for approval. When using neat (unmodified) PG Binders, the binder source may
 be changed without requiring a new mix design, but the binder grade must always remain the
 same for each design. If a source change results in the use of an additive- enhanced modified
 binder of the same grade, a new mix design will be required.
 If a modified binder source is changed or if the modification process is changed, a new mix
 design shall be developed and submitted for approval. A source change to a new location with
 the original manufacturer/supplier and the original modification process will not require a new
 mix design.
 At no time shall different grades of PG Binders be mixed together in the same storage tank.
 When it is necessary to switch to a new binder grade the tank shall be drawn down as far as
 possible, normally to the top of heating coils, before refilling with the new binder. The new
 binder shall be circulated thoroughly before restarting production.
 
 166
 
 401.4.2.1-Warm Mix Asphalt: When the Division allows an approved HMA design
 to be produced as warm-mix asphalt (WMA) using the water injection system, the
 temperature of the completed mixture at the plant may be lowered to an established range
 that has previously been determined through trial production. The allowable temperature
 range specified on the approved T400 mix design form shall be adjusted accordingly when
 producing WMA. In addition, all references to the minimum compaction temperatures in
 Sections 401.10.3 and 401.10.4 of this specification and in MP 401.05.20, Compaction
 Testing of HMA Pavements, may be waived if it can be established that additional density
 can be obtained at lower temperatures without damaging the pavement. Intermingling of
 WMA and HMA on the same course should be avoided. If circumstances result in the need
 for intermingling, it must be approved by the Engineer. Upon approval, the location where
 intermingling occurs on the project shall be clearly defined and documented by the Contractor
 and submitted to the Engineer. Also, if the intermingling occurs on a project where the density
 of the pavement is being controlled by the rollerpass compaction method, then a new test
 section shall be established on the new material beginning at the point where the WMA and
 HMA meet. All testing requirements established for HMA mix designs and quality
 assurance/quality control testing shall also apply to WMA.
 401.5-TESTING:
 401.5.1-Test Methods:
 MP 700.00.06
 AASHTO T168
 AASHTO T11
 AASHTO T27
 AASHTO T30
 AASHTO T164
 AASHTO T308
 AASHTO T245
 ASTM D5581
 AASHTO T166
 AASHTO T209
 AASHTO T312
 
 Aggregate Sampling Procedures
 Sampling Hot-Mix Asphalt
 Materials Finer than No. 200 (75 µm) Sieve in Mineral
 Aggregates by Washing
 Sieve Analysis of Fine and Coarse Aggregates
 Mechanical Analysis of Extracted Aggregate
 Quantitative Extraction of Bitumen from Bituminous
 Paving Mixtures
 Asphalt Content of HMA by the Ignition Method (Test
 Method A)
 Resistance to Plastic Flow of Bituminous Mixtures Using
 Marshall Apparatus
 Resistance to Plastic Flow of Bituminous Mixtures Using
 Marshall Apparatus (For Base-I Marshall designs only)
 Bulk Specific Gravity of Compacted Bituminous Mixtures
 Maximum Specific Gravity of Bituminous Paving Mixtures
 Determining the Density of HMA Specimens by Means of
 the Superpave Gyratory Compactor
 
 401.6-CONTRACTORS QUALITY CONTROL:
 401.6.1-Quality Control Testing: Quality control of bituminous asphalt is the
 responsibility of the Contractor. The Contractor shall maintain equipment and qualified
 personnel including at least one certified Asphalt Plant Technician at each plant. The
 technician shall be in charge of all plant quality control activities such as mix proportioning
 and adjustment and all sampling and testing activities necessary to maintain the various
 properties of asphalt within the limits of the specification.
 167
 
 The Contractor shall maintain necessary equipment and qualified personnel including at
 least one certified Asphalt Field and Compaction Technician at each project during paving
 operations. Additionally, a certified Asphalt Field and Compaction Technician with
 certification to perform nuclear density testing of asphalt pavements shall perform all testing
 necessary to assure compaction of the asphalt meets specification requirements. Compaction
 Technicians may serve as Asphalt Field and Compaction Technicians for asphalt compaction
 testing until December 31, 2017.
 The Contractor, shall design a workable Quality Control Plan, detailing the type and
 frequency of sampling and testing deemed necessary to measure and control the magnitude of
 the various properties of the asphalt governed by these specifications. This plan, prepared in
 accordance with MP 401.03.50 shall be submitted to the Engineer for review prior to
 production of material under this specification.
 401.6.2-Job Mix Formula (JMF) Field Verification: For each JMF, a mix design field
 verification shall be conducted during the first days of plant production. For Marshall designs,
 the verification shall be in accordance with the guidelines established in MP 401.02.27. For
 Superpave, designs it shall be in accordance with MP 401.02.29. The field verification is for
 the purpose of demonstrating that the JMF can be produced within the specified tolerances set
 forth in the MP. If the mix cannot be produce within these requirements, a new mix design
 will be required.
 401.6.3-Quality Control Testing Requirements: After the JMF design field verification
 has been successfully completed, sampling frequency and test requirements for quality control
 shall be as set forth in MP 401.02.27 for Marshall designs and MP 401.02.29 for Superpave
 designs. If the Division determines that a mix cannot be consistently produced within the
 tolerance limits of the specified design properties, approval of the mix may be revoked and the
 contractor will be required to provide a new mix design.
 401.7-ACCEPTANCE TESTING:
 401.7.1-Acceptance Testing of HMA: Acceptance testing of asphalt is the responsibility
 of the Division. For Superpave mixes, the acceptance sampling and testing requirements for
 the mixture shall be as set forth in MP 401.02.29.
 401.7.2-Surface Tolerance: It is the intent of these specifications that projects with a total
 new pavement thickness of 3 inches (75 mm) or more and minimum length of two lots (1100
 ft. (340 m)) shall be constructed to provide a smooth riding surface. The smoothness of the
 riding surface will be determined by the Engineer using an inertial profilometer or Mays Ride
 Meter. The smoothness testing shall be accomplished within 30 days after the project is
 substantially complete. On urban projects with numerous side streets where traffic must cross
 through the paving operation, the Engineer shall determine if it is practical to evaluate the
 pavement for smoothness.
 The pavement will be divided into sampling Lots of one-tenth (0.1) lane-mile (0.16 km)
 each. Each Lot shall exhibit a smoothness measurement, expressed in inches per mile
 (millimeters per kilometer) equal to or less than that shown in the appropriate Table 401.7.2E
 or 401.7.2M. When a Lot is represented by a smoothness number greater than that shown in
 Tables 401.7.2E or 401.7.2M, the unit price shall be adjusted as in 401.13.2.
 168
 
 TABLE 401.7.2E
 Total New Pavement Thickness
 Smoothness
 3 inches to 4 inches
 81 inches per mile or less
 4 inches or greater
 65 inches per mile or less
 TABLE 401.7.2M
 Total New Pavement Thickness
 Smoothness
 75 mm to 100 mm
 1 250 mm/km or less
 100 mm or greater
 1 000 mm/km or less
 When compaction is completed on the course, it shall present a uniform surface, true line
 and grade, conforming to the cross section shown on the Plans. When tested with a
 straightedge of approximately 10 feet (3 meters) in length and a template of the specified
 dimensions, the finished base course shall not show a deviation greater than ¼ inch (6 mm)
 and the finished wearing course shall not show a deviation from the required surface greater
 than 3/16 inch (5 mm).
 The Contractor shall provide the straightedge and template for checking the surfaces and
 an employee to use them under the direction of the Engineer. Any irregularity of the surface
 exceeding the limits specified shall be corrected. Depressions which develop after the initial
 rolling shall be corrected by loosening the mixture and adding new material. High places shall
 be corrected by removing excess material.
 Areas of completed courses found to be defective shall be removed and replaced with
 approved mixtures laid in accordance with these specifications, and no additional
 compensation will be allowed for materials used or work involved in replacing defective areas.
 401.7.3-Compaction: Acceptance testing for compaction shall be performed in accordance
 with either the Lot-by-Lot method described in Section 401.7.3.1 or the rollerpass procedure
 described in MP 401.05.20, based the following criteria:
 Roadway Type
 Interstate and Expressways
 APD Routes
 NHS Routes
 All other routes and roadways
 
 Compaction Method
 Lot By Lot
 Lot By Lot
 Lot By Lot
 Determined by Table 401.7.3.A
 
 Patching-and-leveling and scratch courses shall not be included in determining the total
 new pavement thickness. When asphalt is placed in areas that require a non-uniform thickness
 or is tapered to a thin edge, the method of acceptance testing shall be determined by the
 Engineer. Acceptance testing is not required on areas in which a full-size roller is restricted
 from properly compacting the mat. These areas shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the
 Engineer.
 
 169
 
 TABLE 401.7.3A
 Mainline Compaction Methods
 Traffic
 Type
 
 Heavy
 ≥3
 million
 ESALs
 
 Medium
 <3
 million
 ESALs
 Note 1
 
 Total New
 Pavement
 Thickness
 ≥ 2.5 inches
 (63 mm)
 < 2.5 inches
 (63 mm)
 ≥ 3.0 inches
 (75 mm)
 < 3.0 inches
 (75 mm)
 
 Marshall
 Lift Thickness
 
 Superpave
 Lift Thickness
 
 ≥ 1.5 inch
 (37.5 mm)
 < 1.5 inch
 (37.5 mm)
 > 1.5 inch
 (37.5 mm)
 ≤ 1.5 inch
 (37.5 mm)
 > 1.5 inch
 (37.5 mm)
 ≤ 1.5 inch
 (37.5 mm)
 
 ≥ 1.5 inch
 (37.5 mm)
 < 1.5 inch
 (37.5 mm)
 > 1.5 inch
 (37.5 mm)
 ≤ 1.5 inch
 (37.5 mm)
 > 1.5 inch
 (37.5 mm)
 ≤ 1.5 inch
 (37.5 mm)
 
 All lifts
 
 All lifts
 
 Compaction
 Method
 Note 1, Note 2
 
 Lot-by-Lot
 Rollerpass
 Lot-by-Lot
 Rollerpass
 Lot-by-Lot
 Rollerpass
 Rollerpass
 
 Any lift that is placed at a thickness of less than two times the nominal maximum
 aggregate size, as specified in either Table 401.4.2A or Table 401.4.2B, shall be
 compacted using the rollerpass method.
 Any asphalt that has been specified with a higher than standard grade PG Binder (i.e.
 PG 70-22, PG 76-22, etc.) shall be compacted using the Lot by Lot method in
 accordance with Section 10.0 of MP 401.05.20.
 
 Note 2
 
 Procedure
 Shoulders
 Shoulders with Rolled-In
 Rumble Strips
 
 TABLE 401.7.3B
 Other Compaction Situations
 Construction Situation
 Compaction Method
 New Construction
 Lot-by-Lot
 Overlay Projects
 Rollerpass
 Surface Course Only
 
 Trench Paving
 
 All
 
 Pavement Widening
 
 All
 
 Pavement Repairs
 
 All
 
 See Section 401.7.3.2
 Rollerpass or Satisfaction
 of the Engineer
 Rollerpass or Satisfaction
 of the Engineer
 Rollerpass or Satisfaction
 of the Engineer
 
 401.7.3.1-Lot-by-Lot Testing: Randomly located nuclear density tests will be
 performed in accordance with the Lot-by-Lot test procedure described in MP 401.05.20.
 The pavement shall be divided into Lots not exceeding 1000 feet (300 meters) of paving
 lane. A randomly located density test shall be conducted in each Lot. The density shall be
 within the range of 92 to 96% of the maximum density of the approved mix design or the
 maximum density established under Section 401.6.2, Job Mix Formula Verification. If the
 170
 
 density is outside the range, an additional five tests shall be conducted for the Lot and the
 average of these five tests used to judge acceptance of the Lot in accordance with Table
 401.13.3.
 401.7.3.2-Shoulders with Rolled-In Rumble Strips: On both new construction and
 overlay projects, the compaction requirement for the surface course of the shoulder shall be
 in accordance with the rollerpass procedure described in MP 401.05.20. However, the number
 of roller passes may be reduced in the area of the rolled-in rumble strip to allow for the proper
 placement of the rumble strip.
 401.7.4-Thickness: When a uniform thickness of three inches (75 mm) or more is
 specified, excluding resurfacing, cores shall be taken to verify the thickness of the compacted
 pavement.
 Cores will be taken by the Division at random locations. The sampling frequency shall be
 approximately five cores per 2,000 feet (600 meters) of two-lane construction, except that the
 sampling frequency shall normally be limited to a minimum of five and a maximum of 50
 cores per project. The Division may elect to waive coring for short projects of less than 1,000
 feet (300 meters) in length or for projects where a paving mat of uniform thickness cannot be
 expected (for example: tapered paving mats or pavement widening projects). The Division
 may also elect to take additional cores when needed to resolve problems related to pavement
 thickness.
 The thickness shall be considered acceptable if one or both of the following criteria are
 met:
 (a) The average thickness equals or exceeds the specified thickness.
 (b) The average thickness is less than the specified thickness, but the difference is not
 statistically significant at the 95% confidence level. (Standard one tail “t” test at 0.05
 significance).
 The calculated ‘t’ value shall be less than or equal to the standard ‘t’ value at the 95%
 confidence level. The method for calculating Criteria ‘B’, shall be as follows:
 t  t 95
 
 Where:
 t 9 5 = value from standard “t” table for 95% confidence level
 t
 
 xs = specified thickness
 = average thickness
 n = number of samples
 s
 
 xs  x
 n 1
 s
 
 ( x)2
 n
 n 1
 
  x2 
 
 x = individual core thickness
 
 171
 
 If the average thickness is less than specified and is determined to be significant as
 determined by criteria ‘B’, the Division shall decide on a course of action as described in
 Section 401.13.4.
 401.8-WEATHER RESTRICTIONS:
 Bituminous asphalt shall only be placed when the surface is dry and when weather
 conditions are such that proper handling, finishing, and compaction can be accomplished. In no
 case however, shall asphalt be placed when the surface temperature is below the minimum
 established in Table 401.8.
 TABLE 401.8
 Course Thickness
 Minimum Surface Temperature
 3 inches (75 mm) and over
 35 °F (2 °C) Note 1
 1.5 to 2.9 inches (38 to 74 mm)
 40 °F (4 °C)
 Less than 1.5 inches (38 mm)
 50 °F (10 °C)
 Note 1 In lieu of 35 °F (2 °C), a minimum air temperature of 40 °F (4 °C) shall be used when
 paving directly on an aggregate base, subbase, or subgrade.
 
 In addition to the above surface temperature requirements, no wearing courses shall be
 placed when the air temperature is less than 40° F (4° C).
 401.8.1-Cold Weather Paving: When the air temperature falls below 50° F (10° C) or the
 surface temperature falls below 60° F (15° C) the provisions for cold weather paving shall
 apply.
 Paving shall be performed so that the transverse joints in adjacent lanes shall be no more
 than 50 feet (15 meters) apart at the end of each day's paving operations.
 The surface temperature shall be taken a minimum of once every hour and shall be taken
 in all shaded areas. The temperature requirements as listed in Table 401.8 shall apply.
 It shall be the Contractor's responsibility to monitor the declining surface temperature to
 insure that material delivery from the plant be terminated so as to allow that all material can
 be placed prior to the surface temperature falling below the surface temperatures listed in Table
 401.8.
 The temperature of the delivered material and the mat temperature at the time final density
 is obtained shall be taken for every truck load. These temperatures shall be in accordance with
 Section 401.10.3 for delivered material and 401.10.4 for the mat temperature at the time final
 density is obtained.
 401.9-EQUIPMENT:
 401.9.1-Plants: All plants in West Virginia producing asphalt for the Division shall
 provide documented evidence of compliance with current requirements of the West Virginia
 Air Pollution Control Commission.
 All plants which are not in West Virginia but producing asphalt for the West Virginia
 Division of Highways shall provide documented evidence of compliance with current
 requirements of the laws and regulations of the State in which they are producing, applicable
 to air pollution. All plants shall meet the general requirements set forth in AASHTO M156
 unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Engineer that a consistent quality mix
 can be produced with modifications to any of these requirements.
 172
 
 401.9.2-Dust Collector: An efficient dust collecting system shall be provided to prevent
 the loss of fine material. The material collected may be returned to the mixture at a uniform
 rate or discarded.
 401.9.3-Truck Scales: Truck scales shall be provided at each Plant, except that truck
 scales are not required at properly calibrated automatic batching plant facilities which are
 equipped with digital printout equipment, and which load the trucks directly from the mixer or
 the weigh hopper in a surge or storage bin.
 A person designated as a weigher shall be provided by the producer. The weigher shall
 certify that the weight of the asphalt, as determined either by the truck scales or from the digital
 printout of the batch weights, is correct.
 Each truck shall be weighed empty prior to each load, except at automatic batch plants
 approved to operate without truck scales.
 All truck scales shall be mounted on solid foundations which will insure them remaining
 plumb and level.
 Approval and sealing of scales shall be conducted at the frequency determined by the West
 Virginia Division of Labor, Bureau of Weights and Measures, and when the plant is moved,
 or upon the request of the Engineer. The Engineer shall be notified of any scale malfunctions
 when material is being furnished to Division of Highways projects. The Division may, at its
 option, accept inspection and sealing by out-of-state agencies when the mixing plant is located
 outside West Virginia.
 A digital recorder shall be required on all truck scales. The digital recorder shall produce
 a printed record of the gross, tare and net weights, and the time, date, truck identification, and
 project number. Provision shall be made for constant zero compensation and further provision
 shall be made so that the scales may not be manually manipulated during the printing process.
 The system shall be interlocked so as to allow printing only when the scale has come to rest.
 In case of breakdown of the automatic equipment, the Engineer may permit manual operation
 for a reasonable time, normally not to exceed 48 hours, while the equipment is being repaired.
 The scales shall be of sufficient size and capacity to weigh the loaded trucks that are used
 for delivery of asphalt from the plant.
 401.9.4-Test Weights: As part of its standard equipment, each plant which proportions
 aggregate by weight shall provide a minimum of ten 50-pound (22.68 kg) test weights for the
 purpose of maintaining the continued accuracy of its weighing equipment.
 Plants which proportion asphalt material by weight shall furnish, in addition to the above,
 one five pound (2.268 kg) test weight.
 401.9.5-Surge and Storage Bins: During the normal daily operation of the plant, asphalt
 may be stored in a surge or storage bin for a maximum of 12 hours, provided the bin has
 received prior evaluation and acceptance through the District plant inspection. The resulting
 temperature of the material at time of placement and compaction shall be sufficient to comply
 with 401.10.3 and 401.10.4
 Longer silo storage times, up to 24 hours, may be permitted for dense graded asphalt if the
 storage silo is insulated and/or heated to assure that the proper mix temperature is maintained.
 The gates at the bottom of the storage silo shall be adequately heated and sealed when the
 asphalt is held for the extended period of time. An inert gas system may be used to purge the
 173
 
 silo of oxygen to prevent oxidation of the asphalt. The asphalt delivered from the storage silo
 shall meet all of the specification requirements.
 When asphalt is stored for the extended time period, it shall not be used until the
 temperature has been checked and the asphalt has been visually inspected for hardening of the
 mix and stripping of the asphalt from the aggregate. Approval of the extended storage time
 may be revoked if it is determined through inspection and/or testing that the extended storage
 is having a detrimental effect on the asphalt.
 Loading of trucks through the storage bin will only be permitted when a minimum 25-ton
 (23-Mg) buffer of material is being maintained or an amount as recommended by the bin
 manufacturer, means shall be provided for loading the trucks directly from the mixer when the
 storage bin is not in operation.
 401.9.6-Inspection of Equipment and Plant Operations: The Engineer shall have access
 to the plant to assure the adequacy of the equipment in use, to inspect the conditions and
 operation of the plant, to verify weights, to verify the proportion and character of materials,
 and to determine if specified temperatures are being maintained in the preparation of the
 mixture.
 401.9.7-Trucks for Transporting Mixture: The inside surfaces of trucks shall be thinly
 coated with a soapy water or a mixture with not more than ten percent lubricating oil. The use
 of diesel fuel, kerosene, or similar solvent-based products which can dissolve the asphalt film
 from the aggregate particles will not be permitted. Any commercial release agent which can
 be certified as harmless to the mix may be used; however, the Division reserves the right to
 restrict any release agent that is shown to cause problems during placement of the mix. In the
 case of mixtures composed of PG Binders which contain polymer modification, truck surfaces
 should be coated with a release agent recommended by the binder supplier. All excess coating
 material shall be removed from the truck bed prior to loading the asphalt.
 All truck beds shall be insulated with approved material. No trucks shall be used which
 cause segregation of the materials, which show large oil leaks, or which cause undue delays in
 delivery of material. All trucks shall be provided with a waterproof cover and a hole in the
 body for the purpose of conveniently checking the temperature of the load. Covers shall be
 suspended slightly above the mixture, shall extend over the sides of the truck, and shall be
 securely fastened to eliminate air infiltration and to prevent water from coming in contact with
 the mixture.
 401.9.8-Laboratory: A testing facility or laboratory, as described below, shall be
 provided within reasonable proximity of the asphalt plant. Plant operations must be visible
 from within the laboratory.
 The laboratory shall be of sufficient size to hold all laboratory test equipment and supplies
 with adequate floor space to allow the technicians to test samples in an efficient manner. The
 laboratory shall be furnished and maintained with adequate ventilation, heat, light, water, sink
 and drainage, electrical or gas outlets, or both, work table, shelves, and supply cabinets.
 
 174
 
 The laboratory shall be supplied with the equipment and materials listed below and these
 shall be maintained to meet the applicable requirements of AASHTO or ASTM:
 i. Hot plate, gas or electric.
 ii. Large ovens (as needed for heating and drying samples), gas or electric.
 iii. Unit weight container, ½ cubic foot (0.014 cubic meter). Required for slag only.
 iv. Balances of sufficient capacity and accuracy for conducting specified tests and plant
 calibration.
 
 v. Thermometers: dial type, liquid-in-glass, and digital as required for conducting standard
 
 vi.
 vii.
 viii.
 ix.
 x.
 xi
 xii.
 xiii.
 xiv.
 xv.
 xvi.
 xvii.
 
 test procedures and monitoring mix temperatures. Digital thermometers shall be equipped
 with an appropriate sturdy probe that can be pushed into a sample of hot asphalt to check
 the temperature of the mix.
 Standard Gilson shaker or equivalent, with screens.
 Ro-Tap shaker or equivalent, with 8 and/or 12 inch (200 and/or 300 mm) diameter screens.
 Sample splitters for fine and coarse aggregates.
 Miscellaneous items (including sample splitting trowels, scoops, square point shovel,
 aggregate sample pans, heat resistant gloves, measuring rules, brushes, flashlight, timing
 devices, and glassware as needed).
 Expendable supplies necessary for performance of tests.
 Equipment for determining the maximum specific gravity of asphalt mixtures as specified
 in AASHTO T209.
 Equipment for determining the in-place density of asphalt mixtures meeting the
 requirements of MP 401.05.20.
 Non-contact infrared thermometer accurate to ± 2° F (± 1° C).
 Equipment for determining the bulk specific gravity of HMA using saturated surface dry
 specimens complying with AASHTO T166.
 Marshall equipment necessary to comply with AASHTO T245 and ASTM D5581,
 including a calibrated automatic testing apparatus having recording capabilities and
 compaction hammers. (Marshall designs only)
 Asphalt content ignition oven with built-in scale and printer meeting the requirements of
 AASHTO T308, Test Method A. (Optional for Marshall designs – Mandatory for Superpave
 designs)
 Calibrated Gyratory compactor meeting requirement of AASHTO T312 with computer
 (including software for data acquisition and test calculations) and primer. Compactor must
 be calibrated to the internal angle in accordance with AASHTO TP71 with annual
 verification (Superpave designs only).
 
 401.9.9-Asphalt Paving Equipment: Asphalt paving equipment shall be self-contained
 and of sufficient size, power and stability to receive, distribute and strike-off the asphalt
 mixture at rates and widths commensurate with the typical sections and other details shown on
 the plans. The paver shall be provided with an activated screed or strike-off assembly equipped
 to be heated. Approval of the paver by the Engineer will be based on the demonstrated
 capability of the equipment to place the mixture to the required cross-section, profile and
 alignment in an acceptable, finished condition ready for compaction.
 The paver shall be equipped with means of preventing the segregation of the coarse
 aggregate particles when moving the mixture from the paver hopper to the paver augers. It
 shall also be capable of pushing a sufficient amount of the mixture under the auger gearbox to
 prevent streaking or tearing of the mat. Some paver models may require the installation of a
 manufacturer retrofit kit or equipment modification to accomplish this.
 175
 
 Specialized equipment or hand methods approved by the Engineer may be employed to
 spread the asphalt mixture where the use of standard full scale paver is impractical due to the
 size or irregularity of the area to be paved.
 Pavers shall be equipped with mechanical or automatic grade and slope controls. The use
 of automatic grade and slope controls with a traveling straight edge shall be required only when
 specified on the Plans or in the Proposal. Both the grade and slope controls shall be in working
 order at all times. In the event of failure of the automatic controls, the Contractor will be
 permitted to finish the day's work using manual controls but will not be allowed to resume
 work the following day until the grade and slope controls are in proper working order.
 401.9.10-Compaction Equipment: Compaction may be performed by self-propelled
 steel-wheeled, pneumatic-tired and/or vibratory rollers. Hand-held rollers or vibrating plates
 may be used in small inaccessible areas if approved by the Engineer. Prior to use on any
 project, the roller shall be inspected to see that it is in good mechanical condition. The total
 weight, weight per inch of width (steel-wheeled), and average ground contact pressure
 (pneumatic-tired) shall be documented.
 401.10-PAVING OPERATIONS:
 401.10.1-Cleaning and Sweeping: Immediately prior to the arrival of the paving mixture,
 the existing base or surface shall be thoroughly cleaned by the use of tools and equipment as
 may be required to remove all mud, dirt, dust, and other caked or loose material foreign to the
 type of treatment or surface being placed. The cleaning shall be done to a minimum width of
 one foot on each side beyond the width of the surface being placed.
 401.10.2-Patching and Leveling and Scratch Courses:
 401.10.2.1-Patching and Leveling: A tack coat shall be applied to the existing
 pavement prior to placing patching and leveling.
 Patching and leveling shall be placed at various locations throughout the project to
 remove irregularities in the existing pavement such as dips, or to raise the outside edge of
 the existing pavement to provide a uniform template prior to placing a base or wearing
 course. Patching and leveling shall not be placed as a continuous layer or course over the
 full width and length of the project.
 Compaction of patching and leveling shall be performed with three-wheel (steel) or
 pneumatic-tire rollers.
 401.10.2.2-Scratch Course: A tack coat shall be applied to the existing pavement
 prior to placing a scratch course.
 The scratch course shall be placed to the limits designated on the plans. Scratch
 course shall be placed with a paving machine. The paving machine screed shall be set to
 drag on the high areas of the existing pavement, only depositing material in ruts and other
 depressions.
 The wearing course, or at least one lift of base course, should be placed over the
 scratch course prior to maintaining traffic in the lane where the scratch course has been
 placed. All repairs to a scratch course due to traffic damage shall be at the contractor’s
 expense.
 Compaction of a scratch course shall be performed with a three-wheel (steel) or
 pneumatic-tire roller.
 176
 
 401.10.3-Spreading and Finishing: Before spreading any material, the contact surfaces
 of curbs, gutters, manholes, and of adjacent Portland cement concrete pavement edges shall be
 painted or sealed with asphalt material. Exact edge of pavement, except on concrete, shall be
 established by a string or chalk line for a distance of not less than 500 feet ahead of the
 spreading operation.
 For mixes produced with neat (non-modified) asphalts (which may include PG 70-22, PG
 64-22, PG 64-28, and PG 58-28) the temperature of the mixture at the time of placement shall
 be within the temperature requirements of the JMF. The JMF temperature range shall be within
 the master temperature range of 250° and 338° F (121° and 170° C) unless otherwise specified
 by the asphalt supplier. The mix temperature shall be monitored by inserting a dial type
 thermometer into the mix through the hole in the truck bed.
 The temperature of the completed mix, when measured at the plant, shall be within the
 tolerance as established by the JMF. The first load which demonstrates temperatures outside
 of that range shall be accepted, provided that the temperature is still within the master
 temperature range. No additional loads of material shall be run out until necessary steps are
 taken to reestablish the temperature of the mix within the plant tolerance. When measured at
 the project site, the temperature of the mix shall be within the tolerance established by the JMF.
 The first truck load of material which demonstrates temperatures outside of that range or any
 trucks in transit at that time shall be accepted provided temperatures are within the master
 temperature range. Any truckload of material which exceeds the master temperature range
 may be rejected by the Engineer. However, the plant shall immediately be notified that no
 additional loads of material are to be dispatched until necessary action is taken to reestablish
 temperature within JMF specification limits.
 When the surface temperature falls to within 10° F (6° C) of the weather restrictions of
 Table 401.8, the mix temperature may be increased up to a maximum of 338° F (170° C) unless
 otherwise specified by the asphalt supplier. The temperature of each truckload of material
 shall be monitored for compliance. Any truckload of material which exceeds this maximum
 temperature may be rejected by the Engineer.
 Mixes produced with asphalts that contain modifiers for high or low temperature
 performance enhancement shall meet the temperature requirements recommended by the
 asphalt supplier, which will be referenced on the JMF.
 401.10.4-Rolling Procedure: Shoulders, ramps, and similar areas shall be compacted in
 the same method as the mainline.
 During rolling, roller wheels shall be kept moist with only enough water to avoid picking
 up material. Fuel oil on roller wheels or pneumatic tires is not allowed. Rollers shall move at
 a slow but uniform speed with the drive roll or wheels nearest the paver.
 If rolling causes material displacement, the affected area shall be loosened at once with
 lutes or rakes and restored to its original grade with loose material before being re-rolled.
 Heavy equipment, including rollers, should not be permitted to stand on the finished surface
 before it has thoroughly cooled or set.
 Mat temperature shall be measured using a non-contact infrared thermometer. The
 required density shall be obtained prior to the mat temperature reaching 175° F (80° C). The
 Contractor shall be allowed to lower this temperature to 165° F (74° C) if they can demonstrate
 during the first day of placement of each lift on each project that additional densification can
 be achieved without causing any pavement distress.
 177
 
 401.10.5-Joints: The longitudinal joint in any layer shall offset that in the layer
 immediately below by approximately six inches; however, the joint in the top layer shall be at
 the centerline of the pavement if the roadway comprises two lanes of the width, or at lane lines
 if the roadway is more than two lanes in width. The transverse joint in any layer shall offset
 that in the layer immediately below by approximately six feet.
 All transverse joints between existing and new pavement shall be “heeled-in” to the
 existing surface at the beginning and at the end of the project and at all other locations where
 the new pavement terminates against an existing pavement. Transverse joints between one
 day's production and the next shall be carefully constructed and shall be formed by cutting
 back into the existing section to expose the full depth of the course. All joints shall be squared
 up to the full vertical depth of the course to be placed, and a tack coat of asphalt material shall
 be applied. Joints adjacent to curbs, gutters, or adjoining pavement shall be formed by
 transporting back sufficient hot material to fill any space left uncovered by the paver.
 The longitudinal joint between adjacent mats shall be set up to a sufficient height to receive
 the full compactive effort from the rollers and shall be tacked prior to placing adjacent material.
 Transverse joints shall be checked for smoothness with a ten foot straight edge provided
 by the Contractor. All surface irregularities shall be corrected prior to proceeding with paving
 operations.
 401.11-PROTECTION OF PAVEMENT AND TRAFFIC CONTROL:
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the protection of asphalt surfaces from damage by
 their equipment and personnel. When the construction of asphalt surfaces is undertaken on
 projects under public traffic and the road surface is 16 feet wide or greater and the ADT is 400 or
 greater, the Contractor shall place no passing signs, Interim pavement markings, and Temporary
 pavement markings to delineate the edge line, centerline, and/or lane line of the roadway as
 required herein and in the project plans. The provision of Section 636: Maintaining Traffic shall
 apply.
 401.12-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Asphalt concrete will be measured by the ton (Mg), or square yard (square meter). For
 projects paid by the ton, the quantity will be determined by the Contractor from the total
 weigh slips for each vehicle load weighed upon an approved standard scale or from digital
 printout slips from an automatic batching plant, and certified by the Contractor as correct. For
 projects paid by the square yard, the quantity will be determined by the Plan Quantity as provided
 for in the proposal unless otherwise directed by the Engineer.
 Any patching or leveling mixture placed on a subbase or base course constructed in
 the same Contract with the asphalt items shall be at the expense of the Contractor. No additional
 compensation will be allowed for the material or any work incidental to its placement.
 401.13-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities determine as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price for
 the items listed below, which prices and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all the
 materials and doing all the work herein prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner,
 including all labor, tools, equipment, field laboratory, supplies, and incidentals necessary to
 complete the work.
 
 178
 
 The conditioning, cleaning, and sweeping of the existing base or underlying surface shall
 be considered as part of the construction of the appropriate items listed in 401.14, and no additional
 compensation will be allowed for "Cleaning and Sweeping".
 There will be no additional compensation for tack coat material used for minor (spot) areas
 to be patched and leveled; the cost of this tack coat material will be included in the unit bid price
 for the “patching and leveling” Item.
 There will be no additional compensation for Interim Pavement Markings.
 401.13.1-When a Lot of Superpave asphalt material is found not in compliance with the
 tolerance requirements of MP 401.02.29, it shall be subject to a price adjustment in accordance
 with the criteria established in this MP.
 401.13.2-When a Lot of asphalt pavement is represented by a smoothness value larger than
 that shown in Tables 401.7.2E or 401.7.2M, the unit price of the Lot (surface course only) shall
 be determined as follows:
 Reduced Unit Price
 Where A
 Where A
 Where s
 
 =
 =
 =
 =
 
 ENGLISH VERSION:
 Unit Bid Price X [(127.86 – As)/100]
 0.429 when specified smoothness is 65 in/mi
 0.341 when specified smoothness is 81 in/mi
 Smoothness value measured as per 401.7.2
 
 Reduced Unit Price
 Where A
 Where A
 Where s
 
 =
 =
 =
 =
 
 METRIC VERSION:
 Unit Bid Price X [(127 – As)/100]
 0.0274 when specified smoothness is 1 000mm/km
 0.0218 when specified smoothness is 1 250 mm/km
 smoothness value measured as per 401.7.2
 
 When the measured smoothness value exceeds the specified value by 50% or more, the Lot
 so measured shall be corrected, at the Contractor’s expense, to comply with Tables 401.7.2E
 or Table 401.7.2M.
 401.13.3-When a Lot of asphalt pavement does not meet the density requirements of
 401.7.3, the Price shall be adjusted as follows:
 FORMULA-1: Projects requiring only mat density testing:
 Lot Price Adjustment (Mat only)
 
 = (unit price) X (Lot quantity)
 X ( mat density price adjustment % from
 Table 401.13.3A)
 
 179
 
 TABLE 401.13.3A
 Adjustment of Contract Price for
 Pavement Density not Within Tolerance of Density
 Percent of Density
 Percent of Contract Price to be Paid
 Note 1
 Greater than 96 %
 95% to 96%
 102
 100
 92% to 94%
 91%
 98
 90%
 96
 89%
 92
 88%
 88
 Note 2
 Less than 88%
 Note 1
 Note 2
 
 Mat density slightly above 96% is normally only a problem if it leads to asphalt
 flushing on the surface of the mat or rutting due to an unstable mix. The Division
 will make a special evaluation of the material and determine the appropriate action
 When the density is less than 92%, the mat will be more susceptible to accelerated
 deterioration and a decrease in the expected service life of the pavement. For price
 adjustments on mat densities less than 88%, the percent of Contract Bid Price will
 be decreased by 10% per percentage of mat density less than 88%, unless a Special
 evaluation performed by the Division determines a more appropriate action.
 
 401.13.4-When a Lot of asphalt pavement is determined to be statistically non-conforming
 in accordance with criteria ‘B’ of Section 401.7.4, the Division will review the plans and
 project records to determine if there is an acceptable explanation for this deficiency. If it is
 determined that a deficiency does exist, one of the following adjustments may be used. If the
 deficiency is less than ¾ inch (19 mm), the Division may choose to accept the material at a
 price equal to the bid price times the ratio of the average thickness divided by the specified
 thickness. If the deficiency is ¾ inch (19 mm) or greater, the Division may require that an
 additional lift of material [specified to the nearest ¼ inch (6 mm) of the deficiency] be placed
 at the Contractor’s expense. Retesting of the overlay will be at the expense of the Contractor
 in accordance with MP 109.00.20.
 401.14-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 “design method” Asphalt Base Course, “aggregate
 401001-*
 type”, Type “mix type”
 “design method” Asphalt Wearing Course,
 401002-*
 “aggregate type”, Type “mix type”
 “design method” Asphalt Patching And Leveling
 401003-*
 Course, “aggregate type
 “design method” Asphalt Scratch Course,
 401007-*
 “aggregate type”, Type ‘mixed type”
 *
 
 Sequence number
 “design method” shall be either Marshall or Superpave
 “aggregate type” shall be either stone and gravel or slag
 “mix type” from Table 401.4.2A or 401.4.2B
 
 180
 
 UNIT
 Ton
 (Megagram)
 Ton
 (Megagram)
 Ton
 (Megagram)
 Ton
 (Megagram)
 
 SECTION 402
 ASPHALT SKID RESISTANT PAVEMENT
 402.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of constructing a Hot-Mix Asphalt (HMA) and Warm-Mix (WMA)
 Skid Resistant Wearing Coarse or a Superpave (HMA or WMA) Skid Resistant Wearing Coarse
 in accordance with the requirements of the Section 401 Asphalt Specification with the following
 exceptions and additions:
 402.2-MATERIALS:
 The coarse aggregate shall consist of gravel, slag, or other acceptable polish resistant
 aggregate, or combinations thereof, meeting the requirement of Subsections 703.1 through 703.3,
 except as amended in this subsection.
 When stone or gravel is specified in the contract, the coarse aggregate shall consist of
 gravel or other acceptable polish resistant aggregate, or combination thereof meeting the
 requirements of 703.1 through 703.3, except as amended in this subsection. When slag is specified
 in the contract, the coarse aggregate shall be slag which meets the requirements of 703.3, except
 as amended in this subsection.
 Acceptable dolomite may be used alone or as a part of a coarse aggregate blend on
 roadways with a projected ESAL value of less than 3,000,000. On roadways with a projected
 ESAL value of 3,000,000 or greater, acceptable dolomite may be used only as a part of the coarse
 aggregate blend and shall not exceed 50% of that blend.
 The total of shale (determined by MP 703.00.27), coal and other lightweight deleterious
 material (determined by ASTM C123) and friable particles (determined by MP 703.01.20) shall
 not exceed three percent.
 402.2.1-Marshall Mix Designs: For Marshall mix designs, the coarse aggregate or blends
 thereof shall have a minimum of 80 percent two-face fracture, and, except for those carbonate
 rocks which may be designated as acceptable polish resistant aggregate, the portion obtained
 on the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve shall contain no more than 15 percent carbonate particles.
 The total thin and elongated pieces, when tested as per MP 703.00.25, shall not exceed five
 percent.
 402.2.2-Superpave Mix Designs: For Superpave mix designs, the coarse aggregate or
 blends thereof shall have a minimum angularity requirement as specified in MP 401.02.28,
 Table 401.02.28C and, except for those carbonate rocks which may be designated as acceptable
 polish resistant aggregate, the portion obtained on the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve shall contain no
 more than 15 percent carbonate particles.
 Flat and elongated particles shall be tested in accordance with ASTM D4791 and the
 procedure modification referenced in AASHTO MP2. The total flat and elongated particles,
 measured at a 5:1 ratio, shall not exceed ten percent by weight for all pavements where the
 estimated traffic level is greater than or equal to 0.3 million ESALs.
 
 181
 
 402.3-FINE AGGREGATE:
 402.3.1-Marshall Mix Designs: Fine aggregate shall meet the requirements of 702.3.
 402.3.2-Superpave Mix Designs: Fine aggregate shall meet the requirements of 702.3
 along with the addition of the fine aggregate angularity and sand equivalent requirements noted
 in MP 401.02.28, Table 401.02.28C.
 402.4-MIXING:
 The skid resistant paving mix shall be type designated on the plans.
 402.5-PAY ITEM:
 Method of measurement and basis of payment will be in accordance with the applicable
 sections of Section 401.
 ITEM
 402001-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 “design method” Asphalt Skid Resistant
 Pavement, “aggregate type”, Type “mix type”
 
 UNIT
 Ton (Megagram)
 
  Sequence number
 “design method” shall be either Marshall or Superpave
 “aggregate type” shall be either stone and gravel or slag
 “mix type” from Table 401.4.2A or 401.4.2B
 
 SECTION 403 THROUGH SECTION 404-BLANK
 
 182
 
 SECTION 405
 SURFACE TREATMENTS
 405.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the construction of a wearing course, composed of bituminous
 material and aggregate, in one or more applications upon the completed and accepted base course
 or existing surface, in accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity
 with the lines, grades, thicknesses, and cross sections shown on the Plans or established by the
 Engineer.
 The type of surface treatment will be indicated on the Plans. The contractor may select the
 emulsion grade from the table below. The District may specify the use of a polymer modified
 emulsion.
 The contractor shall notify the engineer a minimum of two weeks prior to starting any
 surface treatment operation.
 405.2-MATERIALS:
 The materials shall conform to the requirements of the following Subsections of Division
 700:
 MATERIALS
 Cationic Emulsified Asphalt2
 Coarse Aggregate1
 Asphalt Emulsion
 Polymer Modified Cationic
 Emulsified Asphalt
 
 SUBSECTION
 705.11
 703.1-4
 705.4
 705.12
 
 KIND OR GRADATION
 CMS-2 or CRS-2 Grades
 57, 67, 8 or 9
 RS-2, MS-2, HFMS-2, or
 HFRS-2 Grades
 CRS-2P
 
 1
 
 In addition to meeting the gradation requirements specified in Table 703.4 the aggregates shall have
 a maximum of 2.0% passing the #200 (75µm) sieve as determined by AASHTO T-11 and T-27. The
 aggregates shall be crushed with a minimum of 80% two face fracture.
 2
 May be used with aggregate other than gravel only if the aggregate asphalt combination meets the
 requirements of ASTM D1664 for the dry aggregate coating test.
 
 405.2.1-Quality Control Testing: Quality control is the responsibility of the Contractor
 as specified in 106.1.
 The contractor shall design a quality control plan in accordance with applicable section of
 MP307.00.50, excluding the attached page, detailing the methods by which the quality control
 program will be conducted. Samples will be obtained at a minimum frequency of one sample
 per day of aggregate placement.
 405.2.2-Acceptance Testing: Acceptance sampling and testing of aggregates is the
 responsibility of the Division, except for furnishing the necessary materials. Quality control
 sampling and testing performed by the Contractor may be used by the Division for Acceptance.
 405.2.3-Acceptance for the Grading of Coarse Aggregate: Acceptance for gradation
 shall be on the basis of test results on consecutive random samples from a lot. A lot shall be
 considered the quantity of material represented by an average test value, not to exceed five
 183
 
 sublots. Generally at the beginning of the project, the average shall be started on the second
 sample in accordance with MP 300.00.51. A sublot is the quantity of material represented by
 a single gradation test. In the case where only one sample is taken, this sublot shall be
 considered the lot. The material shall be sampled and tested in accordance with the applicable
 specification. The gradation test results shall be plotted on a control chart in accordance with
 MP 300.00.51. When the average, or when the most recent three consecutive individual test
 values fall outside the limits of Table 703.4 the lot of material represented will be considered
 nonconforming to the extent that the last of its sublots is nonconforming. When this occurs,
 the last sublot shall have its price adjusted in accordance with Table 405.2.3.2. In the case
 where the average is nonconforming and the last sublot contained is conforming, then there
 would be no price adjustment. In no event, however, shall a sublot of material have its price
 adjusted more than once, and the first adjustment, which is determined, shall apply.
 405.2.3.1-Degree of Nonconformance: When a sublot of material is to have its price
 adjusted, the percentage point difference between the nonconforming test value and the
 specification limit shall be determined for each sieve size determined to be nonconforming
 and this value shall be multiplied by its appropriate multiplication factor as set forth in
 Table 405.2.3.1 to determine the degree of nonconformance on that sieve.
 TABLE 405.2.3.1
 Nonconforming Sieve Size
 Multiplication Factor
 4 in. (100mm) to No. 16(1.18mm)
 1.0
 No. 40 (4.25µm) to No. 50 (300µm)
 1.5
 No. 100 (150µm)
 2.0
 No. 200 (75µm)
 3.0
 The total measure of nonconformance of an individual sublot is the sum of all
 nonconformances on the various sieve sizes of that sublot. When the total degree of
 nonconformance has been established and it is 12.0 or less, the material will be paid for at
 an adjusted contract price as specified in Table 405.2.3.2. When the degree of
 nonconformance is greater than 12.0, the nonconforming sublot shall be resolved on an
 individual basis, requiring a special investigation by the Engineer to determine the
 appropriate course of action to be followed.
 If the degree of nonconformance exceeds 8.0 then the contractor shall cease operations
 and review and/or revise the quality control plan and/or procedure to become in compliance
 with these specifications.
 405.2.3.2-Price Adjustment: Aggregates not conforming with the gradation
 requirements will be paid for at the adjusted contract price based on the degree of
 nonconformance as specified in Table 405.2.3.2.
 
 184
 
 TABLE 405.2.3.2
 Adjustment of Contract Price for
 Gradation not Within Specifications
 Degree of
 Percent of Contract
 Nonconformance
 Price to be Reduced
 1.1 to 3.0
 2
 3.1 to 5.0
 4
 5.1 to 8.0
 7
 8.1 to 12.0
 11
 Greater than 12
 *
 * The Division will make a special evaluation of the material and determine
 the appropriate action. Pending resolution of the matter, additional lifts of
 base or pavement shall not be placed over the nonconforming material.
 
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 405.3-WEATHER RESTRICTIONS:
 Surface treatment shall be constructed only when the condition of the base, subbase or
 existing surface is satisfactory to the Engineer, when the temperature of the material being overlaid
 is 50° F (10° C) or above, and when other weather conditions are satisfactory for construction. The
 temperature may be waived but only when approved by the Engineer. No surface treatment shall
 be performed between October 1 and May 1.
 Surface treatment operations shall be suspended immediately when rain begins or when
 the project engineer determines that a rain event is imminent.
 405.4-EQUIPMENT:
 Equipment shall include equipment for heating bituminous material, a self-powered
 bituminous material pressure distributor, an aggregate spreader, and compaction equipment.
 Equipment shall also include scrapers, hand brooms, shovels, and other items as may be necessary
 to thoroughly clean the base or surface.
 Equipment for heating bituminous material shall consist of a retort coil so designed that
 steam will not be introduced into the material and shall not degradate the emulsion.
 The distributor shall be so designed, equipped, maintained and operated that bituminous
 material at even heat may be applied uniformly on variable widths of surface up to 15 ft. (4.6 m)
 at readily determined and controlled rates from 0.05 to 2.0 gal. per sq. yd (0.22 to 9.3 liters m2)
 with uniform pressure and with an allowable variation from any specified rate not to exceed 0.02
 gal. per sq. yd (0.09 liter m2). The distributor shall also have a cab-metering system, which will
 automatically adjust the flow of the bituminous material as the speed of the truck changes and
 allow the operator to adjust the rate of application from the cab of the truck.
 Distributor equipment shall include a tachometer, pressure gages, and accurate volume
 measuring devices or a calibrated tank, and a thermometer for measuring temperatures of tank
 contents. Distributors shall be equipped with a power unit for the pump, and full circulation spray
 bars adjustable laterally and vertically. A manifold connection shall be provided and hand spraying
 equipment shall be available to cover areas and patches inaccessible to the distributor.
 The spreader for cover grades of coarse aggregates shall be self-propelled. It shall be a
 mechanical revolving cylinder type or mechanical roller hopper spreader that can be so adjusted
 185
 
 to spread accurately the required amounts of materials per square yard. The spreader for other
 grades of coarse aggregate shall be a self-propelled mechanical stone spreader capable of laying a
 uniform surface.
 Compaction equipment shall be a pneumatic-tired roller conforming to the requirements of
 Section 401.9.10.
 405.5-PREPARING AND REPAIRING EXISTING SURFACE:
 This operation shall be performed as prescribed in 401.
 405.6-CLEANING AND SWEEPING:
 Immediately before starting construction, the existing surface shall be swept and
 thoroughly cleaned by the use of tools or machinery as may be required to remove all mud, dirt,
 dust, and other caked or loose material foreign to the type of surface to be placed. Cleaning shall
 be done to a minimum width of one foot on each side beyond the width of the surface to be placed
 excluding the shoulder.
 When the new surface is to be placed on an untreated aggregate surface, the sweeping shall
 continue until embedded larger aggregate is exposed to a depth of approximately ¼ in (6 mm).
 When the new surface is being compacted and finished, the Contractor shall maintain a neat edge
 of the surface treatment. Materials collected in the cleaning operation shall be removed and
 disposed of as directed.
 405.7-APPLICATION OF BITUMINOUS MATERIAL:
 This operation shall be performed as prescribed in 401, except as modified. The
 bituminous material shall be applied to the prepared surface at the rate specified in 405.12.
 Except when required to maintain traffic, surface treatment operations shall be done upon
 the full width of the section.
 Only Type-C or Type-D surface treatment shall be used on new bases.
 405.8-APPLICATION OF AGGREGATE:
 Immediately following each application of bituminous material, aggregate at the rate or
 rates called for in 405.12 shall be spread with the spreader in such a manner that the entire area
 being treated is uniformly covered. Equipment shall be operated so that bituminous material will
 be covered with aggregate before equipment passes over the area that was tacked with bituminous
 material. Additional aggregate shall be spread if necessary, and hand spreading shall be done to
 cover areas inaccessible to the spreading equipment. When directed by the Engineer, the aggregate
 shall be dried or moistened as required in order to obtain a near Surface Saturated Dry condition.
 405.9-BROOMING AND ROLLING:
 Immediately following spreading of each layer of aggregate, the entire surface of the
 aggregate shall be rolled until the aggregate is keyed into the bitumen. Any area that tends to ravel
 shall be repaired and rerolled. Rolling shall be parallel to the centerline and shall begin at the
 edges of the treatment and progress toward the center; on superelevated curves, rolling shall begin
 at the low edge of the curve and continue the entire width of the treatment, each trip uniformly
 overlapping the preceding trip.
 Rolling shall cease before the aggregate is crushed to any appreciable extent. Rollers shall
 be the type and weight specified in 405.4. The number of rollers shall be sufficient to obtain
 186
 
 compaction to the satisfaction of the Engineer. Water, to prevent adhesion of the bituminous
 material to the roller wheels, shall not be used in excessive amounts. The use of fuel oil, paraffin
 oil, and kerosene on rollers or other equipment, for the purpose of preventing material from picking
 up or sticking, is prohibited.
 405.10-JOINTS:
 The longitudinal construction joints between adjacent lanes shall be kept clean of material
 foreign to the type of surface being treated. The joints shall be constructed without overlaps or
 gaps between the materials.
 The transverse joint at the end of successive sections or lanes shall be covered with paper
 to prevent overlapping of the bituminous material. Following its use, the paper shall be removed
 and disposed of satisfactorily.
 405.11-PROTECTION OF PAVEMENT AND TRAFFIC CONTROL:
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the protection of the surface against damage by
 their equipment and personnel. Traffic shall not be permitted on any part of the work under
 construction until the treatment has cured sufficiently to prevent raveling or pickup under traffic.
 The applicable provisions of 636 shall apply for regulating traffic.
 405.12-SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS AND QUANTITIES OF MATERIALS:
 The quantities and kinds of materials to be used and the sequence of applications and
 operations for the various treatments shall be as follows. The quantities shown are the rates per
 square yard (meter).
 Maximum quantities of bituminous material shall be used only when the old surface is
 open or porous. For blast furnace slag aggregate, 91 percent of the aggregate quantities shown
 shall be used and the quantity of bituminous material shall be increased to a maximum of 10
 percent.
 The rates of aggregate and bituminous material may be adjusted by the engineer. When in
 the opinion of the engineer adequate coverage is not being obtained.
 405.12.1-Type A-Light Seal:
 i. Clean and sweep.
 ii. Apply 0.15 to 0.25 gal. (0.7 to 0.9 liters) of bituminous material.
 iii. Spread immediately 8 to 10 lb. (4.4 to 5.5 kg) of #9 aggregate.
 iv. Roll immediately.
 405.12.2-Type B-Single Surface Treatment:
 i. Clean and sweep.
 ii. Apply 0.25 to 0.40 gal. (0.9 to 1.6 liters) of bituminous material.
 iii. Spread immediately 15 to 25 lb. (8.3 to 13.5 kg) of #8 aggregate
 (#9 aggregate if directed by the Engineer).
 iv. Roll immediately.
 405.12.3-Type C-Double Surface Treatment:
 i. Clean and sweep.
 ii. Apply 0.25 to 0.40 gal. (0.9 to 1.6 liters) of bituminous material.
 187
 
 iii. Spread immediately 25 to 35 lb. (13.5 to 19 kg) of #8 aggregate
 (#57 or #67 aggregate if directed by the Engineer).
 iv. Roll tightly.
 v. Apply 0.25 to 0.35 gal. (0.9 to 1.5 liters) of bituminous material.
 vi. Spread immediately 10 to 20 lb. (5.5 to 11 kg) of #8 aggregate
 (#9, #57 or #67 aggregate if directed by the Engineer).
 vii. Alternately roll.
 405.12.4-Type D-Triple Surface Treatment:
 i. Clean and sweep.
 ii. Apply 0.30 to 0.50 gal. (1.0 to 1.8 liters) of bituminous material.
 iii. Spread immediately 25 to 45 lb. (13.5 to 20.4 kg) of #8 aggregate
 (#57 or #67 aggregate if directed by the Engineer).
 iv. Roll tightly.
 v. Apply 0.30 to 0.50 gal. (1.0 to 1.8 liters) of bituminous material.
 vi. Spread immediately 25 to 35 lb. (13.5 to 19 kg) of #8 aggregate
 (#57 or #67 aggregate if directed by the Engineer).
 vii. Roll tightly.
 viii. Apply 0.25 to 0.35 gal. (0.9 to 1.5 liters) of bituminous material.
 ix. Spread immediately 10 to 20 lb. (5.5 to 11 kg) of #8 aggregate
 (#9 or #57 aggregate if directed by the Engineer).
 x. Alternately roll.
 405.13-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 No materials shall be removed from the Project for any purpose until the operation has
 been completed and the quantities of materials incorporated into the operations have been
 determined, except when authorized by the Engineer.
 The quantities of work done will be measured as follows:
 The quantity of "Surface Treatment Aggregate" & "Patching & Leveling Aggregate" shall
 be measured by the ton (megagram) of material complete in place and accepted.
 The number of tons (megagrams) of "Surface Treatment Aggregate" & "Patching &
 Leveling Aggregate" shall be determined by the total of the weights shown on receipted railroad
 freight bills with materials are shipped by rail; by actual measured displacement of barges certified
 by the producer when water shipments are made, providing materials delivered by the methods are
 not stockpiled or stored; or determined by the Contractor from the total and weigh slips for each
 vehicle load weighed on an approved standard scale or from digital printout slips from an
 automatic batching plant, and certified by the Contractor to be correct.
 Truck scales shall be provided by the producer or Contractor, except that truck scales are
 not required where the material is weighed at properly calibrated automatic batching plant facilities
 which are equipped with digital print-out equipment. The scales shall be of sufficient size and
 capacity to weigh the heaviest loaded trucks that are used for delivery of the material.
 All truck scales shall be mounted on solid foundations which will insure their remaining
 plumb and level. All truck scales shall be inspected and sealed by the West Virginia Division of
 Labor, Bureau of Weights and Measures, or other appropriate agencies of the State or its political
 subdivisions. The Division may, at its option, accept inspection and sealing by out of state agencies
 when the material is weighed outside West Virginia.
 188
 
 A weigh person shall be provided by the producer. The weigh person shall certify that the
 weight of the material, as determined either by the truck scales or from the digital printout of the
 weights, is correct.
 Each truck shall be weighed empty prior to each load, except at automatic batch plants
 approved to operate without truck scales.
 A digital recorder shall be required on all truck scales. The digital recorder shall produce
 a printed record of the gross, tare and net weights, and the time, date, truck identification and
 project number. Provision shall be made for constant zero compensation and further provision
 shall be made so that the scales may not be manually manipulated during the printing process. The
 system shall be interlocked so as to allow printing only when the scale has come to rest. In case
 of a breakdown of the automatic equipment, the Engineer may permit manual operation for a
 reasonable time, normally not to exceed 48 hours, while the equipment is being repaired.
 The weight of all surface moisture in the aggregate will be deducted from the pay quantity.
 The quantity of "Bituminous Material" shall be the number of gallons (liters) incorporated
 into the completed work, which volume will be measured as prescribed in 109.1.
 Where a surface treatment is placed upon a base constructed as an item in the same contract,
 the conditioning and cleaning and sweeping of the base shall be considered as a part of the
 construction of the base and no additional compensation will be allowed for "Cleaning and
 Sweeping".
 The Quantity of “Surface Treatment” when specified to be paid by the square yard shall be
 measured by the total length of the area the surface treatment is applied times the average applied
 width of the treated area.
 When items for maintaining traffic are included in the Contract, they will be measured and
 paid as provided in 636.
 405.14-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing
 all the materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner,
 including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 The Quantity of “Surface Treatment” when specified to be paid by the square yard shall
 include the cleaning and sweeping, aggregate and all labor and equipment required to perform the
 operation
 405.15-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 405001-*
 Surface Treatment Aggregate, **
 405002-*
 Patching And Leveling Aggregate, **
 405003-*
 Asphalt Material
 405004-*
 Cleaning And Sweeping
 405005-*
 Surface Treatment, Type “type”
 
 **
 
 UNIT
 Ton (Megagram)
 Ton (Megagram)
 Gallon (Liter)
 Square Yards (Meters)
 Square Yards (Meters)
 
 Sequence number
 Type of Aggregate
 “type” from section 405.12
 
 SECTION 406 THROUGH SECTION407-BLANK
 189
 
 SECTION 408
 TACK COAT
 408.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of preparing and treating an existing hot-mix asphalt or concrete
 surface with asphalt material in accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably close
 conformity with the lines shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 408.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall conform to the requirements of the following Subsection of Division 700:
 MATERIALS
 Asphalt Emulsion
 Cationic Emulsified Asphalt
 
 SUBSECTION
 705.4
 705.11
 
 TYPE
 SS or RS Grades
 CSS or CRS Grades
 
 408.2.1-Quality Control: Quality control is the responsibility of the Contractor as
 specified in 106.1.
 Quality control shall consist of calibrating the distributor to the proper application rate,
 verifying the volume and temperature measuring devices, and when performed, assuring that
 the proper dilution rate is maintained.
 408.2.1.1-Acceptance Testing: Approval of asphalt emulsions used for tack coat
 material will be handled by the Materials Control, Soils and Testing (MCS&T) Division.
 MCS&T maintains a list of all approved asphalt emulsion sources and grades. The local
 District Materials Section can provide a copy of the latest list. The list is also posted on
 the MCS&T web page under the heading Approved Source/Product Listing. The use of
 non-approved material without prior testing by MCS&T may result in nonpayment of the
 item.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 408.3-WEATHER RESTRICTION:
 Tack coat shall be applied only when the weather and existing surface are satisfactory to
 the Engineer and when the temperature of the surface is 40°F (4°C) or above. When the surface
 temperature is less than 50°F (10°C), care must be exercised to assure that the tack coat “breaks”
 (Note 1)
 prior to the application of the hot-mix asphalt.
 Note 1: Tack coat “break” is the process in which water separates from the asphalt emulsion and the color
 of the tack coat begins to change from brown to black. The time required for breaking will depend on the
 type and grade of the emulsion, the application rate, the temperature of the existing pavement surface, and
 environmental conditions. Tack coat “set” refers to the final stage of the process when water has completely
 evaporated from the emulsion leaving a thin film of asphalt binder on the pavement. The rate of set depends
 on the same conditions that control the rate of break of the emulsion.
 
 190
 
 408.4-EQUIPMENT:
 Equipment shall include a power broom and power blower, a broom drag, equipment for
 heating asphalt material, and a self-powered asphalt material pressure distributor. Equipment shall
 also include scrapers, hand brooms, shovels, and other equipment as may be necessary to
 thoroughly clean the base or surface. Equipment for heating asphalt material to the required
 temperature shall consist of a retort coil so designed that steam will not be introduced into the
 material and shall not degradate the emulsion.
 The distributor shall be so designed, equipped, maintained and operated that asphalt
 material at even heat may be applied uniformly on variable widths of surface up to 15 ft. (4.6 m)
 at readily determined and controlled rates from 0.05 to 2.0 gal/sy (0.2 to 0.9 liters/m2) with uniform
 pressure and with an allowable variation from any specified rate not to exceed 0.02 gal/sy (0.09
 liter/m2). The distributor shall also have a cab-metering system that will automatically adjust the
 flow of the asphalt material as the speed of the truck changes and allow the operator to adjust the
 rate of application from the cab of the truck.
 Distributor equipment shall include a tachometer, pressure gages, and accurate volume
 measuring devices or a calibrated tank, and a thermometer for measuring temperatures of tank
 contents. Distributors shall be equipped with a power unit for the pump, and full circulation spray
 bars adjustable laterally and vertically. A manifold connection shall be provided and handspraying equipment shall be available to cover areas and patches inaccessible to the distributor.
 408.5-PREPARING AND REPAIRING BASE OR EXISTING SURFACES:
 No tack coat shall be applied until breaks, holes, depressions, and other irregularities in the
 base or existing surface have been repaired and cured sufficiently to permit the tack coat to be
 placed in a uniform application.
 Patching and leveling material shall be plant mixed. Hand patching will be permitted
 where necessary.
 408.6-CLEANING AND SWEEPING:
 Immediately before starting construction, the existing surface shall be swept and
 thoroughly cleaned by the use of tools or machinery as may be required to remove all mud, dirt,
 dust, and other caked or loose material foreign to the type of surface to be placed. Cleaning shall
 be done to a minimum width of one foot on each side beyond the width of the surface to be placed
 excluding the shoulder.
 408.7-APPLICATION OF ASPHALT MATERIAL:
 Except when required to maintain traffic, the work shall be done on the full width of the
 section.
 After the base or surface has been cleaned, when called for, and is in a dry condition, the
 asphalt material shall be applied by means of a pressure distributor. The spray bar shall be raised
 to a sufficient height so as to uniformly and completely coat the entire surface. The rate of
 application of asphalt material shall be as recommended in 408.11, or as determined by the
 Engineer. Application temperatures of the asphalt material shall be within the range specified in
 Subsection 705 for the particular material being used. With the exception of SS and CSS grades,
 all emulsion grades used for tack coat shall be applied without dilution. Anionic asphalt emulsion
 grades SS-1 and SS-1h, and cationic emulsion grades CSS-1 and CSS-1h, may be diluted at a 1:1
 ratio by addition water to the emulsion.
 191
 
 The tack coat shall not precede the placement of the subsequent HMA course to such an
 extent that the treated surface will be damaged during the interim. No patching and leveling or
 surface courses of any type shall be applied to the tacked surface until the asphalt material is
 thoroughly “set” (see Note 1 in Section 408.3). Tack coat shall not be applied over newly placed
 patching and leveling courses. However, to facilitate construction, minor (spot) areas that have
 been tacked, patched and leveled may be retacked and the quantity so used will be included for
 payment as part of the normal tack coat operation. The intent of the two preceding sentences, in
 conjunction with the next to the last paragraph of 401.13, is (1) to provide one tack coat application
 on the existing surface, although two applications, one over one under, for minor (spot) patching
 and leveling area, are permitted as indicated above, and (2) to limit payment for such operations
 to one application of the tack coat upon the existing surface for the entire project.
 The surfaces of sidewalks, curbs, other structures, and trees adjacent to the area being
 treated shall be protected in such a manner as to prevent their being spattered or marred. Material
 used for such protection shall be removed and disposed of in a satisfactory manner. The distributor
 shall not be cleaned or discharged win the right-of-way, into borrow pits, or so as to pollute or
 block water courses.
 408.8-APPLICATION OF COVER AGGREGATE:
 Any tack coat material applied in excess of the requirements shall be removed or covered
 with a blotter course of dry sand or stone chips as directed by the Engineer.
 408.9-JOINTS:
 Longitudinal joints shall be treated using an application rate that will thoroughly coat the
 vertical face without excessive runoff
 408.10-PROTECTION OF THE PAVEMENT AND TRAFFIC CONTROL:
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the protection of the surface against damage by
 their equipment and personnel. Traffic shall not be permitted on any part of the work under
 construction until the treatment has cured sufficiently to prevent raveling or picking up under
 traffic. The applicable provisions of 636 shall apply for regulating traffic.
 408.11-QUANTITIES OF MATERIALS:
 The application rates referenced in Table 408.11 shall be used as guide to assure the proper
 amount of asphalt is distributed over the pavement surface under various pavement conditions.
 The undiluted application rate refers to the unmodified emulsion that meets all standard
 specifications of the specified grade. When an SS or CSS grade emulsion is diluted with water at
 the allowable 1:1 ratio the residual asphalt content (the amount of asphalt remaining on the
 pavement surface after all water has evaporated from the emulsion) will be cut in half. Therefore
 the distribution rate must be doubled in order to obtain the same residual asphalt application as the
 undiluted emulsion.
 Unless otherwise specified on the Plans, the recommended application rates for undiluted
 and diluted asphalt tack coat shall be as specified in Table 408.11. These rates are provided for
 guidance and may be adjusted as directed by the Engineer to assure a uniform application that
 covers the entire pavement, and to assure that excessive asphalt does not cause a slippage plane
 between two pavement courses.
 
 192
 
 TABLE 408.11
 Application Rate (gal/sy) / (L/m2) (Note 2)
 Condition of Existing Pavement
 Undiluted
 Diluted (1:1) (Note 3)
 0.04 – 0.05 /
 0.08 – 0.10 /
 New HMA (Note 4)
 (0.18 – 0.23)
 (0.36 – 0.45)
 0.07 – 0.10 /
 0.13 – 0.20 /
 Oxidized HMA
 (0.32 – 0.45)
 (0.59 – 0.90)
 0.10 – 0.13 /
 0.20 – 0.27 /
 Milled Surface
 (0.45 – 0.49)
 (0.90 – 1.22)
 0.07 – 0.10 /
 0.13 – 0.20 /
 PC Concrete
 (0.32 – 0.45)
 (0.59 – 0.90)
 Note 2:
 
 Note 3:
 Note 4:
 
 Application rates are for slow setting emulsions grades (SS and CSS) that contain
 approximately 60% asphalt material. Rapid setting emulsion grades may contain
 slightly higher or lower asphalt contents, but can usually be applied within the
 same application range.
 Dilution rate only applies to SS and CSS grades.
 Tack coat is normally not needed over a layer of new HMA that has been placed
 within the last few days, as long as the underlying new layer has not become dirty
 under traffic or from windblown dust.
 
 408.12-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 No materials shall be removed from the Project for any purpose until the operation has
 been completed and the quantities of materials incorporated into the operations have been
 determined, except when authorized by the Engineer.
 The quantity of “Asphalt Material” for tack coat shall be the number of gallons (liters),
 prior to dilution, incorporated into the completed work. Any applicable dilution rates, shall be
 supplied to the Engineer by the Contractor on the material delivery ticket.
 Dry sand or stone chips used as a blotter course due to excessive use of tack coat shall be
 considered incidental to the work.
 When items for maintaining traffic are included in the Contract, they will be measured and
 paid as provided in Section 636.
 408.13-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing
 all the materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner,
 included all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 408.14-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 408002-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Asphalt Material
 
 *Sequence number
 
 SECTION 409-BLANK
 193
 
 UNIT
 Gallon (Liter)
 
 SECTION 410
 ASPHALT BASE AND WEARING COURSES,
 PERCENT WITHIN LIMITS (PWL)
 410.1-DESCRIPTION:
 410.1.1-General: The Contractor shall note that this Section is to be used for Square Yard
 Paving operations; however the proposal and / or plans may contain 401 and 402 items to be
 paid and measured by the Ton (TN). Instances where those items occur they shall be
 constructed and measured in accordance with the applicable sections of the West Virginia
 Division of Highways Standard Specifications Roads and Bridges, current edition, and the
 Supplemental Specifications current when the contract is let.
 Additionally the following Materials Procedures (MP) for Square Yard Paving may be
 obtained by contacting the Materials Control, Soil and Testing (MCS&T) Division:
 a.
 b.
 c.
 d.
 e.
 f.
 g.
 h.
 
 MP 401.02.31
 MP 401.07.20
 MP 401.07.21
 MP 401.07.22
 MP 401.07.23
 MP 401.07.24
 MP 401.07.25
 MP 401.13.50
 
 QC & Acceptance
 Sampling Loose Asphalt Pavement Mixtures
 Sampling Compacted Asphalt
 Thickness of Asphalt Concrete Using Cores
 Bond Strength
 Pavement Macrotexture
 Evaluation of Asphalt Pavements
 Determination of PWL
 
 410.1.2-PWL Paving Description: This work shall consist of constructing one or more
 courses of asphalt, mixed mechanically in a plant, composed of aggregate and asphalt material
 designed in accordance with either the Marshall or Superpave Design System as specified in
 the contract documents, on a prepared foundation in accordance with these specifications and
 in reasonable close conformity with the lines, grades, weights or thicknesses, and cross sections
 shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 The unit of measurement for asphalt will be by the ton (megagram), square yard (square
 meter), or cubic yard (cubic meter).
 The work will be accepted in accordance with these Specifications and the applicable
 requirements of Sections 105, 106, and 109.
 410.2-MATERIALS:
 The materials shall conform to the following requirements:
 
 194
 
 MATERIAL
 Coarse Aggregate
 
 Fine Aggregate
 Mineral Filler
 Performance
 Graded Binders
 Note 1
 Note 2
 Note 3
 
 SUBSECTION
 703.1 thru 703.3 Note 1 & Note
 
 3
 
 (See MP 401.02.28 for
 exceptions and additions required
 for Superpave Items.)
 
 702.3
 (See MP 401.02.28 for additions
 required for Superpave Items)
 
 702.4
 
 PG BINDER GRADE
 For the top two lifts PG 70-22
 Note 2
 shall be used on projects
 specified ≥20 million ESALs.
 Any deviation from the above
 criteria will be specified in
 contract documents.
 Standard grade shall be a PG
 64-22.
 
 705.5
 
 The total shale, coal and other lightweight deleterious material and friable particles shall not
 exceed 3%.
 PG 64-22 Binder may be used in asphalt mixtures placed below the top two lifts.
 When slag is specified in the contract, the coarse aggregate shall be slag which meets the
 requirements of 703.3, except as amended in this subsection.
 
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 410.3-GENERAL:
 Construction methods to be used in performing the work shall be submitted to the Engineer
 for review prior to the start of work. This review may require modification of the proposed
 methods to provide the desired end product. All equipment, tools, machinery, and plant shall be
 maintained in a satisfactory working condition.
 410.4-COMPOSITION OF MIXTURES:
 410.4.1-General: The aggregate for use in the designated mixture shall consist of a
 mixture of aggregate (coarse, fine, reclaimed asphalt pavement (RAP) if desired, or mixture
 thereof) and mineral filler if required. It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to
 determine the percentage of RAP to be used in the mix. The amount and grade of virgin PG
 Binder to be used in the RAP designs shall be determined in accordance with Materials Procedure
 (MP) 401.02.24 and MP 401.02.28.
 410.4.2-Job Mix Formula: Job Mix Formula (JMF) is the specification for a single mix
 produced at a single plant. This mix may be specific to a single project or be used on multiple
 projects if the basic design criteria (design compaction level and PG Binder grade) are the
 same.
 The Contractor shall submit a proposed JMF for each combination of aggregate and asphalt
 material for each asphalt mixture to be produced. Depending on the design type, the JMF
 gradations shall be within the tolerances set forth in either Table 410.4.2A or Table 410.4.2B.
 Marshall mix designs shall be developed in accordance with MP 401.02.22. Superpave mix
 designs shall be developed in accordance with MP 401.02.28.
 Each proposed JMF must be documented on the Division Form T400 or T400SP and the
 entire JMF package shall be forwarded for review to the District Materials
 Engineer/Supervisor. After the District reviews the T400/T400SP and JMF package shall then
 be transmitted to the Materials Control, Soils and Testing Division for final review. If the JMF
 195
 
 requires revision, it will be returned to the designer through the District. The T400/T400SP
 Form shall contain the following information:
 i.
 Identification of the source and type of materials used in the design.
 ii. The aggregate blend percentages and the percentage for each sieve fraction of
 aggregate considered the desirable target for that fraction.
 iii. The percentage of virgin asphalt binder to be blended with RAP and the total asphalt
 binder representing the optimum asphalt content for the JMF submitted, which is to be
 considered the desirable target percentage.
 iv.
 The temperature of the completed mixture at the plant which shall be within ± 25° F (±
 14° C) of the median mix temperature established by the temperature-viscosity chart
 or as recommended by the asphalt supplier.
 v. The ratio (calculated to the nearest one-tenth percent) of the Fines to Asphalt (FA). For
 Marshall mixes the ratio is defined as the percentage of aggregate passing the No. 200
 (75 µm) sieve, divided by the percentage of asphalt content calculated at the percentage
 optimum asphalt content of the design. For Superpave mixes the ratio is defined as the
 percentage of aggregate passing the 75 µm (No. 200) sieve, divided by the percentage
 of effective asphalt content calculated at the percentage optimum asphalt content of the
 design.
 TABLE 410.4.2A
 Design Aggregate Gradation Requirements for Marshall Mix Designs
 Base-II
 Wearing-I Wearing-III
 Type of
 Wearing
 Base-I
 (Patch
 (Scratch-I)
 (Scratch-III)
 Mix
 IV
 & Level)
 Nominal Maximum Size
 Sieve
 1 ½ in
 ¾ in
 ¾ in
 3/8 in
 No. 4
 Size
 (37.5 mm) (19 mm)
 (19 mm)
 (9.5 mm)
 (4.75 mm)
 100
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 1 ½ in (37.5 mm)
 
 90-100
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 1 in (25 mm)
 
 90 max
 
 100
 
 100
 
 –
 
 –
 
 ¾ in (19 mm)
 
 –
 
 90-100
 
 90-100
 
 –
 
 –
 
 ½ in (12.5 mm)
 
 –
 
 90 max
 
 90 max
 
 100
 
 –
 
 3/8 in (9.5 mm)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 85-100
 
 100
 
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 47 min
 
 80 max
 
 90-100
 
 No. 8 (2.36 mm)
 
 15-36
 
 20-50
 
 20-50
 
 30-55
 
 90 max
 
 No. 16 (1.18 mm)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 40-65
 
 No. 30 (600 µm)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 No. 50 (300 µm)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 No. 200 (75 µm)
 
 1-6
 
 2-8
 
 2-8
 
 2-9
 
 3-11
 
 2 in (50 mm)
 
 196
 
 TABLE 410.4.2B
 Design Aggregate Gradation Requirements for Superpave Mix Designs
 19 Note 1
 9.5
 4.75
 Type of Mix
 37.5
 25
 (Patch &
 12.5
 (Scratch) (Scratch)
 Level)
 Standard
 Sieve Size
 
 Nominal Maximum Size
 19 mm
 12.5 mm
 9.5 mm
 (3/4 inch) (1/2 inch) (3/8 inch)
 
 37.5 mm
 (1 ½ inch)
 
 25 mm
 (1 inch)
 
 100
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 37.5 mm (1½”)
 
 90-100
 
 100
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 25 mm (1”)
 
 90 max
 
 90-100
 
 100
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 19 mm (3/4”)
 
 –
 
 90 max
 
 90-100
 
 100
 
 –
 
 –
 
 12.5 mm (1/2”)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 90 max
 
 90-100
 
 100
 
 100
 
 9.5 mm (3/8”)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 90 max
 
 90-100
 
 95-100
 
 4.75 mm (No.4)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 90 max
 
 90-100
 
 2.36 mm (No.8)
 
 15-41
 
 19-45
 
 23- 49
 
 28-58
 
 32-67
 
 1.18 mm (No.16)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 30-60
 
 600 µm (No.30)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 300 µm (No. 50)
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 –
 
 75 µm (No.200)
 
 0-6
 
 1-7
 
 2-8
 
 2-10
 
 2-10
 
 6-12
 
 50 mm (2”)
 
 Note 1
 
 4.75
 (No. 4)
 
 When a 19 mm mix is specified for use as a heavy duty surface mix, it shall be designed as a fine
 graded mix with the additional requirement of a minimum of 47% passing the 4.75 mm (No.4)
 screen.
 
 If it becomes necessary to change aggregate sources, a new mix design shall be developed
 and submitted for approval. When using neat (unmodified) PG Binders, the binder grade must
 always remain the same for each design, however the binder source may be changed without
 requiring a new mix design given that the replacement binder is provided from an approved
 source. If a source change results in the use of an additive enhanced modified binder of the
 same grade, a new mix design will be required.
 If a modified binder source is changed or if the modification process is changed, a new mix
 design shall be developed and submitted for approval. A source change to a new location with
 the original manufacturer/supplier and the original modification process will not require a new
 mix design.
 At no time shall different grades of PG Binders be mixed together in the same storage tank.
 When it is necessary to switch to a new binder grade the tank shall be drawn down as far as
 possible, normally to the top of heating coils, before refilling with the new binder. The new
 binder shall be circulated thoroughly before restarting production.
 197
 
 410.4.2.1-Warm Mix Asphalt: When the Contractor chooses to use an approved
 asphalt design to be produced as warm-mix asphalt (WMA) using the water injection
 system, the temperature of the completed mixture at the plant may be lowered to an
 established range that has previously been determined through trial production. The
 allowable temperature range specified on the approved T400 mix design form shall be
 adjusted accordingly when producing WMA. In addition, all references to the minimum
 compaction temperatures in Sections 410.10.3 and 410.10.4 of this specification, may be
 waived if it can be established that additional density can be obtained at lower temperatures
 without damaging the pavement. All testing requirements established for Hot Mix Asphalt
 mix designs and quality assurance/quality control testing shall also apply to WMA.
 410.5-TESTING:
 410.5.1-Test Methods:
 MP 700.00.06
 AASHTO T168
 AASHTO T11
 AASHTO T27
 AASHTO T30
 AASHTO T164
 AASHTO T308
 AASHTO T245
 ASTM D5581
 AASHTO T166
 AASHTO T209
 AASHTO T312
 AASHTO T331
 ASTM D7227
 MP 401.02.31
 MP 401.07.20
 MP 401.07.21
 MP 401.07.22
 MP 401.07.23
 MP 401.07.24
 MP 401.07.25
 MP 401.13.50
 
 Aggregate Sampling Procedures
 Sampling Hot-Mix Asphalt
 Materials Finer than No. 200 (75 µm) Sieve in Mineral Aggregates by
 Washing
 Sieve Analysis of Fine and Coarse Aggregates
 Mechanical Analysis of Extracted Aggregate
 Quantitative Extraction of Bitumen from Bituminous Paving Mixtures
 Asphalt Content of HMA by the Ignition Method (Test Method A)
 Resistance to Plastic Flow of Bituminous Mixtures Using Marshall
 Apparatus
 Resistance to Plastic Flow of Bituminous Mixtures Using Marshall
 Apparatus (For Base-I Marshall designs only)
 Bulk Specific Gravity of Compacted Bituminous Mixtures
 Maximum Specific Gravity of Bituminous Paving Mixtures
 Determining the Density of HMA Specimens by Means of the
 Superpave Gyratory Compactor
 Bulk Specific Gravity and Density of Compacted HMA Using
 Automatic Vacuum Sealing Method
 Rapid Drying of Compacted Asphalt Specimens Using Vacuum Drying
 Apparatus
 Quality Control and Acceptance of Asphaltic Mixtures
 Sampling Loose Asphaltic Mixtures in the Field
 Sampling Compacted Asphaltic Mixtures in the Field
 Measuring Thickness of Asphalt Pavement using Drilled Cores
 Measuring Bond Strength of Cored Specimens
 Measuring Asphaltic Pavement Macrotexture
 Evaluation of Pavement with Substandard Properties
 Determination of Percent Within Limits
 
 198
 
 410.6-CONTRACTORS QUALITY CONTROL:
 410.6.1-Quality Control Testing: Quality control of the asphalt pavement is the
 responsibility of the Contractor. The Contractor shall maintain equipment and qualified
 personnel including at least one certified Asphalt Plant Technician at each plant. The
 technician shall be in charge of all plant quality control activities such as mix proportioning
 and adjustment and all sampling and testing activities necessary to maintain the various
 properties of asphalt within the limits of the specification.
 The Contractor shall maintain necessary equipment and qualified personnel including at
 least one certified Asphalt Field and Compaction Technician at each project during paving
 operations. Additionally, a certified Asphalt Field and Compaction Technician with
 certification to perform nuclear density testing of asphalt pavements shall perform all testing
 necessary to assure compaction of the asphalt meets specification requirements. Compaction
 Technicians may serve as Asphalt Field and Compaction Technicians for asphalt compaction
 testing until December 31, 2017.
 410.6.2-Job Mix Formula Field Verification: For each JMF, a mix design field
 verification shall be conducted during the first days of plant production. For Marshall and
 Superpave designs, the verification shall be in accordance with the guidelines established in
 MP 401.02.31. The field verification is for the purpose of demonstrating that the JMF can be
 produced within the specified tolerances set forth in the MP 401.02.31. If the mix cannot be
 produce within these requirements, a new mix design will be required.
 410.6.3-Quality Control Testing Requirements: After the JMF design field verification
 has been successfully completed, sampling frequency and test requirements for quality control
 shall be as set forth in MP 401.02.31 for Marshall and Superpave designs. If the Division
 determines that a mix cannot be consistently produced within the tolerance limits of the
 specified design properties, approval of the mix may be revoked and the contractor will be
 required to provide a new mix design.
 410.7-ACCEPTANCE TESTING:
 410.7.1-Acceptance Testing of Asphalt: Material from the paving of the traveled lanes
 and shoulders will be accepted in the field on a lot by lot basis. Lots will be established
 cumulatively and will be specific for each JMF. Each lot consists of five equal sublots (n=5).
 A completed sublot will have cores obtained for Pavement Density, and Bond Strength and a
 Loose Mixture sample for gradation and asphalt content. Samples for mat density and bond
 strength shall also be used to measure lift thickness prior to any preparation for density or bond
 strength. All field samples shall be obtained from locations determined as per MP 401.07.20
 and MP 401.07.21.
 A normal lot size is 2,500 tons with five, 500 ton sublots (n=5), unless operational
 conditions or project size dictate otherwise. If operational conditions or project size dictate,
 readjustment of the lot will be made as specified in Table 410.7.1. Breakdowns or stoppages
 of short periods due to such causes as weather or equipment failure will not be considered as
 reason to adjust the lot size. The original lot will be continued when work resumes after
 stoppages of less than 5 days. If a lot is terminated due to a stoppage of 5 days or more, adjust
 the lot size and number of sublots as specified in Table 410.7.1.
 
 199
 
 TABLE 410.7.1
 Re-adjustment of Lot Size and
 Associated Number of Sublots
 Action
 Remaining Quantity
 Following Last Full Lot
 Less than 500 tons without a combination
 Quantity combined with the previous lot,
 of one mixture acceptance sample and one
 (n=5)
 density core
 Less than 500 tons with a combination of
 One new sublot defined and quantity
 one mixture acceptance sample and one
 combined with the previous lot, (n=6)
 density core
 500 tons to less than 1,000 tons without a
 One new sublot defined and quantity
 combination of two mixture acceptance
 combined with the previous lot, (n=6)
 samples and two density cores
 500 tons to less than 1,000 tons with a
 Two new sublots defined and quantity
 combination of two mixture acceptance
 combined with the previous lot, (n=7)
 samples and two density cores
 1,000 tons to less than 1,500 tons without
 Two new sublots defined and quantity
 a combination of three mixture acceptance
 combined with the previous lot, (n=7)
 samples and three density cores
 1,000 tons to less than 1,500 tons with a
 combination of three mixture acceptance
 New lot defined, (n=3)
 samples and three density cores
 1,500 tons to less than 2,000 tons without
 a combination of four mixture acceptance
 New lot defined, (n=3)
 samples and four density cores
 1,500 tons to less than 2,000 tons with a
 combination of four mixture acceptance
 New lot defined, (n=4)
 samples and four density cores
 2,000 tons to less than 2,500 tons without
 a combination of five mixture acceptance
 New lot defined, (n=4)
 samples and five density cores
 2,000 tons to less than 2,500 tons with a
 combination of five mixture acceptance
 New lot defined, (n=5)
 samples and five density cores
 Immediately after each sample is taken, it shall be identified by labeling or otherwise with
 the following information:
 1) Contract ID
 2) State Project Number
 3) Sample Type (density, bond, loose, etc.)
 4) Pavement Course (surface, base)
 5) Lot Number
 6) Sublot Number
 7) Date
 8) Sampled By
 200
 
 A sample labeling standard is shown in MP 401.07.20 Sampling of Loose Asphaltic
 Pavement Mixtures and MP 401.07.21. Upon fully identifying, marking or labeling, and
 securing, samples shall be transported to the District Materials Laboratory for testing unless
 otherwise indicated in the proposal.
 410.7.1.1-Mixture Acceptance Samples. The Inspector will select sample locations in
 each sublot according to MP 401.07.20 Sampling of Loose Asphaltic Pavement Mixtures.
 The Inspector or in the presence of the Inspector, one loose mixture sample shall be
 obtained for each sublot. This sample is to be taken directly from the uncompacted mixture
 and immediately processed in accordance with the MP.
 410.7.1.2-Compaction: Compaction testing for mat density shall be performed for all
 traveled lanes, ramps and shoulders. Work will be evaluated based on an Upper
 Specification Limit (USL) of 97.0 and a Lower Specification Limit (LSL) of 91.5 for all
 mats within travel lanes. Acceptance of mat density shall be in accordance with 410.13.3.
 Maximum density values that are supplied by the asphalt producer shall be verified by
 the District Materials staff by determining the theoretical maximum specific gravity in
 accordance with AASHTO T209 Theoretical Maximum Specific Gravity (Gmm). This
 verification of Gmm shall be conducted once per lot for all mixes, or one in each five
 reported values from the asphalt producer. This Gmm value must be within 0.024 of the
 asphalt producer’s daily average. Any deviation of greater shall warrant special evaluation.
 Joint density testing is required. The joint density shall be evaluated based on a Lower
 Specification Limit (LSL) of 89% of a maximum density established by averaging the
 maximum densities for the paved mats adjacent to the constructed longitudinal joint. The
 joint density requirement shall only apply to the surface lift of the pavement structure. Lots
 for joint density shall also be established cumulatively and laid out as per the applicable
 provisions within MP 401.07.21.
 A normal lot size for evaluation of joint density is 10,000 linear feet of constructed
 joint with five, 2000 feet long sublots unless operational conditions or project size dictate
 otherwise. Lots for joint density determined to be 4000 feet in length or less shall be
 incorporated into the previous full lot and two samples shall be taken and the lot be
 evaluated with seven samples (n=7). Lots for joint density that are greater then 4000 feet
 in length shall have samples taken representative of each 2000 foot long sublot or portion
 thereof.
 Acceptance for joint density shall be as per 410.13.4.
 Patching-and-leveling and scratch courses shall not be included in determining the total
 new pavement thickness to be tested for compaction. When asphalt is placed in areas that
 require a non-uniform thickness or is tapered to a thin edge, the method of acceptance
 testing shall be determined by the Engineer. Acceptance testing is not required on areas in
 which a full-size roller is restricted from compacting the mat properly. These areas shall
 be compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
 410.7.1.3-Shoulders and Ramps: As per MP 401.07.21, shoulders and ramp areas
 that are constructed simultaneously with the mainline are not included in the sampling plan.
 However, these simultaneously constructed shoulder and ramp areas shall be included in
 the lot of the adjacent mainline for the purposes of penalty and bonus calculations for
 compaction and mixture properties.
 201
 
 Shoulders that are constructed independently of the mainline shall be tested as per MP
 401.07.21. However, compaction penalty calculations for these independently constructed
 shoulders shall not apply.
 410.7.1.4-Thickness: Thickness testing shall be performed on all traveled lanes and
 shoulders.
 Cores obtained for mat density and bond strength will both be measured for thickness
 as per MP 410.07.22 Measurement for Thickness of Asphalt Pavement Using Drilled
 Cores, prior to those subsequent analyses. The core measurements which represent the
 thickness of the sampling units shall be analyzed to determine the average value of the
 pavement thickness. Pavement Thickness (T), shall include all of the pavement layers as
 specified excluding any patch and level course and scratch courses. This value will be used
 to determine the degree of compliance with the provisions and to develop certain factors
 to be used in the derivation of equitable deductions as set forth in Section 410.13.5, in the
 event the provisions of this Specification are not met.
 410.7.1.5-Bond Strength: Bond testing shall be performed on all traveled lanes and
 shoulders. Additionally, Bond Tests will be performed for all surface layers beginning
 with the Existing Pavement layer and then all intermediate pavement layers called for in
 the Proposal and Plans. However if a scratch course is called for in the plans, then a bond
 test will be performed at the scratch course layer and the first new surface pavement layer,
 not between the existing pavement layer and the scratch course layer.
 Core bond strength shall exceed a minimum of 100 psi when tested in accordance to
 MP 410.07.23 Guide to Determining Interface Bond Shear Strength. If all samples
 obtained within a lot exceed the minimum requirement, there will be no adjustment for
 pay. If any of the specimens result in strength below the required amount, the values shall
 then be evaluated for payment as per 410.13.50 Guide to Statistical Analysis of Material
 Using Quality Level Analysis-Percent within Limits. For the purpose of relieving large
 standard deviations from abnormally strong samples, any sample with a strength exceeding
 150 psi will be evaluated as 150 psi instead of the actual strength. The actual strength
 should still be recorded as such on the reporting form.
 410.7.2-Surface Tolerance: Shall be in accordance with Section 720 on the finished mat.
 410.7.3-Pattern Segregation: Pattern segregation is continuous or repeated areas of nonuniform distribution of coarse and fine aggregate particles in the finished mat. The Division
 will address pattern segregation as follows:
 410.7.3.1-Evaluating Pattern Segregation: If the Engineer observes pattern
 segregation that may result in defective pavement, then:
 i. The Inspector will notify the Contractor of the observed pattern segregation.
 ii. The Contractor may continue to work at their own risk while they immediately and
 continually adjusts the operation to eliminate the pattern segregation from future
 work.
 
 202
 
 iii. As a minimum and in the presence of the Engineer and the Contractor’s
 Representative, Division personnel shall determine the average depth of pavement
 surface macrotexture according to MP 401.07.24 in areas with the pattern
 segregation and in areas with non-segregated pavement. The pattern segregation is
 unacceptable if the difference in average pavement texture depth between the nonsegregated and segregated areas exceeds the following:
 a) For 9.5 mm or Wearing I mixes – 0.012 inch (0.305 mm)
 b) For 12.5 mm mixes – 0.016 inch (0.406 mm)
 iv. The Engineer will determine if the pavement is defective as specified in Section
 410.7.3.3.
 410.7.3.2-Test Section: If the macrotexture tests identify unacceptable pattern
 segregation, then:
 i. Immediately suspend placing the asphalt course. Evaluate the cause of pattern
 segregation according to the Paving Operation QC Plan. Provide proposed
 corrective actions to the Engineer and do not resume placing the asphalt course
 until after the Engineer reviews the proposed corrective actions and authorizes
 paving to continue.
 ii. Determine if the pattern segregation resulted in defective pavement as specified in
 Section 410.7.3.3.
 iii. After the Engineer allows paving to resume, place a test section not to exceed 200
 tons. If the corrective actions do not eliminate observed pattern segregation, the
 Department will suspend paving, even if it is before the Contractor places the entire
 test section. Propose additional corrective actions, and construct another test
 section. Resume normal paving operations after constructing an entire test section
 without pattern segregation as determined by the Engineer.
 410.7.3.3-Defective Pavement: At locations selected by the Engineer and with the
 Engineer present, drill three 6-inch diameter cores from the area of pattern segregation and
 three cores from the pavement representing a non-segregated area. Do not compress, bend,
 or distort samples during cutting and handling and immediately provide the cores to the
 Inspector. The Inspector will transport cores to the producer’s laboratory. With the
 Engineer present, test the cores at the plant for density, asphalt content, and gradation.
 Additional cores and/or additional testing as per MP 401.07.24 Measuring Pavement
 Macrotexture Depth can be used to further evaluate the pavement.
 An area of pattern segregation contains defective pavement if:
 a) the summation of absolute deviations from any two sieves is 20% or more from
 the JMF
 b) the core density is defective, the mixture is defective in asphalt content
 c) or the mixture is defective for percent passing the 75 μm (No. 200) sieve.
 The core density is defective, or the cores are defective for asphalt content or gradation
 of the 75 μm (No. 200) sieve if the PWL is less than 55 as determined in accordance with
 MP 401.13.50 and based on three samples (n=3). Remove and replace the full width of the
 affected lane and a minimum of 5 feet beyond each end of the area with unacceptable
 pattern segregation. Construct replacement pavement conforming to the appropriate
 surface tolerances.
 203
 
 410.7.4-Flushing: Provide a mix that will not flush. Flushing is continuous or repeated
 areas of excessive asphalt on the pavement surface. The Division may recognize flushing until
 the Division approves the project through final inspection. The Division will address flushing
 as follows:
 410.7.4.1-Evaluating Flushing: When the Engineer observes flushing, then:
 i.
 The Engineer will immediately notify the Contractor of the observed flushing.
 ii. The Contractor may continue work at its own risk while it immediately and
 continually adjusts the operation to eliminate flushing from future work.
 iii. In the presence of the Engineer, determine the average depth of pavement
 surface macrotexture according to MP 401.07.24 in areas of suspected flushing.
 If the average texture depth is less than or equal to 0.006 inches (0.152 mm),
 then the pavement will be considered to be flushed and is defective.
 410.7.4.2-Test Section: If the macrotexture tests identify flushing, then:
 i.
 Immediately suspend placing the paving course. Evaluate the cause of flushing
 according to the Paving Operation QC Plan and as directed. Provide proposed
 corrective actions to the Engineer and do not resume placing the paving course
 until after the Engineer reviews the proposed corrective actions and authorizes
 paving to continue.
 ii. Remove and replace the defective wearing course at no cost to the Division for
 the full width of the affected lane and a minimum of 5 feet beyond each end of
 the area of defective wearing course. Construct replacement wearing course
 conforming to the appropriate surface tolerances.
 iii. After the Engineer allows paving to resume, place a test section not to exceed
 200TN. If the corrective actions do not eliminate observed flushing, the
 Division will suspend paving even if it is before the Contractor places the entire
 test section. Propose additional corrective actions and construct another test
 section. Resume normal paving operations after constructing an entire test
 section without flushing as determined by the Engineer.
 410.8-BLANK
 410.9-EQUIPMENT:
 410.9.1-Plants: All plants shall meet the general requirements set forth in AASHTO M156
 unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Engineer that a consistent quality mix
 can be produced with modifications to any of these requirements.
 All plants in West Virginia producing asphalt for the Division shall provide documented
 evidence of compliance with current requirements of the West Virginia Air Pollution Control
 Commission.
 All plants which are not in West Virginia but producing asphalt for the West Virginia
 Division of Highways shall provide documented evidence of compliance with current
 requirements of the laws and regulations of the State in which they are producing, applicable
 to air pollution.
 
 204
 
 410.9.2-Dust Collector: An efficient dust collecting system shall be provided to prevent
 the loss of fine material. The material collected may be returned to the mixture at a uniform
 rate or discarded.
 410.9.3-Truck Scales: Truck scales shall be provided at each Plant, except that truck
 scales are not required at properly calibrated automatic batching plant facilities which are
 equipped with digital printout equipment, and which load the trucks directly from the mixer or
 the weigh hopper in a surge or storage silo.
 A person designated as a weigher shall be provided by the producer. The weigher shall
 certify that the weight of the asphalt, as determined either by the truck scales or from the digital
 printout of the batch weights, is correct.
 Each truck shall be weighed empty prior to each load, except at automatic batch plants
 approved to operate without truck scales.
 All truck scales shall be mounted on solid foundations which will insure them remaining
 plumb and level.
 Approval and sealing of scales shall be conducted at the frequency determined by the West
 Virginia Division of Labor, Bureau of Weights and Measures, and when the plant is moved,
 or upon the request of the Engineer. The Engineer shall be notified of any scale malfunctions
 when material is being furnished to Division of Highways projects. The Division may, at its
 option, accept inspection and sealing by out-of-state agencies when the mixing plant is located
 outside West Virginia.
 A digital recorder shall be required on all truck scales. The digital recorder shall produce
 a printed record of the gross, tare and net weights, and the time, date, truck identification, and
 project number. Provision shall be made for constant zero compensation and further provision
 shall be made so that the scales may not be manually manipulated during the printing process.
 The system shall be interlocked so as to allow printing only when the scale has come to rest.
 In case of breakdown of the automatic equipment, the Engineer may permit manual operation
 for a reasonable time, normally not to exceed 48 hours, while the equipment is being repaired.
 The scales shall be of sufficient size and capacity to weigh the loaded trucks that are used
 for delivery of asphalt from the plant.
 410.9.4-Test Weights: As part of its standard equipment, each plant which proportions
 aggregate by weight shall provide a minimum of ten 50-pound (22.68 kg) test weights for the
 purpose of verifying the continued accuracy of its weighing equipment.
 Plants which proportion asphalt material by weight shall furnish, in addition to the above,
 one five pound (2.268 kg) test weight.
 410.9.5-Surge and Storage Silos: During the normal daily operation of the plant, asphalt
 may be stored in a surge or storage silo for a maximum of 12 hours, provided the silo has
 received prior evaluation and acceptance through the District plant inspection. The resulting
 temperature of the material at time of placement and compaction shall be sufficient to comply
 with 410.10.3 and 410.10.4
 Longer silo storage times, up to 24 hours, may be permitted for dense graded asphalt if the
 storage silo is insulated and/or heated to assure that the proper mix temperature is maintained.
 The gates at the bottom of the storage silo shall be adequately heated and sealed when the
 asphalt is held for the extended period of time. When asphalt is stored for the extended time
 205
 
 period, it shall not be used until the temperature has been checked and the asphalt has been
 visually inspected for hardening of the mix and stripping of the asphalt from the aggregate.
 Approval of the extended storage time may be revoked if it is determined through inspection
 and/or testing that the extended storage is having a detrimental effect on the asphalt.
 410.9.6-Inspection of Equipment and Plant Operations: The Engineer shall have access
 to the plant to assure the adequacy of the equipment in use, to inspect the conditions and
 operation of the plant, to verify weights, to verify the proportion and character of materials,
 and to determine if specified temperatures are being maintained in the preparation of the
 mixture.
 410.9.7-Trucks for Transporting Mixture: The use of diesel fuel, kerosene, or similar
 solvent-based products which can dissolve the asphalt film from the aggregate particles will
 not be permitted for use as a release agent. Any commercial release agent which is certified
 as harmless to the mix may be used; however, the Division reserves the right to restrict any
 release agent that is shown to cause problems during placement of the mix. All excess release
 agent shall be removed from the truck bed prior to loading the asphalt.
 All truck beds shall be insulated with approved material. No trucks shall be used which
 cause segregation of the materials, which show large oil leaks, or which cause undue delays in
 delivery of material. All trucks shall be provided with a waterproof cover and a hole in the
 body for the purpose of conveniently checking the temperature of the load. Covers shall be
 suspended slightly above the mixture, shall extend over the sides of the truck, and shall be
 securely fastened to eliminate air infiltration and to prevent water from coming in contact with
 the mixture.
 410.9.8-Laboratory: A testing facility or laboratory, as described below, shall be
 provided within reasonable proximity of the asphalt plant. Plant operations must be visible
 from within the laboratory.
 The laboratory shall be of sufficient size to hold all laboratory test equipment and supplies
 with adequate floor space to allow the technicians to test samples in an efficient manner. The
 laboratory shall be furnished and maintained with adequate ventilation, heat, light, water, sink
 and drainage, electrical or gas outlets, or both, work table, shelves, and supply cabinets.
 The laboratory shall be supplied with the equipment and materials listed below and these
 shall be maintained to meet the applicable requirements of AASHTO or ASTM:
 i. Hot plate, gas or electric.
 ii. Large ovens (as needed for heating and drying samples), gas or electric.
 iii. Unit weight container, ½ cubic foot (0.014 cubic meter). Required for slag only.
 iv. Balances of sufficient capacity and accuracy for conducting specified tests and
 plant calibration.
 v. Thermometers: dial type, liquid-in-glass, and digital as required for conducting
 standard test procedures and monitoring mix temperatures. Digital thermometers
 shall be equipped with an appropriate sturdy probe that can be pushed into a sample
 of hot asphalt to check the temperature of the mix.
 vi. Ro-Tap Sieve shaker or equivalent, with 8 and/or 12 inch (200 and/or 300 mm)
 diameter screens.
 vii. Sample splitters for fine and coarse aggregates.
 206
 
 viii. Miscellaneous items (including sample splitting trowels, scoops, square point
 shovel, aggregate sample pans, heat resistant gloves, measuring rules, brushes,
 flashlight, timing devices, and glassware as needed).
 ix. Expendable supplies necessary for performance of tests.
 x. Equipment for determining the maximum specific gravity of asphalt mixtures as
 specified in AASHTO T209.
 xi. Non-contact infrared thermometer accurate to ± 2° F (± 1° C).
 xii. Equipment for determining the bulk specific gravity of asphalt mixtures using
 saturated surface dry specimens complying with AASHTO T166.
 xiii. Marshall equipment necessary to comply with AASHTO T245 and ASTM D5581,
 including a calibrated automatic testing apparatus having recording capabilities and
 compaction hammers. (Marshall designs only)
 xiv. Asphalt content ignition oven with built-in scale and printer meeting the requirements
 of AASHTO T308, Test Method A.
 xv. Calibrated Gyratory compactor meeting requirement of AASHTO T312 with
 computer (including software for data acquisition and test calculations) and printer.
 Compactor must be calibrated to the internal angle in accordance with AASHTO
 TP71 with annual verification (Superpave designs only).
 410.9.9-Asphalt Paving Equipment: Asphalt paving equipment shall be self-contained
 and of sufficient size, power and stability to receive, distribute and strike-off the asphalt
 mixture at rates and widths commensurate with the typical sections and other details shown on
 the plans. The paver shall be provided with an activated screed or strike-off assembly equipped
 to be heated. Approval of the paver by the Engineer will be based on the demonstrated
 capability of the equipment to place the mixture to the required cross-section, profile and
 alignment in an acceptable, finished condition ready for compaction.
 The paver shall be equipped with means of preventing the segregation of the coarse
 aggregate particles when moving the mixture from the paver hopper to the paver augers. It
 shall also be capable of pushing a sufficient amount of the mixture under the auger gearbox to
 prevent streaking or tearing of the mat. Some paver models may require the installation of a
 manufacturer retrofit kit or equipment modification to accomplish this.
 Specialized equipment or hand methods approved by the Engineer may be employed to
 spread the asphalt mixture where the use of standard full scale paver is impractical due to the
 size or irregularity of the area to be paved.
 Pavers shall be equipped with mechanical or automatic grade and slope controls. The use
 of automatic grade and slope controls with a traveling straight edge shall be required only when
 specified on the Plans or in the Proposal. Both the grade and slope controls shall be in working
 order at all times. In the event of failure of the automatic controls, the Contractor will be
 permitted to finish the day's work using manual controls but will not be allowed to resume
 work the following day until the grade and slope controls are in proper working order.
 410.9.10-Compaction Equipment: Compaction may be performed by self-propelled
 steel-wheeled, pneumatic-tired and/or vibratory rollers. Hand-held rollers or vibrating plates
 may be used in small inaccessible areas if approved by the Engineer. Prior to use on any
 project, the roller shall be inspected to see that it is in good mechanical condition. The total
 weight, weight per inch of width (steel-wheeled), and average ground contact pressure
 (pneumatic-tired) shall be documented.
 207
 
 410.10-PAVING OPERATIONS:
 410.10.1-Spreading and Finishing: Before spreading any material, the contact surfaces
 of curbs, gutters, manholes, and of adjacent Portland cement concrete pavement edges shall be
 painted or sealed with asphalt material. Exact edge of pavement, except on concrete, shall be
 established by a string or chalk line for a distance of not less than 500 feet ahead of the
 spreading operation. For projects where the existing pavement was milled prior to the
 placement of new asphalt, the edge of pavement shall be the edge of milled section.
 For mixes produced with neat (non-modified) asphalts (which may include PG 70-22,
 PG 64-22, PG 64-28, and PG 58-28) the temperature of the mixture at the time of placement
 shall be within the temperature requirements of the JMF. The JMF temperature range shall be
 the liquid asphalt supplier’s specified mixing temperature ±45F (±25C) with a maximum
 mixing temperature of 338F (170C). Additional allowances will be made for water injection
 processes with a minimum mixing temperature of 220F (105C).
 The mix temperature shall be monitored by inserting a thermometer into the mix through
 the hole in the truck bed.
 The temperature of the completed mix, when measured at the plant, shall be within the
 tolerance as established by the JMF. The first load which demonstrates temperatures outside
 of that range shall be accepted, provided that the temperature is still within the master
 temperature range. No additional loads of material shall be run out until necessary steps are
 taken to reestablish the temperature of the mix within the plant tolerance. When measured at
 the project site, the temperature of the mix shall be within the tolerance established by the JMF.
 The first truck load of material which demonstrates temperatures outside of that range or any
 trucks in transit at that time shall be accepted provided temperatures are within the master
 temperature range. Any truckload of material which exceeds the master temperature range
 may be rejected by the Engineer. However, the plant shall immediately be notified that no
 additional loads of material are to be dispatched until necessary action is taken to reestablish
 temperature within JMF specification limits.
 When the surface temperature falls to within 10° F (6° C) of the weather restrictions of
 Table 410.8, the mix temperature may be increased up to a maximum of 338° F (170° C) unless
 otherwise specified by the asphalt supplier. The temperature of each truckload of material
 shall be monitored for compliance. Any truckload of material which exceeds this maximum
 temperature may be rejected by the Engineer.
 Mixes produced with asphalts that contain modifiers for high or low temperature
 performance enhancement shall meet the temperature requirements recommended by the
 asphalt supplier, as determined using the mid-point of the mixing temperature range shown on
 the asphalt temperature-viscosity charts and allowing for ± 25° F (14° C).
 410.11-PROTECTION OF PAVEMENT AND TRAFFIC CONTROL:
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the protection of asphalt surfaces from damage by
 their equipment and personnel. When the construction of asphalt surfaces is undertaken on
 projects under public traffic and the road surface is 16 feet wide or greater and the ADT is 400 or
 greater, the Contractor shall place no passing signs, Interim pavement markings, and Temporary
 pavement markings to delineate the edge line, centerline, and/or lane line of the roadway as
 required herein and in the project plans. The provision of Section 336: Maintaining Traffic shall
 apply.
 
 208
 
 Interim markings are described as markings applied to freshly resurfaced roadways
 between lifts and after placement of the final lift prior to opening the portion of the roadway being
 resurfaced to traffic. These markings are intended to provide the minimum amount of delineation
 required for safe navigation of the roadway, and are to be succeeded by Temporary markings
 within a three (3) to fourteen (14) day period, based on the type of roadway and AADT, as specified
 herein. Interim and Temporary markings shall conform to the requirements of Section 663:
 Pavement Markings.
 410.12-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Asphalt will be measured by the Square Yard (SY). The quantity will be determined by
 the Plan Quantity as provided for in the proposal unless otherwise directed by the Engineer.
 Any patching or leveling mixture placed on a subbase or base course constructed in the
 same Contract with the asphalt items shall be at the expense of the Contractor. No additional
 compensation will be allowed for the material or any work incidental to its placement unless
 otherwise approved by the Engineer.
 410.13-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities determine as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price for
 the items listed below, which prices and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all the
 materials and doing all the work herein prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner,
 including all labor, tools, equipment, field laboratory, supplies, tack coat, and incidentals necessary
 to complete the work and provide the performance criteria specified.
 There will be no additional compensation for Interim Pavement Markings.
 410.13.1-When a Lot of asphalt material is found not in compliance with the tolerance
 requirements for asphalt content and gradation as shown in MP 401.02.31, it shall be subject
 to a price adjustment in accordance with the criteria for Determination of Percent Within Limits
 established in MP 401.13.50 and pay factors in Table 410.13.3.1.
 410.13.2-BLANK
 410.13.3-The unit price for each Lot of asphalt pavement Mat shall be adjusted as follows
 in Table 410.13.3.1 in accordance with MP 401.13.50.
 
 209
 
 TABLE 410.13.3.1
 Percentage of Material Within
 Lot Pay Factor (Percent of
 Specification Limits (PWL)
 Contract Unit Price)
 Note 1
 96-100
 102 Note 1
 90-95
 100
 75-89
 [(0.5)PWL]+55
 55-74 Note 2
 [(1.4)PWL]-12
 Note 1
 Note 2
 
 Payment of 102% for mat density shall be subject to additional requirement of the
 average compaction for the lot being evaluated to be a minimum of 93% density.
 Material with a PWL less than 55 is considered defective, and will be considered for
 removal and replacement of the lot. If only one lot characteristic has a percent within
 limits less than 55, the Engineer, may allow the Contractor to leave the defective lot in
 place. The decision to remove and replace the subject lot shall include evaluation of
 all lot characteristics for pay and surface characteristics as per guidelines set forth in
 MP 401.07.25. If the material is left in place, the Department will pay for the defective
 lot at a value not to exceed 50% of the contract unit price of asphalt per square yard.
 (ie Contract unit price = $10 sy  $5 sy max)
 
 410.13.3.1-Price Adjustment: The Division will compute the percent of the contract
 unit price paid as follows:
 Lot Payment = CP (2PD + PB + PA) / 400
 Where:
 CP = Contract unit price per lot (unit price times lot quantity)
 PD = Payment Factor Percentage for mat density
 PB = Payment Factor Percentage for asphalt content.
 PA = Payment Factor Percentage for percent passing the 75 μm (No. 200) sieve
 Shoulders and ramps shall be included in penalty calculations for mixture and
 compaction, unless they are constructed independently where the density requirements
 shall be waived. When compaction requirements are waived, PD will be minimum of 100.
 410.13.4-Joint Density Adjustments: Joint Density PWL calculations shall be in
 accordance with MP 401.13.50. Joint Density bonus adjustments will be calculated for joint
 lots with a PWL greater than or equal to 80. Joint Density negative adjustments will be
 calculated for joint list with a PWL less than or equal to 60. Price adjustments shall be
 calculated using the formulas below. There will be no adjustment for joint lots who’s PWL
 falls between 60 and 80.
 Bonus adjustment calculated as follows:
 $T =
 
 PWL−80
 20
 
 X 4,000
 
 Negative adjustment calculated as follows:
 $T =
 
 60−PWL
 60
 
 X 12,500
 
 210
 
 Adjustments calculated for lots less than or greater than 10,000 feet in length shall be
 prorated directly proportional to the amount of length less than or greater than 10,000 feet.
 410.13.5-Thickness Adjustments: No payment will be made for pavement areas deficient
 in thickness by more than 35% T.
 Pavement which is deficient in thickness by more than 50% T is considered to be
 inadequate to perform satisfactorily and shall be removed and replaced at no added cost to the
 Division.
 The balance of the item, the portion of the item not treated in the manner set forth above,
 will be treated in the manner set forth in 410.13.5.1 below.
 410.13.5.1- Price Adjustments for Thickness - When all individual measurements
 meet or exceed the specified thickness, there will be no adjustment for payment. If any
 individual values or when the average value of the pavement thickness per lot is less than
 the specified total thickness, the quantity of pavement represented by this average thickness
 will be paid by a direct calculation as defined as follows:
 t
 Price Adjustment % = ( ) x100
 T
 
 Where:
 T = Total Plan Thickness
 t = avg. lot thickness + 0.04 in.
 
 This value is then applied to the unit price for the asphalt place in the lot, this adjustment
 shall remain separate from the PWL adjustments for AC, Gradation, Density, etc.
 410.13.6-Bond Strength:
 410.13.6.1-Tack Coats: Any tack coats applied by the contractor shall be applied in
 accordance with section 408. It is the intent of the Sections 410.13.6, 410.13.6.1 and
 Section 408.7 to provide one tack coat application on the existing surface including any
 milled surfaces.
 However, any new intermediate asphalt layers installed shall receive an additional tack
 coat when such layers have been used for maintaining traffic for two or more weeks prior
 to placement of any final or intermediate layers. If the contractor chooses not to tack any
 intermediate layers as described above, then the Bond Strength Pay adjustment factor
 described in section 410.13.6.2 shall apply.
 410.13.6.2-Bond Strength Calculations: If no tack coat is applied in accordance with
 Section 408, then the following price adjustment will be applied for Bond Strength.
 When a lot of Asphalt does not meet the Bond Strength requirements as specified in
 Section 410.7.1.4, the price shall be adjusted as follows:
 Negative adjustment calculated as follows:
 $T =
 
 70−PWL
 70
 
 X 40,000
 
 211
 
 410.13.7-Lot Payment Calculations: The pay factors that are calculated with in the
 specification are to be applied in the following way:
 410.13.7.1-PWL Factors: The calculated total PWL for a given lot is applied to the
 bid unit price for the asphalt mixture in the lot. Once the unit price has been adjusted the
 quantities can be calculated to arrive at the payment for the lot.
 410.13.7.2-Thickness Adjustment: There is no adjustment for thickness greater than
 the thickness that is specified in the plans. If there is a Price Adjustment (Section 410.13.5)
 for thickness this factor (percentage) is applied to the contract bid unit price times the
 quantity in the lot to arrive at a dollar amount penalty. This penalty is applied to the overall
 payment for the lot.
 410.13.7.3-Joint Density Adjustment: If it is determined in Section 410.13.4 of this
 specification that a Joint Density Adjustment is warranted the dollar amount determined in
 the formulas of Section 410.13.4 shall be applied to the overall payment for the lot.
 410.13.7.4-Bond Strength Adjustment: If it is determined that a Bond Strength
 Adjustment is warranted by Section 410.7.1.4 of this specification the formulas in Section
 410.13.6.2 shall be used to calculate the adjustment. This adjustment shall be applied to
 the overall payment for the lot.
 410.14-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 
 DESCRIPTION
 
 410001-* “design method” Asphalt Base Course, Type “mix type”
 410002-* “design method” Asphalt Wear Course, Type “mix type”
 410007-* “design method” Asphalt Skid Pavement, Type “mix type”
 *
 
 Sequence number
 “design method” shall be either Marshall or Superpave
 “mix type” from Table 401.4.2A or 401.4.2B
 
 SECTION 411-BLANK
 
 212
 
 UNIT
 Square Yard
 (Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Meter)
 
 SECTION 412
 WINTER GRADE ASPHALT PATCHING MIXTURE
 412.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of preparing a mixture of aggregate and bituminous material
 suitable for stockpiling and remaining workable for a period of six months.
 412.2-MATERIALS:
 412.2.1-Bituminous Material: The material shall conform to the requirements of 705.1,
 Winter Grade Cut-Back Asphalt.
 412.2.2-Aggregate: The aggregate shall consist of crushed stone, crushed gravel, or slag,
 meeting the requirements of 703.1, 703.2 and 703.3 respectively, and sand meeting the
 requirements of 702.3. The gradation of the final mixture shall be as follows:
 Sieve Sizes
 1/2 in.(12.5 mm)
 3/8 inch(9.5 mm)
 # 4 (4.75 mm)
 # 8 (2.36 mm)
 # 100 (150 μm)
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 85-100
 25-65
 10-20
 0-5
 
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 412.3-MIXING PROPORTIONS:
 Samples of bituminous materials and aggregates intended to be used shall be furnished the
 Division who will advise the mixture proportions to be used.
 412.4-PREPARATION OF MIX:
 The asphaltic binder shall be heated to 150° to 175° F (66 to 79° C), care being taken to
 prevent local overheating. The aggregate and bituminous material shall be measured separately
 and accurately to the proportions in which they are to be mixed. After the aggregate and binder
 have been combined, they shall be thoroughly mixed until all particles of the aggregate are coated.
 At no time shall the finished mixture be at a temperature greater than 150° F (66° C).
 The constituents shall be combined in such proportions as to produce a mixture conforming
 to the following composition by weight:
 Total Mineral Aggregate
 Winter Grade Cut Back Asphalt
 
 Limestone or Gravel Percent
 94.0-95.0
 5.0-6.0
 
 Slag Percent
 92.5-94.0
 6.0-7.5
 
 When the correct percentage of bituminous material is established for a given aggregate,
 this quantity shall not vary more than minus 0.1 percent or plus 0.3 percent.
 
 213
 
 412.5-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantities of work done will be measured in tons (megagrams) of "Winter Grade
 Bituminous Patching Mixture", F.O.B. vendor's plant or stockpile, or the Division's stockpile as
 designated.
 The number of tons (megagrams) of "Winter Grade Bituminous Patching Mixture" shall
 be determined by the total of the weights shown on receipted railroad freight bills when materials
 are shipped by rail; by actual measured displacement of barges certified by the producer when
 water shipments are made, providing materials delivered by the methods are not stockpiled or
 stored; or determined by the Contractor from the total of weigh slips for each vehicle load weighed
 on an approved standard scale or from digital printout slips from an automatic batching plant, and
 certified by the Contractor to be correct.
 Truck scales shall be provided by the producer or Contractor, except that truck scales are
 not required where the material is weighed at properly calibrated automatic batching plant facilities
 which are equipped with digital print-out equipment. The scales shall be of sufficient size and
 capacity to weigh the heaviest loaded trucks that are used for delivery of the material.
 All truck scales shall be mounted on solid foundations which will insure their remaining
 plumb and level. All truck scales shall be inspected and sealed by the West Virginia Division of
 Labor, Bureau of Weights and Measures, or other appropriate agencies of the State or its political
 subdivisions. The Division may, at its option, accept inspection and sealing by out of state
 agencies when the material is weighed outside West Virginia.
 A weigh person shall be provided by the producer. The weigh person shall certify that the
 weight of the material, as determined either by the truck scales or from the digital printout of the
 weights, is correct.
 Each truck shall be weighed empty prior to each load, except at automatic batch plants
 approved to operate without truck scales. A digital recorder shall be required on all truck scales.
 The digital recorder shall produce a printed record of the gross, tare and net weights, and the time,
 date, truck identification and project number. Provision shall be made for constant zero
 compensation and further provision shall be made so that the scales may not be manually
 manipulated during the printing process. The system shall be interlocked so as to allow printing
 only when the scale has come to rest. In case of a breakdown of the automatic equipment, the
 Engineer may permit manual operation for a reasonable time, normally not to exceed 48 hours,
 while the equipment is being repaired.
 412.6-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the item listed below, which price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing and
 handling all the materials incorporated in the mixture.
 412.7-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 412001-* Winter Grade Bituminous Patching Mixture, **
 * Sequence number
 ** Type of Aggregate
 
 UNIT
 Ton (Megagram)
 
 SECTION 413 THROUGH SECTION 414-BLANK
 214
 
 SECTION 415
 MILLING OF ASPHALT PAVEMENT SURFACES
 415.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This item shall govern for the milling of existing and/or new asphalt pavement at locations
 shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer in accordance with the requirements herein and
 MP 401.07.24. The work shall provide a skid resistant surface that meets smoothness requirements
 and provides a constant cross slope, or be used as surface preparation prior to placement of a final
 surface course.
 415.1.1-Standard Milling: Item 415005-* shall be used as the default milling of asphalt
 pavements. It should be used when the Division plans to remove existing asphalt pavement in
 preparation for an asphalt overlay or other process. This method of removal is most common
 and possesses a minor level of profile and slope control, or as otherwise shown in the plans.
 415.1.2-Fine Milling: Item 415006-* shall be used when the Division intends to overlay
 the milled surface with a thin lift asphalt course, or as otherwise shown in the plans. This
 removal method shall be considered a detailed surface preparation, therefore requiring a high
 level of profile and slope control, or as otherwise shown in the plans.
 415.1.3-Micromilling: Item 415007-* shall be used for in an effort to recover skid
 resistance on existing pavement or smoothness correction, bump and/or grade corrections on
 existing or newly paved surfaces where called for in the plans. This removal method shall be
 considered specialized and is not intended to be used when standard overlays are to be used.
 415.2-CONSTRUCTION:
 415.2.1-General: The plans will designate the area of pavement surfaces to be milled.
 Milling of roadway shoulders will not be required unless indicated on the plans or required to
 provide drainage.
 415.2.2-Equipment: The equipment for removing the existing pavement shall be a power
 operated planing machine or grinder. The equipment shall be capable of accurately
 establishing profile grades along each edge of the machine within plus or minus 1/4 inch (6
 mm) by referencing from the existing pavement and able to maintain accurate depth of cut and
 cross-slope.
 The machine shall have a control system providing for uniformly varying the depth of cut
 while the machine is in motion to prevent cutting of or damage to drainage works, manholes
 or other appurtenances within the paved area.
 At the end of each working day, all equipment shall be removed to a location where it does
 not present a hazard to traffic, the pavement shall be cleaned by sweeping or flushing.
 415.2.3-Milling Residue: The Contractor shall establish a positive and immediate means
 for removal of milling residue. The machine shall have adequate loading equipment to remove
 solid residue from the surface and discharge them into a truck or as directed. Residue shall not
 be permitted to flow across lanes used by the traveling public or into gutters or drainage
 facilities.
 215
 
 415.2.4-Millings: The removed pavement material shall become the property of the
 Contractor.
 Excess waste material resulting from the operation shall be removed and disposed of in a
 manner approved by the Engineer.
 415.2.5-Milled Surface Opened to Traffic: If the ground area is opened to traffic the
 following shall apply;
 1) Any transverse vertical face shall be sloped so as not to present a hazard to traffic;
 2) Any longitudinal vertical face shall not exceed 2 inches (50 mm);
 3) The pavement surface shall be cleaned by sweeping or flushing.
 415.2.6-Cross Slope: Milling will be accomplished in a manner that eliminates crack or
 joint faults while providing positive lateral drainage by maintaining a constant cross-slope
 between grinding extremities in each lane. Auxiliary or ramp lane grinding shall transition as
 required from the mainline edge to provide positive drainage and an acceptable riding surface.
 The operation shall result in pavement that conforms to the typical cross-section and the
 requirements specified for the final surface finish. However, it is the intention of this
 specification that the faulting at joints and cracks be eliminated and the overall riding
 characteristics be restored within the limits specified. To accomplish the smoothness required,
 milling may not be required on 100 percent of the pavement surface. If directed by the
 Engineer, any spalling or dislodged unsound pavement due to milling shall be corrected by the
 Contractor via section 109.4.
 415.2.7-Surface Finish: The milling process shall produce a smooth riding pavement
 surface that is true to the established line, grade and cross section with the milled area
 consisting of a longitudinal corduroy-type texture. The milling operation shall be capable of
 efficiently and accurately establishing profile grades along each edge of the machine within
 the tolerance listed below:
 415005-*
 415006-*
 415007-*
 
 Standard Milling
 Fine Milling
 Micromilling
 
 1
 
 /4 inch (6 mm)
 /8 inch (3 mm)
 1
 /8 inch (3mm)
 1
 
 Transverse joints and cracks shall be made flush with adjacent surfaces. Transverse joints
 and cracks shall be visually inspected to ensure that adjacent surfaces are in the same plane.
 Alignment of adjacent sides of the joints or cracks shall be within 1/8 inch (3 mm) of each
 other to be considered flush.
 The transverse slope of the pavement shall be uniform to a degree that no depressions of
 misalignment of slope greater 1/4 inch (6 mm) in 12 ft. (3.65 m) are present when tested with
 a straightedge placed perpendicular to the centerline. Straightedge requirements do not apply
 outside of the milled area. The peaks of the ridges shall be approximately 1/8 inch (3 mm)
 higher than the grooves.
 
 216
 
 The finished, milled pavement surface shall be evaluated using MP 401.07.24 except that
 the volume of glass beads to be used for each test shall be 200 ml (12in3), and only one such
 test shall be required at each individual test location. The measured diameter for each test shall
 be equal to or greater than the values shown below:
 415005-*
 415006-*
 415007-*
 
 Standard Milling
 Fine Milling
 Micromilling
 
 NA
 9” Dia.
 12” Dia.
 
 Testing shall be performed as soon as practical behind the milling operation in order to not
 allow gaps to occur between sections being milled and sections being evaluated. Three tests
 shall be performed within the first 3,000 square yards of milling, and then at a minimum
 frequency of one test for every 7,500 square yards of milled surface thereafter. If the minimum
 diameter is not maintained, cease operations until necessary adjustments to the equipment
 and/or the process are made to meet this requirement. Do not resume milling operations until
 the Engineer is satisfied with the corrective actions.
 Upon resuming operations after any adjustments are made, the first 3,000 square yards
 shall be evaluated as stated above. Additionally, if the equipment is replaced for any reason,
 or if mobilization back to the project site occurs at a later date for any reason, the first 3,000
 square yards shall be evaluated as stated above.
 The Engineer may reduce the testing frequency provided that a uniform texture is
 consistently maintained meeting the requirements shown above.
 415.3-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Pavement milling will be measured by the square yard (square meter) of pavement milled
 and accepted. The quantity of pavement milling will be determined by multiplying the width
 specified on the plans by the total length of the finished pavement surface.
 415.4-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The contract price per square yard (square meter) for Standard, Fine Milling, or
 Micromilling shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor, materials, tool, equipment and
 incidentals and for doing all work involved in milling the existing pavement, removing residue,
 cleaning the pavement, and testing per MP 401.07.24 in accordance with these specifications and
 as shown on the plans.
 415.5-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 415005-*
 415006-*
 415007-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Standard Milling
 Fine Milling
 Micromilling
 
 * Sequence number
 
 217
 
 UNIT
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Square Yard (Meter)
 
 218
 
 DIVISION 500
 RIGID PAVEMENT
 
 SECTION 501
 PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT
 501.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of a pavement or an unbonded overlay pavement composed of
 Portland cement concrete, with or without reinforcement as shown on the Plans, constructed on a
 prepared subgrade, base course, or existing pavement in accordance with these Specifications and
 in reasonably close conformity with the lines, grades, thicknesses, and typical cross sections shown
 on the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 Pozzolanic materials (fly ash, ground granulated blast furnace slag and microsilica)
 conforming to the provisions of these specifications may be used as an additive to portland Cement
 Concrete Pavement at the Contractor's option. These additives are not permitted when a blended
 hydraulic cement is used.
 A water reducing admixture may be used at the Contractor's option. A water reducing
 admixture shall not be used in conjunction with a water reducing retarder.
 501.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall meet the requirements of Division 700, as follows:
 MATERIAL
 Air Entraining Admixture
 Coarse Aggregate
 Coated Dowel Bars
 Curing Materials
 Fine Aggregate*
 Joint Tie Bolt Assembly
 Low Modulus Silicone Joint Sealant; Back-Up Material
 Pavement Reinforcement
 Performed Elastomeric Joint Seals; Lubricant-Adhesive
 Portland Cement
 Pozzolanic Additives
 Preformed Expansion Joint Filler
 Tie Bars
 Water
 Water Reducer
 *
 
 SUBSECTION
 707.1
 703.1-4
 709.15
 707.6-707.10
 702.1
 709.7
 708.4
 709.4, 709.6
 708.2
 701.1, 701.3
 707.4
 708.1.1 (Type 1), 708.1.2
 709.1
 715.7
 707.3
 
 The use of limestone will not be permitted.
 
 Shipping and Storage of Cement: Cement shall be shipped from pretested and approved
 bins at the mill or other terminal locations. Cement stored by the Contractor for a period longer
 than 90 days shall be retested before being used in the work. Cement failing to meet any of the
 specified requirements at any time prior to incorporation into the work will be rejected and
 removed from the work. Cements of different types shall be stored separately.
 Shipping and Storage of Pozzolanic Additives: Pozzolanic additives shall be shipped
 from only those sources approved by the Division. Bulk Pozzolanic additives shall be stored at
 219
 
 the job site in weatherproof bins. Pozzolanic additives from different sources or from different
 lots at the same source shall be stored separately.
 501.2.1-Recycled Pavement for use as Coarse Aggregate for Concrete:
 501.2.1.1-The existing portland cement concrete pavement may be removed and
 crushed, when called for on the Plans. If asphaltic concrete resurfacing is present, the
 asphaltic concrete shall be removed before the portland cement concrete is crushed.
 501.2.1.2-Any existing reinforcing steel encountered shall be removed from the
 existing pavement prior to or during the crushing operation and shall be disposed of by the
 Contractor.
 501.2.1.3-The Contractor shall remove the pavement in a manner which excludes
 subgrade and base material to the maximum extent practical.
 501.2.1.4-The pavement material shall be crushed to pass the 1½ in. (37.5 mm) sieve.
 Processing equipment shall include a No. 4 (4.75 mm) screen and excessive fines in the
 crushed material shall be controlled by removal of fines passing the No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 screen.
 501.2.1.5-Any excess material removed during processing shall be disposed of by the
 Contractor.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 501.3-PROPORTIONING:
 Prior to the start of construction, the Contractor shall design and submit to the Engineer for
 approval the proportions of materials, including admixtures, to be used which will result in a
 workable concrete having the properties enumerated below, including those of Table 501.3.1. The
 mix design, prepared in accordance with MP 711.03.23, shall include a statement giving the source
 of materials and certified test data from a Division approved laboratory demonstrating the
 adequacy of the mix design. The Contractor shall notify the Engineer of any change in the source
 of materials or the addition of admixtures during the process of the work since such change may
 necessitate a new mix design. The Contractor shall also state the Ā value of the combined grading
 of the coarse aggregate, fine aggregate, and cement used in the mix design.
 The combined grading of the coarse aggregate, fine aggregate, and cement used in the
 pavement concrete shall conform to the design mix Ā plus or minus the tolerance specified in the
 following table for the coarse aggregate size used:
 Coarse Aggregate
 Size No.
 357 or 467
 57 or 67
 
 Design Mix Ā
 Tolerance
 ±0.35
 ±0.25
 
 220
 
 Ā is the values of total solids (coarse aggregate, fine aggregate and cement). The grading
 of the total solids shall be determined by the Contractor at least once each production day. Should
 the moving average of any five consecutive grading test results of the total solids have an Ā outside
 the specified mix design tolerance limits, production shall be discontinued until appropriate
 corrections are made. Corrections shall be made either in the proportions of the concrete (the mix
 design), the gradation of the aggregates, or the storage and loading of the aggregate, as the
 Contractor may elect.
 TABLE 501.3.1 {ENGLISH}
 Minimum
 28-Day Design
 Strength
 
 Minimum
 Cement Factor
 
 Maximum
 Water Content
 
 Standard Size of
 Coarse Aggregate
 
 psi
 
 Bags per cu. yd.
 
 Gal. per cu. yd.
 of concrete
 
 Number
 
 3,000 Compressive
 or
 500 Flexural*
 
 6**
 
 33
 
 357, 467
 57 or 67
 TABLE 501.3.1 {METRIC}
 
 Minimum
 28-Day Design
 Strength
 
 Minimum
 Cement Factor
 
 Maximum
 Water Content
 
 Standard Size of
 Coarse Aggregate
 
 Mpa
 
 kg per cu. meter
 
 Liters per cu. m.
 of concrete
 
 Number
 
 20.7 Compressive
 or
 3.5 Flexural*
 
 335 kg**
 
 163.4
 
 *
 **
 
 357, 467
 57 or 67
 
 Flexural strength when tested by the third point method.
 An equal volume of a Pozzolanic additive may be substituted for portland cement up to
 the following maximum amount. Only one Pozzolanic additive is permitted in a mix
 design.
 
 MATERIAL
 Fly Ash
 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag
 Microsilica
 
 QUANTITY
 1 bag
 3 bags
 1/2 bag
 
 MP 711.03.26 shall be used to control the cement factor in pavement concrete if the
 Contractor has a suitable means of verifying the minimum 28-day design strength, and providing
 a copy of the plan for verifying the strength is submitted to the Engineer. When MP 711.03.26 is
 used to control the cement factor in portland cement concrete pavements, then column two in Table
 501.3.1 will be considered to contain a target cement factor instead of a minimum cement factor.
 The amount of entrained air in freshly mixed concrete shall be 7 percent plus or minus 2½ percent.
 
 221
 
 Concrete shall have the consistency which will allow proper placement and consolidation
 in the required position. The optimum consistency shall be as indicated in Table 501.3.2.
 TABLE 501.3.2 CONSISTENCY
 Optimum Consistency
 Inches (mm) Of Slump
 
 Type
 (a) For pavements when concrete is permitted to be
 placed using a slip form paver, where a low slump
 is required to maintain the prescribed geometry.
 (b) For pavements supplied by travel mixers of central
 mixers where the concrete is struck off and
 consolidated entirely by mechanical equipment.
 (c) For pavements and approaches supplied by travel,
 central or transit mixtures where the concrete is
 struck off and consolidated partially by hand labor.
 *
 **
 
 *1 in. (25 mm)
 **2 in. (50 mm)
 **2 ½ in. (65 mm)
 
 The consistency shall be that which will allow a proper placement and consolidation of the
 concrete, and will permit the prescribed geometry to be maintained. The concrete will be
 rejected when the consistency exceeds 2 inches (50 mm).
 If the consistency exceeds the optimum plus ¾ in. (20 mm), the Contractor shall take
 immediate steps to reduce the slump of succeeding loads by making necessary
 adjustments in the mixture. The Contractor will be allowed a reasonable time for the
 trucks already on the road for a central mix or transit mix operation. Failure to comply
 will be cause for rejection of the concrete. If the consistency exceeds the optimum plus 2
 inches (50 mm), the concrete will be rejected.
 
 The approved mix design shall be subject to modification under the following conditions:
 After the start of the first concreting operation and immediately after the specified
 consistency and entrained air have been established, three unit weight determinations shall be
 made from different batches and the average of the three determinations shall be considered the
 unit weight of the concrete. The actual yield shall be adjusted as required to correct the actual
 yield to correspond to the theoretical.
 During the progress of the work, the actual yield may be verified; and, if the yield based
 on a single unit weight determination should differ from the theoretical more than plus or minus
 two percent, two additional unit weight determinations shall be made from different batches and
 the average of the three determinations shall be considered the unit weight of the concrete. The
 actual yield shall be determined from the average unit weight, and the design mix shall again be
 adjusted as required to correct the actual yield to correspond to the theoretical.
 In addition to the design mix adjustments specified above to correct for yield, other
 adjustments in the design mix proportions shall be made as necessary to maintain a plastic,
 workable mix with suitable finishing characteristics.
 No change in the sources of material shall be made without prior approval of the Engineer.
 Methods for determining the properties enumerated above shall be in accordance with
 501.4.
 
 222
 
 501.4-TESTING:
 501.4.1-Test Methods:
 Slump of Hydraulic Cement Concrete
 Air Content of Freshly Mixed Concrete by the Pressure
 Method
 Air Content of Freshly Mixed Concrete by the Volumetric
 Method
 Unit Weight and Yield of Concrete
 Making and Curing Concrete Test Specimens in the Field
 Flexural Strength of Concrete
 Obtaining and Testing Drilled Cores and Sawed Beams of
 Concrete
 Measuring Length of Drilled Concrete Cores
 Non-Destructive Thickness Determination of Pavements
 Using Magnetic Imaging Tomography Technology
 Total Evaporable Moisture Content of Aggregate by
 Drying
 Sampling Fresh Concrete
 Sieve Analysis of Fine and Coarse Aggregates
 Materials Finer Than No. 200 Sieve in Mineral Aggregates
 by Washing
 Determination of Free Moisture in Fine Aggregate Using a
 “Speedy Moisture Tester”
 Aggregate Sampling Procedures
 Standard Method for Determination of Ā of the Total
 Solids in Portland Cement Concrete
 
 AASHTO T 119
 AASHTO T 152
 AASHTO T 196
 AASHTO T121
 AASHTO T 23 with
 MP 601.04.20
 AASHTO T 97
 AASHTO T 24
 AASHTO T 148
 MP 700.10.01
 AASHTO T 255
 AASHTO R 60
 AASHTO T 27
 AASHTO T 11
 MP 702.00.20
 MP 700.00.06
 MP 601.03.51
 
 501.4.2-Contractor's Quality Control: Quality control of the portland cement concrete
 is the responsibility of the Contractor as designed in MP 601.03.50. The Contractor shall
 maintain equipment and qualified personnel, including at least one certified portland cement
 concrete technician who shall direct all field inspection, sampling and testing necessary to
 determine the magnitude of the various properties of concrete governed by the Specifications
 and shall maintain these properties within the limits of this Specification. The Contractor’s
 personnel who conducts the field sampling and testing shall be a certified portland cement
 concrete inspector. The quality control plan designated by MP 601.03.50 shall be submitted
 to the Engineer at the preconstruction conference.
 Work shall not begin until the Contractor’s Quality Control Plan, in accordance with MP
 601.03.50, is reviewed for conformance with the contract documents.
 Two separate concrete samples shall be taken, from the finished concrete surface behind
 the concrete paving operation, at the beginning of first day’s paving operation. These concrete
 samples shall be tested for air content. The results from these two samples shall be compared
 to air content test results from samples taken ahead of the paving operation. These values shall
 then be used by the Contactor to determine the amount by which the air content of the concrete
 is being reduced due to paving operations. If the air content behind the paving operation is
 223
 
 found to be below the specified level, the Contractor shall make adjustments in the concrete
 mix to allow for this loss of air content, and retest. The Contractor shall fill the voids in the
 plastic concrete created by obtaining these samples and shall finish the plastic concrete surface
 to match the adjacent concrete surface.
 501.4.3-Acceptance Testing: Acceptance sampling and testing of portland cement
 concrete is the responsibility of the Division, except for furnishing of necessary materials.
 Strength, as used in this Specification, is only one indicator of the durability of the portland
 cement concrete. Evaluation of a pavement may include evaluation of the freeze-thaw
 durability, including scaling characteristics, abrasion resistance, density, and such other factors
 as the Division deems appropriate to the pavement.
 Quality control sampling and testing performed by the Contractor may be used by the
 Division for acceptance.
 501.4.4-Testing for Opening Pavement to Traffic: A minimum of three sets of three
 concrete specimens (beams or cylinders) each shall be made for each day's paving operation.
 The three sets of specimens shall be treated in the following manner to determine when the
 pavement represented may be put into service under the provisions of 501.18, except that said
 determination and the action permitted shall in no way affect the treatment of concrete as
 specified in 501.21.1 and 501.14.
 In lieu of the cylinders outlined in the previous paragraph, the Contractor may use the
 Maturity Method for the estimation of concrete strength, as outlined in MP 601.04.21, for
 determining when the pavement may be opened to traffic.
 One specimen from each of the three sets shall be tested at age four days and the results
 averaged to establish the test value. If the test value complies with the Specification, the
 portion of pavement which is aged four days may be put into service.
 In the event Specification compliance has not been verified at age four days, one specimen
 from each of the three sets shall be tested at age six days and the results averaged to establish
 the test value. If the test value complies with the specifications the portion of pavement which
 is aged six days may be put into service.
 In the event Specification compliance has not been verified at age six days, one specimen
 of the remaining specimen from each of the three set shall be tested at age eight days and the
 results averaged to establish the test value. If the test value complies with the Specification,
 the portion of pavement that has aged eight days may be put into service.
 In the event the test value determined at age eight days does not comply with the
 Specification, the test values determined at ages four, six, and eight days may be plotted on a
 graph and a line drawn through the points in such a manner as to establish the age-strength
 relationship. The line may be projected to age 28 days, and if the projection indicates
 specification design strength compliance prior to age 28 days, then the pavement may be put
 into service at the age at which specification compliance is indicated.
 When high early strength cement is used, the first test value may be established at age three
 days and all succeeding values established at 24 hour intervals.
 501.4.5-Compressive Strength Tests for Acceptance: The compressive strength of
 concrete will be determined by testing concrete cylinders. Concrete cylinders shall be
 fabricated at the frequency specified in MP 601.03.50. A compressive strength test shall
 224
 
 consist of three test specimens. Either 6” x 12” (150 mm x 300 mm) or 4” x 8” (100 mm x
 200 mm) cylinders are permitted, provided the requirements of MP 711.03.23 are met. The
 size of cylinders which the Contractor intends to use on each project shall be listed in the
 Contractor’s Quality Control Plan. The test shall be the average of three test specimens, except
 that if one specimen shows manifest evidence of improper sampling, molding, or testing, it
 shall be discarded and the remaining two strengths averaged. Should more than one specimen
 representing a given test show definite defects due to improper sampling, molding, or testing,
 the entire test shall be discarded.
 The maximum acceptable range of compressive strengths within a set of three cylinders is
 9.5%. This range is found by multiplying 9.5% times the average compressive strength of the
 three cylinders. If this acceptable range is exceeded, the cylinder that varies the most from the
 average shall be discarded, and the remaining two cylinders shall be evaluated as outlined in
 the following paragraph.
 The maximum acceptable range of compressive strengths within a set of two cylinders is
 8.0%. This range is found by multiplying 8.0% times the average compressive strength of the
 two cylinders. If this acceptable range is exceeded, the entire test shall be discarded. Under
 no circumstances shall a compressive strength test consist of less than the average of two
 specimens.
 Compressive strength tests shall conform to the requirements of Table 501.3.1. Statistical
 analysis may indicate a percentage of production to be below nominal minimum design
 strength. Concrete represented by compressive strengths below the nominal design strength
 of Table 501.3.1 may be removed and replaced by the Contractor. If the Contractor elects to
 leave the material in place, it will be evaluated as to adequacy for the use intended. All concrete
 evaluated as unsatisfactory for the use intended shall be removed and replaced or otherwise
 corrected by and at the expense of the Contractor as required in 105.3. When an evaluation
 indicates that the work may satisfactorily remain in place, a statistical analysis will be made of
 the material. If this statistical analysis indicates at least 93 percent of the material may be
 expected to have compressive strengths equal to or greater than that shown in Table 501.3.1,
 and 99.87 percent of the material may be expected to have compressive strengths at least one
 standard deviation above forty percent of the design strength (0.4f'c+σ), the work will be
 accepted as substantially complying with the specification requirements. If this statistical
 analysis indicates that less than 93 percent of the material may be expected to have compressive
 strengths equal to or greater than that shown in Table 501.3.1 or less than 99.87 percent of the
 material may be expected to have compressive strengths at least one standard deviation above
 forty percent of the design strength (0.4f'c+σ), the Engineer will provide for an appropriate
 adjustment under the provisions of 601.15.
 Whenever possible, the Division's statistical analysis will be based on a minimum of 10
 cylinder test results. These results may be from the concrete item being placed, the same class
 of concrete on the project, or the same class of concrete from the producer. All of the cylinder
 test results used in this evaluation, however, must be from the same mix design.
 501.5-EQUIPMENT AND TOOLS:
 Equipment and tools necessary for handling materials and performing all parts of the work
 shall be approved by the Engineer as to design, capacity, and mechanical condition. The
 equipment shall be at the job site sufficiently ahead of the start of construction operations to be
 
 225
 
 examined. Any equipment not maintained in satisfactory working order, or which is proved
 inadequate, shall be improved or new equipment substituted, as directed by the Engineer.
 501.5.1-Field Laboratory: Portland cement concrete shall be supplied by a plant which
 has been certified by the Division as meeting all requirements of the governing Specifications
 and as having the facilities necessary to ascertain and control the quality of the product in
 accordance therewith.
 A testing facility or laboratory, as described below, shall be provided within reasonable
 proximity of the concrete batch patch.
 The laboratory shall have inside dimensions which provide a minimum working area of 26
 ft. (8 meters) in length by 6 ft. (2 meters) in width (examples which would generally meet this
 requirement are a building with inside dimensions of 12 by 13 ft. (3.5 by 4 meters), or a trailer
 with dimensions of 8 by 30 ft. (2.5 by 9 meters)). The laboratory shall be furnished and
 maintained with adequate ventilation, heat, light, water, sinks and drainage, electrical or gas
 outlets, or both, work table, shelves, and supply cabinets.
 The laboratory shall be supplied with the equipment and materials listed below and shall
 be maintained in such a condition that the equipment will meet the applicable requirement of
 ASTM or AASHTO.
 i. Hot plate, gas or electric.
 ii. Large oven, gas or electric.
 iii. Pressure air meter or volumetric air meter (Rollameter).
 iv. Slump cone and rod.
 v. Unit weight container, ½ cu. ft. (0.014 m3)
 vi. Solution balance, 20 kg. capacity, one gram increments.
 vii. Balance, minimum capacity 1,000 g., 0.1 g. increments.
 viii. Platform scale, 100 kg. capacity, 10 g. increments.
 ix. Thermometer, armored type.
 x. Standard Gilson shaker or equivalent, with screens.
 xi. Ro-Tap shaker or equivalent, with 8-inch (200 mm) round screens.
 xii. Wire basket and container for weighing aggregates under water.
 xiii. Sample splitters for fine and coarse aggregates.
 xiv. Equipment for determining specific gravity of sand.
 xv. Miscellaneous items (including rubber hammer, mason's trowels, approximate
 dimensions 4 in. and 8 in. (100 mm and 200 mm), square point shovel, small and
 large sugar scoops, heavy galvanized pail approximate 14 qt. (13 liter) capacity,
 aggregate sample pans, brushes, flashlight, glassware, steel straightedge approximate
 dimensions 18 by 2 in. (450 by 50 mm)), and such expendable supplies as are
 necessary for the tests to be made.
 xvi. “Speedy Moisture Tester”, 20 g. or 26 g. capacity.
 501.5.2-Batching Plant Equipment:
 501.5.2.1-General: The batching plant shall include bins, weighing hoppers, and
 scales for the fine aggregate and for each size of coarse aggregate. If cement is used in
 bulk, a separate bin, hopper, and scale for cement shall be included. The weighing hopper
 shall be properly sealed and vented to preclude dusting during operation. If fly ash is used
 in the concrete, a separate bin shall be included.
 226
 
 501.5.2.2-Bins and Hoppers: Bins with adequate separate compartments for fine
 aggregate and for each size of coarse aggregate shall be provided in the batching plant.
 501.5.2.3-Scales: The scales for weighing aggregates and cement shall conform to the
 requirements of 109.1.
 Scales shall be inspected and sealed as often as the Engineer may deem necessary to
 assure their continued accuracy. The Contractor shall have on hand not less than ten 50
 pound (22.68 kg) test weights for frequent testing of all scales.
 Batching plants equipped to proportion aggregates and bulk cement by means of
 automatic weighing devices may be used.
 501.5.2.4-Water Measuring Equipment: Unless the water is weighed, the water
 measuring equipment shall include an auxiliary tank from which the measuring tank shall
 be filled. The measuring tank shall be equipped with an outside tap and valve to provide
 for checking the setting, unless other means are provided for readily and accurately
 determining the amount of water in the tank. The volume of the auxiliary tank shall be at
 least equal to that of the measuring tank.
 501.5.2.5-Admixture Dispenser: A positive, automatic mechanical method shall be
 used for adding admixtures in solution.
 501.5.3-Mixers and Hauling Equipment:
 501.5.3.1-General: Mixers at the site of construction or at central point, truck mixers,
 and hauling equipment shall conform to the requirements specified. Each mixer shall have
 attached in a prominent place a manufacturer's plate showing the capacity of the drum in
 terms of volume of mixed concrete and the speed of rotation of the mixing drum or blades.
 501.5.3.2-Mixers: Mixing shall be in a mixer capable of combining the aggregates,
 cement, and water into a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass within the specified mixing
 period. The mixer shall be equipped with a timing device which will automatically lock
 the discharge level when the drum has been charged and release it at the end of the mixing
 period. The device shall be equipped with a bell or other suitable warning device adjusted
 to give a clearly audible signal each time the lock is released. In case of failure of the
 timing device, the mixer may be used for the balance of the day while it is being repaired.
 The mixers shall be cleaned at suitable intervals. The pickup and throw-over blades in
 the drum or drums shall be repaired or replaced when they are worn down 3/4 in. (20 mm)
 or more. The Contractor shall (1) have available at the job site a copy of the manufacturer's
 design showing dimensions and arrangements of blades in reference to original height and
 depth, or (2) provide permanent marks on blades to show points of 3/4 in. (20 mm) wear
 from new conditions. (Holes of 1/4 in. (6 mm) diameter near each end and at a midpoint
 of each blade are recommended.)
 501.5.3.3-Truck Mixers and Truck Agitators: Truck mixers used for mixing and
 hauling concrete, and truck agitators used for hauling central-mixed concrete, shall
 conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 157.
 
 227
 
 501.5.3.4-Nonagitator Trucks: Bodies of nonagitating hauling equipment for
 concrete shall be smooth, mortar tight, metal (non-aluminum) containers and shall be
 capable of discharging the concrete at a satisfactorily controlled rate without segregation.
 The concrete shall be discharged from the bottom of the container. If discharge of concrete
 is accomplished by tilting the body, the surface of the load shall be retarded by a suitable
 baffle. Covers shall be provided when needed for protection.
 501.5.4-Finishing Machine: The finishing machine shall be designed and operated to
 strike off, consolidate, and obtain a smooth finish. The top of the forms, if used, shall be kept
 free from accumulation by an effective device attached to the machine, and the travel of the
 machine on the forms shall be maintained true.
 501.5.5-Vibrators: For full width vibration of concrete paving slabs, vibrators may be
 either the surface pan type or the internal type with either immersed tube or multiple spuds.
 They may be attached to the spreader or the finishing machine, or may be mounted on a
 separate carriage. They shall not come in contact with the joint, load transfer devices,
 subgrade, or side forms. The frequency of the surface vibrators shall not be less than 3,500
 impulses per minute, and the frequency of the internal type shall not be less than 5,000 impulses
 per minute for tube vibrators and shall be between 5,000 and 10,000 impulses per minute for
 spud vibrators.
 When spud type internal vibrators, either hand operated or attached to spreaders or
 finishing machines, are used adjacent to forms, they shall have a frequency of not less than
 3,500 impulses per minute.
 Other types of vibrators may be used when shown they perform the function intended.
 501.5.6-Concrete Saw: When sawing joints is elected or specified, the Contractor shall
 provide sawing equipment, adequate in number of units and power to complete the sawing to
 the required dimensions and at the required rate for preventing uncontrolled cracking. A
 standby saw and ample supply of saw blades shall be maintained at the site of the work at all
 times during sawing operations. The Contractor shall provide adequate artificial lighting
 facilities for night sawing. All of this equipment shall be on the job both before and
 continuously during concrete pavement.
 501.5.7-Forms: Straight side forms shall be of adequate design to support the paving train
 and to provide the proper pavement section without horizontal joints. Flexible or curved forms
 of proper radius shall be used for curves of 200-feet (60 meter) radius or less. Flexible or
 curved forms shall be of a design acceptable to the Engineer. Forms shall be provided with
 adequate devices for secure setting and shall have an attachment provision for forming the
 keyed joint between lanes. When in place they shall withstand, without visible springing or
 settlement, the impact and vibration of consolidating and finishing equipment. Forms with
 battered top surfaces, and bent, twisted, or broken forms shall be removed from the job. The
 top face of the forms shall not vary from a true plane more than 5/8 in. (3 mm) in 10 ft. (3 mm
 in 3 meters), and the upstanding leg shall not vary more than ¼ in. (6 mm) from a plane normal
 to the subgrade. The forms shall contain provisions for locking the ends of abutting form
 sections together tightly, and for secure setting.
 
 228
 
 501.5.8-Edging Tools: Edging tools shall have ¼ in. (6 mm) radius for all edges except
 outside edges, which shall have a ¾ in. (20 mm) radius.
 501.6-PREPARATION OF GRADE, SETTING FORMS, AND CONDITIONING OF
 SUBGRADE OR BASE:
 501.6.1-Preparation of Grade: After the roadbed has been graded and compacted, as
 provided in 207 or 228, the grade shall be trimmed approximately to correct elevation,
 extending the work at least 2 ft. beyond each edge of the proposed concrete pavement to
 provide support for the fixed-forms or the slip-form paver tracks.
 501.6.2-Setting Forms:
 501.6.2.1-Base Support: The foundation under the forms shall be hard and true to
 grade so that the form, when set, will be firmly in contact for its whole length and at the
 specified grade. Any grade which at the form line is found below established grade shall
 be filled to grade with granular material, in lifts of ½ in. (13 mm) or less for a distance of
 18 in. (450 mm) on each side of the base of the form, and thoroughly compacted.
 Imperfections or variations above grade shall be corrected by tamping or by cutting as
 necessary.
 501.6.2.2-Form Setting: Forms shall be set sufficiently in advance of the point where
 concrete is being placed. After the forms have been set to correct grade, the grade shall be
 thoroughly tamped, mechanically or by hand, at both the inside and outside edges of the
 base of the forms. Form sections shall be tightly locked, free from play or movement in
 any direction. The forms shall not deviate from true line by more than ¼ in. (6 mm) at any
 point. Excessive settlement or springing of forms under the finishing machine will not be
 tolerated. Forms shall be cleaned and oiled prior to the placing of concrete.
 501.6.2.3-Grade and Alignment: The alignment and grade elevations of the forms
 shall be checked and corrections made by the Contractor prior to placing the concrete.
 When any form has been disturbed or any grade has become unstable, the form shall be
 reset and rechecked.
 501.6.3-Conditioning of Subgrade or Base: The base shall be brought to the proper cross
 section and plan grade within the tolerances specified for the final course underlying the
 pavement. The finished grade shall be maintained in a smooth and compacted condition until
 the pavement is placed. The grade shall be constructed sufficiently in advance of the paver to
 prevent delays.
 Unless waterproof subgrade or base course cover material is specified, the subgrade or base
 course shall be uniformly moist when the concrete is placed.
 501.6.3.1-Conditioning of Surfaces Receiving an Unbonded Concrete Overlay: If
 required, the bond breaker/leveling course for unbonded concrete overlays shall be
 constructed as shown on the Plans.
 Construct any specified hot-mix asphalt base, bond breaker, or patching and leveling
 course in accordance with Section 401. Remove all loose materials from the existing
 pavement prior to placing the asphalt.
 229
 
 If required on the Plans, mill the surface before concrete placement in accordance with
 Section 415. After milling, tight blade the surface to remove ridges and loose material.
 Prior to placement of the overlay, the milled surface shall be swept clean. The Engineer
 shall be notified if milling operations expose underlying concrete pavement. All areas
 where the underlying concrete pavement is exposed shall be repaired, regardless of size.
 The Contractor shall first determine, in the presence of the Engineer, if the remaining
 asphalt surrounding the area of exposed concrete is sound. This asphalt shall be considered
 sound if it cannot be easily removed by prying it loose with a shovel. If it can be easily
 removed in such a manner, the Contractor shall continue to remove all such unsound
 asphalt until sound asphalt is encountered. If the asphalt surrounding the exposed concrete
 area is less than 2 inches (50 mm) thick, greater than 50 square feet (4.6 square meters) or
 are wider than 6 feet (1.8 meters) in the transverse direction, spray exposed concrete with
 tack coat meeting the requirements of Section 408 and cover with engineering fabric
 meeting the requirements of Section 715.11.8. If the asphalt surrounding the exposed
 concrete area is 2 inches (50 mm) or more in thickness, repair the exposed concrete area
 with an asphalt patch of the same thickness as the surrounding asphalt with either a BaseII or 19 mm mix in accordance with Section 401.
 501.7-HANDLING, MEASURING, AND BATCHING MATERIALS:
 The batch plant site, layout, equipment and provisions for transporting material shall be
 such as to assure a continuous supply of material to the work.
 Stockpiles shall meet the requirements of 106.5. Aggregates shall be handled, hauled, and stored
 in such a manner which will minimize segregation, avoid contamination, and secure a uniform
 grading of the material within the specified gradation band. All aggregates produced or handled
 by hydraulic methods, and washed aggregates, shall be stockpiled or binned for draining a
 sufficient time to eliminate excess water. Aggregates which have dried below a saturated surfacedry condition shall be wet down the night previous to their use, and sprinkled during the day to
 obtain saturated surface-dry condition.
 The fine aggregate and each size of coarse aggregate shall be separately weighed into
 hoppers in the respective amounts approved by the Engineer for the job mix. Cement shall be
 measured by weight. Separate scales and hoppers shall be used for weighing the cement, with a
 device to indicate positively the complete discharge of the batch of cement. Bulk fly ash shall be
 stored in weatherproof bins. Batching shall be so conducted as to result in weights within a
 tolerance of one percent for cement and two percent for aggregates.
 Water may be measured either by volume or by weight. The accuracy of measuring the
 water shall be within a range of error of not over one percent.
 All admixtures shall be measured into the mixer with an accuracy of plus or minus three
 percent. Admixtures shall be introduced into the mix simultaneously with the mixing water. When
 more than one type of admixture is used they shall be introduced into the mix separately.
 When cement or pozzolanic additives are being added in bag form, under no circumstances
 shall the packaging material be allowed to enter into the mix.
 Handling, measuring, and batching of materials for volumetric batching and continuous
 mixing shall, in addition to the preceding requirements, conform to the applicable requirements
 specified in AASHTO M 241.
 
 230
 
 501.8-MIXING CONCRETE:
 Concrete may be mixed at the site or a central mix plant, or it may be produced by
 volumetric batching and continuous mixing as designated in AASHTO M 241. When permitted
 in the Contract, concrete may be mixed in a truck-mixer.
 Ready-mixed concrete shall be mixed and delivered in accordance with the requirements
 of AASHTO M 157 paragraphs 10 and 11, or AASHTO M 241 paragraphs 7 and 8, except as
 otherwise specified.
 The required minimum mixing time for an individual mixer may be specified as that which,
 as shown by tests made at the Contractor's expense, will result in satisfactory mixing. Performance
 tests and the acceptable ranges in test results within each batch from the three different samples
 are given in Table 501.8. The mixing time shall not be less than 75 seconds. Where mixer
 performance tests are not made, minimum mixing time shall be 60 seconds plus 15 additional
 seconds for each cubic yard (meter) of concrete being batched in excess of one cubic yard (meter).
 The mixer shall be operated at a drum speed recommended by the manufacturer. Any
 concrete mixed less than the specified time shall be discarded and disposed of by the Contractor
 at his expense. The mixer shall not be operated in excess of its nominal capacity as shown on the
 manufacturer's rating plate.
 The mixing of concrete shall continue for the required mixing time after all ingredients,
 except water and admixture if added with water, are in the mixing compartment of the mixer before
 any part of the batch is released. The batch shall be so charged into the drum that a portion of the
 mixing water shall enter in advance of the cement and aggregates. The flow of water shall be
 uniform and all water shall be in the drum by the end of the first 15 seconds of the mixing period.
 The throat of the drum shall be kept free of such accumulations as may restrict the flow of materials
 into the drum.
 The time elapsing from the time water is added to the mix until the concrete is deposited
 in place at the site of the work shall not exceed 30 minutes when the concrete is hauled in nonagitating trucks, nor shall it exceed 60 minutes when hauled in transit-mix trucks or truck agitators.
 The addition of water after the completion of the initial mixing operation will not be
 permitted, except that when concrete is delivered in transit-mix trucks additional water may be
 added to the batch materials and additional mixing (minimum of 20 revolutions at mixing speed)
 performed to modify the consistency to meet the specified requirements, provided all these
 operations are performed within 45 minutes after the initial mixing operation and provided the
 maximum number of revolutions at mixing speed is not exceeded. Concrete that is not within the
 specified consistency limits at the time of placement shall not be used.
 No concrete shall be mixed, placed or finished when the natural light is insufficient unless
 an adequate artificial lighting system is used.
 
 231
 
 TABLE 501.8
 PERFORMANCE TESTS AND ACCEPTABLE RANGES FOR
 CENTRAL MIXED CONCRETE
 **Permissible Ranges Within
 Batch From Three Samples
 *Test Criteria
 Plant
 Slump, in inches (mm)
 2.25 (60 mm)
 Air content, percent by volume of concrete sample.
 2.0
 Weight per cu. ft. of plastic concrete, in lbs.
 4.0 (64.8 mm)
 Coarse aggregate retained on No. 4 sieve expressed
 11.0
 as a percent of three-sample average weight retained
 *
 **
 NOTE:
 
 Tests to be made in accordance with applicable AASHTO or ASTM Methods.
 Each property measured shall not exceed the permissible range in more than one out of seven
 batches
 Mixer performance data shall be based on three concrete samples per test batch, taken at the
 mixer during discharge from approximately 1/6th, 1/2 and 5/6th points of the batch discharge.
 
 Determination of coarse aggregate uniformity within the batch where concrete ingredients
 are batched from separate stockpiles of more than one size of coarse aggregate shall be made using
 sieves of appropriate size to identify the quantity of coarse aggregate coming from each of the
 separate stockpiles.
 A minimum of seven production batches of concrete shall be tested for the proposed
 minimum mixing time unless the Engineer determines, on the basis of prior tests on concrete
 produced with the equipment and materials to be used, that a different number of batches is
 adequate for the purpose. When any change occurs in size of the batch, the operating process,
 conditions affecting mixing or hauling, the ingredients of the concrete, or other conditions which
 will affect the quality of the concrete incorporated in the pavement, an additional seven production
 batches of concrete shall be tested.
 501.9-PLACING CONCRETE:
 The concrete shall be deposited on the grade in such manner as to require as little
 rehandling as possible. Unless transit-mix trucks, agitators, or other hauling equipment units are
 equipped with means for discharge of concrete without segregation, the concrete shall be unloaded
 into a spreading device and mechanically spread on the grade in such manner as to prevent
 segregation of the materials. Placing shall be continuous between transverse joints without the use
 of intermediate bulkheads. Necessary hand spreading shall be done with shovels, not rakes.
 Workers shall not be allowed to walk in the fresh concrete with boots or shoes coated with earth
 or foreign substances.
 The pavement shall be constructed by placing two longitudinal traffic lanes full width in
 one operation unless otherwise indicated in the Contract. Lane-at-a-time construction will be
 permitted in variable width sections or other sections designated by the Engineer.
 When the Contract permits lane-at-a-time construction and concrete is to be placed
 adjoining a previously constructed lane of pavement and mechanical equipment other than
 finishing equipment will be operated upon the existing lane, that lane shall first meet the
 requirements of 501.18. If only finishing equipment is carried on the existing lane, paving in
 adjoining lanes may be permitted after three days.
 232
 
 Concrete shall be deposited as near to expansion and contraction joints as possible without
 disturbing them, but shall not be dumped from the discharge bucket onto a joint assembly unless
 the bucket is well centered on the joint assembly.
 When using a slip-form paver, or combination of pavers, they shall be designed to spread,
 consolidate, screed and float-finish the freshly placed concrete in one complete pass of the paving
 train in such manner that a minimum of hand finishing will be necessary to provide a dense and
 homogenous pavement in conformance with the Plans and Specifications. The equipment shall
 vibrate the concrete for the full width and depth of the strip of pavement being placed. Such
 vibration shall be accomplished with vibrating tubes or arms working in the concrete or with a
 vibrating screed or pan operating on the surface of the concrete. No appreciable edge slumping of
 the in-place concrete will be allowed, and, if necessary, forms shall be trailed behind the paver to
 prevent slumping. If training forms are used, they shall be rigidly supported laterally.
 Slip-form pavers shall be operated with as nearly a continuous forward movement as
 possible and all operations of mixing, delivering and spreading concrete shall be so coordinated as
 to provide uniform progress. If, for any reason, it is necessary to stop the forward movement of
 the paver, the vibratory and tamping elements shall also be stopped immediately. No tractive force
 shall be applied to the machine, except that which is controlled from the machine.
 Placement to essential full width is required when slip-form paving methods are used.
 However, the Engineer may permit lane-at-a-time placement on variable width, small, or otherwise
 restricted sections using standard forming methods detailed elsewhere in these Specifications.
 Concrete shall be thoroughly consolidated against and along the faces of all forms and
 along the full length and on both sides of all joint assemblies by means of vibrators inserted in the
 concrete. Vibrators shall not be permitted to come in contact with a joint assembly, the grade, or
 a side form. In no case shall the equipment mounted vibrators be operated when the equipment is
 not moving in the forward direction. All equipment mounted vibrators shall be stopped, either
 manually or automatically, when the equipment stops its forward progress.
 Should any concrete materials fall on, or be worked into, the surface of a completed slab,
 they shall be immediately removed.
 When placing an unbonded concrete overlay, place the concrete when the base temperature
 is below 115° F (46° C). Reduce the temperature by spraying a fine water fog on the base. Ensure
 water does not pond in front of the plastic concrete. The application of white curing compound or
 a lime slurry shall be permitted as temperature control measures when waterproof bases are
 encountered. Concrete shall not be placed if frost exists in the base or if the base temperature is
 below 35° F (2° C).
 When placing unbonded concrete overlays, concrete should be placed on the grade to the
 nominal thickness shown on the Plans. Any deviations for profile adjustments, and/or cross
 section adjustments, should be above the nominal thickness. When adjustments are necessary for
 grade or yield improvement, the thickness shall not, in any case, be less than the minimum
 thickness shown on the Plans.
 501.10-STRIKE-OFF OF CONCRETE AND PLACEMENT OF REINFORCEMENT:
 Following placing, the concrete shall be struck off to conform to the cross section shown
 on the Plans and to an elevation such that when the concrete is properly consolidated and finished,
 the surface of the pavement will be at the elevation shown on the Plans. When reinforced concrete
 pavement is placed in two layers, the entire width of the bottom layer shall be struck off to such
 length and depth that the sheet of fabric or bar mat may be laid full length on the concrete in its
 233
 
 final position without further manipulation. The reinforcement shall then be placed directly upon
 the concrete, after when the top layer of the concrete shall be placed, struck off, and screeded. All
 portions of the bottom layer which have been placed more than 30 minutes without being covered
 by the top layer shall be replaced at the Contractor's expense. When reinforced concrete pavement
 is placed in one layer, the reinforcement may be positioned in advance of concrete placement, or
 it may be placed in the plastic concrete, after spreading, by mechanical or vibratory means. When
 reinforcement is specified, it shall be placed in the center portion of the pavement. Variation in
 the depth of reinforcement is permitted, but the minimum concrete cover shall be one-third of the
 plan depth of the pavement.
 Reinforcement shall be as designated on the Plans and shall be free from dirt, oil, paint,
 grease, and loose rust which could impair bond of the steel with the concrete.
 501.11-JOINTS:
 Joints shall be constructed of the type and dimensions and at the locations shown on the
 approved Joint Layout Plan(s). The Contractor shall submit for approval a Joint Layout Plan for
 all intersections on the project in general accordance with the following: “Street Jointing Criteria:
 Ten Rules Of Practice” as suggested by the Portland Cement Association (PCA), Skokie, Illinois;
 the American Concrete Pavement Association’s Intersection Joint Layout Guidelines; the latest
 issue of the West Virginia Division Of Highways’ Standard and Supplemental Specifications; the
 West Virginia Division Of Highways’ “Standard Details Book Volume 1 – Drainage, Guardrail,
 Pavement, Fence, and Markers” hereinafter referred to as “Standard Details Volume 1”; or as
 directed by the Engineer.
 The “Street Jointing Criteria: Ten Rules of Practice” suggested by the PCA are paraphrased
 and revised for the West Virginia Division of Highways’ needs as follows:
 i
 Joints are used in concrete pavement to aid construction and to minimize random
 cracking. Avoid odd-shaped areas of pavement.
 ii Space longitudinal joints not to exceed 12.0 ft. (3.8 m). The contractor shall decide on
 the type of longitudinal joint as shown on Standard Detail Sheet PVT1 of “Standard
 Details Volume 1” needed depending on the type of construction. Type D joints will
 be used for full-width construction. Type D joins with a projecting tie bar for the
 following lane/shoulder pour are acceptable. Type E joints without the key are
 acceptable for lane-at-a-time construction. Type F joints are not acceptable at any
 location on the project.
 iii Space transverse joints at regular intervals of 15.0 ft. (4.6 m) or less.
 iv Thinner slabs tend to crack at closer intervals than do thicker slabs. Long narrow slabs
 tend to crack more than square ones.
 v All contraction and expansion joints must be continuous through any Combination
 Concrete Curb and Gutter or Integral Concrete Curb (Standard Sheet PVT6, Sheet 1
 of 2 of Standard Details Volume 1). See Standard Specification Section 610.3.4.
 vi Longitudinal construction joints should be butt-type joints with tie bars (Types D or E
 joints based on construction method) as shown on Standard Detail Sheet PVT1 of
 Standard Details Volume 1. The purpose of these tie bars is to hold adjacent slabs in
 vertical alignment. The normal backfill behind any integral curb or curb and gutter
 constrains the slabs and holds them together. With separate curb and gutter built on
 fill, use Type E Joints as shown on Standard Detail Sheet PVT1 of Standard Details
 Volume 1.
 234
 
 vii Offsets at radius points should be at least 2.0 ft. (0.60 m) in width. Angles of less than
 60º shall be avoided.
 viii Make minor adjustments in joint locations to meet all structures projecting through,
 into or against the pavement. Minor adjustments should not make any joint spacing
 greater than that specified in ii. and iii. in this list.
 ix (Deleted)
 x Manhole and inlet frames, as well as any other metal structure projecting through, into
 or against the pavement shall be isolated in accordance with 501.11.6.
 The Contractor shall submit a Joint Layout Plan for each intersection on the Project to the
 Engineer for approval a minimum of 10 working days before ordering materials. No work on or
 ordering of materials for the intersections shall be performed until the Engineer has approved the
 Joint Layout Plan(s). These Submittals are not required to be signed and sealed by a Registered
 Professional Engineer.
 501.11.1-Longitudinal Joints: Deformed steel tie bars (Type D joint) or tie bolt
 assemblies (Type E joint) shall be placed perpendicular to the longitudinal joints. They shall
 be placed by suitable mechanical equipment or rigidly secured by suitable supports to prevent
 displacement. Tie bars shall be epoxy coated and free of grease, oils, dirt, paint or other foreign
 materials, and shall not be enclosed in tubes or sleeves.
 All longitudinal joints shall be sawed normal to the surface of the pavement with a suitable
 concrete saw. Construction of longitudinal joints shall be in accordance with the appropriate
 requirements, as follows:
 i When the longitudinal joint separates adjacent pavement lanes or slabs that are poured
 at the same time (full-width construction: Type D joint), sawing of longitudinal joints
 shall be performed between 4 and 24 hours after the pavement is placed and before any
 equipment and vehicles are allowed on the pavement. The saw cut shall be to a
 minimum depth of one-third of the plan depth of pavement; the width shall be 1/8 in.
 (3 mm), with a tolerance of plus or minus 1/16 in. (2 mm).
 ii When the longitudinal joint separates adjacent pavement lanes or slabs that are poured
 separately (lane-at-a-time construction: Type D or E joint), the longitudinal joint shall
 be sawed. The saw cut shall be to a depth of 1 in. (25 mm), plus ¼ in. (6 mm); the
 width shall be 1/8 in. (3 mm) plus or minus 1/16 in. (2 mm).
 501.11.2-Transverse Expansion Joints (Type B or Type C joint): The expansion joint
 filler shall be one piece, continuous from form to form, shaped to the subgrade and to the cross
 section of concrete. The filler shall be depressed ½ in. (13 mm) below the surface of the
 pavement.
 The expansion joint filler shall be held in a vertical position. Finished joints shall not
 deviate more than ¼ in. (6 mm) in the horizontal alignment from a straight line at right angles
 to the centerline of the pavement. No plugs of concrete will be permitted anywhere within the
 expansion space.
 501.11.3-Transverse Contraction Joints: Transverse contraction (Type A) joints shall
 consist of planes of weakness created by sawing or forming grooves, normal to the grade, in
 the surface of the pavement as shown on the approved Joint Layout Plan(s). These contraction
 235
 
 joint grooves shall be centered, within 1 in. (25 mm) of the mid-length of the dowels, over the
 coated dowel bars specified.
 Unless otherwise specified or authorized, all transverse contraction joint grooves shall be
 constructed as described, resulting in the dimensions detailed on the approved Joint Layout
 Plan(s) and at the spacing and locations shown on the Plans.
 As soon as feasible after placing the concrete, the contraction joints shall be sawed to the
 dimensions shown on the approved Joint Layout Plan(s). Sawing of joints shall commence as
 soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to permit sawing without excess raveling,
 usually 4 to 24 hours. All joints shall be sawed before uncontrolled shrinkage cracking takes
 place, but no later than 24 hours after placement of concrete. If necessary, sawing operations
 shall be continuous, through day and night, regardless of weather conditions. In general, all
 joints should be sawed in sequence. The sawing of any joint shall be omitted if cracking occurs
 at or near the joint location prior to the time of sawing. Sawing of a joint shall be discontinued
 when a crack develops ahead of the saw. If extreme conditions exist which make it impractical
 to prevent erratic cracking by early sawing, the contraction joints shall be formed in the plastic
 concrete.
 All joint repair work shall be done at the Contractor's expense and to the satisfaction of the
 Engineer.
 When formed joints are permitted, they shall be effected by an approved mechanically
 operated device to the dimensions specified and while the concrete is still in the plastic state.
 Random cracking at transverse contraction joints, as described in 501.11.7, shall be sealed
 with silicone sealant.
 501.11.4-Transverse Construction Joints: Transverse construction joints shall be
 installed when there is an interruption of more than 30 minutes in the concreting operations.
 No construction joint shall be installed within 10 ft. (3 meters) of an expansion or contraction
 joint. If sufficient concrete has not been placed to form a slab at least 10 ft. (3 meters) long,
 the excess concrete back to the last proceeding joint shall be removed.
 Construction joints shall be constructed in a manner similar to transverse contraction joints
 utilizing a Type A joint. The groove shall have the same dimensions as for transverse
 contraction joints.
 501.11.5-Coated Dowel Bars: Coated dowel bars (load transfer reinforcement) shall be
 used across all transverse Type A joints as shown on the approved Joint Layout Plan(s).
 Dowels shall be located at mid-depth of the pavement with a tolerance of placement within
 plus or minus 1 in. (25 mm) of the lateral and vertical positions shown on the approved Joint
 Layout Plan(s). Dowels shall be aligned parallel to the centerline and surface of the pavement
 with a tolerance for such alignments within plus or minus 0.6 inches (15 mm) per dowel.
 Dowels shall be held in position in the pavement by means of metal supports that remain
 in the pavement, except as noted. The combination of dowel bars and all the various
 components of the metal supports at a joint is commonly referred to as the dowel bar assembly
 or load transfer unit. Welding of dowels to the supports, to achieve a fixed end condition, shall
 be performed in accordance with the details shown on the approved Joint Layout Plan(s). For
 dowel assemblies at contraction and construction joints, welding of dowels to any member of
 the supports will not be permitted within the middle one-third of the dowel’s length. The
 longitudinal misalignment of one end of a dowel assembly with respect to the other end in
 236
 
 achieving a perpendicular alignment with the centerline of the pavement (longitudinal side
 shift) shall not exceed 2 inches (50 mm) when 18 inch (450 mm) long dowel bars are used.
 Acceptance of a type of dowel assembly by the Division in no way relieves the Contractor of
 their responsibility for furnishing, as part of the assembly, coated dowel bars that meet the
 requirements of 709.15, nor does it relieve the Contractor of the Contractor’s responsibility for
 placing and maintaining the assembly in its proper position and alignment during paving
 operations.
 The mechanical implanting method of placing dowel bars is permitted if the Contractor can
 show, by the method outlined below or other approved methods, that the dowel bars can be
 placed within the required tolerance with no adverse effects to the finished concrete pavement.
 Prior to, or on the first day of the paving operation, the Contractor shall use non-destructive
 testing methods, such as the MIT Scan-2 technique, approved by the Engineer, to confirm
 dowel placement and alignment.
 Dowel bars shall be placed to within plus or minus 1 inch (25 mm) of the depth shown on
 the plans, and parallel to the traffic lane centerline and top of roadway surface within a
 tolerance of 0.6 inches (15 mm) per 18 inches (450 mm) of dowel bar length.
 Suspend paving operations if dowels are installed improperly and dowel alignment does
 not meet the specified tolerances. Paving operations shall not be resumed until the Contractor
 demonstrates to the Engineer that the problem has been corrected.
 For coated dowel bar types that require a bond breaker, the bond breaking material,
 prequalified for use with that particular type coating, shall be carefully applied over the entire
 length of the bar just prior to placement of concrete unless an approved bond breaker lubricant
 has been applied in the shop.
 The free end of expansion joint dowels utilized in a Type B joint shall be provided with a
 close fitting metal cap or sleeve equipped with a stop to prevent closing during paving
 operations. A clearance of 1 in. (25 mm) shall be maintained between the closed end of the cap
 and the end of the dowel to accommodate future movement of the concrete slab.
 501.11.6-Expansion Joints around Structures: Expansion joints shall be formed by
 placing pre-molded expansion joint material about all structures and features projecting
 through, into or against the pavement. Unless otherwise indicated, such joints shall be ½ in.
 (13 mm) in width.
 501.11.7-Random Cracks: Random cracks falling within 3 inches (75 mm) of the center
 of the transverse contraction joint's dowel bars shall be sawed for the full width, widening and
 deepening the crack to the dimensions of sawing for transverse contraction joints.
 If any random or uncontrolled crack occurs outside 3 inches (75 mm) from a doweled joint,
 the entire pavement within the lane where such crack occurs shall be removed for the entire
 15ft panel between joints. The dowel assembly or bars, as the case may be, shall be replaced
 with a new dowel assembly with drilling. The new joint over the dowel assembly shall be
 initially formed by the use of a removable insert or by sawing. The tie bars shall be replaced
 with a Modified Type E joint. The above described work shall be done at no additional cost
 to the Division.
 501.11.8-Transverse Joints in Concrete Shoulders: Dowel bars are not required in
 paved shoulders except where turning traffic may use the shoulders as a lane.
 237
 
 501.12-FINAL STRIKE-OFF, CONSOLIDATION AND FINISHING:
 501.12.1-Sequence: The sequence of operations shall be strike-off and consolidation,
 floating and removal of laitance, straight-edging, and final surface finish.
 Any addition of water to the surface of the concrete to assist in the finishing operations will
 not be permitted. When conditions are such that unusually rapid drying is occurring, an
 atomized mist may be used to prevent the rapid evaporation of water from the concrete surface
 during the final finishing.
 501.12.2-Finishing at Joints: The concrete adjacent to joints shall be consolidated or
 firmly placed without voids or segregation against the joint material, under and around all load
 transfer devices, joint assemblies, and other features designed to extend into the pavement.
 Concrete adjacent to the joints shall be mechanically vibrated as required in 501.9.
 The operation of the finishing machine over the joints shall not cause segregation of
 concrete and damage to or misalignment of joints.
 501.12.3-Machine Finishing: The concrete shall be distributed as soon as placed. It shall
 immediately be struck off and screeded by the finishing machine.
 Vibrators for full width vibration of concrete paving slab shall meet the requirements of
 501.5.5. If uniform and satisfactory density of the concrete is not obtained by the vibratory
 method at joints, along forms, at structures, and throughout the pavement, the Contractor will
 be required to furnish equipment and methods which will produce pavement conforming to the
 Specifications.
 501.12.4-Hand Finishing and Consolidation: Hand finishing will not be permitted
 except under the following conditions:
 In the event of breakdown of the mechanical equipment, hand methods may be used to
 finish the concrete already deposited on the grade.
 Areas of narrow widths or irregular dimensions, where operation of mechanical equipment
 is impractical, may be finished by hand.
 Concrete, as soon as placed, shall be struck off and screeded. A portable screed shall be
 used.
 If reinforcement is used, a second screed shall be provided for striking off the bottom layer
 of concrete.
 The surface screed shall be at least 2 ft. longer than the maximum width of slab to be struck
 off. It shall be sufficiently rigid to retain its shape under all working conditions, and
 constructed either of metal or of other suitable material shod with metal.
 Consolidation shall be attained by the use of suitable vibrator or other equipment.
 In operation the screed shall be moved forward on the forms in the direction the work is
 progressing, using a combined longitudinal and transverse shearing motion, so manipulated
 that neither end is raised from the side forms during the striking process. This shall be repeated
 until the surface is of uniform texture, true to grade and cross section, and free from porous
 areas.
 501.12.5-Floating: After the concrete has been struck off and consolidated, it shall be
 further smoothed, trued, and consolidated by means of a mechanical longitudinal float, except
 when waived by the Engineer.
 238
 
 If necessary, following one of the methods of floating described, long-handled floats may
 be used to smooth and fill in open textured areas in the pavement. Care shall be taken not to
 work the crown out of the pavement during the operation.
 501.12.5.1-Mechanical Method: The mechanical longitudinal float shall be
 maintained in proper working order. At the beginning of each day's operation the float
 shall be checked and adjusted to the design crown of the pavement. A small amount of
 mortar shall be carried ahead of the float at all times. The forward speed shall be adjusted
 so that succeeding strokes of the float shall overlap on each transverse trip. The float shall
 pass over each area of pavement sufficient number of times until the surface shows no
 variation from straightedge requirements, but excessive operation over a given area will
 not be permitted. All excess water, laitance, or other foreign material shall be wasted over
 the side forms on each pass.
 Pipe float devices may be used for longitudinal floating when slipform paving.
 501.12.5.2-Alternative Mechanical Method: As an alternate to the above method,
 the Contractor may use a machine composed of a cutting and smoothing float, or floats,
 suspended from and guided by a rigid frame. The frame shall be carried by at least four
 visible wheels riding on, and constantly in contact with, the side forms.
 501.12.5.3-Hand Method: The hand-operated longitudinal float shall be not less than
 12 ft. in length and 6 inches (150 mm) in width, properly stiffened to prevent flexibility
 and warping. The float shall be operated from foot bridges resting on the side forms and
 spanning but not touching the concrete. The float shall be worked with a sawing motion,
 while held in a floating position parallel to the road centerline and passing gradually from
 one side of the pavement to the other. Movement ahead along the centerline of the
 pavement shall be in successive advances of not more than one-half the length of the float.
 Any excess water, laitance, and other foreign material shall be wasted over the side forms
 on each pass.
 501.12.6-Straightedge Checking and Surface Correction: After the floating has been
 completed and the excess water removed, but while the concrete is still plastic, the surface of
 the concrete shall be tested for trueness with a 10-foot straightedge. The Contractor shall
 furnish and use a 10 foot straightedge swung from handles at least 3 foot longer than one-half
 the width of the slab. The straightedge shall be held in contact with the surface in successive
 positions parallel to the road centerline and the whole area gone over from one side of the slab
 to the other as necessary. Advance along the road shall be in successive stages of not more
 than one-half the length of the straightedge. Any depressions found shall be immediately filled
 with freshly mixed concrete, struck off, consolidated, and refinished. High areas shall be cut
 down and refinished. Special attention shall be given to assure that the surface across joints
 meet the requirements for smoothness. Straightedge testing and surface corrections shall
 continue until the entire surface is found to be free from observable departures from the
 straightedge and the slab conforms to the required grade and cross section.
 501.12.7-Final Finish: The surface of the mainline pavement, acceleration and
 deceleration lanes, ramps, and all traveled ways shall be given a final groove finish. The tool
 239
 
 used shall produce a groove that it approximately 3/32 in. (2 mm) wide. The depth of the
 groove shall be 1/8 in. (3 mm) to 3/16 in. (5 mm) and spaced approximately ½ in. (13 mm)
 center to center. The grooves shall be formed in a direction transverse to the centerline of the
 roadway. Adjacent strokes to establish the texture shall abut one another without appreciable
 overlap. Texturing shall be performed when the concrete surface is of such plasticity as to
 prevent excessive raveling (concrete too dry) or to prevent mortar from flowing back into the
 grooves (concrete too wet). All texturing shall be accomplished with a single pass of the tool.
 501.12.8-Edging at Forms and Joints: Before the concrete has taken its initial set, the
 edges of the pavement along each side of the slab and on each side of all formed joints, except
 joints initially formed that will be later widened by second-step sawing, shall be rounded. A
 ¾ in. (20 mm) radius edging tool shall be used for rounding outside edges and a ¼ in. (6 mm)
 radius tool for other edges. A well-defined and continuous radius shall be produced and a
 smooth, dense mortar finish obtained. The surface of the slab shall not be unduly disturbed by
 tilting the tool during use. Any tool marks shall be eliminated by brooming the surface without
 disturbing the radius. All concrete on top of the joint filler shall be removed.
 All joints shall be checked with a straightedge before the concrete has set and all necessary
 corrections made if one side is higher than the other or if they are higher or lower than the
 adjacent slabs.
 501.12.9-Station Numbers: The Contractor shall impress station numbers into the
 pavement before it takes its final set. The complete station number is to be marked each 100
 ft. (20 meters). Where equalities in alignment occur, they shall be marked in the pavement in
 the same manner as they are shown on the Plans. The numerals shall be 3 to 4 inches (75 to
 100 mm) in height and ¼ in. (6 mm) in depth. The station numbers shall be placed parallel to
 the transverse joints, approximately 12 to 24 inches (300 to 600 mm) from the outside edge of
 the pavement. Station numbers shall be placed along the right edge of a two-lane highway,
 readable in the direction of increasing stations. On multi-lane highways, numbers shall be
 placed along the outside edge of the two outside lanes of the roadway, readable in the direction
 of travel.
 501.12.10-Protection Against Rain: In order that the concrete may be properly protected
 against the effects of rain before the concrete is sufficiently hardened, the Contractor shall have
 available at all times materials for the protection of the edges and surface of the unhardened
 concrete. Such protective materials shall consist of metal forms or wood planks having a
 nominal thickness of not less than 2 inches (50 mm) and nominal width of not less than the
 thickness of the pavement at its edge for protection of the pavement edges, and covering
 material such as burlap or cotton mats, curing paper, or plastic sheeting for protection of the
 surface. When rain appears imminent, all paving operations shall stop and all available
 personnel shall begin placing forms against the sides of the pavement and covering the surface
 of the unhardened concrete with the protective covering.
 501.13-SURFACE TESTS:
 The smoothness of the riding surface will be determined by the engineer using an inertial
 Profilometer or Mays Ride Meter calibrated to an inertial Profilometer. The smoothness testing
 will generally be accomplished within 30 days after the project is complete.
 240
 
 501.13.1-Sampling Units: The pavement will be divided into sampling Lots of 0.1 lane
 mile (0.16 lane kilometer) each. Each Lot shall exhibit a smoothness measurement, expressed
 in inches per mile (millimeters per kilometer).
 501.13.2-Smoothness Requirement: Each sampling unit shall exhibit a smoothness
 equal to or less than 65 inches per mile (1000 millimeters per kilometer). Sampling units
 exhibiting smoothness values greater than 65 inches per mile (1000 millimeters per kilometer)
 shall be paid for at an adjusted price as follows:
 Revised Unit Price = UBP – [(1.00-{127.86-0.429S }) (0.18 UBP)] English
 100
 = UBP – [(1.00-{127.86-0.028S }) (0.18 UBP)] Metric
 100
 Where:
 UBP
 = Unit Bid Price
 S
 = Smoothness in inches per mile (millimeters per kilometer).
 When the measured smoothness value exceeds the specified value by 50 percent or more,
 the Lot shall be corrected to comply with these specifications.
 501.13.3-Grinding Requirements: When the pavement requires corrective action as
 noted above, the diamond grinding operations shall be in accordance with section 508, except
 that the final pavement smoothness requirements shall be in accordance with section 501.
 501.14-CURING:
 Immediately after the finishing operations have been completed and as soon as marring of
 the concrete will not occur, the entire surface of the newly placed concrete shall be cured in
 accordance with one of the methods described.
 In all cases in which curing requires the use of water, the curing shall have prior right to the use of
 all water supplies. Failure to provide sufficient curing materials of whatever kind the Contractor
 may elect to use will be cause for immediate suspension of concreting operations. The concrete
 shall not be left exposed for more than 30 minutes between stages of curing or during the curing
 period.
 Concrete placed in cold weather, as defined in 501.21, shall be cured a minimum of seven
 calendar days or when the Contractor provides suitable means for documenting the maturity
 (degree-hours) of the concrete, based on slab surface temperature, the curing period may be
 terminated when the curing has been maintained for a minimum of 7,000 degree hours.
 During the curing period the surface temperature of the concrete shall not be allowed to
 fall below freezing. The Contractor shall be responsible for the quality of the concrete placed or
 cured, or both, during cold weather. Any concrete injured by frost action shall be removed and
 replaced at the Contractor's expense.
 Polyethylene coated burlap and white polyethylene sheeting will be permitted as a curing
 application only on areas where intimate contact with the concrete surface can be obtained and
 maintained.
 
 241
 
 501.14.1-Burlap Mats: The surface of the pavement shall be entirely covered with the
 mats. The mats shall be of such length that they will extend at least twice the thickness of the
 pavement beyond the edges of the slab. The mat shall be placed so that the entire surface and
 both edges of the slab are completely covered. Before placing, the mats shall be thoroughly
 saturated with water. The mats shall be weighted down so as to remain in intimate contact
 with the surface covered and shall be maintained fully wetted and in position for 72 hours after
 the concrete has been placed, unless otherwise specified.
 501.14.2-Waterproof Paper: The top surface and sides of the pavement shall be entirely
 covered with waterproof paper. The units shall be lapped at least 18 in. (450 mm). The paper
 shall be weighted down so as to remain in intimate contact with the surface. Each unit as laid
 shall extend at least twice the thickness of the pavement beyond the edges of the slab. Paper
 not manufactured in sizes providing this width shall be securely sewed or cemented together,
 the joints being securely sealed in such a manner that they do not open up during curing. The
 surface shall be thoroughly wetted before placing the paper. Curing shall continue for 72 hours
 after the concrete is placed, unless otherwise specified.
 501.14.3-Straw Curing: When this type of curing is used, the pavement shall be cured
 initially with burlap or cotton mats, as specified above, until after final set of the concrete or,
 in any case, for 12 hours after placing the concrete. As soon as the mats are removed, the
 surface and sides of the pavement shall be thoroughly wetted and covered with at least 8 inches
 (200 mm) of straw or hay, thickness to be measured after wetting. The straw or hay shall be
 kept thoroughly saturated with water for 72 hours after placing the concrete. If the straw or
 hay becomes displaced during the curing period, it shall be replaced to the original depth and
 saturated. Upon removal, the covering shall be disposed of in such a manner as to leave the
 right-of-way in a neat condition. The straw or hay shall not be burned on, or adjacent to, the
 pavement.
 501.14.4-White Pigmented Impervious Membrane: The entire surface of the pavement
 shall be sprayed uniformly with white pigmented curing compound immediately after the
 finishing operation and before initial set has taken place, or, if the pavement is initially cured
 with burlap or cotton mats, it may be applied upon removal of the mats. The curing compound
 shall not be applied during rainfall.
 Curing compound shall be applied under pressure by mechanical sprayers. The spraying
 equipment shall be of the fully atomizing type equipped with a tank agitator. The rate of
 application of the curing compound shall be as follows:
 1. Pavement with Burlap Drag Finish-One Gallon Per Maximum of 150 sq. ft. (0.27 liters
 per square meter)
 2. Pavement Requiring Groove Finish-One Gallon Per Maximum of 125 sq. ft. (0.33 liters
 per square meter)
 For unbonded concrete overlays, the curing compound application rates noted below shall
 be doubled.
 At the time of use, the compound shall be in a thoroughly mixed condition with the pigment
 uniformly dispersed throughout the vehicle. During application the compound shall be
 continuously agitated. Hand spraying of odd widths or shapes and surfaces exposed by
 
 242
 
 removal of forms will be permitted. Curing compound shall not be applied to the inside faces
 of joints to be sealed.
 Should the film become damaged from any cause within the required curing period (72
 hours after placement of concrete, unless otherwise specified), the damaged portions shall be
 immediately repaired with additional compound.
 Upon removal of the side forms, the sides of the exposed slabs shall be protected
 immediately with a curing treatment equal to that provided for the surface.
 501.14.5-White Polyethylene Sheeting or Polyethylene Coated Burlap: The top surface
 and sides of the pavement shall be entirely covered with polyethylene sheeting or polyethylene
 coated burlap. Units shall be lapped at least 18 in. (450 mm). The covering shall be weighed
 down so as to remain in intimate contact with the surface covered. The covering shall extend
 at least twice the thickness of the pavement beyond the edges of the slab. The covering shall
 be maintained in place at least 72 hours after the concrete is placed, unless otherwise specified.
 501.15-REMOVING FORMS:
 Forms shall not be removed until at least 12 hours after placement of the concrete. Forms
 shall be removed carefully so as to avoid damage to the slab. As soon as the side forms have been
 removed, minor honeycombed areas shall be filled with mortar composed of one part cement to
 two parts fine sand and cured as outlined in one of the methods indicated above. Major
 honeycombed areas shall be removed and replaced. All areas or sections so removed shall be not
 less than 10-feet in length nor less than the full width of the traffic lane involved. Any remaining
 portion of the slab adjacent to the joints that is less than 10-feet in length shall also be removed
 and replaced. Slabs shall be cut by sawing full depth for removal.
 501.16-SEALING JOINTS:
 All transverse contraction and construction joints to be sealed shall have the preformed
 elastomeric seal installed or shall be filled with silicone sealer before the pavement is opened to
 traffic, including construction traffic, and as soon after completion of curing as is feasible.
 All longitudinal joints shall be sealed with silicone sealant.
 Cleaning and sealing of all joints is not required unless shown in the Plans.
 501.16.1-Silicone Sealant: Following forming, initial sawing and final or second-step
 sawing operations, the joints shall have been cleaned in accordance with 501.11.8. In
 preparation for sealing, all joints that have become contaminated since those forming or sawing
 operations shall be cleaned by wire brushing, sandblasting, or a high pressure water blast or by
 a combination of these methods.
 Just prior to installing the back-up material, the joints shall be blown out with compressed
 air at a pressure of at least 90 psi (620 kPa) to remove all dust, loose particles and debris. Air
 compressors used for this purpose shall be equipped with traps capable of removing moisture
 and oil from the compressed air. A joint shall not be sealed until it is thoroughly clean and
 dry.
 When recommended by the manufacturer, the vertical surfaces of joints shall be fully
 wetted by a primer. The primer and application, including all safety precautions, shall be as
 per the manufacturer's recommendations. The primer shall be allowed to dry tack-free prior to
 installation of the backer rod.
 243
 
 The back-up material shall be installed in the joint at the required depth. The silicone
 sealant shall then be applied from inside the joint in a manner which causes it to wet the joint
 faces and to reasonable close conformity with the required dimensions.
 Immediately following placement of the sealant and before a skin forms, the sealant shall
 be tooled to force it against the joint faces and to provide a slightly concave surface with a
 depth of approximately ¼ inch (6 mm) (at the center of the joint) below the pavement surface.
 Any unreasonable deviation from the required joint or sealant dimensions will be just cause
 for rejection of the joint until satisfactory corrective measures are taken by the Contractor at
 no additional cost to the Division.
 Any failure of the joint material in either adhesion or cohesion will be cause for rejection of
 the joint, and the joint shall be repaired to the Engineer's satisfaction by the Contractor at no
 additional cost to the Division.
 Silicone sealant shall never be applied to frozen, dirty, wet, or damp concrete or during
 inclement weather conditions. Silicone sealant shall not be placed in the joints without the
 approval of the Engineer when the temperature at the surface of the concrete is less than 40 F
 (5 C).
 501.16.2-Performed Elastomeric Seal: The dimensional requirements shall be as
 specified on the Plans. Joints shall be clean and dry at the time the elastomeric seal is installed.
 Just prior to installation of the seal, the lubricant-adhesive shall be applied to the joint faces or
 the sides of the seal, or both, to facilitate installation of the seal and to help secure the seal in
 place in the joint. The lubricant-adhesive shall be applied in such a manner as to cover both
 sides of the seal over the full area in contact with the joint faces. Any lubricant-adhesive that
 gets on top of the seal shall be immediately removed. Seals shall be installed in a substantially
 full compressed condition with the vertical axis of the seal parallel to the joint faces. Seals
 shall be installed in the joints to the depth shown on the Plans using suitable machines or tools
 that will not twist, curl, nick, notch, or otherwise damage the seal and that will insert the seal
 in such a manner that elongation of the seal shall not exceed five percent. The in place seals
 shall be one-piece construction, without field or factory splices, for the full length of the joint.
 Any seal that is damaged during installation shall be removed and replaced with a new,
 undamaged seal. Any seal that is improperly installed or positioned in the joint or that shows
 more than five percent elongated following installation shall be removed and properly
 reinstalled or replaced.
 501.17-PROTECTION OF PAVEMENT:
 The Contractor shall protect the pavement and its appurtenances against both public traffic
 and the traffic caused by their own employees and agents. This protection shall include watchmen
 to direct traffic, and the erection and maintenance of warning signs, lights, barricades, pavement
 bridges, crossovers, etc. The above shall be arranged so as not to interfere with public traffic on
 any lane intended to be kept open.
 All damage to the pavement occurring prior to final acceptance shall be repaired or the
 pavement replaced, as the Engineer may direct.
 501.18-OPENING PAVEMENT TO TRAFFIC:
 If approved by the Engineer, the Contractor may open the pavement to traffic prior to 28
 days after placement of concrete, provided tests conducted in accordance with 501.4.4 indicate the
 244
 
 pavement has attained the 28-day design strength. If the Contractor wishes to open pavement to
 traffic prior to age 28 days, then all provisions for making test specimens and conducting and
 reporting the tests shall be handled by the Contractor at their expense. However, the Engineer may
 require that the pavement not be opened to traffic for a period of 28 days or longer, after placement
 of concrete, if conditions make it advisable to extend this time.
 501.19-TOLERANCE IN PAVEMENT THICKNESS:
 It is the intent of these Specifications that the pavement shall be constructed in substantial
 conformity with the specified thickness. Paving operations shall be directed toward obtaining an
 average and uniform thickness equal to or greater than the specified thickness.
 For the purpose of establishing an adjusted unit price for pavement areas deficient in
 thickness, the thickness characteristics will be determined in accordance with the criteria specified.
 501.19.1-Sampling Units and Sampling Requirements: The pavement thickness
 characteristics will be determined from an analysis of measurements made by non-destructive
 methods in accordance with MP 700.10.01. These measurements will be made by the Division
 with a frequency of one measurement from each sampling unit as defined. If the accuracy of
 a result from the non-destructive method is questioned by the Engineer, then a core shall be
 taken from the location at which the non-destructive measurement was taken. The subject core
 thickness shall then be used to verify the measurement from the non-destructive method, and
 if a difference of more than ¼ inch (6 mm) between the two measurements exists, the core
 measurement shall be used for acceptance purposes, instead of the non-destructive method
 measurement.
 501.19.1.1-Highway Proper: The total length of paving lane in linear feet in the
 highway proper shall be divided by 500 to determine the largest whole number which shall
 be the number of sampling units in the highway proper. The width of the sampling unit
 shall be the width of the paving lane, and the length of the sampling unit shall be determined
 by dividing the total length of paving lane in linear feet in the highway proper by the
 number of sampling units determined in the manner set forth. When paving lane width
 exceeds 24 ft. (7.2 meters), the Division may establish shorter sampling units.
 When the number as determined above is less than 10, the total length of the paving
 lane in linear feet shall be divided into 10 equal sampling units.
 501.19.1.2-Auxiliary Features: Intersections, entrances, exits, crossovers, ramps,
 etc., may be considered individually or collectively so as to form sampling units most
 nearly the length previously established in the highway proper.
 501.19.2-Deficient Thickness (Detection and Delineation): One thickness measurement
 will be taken, by the method outlined in MP 700.10.01, from each sampling unit. That
 thickness measurement shall represent the thickness of the pavement in that unit.
 When a sampling unit is represented by a measurement which is less than the specified
 pavement thickness (T) minus 7.8%T (T - 7.8%T = 0.922T), the sampling unit will be
 evaluated as set forth in 501.19.2.1.
 
 245
 
 501.19.2.1-When a thickness measurement, which represents a sampling unit, has a
 value of 0.922T or less, the area of deficient thickness in that sampling unit will be
 delineated by taking exploratory cores at approximately 20 ft. (6 m) intervals, parallel to
 the centerline, in each direction from the measurement taken in 501.19.2, until a core is
 obtained, in both directions, which is greater than 0.922T in thickness (length). Areas thus
 defined shall be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the Division. These
 exploratory cores will not be used in the analysis of the remainder of the unit. The balance
 of the sampling unit will be treated as a separate sampling unit.
 One additional core will be obtained from another random location in that sampling
 unit and shall represent the thickness of the remainder of that sampling unit. The thickness
 of the sampling unit represented by this core, when greater than 0.922T, will be included
 in the measurements specified in 501.23.1.1.
 501.19.3-Refilling of Cores: As soon as directions are issued by the Engineer, the
 Contractor shall refill and properly cure all test holes at no additional cost to the Division.
 501.20-PAVEMENT WIDENING:
 When called for on the Plans or directed by the Engineer to widen an existing pavement by
 means of strips of portland cement concrete, on one or both sides, the construction methods and
 materials shall be as specified for regular portland cement concrete pavement, except as modified.
 i. Compaction of the fine grade may be by means of an approved special roller capable
 of exerting a compressive force of not less than 100 lb. per in. (1.8 kg per mm) of width
 and as further prescribed in 207.9.
 ii. Forms may be of steel or wood. They shall be secured as required by the Engineer.
 501.21-ADVERSE WEATHER CONDITIONS:
 501.21.1-Cold Weather Concreting: When the component materials are not artificially
 heated and the temperature of the plastic concrete becomes less than 55 F (13 C), the
 provisions for cold weather concreting shall apply. The concrete shall have a temperature of
 at least 50 F (10 C) but not more than 85 F (30 C). This temperature shall be maintained
 by heating the water or aggregate, or both, as necessary. Heating methods which alter or
 prevent the entrainment of the required amount of air in the concrete shall not be used. The
 equipment shall be capable of heating materials uniformly. Aggregates or water shall not be
 heated to a temperature exceeding 150 F (65 C). Stockpiled aggregate may be heated by the
 use of dry heat or steam. Aggregates shall not be heated directly by gas or oil flame or on sheet
 metal over fire. Binned aggregates may be heated by steam-coil or water-coil heating. The
 use of live steam on or through binned aggregates will not be permitted.
 If the Contractor is placing concrete or plans to place concrete during cold weather
 conditions, the Contractor shall advise the Division of their plans for curing and protecting the
 concrete. The Division may, at any time, require the Contractor to provide additional
 protection to cause the provisions of this Specification to be met. When concrete is being
 placed and the air temperature is expected to fall below 35 F (2 C), a sufficient supply of
 suitable blanketing material shall be provided. Any time the air temperature is expected to
 reach the freezing point during the day of placement or the following night, the material so
 provided shall be spread over the pavement to a sufficient thickness to prevent freezing of the
 
 246
 
 concrete. The material shall be covered or otherwise secured to insure that it will remain in
 place for the duration of the curing period.
 No concrete shall be placed on a frozen subgrade. Materials containing frost or lumps of
 frozen material shall not be used.
 501.21.2-Hot Weather Concreting: The Contractor will be required to state, at the preconstruction conference, their plan of action when the temperature of plastic concrete reaches
 90 F (32 C).
 When a shaded thermometer in the vicinity of the production plant reaches 85 F (30 C),
 thermometer readings of the temperature of the plastic concrete shall be taken at least once per
 hour.
 When the temperature of the plastic concrete reaches 85 F (30 C), the elapsed time
 between the introduction of the mixing water to the cement-aggregates and discharge of the
 mix shall not exceed 45 minutes. At this temperature or above, particular attention shall be
 paid to the Specification provisions concerning the sprinkling and wetting of subgrade and
 forms, the maintenance of coarse aggregate stock in saturated surface-dry condition, and the
 prompt start of concrete curing operations.
 When the temperature of the plastic concrete reaches 90 F (32 C), immediate steps shall
 be taken to cool either mixing water or aggregates, or both, in order to maintain a plastic
 concrete temperature of 90 F (32 C), or less. Crushed or flaked ice may be used to cool the
 mixing water. Crushed or flaked ice may also be introduced into the mixing drum when the
 concrete is batched and mixed in a truck mixer. The ice will be considered as part of the mix
 water in the mix proportions. The mixing operation shall not be considered complete until all
 ice in the drum has melted.
 In no event shall concrete be placed when its temperature in the plastic state, at the
 completion of mixing, exceeds 90 F (32 C).
 501.22-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of concrete pavement to be paid for will be the number of square yards
 (meters) complete in place and accepted. The width for measurement will be the width of the
 pavement shown on the typical cross section of the Plans and additional widening where called for
 or as otherwise directed in writing by the Engineer. The length will be measured on the surface
 along the centerline of each roadway ramp.
 When Item 501009-* is specified in the project plans, the quantity of concrete overlay
 placement to be paid for will be the number of square yards (meters) complete in place and
 accepted. The width for measurement will be the width of the pavement or overlay shown on the
 typical cross section of the Plans and additional widening where called for or as otherwise directed
 in writing by the Engineer. The length will be measured on the surface along the centerline of
 each roadway and each roadway ramp.
 When Item 501011-* is specified in the project plans the quantity of concrete used in
 concrete overlays to be paid for will be the number of cubic yards (meters) in place and accepted.
 The Engineer will measure the volume of concrete used in concrete overlays using the Contractor’s
 certified batch tickets or other approved documentation.
 Bridge approach expansion joints will be measured separately and shall be the actual
 number of joints constructed, complete in place and accepted.
 
 247
 
 In contracts where only widening is called for, the square yards (meters) of pavement
 widening will be determined from the length of strips, measured along the edges and upon the
 surface, times the width as measured at regular intervals, plus the area of any widening on curves,
 turnouts or intersections authorized and measured separately.
 No extra payment will be made for removing and crushing the existing pavement for use
 as coarse aggregate for concrete.
 501.23-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 501.23.1-General: The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the
 contract unit prices less adjustments referred to below, which shall constitute full compensation
 for furnishing and preparing of all materials, including reinforcing steel, transverse and
 longitudinal joints, expansion joint filler, elastomeric joint seals, silicone sealant, epoxy mortar
 for joint repair work, polyethylene tape, rope or rod joint back-up material, lubricant-adhesive
 for elastomeric seals, and dowels or load transfer devices as are required in the Plans;
 construction of any bond breaker/leveling course, milling existing surface; placing, finishing
 and curing concrete; and all labor, equipment, tools, field laboratory, supplies and incidentals
 necessary to complete the work.
 501.23.1.1-The core measurements which represent the thickness of the sampling units
 shall be analyzed to determine the average value of the pavement thickness. This value
 will be used to determine the degree of compliance with the provisions set forth in 501.19
 and to develop certain factors to be used in the derivation of equitable deductions as set
 forth in 501.23.1.2 and 501.23.1.3, in the event the provisions of this Specification are not
 met.
 No payment will be made for pavement areas deficient in thickness by more than
 7.8%T, the area being defined in the manner set forth in 501.19.2. Pavement which is
 deficient in thickness by more than 0.7 inches (18 mm) and is considered by the Engineer
 to be inadequate to perform satisfactorily shall be removed and replaced at no added cost
 to the Division. The balance of the item, the portion of the item not treated in the manner
 set forth above, will be treated in the manner set forth in 501.23.1.2 or 501.23.1.3.
 501.23.1.2-When the average value of the pavement thickness is equal to or greater
 than the specified thickness, the quantity of pavement represented by this average thickness
 will be paid at the contract unit price.
 501.23.1.3-When the average value of the pavement thickness is less than the specified
 thickness, the fraction of pavement having a thickness greater than 0.922T will be paid for
 at a unit price as set forth in the following schedule, and no payment will be made for the
 remainder of the pavement being considered.
 
 248
 
 SCHEDULE OF UNIT PRICES
 Average Value of
 Unit Price as Percent of
 Pavement Thickness
 Contract Unit Price
 0.01 to 0.10 inches (0.25 to 2.66 mm)
 98.0
 Less Than Specified Thickness
 0.11 to 0.20 inches (2.67 to 5.20 mm)
 96.0
 Less Than Specified Thickness
 0.21 to 0.30 inches (5.21 to 7.74 mm)
 94.0
 Less Than Specified Thickness
 0.31 to 0.40 inches (7.75 to 10.28 mm)
 92.2
 Less Than Specified Thickness
 0.41 to 0.50 inches (10.29 to 12.82 mm)
 90.3
 Less Than Specified Thickness
 0.51 to 0.60 inches (12.83 to 15.36 mm)
 88.4
 Less Than Specified Thickness
 0.61 to 0.70 inches (15.37 to 17.78 mm)
 86.5
 Less Than Specified Thickness
 More than 0.70 inches (17.78 mm)
 0.0
 Less Than Specified Thickness
 501.24-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 "thickness" Reinforced Portland Cement Concrete
 501001-*
 Pavement
 "thickness" Reinforced High-Early-Strength Portland
 501002-*
 Cement Concrete Pavement
 "thickness" Reinforced Portland Cement Concrete
 501003-*
 Pavement Widening
 "thickness" Reinforced High-Early Strength Portland
 501004-*
 Cement Concrete Pavement Widening
 "thickness" Non-Reinforced Portland Cement Concrete
 501005-*
 Pavement
 "thickness" Non-Reinforced High-Early-Strength Portland
 501006-*
 Cement Concrete Pavement
 "thickness" Non-Reinforced Portland Cement Concrete
 501007-*
 Pavement Widening
 "thickness" Non-Reinforced High-Early-Strength Portland
 501008-*
 Cement Concrete Pavement Widening
 501009-*
 
 “thickness” Unbonded Portland Cement Concrete Overlay
 
 501010-*
 
 Bridge Approach Expansion Joint
 
 501011-*
 
 Unbonded Portland Cement Concrete Overlay
 
 * Sequence number
 “thickness” in inches
 
 249
 
 UNIT
 Square Yard
 (Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Meter)
 Square Yard
 (Meter)
 Each
 Cubic Yard
 (Meter)
 
 SECTION 502
 APPROACH SLABS
 502.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of reinforced Portland cement concrete approach slabs for bridges,
 constructed on the completed and accepted subgrade, subbase or other base course, in accordance
 with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines, grades and dimensions
 specified on the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 502.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials for this work shall conform to the requirements for materials in 501 except as
 modified.
 Class B concrete, under the provisions of 601, may be used in lieu of the concrete in 501,
 in which case materials and batching requirements for this work shall conform to the requirements
 for 601.
 Compressive strength tests for acceptance of concrete shall be conducted in accordance
 with 601.4.4.
 Reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements prescribed in 602.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 Construction methods and equipment used for this work shall conform to the requirements
 prescribed for construction methods and equipment in 501, except as modified.
 502.3-FORMS:
 Side forms may be of steel or wood. Forms shall not be removed for at least 24 hours after
 the concrete is placed.
 502.4-PLACING:
 The subgrade or base shall be thoroughly moistened immediately prior to placing the
 concrete. The concrete shall not be placed until the forms and reinforcing steel have been checked.
 The method and sequence of placing concrete shall be approved by the Engineer.
 Vibrators shall be so manipulated as to work the concrete thoroughly around the
 reinforcement and imbedded fixtures and into corners and angles of the forms.
 502.5-JOINTS:
 Approach slabs shall have longitudinal joints in line with the longitudinal joints of the
 adjacent pavement. Longitudinal joints shall be sawed to a minimum depth of one-fourth of the
 plan depth of the slab plus ¼ in. (6 mm); the width shall be ¼ in. (6 mm), with a tolerance of plus
 or minus 1/16 in. (2 mm). Sawing shall be performed within five days after the slab is placed and
 prior to opening to construction traffic. Joints shall be sealed in accordance with the requirements
 of 501.17 and 503.
 
 250
 
 502.6-CURBS:
 The safety curbs shall be constructed using the same type of concrete as for the approach
 slab and shall be in accordance with the Plans. The finish of the curb shall be in accordance with
 610.
 502.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be measured in square yards (meters) of "Portland Cement
 Concrete Approach Slab" complete in place and accepted; the area will be measured to the
 extremity of the concrete.
 502.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the item below, which price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials
 including reinforcing steel, such transverse and longitudinal joints, joint filler, dowels and curbs,
 and all labor equipment, tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 502.9-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 502001-* "thickness" Portland Cement Concrete Approach Slab
 * Sequence number
 “thickness” in inches
 
 251
 
 UNIT
 Square Yard (Meter)
 
 SECTION 503
 SEALING CRACKS IN CONCRETE PAVEMENT
 503.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the cleaning and sealing of cracks in concrete pavement in the
 manner and subject to the conditions and regulation prescribed.
 503.2-MATERIALS:
 The sealant shall be in accordance with section 708.3.
 The joint back-up material shall be in accordance with section 708.4.2, shall meet the
 requirements of the Sealant Manufacturer, and shall be appropriate for outdoor applications.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 Old filler and foreign material in the cracks shall be removed. The cracks shall then be
 sealed as prescribed. Other means and/or methods recommended by the Sealant Manufacturer and
 approved by the Engineer may be used.
 503.3-BLANK
 503.4-PREPARATION OF MATERIAL BEFORE USE:
 Before charging the compound into the melting unit, the unit shall be free from all foreign
 material. If the type of heater to be used requires that the sealing material as shipped, be cut into
 smaller pieces before melting, the method used is subject to approval by the Engineer.
 The heating kettle used for melting sealing materials shall be of the indirect heating or
 double boiler type, using oil as the heat transfer medium. It shall have a thermostatically controlled
 heat source, a built-in automatic agitator, and thermometers installed to indicate both the
 temperature of the melted sealing material and that of the oil bath. Other methods of indirect
 heating approved by the Engineer may be used. A positive means of controlling the temperature
 of the heat transfer medium at all points in the system shall be incorporated in the heater. Sealing
 material shall be uniformly heated until the pouring temperature recommended by the Sealant
 Manufacturer is reached. Should the maximum recommended pouring temperature be exceeded,
 the material will be rejected. The material shall be poured as soon as possible after the pouring
 temperature is reached. Only sufficient material for the day’s operation shall be heated each day.
 Other means and/or methods recommended by the Sealant Manufacturer and approved by the
 Engineer may be used.
 503.5-PREPARATION OF JOINTS FOR SEALING:
 Cracks should be widened with a crack saw to a minimum width of ½” (16 mm) and to a
 depth necessary to provide a 1:1 width to depth ratio including room for the backer rod. The cracks
 shall be thoroughly cleaned of all loose scale, dirt, dust, other foreign matter, old sealant and
 loosely stuck particles of mortar and aggregate, so that dry, sound, and clean surfaces result. The
 use of any tool which results in damage to the pavement is prohibited. Just prior to the actual
 sealing operation, the crack shall be thoroughly blown out with an air jet having sufficient volume
 and pressure to remove any loose material left by the cleaning operation. After the final cleaning,
 the back-up material shall be inserted into the crack in accordance with the Manufacturer’s
 recommendations to provide the correct shape factor for the sealant.
 252
 
 503.6-EQUIPMENT FOR APPLYING SEALER:
 The equipment used for the placing of sealing material in the cracks may consist of
 conventional hand pouring pots, individual mechanical pouring kettles mounted on wheels with a
 pouring shoe, or heating units from which material may be discharged into the joint through the
 use of flexible lines and suitable shoes. Any heat, which it may be necessary to apply to sealing
 material after it leaves the main heating unit, shall be applied by indirect and controlled methods
 as specified in 503.4. No direct heat will be permitted on the pouring unit in order to meet field
 controls set forth below. Any method of placing sealing material, which results in compliance
 with the following requirements, will be satisfactory.
 503.7-PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
 After insertion of the back-up material and prior to becoming contaminated, the crack shall
 be sealed in accordance with the Sealant Manufacturer’s recommendations. At the time of sealing,
 the crack faces shall be dry and dust free. The sealant shall be introduced into the crack in a
 continuous uniform operation to properly fill and seal the crack from the bottom upward in order
 to avoid trapping any air bubbles. The crack shall be sealed to within 1/8 to ¼ inch (3 to 6 mm)
 below the pavement surface. Traffic shall not be allowed on the sealed joint for the minimum time
 recommended by the Sealant Manufacturer after placement, unless otherwise approved by the
 Engineer.
 Sealant shall never be applied to frozen, dirty, wet, or damp concrete or during inclement
 weather conditions. Sealant shall not be placed in the cracks unless the temperature of the
 pavement is 40° F (4° C) or higher unless approved by the Engineer.
 503.8-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be measured in linear feet (meters) of “Sealing Cracks”,
 when the item below is included in the contract.
 503.9-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity of work, as described above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for
 the item below, which price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all the materials
 and doing all the work prescribed in an acceptable manner, including all the labor, tools,
 equipment, supplies, and incidental items necessary to complete the work.
 503.10-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 503001-* Sealing Cracks in Concrete Pavement
 *
 
 Sequence number
 
 253
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 
 SECTION 504
 BITUMINOUS UNDERSEAL FOR CONCRETE PAVEMENT
 504.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of drilling holes in portland cement concrete pavement at the
 locations shown on the Plans or where directed by the Engineer, pumping bituminous material
 through the holes, and sealing the holes with cement grout.
 504.2-MATERIALS:
 The materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of
 Division 700:
 MATERIAL
 Asphalt Cement
 Fine Aggregate*
 Portland Cement
 Water
 
 SUBSECTION
 705.6
 702.1
 701.1 & 701.3
 715.7
 
 * The use of limestone sand will not be permitted.
 Grout for sealing holes shall consist of one part Portland cement and three parts fine
 aggregate, mixed to the consistency directed by the Engineer.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 504.3-GENERAL:
 Holes of 1-1/2 in. (40 mm) diameter shall be drilled through the concrete pavement at the
 locations shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer. Bituminous material shall then be
 pumped through the holes and under the pavement by means of an approved type of pump.
 Equipment for pumping shall be capable of developing a pressure of 80 lb. per sq. in. (550
 kPa), the exact working pressure to be determined by the Engineer.
 Prior to pumping, the surface of the concrete pavement around the previously drilled holes
 shall be thoroughly sprinkled with water or shall be covered with sand, earth or other suitable
 material in order to prevent any bitumen that may be spilled on the pavement from adhering to the
 surface. The nozzle shall then be inserted in the hole, driven to a snug fit, and pumping operations
 begun. Bituminous material shall be pumped through the holes and under the pavement until the
 voids under the pavement are completely filled, or the concrete pavement has been raised to the
 grade of existing adjacent pavement or to such grade as directed by the Engineer. At the first
 indication of an undesirable movement of the slab or a blowout, pumping shall immediately be
 discontinued. The connecting device placed in the drilled hole shall not be removed from the hole
 until the bitumen has cooled sufficiently to prevent backflow. At the time the bituminous material
 is pumped under the pavement, it shall have a temperature of not less than 400 F (205 C). The
 Contractor shall provide all necessary facilities for determining the temperature of the bituminous
 material in all heating equipment and distributors.
 After completion of the pumping in each hole, all bituminous material shall be cleaned
 from the pavement surface and the drilled hole shall be filled with grout to an elevation flush with
 the pavement surface.
 254
 
 After the completion of subsealing operations, the pavement surface shall be left in a clean
 and neat condition satisfactory to the Engineer.
 The bituminous material shall not be applied on a frozen subgrade, nor when the
 atmospheric temperature is below 40 F (5 C) and is falling, with the further provision that it shall
 be placed only when general weather conditions, in the opinion of the Engineer, are suitable.
 504.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be measured in gallons (liters) of "Bituminous Underseal
 Material" and in "Drilling Holes in Concrete Pavement" determined as follows: The quantity of
 "Bituminous Underseal Material" shall be the number of gallons (liters) incorporated in the
 completed and accepted work, which volume will be measured as prescribed in 109.1. The
 quantity of "Drilling Holes in Concrete Pavement" shall be the actual counted number of holes
 drilled and satisfactorily filled.
 504.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing
 all the materials, including grout, and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and
 acceptable manner, including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies and incidentals necessary to
 complete the work.
 504.6-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 504001-*
 504002-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Bituminous Underseal Material
 Drilling Holes In Concrete Pavement
 
 * Sequence number
 
 SECTION 505-BLANK
 
 255
 
 UNIT
 Gallon (Liter)
 Each
 
 SECTION 506
 CONCRETE PAVEMENT REPAIR
 506.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work consists of the removal and replacement of deteriorated concrete pavement and
 patches, and replacing subbase material where required, at locations as shown on plans or as
 specified by the Engineer.
 The following is a description of each patch type:
 i. Jointed Concrete Pavement Patch, Type I:
 Patching shall consist of full depth, full lane width concrete pavement repairs equal to
 or greater than 6 feet (1.8 meters) in length. Type I patches shall constructed in
 accordance with the Concrete Repair Details in the plans.
 ii. Jointed Concrete Pavement Patch, Type II:
 Patching shall consist of partial depth concrete pavement repairs that extend a
 minimum of 2 inches (50mm) and no deeper than one-half the slab thickness at cracks
 or no more than one-third the slab thickness at doweled joints. Type II patches shall be
 constructed in accordance with the Concrete Repair Details in the plans.
 iii. Jointed Concrete Pavement Patch, Type III:
 Patching shall consist of a repair along the edge of a transverse crack or joint that
 extends from the bottom of a partial depth repair (Type II) to potentially the full depth
 of the slab, and isolated within 12” of either the longitudinal joint or pavement edge.
 Type III patches shall be constructed in accordance with the Concrete Repair Details
 in the plans.
 506.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall meet the requirements of section 501 or 601, and as follows:
 MATERIAL
 Accelerating Admixtures
 Curing Materials
 Epoxy-Coated Dowel Bars
 Joint Sealer
 Portland Cement Concrete
 Subbase
 Tie Bars and Hook Bolts
 
 SECTION OR SUBSECTION
 707.13
 707.6-707.10
 709.15
 708.3, 708.4
 501 or 601
 307
 709.1
 
 An approved epoxy grout shall be used to firmly anchor dowel bars in 30 minutes.
 Cement meeting the requirements of ASTM C150, Type III may be used in the concrete
 mixes for concrete pavement repair.
 506.3-PROPORTIONING:
 Portland cement concrete for patching concrete pavement shall meet the requirements of
 Section 501, or Class B or Modified Class B as specified in Section 601, except that it shall be
 shown by compressive strength tests that the concrete mix shall attain 2,000 psi (13.8 Mpa) prior
 to the time at which the pavement will be opened to traffic, and an AASHTO number 8 coarse
 aggregate shall be required in Type II repairs with a depth of 3 inches (75 mm) or less.
 256
 
 Type III repairs may be placed simultaneously with Type II repairs. When constructed in
 this manner, the same concrete mix shall be used in both repair types.
 Prior to the start of work, the Contractor shall submit the mix proportions and recent
 compressive strength test data for the specified age at which the concrete is to be opened to traffic.
 506.4-TESTING:
 All testing shall be in accordance with section 501. The Contractor shall fabricate a
 minimum of nine compressive strength cylinders for each 24 hour period of operation. Six of these
 nine field cured cylinders shall be field cured in a temperature and moisture condition as close as
 possible to that of the concrete in the repair area. When the average strength of three of these
 cylinders, representing the concrete placed, indicate that the concrete has attained the required
 strength for opening to traffic, that concrete may be put into service. These cylinders shall
 represent concrete produced from the batch from which they were fabricated and, if applicable,
 concrete from previous batches also. These cylinders will not represent any concrete which was
 placed after the time that they were fabricated. Three of the nine cylinders shall receive standard
 curing and shall be tested at 28days to verify that the required strength at that age has been
 achieved.
 In lieu of six field cured cylinders required above, the Contractor may use the Maturity
 Method for the Estimation of concrete strength, as outlined in MP 601.04.21 for determining when
 the pavement may be opened to traffic.
 506.5-EQUIPMENT AND TOOLS:
 Equipment and tools shall be in accordance with section 501 unless noted otherwise. Saw
 cutting equipment shall be capable of sawing neat vertical faces along the patch boundaries. The
 use of a carbide-toothed wheel saw shall not be permitted for sawing the patch boundaries. A
 carbide-tipped wheel saw may be used for additional saw cuts provided that a minimum 3-inch
 (75 mm) clearance from the sawed boundary is maintained.
 506.6-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 506.6.1-Removal of Existing Pavement: Designated defective pavement shall be
 removed full depth, and undisturbed portions of the existing pavement adjacent to the area to
 be patched shall be left with straight vertical sides.
 The existing pavement to be removed shall be sawed full depth along the transverse and
 longitudinal boundaries, including the lane and shoulder/lane joints as shown on the plans or
 as directed by the Engineer. Additional saw cuts inside the patch boundaries will be permitted
 to facilitate the concrete removal operation.
 Concrete sawn full depth to be removed shall be lifted out by means of chains, lift-pins, or
 other approved devices. The breaking of concrete in-place shall not be permitted. During the
 removal operations, utmost care shall be exercised to minimize disturbance and damage to the
 base material, and the adjacent pavement and shoulder.
 506.6.2-Conditioning Existing Subbase: Prior to placing concrete in the repair area, any
 subbase material that is disturbed below the desired level of cleanout shall be removed and the
 patch area compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer. Unsuitable subbase material,
 concrete, reinforcing steel, and any other debris shall become property of the Contractor and
 shall be legally disposed. The Contractor shall replace the removed subbase material with
 257
 
 concrete integral to pavement replacement up to a maximum 1-inch (25 mm) depth. In the
 event that soft areas are encountered in the subbase or subgrade, or if more than 1-inch (25
 mm) of subbase material is removed, replacement of subbase and subgrade shall be in
 accordance with Section 307, testing shall be waived. When subbase or subgrade material is
 replaced, it shall be brought to grade and compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
 506.6.3-Placing Concrete: Unless behind permanent closures or unless otherwise
 approved by the Engineer, all excavated areas shall be patched the same day that they are
 excavated. The excavated area shall be thoroughly cleaned of loose material and debris and
 moistened prior to the placement of concrete.
 Existing pavements shall not be removed if such removal will result in concrete being
 placed when the ambient air temperature is below 32 F, unless approved by the Engineer.
 Concrete for partial depth repairs shall not be placed when the ambient temperature is below
 40 F. The concrete temperature at the time of placement shall not be less than 70 F and not
 more than 95 F, unless approved by the Engineer.
 Concrete shall be deposited in the excavated area, and the free fall shall not be more than
 3 feet (1 m). If the concrete does not fall into its final position in the patch, it shall be moved
 by means of shovels; raking is prohibited. The concrete shall be worked with tampers, spades,
 or other tools to completely fill the patch area. Maximum effort will be used to ensure that the
 area beneath the existing concrete pavement is completely filled. Internal vibration shall be
 used.
 Following the placing of the concrete, the surface will be struck off to a finished grade and
 floated to a smooth finish. Finishing of the plastic concrete shall conform to the requirements
 of Section 501.12 of the Specifications, except that the final concrete surface shall be textured
 similar to that of the adjoining pavement.
 506.6.4-Straightedge Checking and Surface Correction: During finishing operations,
 deviations in adjacent lanes which are also to be repaired shall not be transferred to the new
 construction. The Contractor shall furnish and use straightedges to check the surface tolerance.
 For patches 10 feet (3 m) or more in length, a 10 foot (3 m) straightedge shall be used. Shorter
 straightedges shall be used for patches less than 10 feet (3 m) in length.
 The minimum length straightedge shall be 6 feet (1.8 m). Section 501.12.6 shall govern
 except that the shorter straightedges shall be used for shorter patches.
 506.6.5-Curing: Immediately after straight edging and texturing, the concrete shall be
 cured in accordance with Section 501.14. Where early opening to traffic is required, insulation
 mats or blankets may be used over the repairs during curing in order to accelerate strength
 gain.
 506.6.6-Sealing Joints: When patching two lanes simultaneously, the longitudinal joint
 shall be reestablished by sawing. Joint sealing shall be done in accordance with Section 510.
 506.6.7-Repair of Adjacent Shoulders: Within 24 hours after completion of a patch area,
 any adjacent shoulders damaged during pavement repair operations shall be reconstructed in
 accordance with the requirements of the applicable section of the specifications to match the
 finished shoulder grade and to the satisfaction of the Engineer. In the event traffic is to be
 258
 
 permitted on the patch area prior to reconstruction of the shoulder, the Contractor shall first
 make such temporary repair to the shoulder as is necessary to avoid any hazardous condition.
 506.6.8-Specific Construction Methods: Construction methods specific to each repair
 type are noted in the following sections.
 506.6.8.1-Type I Repairs: Where the existing joint dowel assembly is to be removed,
 the existing concrete shall be saw cut full depth and removed a minimum of 1 foot (300
 mm) on either side of existing transverse joints. Minimum length of removal shall be 6
 feet (1.8 m) in accordance with that shown in the WVDOH Concrete Repair Details.
 Oversawing into the adjacent slabs or shoulder shall be kept to the minimum amount
 necessary to ensure that full depth cuts in the corners have been achieved. All oversawing
 shall be cleaned and filled with an approved epoxy material.
 Any areas damaged during concrete sawing and removal operations shall be repaired
 to the satisfaction of the Engineer by extending the patch boundary or repairing spalls at
 the Contractor’s expense. Spalls greater than ¼ inch (6 mm) wide and 2 inches (50 mm)
 long and more than ½ inch (13 mm) deep below the pavement surface shall be repaired
 using an approved epoxy mortar. The patch boundary shall be extended by re-sawing the
 limits of the patch beyond the spalled area when spalls greater than 1 inch (25 mm) wide
 and 12 inches (300 mm) long and more than ½ inch (13 mm) deep below the pavement
 surface are created by the pavement removal operation.
 A bond breaking material, approved by the Engineer, shall be placed at the longitudinal
 joint for Type I patches as shown in WVDOH Concrete Repair Details. Acceptable bondbreaking materials include white pigmented curing compound, roofing felt, and tar paper.
 Where dowels are required, holes slightly larger than the diameter of the dowels shall
 be drilled 9 inches (225 mm) into the face of the existing slab starting 6 - 12 inches (150 –
 300 mm) from either edge and then on 12 inch (300 mm) centers. The number of dowels
 per joint shall be as shown in the WVDOH Concrete Repair Details. The holes shall be
 located at a depth as shown in the WVDOH Concrete Repair Details. The dowels shall be
 carefully aligned (within ¼ inch (6 mm)) with the direction of the pavement and parallel
 to the plane of the surface. An approved quick setting, non-shrinking mortar or an
 approved high viscosity epoxy shall be used to anchor the dowels in the holes. The holes
 shall be completely filled around the dowels so as to minimize vertical movement of the
 dowels and ensure that the dowels are permanently fastened to the existing concrete. The
 epoxy or grout is to be put into the hole in sufficient quantity so that when the bar is
 inserted, the material completely fills the annular space around the dowel. The holes shall
 be filled from the back to the front with epoxy or grout prior to insertion of the dowel.
 Dipping of the dowels into epoxy or grout prior to insertion into the holes is not permitted.
 A grout retention ring shall be used as shown in the WVDOH Concrete Repair Details.
 The surface edges of all patches shall be tooled, formed and/or sawed, and cleaned to
 result in a properly dimensioned reservoir for sealant. All transverse and longitudinal joints
 at pavement repair locations shall be sealed in accordance with manufacturer’s
 recommendations unless otherwise approved by the Engineer.
 
 259
 
 506.6.8.2-Type II Repairs: Full lane-width partial depth repairs at transverse joints
 and cracks and at longitudinal joints 12 feet or more in length shall be a minimum of 18
 inches (450 mm) wide, with the vertical face of the repair being no less than 6 inches (150
 mm) from the crack or the joint. Partial depth repairs shall be sawed a minimum depth of
 2 inches (50 mm) around the perimeter of the patch area to provide a vertical face at the
 edges unless removal is to be performed with milling operations. Acceptable milling
 operations shall provide neat vertical faces and be approved by the Engineer. Concrete
 within the patching area shall be broken out with a pneumatic hammer not heavier than a
 35-pound class or by other methods approved by the Engineer. Edge spalls greater than ¼
 inch (6 mm) wide and 2 inches (50 mm) long and more than ½ inch (50 mm) deep below
 the pavement surface shall be repaired using an approved epoxy mortar. The patch
 boundary shall be extended by re-sawing the limits of the patch beyond the spalled area
 when spalls greater than 1 inch (25 mm) wide and 12 inches (300 mm) long and more than
 ½ inch (13 mm) deep below the pavement surface are created by the pavement removal
 operation.
 The area of failure shall be removed by equipment that will not damage the adjacent
 sound pavement. The exposed faces of the concrete shall be free of loose particles, oil,
 dust, and other contaminants before placement of patch material. Immediately prior to
 placement of the concrete patch, all exposed concrete faces within the patched area shall
 be cleaned by sandblasting, then airblasting, then coated with an approved epoxy bonding
 compound per the manufacturer’s recommendations. All residues shall be removed just
 prior to placement of the concrete bonding agent.
 Any crack or joint within the limits of, or adjacent to, the partial depth repair shall be
 re-established by forming with an acceptable material in order to follow the crack or joint
 alignment. The method and material used to re-establish the crack or joint shall be
 approved by the Engineer. However, at joint repairs, sawcutting through the full-depth of
 the repair area may be used to fully re-establish the joint being repaired. Additionally, the
 Contractor shall saw and seal existing joints and cracks, involving partial depth repairs, in
 accordance with Section 510.
 506.6.8.3-Type III Repairs: “Turned Down Edge” repairs at transverse joints and
 cracks shall extend no more than 12 inches (300 mm) into the slab from the edge of
 pavement whether at the outside or along an interior longitudinal joint. Concrete within
 the patching area shall be broken out with a pneumatic hammer not heavier than a 35pound class or by other methods approved by the Engineer. The area of failure shall be
 removed by equipment that will not damage the adjacent sound pavement.
 Number 4 tie bars, 10 inches (250 mm) in length, shall be inserted into the exposed
 vertical faces within the repair area. One bar shall be placed per one-foot (300 mm) of
 exposed face, or fraction thereof, on each side of the transverse crack or joint. The bar(s)
 shall be inserted at mid-depth of the slab, allowing for five inches (125 mm) of length to
 extend into the area to be repaired. The hole(s) for placement of the tie bar(s) into the
 exposed vertical face of the slab shall be slightly larger than the diameter of the bar and
 shall be drilled at an angle in order to allow for drill clearance. Additionally, a minimum
 clearance of one inch shall be maintained around the hole for placement of concrete. The
 holes shall be filled from the back to the front with epoxy or grout prior to insertion of the
 bar. Dipping of the bars into epoxy or grout prior to insertion into the hole is not permitted.
 260
 
 The bar should be bent prior to insertion into the grouted hole such that the exposed portion
 of the bar within the area being repaired shall be parallel with the pavement surface. No
 bars shall be placed in a manner that would interfere with free movement of the joint or
 crack being repaired and re-established.
 The exposed faces of the concrete shall be free of loose particles, oil, dust, and other
 contaminants before placement of patch material. Immediately prior to placement of the
 concrete patch, all exposed concrete faces within the patched area shall be cleaned by
 sandblasting, then airblasting, then coated with an approved epoxy bonding compound per
 the manufacturer’s recommendations. All residues shall be removed just prior to
 placement of the concrete bonding agent.
 Any crack or joint within the limits of, or adjacent to, the repair shall be re-established
 by forming with an acceptable material in order to follow the crack or joint alignment.
 However, at joint repairs, sawcutting through the full-depth of the repair area may be used
 to fully re-establish the joint being repaired. The method and material used to re-establish
 the crack or joint shall be approved by the Engineer. Additionally, the Contractor shall
 saw and seal existing joints and cracks, involving partial depth repairs, in accordance with
 Section 510.
 506.7-RIDE ACCEPTANCE:
 As soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently, the pavement surface shall be tested with
 a 10 foot (3 m) straightedge. The straightedge shall be placed in successive positions parallel to
 the road centerline, matching existing wheel paths. Areas showing deviations (either high or low)
 of more than ¼ inch (6 mm) in 10 feet (3 m) shall be marked and corrected down with approved
 grinding equipment to an elevation where the surface deviations will not be more than ¼ inch in
 10 feet (3 m). All joint sealing operations shall be performed after any grinding operations.
 In the event that the deviation cannot be corrected to ¼ inch (6 mm) or less (either high or
 low) in 10 feet (3 m), the areas shall be removed and replaced at the discretion of the Engineer and
 at the Contractor’s expense. All areas or sections so removed shall not be less than 6 feet (1.8 m)
 in length or less than full width of the traffic lane involved. Any remaining portion of the slab
 adjacent to the joints that is less than 6 feet (1.8 m) in length shall also be removed and replaced.
 Where concrete repairs are made that are to be overlayed, the smoothness criteria is waived for the
 concrete repair.
 506.8-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of concrete pavement repair to be paid for will be the number of square yards
 (meters) complete in place and accepted for all Type I and Type II repairs.
 For Type III repairs, each location complete in place and accepted will be paid for.
 506.9-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity of concrete pavement repair, determined as provided above, will be paid for
 at the contract unit price and shall constitute full compensation for the furnishing, hauling, and
 placing of all materials, saw cutting pavement to the required depth, the removal and disposal of
 old concrete, preparing of sublayer, furnishing and installing steel dowels, furnishing and installing
 reinforcing steel as specified, furnishing, placing, finishing, and curing the concrete, cleaning and
 sealing joints, patch area protection, and for all other materials, labor, tools, equipment, and
 incidentals necessary to complete the item.
 261
 
 506.10-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 506001-003 Concrete Pavement Repair, Type I, “thickness”
 506001-004 Concrete Pavement Repair, Type II
 506001-005 Concrete Pavement Repair, Type III
 506003-*
 Replace Existing Aggregate Base Course
 *
 
 Sequence number
 “thickness” shall be in inches
 
 262
 
 UNIT
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Each
 Ton (Megagram)
 
 SECTION 507
 CRACK AND POTHOLE REPAIR
 507.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of repairing an existing concrete pavement surface prior to
 resurfacing with hot-laid asphalt concrete in accordance with these specifications.
 507.2-MATERIALS:
 The materials shall conform to the requirements of the following sections.
 MATERIAL
 Fine Aggregate
 Hot-Mix Asphalt Base Course
 Performance Graded Binder
 Tack Coat
 
 SECTION
 702.3
 401
 705.5
 408
 
 507.3-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 All cracks in excess of 1 in. (25 mm), but less than 3 inches (75 mm) in width, shall be
 thoroughly cleaned of all dirt, debris, loose or other foreign or unstable material and filled with a
 mixture of sand and asphalt. The asphalt content shall be 5 to 10%. Asphalt mixture shall be
 applied at a temperature range of 250 to 325 F (120 C to 162 C).
 All cracks in excess of 3 inches (75 mm) and all potholes greater than 1 in. (25 mm) in
 depth, shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt, debris, loose or other foreign or unstable material.
 After cleaning, the cracks and potholes are to be tacked, in accordance with Section 408 of the
 Specifications, and filled with asphalt concrete base course material in accordance with 401 or as
 approved by the Engineer.
 Prior to resurfacing, all cracks and potholes are to have the same finished grade as the
 adjacent surfaces.
 507.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done for crack and pothole repair will be measured by the actual
 number of tons (megagrams) of material used for crack and pothole repair and shall include
 cleaning, tack material, asphalt, sand, asphalt concrete base course complete in place and accepted.
 507.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the item listed below, which price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all
 the materials, and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner,
 including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 507.6-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 507002-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Crack And Pothole Repair
 
 * Sequence number
 
 263
 
 UNIT
 Ton (Megagram)
 
 SECTION 508
 DIAMOND GRINDING
 508.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work consists of diamond grinding portland cement concrete pavement and roadway
 surfaces of structures to provide good riding characteristics, a surface texture and proper drainage.
 508.2-EQUIPMENT:
 Grinding shall be done utilizing diamond blades mounted on a self-propelled machine
 designed for grinding and texturing pavement. The equipment shall have a minimum weight,
 including the grinding head, of 35,000 lbs (15,875 kg) and of a size that will grind a strip at least
 3 feet (1 meter) wide. Grinding equipment that causes raveling, aggregate fractures, spalls, or
 disturbance to the transverse or longitudinal joints shall not be permitted. The equipment shall
 have a positive means of vacuuming the grinding residue from the pavement surface and will leave
 the pavement in a clean condition.
 508.3-CONSTRUCTION:
 The construction operation shall be scheduled and proceed in a manner that produces a
 neat, uniform, finished surface. Auxiliary or ramp lane grinding shall transition from the edge of
 the mainline as required to provide drainage and an acceptable riding surface. Pavement repair, if
 required, shall be completed prior to any grinding. Joint resealing shall be completed subsequent
 to all diamond grinding operations.
 Grinding shall be accomplished in a manner that eliminates joint or crack faults and
 provides lateral drainage by maintaining a constant cross slope between grinding extremities in
 each lane. The cross slope of the pavement shall be as shown on the plans and shall have no
 depressions or misalignment of slope greater than 1/4 inch (6 mm) in 12 feet (3.7 meters) when
 measured with a 12-foot (3.7 meter) straightedge placed perpendicular to the centerline. Areas of
 deviation shall be reground. Straightedge requirements will not apply across longitudinal joints or
 outside the ground area. Areas that display a ridge in excess of 1/4 inch (6 mm) at the pavement
 shoulder interface shall be diamond ground a minimum width of 2 feet (0.6 meters) on to the
 shoulder and paid for at the Contractor’s bid price.
 Grinding shall begin and end at lines normal to the pavement centerline at the project limits.
 No unground surface area between passes will be permitted.
 508.4-FINAL SURFACE FINISH:
 The grinding process shall produce a pavement surface which is true to grade and uniform
 in appearance with a longitudinal line-type texture. The line-type texture shall contain
 corrugations, parallel to the outside pavement edge, which present a narrow ridge corduroy type
 appearance. The peaks of the ridges shall be 1/8 inch + 1/16 inch (3 mm + 1.5 mm) higher than
 the bottoms of the groove with evenly spaced ridges having a width that measures within the ranges
 listed in the table below:
 
 264
 
 TABLE 508.4
 Type of aggregate used in the pavement
 Limestone
 Blade segment thickness minimum
 0.120 inch (3.0 mm)
 Blade segment thickness maximum
 0.130 inch (3.3 mm)
 0.090 to 0.120 inch
 Land area between grooves*
 (2.3 to 3.0 mm)
 
 Gravel
 0.120 inch (3.0 mm)
 0.130 inch (3.3 mm)
 0.080 to 0.110 inch
 (2.0 to 2.8 mm)
 
 * Based on an average of a minimum of five measurements per lane mile (1600 meters) of pavement ground.
 
 It shall be the Contractor’s responsibility to select the number of grooves per foot (meter)
 to be used to produce the previously described surface finish for each aggregate type that may be
 present in the concrete surface on the project. The engineer may require removal of unbroken fins
 at the contractor’s expense. At a minimum, 95% of the pavement surface shall be textured.
 Depressed pavement areas due to subsidence or other localized causes will be excluded from this
 requirement when approved by the engineer.
 508.5-SLURRY REMOVAL:
 All residue from the pavement surface shall become the responsibility of the Contractor
 and shall be removed and disposed of legally in a manner and at a location which satisfies
 environmental regulations.
 Solid residue shall be removed from the pavement surface before any residue is blown by
 traffic action or wind. Residue shall not be permitted to encroach on open lanes. The residue shall
 not enter into gutters or closed drainage systems. Erosion control items that help prevent slurry
 discharge into drains and culverts (etc.) may be necessary to ensure that uncontrolled slurry
 releases are prevented.
 508.6-SMOOTHNESS REQUIREMENTS:
 An initial profile index of representative portions of the pavement will be available through
 the Engineer upon written request. After the contract is awarded, the initial profile index will be
 available from the Engineer. This information represents a summary of conditions found to exist
 at the time the survey was made. If this IRI testing is conducted more than 180 calendar days prior
 to the scheduled beginning of the work, the Engineer or Contractor may request new IRI testing.
 This information is provided to give the Contractor an idea of the condition of the pavement in
 regard to smoothness when bidding on this work. The Contractor assumes the risk of error if the
 information is used for any purpose other than the intended purpose. Prior to performing any
 grinding work, the Contractor shall provide a profile trace utilizing light weight profiler (LWP)
 equipment approved by the Engineer. This profile trace will be used to identify the required
 smoothness for the project. Each segment of the finished ground surface shall have a final profile
 index of:
 i. For speeds greater than 45 mph (70 kph) - 80 in/mile (1.26 m/km) IRI or a minimum 30
 percent improvement.
 ii. For speeds 45 mph (70 kph) or less and pavements that do not warrant the increased level
 of smoothness -135 in/mile (2.13 m/km) IRI or a minimum 30 percent improvement.
 The profile trace shall be run in both wheel paths and averaged for acceptance. The
 Engineer may test for smoothness and bumps near the center line and at other spot locations where
 compliance is questionable. Additional grinding may be required.
 265
 
 The finished ground surface shall not include any bumps exceeding 0.3 inch in 25 feet (7.5
 mm in 8 m). Depressed pavement areas due to subsidence or other localized causes and areas
 where the maximum cut at mid panel or a fault restricts further grinding, will be excluded from
 testing when approved by the Engineer.
 508.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Grinding of pavement will be measured by the square yard (meter). The square yards
 (meters) measured will be the final textured surface area regardless of the number of passes
 required to achieve acceptable results. Minor areas of untextured pavement within the designated
 areas to be textured will be included in the measurement.
 508.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 Grinding will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard (meter). Payment shall
 be full compensation for all labor, equipment, material, and incidentals to complete this work,
 including hauling and disposal of grinding residue.
 508.9-SMOOTHNESS:
 Smoothness of the riding surface shall be determined by the Engineer using an inertial
 profiler. Smoothness incentives based on the International Roughness Index (IRI) shall be as
 follows:
 TABLE 508.9-ENGLISH
 Posted Speeds ≤ 45 mph
 Posted Speeds > 45 mph
 Final IRI
 Incentive
 Final IRI
 Incentive
 (inches/mile)
 ($ per 0.1 mile section)
 (inches/mile)
 ($ per 0.1 mile section)
 0.00 - 70.00
 $450.00
 0.00 - 50.00
 $450.00
 70.01 - 100.00
 -11*(IRI)+1220.00
 50.01 - 65.00
 -22*(IRI)+1550.00
 100.01- 135.00
 $0.00
 65.01 - 80.00
 $0.00
 TABLE 508.9-METRIC
 Posted Speeds ≤ 70 km/h
 Posted Speeds > 70 km/h
 Final IRI
 Incentive
 Final IRI
 Incentive
 (meters/km)
 ($ per 0.1 km section)
 (meters/km)
 ($ per 0.1 km section)
 0.0000 - 1.1048
 $450.00
 0.0000 - 0.7892
 $450.00
 1.1050 - 1.5784
 -950*(IRI) + 1499.56
 0.7893 - 1.0259
 -1899.54*(IRI) + 1949.12
 1.5785- 2.1308
 $0.00
 1.0261 - 1.2627
 $0.00
 508.10-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 508001-* Slurry Removal
 508002-* Erosion Control Items For Prevention Of Slurry Release
 508003-* Final Textured Surface Area Of Diamond Ground
 Pavement
 * Sequence number
 
 SECTION 509-BLANK
 266
 
 UNIT
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Square Yard
 (Meter)
 
 SECTION 510
 RE-SEALING CONCRETE PAVEMENT JOINTS
 510.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work includes all labor, equipment, and material required to remove existing sealers,
 clean the joint, and seal the joint with a sealant meeting the requirements of section 510.2. The
 location of the joints to be sealed shall be as shown in the plans or as directed by the Engineer.
 510.2-MATERIALS:
 The joint sealant shall be in accordance with either section 708.3 or 708.4.
 The joint back-up material shall be in accordance with section 708.4.2, shall meet the
 requirements of the Sealant Manufacturer, and shall be appropriate for outdoor applications.
 510.3-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 510.3.1-Joint Preparation: All spalls along the joint which are directed by the Engineer
 to be repaired, shall be repaired as specified in section 506 for partial depth repair. The spalls
 shall be repaired prior to resealing the joint. Existing joint sealer or sealant shall be removed
 from the joint groove as designated by the Engineer.
 Where re-sealing in an area of previously installed sealant, a fresh sawcut shall be made to
 provide a clean face for the new sealant to bond. The new sawcut shall provide a joint groove
 of adequate width and depth to provide a width to depth ratio (shape factor), including joint
 back-up material, of 1:1 for hot-poured sealant and 2:1 for silicone sealant. Any damage done
 to newly placed sealant by re-sawing operations shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the
 Engineer. The longitudinal joints shall be sawed prior to resealing the intersecting transverse
 joints.
 Immediately following the final sawing operation, both vertical faces of the joint shall be
 completely free of dirt and dust; leaving a clean dry, newly exposed concrete surface. Joints
 shall be cleaned by sandblasting each vertical face with the nozzle held at an angle to the joint
 face and within 1 or 2 inches (25 to 50 mm) of the pavement. Sandblasting shall be done to a
 depth at which the sealant and backer rod are to be installed.
 Just prior to installing the back-up material, the joints shall be blown out with compressed
 air at a pressure of at least 90 psi (620 kPa) to remove all dust, loose particles, and debris. Air
 compressors used for this purpose shall be equipped with traps capable of removing moisture
 and oil from the compressed air. A joint shall not be sealed until it is thoroughly clean and
 dry.
 After the final cleaning, the back-up material shall be inserted into the joint groove in
 accordance with the Manufacturer’s recommendations to provide the correct shape factor for
 the sealant being used.
 510.3.2-Joint Sealing: After insertion of the back-up material and prior to becoming
 contaminated, the joint groove shall be sealed in accordance with the Sealant Manufacturer’s
 recommendations. At the time of sealing, the joint groove faces shall be dry and dust free.
 The sealant shall be pumped into the joint groove in a continuous uniform operation to properly
 fill and seal the joint groove from the bottom upward in order to avoid trapping any air bubbles.
 Tooling of the sealant, in order to force the sealant against the joint faces and provide a slightly
 concave surface with a depth of approximately ¼ in. (6 mm) (at the center of the joint) below
 267
 
 the pavement surface, is required unless otherwise directed by the sealant manufacturer. When
 not tooled, the joint groove shall be sealed flush to within 1/8 to ¼ inch (3 to 6 mm) below the
 pavement surface. Traffic shall not be allowed on the sealed joint for the minimum time
 recommended by the Sealant Manufacturer after tooling or placement, unless otherwise
 approved by the Engineer.
 Sealant shall never be applied to frozen, dirty, wet, or damp concrete or during inclement
 weather conditions. Sealant shall not be placed in the joints unless the temperature of the
 pavement is 40° F (4° C) or higher unless approved by the Engineer.
 510.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of re-sealing concrete pavement joints to be paid for will be the number of
 linear foot (meters) complete in place and accepted.
 510.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 Re-sealing concrete pavement joints will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear
 foot (meter). Payment shall be full compensation for all labor, equipment, material, and incidentals
 required to remove all existing sealers or sealants, clean the joint groove, install the back-up
 material, and seal the joint with sealant.
 510.6-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 510001-* Re-Sealing Transverse Concrete Pavement Joints
 510002-* Re-Sealing Longitudinal Concrete Pavement Joints
 * Sequence number
 
 268
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 
 SECTION 511
 DOWEL BAR RETROFIT
 511.1-DESCRIPTION:
 Dowel bar retrofit consists of installing epoxy-coated, round steel dowels into existing
 concrete pavement across transverse joints and/or cracks. Slots are cut using diamond-tipped saw
 blades, the existing concrete is removed, the dowels are placed in the slots across the joints or
 cracks, and the slots are backfilled.
 511.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Sections:
 MATERIAL
 Bond Breaker
 Caulking Filler
 Dowel Bar Support Chairs
 Epoxy-Coated Dowel Bars
 Expansion Caps
 Foam Core Insert
 Non-Shrink Concrete Backfill Material
 
 SECTION OR SUBSECTION
 511.2.1 or 707.9
 511.2.1
 511.2.1
 709.15
 511.2.1
 511.2.1
 ASTM C 928 and 511.2.1
 
 511.2.1-Material Requirements:
 Bond Breaker: Acceptable bond-breaking compounds include white pigmented curing
 compound or other approved bond breaker materials. Apply bond breaker coating on all
 surfaces of the dowel bar, either at the manufacturing facility before shipment, or on-site. Do
 not apply bond breaker while the dowel bars are in place within the pavement section.
 Dowel Bar End Caps (Expansion Caps): Use tight-fitting, commercial quality end caps
 made of a non-metallic, non-organic material that allow for ¼ inch (6 mm) of movement at
 each end of the dowel bar.
 Dowel Bar Support Chairs: Use chair devices for supporting the dowel bars that conform
 to the epoxy-coated steel requirements of ASTM A884/A884M, or are fabricated from
 commercial quality, nonmetallic, non-organic material. Dowel bar chairs are used to firmly
 hold the dowels centered in the slots during backfill operations.
 Design the dowel bar chairs to hold the bar a minimum of ½ inch (13 mm) above the bottom
 of the slot while the backfill material is placed and consolidated.
 Foam Core Insert: Use a foam core insert to re-establish the joint or crack. The insert
 shall consist of rigid styrofoam material or closed cell foam, faced with poster board or plastic
 material. The foam core insert (joint/crack re-former) allows each side of the slot to expand
 and contract. Ensure that the insert extends up to the bottom of the existing joint sealant
 reservoir.
 
 269
 
 Caulking Filler: Acceptable silicone caulking filler used for sealing the existing
 transverse joint or crack at the bottom and sides of the slot includes any commercial silicone
 caulk designed as a concrete sealant that is compatible with the patch material being used.
 Caulking filler is used to prevent backfill material from flowing into the joint or crack.
 Non-Shrink Concrete Backfill Material – Use concrete backfill material tested as Dry,
 Rapid-Hardening Cementitious Materials for Concrete Repairs in accordance with ASTM C
 928. Only use material that: (1) provides a compressive strength of 3000 psi (21 MPa) prior to
 the time anticipated for opening to traffic; (2) has a calculated minimum durability factor of
 90 percent at the end of 300 freeze-thaw cycles per ASTM C 666; and (3) has a total chloride
 ion content less than 0.75 lb/yd3 (450 g/m3). Provide certified material test results, for this
 material, from an approved independent testing laboratory to the Engineer at least 30 calendar
 days prior to any placement operations. A manufacturer’s representative shall be on-site at the
 beginning of the backfill operation.
 511.2.2-Material Submittal Requirements: Submit samples of the following materials
 to the Engineer for approval prior to the installation of the following items:
 Dowel Bar End Caps
 Dowel Bar Support Chairs
 Foam Core Insert
 Caulking Filler
 Submit the material samples at least 30 calendar days prior to use or at the pre-construction
 conference, whichever occurs first.
 511.3-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 Install dowel bars in the existing portland cement concrete pavement at locations as shown
 in the plans. When retrofitting existing doweled joints, the Contractor shall be responsible for
 locating any existing dowel bars. The location of the retrofit dowel slots shall be adjusted so that
 the retrofit slots are mid-way between pairs of existing dowels. The Contractor shall use nondestructive testing methods, such as the MIT Scan-2 technique, as approved by the Engineer, to
 confirm the locations of any existing dowels.
 511.3.1-Saw Cutting: Make two saw cuts in the pavement to outline the longitudinal sides
 of each dowel bar slot. These saw cuts shall be parallel to each other and shall create a slot
 which is 2 ½ ± 1/8 inches (63 ± 3 mm) wide. Saw to a depth and length that allows the center
 of the dowel to be placed at mid-depth in the pavement slab. The slots shall be sawed so that
 half the length of each dowel bar is located on either side of the transverse joint and/or crack.
 Saw slots parallel to each other and to the centerline of the roadway with a maximum tolerance
 of ¼ inch (6 mm) per 12 inches (300 mm) of dowel bar length. Use saws equipped with gang
 mounted diamond blades capable of cutting a minimum of three or four slots simultaneously
 in each wheel path. Skewed joints or cracks may require slots longer than the length specified
 in the plans.
 Pick up and remove water and residue from the pavement surface immediately by means
 of a vacuum attachment on the sawing machine. This material shall become property of the
 Contractor and shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal
 regulations.
 270
 
 For smaller projects, a slot sawing machine might not be feasible. The Engineer may
 approve the use of walk-behind saws for slot cutting when the project contains less than 100
 retrofit bars. The Contractor shall take additional steps to ensure proper slot alignment and
 spacing when using walk-behind saws for creating the slots.
 511.3.2-Concrete Removal: Use maximum weight 30 lb (14 kg) jackhammers to remove
 the concrete remaining between the saw cuts. If the concrete removal operations cause damage
 to the pavement that is to remain, discontinue concrete removal operations and only resume
 after taking corrective measures. Repair or replace pavement damaged during concrete
 removal operations at no additional expense to the owner and to the satisfaction of the
 Engineer.
 During concrete removal operations, use appropriate equipment as necessary to produce a
 flat, level surface within the slot, so the backfill flows and consolidates under the dowel bars.
 Dispose of any debris generated during concrete removal operations outside the right-of-way
 in accordance with Section 207.
 Installation of retrofit dowels, with dowel bars and placement of backfill must be
 completed prior to reopening the lane to public traffic.
 511.3.3-Slot Cleaning and Preparation: Sandblast all exposed surfaces in the dowel bar
 slot to remove saw slurry and debris such that clean aggregate is exposed. After sandblasting,
 clean the slot by blowing with moisture-free, oil-free compressed air having a minimum
 pressure of 150 psi (1 MPa) to remove any dust, residue, or debris left in the slot.
 511.3.4-Sealing Joints and Cracks in Slot: Seal the existing transverse contraction joint
 and/or all cracks at the bottom and the sides of the dowel bar slot with an approved caulking
 filler to prevent any of the backfill material from entering these areas. Prior to sealing, ensure
 that surfaces receiving the caulking filler are clean and free of moisture. Do not extend the
 caulking filler beyond 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) of each side of the existing joint or crack.
 511.3.5-Placing Dowel assembly in slot: Use good construction practices to prevent
 contamination of the cleaned slot before or while placing dowel assemblies to limit the
 potential of bonding loss with the backfill material.
 Refer to Figure 511.3.5 as a guide for dowel bar placement in the slot.
 Dowel bar end caps shall be installed on the end of each dowel bar, and an approved bond
 breaker material shall be applied to each dowel bar prior to placement of the bar in the slot.
 Place the dowel bars in the slots to within 5% tolerance of the depth shown on the plans,
 and parallel to the traffic lane centerline and top of roadway surface within a tolerance of ¼
 inch (6 mm) per 12 inches (300 mm) of dowel bar length. Center dowels at the transverse joint
 or crack, such that approximately one-half of the dowel extends into each adjacent panel. Cease
 and adjust operations if the chairs do not hold dowel bars securely in place during placement
 of the backfill material.
 Place a foam core insert at the middle of the dowel bar and 2 inches (50 mm) below the
 surface of pavement. Place the insert so it covers the existing transverse joint or crack and is
 capable of remaining in a vertical position, tight to all edges during backfill placement
 operations. Re-establish the joint or crack above the foam core insert within 4 hours of backfill
 placement by means of sawing when the backfill material has hardened sufficiently.
 271
 
 FIGURE 511.3.5
 
 511.3.6-Mixing and Placing Backfill Material: Mix backfill material in accordance with
 the manufacturer’s instructions and the specifications. Refer to manufacturer’s information on
 handling, mixing, and placing backfill material.
 Take extreme care regarding backfill material mix proportions, water cement ratio, and the
 condition of the mixing equipment. Improper mix proportioning and/or inefficient mixing
 apparatus can result in premature deterioration of the backfill material. When using auger type
 mixing equipment, take steps to keep the auger flights free from material buildup, causing
 inefficient mixing operations.
 Fill each dowel bar slot with backfill material after placement of the caulking filler, the
 dowel bar, expansion caps, support chairs, and the foam core insert. Ensure that the foam core
 inserts remain upright and over the existing joint or crack during the backfill process. Vibrate
 the backfill material with a small hand held vibrator capable of thoroughly consolidating the
 backfill material into the slot around the dowel bars and support chairs.
 Place backfill while fresh, and before the backfill has taken an initial set. Do not re-temper
 the backfill with water. Discard unacceptable backfill material outside the right-of-way in
 accordance with Section 207.
 Overfill, by approximately 1/8 inch (3 mm), the slot and finish the surface of the filled slot
 level with the existing concrete. It is acceptable to leave the slot slightly overfilled if diamond
 grinding is to be employed. Cure backfill material in accordance with the backfill
 manufacturer’s recommendations. Apply curing compound within 60 seconds after placing
 the backfill material.
 511.3.6.1-Testing: Fabricate a minimum of six compressive strength specimens in
 accordance with AASHTO T 23 for each day of backfill placement. The compressive
 strength of an average of three of these specimens shall represent the compressive strength
 of all backfill material placed after the batch from which the previous compressive strength
 specimens were fabricated through the batch from which these specimens were fabricated.
 511.3.7-Diamond Grinding: Diamond grinding shall conform to the requirements of
 Section 508 if the pavement section is to be diamond ground following the dowel retrofit
 operations. Diamond grind dowel bar retrofitted joints after the backfill material has cured
 properly in the dowel bar slots and has achieved a compressive strength of at least 3000 psi
 (21 Mpa). Diamond grinding must be completed within 14 calendar days of the installation of
 272
 
 the project’s final dowel bar. Diamond grind the entire width of the pavement lane, from
 longitudinal joint to longitudinal joint.
 511.3.8-Sealing Joints and Cracks: If specified, widen the transverse joints or cracks by
 diamond saw cutting after completion of the retrofit dowel installation if diamond grinding is
 not employed, or after the grinding has been completed. This work shall be done and paid for
 in accordance with Section 510 of the Specifications.
 511.4-OPENING TO TRAFFIC:
 Unless otherwise permitted in writing by the Engineer, do not permit traffic on dowel
 retrofitted pavement until the backfill attains a compressive strength of 3000 psi (21 MPa) or
 greater as verified by specimens fabricated and tested in accordance with Section 511.3.6.1.
 511.5-DOWEL BAR ALIGNMENT ASSURANCE:
 The Contractor shall use one of the two methods below to assure dowel bar alignment.
 511.5.1-Coring: The Contractor may use diamond coring to confirm dowel placement and
 to randomly check dowel positioning. Check each day’s retrofitting within two calendar days
 by performing one test for every 600 dowels placed. One test consists of drilling two cores,
 one on each end of a dowel bar to expose both ends and allow measurement for proper
 alignment. Identify the concrete cores with a location description immediately after coring and
 submit to the Engineer for inspection. Core the holes by a method that will not shatter or
 damage the concrete adjacent to the holes. Use a minimum diameter of 4 inch (100 mm) cores.
 Clean and fill the core holes in the concrete pavement using the same requirements for the
 backfill materials as specified earlier in this document. Finish the core hole backfill material
 after placement to match the adjacent pavement surface. The backfill shall not evidence any
 depressions or surplus material above the level surface of the existing pavement.
 If tests indicate dowel bars are aligned incorrectly or backfill material is improperly placed,
 the Engineer shall select the number and location of any additional coring tests to determine
 the severity.
 Suspend dowel retrofitting operations if: (1) dowels are installed improperly and (2) dowel
 alignment does not meet the specified tolerances. Do not allow dowel retrofitting operations
 to resume until the Contractor demonstrates to the Engineer that the problem has been
 corrected. Replace any individual dowel bar retrofit not functioning or damaged.
 511.5.2-Non-Destructive Testing: The Contractor may use non-destructive testing
 methods, such as the MIT Scan-2 technique, approved by the Engineer, to confirm dowel
 placement and alignment.
 Check each day’s retrofitting operation the next calendar day by testing 10% of the joints
 completed on the first day of operation and 5% of the joints completed each day thereafter.
 Suspend dowel bar retrofitting operations if dowels are installed improperly and/or dowel
 alignment does not meet the specified tolerances. Do not allow dowel retrofitting operations
 to resume until the Contractor demonstrates to the Engineer that the problem has been
 corrected. Replace any individual dowel bar retrofit not functioning or damaged.
 
 273
 
 511.6-TEST SECTION:
 In the presence of the Engineer, construct a test section that consists of slot sawing,
 concrete removal, and placement of dowel bars and backfill material at a location directed by the
 Engineer prior to the start of major operations. A test section shall be one lane wide and of a length
 which contains three joints and/or cracks to be retrofitted. This test section may consist of a section
 of existing concrete which is not within the limits of the project.
 Take six full depth cores (one at each end of two dowel bars and one at the midpoint of
 two additional dowels), at least 4 inches (200 mm) in diameter as directed by the Engineer at least
 twenty-four hours after the completion of the retrofit test section. These cores shall be used to
 determine the completeness of the slot removal, dowel bar installation, and backfill placement
 operations. Begin production operations upon approval from the Engineer.
 If the test section does not conform to the plans and specifications, construct additional test
 sections at the direction of the Engineer to demonstrate ability to install the retrofit dowels in a
 fashion that meets the requirements of the plans and specifications.
 If a Contractor can provide evidence that they have sufficient experience with this type of
 work, based on experience with previous projects, then this test section requirement may be waived
 by the Engineer.
 511.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Dowel bar retrofit is measured by each dowel bar installed and accepted.
 511.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The contract unit price paid for each dowel bar includes full compensation for all material
 removal and for furnishing and placing all the materials and doing the work herein prescribed in
 an acceptable manner including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to
 complete the dowel bar retrofit. This also includes the cost of each dowel bar assembly installed
 in the construction of the dowel retrofit test section and the cost of dowel bar placement alignment
 assurance.
 511.9-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 511001-* Installation Of Dowel Bar
 511002-* Installation Of Dowel Bar At Existing Doweled Joint
 * Sequence number
 
 274
 
 UNIT
 Each
 Each
 
 SECTION 512
 CONCRETE SLAB STABILIZATION
 512.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This item of work shall consist of drilling holes in Portland cement concrete pavement as
 directed, pumping a portland cement/fly ash grout through the holes to fill voids under the
 pavement, and filling the drilled holes with mortar.
 512.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Sections:
 MATERIAL
 Accelerating Admixtures
 Curing Compound
 Fine Aggregate
 Fly Ash
 Portland Cement
 Water-Reducing Admixtures
 
 SECTION OR SUBSECTION
 707.13, 707.14
 707.9
 702.1
 707.4.1
 701.1, 701.3
 707.3
 
 512.3-PROPORTIONING:
 512.3.1-Mix Design Requirements: The subsealing grout mix shall be as follows:
 94 pounds (42.6 kg) of portland cement (minimum)
 210 pounds (95.3 kg) of fly ash
 Water-reducing admixture dosed at the Manufacturer’s recommended dosage rate
 for the cementitious material content listed above
 Water to achieve required fluidity
 If ambient temperatures are below 55 °F (13 °C), an accelerating admixture shall be used.
 Prior to the start of construction, the Contractor shall design and submit to the Engineer for
 approval the proportions of materials, including admixtures, to be used which will result in a
 workable subsealing grout mixture having the desired properties. Submittals shall include tests
 of the grout by an approved laboratory showing 1-day, 3-day, and 7-day compressive strengths
 and flow cone efflux time. An approved laboratory is defined as a laboratory which is regularly
 inspected by the Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory. The 7-day strength shall not be
 less than 400 psi (2.8 Mpa) as measured by ASTM C 109. The subsealing grout efflux time
 shall be measured by ASTM C 939 (Flow Cone Method) and shall be between 16 and 25
 seconds.
 512.4-EQUIPMENT:
 The grout plant shall consist of a positive displacement cement injection pump and mixing
 equipment that is capable of providing a thoroughly mixed and homogenous mixture.
 Rock drills or other devices capable of drilling the grout injection holes through the
 pavement and base material will be permitted. The rock drill shall not be heavier than 60 pounds
 (27 kg), and the downfeed pressure whether by hand or mechanical means shall not damage the
 bottom portion of the slab.
 275
 
 The Contractor shall supply equipment capable of detecting the lift of the pavement near
 the hole being grouted. These devices shall make lift measurements from a stable reference point
 and shall be of a design satisfactory to the Engineer.
 The Contractor shall also furnish all necessary hoses, valves, valve manifolds, positive cutoff, bypass provisions, pressure gauges with gauge protectors, expanding packers or hose for
 positive seal, and any other equipment necessary to control pressure and volume during grout
 injection.
 512.5-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 512.5.1-Drilling Holes: The hole pattern for joints or transverse cracks shall require one
 hole in the approach panel or slab 1.5 feet (0.5 m) from the fissure and 6 feet (2 m) from the
 centerline, and two holes in the slab on the panel on the opposite side of the fissure. This side
 of the fissure shall be noted as the leave panel. Of these two leave panel holes, one hole shall
 be 3 feet (1 m) from the fissure and 3 feet (1 m) from the pavement edge, and the other hole
 shall be 3 feet (1 m) from the fissure and 3 feet (1 m) from the centerline.
 When full depth repairs were made under previous contracts, the hole pattern for grouting
 shall be two approach panel holes and two leave panel holes, 1.5 feet (0.5 m) from the full
 depth repair and 3 feet (1 m) from the pavement edge and centerline, respectively. Full depth
 repairs made under this contract shall not be grouted.
 Grout holes shall not be larger than 2.5 inches (63 mm) in diameter. Holes shall be drilled
 to a depth sufficient to penetrate through any stabilized base, but they shall not penetrate into
 a granular subbase more than 1 to 2 inches (25 to 50 mm). Holes may be washed or blown out,
 if necessary, to obtain thorough distribution of the injected grout.
 512.5.2-Subsealing: The Contractor shall grout one hole at a time using an expanding
 rubber packer or hose on the nozzle connected to the discharge of the grout pump. When grout
 appears at any longitudinal or transverse crack or adjacent holes, or when the lift monitoring
 device indicates slab movement of 3/16 inch (5 mm), grouting shall be stopped. Immediately,
 after the nozzle is removed, the grout hole shall be temporarily sealed with a round tapered
 plug constructed from wood or another suitable material as approved by the Engineer. The
 plug shall remain in place until the grout in the hole is not disturbed by adjacent grouting.
 Pavement which has been raised in excess of ¼ inch (6 mm) shall be deemed unacceptable.
 No payment for any subsealing material at the subject location shall be made when this
 tolerance is exceeded.
 Grout holes shall be filled full-depth and flush with the surface of the pavement with a stiff
 mortar consisting of one part portland cement to three parts of fine aggregate. The surface shall
 be troweled and painted with curing compound.
 Grout subsealing shall not be performed when ambient temperatures are below 40 °F (4
 C). In addition, subsealing operations shall not be performed if the subgrade or base course
 material is frozen.
 Mixed grout held in the mixer or injection pump for more than one hour after mixing shall
 not be used.
 In the event the Engineer determines that continued grout injection at any specific location
 is no longer practical, he may direct the Contractor to cease grout injection at that location.
 
 276
 
 512.5.3-Testing: The Contractor shall determine the grout efflux time in accordance with
 ASTM C 939. The Contractor shall furnish the flow cone for this test. The Contractor shall
 perform a minimum of three tests per day, in the presence of the Engineer. More tests shall be
 performed if deemed necessary by the Engineer. The subsealing grout efflux time shall be
 between 16 and 25 seconds. Adjustments to the grout mixture will be made during the
 subsealing operation to meet flow requirements.
 512.6-OPENING TO TRAFFIC:
 No traffic will be permitted on the grouted slabs for at least 3 hours after grouting, unless
 otherwise approved by the Engineer.
 512.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work performed for concrete slab stabilization shall be measured by the
 number of holes drilled and filled with grout. This work shall include drilling and filling holes
 with grout; full compensation for furnishing all labor, materials, tools, equipment and incidentals;
 and, for doing all work involved in grout subsealing of existing concrete pavement, in place,
 complete and accepted.
 The quantity of grout for subsealing of concrete slabs shall be measured by the number of
 pounds (kg) of portland cement used in the work, complete in-place and accepted.
 512.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit bid price
 for all of the items listed below. The price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing
 and placing all the materials and doing the work herein prescribed in an acceptable manner
 including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 512.9-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 512001-* Holes Drilled For Concrete Slab Stabilization
 512002-* Grout Used For Subsealing Of Slabs
 * Sequence number
 
 277
 
 UNIT
 Each
 Tons (Megagram)
 
 SECTION 513
 CONCRETE PAVEMENT CROSS STITCHING
 513.1-DESCRIPTION:
 Concrete pavement cross stitching consists of drilling holes and anchoring deformed
 reinforcing bars diagonally across longitudinal cracks.
 513.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections of Division 700:
 MATERIAL
 Deformed Steel Reinforcing Bars
 
 SUBSECTION
 709.1
 
 513.2.1-Material Requirements:
 Deformed Steel Reinforcing Bars shall be Grade 60.
 Anchoring Material and Dispensing Equipment - Use a pourable, two component, 100%
 solids structural epoxy which is approved by the Engineer. It shall be dispensed either from:
 i.
 Side-by-side cartridges by manual or pneumatically powered injection guns.
 ii.
 Through a static nozzle that homogeneously mixes the material without any hand
 mixing first.
 513.3-EQUIPMENT AND TOOLS:
 513.3.1-Drills: Use a hydraulic drill with tungsten carbide bits. Control the forward and
 reverse travel of the drills by mechanically applied pressure. Mount the drill on a suitable
 piece of equipment such that it is quickly transported and positioned. Rest and reference the
 drill rig frame on and to the pavement surface such that the drilled holes are cylindrical and
 repeatable in terms of position and alignment on the surface being drilled. Hand-held drills
 are not permitted.
 513.4-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 513.4.1-Drilling Holes: Drill the end holes in a slab 18 – 20 inches (450 - 500 mm) from
 the transverse joints. Drill interior slab holes at a maximum of 12 inch (300 mm) spacing.
 Drill such that the:
 i.
 Holes are oriented at a 30° angle to the pavement surface.
 ii.
 Hole centerlines are perpendicular to the crack at each location being drilled.
 iii. Adjacent holes are drilled in opposite directions across the crack.
 iv.
 Longitudinal centers of drilled holes are at the crack.
 v.
 Hole diameters are in accordance with the anchoring material Manufacturer’s
 written recommendations. Those recommendations shall be submitted to the
 Engineer prior to the start of construction.
 vi.
 Hole bottoms are no more than 1 inch (25 mm) from the slab bottom.
 Repair cracks that result from drilling with a full depth repair as approved by the Engineer.
 
 278
 
 513.4.2-Cleaning Holes: Clean the drilled holes in accordance with the anchoring material
 Manufacturer’s written recommendations. Those recommendations shall be submitted to the
 Engineer prior to the start of construction. As a minimum, clean holes with oil-free and
 moisture-free compressed air. The Engineer will check the compressed air stream purity with
 a clean white cloth. The compressor must deliver air at a minimum pressure of 120 ft3 (3.4
 m3) per minute and develop a minimum nozzle pressure of 90 psi (0.62 Mpa). Insert the nozzle
 the full depth of the hole, to the back of the hole, to force out all dust and debris. Also, clean
 any chipped areas at the surface resulting from drilling holes at an angle. Repair chipped area
 with the anchoring material.
 513.4.3-Deformed Bar Installation: Unless otherwise specified by the Engineer, use 0.75
 inch (19 mm) diameter bars of sufficient length such that, when anchored, the top of the bar is
 1.75 – 2 inches (45 – 50 mm) below the pavement surface and the center of the bar is at the
 crack.
 When using new cartridges of anchoring material, ensure the initial material exiting the
 nozzle appears uniformly mixed. If it is not uniformly mixed, waste the material until
 uniformly mixed material extrudes.
 Place the anchoring material in the back of the hole using a nozzle or wand of sufficient
 length. Insert the bar such that the anchoring material is evenly distributed around the bar and
 slightly extrudes out the hole as the bar is inserted. Trowel the anchoring material smooth to
 the pavement surface, filling any chipped areas.
 TABLE 513.4
 Slab thickness (T), in. (mm)
 
 8
 (200)
 
 9
 (225)
 
 10
 (250)
 
 11
 (275)
 
 12
 (300)
 
 Distance (X) from crack to centerline of
 hole, in. (mm)
 
 6.9
 (175)
 
 7.8
 (198)
 
 8.7
 (220)
 
 9.5
 (241)
 
 10.4
 (264)
 
 Length of bar, in. (mm)
 
 9
 (230)
 
 11
 (280)
 
 13
 (330)
 
 15
 (380)
 
 17
 (430)
 
 279
 
 Typical Cross Stitching Repair Details
 
 513.5-OPENING TO TRAFFIC:
 No traffic will be permitted on the cross-stitched pavement until the anchoring material can
 be expected, as shown by test data supplied by the anchoring material Manufacturer from an
 Independent Approved Laboratory, to have a compressive strength of at least 2,000 psi (14 Mpa),
 unless otherwise approved by the Engineer.
 280
 
 513.6-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Concrete pavement cross stitching is measured by each deformed bar installed and
 accepted.
 513.7-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The contract unit price paid for each deformed bar includes full compensation for
 furnishing and placing all the materials and the cost of all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and
 incidentals necessary to complete the work in an acceptable manner. No payment will be made
 for items required by the Engineer to repair damage to the adjacent pavement incurred during
 drilling.
 513.8-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 513001-*
 
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Installation Of Deformed Bar
 
 Sequence number
 
 281
 
 UNIT
 Each
 
 SECTION 514
 ROLLER COMPACTED CONCRETE
 514.1-DESCRIPTION:
 Roller Compacted Concrete (RCC) consists of aggregate, Portland cement and possibly
 other supplementary cementitious materials (fly ash, slag), and water. RCC is proportioned,
 mixed, placed, compacted, and cured in accordance with these specifications. Ensure that the
 RCC conforms to the lines, grades, thickness, and typical cross section shown in the plans or
 otherwise established by the WVDOH. When used as base course, it shall be constructed as
 shown in the plans.
 514.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall conform to the requirements of the following Subsection of Division 700:
 MATERIAL
 Coarse Aggregate
 Curing Materials
 Fine Aggregate Note 1
 Portland Cement
 Pozzolanic Additives
 Water
 Water Reducing and Retarding Admixtures
 
 SUBSECTION
 703.1-4
 707.6-707.10
 702.1
 701.1, 701.3
 707.4
 715.7
 707.2
 
 Note 1 The use of limestone as fine aggregate will not be permitted
 
 Shipping and storage of Cement and Pozzolanic Additives: Cement and pozzolanic
 additives shall be shipped and stored as outlined in Section 501.2.
 514.2.1-Material Requirements:
 Aggregates: Use no aggregate where the plasticity index of the aggregate exceeds 5.
 Aggregates may be a blend of fine and coarse aggregates. Use well-graded aggregate without
 gradation gaps and conforming to the following gradation:
 Sieve Size
 1 inch
 ¾ inch
 ½ inch
 3/8 inch
 #4
 #16
 #100
 #200
 
 % Passing by Weight
 100
 95-100
 70-90
 60-85
 40-60
 20-40
 3-15
 0-8
 
 Prior to the start of each day’s production, the Contractor shall perform a gradation test on
 the material to be used that day in order to verify that the aggregate gradation meets the above
 requirements. If the results of this test show that the aggregate gradation does not meet the
 282
 
 above requirements, the Contractor shall immediately notify the Engineer and shall not begin
 production that day unless approved to do so by the Engineer. The Contractor shall then take
 immediate action to correct any gradation not meeting the above requirements, regardless of
 whether or not production is allowed. All gradation test results shall be submitted to the
 Engineer within 72 (seventy-two) hours.
 514.3-PROPORTIONING:
 514.3.1-RCC Mix Design Requirements: At least 45 days prior to the start of
 construction, the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer for approval the proportion of materials
 to be used which will result in a workable RCC mix. No more than 25%, by mass, of the
 cementitious material content of the RCC mix shall be pozzolanic materials. The Engineer will
 review these proportions within 14 (fourteen) Calendar Days.
 Laboratory density tests, in accordance with AASHTO T180 (Method D), shall be performed
 during development of the mix design in order to determine the maximum laboratory density and
 optimum moisture content for the RCC mix. The material proportions used to achieve the
 maximum laboratory density and the optimum moisture content shall be the material proportions
 used in the approved mix design and during construction. Compressive strength tests, as outlined
 in Section 514.3.2 shall be conducted on at least two separate batches of RCC developed from
 these material proportions. The mix design results shall be reported on the attachments for MP
 711.03.23. The maximum laboratory density and optimum moisture content shall be reported and
 included on the mix design submittal also.
 The mix design shall be accompanied by a document listing the source of materials and
 certified test data from a Division approved laboratory demonstrating the adequacy of the mix
 design. The Contractor shall notify the Engineer of any change in the source of materials or the
 addition of admixtures during the progress of work, since such change may necessitate a new mix
 design.
 514.3.2-Design Compressive Strength: A mix design shall be used which demonstrates
 a minimum compressive strength of 4500 psi within 28 days. Compressive strength specimens
 shall be prepared in accordance with ASTM C1435 and tested in accordance with AASHTO
 T22. At least three sets of three cylinders shall be produced, with one set being tested at 3
 days, one set being tested at 7 days, and the other at 28 days. The compressive strength at a
 particular age shall be determined as the average of the three specimens. If one individual
 result is much lower or much higher than the other two due to defects in the specimen as
 outlined in section 601.4.4, that value shall be discarded.
 514.3.3-Design Moisture Content: A test for moisture content, in accordance with ASTM
 C566, shall be performed on each of the RCC batches produced in Section 514.3.1, from which
 compressive strength specimens were fabricated. The average moisture content shall be
 considered the target evaporable moisture content of the RCC mix, and shall be used for quality
 control purposes as outlined in Section 514.4.2.1.
 514.3.4-Test Section: If the mix design appears satisfactory to the Engineer, the Contractor
 shall prepare and test a trial batch mixture and representative test section at least 100 ft. (30 m) in
 length and 10 ft (3 m) in width to verify that the design criteria for strength and density are met.
 The criteria for strength and lift thickness shall be verified by the Contractor by taking three cores
 283
 
 at random locations and testing them in accordance with AASHTO T24. The minimum required
 compressive strength for each of these cores is 3,500 psi (24 Mpa), measured at an age no later
 than 28 days, or within 10 percent of either the 3 or 7-day mix design strength, as determined
 in Section 514.3.2. Density testing, as outlined in Section 514.4.2.3 shall be performed on this
 Test Section also. The minimum required density for this testing is 98 percent of the maximum
 laboratory density.
 Perform batch mixture preparation and testing in the presence of representatives of the
 Engineer. Construction, using RCC, shall not begin until an approved mix design has been
 obtained.
 The Test Section shall be located in a location approved by the Engineer. If permitted by the
 Engineer, it is acceptable to place and leave the Test Section in place as part of the completed
 pavement if it meets all of the above required testing and acceptance criteria. If the Test Section
 is placed in an area which is to be paved with RCC, and it does not meet all of the above
 acceptance criteria, it shall be removed at the Contractor’s expense.
 514.4-TESTING:
 514.4.1-Test Methods:
 Standard Practice for Molding Roller-Compacted Concrete
 in Cylinder Molds Using a Vibrating Hammer
 Compressive Strength of Cylindrical Concrete Specimens
 Making and Curing of Concrete Specimens
 Obtaining and Testing Drilled Core Specimens
 Measuring Length of Drilled Concrete Cores
 Standard Test Method for Total Evaporable Moisture
 Content of Aggregate by Drying
 Moisture-Density Relations of Soils using a 4.54 kg (10 lb.)
 Rammer and a 457 mm (18 inches) Drop
 
 ASTM C1435
 AASHTO T22
 AASHTO T23
 AASHTO T24
 AASHTO T148
 ASTM C566
 AASHTO T180
 
 514.4.2-Contractor’s Quality Control:
 514.4.2.1-RCC Moisture Content: The Contractor shall perform moisture content
 tests in accordance with ASTM C566 on the initial batch of RCC produced each day and
 then once again if the ambient temperature reaches 85 °F (30 °C) or greater, as recorded
 in the vicinity of the concrete production facility.
 514.4.2.2-Testing for Opening Pavement to Traffic: A minimum of three sets of
 compressive strength specimens shall be made for each day’s paving operation. These
 compressive strength specimens shall be fabricated in accordance with ASTM C1435, and
 under the direct observation of the Engineer. A set of specimens consists of three cylinders.
 Field cure the specimens in accordance with AASHTO T23. Test one cylinder from each
 set of these cylinders for compressive strength in accordance with AASHTO T22 at each
 of the following ages under the direct observation of the Engineer: 3 days, 5 days, and 7
 days. The compressive strength of each set of cylinders shall be the average of the three
 specimens except that if one specimen shows evidence of improper sampling, molding, or
 testing, it shall be discarded and the remaining two strengths averaged. Should more than
 one specimen representing a given test show definite defects due to improper sampling,
 molding, or testing, the entire test shall be discarded.
 284
 
 The Contractor’s personnel who fabricate the compressive strength specimens shall
 provide evidence, prior to the start of construction and to the satisfaction of the Engineer,
 that they are proficient in the specified test methods.
 RCC pavement at an age of 3, 5, or 7 days may be put into service if the average
 compressive strength test result of the set of cylinders at the corresponding age is at least
 3,000 psi (21 Mpa).
 The results of the 3 and 7 day quality control compressive strength tests shall also be
 compared to the compressive strength results obtained in Section 514.3.2. If the
 compressive strength of these quality control specimens is less than 90% of the
 compressive strength results obtained in Section 514.3.2, the Contractor shall investigate
 the potential causes of the low strengths and report to the Engineer within 24 hours. If the
 compressive strength of these quality control specimens is less than 80% of the
 compressive strength results obtained in Section 514.3.2, and the compressive strength is
 also less than 3,500 psi immediately stop production and notify the Engineer. Do not
 resume production until the cause of the discrepancy has been determined to the
 satisfaction of the Engineer.
 If the average strength of any of these sets of quality control cylinders, representing a
 single day’s production, is equal to or greater than 4,000 psi (28 Mpa), then the Contractor
 is not required to test any of the remaining quality control cylinders representing that day’s
 production.
 514.4.2.3-Density Testing: Field density tests for quality control shall be performed
 by the contractor as soon as possible, but no later than 30 minutes after the completion of
 the rolling. The in-place density and moisture content shall be determined using a properly
 maintained nuclear moisture-density gauge in accordance with the applicable provisions of
 MP 717.04.21. All testing shall be performed in direct transmission mode. Only wet
 density is used for evaluation.
 The testing shall be performed at a frequency not to exceed one test for every 1,000 yd2
 placed. The required minimum density is 98 percent of the maximum laboratory density
 obtained according to AASHTO T 180 (Method D), as determined in Section 514.3.1. The
 gauge will be calibrated for moisture content at the beginning of the work and at any time
 during the work. Any lot of RCC which was properly placed and compacted, but not
 meeting the density requirements based on the initial testing, can be further evaluated by
 obtaining five additional randomly located density tests within the lot in question. If the
 average of these five additional tests meets the required minimum density, the lot shall be
 considered acceptable.
 If the lot has been determined to not meet the specified minimum density requirements,
 it may be cored and tested by the Division in addition to any coring performed for
 acceptance as per Section 514.4.3.1. If the tested area achieves 3,500 psi (24 Mpa), it will
 be paid at the full unit price. If the tested area indicates strength less than 3500 psi but
 greater than 3150 psi, payment will be made as set forth in Table 514.4.2.3.
 TABLE 514.4.2.3
 Compressive Strength
 Price Reduction
 (psi)
 (percent of unit bid price)
 3300-3499
 5
 3150-3299
 15
 285
 
 If the cores indicate strengths less than 3150 psi at 28 days or longer, the Engineer will
 evaluate the results and may reject the affected area and require removal and replacement
 or elect to pay at a reduced rate.
 514.4.3-Acceptance Testing:
 514.4.3.1-Compressive Strength Tests for Acceptance: The compressive strength
 for acceptance of RCC will be determined by testing cores. The RCC shall be at least 28
 days old before the cores are obtained. One 4-inch (100 mm) diameter core shall be
 obtained, by the Division, for every 1,500 yd2 (1,250 m2) or fraction thereof of RCC placed
 and represent that area for acceptance purposes. These cores shall be tested by the Division
 for compressive strength. The minimum required compressive strength of these cores is
 3,500 psi (24 Mpa).
 The Contractor shall repair the core holes using concrete meeting the requirements of
 Section 501 and shall rod and neatly strike off the repair material.
 Areas of RCC represented by any cores not meeting the minimum compressive strength
 requirements shall be handled in accordance with Section 105.12. Such areas that are
 allowed to remain in place shall be paid for at a reduced unit bid price as outlined in Section
 601.15.2, with the Design Strength being 3,500 psi (24 Mpa).
 Additionally, as outlined in Section 514.4.2.3, cores may also need to be obtained to
 determine the compressive strength of any areas which are found to not meet the specified
 density requirements. It should be noted that lot sizes for density testing (1,000 yd2) and
 compressive strength acceptance testing (1,500 yd2) are different, and will overlap
 throughout the project. However, only one price adjustment shall be applied to any area
 not meeting the specification requirements. If any lot, or portion of a lot, is determined to
 have compressive strengths below 3,500 psi (24 Mpa) as outlined in Section 514.4.2.3 and
 is also found to be deficient in strength as outlined in Section 514.4.3.1, the price
 adjustment to be applied to that lot, or portion of that lot, shall be the greater of either the
 price adjustments calculated accordingly.
 514.4.3.2-Thickness Tests for Acceptance: The cores obtained in Section 514.4.3.1
 shall be measured for thickness, in accordance with AASHTO T148, prior to being tested
 for compressive strength.
 If the thickness of any core is found to be less than the specified design thickness, then
 an evaluation of the area represented by that core shall be performed by the Engineer in
 accordance with Section 105.12. If the Engineer allows that area of deficient thickness to
 remain in place, then that area shall be paid for at a reduced unit bid price as outlined in
 Table 514.4.3.2.
 
 286
 
 TABLE 514.4.3.2
 Average Value of Pavement Thickness as
 Represented by Acceptance Core
 0.1 to 1.0% Less than Specified Thickness
 1.1 to 2.0 % Less than Specified Thickness
 2.1 to 3.0% Less than Specified Thickness
 3.1 to 4.0% Less than Specified Thickness
 4.1 to 5.0% Less than Specified Thickness
 5.1 to 6.0% Less than Specified Thickness
 6.1 to 7.0% Less than Specified Thickness
 More than 7.0% Less than Specified
 Thickness, with a maximum of 0.70 inches
 (18 mm) Less than Specified Thickness
 
 Unit Price as Percent of
 Contract Unit Price
 98.0%
 96.0%
 94.0%
 92.2%
 90.3%
 88.4%
 86.5%
 Remove and Replace
 
 514.5-EQUIPMENT AND TOOLS:
 Construct roller compacted concrete with any combination of equipment that will produce a
 completed pavement meeting the requirements for mixing, transporting, placing, compacting,
 finishing, and curing as provided in this specification.
 514.5.1-Field Laboratory: RCC shall be supplied by a plant which has been certified by
 the Division as meeting all requirements of the governing Specifications and as having the
 facilities necessary to ascertain and control the quality of the product in accordance therewith.
 A testing facility or laboratory, meeting the requirements of Section 501.5.1 shall be provided
 by the Contractor.
 514.5.2-Mixing Plant:
 514.5.2.1-General: Unless approved measures are taken to delay the setting time of
 the RCC, the mixing plant shall be located within a thirty-minute haul time from the point
 of RCC placement. Use only plants capable of producing an RCC pavement mixture in
 the proportions defined by the final approved mix design and within the specified
 tolerances. The capacity of the plant must be sufficient to produce a uniform mixture at a
 rate compatible with the placement equipment. The estimated production rate of the Plant
 shall be noted in the Contractor’s Quality Control plan. If the plant is unable to produce
 material at a rate adequate to prevent unnecessary cold joints and frequent paver stoppages,
 the Engineer may halt production until such time that a plant of appropriate capacity is
 used. The plant shall be inspected and approved by WVDOH District Materials Personnel
 prior to production of material under these specifications.
 514.5.2.2-Pugmill Plant: Use only pugmill plants of the central plant type with a twinshaft pugmill mixer, capable of batch or continuous mixing, equipped with synchronized
 metering devices and feeders to maintain the correct proportions of aggregate, cement,
 pozzolan, and water. These plants shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M156. Other
 pugmill plant requirements are as follows:
 514.5.2.2.1-Aggregate Storage: If previously blended aggregate is furnished, storage
 may be in a stockpile from which it is fed directly to a conveyor feeding the mixer. If
 287
 
 aggregate is furnished in two size groups, follow proper stockpiling techniques in
 accordance with section 501.7 to ensure aggregate separation.
 514.5.2.2.2-Aggregate Feed Rate: Use aggregate bins with a feed rate controlled by
 a variable speed belt, or an operable gate calibrated to accurately deliver any specified
 quantity of material. If two aggregate size stockpile sources are used, the feed rate from
 each bin must be readily adjustable to change aggregate proportions, when required. Feed
 rate controls must maintain the established proportions of aggregate from each stockpile
 bin when the combined aggregate delivery is increased or decreased.
 514.5.2.2.3-Plant Scales: Plant scales, if utilized, for any weigh box or hopper must
 comply with Section 601.5.2.3.
 514.5.2.2.4-Cement and Pozzolan Material Storage:
 Supply separate and
 independent storage silos for Portland cement and pozzolan. At plants with two or more
 silos in which different types of cement or cementitious materials are stored, ensure that
 each silo has a sign at each fill inlet to reduce the potential for loading errors. Make the
 sign from a durable material, with minimum two-inch high by ¼-inch wide letters that are
 raised, indented, or cut. Ensure that the sign clearly identifies the material that is in the
 silo and may be easily read even when completely coated with dust.
 514.5.2.2.5-Portland Cement and Pozzolan: If using Portland cement and pozzolan
 (such as fly ash or slag), employ blending equipment acceptable to the WVDOH and
 demonstrate, with a testing plan, the ability to successfully produce a uniform blended
 material meeting the mix design requirements. Perform testing on at least a daily basis to
 ensure both uniformity and proper quantities.
 514.5.2.2.6-Cement and Pozzolan Feed Unit: Provide a satisfactory means of
 dispensing Portland cement and pozzolan, volumetrically or by weight, to ensure a uniform
 and accurate quantity of cementitious material enters the mixer.
 514.5.2.2.7-Water Control Unit: Use a water control unit capable of measuring the
 required amount of water for the approved mix by weight or volume. Ensure that the unit
 is equipped with an accurate metering device. Vary the amount of water to be used only
 with the approval of the Engineer.
 514.5.2.2.8-Gob Hopper: For continuous operating pugmills, provide a gob hopper
 attached to the end of the final discharge belt to temporarily hold the RCC discharge in
 order to allow the plant to operate continuously.
 514.5.2.3-Rotary Drum Mixer: Shall meet the requirements of Section 501.5.3 and
 shall provide a rotary drum batch mixer capable of producing a homogeneous mixture,
 uniform in color, and having all coarse aggregate coated with mortar. Equip the mixer with
 batching equipment to meet the following requirements:
 
 288
 
 514.5.2.3.1-Weighing Equipment: Measure the amounts of cement, pozzolan, and
 aggregate entering into each batch of RCC by direct weighing equipment. Use only
 weighing equipment that is readily adjustable in order to compensate for the moisture
 content of the aggregate or to change the proportionate batch weights. Include a visible
 dial or equally suitable device that will accurately register the scale load from zero to full
 capacity. The cement and pozzolan may be weighed separately or cumulatively in the same
 hopper on the same scale, provided the cement is weighed first.
 514.5.2.3.2-Weigh Hoppers: Use only bulk cement and pozzolan weigh hoppers that
 are equipped with vibrators to operate automatically and continuously while weighing
 hoppers are being dumped. Ensure that the weigh hopper has sufficient capacity to hold
 not less than 10 percent in excess of the cementitious material required for one batch.
 514.5.2.3.3-Water Metering: Measure the amount of water entering each batch of
 RCC by weight or volume. Use only equipment capable of measuring the water to within
 a tolerance of plus or minus one percent and equipped with an accurate gauge or dial
 measuring device. Vary the amount of water to be used only with the approval of the
 Engineer. During batching, admit water to the mixer only through the water measuring
 device and then only at the time of charging.
 514.5.2.3.4-Mixing Time: Use only drum mixers equipped with an accurate clock or
 timing device, capable of being locked, for visibly indicating the time of mixing after all
 the materials, including the water, are in the mixer.
 514.5.2.3.5-Recharging: Discharge all material in the drum before recharging. Ensure
 that the volume of mixed material per batch does not exceed the manufacturer’s rated
 capacity of the mixer.
 514.5.3-Paver: Place RCC with a high-density asphalt-type paver subject to approval by
 the Engineer. Use only pavers equipped with compacting devices capable of producing an
 RCC pavement with a minimum of 90 percent of the maximum density in accordance with
 AASHTO T 180, Method D prior to any additional compaction. Ensure that the paver is of
 suitable weight and stability to spread and finish the RCC material, without segregation, to the
 required thickness, smoothness, surface texture, cross-section, and grade.
 514.5.4-Compactors: Use self-propelled steel drum vibratory rollers having a minimum
 static weight of 10 tons (9.1 Mg) for primary compaction. For final compaction, use either a
 steel drum roller, operated in a static mode, or a rubber-tired roller of equal or greater weight.
 Only use walk-behind vibratory rollers or plate tampers for compacting areas inaccessible to
 large rollers.
 514.5.5-Haul Trucks: Use trucks for hauling the RCC material from the plant to the paver
 with covers available to protect the material from inclement weather and excessive
 evaporation. To ensure adequate and continuous supply of RCC material to the paver, have a
 sufficient number of trucks. If the number of trucks is inadequate to prevent frequent starts
 and stops of the paver, cease production until additional trucks are obtained.
 289
 
 514.5.6-Water Trucks: Keep at least one water truck, or other similar equipment, on-site
 and available for use throughout the paving and curing process. Equip such equipment with a
 spreader pipe containing fog spray nozzles capable of evenly applying a fine spray of water to
 the surface of the RCC without damaging the final surface.
 514.5.7-Inspection of Equipment: Before start-up, the Contractor’s equipment will be
 carefully inspected. Should any of the equipment fail to operate properly, cease work until the
 deficiencies are corrected.
 514.5.8-Access for Inspection and Calibration: Provide the Engineer or WVDOH
 District Materials Inspector access at all times for any plant, equipment, or machinery to be
 used in order to check calibration, scales, controls, or operating adjustments.
 514.6-PREPARATION OF GRADE AND CONDITIONING OF SUBGRADE OR BASE:
 Before the RCC processing begins, prepare the subgrade in accordance with Section 228
 of the WVDOH Standard Specifications.
 514.7-HANDLING, MEASURING, AND BATCHING MATERIALS:
 Handling, measuring, and batching of materials shall be in accordance with Section 501.7,
 except that volumetric batching shall not be permitted.
 514.8-MIXING RCC:
 514.8.1-Mixing Process: Use the same mixture for the entire project unless otherwise
 stated in the project documents. If, during production, the source of Portland cement, pozzolan,
 or aggregates is changed, then suspend production and submit a new mix design to the Engineer
 for approval. Do not exceed the manufacturer's rated capacity for dry concrete mixtures in the
 mixing chamber. Keep the sides of the mixer and mixer blades free of hardened RCC or other
 buildups. Routinely check mixer blades for wear and replace if wear is sufficient to cause
 inadequate mixing.
 514.8.2-Mixing Time: Use a mixing time adequate to ensure a thorough and complete
 mixing of all materials. Do not allow the mixing time, after all materials including water are
 in the mixer, to be less than 1½ minutes for one cubic yard (0.76 cubic meter) and 20 seconds
 for each additional cubic yard (0.76 cubic meter).
 514.8.2.1-Mixing Time for Truck Mixers: When truck mixers are used to mix RCC,
 the mixer capacity shall be limited to 5 cubic yards (3.8 cubic meters) per batch and mixing
 time shall be a minimum of 3 minutes. If the condition of the blades in the drum of any
 truck mixer, used for mixing RCC, is such that the adequacy of mixing after 3 minutes is
 questionable, or if there is any other reason to question the adequacy of the mixing,
 uniformity testing, in accordance with AASHTO M157, for mass per cubic foot (meter)
 and coarse aggregate content, shall be performed on that truck prior to using it during
 production. If that truck mixer cannot produce a uniform RCC mix after 3 minutes of
 mixing, then the required mixing time shall be increased to the mixing time which is shown
 to produce a uniform mix.
 
 290
 
 514.8.3-Plant Calibration: Prior to commencement of RCC production, carry out a
 complete and comprehensive calibration of the plant in accordance with Section 501.5.2.
 Provide all scales, containers, and other items necessary to complete the calibration. After
 completion of the initial calibration, calibrate the plant periodically as directed by the Engineer.
 Plants listed on WVDOH approved list at the time of RCC production are exempt from this
 requirement, although the WVDOH reserves the right to require additional calibration if
 variation in mixture quantities are suspected.
 514.8.4-Daily Reports: Supply daily plant records of production and quantities of
 materials used that day to the Engineer. These records may be used as a check on plant
 calibration.
 514.8.5-Transportation: Transport the RCC pavement material from the plant to the areas
 to be paved in dump trucks equipped with retractable protective covers for protection from rain
 or excessive evaporation. Ensure that the trucks are dumped clean with no buildup or hanging
 of RCC material in the corners. Have the dump trucks deposit the RCC material directly into
 the hopper of the paver or into a secondary material distribution system that deposits the
 material into the paver hopper. Dump truck delivery must be timed and scheduled so that RCC
 material is spread and compacted within the specified time limits.
 514.9-PLACING RCC:
 514.9.1-Subbase Condition: Prior to RCC placement, ensure that the surface of the
 subbase is clean and free of foreign material, ponded water, and frost. Ensure that the subbase
 is uniformly moist at the time of RCC placement. If sprinkling of water is required to remoisten
 certain areas, ensure that the method of sprinkling will not form mud or pools of freestanding
 water. Correct soft or yielding subbase areas prior to placement of RCC as specified in Section
 6.1 above.
 514.9.2-Adverse Weather Conditions:
 514.9.2.1-Cold Weather Precautions: Employ cold weather precautions as detailed
 in Section 601.9.1 of the Standard Specifications.
 Stop placement operations when the air temperature falls below 40°F (4.5°C) and is
 declining. Start operations only if the air temperature rises above 35°F (1.7°C) and is
 elevating.
 If the air temperature is expected to fall below 40°F (4.5°C) at some time during
 construction, and if the Contractor plans to place RCC during that time, the Contractor
 shall advise the Division of his plans for cold weather curing and protecting the RCC. The
 Division may, at any time, require the Contractor to provide additional protection to cause
 the provisions of this specification to be met.
 514.9.2.2-Hot Weather Precautions: Employ hot weather precautions as detailed in
 Section 601.9.2 of the Standard Specification. During periods of hot weather or windy
 conditions, take special precautions to minimize moisture loss due to evaporation. Cooling
 of aggregate stockpiles by shading or the use of a fine mist may be required. Protective
 covers may be required on dump trucks. Keep the surface of the newly placed RCC
 pavement continuously moist.
 291
 
 The Engineer may decrease the allowable time, specified in Section 514.10.1, between
 mixing and the completion of compaction when the ambient temperature exceeds 90°F
 (32°C) or during windy conditions.
 In no event shall RCC be placed when its temperature at any time after the completion
 of mixing exceeds 90°F (32°C).
 514.9.2.3-Rain Limitations: Conduct no placement of RCC pavement during rain
 conditions sufficient to be detrimental to the finished product. Placement may continue
 during light rain or mists provided the surface of the RCC pavement is not eroded or
 damaged in any way. Use dump truck covers during these periods. The WVDOH may
 terminate paving at any time when, in the WVDOH judgment, the rain is detrimental to the
 finished product.
 514.9.3-Paver Requirements: Place all RCC with an approved paver as specified in
 Section 514.5.3, and also meeting the requirements of this Section.
 514.9.3.1-Filling the Paver: Do not allow the quantity of RCC material in the paver
 to approach empty between loads. Maintain the material above the auger at all times during
 paving.
 514.9.3.2-Stopping the Paver: Ensure that the paver proceeds in a steady, continuous
 operation with minimal starts and stops, except to begin a new lane. Maximum paver speed
 during laydown is 10 feet (3 m) per minute. Higher paver speeds may be allowed at the
 discretion of the WVDOH if the higher speeds may be obtained without distress to the final
 product or cause additional starts and stops.
 514.9.3.3-Surface Condition: Ensure that the surface of the RCC pavement is smooth,
 uniform, and continuous without excessive tears, ridges, or aggregate segregation once it
 leaves the paver.
 514.9.4-Inaccessible Areas: Pave all areas inaccessible to either roller or paver with castin-place concrete meeting the requirements of Section 501.
 514.9.5-Adjacent Lane Pavement: Place adjacent paving lanes within 60 minutes. If
 more than 60 minutes elapses between placement of adjacent lanes, the vertical joint must be
 considered a cold joint and prepared in accordance with Section 514.11. At the discretion of
 the Engineer, this time may be increased or decreased depending on ambient conditions of
 temperature, wind, and humidity. Multiple pavers may be used in tandem to reduce the
 occurrence of cold joints.
 514.9.6-Hand Spreading: Broadcasting or fanning the RCC material across areas being
 compacted is not permissible. Such additions of materials may only be done immediately
 behind the paver and before any compaction has taken place. Any segregated coarse aggregate
 shall be removed from the surface before rolling.
 514.9.7-Segregation: If segregation occurs in the RCC during paving operations,
 placement shall cease until the cause is determined and corrected to the satisfaction of the
 292
 
 Engineer. If the segregation is judged by the Engineer to be severe, remove and replace the
 segregated area at no additional cost to the Department.
 514.10-COMPACTION:
 514.9.1-Time to Compaction Start: Ensure that compaction begins with the placement
 process and is completed within 60 minutes of the start of the mixing at the plant. The time
 may be increased or decreased at the discretion of the WVDOH depending on ambient
 conditions of temperature and humidity. Do not permit delays in rolling unless approved by
 the Engineer. Plan operations and supply sufficient equipment to ensure that these criteria are
 met.
 514.10.2-Rolling: Determine the sequence and number of passes by vibratory and nonvibratory rollers to obtain the specified density and surface finish. Only operate rollers in the
 vibratory mode while in motion. Rubber-tire rollers may be used for final compaction. Use
 additional rollers if specific density requirements are not obtained or if placing operations get
 ahead of the rolling operations.
 514.10.3-Rolling Longitudinal and Transverse Joints: Do not operate the roller within
 2 feet of the edge of a freshly placed lane until the adjacent lane is placed. Then, roll both
 edges of the two lanes together within the allowable time. If a cold joint is planned, then roll
 the complete lane and follow cold joint procedures as specified in Section 514.11.
 514.10.4-Inaccessible Areas: Compact areas inaccessible to large rollers using walkbehind rollers or hand tampers. Cast-in-place, meeting the requirements of Section 501, may
 be used in these areas as a replacement for RCC.
 514.11-JOINTS:
 514.11.1-Fresh Vertical Joints: A joint is considered a fresh joint when an adjacent RCC
 lane is placed within 60 minutes of placing the previous lane or as specified by the Engineer
 based on ambient conditions. Fresh joints do not require special treatment.
 514.11.2-Cold Vertical Joints: Any planned or unplanned construction joints that do not
 qualify as fresh joints are considered cold joints. Prior to placing fresh RCC mixture against a
 compacted cold vertical joint, thoroughly clean the cold joint of loose or foreign material. Wet
 the vertical joint face and maintain it in a moist condition immediately prior to placement of
 the adjacent lane.
 514.11.2.1-Sawing Cold Vertical Joints: For uncompacted surfaces or slopes more
 than 15 degrees from the vertical, cut the joint vertically for the full depth. Within 2 hours
 of final compaction, the edge of a cold joint may be cut with approved mechanical
 equipment. For edges cut after 2 hours, sawcut to the full depth of the pavement.
 Demonstrate any modification or substitution of the sawcutting procedure to the WVDOH
 for approval prior to use. In no case allow cutting of the edge to cause raveling or tearing
 of the surface. Moisten the cut edge immediately prior to placement of the adjacent lane.
 
 293
 
 514.11.3-RCC Pavement Joints at Structures: Line structures such as manholes, valves,
 or concrete curb and gutter with joint filler as defined in Section 708 of the Standard
 Specifications.
 514.11.4-Control Joints: Construct transverse contraction joints in the RCC pavement by
 sawing. At the option of the Contractor, soft-cut or green-cut saws may be utilized as soon as
 possible behind the rolling operation and set to manufacturer's recommendations.
 Conventional cut saws must be used as soon as the sawing operation will not result in raveling
 or other damage to the RCC pavement, but not more than 18 hours after RCC placement. Cut
 all joints to 1/4 the depth of the RCC pavement to a single saw blade width. Joints should be
 spaced at intervals not to exceed 24 times the nominal pavement thickness unless otherwise
 indicated on the Plans or directed by the WVDOH. (For example, for an 8-inch RCC
 pavement, cut joints at 16-foot intervals.).
 In areas where RCC is placed adjacent to existing concrete pavement, such as in shoulder
 areas, the Contractor shall adjust the joint spacing to align with the joints in the existing
 adjacent concrete pavement. In these areas, in order to work out a joint spacing which aligns
 with the joints in the existing pavement, the joints in the RCC may be spaced at intervals up to
 24 times the nominal RCC pavement thickness, plus 10 percent of that distance. (For example,
 for an 8-inch RCC pavement, cut joints at a maximum spacing of 17.6-foot intervals).
 514.12-FINISHING:
 Ensure that the finished surface of the RCC pavement, when tested with a 10-foot
 straightedge or crown surface template, does not vary from the straightedge or template by more
 than 1/4 inch at any one point and shall be within 5/8 inch of the specified finished grade. When
 surface irregularities are outside these tolerances, or other smoothness requirements specified in
 the plans, diamond-grind the surface to meet the tolerance at no additional cost to the WVDOH.
 514.13-CURING:
 Immediately after final rolling and compaction testing, keep the surface of the RCC
 pavement continuously moist until an approved curing compound, a suitable prime coat, or a layer
 of asphalt concrete is applied or for 72 hours after placement, whichever comes first.
 Until the RCC has achieved the required strength for opening to traffic, the surface
 temperature of the RCC shall not be allowed to fall below freezing. The Contractor shall be
 responsible for the quality of the RCC placed and cured during cold weather. Any RCC injured
 by frost action shall be removed and replaced at the Contractor’s expense.
 514.13.1-Water Cure: Apply water cure by water trucks equipped with fog spray nozzles,
 soaking hoses, sprinkling system, or other means such that a uniform moist condition on the
 surface of the RCC is ensured. Apply this moisture in a manner that will not erode or damage
 the surface of the finished RCC pavement.
 514.13.2-Curing Compound: Do not use curing compounds when the RCC material is to
 be promptly covered with asphalt. Apply curing compound as indicated in Section 707.9 of
 the Standard Specifications, except that the minimum rate of curing compound application is
 11 square yards per gallon (2.5 m2/L) unless a higher rate is specified by the curing compound
 manufacturer.
 294
 
 514.14-OPENING TO TRAFFIC:
 Protect the RCC from vehicular traffic during the curing period. Do not place vehicular
 traffic, except for curing equipment or sawcutting equipment, on the RCC pavement until the RCC
 material achieves a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 psi (21 Mpa) as demonstrated in
 Section 514.4.2.2.
 514.15-MAINTENANCE:
 Maintain the RCC pavement in good condition until all work is completed and accepted.
 Perform such maintenance at no additional cost to the Engineer.
 514.16-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of RCC placement to be paid for will be the number of square yards (meters)
 complete in place and accepted. The width for measurement will be the width of the pavement or
 overlay shown on the typical cross section of the Plans and additional widening where called for
 or as otherwise directed in writing by the Engineer. The length will be measured on the surface
 along the centerline of the roadway or roadway ramp. Construction of control joints will not be
 measured separately and no direct payment will be made for this work.
 514.17-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 less adjustments referred to below and shall constitute full compensation for furnishing and
 preparing of all materials, equipment, tools, labor, and incidentals necessary to satisfactorily
 complete the work.
 514.17.1-Thickness: Any sampling units found to be deficient in thickness, and which are
 allowed to remain in place by the Engineer, shall be paid for at a reduced Contract Unit Bid
 Price as outlined in Table 514.4.3.2. No compensation will be allowed for the materials or
 labor involved in the removal of defective material.
 514.17.2-Strength: Determination of RCC strength shall be in accordance with Section
 514.4.3.1. Any sampling units found to be deficient in strength, and which are allowed to
 remain in place by the Engineer, shall be paid for at a reduced Contract Unit Bid Price as
 outlined in Section 514.4.3.1. No compensation will be allowed for the materials or labor
 involved in the removal of defective material.
 514.17.3-Density: Determination of RCC density shall be in accordance with Section
 514.4.2.3. Any sampling units found to be deficient in density, shall be handled in accordance
 with Sections 514.4.2.3 and 514.4.3.1.
 514.18-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 514001-* “thickness” Roller Compacted Concrete
 * Sequence number
 
 295
 
 UNIT
 Square Yard (Meter)
 
 296
 
 DIVISION 600
 INCIDENTAL CONSTRUCTION
 
 SECTION 601
 STRUCTURAL CONCRETE
 601.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing and placing portland cement concrete for structures,
 and incidental construction, in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close
 conformity with the lines, grades and dimensions as shown on the Plans or established by the
 Engineer.
 All concrete shall be air-entrained.
 Classes of concrete shall be used as indicated below unless noted otherwise on the Plans:
 Class A concrete shall be used in railing, cribbing, precast shapes, for filler, and in steel
 grid floors.
 Class K concrete shall be used in all sidewalks, parapets, decks, and median barriers when
 they are a part of the bridge superstructure.
 Class B concrete shall be used in all beams and girders, roadway sidewalks, columns,
 hammerhead piers, arch rings including ties and spandrel walls, rigid frames, box culverts, heavily
 reinforced abutments, retaining walls, footings, pedestals and other areas not specifically
 designated as to class of concrete.
 Class C concrete shall be used in massive footings and pedestals, massive pier shafts,
 gravity walls and, in general, for non-reinforced or lightly reinforced concrete.
 Class D concrete shall be used as unformed and non-reinforced concrete for backfilling of
 any excavated pockets or voids on which footings are to be located.
 Class H concrete shall be used for bridge decks and other bridge elements when designated in
 the plans.
 Class DC concrete shall be used in drilled caisson foundations.
 If the Contractor so elects, the Engineer may permit the use of a higher class concrete than
 the particular class designated for the work, in which event the higher class concrete shall meet
 the Specifications applicable without additional compensation. If the contractor uses a higher class
 concrete, and the strength specimens do not meet the minimum strength requirement of that higher
 class concrete, no penalty will be applied, provided that the strength specimens exceed the
 minimum strength requirement of the concrete that was originally designated for the work.
 When called for on the Plans, an admixture of water-reducing retarder shall be added to all
 concrete so specified. A retarder may be used in other concrete at the Contractor's option.
 The work will be accepted in accordance with these Specifications and the applicable
 requirements of 105, 106, and 109.
 All classes of concrete shall be designated as modified when using increased design
 strengths.
 All classes of concrete shall be designated as architectural when using additional
 formwork as shown in Section 601.8.10.
 A hydration control stabilizing admixture may be used at the Contractor's option provided
 that the conditions in section 601.7 are met.
 601.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sections or Subsections
 of Division 700:
 
 297
 
 Class H Concrete Requirements: The total concrete constituents shall contribute less than
 0.10% water soluble chloride ion by weight of cement. The Contractor shall use only one brand and/or
 source for any concrete constituent. The Contractor shall obtain a written statement from the
 manufacturer of the microsilica admixture that confirms the compatibility of the material combination
 and the sequence in which they are combined. The written statement, along with the results of all required
 tests, shall be furnished to the Engineer prior to the pre-pour meeting.
 MATERIAL
 Accelerating Admixtures
 Air-Entraining Admixtures
 Boiled Linseed Oil
 Coarse Aggregate
 Curing Materials
 Epoxy Resin Protective Coating
 Fine Aggregate**
 Hydration Control Stabilizing Admixtures
 Joint Filler (Substructure)****
 Joint Filler (Superstructure)*****
 Petroleum Spirits (Mineral Spirits)
 Portland Cement*
 Pozzolanic Additives***
 Specific Performance Admixtures
 Water
 Water Reducer
 Water-Reducing, Accelerating Admixtures
 Water-Reducing, Set-Retarding Admixtures
 
 SECTION OR SUBSECTION
 707.13
 707.1
 711.2
 703
 707.6-707.10
 707.11
 702.1
 707.15
 708.1.2
 708.1.1
 711.5
 701.1, 701.3
 707.4
 707.17
 715.7
 707.3
 707.14
 707.2
 
 * It is normally intended that the product of only one mill or of any one brand or type of Portland
 cement be used on any one structure.
 
 ** Only siliceous sand shall be used as fine aggregate in bridge deck wearing surfaces.
 *** The use of a Pozzolanic additives will not be permitted when a blended hydraulic cement is
 ****
 *****
 
 used. Unless otherwise permitted by the Engineer, only one source of a Pozzolanic additive
 shall be used in any one structure.
 Joint filler for vertical joints in the substructure shall be in accordance with Section 708.1.2.
 Preformed joint filler for vertical joints in the superstructure shall be sponge rubber in
 accordance with Section 708.1.1.
 
 Shipping and Storage of Cement: Cement shall be shipped from pretested and approved
 bins at the mill or distribution terminals. Cement stored by the Contractor for a period longer than
 90 days shall be retested before being used in the work. Cement failing to meet any of the specified
 requirements at any time prior to incorporation into the work will be rejected and shall be removed
 from the work. Cements of different brands, types, or from different mills shall be stored
 separately.
 Shipping and Storage of Pozzolanic Additives: Pozzolanic additives shall be shipped
 from only those sources approved by the Division. Bulk Pozzolanic additives shall be stored at
 298
 
 the job site in weatherproof bins. Pozzolanic additives from different sources or from different
 lots at the same source shall be stored separately.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 601.3-PROPORTIONING:
 
 The proportions for any concrete designated as modified shall be submitted by the
 Contractor to the Engineer for approval. The Design 28-Day Compressive Strength shall
 be as shown in the plans. The contractor’s mix design shall utilize Table 601.3.1, except
 the Target Cement Factor may be revised to obtain the modified strength.
 Class H concrete shall consist of a homogeneous mixture of cement, fine aggregate, coarse
 aggregate, microsilica admixture, fly ash or ground granulated blast furnace slag, chemical admixtures,
 and water.
 Establishment of mixture proportions shall be coordinated with the manufacturer of the
 microsilica admixture.
 Design mixture testing for Class H concrete shall be in accordance with MP 711.03.23 and shall
 include air content, slump, compressive strength, and rapid chloride permeability tests. For
 establishment of mixture proportions, rapid chloride permeability tests shall be made on representative
 samples prepared and tested in accordance with AASHTO T277. The rapid chloride permeability test
 specimens shall be tested at an age of 90 days (or at any time prior to 90 days), and the results of this
 test shall not exceed 750 coulombs. Specimens shall be moist cured for 56 days prior to the start of
 specimen preparation unless specimens are to be tested prior to 56 days, in which case the specimens
 shall be moist cured until the time of test. The 28-day compressive strength of the test mix that satisfies
 the 750 coulomb threshold shall be used as the basis for acceptance of Class H concrete per Section
 601.4.5. The cost of all test mix requirements shall be considered incidental to the cost of Class H
 concrete.
 For establishment of mixture proportions, as an alternative to the curing methods for
 rapid chloride permeability testing outlined in the previous paragraph, specimens may be moist
 cured for 7 days in accordance with ASTM C 192, then cured for 21 days in lime-saturated water
 at 100.0 ± 3.5 °F (38.0 ± 2.0 °C), then tested at an age of 28 days. This method of curing shall
 be noted as the accelerated RCPT curing method.
 601.3.1-Mix Design Requirements: Prior to the start of construction, the Contractor shall
 design and submit to the Engineer for approval the proportion of materials, including
 admixtures, to be used which will result in a workable concrete having the applicable properties
 enumerated below, including those of Table 601.3.1A. A mix design prepared in accordance
 with MP 711.03.23, shall be required for each class of concrete to be used in the work. The
 mix design shall be accompanied by a statement giving the source of materials and certified
 test data from a Division approved laboratory demonstrating the adequacy of the mix design.
 The Contractor shall notify the Engineer of any change in the source of materials or the addition
 of admixtures during the progress of the work, since such change may necessitate a new mix
 design. The Contractor shall also state the Ā value of the fine aggregate and the Ā value of the
 combined grading of the coarse aggregate, fine aggregate, and cement used in the mix design.
 Each mix design shall remain approved for a period of three years from the date of approval,
 after which the mix design may be re-approved for an additional time period. The guidelines
 for this re-approval process are set forth in MP 711.03.23.
 299
 
 Approved Hydration Control Stabilizing Admixtures, as defined in Section 707.15, which
 are designed to stop the hydration of cement in a concrete mix, enabling an extension to the
 allowable discharge time from a truck mixer as outlined in Section 601.7, may be added to an
 existing approved concrete mix design in accordance with the procedures outlined in MP
 711.03.23.
 TABLE 601.3.1A {ENGLISH}
 Design 28 Day
 Compressive
 Strength
 
 Class of
 concrete
 
 Target
 Maximum Water Standard Size of
 Entrained
 Cement
 Content
 Coarse Aggregate***
 Air
 Factor
 
 Pounds per Square
 lb. of water / lb. of
 lbs./c.y. *
 inch
 cement **
 3500
 682
 0.51
 4000
 658
 0.44
 3000
 564
 0.49
 2500
 494
 0.58
 2000
 400
 0.62
 4000
 658
 0.40
 4500
 705
 0.44
 
 A
 K
 B
 C
 D
 H
 DC
 
 Number
 
 Percent
 
 7, 78, or 8
 57, 67
 57, 67
 57, 67
 57, 67
 57,67
 7, 78, 8
 
 7½
 7
 7
 6
 5½
 6½
 6
 
 TABLE 601.3.1A {METRIC}
 Class of
 concrete
 
 Design 28 Day
 Compressive
 Strength
 Mpa
 
 A
 K
 B
 C
 D
 H
 DC
 
 24
 28
 21
 17
 14
 28
 31
 
 Target
 Maximum Water Standard Size of
 Entrained
 Cement
 Content
 Coarse Aggregate***
 Air
 Factor
 Kg per cu. L/Kg of cement
 m. *
 **
 404
 0.51
 390
 0.44
 335
 0.49
 295
 0.58
 235
 0.62
 390
 0.40
 418
 0.44
 
 Number
 
 Percent
 
 7, 78, or 8
 57, 67
 57, 67
 57, 67
 57, 67
 57,67
 7, 78, or 8
 
 7½
 7
 7
 6
 5½
 6½
 6
 
 * An equal volume of a pozzolanic additive may be substituted for Portland cement up to the maximum
 
 **
 
 amount in Table 601.3.1B. Only one pozzolanic additive is permitted in a mix design, except for Class
 H concrete. The target cement factor of Class H concrete shall consist of Option 1 or Option 2 from
 Table 601.3.1C. The Contractor may choose either option.
 When using a pozzolanic additive, volumes of these materials shall be considered as cement for
 purposes of establishing maximum water content.
 
 *** A number 67 coarse aggregate may be used in Class DC concrete, provided the Engineer approves
 the use of that size aggregate for the specific project on which it is to be used. That approval will
 depend on the minimum spacing of the reinforcing steel in the drilled caisson.
 
 300
 
 TABLE 601.3.1B
 Material
 Fly Ash
 
 Ground Granulated Furnace Slag
 Microsilica
 
 Class Of Concrete
 B, C, D
 A, K
 DC
 A, B, K
 C, D
 DC
 All Classes
 
 Quantity
 0.48 ft3 (0.014 m3)
 0.60 ft3 (0.017 m3)
 0.72 ft3 (0.020 m3)
 1.43 ft3 (0.040 m3)
 0.96 ft3 (0.027 m3)
 1.79 ft3 (0.051 m3)
 0.24 ft3 (0.007 m3)
 
 TABLE 601.3.1C
 Option
 1
 2
 
 Ground Granulated
 Furnace Slag
 
 Cement
 
 Fly Ash
 
 2.39 ft3
 (0.068 m3)
 2.15 ft3
 (0.061 m3)
 
 0.84 ft3
 (0.024 m3)
 1.08 ft3
 (0.031 m3)
 
 Microsilica
 30 lbs.
 (13.6 kg)
 30 lbs.
 (13.6 kg)
 
 MP 711.03.26 shall be used to control the cement factor in all classes of concrete except Class H.
 601.3.2-Field Tolerances and Adjustments:
 601.3.2.1-Consistency: Concrete shall have the consistency which will allow proper
 placement and consolidation in the required position. Every attempt shall be made to
 obtain a uniform consistency. The optimum consistency for various types of highway
 structures shall be as indicated in Table 601.3.2. Concrete for any “Slump Test” shall be
 deposited in a manner and location that excludes the effects of vibrations caused by traffic and
 concrete placement operations.
 An approved Type F or Type G admixture may be used to increase the consistency and
 improve the workability of the concrete as long as the requirements of section 707.2.2.1 or
 section 707.3.2.1 are met. When an admixture is used for this purpose, it may be referred
 to as a superplasticizer.
 No more than a total of two additions of a superplasticizer shall be permitted in any
 one batch of concrete. If a superplasticizer is used at the batch plant, then only one field
 addition is permitted. The total quantity of the superplasticizer shall not exceed the
 manufacturer’s recommended dosage rate.
 Upon addition of a superplasticizer at the job site, the mixing drum shall be turned for
 a minimum of 60 revolutions or 5 minutes at mixing speed to establish a workable mixture
 of uniform composition and consistency. If a second job site addition of superplasticizer
 is used; the mixing drum shall be turned a minimum of 30 additional revolutions at mixing
 speed. All additions and mixing of the superplasticizer shall be completed before
 placement of the concrete is started. The total number of revolutions shall not exceed 300,
 and the concrete shall be discharged within the time limits in section 601.7. The slump of
 Class H concrete shall not exceed 7 inches (175 mm) under any circumstances.
 
 301
 
 When a superplasticizer is used, the optimum consistency target value may be increased
 by 4 inches (100 mm), but under no circumstances shall the slump exceed 8 inches (200
 mm).
 Acceptance tests for consistency (slump), air content, compressive strength, etc. shall
 be made after all additions and mixing of the superplasticizer. Slump tests shall be
 performed on every batch of concrete to which superplasticizer is added (one test before
 and one test after the addition of superplasticizer).
 The Contractor shall obtain a written statement from the manufacturer of the
 superplasticizer stating:
 i. The manufacturer is satisfied with the compatibility of the combination of
 materials and the sequence in which they are combined.
 ii. The recommended maximum admixture dosage rate.
 iii. Immediately after mixing, the air content and slump shall be measured by a
 certified Portland Cement Concrete Inspector.
 This written statement from the admixture manufacturer shall be made available to
 project personnel before any superplasticizer is added at the job site.
 
 302
 
 TABLE 601.3.2 CONSISTENCY
 *Optimum
 Consistency
 Inches of
 Slump
 (mm of slump)
 
 TYPE
 For structures which have exposed, inclined surfaces such as
 concrete gutters, cast in place concrete slope protection, etc.,
 requiring low slump concrete to allow proper placement and
 consolidation and the maintenance of the prescribed geometry; those
 structures which are placed by slip form construction methods where
 a low slump is required to maintain the prescribed geometry; and
 mass nonreinforced concrete.
 ii. For reinforced concrete structures which are sufficiently massive
 and generally have sufficient clearances to allow the access of
 workers into the immediate area of concrete placement, such as
 bridge piers, column and abutment footings; piers, large columns,
 and other similar type structures into which workers may enter for
 the purpose of placing and consolidating the concrete.
 iii. a. For reinforced concrete structures which are not easily
 accessible for spading and vibrating and offer a fair degree of
 difficulty in the placement and consolidation of the concrete,
 such as pier caps and abutments, beams and girders, box
 culverts, miscellaneous structure footings and other slab type
 structures, wall or vertical sections 8 inches (200 mm) or greater
 in width with one line of reinforcement or 12 inches (300 mm)
 or greater in width with two lines of reinforcement.
 i.
 
 1 inch
 (25 mm)
 
 2 inches
 (50 mm)
 
 3 inches
 (75 mm)
 
 2 ½ inches
 (62 mm)
 
 b. For bridge decks
 
 For structures which are inaccessible to workers and generally offer
 a considerable degree of difficulty in the placement and
 consolidation of the concrete, such as long slender columns and thinwalled 3 ½ sections less than 8 inches (200 mm) thickness.
 v. For structures which present peculiar conditions under which
 concreting must be done, such as structural steel encasement; other
 special structures which contain small openings through which the
 concrete must pass; tremie concrete which must be placed and
 consolidated into all spaces without mechanical disturbances; and
 other special structures which would require high consistency
 concrete for proper placement and consolidation.
 
 iv.
 
 
 
 3 ½ inches
 (87 mm)
 
 **
 
 If the consistency exceeds the target value plus one inch (25 mm), the Contractor shall take immediate
 steps to reduce the slump of succeeding loads by making necessary adjustments in the mixture. The
 Contractor will be allowed a reasonable time for the trucks already on the road for a central mix or
 truck mix operation. Failure to comply will be cause for rejection of the concrete. If the consistency
 exceeds the target value plus 1 ¾ inches (445 mm), the concrete will be rejected.
 ** The optimum consistency shall be that consistency which will allow a proper placement and
 consolidation of the concrete into all spaces.
 
 303
 
 601.3.2.2-Air Content: The target value of the entrained air at the point of placement
 shall be as shown in Table 601.3.1A. If the entrained air does not conform with the target
 value within plus or minus 2.5 percentage points, the Contractor shall take immediate steps
 to adjust the air content of succeeding loads by making necessary adjustments in the
 mixture. The air content shall be measured on loads already batched and enroute, as well
 as the first load to which any adjustments were made in batching procedures. If the air
 content exceeds the target value plus 3.0 percentage points the concrete shall be rejected.
 When the concrete is delivered in a truck mixer and the air content is less than the target
 value minus 2.5 percentage points the concrete shall be rejected, or the Contractor may use
 additional air entraining agent in an amount that is intended to achieve the target value
 specified. The addition is permitted under the conditions listed below.
 The target of the entrained air content of Class H concrete at the time of placement shall be
 as shown in Table 601.3.1A. If the entrained air does not conform with the target value within plus or
 minus 1.5 percentage points, the Contractor shall take immediate steps to adjust the air content
 of succeeding loads by making necessary adjustments in the mixture. If the entrained air content
 of Class H concrete does not conform to the target value plus 2.0 percentage points, the concrete
 shall be rejected. When Class H concrete is delivered in a truck mixer and the air content is
 less than the target value minus 2.0 percentage points, the concrete shall be rejected or the
 Contractor may use additional air-entraining agent in an amount that is intended to achieve the
 target value specified. The addition is permitted under the conditions listed below.
 i. The air entraining agent is the same as used in the approved mix design and is
 thoroughly mixed with a minimum of 2 gallons (7.57 liter) of water. The
 solution will be directed to the front of the mixer.
 ii. The mixer is turned a minimum of 30 revolutions, at mixing speed, or the
 number of revolutions established in tests to comply with uniformity
 requirements, whichever is more.
 Immediately after mixing, the air content and slump shall be measured by a certified
 inspector or technician.
 An air adjustment may be attempted twice per truck. If after the second addition the
 specified air content is not achieved, the concrete shall be rejected. These procedures do
 not alter the limits placed on time to discharge, the total revolutions of the mixing drum,
 or the specified slump.
 601.3.2.3-Yield: The approved mix design shall be subject to modification under the
 conditions prescribed.
 After the start of the first concreting operation and immediately after the specified
 consistency and entrained air have been established, three unit weight determinations shall
 be made from different batches and the average of the three determinations shall be
 considered the unit weight of the concrete. The actual yield shall be determined from the
 average unit weight. The design mix shall be adjusted as required to correct the actual
 yield to correspond to the theoretical.
 During the progress of the work, the actual yield shall be verified at the frequency noted
 in MP 601.03.50; and, if the yield, based on a single unit weight determination, should
 differ from the theoretical yield by more than plus or minus two percent, two additional
 unit weight determinations shall be made, and the average of the three determinations shall
 304
 
 be considered the unit weight of the concrete. The actual yield shall be determined from
 that average unit weight, and the design mix shall be adjusted as required to correct the
 actual yield to correspond to the theoretical yield.
 In addition to the mix design adjustments specified above to correct for yield, other
 adjustments in the design mix proportions shall be made as necessary to maintain a plastic,
 workable mix with suitable finishing characteristics.
 No change in the brands or sources of material shall be made without prior approval of
 the Engineer. Methods for determining-the properties enumerated above shall be in
 accordance with 601.4.
 601.3.2.4-Total Solids Ā: The combined grading of the coarse aggregate, fine
 aggregate, and cement used in the structural concrete shall conform to the design mix Ā
 plus or minus the tolerance specified in the following table for the coarse aggregate size
 used.
 TABLE 601.3.2.4-Total Solids Ā
 Coarse Aggregate
 Design Mix Ā
 Size Number
 Tolerance
 3 or 4
  0.35
 57 or 67
  0.25
 7, 78 or 8
  0.15
 Ā is the value obtained by grading of the total solids (coarse aggregate, fine aggregate,
 and cement). The Ā shall be determined by the Contractor (in accordance with MP
 601.03.51) at least once for every 50 cubic yards (37.5 cubic meters) of concrete that are
 produced from the same mix design. However, not more than one Ā test (for each mix
 design) shall be required per calendar day as long as not more than 400 cubic yards (305
 cubic meters) of concrete are produced in a single day from the same mix design. In
 situations when more than 400 cubic yards (305 cubic meters) of concrete are produced in
 a single day from the same mix design, two Ā tests shall be required (one in the AM and
 one in the PM) for that mix design.
 During any calendar week (Sunday through Saturday) in which concrete is being
 produced, a minimum of one Ā test shall be required (for each mix design from which
 concrete is being produced). This Ā test shall be conducted on the first day of production
 of that calendar week. For days on which concrete is being produced, but no Ā test is
 required, laboratory number 1392885 shall be used for Ā test documentation purposes.
 Should the moving average of any five consecutive grading tests of the total solids have
 an Ā outside the specified mix design tolerance limits, production shall be discontinued
 until appropriate corrections are made. Corrections shall be made either in the proportions
 of the concrete (the mix design), the gradation of the aggregates, or the storage and loading
 of the aggregate, as the Contractor may elect.
 When the small quantity work condition applies, the Ā required after 50 cubic yards
 (37.5 cubic meters) of concrete production shall be performed on the day that the 50 cubic
 yard quantity is achieved. All concrete produced on that day (the day that the 50 cubic
 yard quantity is achieved) shall be represented by the previous Ā. The Ā conducted on the
 day that the 50 cubic yard quantity is achieved shall represent the next 50 cubic yards of
 concrete produced, beginning with the concrete produced on the next day of production.
 305
 
 When, in a concrete mix, gradations tests show that the percentage of material which
 passes the No. 200 (75 µm) sieve, exceeds the amount permitted in Sections 702.1.2 and
 703.4, and provided the Engineer permits the material to remain in place and the Contractor
 elects to leave the material in place, then a penalty shall be applied in the manner outlined
 in the following paragraph.
 It shall be determined which material (coarse aggregate, fine aggregate, or both) caused
 the total material finer than the No. 200 (75 µm) sieve to exceed the specification limits as
 determined in Sections 702.1.2 and 703.4. The mass of the material(s) in the concrete mix
 (Mca, Mfa, or both, as defined in MP 601.03.51), which caused the total material finer than
 the No. 200 (75 µm) sieve to exceed the specification limits shall be divided by Mt (as
 defined in MP 601.03.51). The resulting number shall be multiplied by the unit price of
 the concrete, as billed by the Concrete Supplier and by the quantity of non-specification
 concrete placed. That value shall be the penalty applied for the use of the material which
 did not meet the specification requirements.
 601.4-TESTING:
 601.4.1-Sampling and Testing Methods:
 Sampling fresh concrete
 Sampling aggregate
 Sieve analysis of fine and coarse aggregates
 Slump of portland cement concrete
 Air content of freshly mixed concrete
 Unit weight/Yield of concrete
 Making and curing concrete compressive
 specimens
 Compressive strength of cylindrical concrete
 specimens
 Total moisture content of aggregate by drying
 Predicting potential strength of portland
 cement concrete
 Determination of Ā of total solids in concrete
 Determination of free moisture in fine
 aggregate using 20 gram or 26 gram A
 “Speedy Moisture Tester”
 Rapid Chloride Permeability Test
 Note 1
 
 AASHTO R 60
 MP 700.00.06
 AASHTO T 27 and T 11
 AASHTO T 119 Note 1
 AASHTO T 152
 AASHTO T 196
 AASHTO T 121
 AASHTO T 23 With MP
 601.04.20
 AASHTO T 22
 AASHTO T 255
 MP 711.03.31
 MP 601.03.51
 MP 702.00.20
 AASHTO T 277
 
 When testing concrete produced by volumetric batching and continuous mixing, the
 consistency testing shall be delayed for approximately three to five minutes after
 mixing.
 
 306
 
 601.4.2-Contractor's Quality Control: Quality control of the structural concrete is the
 responsibility of the Contractor as designated in MP 601.03.50. The Contractor shall maintain
 equipment and qualified personnel, including at least one certified Portland cement concrete
 technician who shall direct all field inspection, sampling and testing necessary to determine
 the magnitude of the various properties of concrete governed by the Specifications and shall
 maintain these properties within the limits of this Specification. The Contractor’s personnel
 
 who conducts the field sampling and testing shall be a certified Portland Cement
 Concrete Inspector. The quality control plan designated in MP 601.03.50 shall be submitted
 to the Engineer at the preconstruction conference. Work shall not begin until the plan is
 reviewed for conformance with the contract documents.
 The Contractor shall provide a copy of the quality control test results to the Supplier of the
 concrete which was tested within 48 hours of the completion of the test.
 601.4.3-Acceptance Testing: Acceptance sampling and testing of Portland cement
 concrete is the responsibility of the Division, except for furnishing of necessary materials.
 Quality control sampling and testing performed by the Contractor may be utilized by the
 Division for acceptance.
 Strength as used in this specification, is only one indicator of the durability of the Portland
 cement concrete. Evaluation of structural concrete may include evaluation of the freeze-thaw
 durability, scaling characteristics, abrasion resistance, density and such other factors the
 Division deems appropriate.
 601.4.4-Compressive Strength Tests for Acceptance: A strength test shall consist of
 three test specimens. Either 6” x 12” (150 mm x 300 mm) cylinders or 4” x 8” (100 mm x 200
 mm) cylinders are permitted, provided the requirements of MP 711.03.23 are met. The size of
 the cylinders which the Contractor intends to use on each project shall be listed in the
 Contractor’s Quality Control Plan. The test shall be the average of the three specimens, except
 that if one specimen shows manifest evidence of improper sampling, molding, or testing, it
 shall be discarded and the remaining two strengths averaged. Should more than one specimen
 representing a given test show definite defects due to improper sampling, molding, or testing,
 the entire test shall be discarded.
 The maximum acceptable range of compressive strengths within a set of three cylinders is
 9.5%. This range is found by multiplying 9.5% times the average compressive strength of the
 three cylinders. If this acceptable range is exceeded, the cylinder that varies the most from the
 average shall be discarded, and the remaining two cylinders shall be evaluated as outlined in
 the following paragraph.
 The maximum acceptable range of compressive strengths within a set of two cylinders is
 8.0%. This range is found by multiplying 8.0% times the average compressive strength of the
 two cylinders. If this acceptable range is exceeded, the entire test shall be discarded. Under
 no circumstances shall a compressive strength test consist of less than the average of two
 specimens.
 Compressive strength tests shall conform to the requirements of Table 601.3.1. Statistical
 analysis may indicate a percentage of production to be below nominal minimum design
 strength. Concrete represented by compressive strengths below the nominal minimum design
 strength of Table 601.3.1 may be removed and replaced by the Contractor. If the Contractor
 elects to leave the material in place, it will be evaluated as to adequacy for the use intended.
 307
 
 All concrete evaluated as unsatisfactory for the use intended shall be removed and replaced or
 otherwise corrected by and at the expense of the Contractor as required in 105.3. When an
 evaluation indicates that the work may satisfactorily remain in place, a statistical analysis will
 be made of the material. If this statistical analysis indicates at least 93 percent of the material
 may be expected to have compressive strengths equal to or greater than that shown in Table
 601.3.1 and 99.87 percent of the material may be expected to have compressive strengths at
 least one standard deviation above forty percent of the design strength (0.4f'c+σ), the work will
 be accepted as substantially complying with the specification requirements. If this statistical
 analysis indicates that less than 93 percent of the material may be expected to have compressive
 strengths equal to or greater than that shown in Table 601.3.1 or less than 99.87 percent of the
 material may be expected to have compressive strengths at least one standard deviation above
 forty percent of the design strength (0.4f'c+σ), the Engineer will provide for an appropriate
 adjustment under the provisions of 601.15.
 Whenever possible, the Division's statistical analysis will be based on a minimum of 10
 cylinder test results. These results may be from the concrete item being placed, the same class
 of concrete on the project, or the same class of concrete from the producer. All of the cylinder
 test results used in this evaluation, however, must be from the same mix design.
 601.4.5-Tests for Permeability Acceptance of Class H Concrete: The Contractor shall
 be required to compare the compressive strength test results obtained in Section 601.4.4, for
 Class H concrete, to the compressive strength of the approved test mix per Section 601.3.
 The Contractor shall also be required to fabricate six rapid chloride permeability test
 specimens in accordance with AASHTO T277 every time that a set of compressive strength
 specimens for Class H concrete is fabricated. Chloride Permeability of the in-place concrete shall
 be considered acceptable if the 28-day compressive strengths obtained in Section 601.4.4 are
 greater than eighty percent of the 28-day compressive strength of the approved test mix. Concrete
 represented by compressive strengths below eighty percent of the 28-day compressive strength of
 the approved test mix may be removed and replaced by the Contractor. If the Contractor elects to
 leave the material in place, it will be evaluated as to adequacy for the use intended. All concrete
 evaluated as unsatisfactory for the use intended shall be removed and replaced or otherwise
 corrected by and at the expense of the Contractor as required in Section 105.3.
 The Contractor shall also be required to fabricate six rapid chloride permeability test specimens
 in accordance with AASHTO T277 every time that a set of compressive strength specimens is
 fabricated. These test specimens shall be moist cured until as close to the time of test as possible.
 If the 28-day compressive strength of the in-place concrete (obtained in Section 601.4.4) is less
 than or equal to eighty percent of the compressive strength of the approved test mix, these rapid
 chloride permeability test specimens shall be tested in accordance with AASHTO T277, otherwise
 testing of these specimens is not required. When testing of these specimens is required, two test
 specimens shall be tested at each of the following ages: 35, 56, and 90 days. These test results
 shall be used by the Engineer as the basis for evaluation as to the adequacy of the material for the
 use intended.
 601.5-EQUIPMENT AND TOOLS:
 601.5.1-Field Laboratory: Field laboratory provisions shall conform to the requirements
 prescribed in 501.5.1.
 
 308
 
 601.5.2-Batching Plant and Equipment:
 601.5.2.1-General: The batching plant shall include bins, weigh hoppers, and scales
 for the fine aggregate and for each size of coarse aggregate. If cement is used in bulk, a
 separate bin, weight hopper, and scale for cement shall be included. The cement weight
 hopper shall be properly sealed to preclude dusting during operation and shall be properly
 vented to prevent a build-up in pressure. The discharge chute shall not be suspended from
 the weighing hopper and shall be so arranged that cement will not lodge in it nor leak from
 it. When fly ash is used in the concrete a separate bin shall be included.
 601.5.2.2-Bins: Bins with adequate separate compartments for fine aggregate and for
 each size of coarse aggregate shall be provided in the batching plant.
 601.5.2.3-Scales: The scales for weighing aggregates and cement shall conform to the
 requirements in 109.1.
 Scales shall be inspected and sealed as often as may be deemed necessary to assure
 their continued accuracy. The Contractor shall have on hand not less than ten 50 lb. (20
 kg) weights for testing scales.
 601.5.2.4-Automatic Weighing Devices: Batching plants equipped to proportion
 aggregates and bulk cement by means of automatic weighing devices of an approved type
 may be used.
 601.5.2.5-Water Measuring Equipment: Water shall be measured by volume or by
 weight. The device for the measurement of the water shall be readily adjustable and, under
 all operating conditions, shall have an accuracy within one percent of the quantity of water
 required for the batch.
 601.5.2.6-Admixture Dispenser: A positive, automatic method shall be used for
 adding each admixture in solution.
 601.5.2.7-Aggregate Sampling: Provisions shall be made to allow a rapid sampling
 of the aggregates as they pass from the storage bin to the weigh hopper or as they pass from
 the storage bin into the conveyor feed.
 601.5.3-Mixers and Agitators: Site and central mixers, truck mixers, truck agitators, and
 non-agitator trucks shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 157, except as modified.
 Volumetric mixers shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 241, except as
 modified.
 Central mixers shall be equipped with a device which will automatically lock the discharge
 lever when the drum has been charged and release it at the end of the mixing period. The
 device shall be equipped with a bell or other suitable warning device adjusted to give a clearly
 audible signal each time the lock is released. In case of failure of the timing device, the mixer
 may be used for the balance of the day while it is being repaired, providing that each batch is
 mixed for the specified time period.
 All mixers shall be cleaned at suitable intervals. The pickup and throw-over blades in the
 drum or drums shall be repaired or replaced when they are worn down ¾ inch (20 mm) or
 309
 
 more. The Contractor shall either have available at the job site a copy of the manufacturer's
 design, showing dimensions and arrangements of blades in reference to original height and
 depth, or provide permanent marks on blades to show points of ¾ inch (20 mm) wear from
 new conditions. Holes of ¼ inch (6 mm) diameter near each end and at midpoint of each blade
 are recommended).
 601.5.4-Recording Thermometer: The Contractor shall supply a continuous recording
 thermometer capable of recording temperatures in the 30-150° F (1 – 66 °C) range. It shall likewise
 provide a recording capability over a 24-hour continuous period, minimum. The Contractor shall
 provide any ancillary equipment, supplies and labor necessary for calibration of this equipment.
 601.6-HANDLING, MEASURING, AND BATCHING OF MATERIALS:
 Handling, measuring, and batching of materials for ready-mix concrete shall conform to
 the requirements specified in 501.7. Handling, measuring, and batching of materials for
 volumetric batching and continuous mixing shall conform to the applicable requirements specified
 in 501.7 and AASHTO M 241.
 When microsilica densified powder is used, the densified powder shall be weighed using an
 approved cement scale or standard 25 lb. (11.3 kg) or 50 lb. (22.6 kg) full bags may be substituted.
 Batching tolerance for the cement plus densified powder shall be 1.0%.
 Batching and mixing recommendations for bulk and bagged densified microsilica (silica
 fume) are provided in the Silica Fume User’s Manual which is available through the Silica Fume
 Association (Report Number FHWA-IF-05-016).
 These recommendations include procedures to be used when the Ready-Mix Supplier
 desires to add microsilica, which is supplied in repulpable bags, into the mix. If these
 recommendations are followed, and the Ready-Mix Supplier can satisfactorily demonstrate to the
 Engineer, by means of testing and wet-sieving a trial batch (see section 7.3.6 of the Silica Fume
 User’s Manual), that there are no fragments of the packaging material remaining in the mix, then
 the restriction in section 501.7, concerning the addition of the pozzolan packaging material, may
 be waived.
 The above referenced testing and wet-sieving of the trial batch shall be done on a plant-byplant and mix-by-mix basis. When truck-mixed concrete is used, the truck which demonstrates
 the greatest degree of variability in the uniformity requirements, as specified in AASHTO M 157,
 shall be the truck which is used to produce the trial batch for testing and wet-sieving purposes. If
 the Ready-Mix Supplier intends to use this approach, it shall be addressed in the Plant portion of
 the Quality Control Plan.
 601.7-MIXING:
 Concrete may be central-mixed, truck-mixed, or shrink-mixed as defined in AASHTO M
 157 and will be designated as ready-mixed concrete. The production of ready-mixed concrete
 shall meet the applicable requirements of AASHTO M 157, paragraphs ten and eleven, except as
 otherwise specified.
 Concrete for incidental construction items may be made by volumetric batching and
 continuous mixing as designated in ASTM C 685, except as otherwise specified. Concrete
 produced by this method will not be permitted in bridge, box culvert, pavement, or retaining wall
 construction.
 When a truck mixer or agitator is used for transporting concrete, the concrete shall be
 delivered to the site of the work and discharge shall be completed within one and one-half hours
 310
 
 after the addition of the cement to the aggregates. Each batch of the concrete delivered at the job
 site shall be accompanied by a batch ticket (Form HL 411A) bearing complete batching
 information. In adverse weather or under other conditions contributing to quick stiffening of the
 concrete, or when the temperature of the concrete is 85 F (30° C) or above, the time between the
 introduction of the cement to the aggregates and discharge shall not exceed one hour. When a truck
 mixer is used for the complete mixing of the concrete, the mixing operation shall begin within one
 hour after the cement has been added to the aggregate.
 When placing concrete at remote locations, due to excessive haul time to the site of work
 from the closest approved batch plant, and when discharge of the concrete within the time limits
 specified in the previous paragraph is not possible, or in other circumstances when approved by
 the Engineer, a concrete mix that includes a hydration control stabilizing admixture may be used
 to extend the allowable concrete discharge time. The subject concrete mix containing this
 admixture must be approved in accordance with section 601.3.1, and the hydration control
 stabilizing admixture must be approved in accordance with section 707.15. When conditions are
 such that a hydration control stabilizing admixture is used, the allowable time between the
 introduction of the cement to the aggregates and discharge of the concrete shall be increased to
 three hours. The limit of 300 maximum revolutions (pertaining to truck mixers or agitators)
 specified in AASHTO M 157 may be waived when hydration control stabilizing admixtures are
 used, provided that no additional water is added prior to discharge of the concrete. A single batch
 of concrete containing a hydration control stabilizing admixture may not be discharged on more
 than one project
 The addition of water after completion of initial mixing will not be permitted, except that
 when concrete is delivered in truck mixers, additional water may be added to adjust to a specified
 consistency. In this event, a minimum of 20 additional revolutions of the truck mixer drum at
 mixing speed shall be required before discharge of any concrete; the maximum allowable time
 between the addition of the cement to the aggregates and the discharge of the batch shall not be
 exceeded. Concrete that is not within the specified consistency limits at the time of placement shall
 not be used.
 Shrink-mixed concrete is a ready-mixed concrete which is initially and partially mixed in
 a central mix plant and lastly mixed to completion in a truck mixer while in transit to or after
 arrival at the job site. Shrink-mixed concrete will be allowed for use in the work if specified in
 the Contract.
 601.8-FORMS:
 601.8.1-General: Forms shall be of wood, metal or other approved material and shall be
 mortar tight and sufficiently rigid to prevent distortion due to pressure of the concrete and other
 loads incidental to the construction operations including vibration. Wood forms shall be
 constructed and maintained so as to prevent the opening of joints due to shrinkage of the lumber.
 All falsework shall be designed and constructed to provide the necessary rigidity and to
 support the loads without appreciable settlement or deformation. Suitable jacks, wedges or
 other approved devices shall be used to maintain the forms at correct elevation and to permit
 lowering the centers gradually and uniformly without injury to the structure.
 Deck slab overhang forms shall be supported from the bottom flange of fascia girders or
 stringers. The Contractor shall submit forming plans and supporting calculations for the
 overhang to the Engineer for approval prior to erecting the formwork.
 
 311
 
 A "Telltale" or other approved type of indicator shall be attached to the forms and arranged
 in such a manner that any settlement or movement in the forms or falsework is indicated.
 Forms shall be filleted and chamfered as shown on the Plans and shall be given a bevel or draft
 in the case of all projections to assure easy removal.
 All field welding shall be performed by a certified welder. Welding of form ties and
 supports to the beam will not be permitted. Welding of screed rail supports will not be
 permitted in the top flange in tension zone.
 601.8.2-Form Lumber: Form lumber for all exposed concrete surfaces shall be dressed
 at least on one side and two edges.
 601.8.3-Metal Ties: Metal ties or anchorages within the forms shall be constructed to
 permit their removal to a depth of at least 1 inch (25 mm) from the face without injury to the
 concrete. Only rods shall be used for internal ties. The cavities shall be filled with cement
 mortar and the surface left sound, smooth, even, and uniform in color.
 601.8.4-Cleanouts: Where the bottom of the form is inaccessible, the lower form area
 shall be left loose or other provisions made so that extraneous material may be removed from
 the forms immediately before placing the concrete.
 601.8.5-Surface Treatment: Forms shall be treated with oil in such manner as to prevent
 contamination of reinforcing steel. Oil which will adhere to or discolor the concrete shall not
 be used.
 601.8.6-Metal Forms: The metal used for the forms shall be of such thickness that the
 forms will remain true to shape. All bolts and rivet heads shall be countersunk. Clamps, pins,
 and other connecting devices shall be designed to hold the forms rigidly together and to allow
 removal without injury to the concrete. Metal forms which do not present a smooth surface or
 do not line up properly shall not be used. Metal forms shall be kept free of rust, grease, or
 other foreign matter.
 601.8.7-Removal of Forms and Construction of Superimposed Elements: The forms
 for any portion of the structure shall not be removed until the concrete is strong enough to
 prevent damage. Methods of form removal likely to cause overstressing of the concrete shall
 not be used.
 The minimum requirements for removal of forms or supports and the construction of
 superimposed elements shall be as specified in Table 601.8.7.
 In lieu of field cured cylinders for the determination of compressive strength required for
 from removal and construction of superimposed elements, the Contractor may use the Maturity
 Method for the estimation of concrete strength as outlined in MP 601.04.21.
 
 312
 
 TABLE 601.8.7
 Requirements for Removal of Forms and Construction of Superimposed Elements
 Placing Concrete In
 Superimposed Elements
 Structural Element
 Compressive
 Compressive
 Strength-psi (Mpa)
 Strength-psi (Mpa)
 Bridge Decks
 2000 (14.0)
 3000 (21)
 Columns
 2000 (14.0)
 2000 (14.0)
 Walls & Beams
 2000 (14.0)
 2000 (14.0)
 Footings
 500 (3.5)
 2000 (14.0)
 Components Supported By Falsework
 3000 (21)
 3000 (21)
 2000 (14.0)
 Parapets
 ------------(See 601.11)
 Removal of Forms
 
 601.8.8-Slip Forming: Slip forming and related methods of placing concrete may be used.
 At the Contractor's option, parapet wall joints and median barrier on the bridge may be sawed
 in lieu of formed open joints and the joints shall be spaced as shown on the Plans and shall be
 1/4 inch  1/16 inch (6 mm  1.6 mm) wide. Joints shall be sawed full width from the top of
 the wall to the upper break point in the wall. From the upper break point to the bottom of the
 wall a 2 inches (50 mm) minimum depth saw cut shall be made along the face and back of the
 wall. Joints shall be sealed in accordance with Section 501.16.1. The face of the back-up
 material shall be ½ inch (13 mm) minimum from the concrete surface.
 Initial sawing of joints shall commence as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently
 to permit sawing without excess raveling, usually 4 to 24 hours. All joints shall be initially
 sawed before uncontrolled shrinkage cracking takes place, but no later than 24 hours after
 placement of concrete.
 601.8.9-Stay-in-Place Fabricated Metal Forms for Concrete Bridge Decks: All concrete
 bridge decks shall be constructed with a stay-in-place fabricated metal forming system per the
 requirements shown in this specification unless otherwise noted in the plans.
 601.8.9.1-General: Stay-in-place fabricated metal forms for concrete deck slabs of
 bridges shall be used on all interior bays of beams. For overhangs and where longitudinal
 expansion joints are located between stringers removable forms shall be used. The design
 and material of the forms, in the judgment of the Engineer, shall be such as to give an
 expected maintenance free service life equal to the service life of the concrete slab. The stayin-place fabricated metal forms shall be crimped at each end.
 Unless otherwise specified in the plans, the weight of stay-in-place fabricated metal
 forms plus concrete in the form flutes used in the design is 15 psf (74 N/m2). The contractor
 shall submit revised computations if the proposed forming system is heavier than 15 psf (74
 N/m2). The cost of the revised computations shall be at no additional cost to the Division.
 601.8.9.2-Material: Stay-in-place fabricated metal forms for concrete decks slabs and
 exposed material for supports shall be zinc-coated (galvanized) steel sheet conforming to
 ASTM A-653, Designation SS, Grades 33 (230) through 80 (550), with a G165 Coating
 313
 
 Designation. The stay-in-place fabricated metal forms shall be designed on the basis of
 dead load of the forms, reinforcement, and the plastic concrete plus 50 psf (2400 N/m²) for
 construction loads. Unit working stresses shall be in accordance with the AASHTO LRFD
 Bridge Design Specifications for construction loads and the unit stress in the steel sheet
 shall be not more than 0.725 of the specified minimum yield strength of the material
 furnished but not to exceed 36,000 psi (250 Mpa). Maximum deflection under weight of
 plastic concrete, reinforcement and form shall not exceed 1/180 of the form span or ½” (13
 mm), whichever is less. Maximum deflection under 60 psf (2900 N/m²) of live loads shall
 not exceed 1/360 of the form span or ¼” (6 mm), whichever is less. The form span for
 design and deflection shall be the clear distance between the flanges of the supporting
 beams less 2” (50 mm), measured parallel to the form flutes.
 All stay-in-place fabricated metal forms shall have a minimum thickness of 22 gage.
 Physical design properties shall be computed in accordance with requirements of
 American Iron and Steel Institute Specification for the Design of Cold-Formed Steel
 Structural members, latest published edition.
 All reinforcing bars in the bottom layer of the deck slab reinforcement shall have a
 minimum concrete cover of 1” (25 mm). The distance from the top of the slab to the bottom
 layer of deck slab reinforcement shall not be less than that shown on the plans.
 601.8.9.3-Installation: All forms shall be installed in accordance with detailed
 fabrication plans submitted to the Engineer for approval. The fabrication plans shall clearly
 indicate locations where the forms are supported by steel beam flanges.
 Form sheets shall not be permitted to rest directly on the top of the stringer or floor beam
 flanges. Sheets shall be securely fastened to form supports and shall have a minimum bearing
 length of 1” (25 mm) at each end. Form supports shall be placed in direct contact with the
 flange of stringer or floor beam. All attachments shall be made by bolts, clips, or other
 approved means. Welding of form supports to flanges shall not be permitted.
 Any exposed form metal where the galvanized coating has been damaged shall be
 thoroughly cleaned and wire brushed, and then painted with two coats of zinc-rich primer,
 conforming to Subsection 711.21, to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
 Transverse construction joints shall be located at the bottom of a flute and ¼” (6 mm)
 weep holes shall be provided in the field at 12” (300 mm)  3” (75 mm) on center along the
 line of the joint.
 601.8.9.4-Placement of Concrete: Concrete shall be placed in accordance with the
 contract specifications. The entire form shall be filled with deck concrete. No filler material
 shall be permitted. Particular emphasis should be placed on proper vibration of the concrete
 to avoid honeycomb and voids, especially at construction joints, expansion joints, flutes, and
 ends of form sheets.
 The use of covered flutes or fillers of any kind in the flutes of the stay-in-place fabricated
 metal forms is not permitted.
 Prior to placement of concrete, the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer for approval
 Concrete Volume to Stay in Place Form Adjustment Factor (SIPadj). The SIPadj shall be
 the equivalent ratio of the concrete volume in the form flutes to Square Yard of Stay-InPlace Form Area.
 
 314
 
 601.8.9.5-Inspection: The Contractor's method of construction shall be carefully
 observed during all phases of the construction of the bridge deck. These methods include
 installation of the Stay-in-place fabricated metal forms; location and fastening of the
 reinforcement; composition of concrete, placement and vibration; and finishing of the bridge
 deck.
 Unless waived by the Engineer, the Contractor shall remove at least one section of the
 forms at a location and time selected by the Engineer for each concrete placement in each
 approved pour sequence. This should be done as soon after placing the concrete as
 practicable in order to provide visual evidence that the concrete mix and the Contractor’s
 procedures are obtaining the desired results. An additional section shall be removed each
 time the concrete mix or the contractor’s procedures are changed, unless waived by the
 Engineer.
 After the deck concrete has been in place for a minimum of two days, the concrete shall
 be tested for soundness and bonding of the forms by sounding on the forms with a hammer
 at least 50 percent of the area of at least 25 percent of the individual form panels, as selected
 by the Engineer on a random basis. If areas of doubtful soundness are disclosed by this
 procedure, the Contractor will be required to remove the forms from such areas for visual
 inspection.
 At locations where sections of the forms are removed, the Contractor will not be required
 to replace the forms, but the adjacent metal forms and supports shall be repaired to present a
 neat appearance and assure their satisfactory retention. As soon as the form is removed, the
 concrete surfaces will be examined for cavities, honeycombing and other defects. If
 irregularities are found, and in the opinion of the Engineer these irregularities do not justify
 rejection of the work, the concrete shall be given a Class 1, Ordinary Surface Finish in
 accordance with the contract specifications and shall be repaired as the Engineer may direct.
 If the concrete where the form is removed is unsatisfactory, additional forms shall be
 removed, as necessary, to inspect and repair the slab, and the Contractor's methods of
 construction shall be modified as required to obtain satisfactory concrete in the slabs.
 The amount of sounding and form removal may be moderated, at the Engineer's
 discretion, after a substantial amount of slab has been constructed and inspected if the
 Contractor's methods of construction and the results of the inspections as outlined above
 indicate that sound concrete is being obtained throughout the slabs.
 The Contractor shall provide all facilities required for the safe and convenient conduct of
 the Engineer's inspection procedures.
 601.8.9.6-Forming System Changes: The contractor shall not utilize a removable
 forming system without the submittal of the following information:
 1. Revised camber tables based on actual forming system.
 2. Revised dead load deflection tables based on actual forming system.
 These revised drawings must be stamped by a West Virginia Professional Engineer and
 approved by the Engineer prior to commencing forming. No change in unit prices, or contract
 completion date will be permitted for the use of a removable forming system.
 
 315
 
 601.8.10-Architectural Formwork:
 601.8.10.1-General: This work includes additional requirements for the forming of
 cast-in-place structural concrete designated as architectural. The scope of this work is as
 indicated and as detailed on the drawings.
 601.8.10.2-Submittals: The following shall be submitted to the Engineer for his
 review:
 A. Product data and installation instructions for manufactured form systems, form
 liners, release agents, ties, and accessories. The release agent manufacturer shall
 certify that the products supplied comply with regulations controlling the use of
 volatile organic compounds (VOC's).
 B. Shop drawings for fabrication and erection. These drawings shall show all items
 that visually affect the exposed concrete, including, but not limited to, general
 form construction, jointing, specially formed joints or reveals, and patterns of
 placement. The Engineer’s review will be for general architectural applications
 and features only. Formwork design for structural stability and sufficiency is the
 Contractor's responsibility and shall not be submitted for the Engineer’s review.
 C. Mockup or Sample Panels. The Contractor shall submit a mockup or sample panel
 of their respective material indicating texture, finish, and pattern in accordance
 with Section 601.8.10.3.A. This Mockup or Sample Panel shall have a minimum
 front surface area of 15 ft2 (1.2 m2).
 601.8.10.3-Quality Assurance:
 A. The Contractor shall construct a mockup or sample panel using the proposed
 formwork and facing materials in order to demonstrate the required finishes and
 textures. Actual construction of architectural concrete shall not proceed until the
 Engineer has accepted the sample units.
 B. Before placing concrete, the Contractor shall check lines and levels of erected
 formwork, and shall make corrections and adjustments to ensure:
 1) proper size and location of concrete members
 2) stability of the forming systems
 C. During concrete placement, the Contractor shall check formwork and related
 supports to ensure the forms are not displaced and that completed work will be
 within specified tolerances.
 601.8.10.4-Materials:
 601.8.10.4.1-Form Materials:
 A. Forms for Exposed-Finish Concrete: Unless otherwise indicated, construct
 formwork for exposed concrete surfaces with plywood, metal, metal-framed
 plywood-faced or other paneled materials to provide as-cast surfaces. Furnish in
 largest sizes to minimize number of joints and to conform to joint system shown
 on drawings. Provide form materials with sufficient thickness to withstand
 pressure of placed concrete without bow or deflection beyond allowable
 tolerances.
 
 316
 
 1)
 
 Use overlaid plywood, APA grade trademarked "High Density Overlay
 (HDO)."
 2) Use plywood, APA grade trademarked "B-B Plyform Class 1."
 B. Forms for Textured Finish Concrete: Provide special forming materials to
 produce surfaces with face design, texture, arrangement, and configuration as
 shown on drawings or as required to match Engineer's control sample. Provide
 solid backing and form supports to ensure stable textured form liners.
 C. Form Coating: Provide a commercial formula release agent that will not bond
 with, stain, or adversely affect concrete. Provide material that will not impair
 subsequent treatment of concrete surfaces requiring bond or adhesion, nor impede
 wetting surfaces to be cured with water or a curing compound.
 601.8.10.4.2-Formwork Design: Design formwork for easy removal without impact,
 shock, or damage to the concrete and adjacent materials.
 601.8.10.5-Construction Methods:
 601.8.10.5.1-Form Construction:
 A. General: Construct forms to sizes, shapes, lines, and dimensions shown, and as
 required to obtain accurate alignment, location, level, and plumb work in finished
 structures. Provide for openings, offsets, keyways, recesses, chamfers, blocking,
 screeds, bulkheads, and other as required.
 B. Fabricate forms to prevent cement paste from leaking while placing concrete and
 for easy removal without hammering or prying against exposed concrete surfaces.
 Provide crush plates where stripping might damage cast concrete surfaces.
 Provide top forms for inclined surfaces where slope is too steep to place concrete.
 Solidly butt joints and provide backup material at joints to prevent leakage and
 fins. Assemble forms so that they may be easily removed without damaging
 exposed concrete surfaces
 C. Provide temporary form openings where inaccessible formwork interior can be
 cleaned and inspected before placing concrete. Place temporary form openings
 as inconspicuously as possible, consistent with project requirements.
 D. When drilling forms used for exposed concrete, drill from the contact face to the
 outside to suit the ties used and to prevent leakage of concrete mortar. Do not
 splinter the forms by driving ties through improperly prepared holes.
 E. Unless otherwise shown in the plans,
 1) provide sharp, clean corners at intersecting planes with no visible edges or
 offsets.
 2) provide accurately formed chamfered corners using ¾ x ¾ inch
 (19 x 19 mm) strips, surfaced to produce uniformly straight lines and tight
 edge joints.
 601.8.10.5.2-Form Coatings:
 A. General: Coat form contact surfaces with form-release agent before placing
 reinforcement. Do not allow excess material to accumulate in forms or to come
 into contact with reinforcement or surfaces that will be bonded to fresh
 concrete. Apply coating according to manufacturer's instructions.
 317
 
 B. Coat steel forms with non-staining, rust-preventative release agent, or
 otherwise protect from rusting. Rust-stained steel formwork is not acceptable.
 601.8.10.5.3-Reusing Forms: Split, frayed, delaminated, or otherwise damaged
 form-facing materials are not acceptable. Clean and apply a new form-release agent
 to concrete contact surfaces.
 601.9-ADVERSE WEATHER CONDITIONS:
 601.9.1-Cold Weather Concreting: The plastic concrete shall have a temperature of at
 least 50 F (10 C) but not more than 85 F (30 C) at the time of placing. When the plastic
 concrete has a temperature of less than 55 F (13 C), the provisions for cold weather
 concreting shall apply. Maintenance of at least the minimum temperature shall be
 accomplished by heating the water or the aggregates, or both, as necessary. Heating methods
 which alter or prevent the entrainment of the required amount of air in the concrete shall not
 be used. Heating equipment shall be capable of heating the materials to achieve the specified
 temperature of the plastic concrete. The temperature of the aggregates or water shall not
 exceed 150 F (65 C) at the time the cement is added to the mixture. Materials containing
 frost or lumps of frozen materials shall not be used.
 If the Contractor is placing concrete or plans to place concrete during cold weather
 conditions, the Contractor shall advise the Division of his plans for curing and protecting the
 concrete. The Division may at any time, require the Contractor to provide additional protection
 to cause the provisions of this specification to be met.
 Stockpiled aggregate may be heated by the use of dry heat or steam. Aggregates shall not
 be heated directly by gas or oil flame or on sheet metal over fire.
 Binned aggregates may be heated by steam-coil or water-coil heating. The use of live
 steam on or through binned aggregate will not be permitted.
 The use of calcium chloride to hasten the initial set of structural concrete will not be
 permitted.
 Insulated forms may be used for protecting and curing concrete. There will be no additional
 cost to the Division for the use of insulated forms.
 Class H or Class K Concrete Cold Weather Provisions: Cold weather periods shall be
 defined as those periods when temperatures above 50° F (10° C) do not occur for more than half
 of any 24 hour duration. The temperature of the surface on which the concrete is to be placed shall
 not be less than 45° F (7° C) immediately prior to placement of the concrete. During the cold
 weather periods, as defined above, the temperature of the concrete immediately after placement
 shall be between 55 and 75° F (13 and 24° C).
 601.9.2-Hot Weather Concreting: The Contractor will be required to state, at the preconstruction conference, his plan of action when the temperature of plastic concrete reaches
 90 F (32 C).
 When a free air, shaded thermometer in the vicinity of the concrete production plant
 reaches 85 F (30 C), thermometer readings of the temperature of the plastic concrete shall be
 taken at least hourly.
 When the temperature of the plastic concrete reaches 85 F (30 C), the elapsed time
 between the introduction of the mixing water to the cement-aggregates and discharge of the
 318
 
 mix shall not exceed 1 hour. At this temperature or above, particular attention shall be paid to
 the Specification provisions concerning the sprinkling and wetting of surfaces not oil-treated,
 the maintenance of coarse aggregate stock in saturated surface-dry condition, and the prompt
 start of concrete curing operations.
 When the temperature of the plastic concrete reaches 90 F (32 C), immediate steps shall
 be taken to cool either mixing water or aggregates, or both, in order to maintain a plastic
 concrete temperature of 90 F (32 C) or less. Crushed or flaked ice may be used to cool the
 mixing water. Crushed or flaked ice may also be introduced into the mixing drum when the
 concrete is batched and mixed in a truck mixer. The ice will be considered as part of the mix
 water in the mix proportions. The mixing operation shall not be considered complete until all
 ice in the drum has melted.
 In no event shall concrete be placed when its temperature in the plastic state at the
 completion of mixing exceeds 90 F (32 C).
 Bridge Decks: The Contractor's plan of action for all bridge deck concreting operations
 shall contain provisions designed to minimize the probability that any bridge deck concrete
 will be placed when the ambient temperature is greater than 85 F (30 C).
 601.10-PLACING CONCRETE:
 601.10.1-General: Concrete shall not be placed until forms and reinforcing steel have
 been inspected and approved. The forms shall be cleaned of all debris immediately prior to
 placing concrete, and surfaces not oil treated shall be wetted. The method and sequence of
 placing concrete will be subject to approval by the Engineer. Concrete shall be placed so that
 no segregation will occur and no displacement of reinforcement will be caused. Concrete shall
 be placed in the forms as nearly as practical in its final position in order to avoid rehandling,
 and an approximately horizontal surface of the plastic concrete shall be maintained. After
 initial set of the concrete, the forms shall not be jarred and no strain shall be placed on the ends
 of projecting reinforcement. Concrete shall not be placed until all laitance which may have
 formed on concrete previously placed, or any loose deleterious material on reinforcing bars,
 has been removed.
 601.10.1.1-Pre-Pour Meeting: On projects for which the concrete is being used in
 bridge construction, the Contractor shall schedule a meeting prior to the start of the
 concrete work. The Engineer, Construction Manager, Prime Contractor, Concrete
 Contractor, Concrete Finisher, Concrete Supplier, and the Individual or Agency that will
 perform the quality control testing of the concrete shall attend. Topics of discussion shall
 include concrete mixture proportions, batching, transporting, handling, placing, finishing,
 curing, and on-site quality control testing requirements.
 
 319
 
 601.10.1.2-Concrete Placement Limitations: Immediately prior to, and during,
 placement of Class H concrete, if the evaporation rate exceeds 0.10 lb./sq. ft. per hour (0.5
 kg/sq. m per hour) (see Figure 1), the Contractor shall make provisions (i.e. wind breaks,
 fogging, etc.) to reduce the rate prior to placing concrete. These provisions shall be
 maintained during the placement of the concrete. If the evaporation rate obtained from Figure
 1 is close enough to the maximum allowable value of 0.10 lb./sq. ft. per hour (0.5 kg/sq. m per
 hour) that there may a discrepancy in the exact numerical value, the following equation shall
 be used to obtain a more accurate value.
 E = [Tc2.5 – (r x Ta2.5)] [1 + 0.4V] x 10-6
 Where:
 E
 Tc
 Ta
 r
 V
 
 =
 =
 =
 =
 =
 
 evaporation rate, lb/ft2/h
 concrete temperature, °F
 air temperature, °F
 (relative humidity %) / 100
 wind velocity, mph
 Example:
 Air Temperature
 Relative Humidity
 Concrete
 Temperature
 Wind Velocity
 
 = 65 °F
 = 45%
 = 60 °F
 = 20 mph
 
 Result Using Figure 1:
 Evaporation Rate ≈ 0.11 lb/ ft2/h
 Result Using Formula:
 E
 E
 E
 E
 E
 
 =
 =
 =
 =
 =
 
 [Tc2.5 – (r x Ta2.5)] [1 + 0.4V] x 10-6
 [602.5 – (0.45 x 652.5)] [1 + (0.4 x 20)] x 10-6
 [27885 – 15328] [1 + 8] x 10-6
 12557 x 9 x 10-6
 0.11 lb/ ft2/h
 
 601.10.1.3-Concrete Placement at Night: If placement of any concrete is to be made at night,
 a plan which provides adequate lighting for the work area shall be submitted at least 14 days before
 concrete is placed for the Engineer's approval.
 
 320
 
 321
 
 601.10.2-Chutes and Troughs: Concrete shall not be dropped in the forms a greater
 distance than 5 feet (1.5 meters) without the use of closed chutes or pipes. When chutes or
 troughs are used under steep slope conditions, they shall be equipped with baffle boards or
 shall be used in short lengths to reverse the direction of movement. All chutes, troughs or
 pipes shall be kept clean and free of hardened concrete by flushing with water after each run.
 Flushing water shall be discharged outside the forms. Aluminum chutes, troughs or pipes shall
 not be used.
 601.10.3-Vibrating: Concrete shall be compacted by the operation of approved
 mechanical vibrators within the concrete. When required, vibrating shall be supplemented by
 hand spading to assure proper compaction, to force all coarse aggregate from the surface, and
 to bring mortar against the forms to produce a smooth finish. Vibrators shall be manipulated
 in such a manner that concrete is worked around reinforcement and imbedded features and into
 angles of the form. Vibration shall be of sufficient duration to accomplish compaction but
 shall not be prolonged to the point where segregation occurs. Vibration shall not be used to
 cause concrete to flow from point to point within forms. The frequency of the vibrators shall
 meet the requirements of Section 501.5.5.
 601.10.4-Placing Concrete Bridge Decks: Concrete for bridge decks shall be placed and
 finished with mechanical equipment unless waived by the Engineer. The Contractor shall
 furnish the Engineer information as to the weight of the proposed machine, the volume of
 concrete to be placed per hour, and the operating procedure to be followed.
 Where beam support screeds are used and the distance between the support and gutter line
 is in excess of 1 foot (300 mm), the Contractor shall use devices to control the grade of the
 gutter line during the deck finishing operations.
 601.10.4.1-Fogging Equipment: When Class H concrete is used, fogging equipment shall
 be available for use in accordance with these specifications. The fogging nozzles shall produce
 an atomized mist. Fogging nozzles shall incorporate compressed air to create the mist. Hand
 held or hand operated equipment shall be permitted when the Contractor has demonstrated that
 his operator has been trained in its use.
 601.10.4.2-Placement: The following requirements shall apply during placement of the
 Bridge Deck concrete:
 a. So that the use of hand tools will be kept to a minimum, concrete shall be deposited
 as nearly as possible to its final position. Internal vibrators shall not be used for
 moving concrete into position.
 b. A pencil type vibrator shall be used along all construction joints to further
 consolidate the concrete to prevent voids.
 c. The new concrete shall be placed slightly above final grade. It shall then be struckoff, screeded, and finished to final grade.
 d. The finished surface, before texturing, shall be uniformly smooth, dense and even.
 Variations in pavement surface in excess of 1/8 inch (3 mm) above, or below, the
 proper finished elevation, or surface irregularities of more than 1/8 inch (3 mm)
 in 10 feet (3 m), will not be accepted.
 322
 
 e.
 
 f.
 g.
 
 A construction dam, or bulkhead, shall be installed in case of a delay in the placement
 operations exceeding 30 minutes duration. During any delays of 30 minutes or
 less, the placement shall be protected from drying with several layers of wet
 burlap. If the concrete placement is stopped, or delayed, for 90 minutes or more,
 further placement shall be discontinued and may be resumed only after the
 concrete has cured. This restriction does not prohibit continuation of the
 placement provided a gap is left in the placement. This gap shall be sufficient in
 length to allow the finishing machine to clear the previously placed concrete.
 Adequate precautions shall be taken to protect freshly placed concrete from
 rainfall. All placement operations shall stop when it starts to rain. The Engineer
 may order removal and replacement of material damaged by rainfall.
 The addition of superficial water to the surface of the concrete to assist in finishing
 operations will not be permitted.
 
 601.10.5-Depositing Concrete Under Water: Concrete shall not be placed until all
 laitance which may have formed on concrete previously placed has been removed. Still water
 shall be maintained at the point of deposit. While depositing foundation concrete, pumping
 shall be discontinued if it results in a flow of water inside the forms. All concrete deposited
 under water shall have the minimum cement content increased at least 10 percent.
 Concrete deposited under water shall be carefully placed in a compact mass in its final
 position by means of a tremie, a closed bottom dump bucket, or other approved method and
 shall not be disturbed after being deposited.
 601.11-FINISHING CONCRETE SURFACES:
 The surface of the concrete shall be finished immediately after form removal.
 The exposed surfaces of bridge parapets, wingwalls, headwalls and vertical edge of the
 bridge deck shall be given a Class 2, Rubbed Finish, or a Class 1, Ordinary Surface Finish
 supplemented with wood float rubbing. When the Class 1, Ordinary Finish is used, the forms shall
 be removed as early as practical, not to exceed six hours (in lieu of 601.8.7) after placing, and the
 finish completed including rubbing with a wood float and water. The rubbing shall produce a
 nonplastered, smooth textured and uniform color surface. Other concrete surfaces except bridge
 decks shall be given a Class 1, Ordinary Finish.
 Unless otherwise shown in the plans, all concrete designated as architectural shall receive
 a Class 1, Ordinary Surface Finish, as defined in Section 601.11.1.
 601.11.1-Class 1, Ordinary Surface Finish: Immediately following the removal of the
 forms, all fins and irregular projections shall be removed from all surfaces except those which
 are not to be exposed or are not to be waterproofed. On all surfaces the cavities produced by
 form ties and all other holes, honeycomb spots, broken corners or edges and other defects shall
 be thoroughly cleaned, saturated with water, and carefully pointed and trued with a mortar of
 cement and fine aggregate mixed in the proportions used in the class of concrete being finished.
 Mortar used in pointing shall be not more than 30 minutes old. The mortar patches shall be
 cured as specified in 601.12. All construction and expansion joints in the completed work shall
 be left carefully tooled and free of all mortar and concrete. The joint filler shall be left exposed
 for its full length with clean and true edges.
 
 323
 
 The resulting surfaces shall be true and uniform. All surfaces which cannot be repaired to
 the satisfaction of the Engineer shall be rubbed as specified for Class 2, Rubbed Finish.
 601.11.2-Class 2, Rubbed Finish: After removal of forms, the rubbing shall be started as
 soon as the condition of the concrete will permit. The concrete shall be thoroughly saturated
 with water immediately prior to rubbing and shall be kept saturated throughout the rubbing
 operation.
 Sufficient time shall have elapsed before wetting down to allow the mortar used in pointing
 to thoroughly set. Surfaces to be finished shall be rubbed with a medium coarse carborundum
 stone, using a small amount of mortar on its face. The mortar shall be composed of cement
 and fine sand in the same proportion as the concrete being finished. Rubbing shall be continued
 until all form marks, projections, and irregularities have been removed, all voids filled, and a
 uniform surface obtained. The past produced by this rubbing shall be left in place. After all
 concrete above the surface being treated has been cast, the final finish shall be obtained by
 rubbing with a fine carborundum stone and water. This rubbing shall be continued until all the
 paste produced by the first rubbing operation has been removed from the face of the concrete
 except from depressions and defects which have been filled with the paste. The surface of the
 concrete after rubbing shall have a non-plastered, smooth texture and a uniform color.
 After the final rubbing is completed and the surface has dried, the surface shall be rubbed
 with burlap to remove loose powder.
 The resulting surfaces shall be free from all unsound patches, paste, powder, and
 objectional marks.
 601.11.3-Class 6, Float Finish: This finish, for horizontal surfaces, shall be achieved by
 placing an excess of material in the form and removing or striking off the excess with a
 template, forcing the coarse aggregate below the mortar. Creation of concave surfaces shall be
 avoided. After the concrete has been struck off, the surface shall be thoroughly worked and
 floated with a suitable floating tool of wood, canvas or cork. Before the finish has set, the
 surface cement film shall be removed with a fine brush in order to have a fine grained, smooth
 but sanded texture.
 601.11.4-Finishing Concrete Bridge Decks: Any addition of water to the surface of the
 concrete to assist in the finishing operations will not be permitted. When conditions are such
 that unusually rapid drying is occurring, an atomized mist may be used to prevent the rapid
 evaporation of water from the concrete surface during the final finishing.
 601.11.4.1-Class K Bridge Decks: After striking off, consolidating, and floating have
 been completed, both while the concrete is still plastic, the surface shall be checked for
 trueness with a straightedge. The Contractor shall furnish an accurate scraping type
 straightedge with a minimum length of 10 feet (3.048 meters) and swung from a handle at
 least 3 feet (1 meter) longer than one-half the width of the slab.
 The straightedge shall be held in successive positions parallel to the road centerline and
 in contact with the roadway surface and operated from side to side until the surface is
 within the permissible tolerance provided. Advance along the roadway shall be in
 successive stages of not more than one-half of the length of the straightedge. Any
 depressions found shall be immediately filled with freshly mixed concrete, struck-off,
 324
 
 consolidated, and refloated. High areas shall be cut down and refloated. The straightedge
 testing and reflecting shall continue until the surface is found to be free from observable
 departures from the straightedge and the slab has the required grade and contour.
 Upon completion of the above operations, the surface shall be smoothed with a lute or
 smoothing float, 4 to 6 feet (1.2 to 1.8 meters) in length, after which the surfaces shall be
 tested with an accurate straightedge. This checking straightedge shall be 10 feet (3.048)
 meters long and shall be held in a position parallel to the centerline of the roadway. The
 advance of this straightedge along the slab shall be in successive stages of not more than
 one-half of its length. When tested with this straightedge, the finished surface shall be free
 from observable departures from the straightedge.
 Upon completion of the above operations, the surface of the concrete shall be given a
 groove finish while the concrete is still plastic. The tool used shall produce a groove that
 is approximately 3/32 inch (2 mm) wide. The depth of this groove shall be 1/8 inch (3
 mm) to 3/16 inch (5 mm) and spaced approximately ½ inch (13 mm) center to center. The
 grooves shall be formed in a direction that is transverse to the centerline of the roadway or
 parallel to the skew. On any one bridge the direction of the grooves shall be consistent.
 Adjacent strokes to establish the texture shall abut one another without appreciable overlap.
 Texturing shall be performed when the concrete surface is of such plasticity as to prevent
 excessive raveling (concrete too dry) or to prevent mortar from flowing back into the
 grooves (concrete too wet). All texturing shall be accomplished with a single pass of the
 tool. To facilitate drainage, the 12 inches (300 mm) immediately adjacent to the curbline
 shall be left untextured.
 Instead of forming the grooves into the plastic concrete by tining, as specified in the
 previous paragraph, the Contractor may sawcut the grooves into the hardened concrete
 bridge deck as specified in Section 601.11.4.4. All sawcutting shall be performed before
 any sealing operations required in Section 601.13.1. No additional payment will be made
 for constructing this type of bridge deck surface.
 601.11.4.2-Class H Bridge Decks: The surface of the Class H concrete shall be
 uniformly smooth, dense and even. The surface shall then be given a suitable texture with
 an approved burlap drag.
 The Contractor shall texture in a transverse or longitudinal direction. Once begun, the
 direction of texturing shall not change. All texturing shall be performed prior to the
 beginning of curing operations. Only one pass of the drag over the finished area will be
 permitted. Texturing shall be in strict accordance with the time requirements of 601.12.4
 for applying wet burlap.
 If texturing is done in the transverse direction, the Contractor shall texture by hand
 methods as soon as practicable after finishing machine passage, without any additional
 finishing operations between the machine passage and texturing operations.
 If texturing is done in the longitudinal direction, the burlap drag shall be a seamless
 strip and shall be attached to the work bridge such that the surface of the concrete is
 textured as soon as practicable after finishing machine passage, without any additional
 finishing operations between the machine passage and texturing operations. Small areas,
 inaccessible to the attached drag, may be textured by hand methods.
 The finishing movement and resulting progress of the burlap drag shall be done in a
 manner so as to prevent ridges or gouges from forming in the concrete surface. The drag
 325
 
 shall be weighted and the contact area changed as required to produce a texture acceptable
 to the Engineer. The drag shall be cleaned as required; to remove all hardened concrete
 particles and shall be replaced after each day’s operation.
 Texture resulting from the drag shall stop within one foot (305 mm) of curbs or
 parapets.
 Any hand finishing operations shall be kept to a minimum for Class H bridge decks.
 601.11.4.3-Straightedge Testing of Hardened Bridge Decks: When finishing has
 been completed and the concrete has hardened sufficiently, the surface shall be given a
 further test for trueness with a rolling straightedge. Areas showing high spots of more than
 1/8 inch (3 mm) shall be marked by the Engineer and, only when directed by the Engineer,
 such areas shall be ground with an approved grinding tool, utilizing carborundum stones
 or industrial diamond wheels; grinding shall be done to an elevation where the area or spot
 will not show a surface deviation in excess of 1/8 inch (3 mm) when tested with the 10 feet
 (3.048 meter) rolling straightedge, except that the maximum depth of grinding shall not
 exceed ¼ inch (6 mm). The ground areas shall be treated as directed by the Engineer.
 Where the initial deviation from the straightedge is ½ inch (13 mm) or more, the Contractor
 will be required to remove and replace the complete pour in which the areas not meeting
 the required tolerance are located.
 After grinding, all areas either high or low, not meeting the requirements of 1/8 inch (3
 mm) tolerance will be measured and disposition of these areas will be as set forth in
 601.15.2.
 601.11.4.4-Class H Concrete Finished Deck Grooving: After completion of water
 curing the concrete and after corrective grinding, but before opening the bridge to traffic,
 saw longitudinal or transverse grooves in accordance with the following applicable
 subsection.
 601.11.4.4.1-Transverse Grooving: After corrective grinding and before opening to
 traffic, grooves shall be cut into the concrete using a mechanical saw. These grooves shall
 be 0.10 inch (3 mm) wide and 0.25 inch (6 mm) deep. Groove spacing shall be 1.5 inches
 (38 mm) center to center. No later than one week prior to grooving operations, the
 Contractor shall provide the Engineer with two accurate, easily readable gauges with which
 to verify groove dimensions. Groove depth and spacing tolerances are limited to ±1/16 inch
 (±2 mm). Groove width tolerances are +0.02 (+0.5 mm) inch and -0.0 inch (-0 mm). The
 grooves shall be cut in a direction that is transverse to the centerline of the roadway or
 parallel to the skew. On any one bridge the direction of the grooves shall be consistent.
 Grooves shall be cut continuously across the deck to within one foot (305 mm) of gutter
 lines or drainage structures. Grooves shall also be continuous across the full width of the
 deck surface including construction joints. Grooves shall terminate within 1 inch (25 mm)
 of any exposed metal component or elastomeric concrete of an expansion joint. When the
 deck is skewed and the contractor is using gang blades to saw the grooves, the maximum
 distance (measured perpendicular to the centerline of the expansion joint) from the last
 groove termination in the pass to the expansion joint shall be 1 foot - 8 inches (508 mm).
 Radial grooving shall be performed in increments limited to 12 feet (3.7 m) of bridge
 length.
 326
 
 601.11.4.4.2-Longitudinal Grooving: Use diamond blades mounted on a multi-blade
 arbor on self-propelled machines that were built for grooving of concrete surfaces. The
 groove machines shall have depth control devices that detect variations in the pavement
 surface and adjust the cutting head height to maintain the specified depth of the groove.
 The grooving machines shall have devices to control alignment. Do not use flailing or
 impact type grooving equipment. More than one size grooving machine may be required
 in order to saw the grooves as specified.
 Provide an experienced technician to supervise the location, alignment, layout,
 dimension, and grooving of the surface.
 Saw grooves parallel to the bridge centerline in a continuous pattern across the surface.
 Begin and end sawing 9 to 12 inches (220 to 300 mm) from any device in place in a bridge
 deck, such as scuppers or expansion joints. Stop sawing a minimum of 2 inches (50 mm)
 to a maximum of 24 inches (600 mm) from skewed expansion joints. Maintain a clearance
 of a minimum of 2 inches (50 mm) and a maximum of 4 inches (100 mm) from the grooves
 to longitudinal joints in the deck. Maintain a minimum clearance of 9 inches (220 mm) to
 a maximum of 30 inches (750 mm) clearance between the grooves and the curb or parapet
 toe. However, at no point shall un-grooved portions of deck extend beyond edge line and
 into the temporary or permanent travelled lanes. Saw grooves in a uniform pattern spaced
 at 3/4 inch minus 1/4 inch or plus 0 inches (19 mm minus 6 mm or plus 0 mm). Saw grooves
 0.15 inches (4 mm) deep and 0.10 inches (3 mm) wide. Groove tolerances for depth are
 +0.0625 inches (2 mm) and minus 0 inches (0 mm). Groove tolerances for width are +0.02
 inches (0.5 mm) and minus 0 inches (0 mm).
 For staged, or phased bridge deck work, saw the grooves parallel to the final, permanent
 bridge centerline. If the different stages or phases of the bridge deck work occur within one
 construction season, any stage opened to traffic shall receive an interim coarse broom finish
 during placement, then saw the longitudinal grooves after the final stage. The interim
 broom finish will not be allowed as a surface texture when opened to traffic over a winter
 season. Saw longitudinal grooves in the deck prior to opening to traffic for a winter season.
 For bridge decks that widen from one end to the other, saw the longitudinal grooves
 parallel to the centerline of the roadway. On the side of the bridge that widens, saw the
 longitudinal grooves to follow the edge line. Saw longitudinal grooves in the gore areas,
 avoiding the overlapping of grooves.
 At the beginning of each work shift, furnish a full complement of grooving blades with
 each saw that are capable of cutting grooves of the specified width, depth, and spacing.
 If during the work, a single grooving blade on a machine becomes incapable of cutting
 a groove, continue work for the remainder of the work shift. The Contractor is not required
 to cut the groove omitted because of the failed blade. Should two or more grooving blades
 on a machine become incapable of cutting grooves, cease operating the machine until it is
 repaired.
 Continuously remove all slurry and remaining residue from the grooving operation and
 leave the deck surface in a clean condition. Prevent residue from grooving operations from
 flowing across shoulders or across lanes occupied by public traffic or from flowing into
 gutters or other drainage facilities. Remove solid residue before the residue is blown by
 passing traffic or by wind.
 Provide water as necessary to saw grooves according to this subsection.
 
 327
 
 601.12-CURING AND PROTECTING CONCRETE:
 601.12.1-Curing Under Normal Conditions: All concrete shall be protected by one or
 more of the curing materials, meeting the requirements of 601.2, as soon as possible after
 placement to prevent loss of moisture from the surface. Burlap and water curing shall be used
 on all bridge decks.
 Concrete surfaces shall be kept completely and continuously moist. Curing shall be continued
 for a period of at least 7 days. This curing period may be reduced if the contractor presents evidence
 that the in place concrete has attained 70% of the specified strength for the class of concrete under
 cure. Under no circumstances, shall the period of cure be less than 3 days. The reduced curing
 period option is not applicable to Class H or Class K concrete. The contractor shall not be permitted
 to add additional cement to the target cement factor in the approved mix design in order to
 obtain high-early strength and/or reduce curing time. Surfaces may have coverings temporally
 removed for finishing, but the covering shall be restored as soon as possible.
 Membrane forming curing compounds may be used providing they do not conflict with
 other requirements of these Specifications. If membrane forming curing compound is used,
 all surfaces shall be given the required finish prior to application of the curing compound with
 the concrete protected by some other method before finishing.
 Curing compound shall be applied at a minimum rate of one gallon of liquid coating per
 300 square feet (13.6 liters of liquid coating per 100 m2) of concrete surface for each application.
 The curing compound shall be continuously agitated during use. All concrete cured by this
 method shall receive two applications of the curing compound. The first coat shall be applied
 immediately after acceptance of the concrete finish. If the surface is dry, the concrete shall be
 saturated with water and the curing compound applied as soon as the surface film of water
 disappears. The second application shall be made after the first application has set. Placement
 in more than two coats may be required to prevent streaking.
 During the curing period, any coating marred or otherwise disturbed shall be given an
 additional coating. Should the surface coating be subjected continuously to injury, another
 method of cure shall be immediately substituted. If the use of an impervious compound results
 in a streaky or blotched appearance, the method shall be stopped and water curing applied until
 the cause of the defective appearance is corrected.
 Curing Temperature is the air temperature at the concrete surface, or the air temperature
 between the concrete surface and its protective covering.
 601.12.2-Curing Under Cold Weather Conditions: When the air temperature is
 expected to fall below 30 F (-1° C), the Contractor shall provide suitable measures to maintain
 the concrete surface temperature between 50 F (10° C) and 90 F (32° C).
 Calendar days on which the surface temperature of the concrete falls below 50 F (10° C)
 shall not be considered days of curing. In no event shall the temperature of the concrete be
 allowed to fall below 35 F (2 C) before the specified curing is completed. The Contractor
 shall be responsible for the quality and strengths of the concrete placed or cured, or both, during
 the cold weather, and any concrete injured by frost action shall be removed and replaced at the
 Contractor's expense.
 When protection is removed from the structure after the specified curing is complete, the
 temperature of the concrete shall not be permitted to fall at a greater rate than 20 F (11 C)
 per 24 hour period.
 
 328
 
 Class H or Class K Concrete Provisions: The surface temperature of the concrete shall be
 maintained between 55 and 75° F (13 and 24° C) for 72 continuous curing hours immediately
 after placement. After this 72 hour period, a minimum concrete surface temperature of at least
 50° F (10° C) shall be maintained for an additional 96 continuous curing hours.
 If it is expected that the surface temperature of the concrete will drop below 50° F (10° C) during
 the 168 hour curing period, then the surface shall be enclosed and external heat shall be provided in
 accordance with the provisions of this section. Once external heat provisions are required, they shall
 remain on the surface until curing is complete, regardless of the ambient air temperature. Enclosures
 for heat retention shall be properly vented to prevent surface disintegration from carbon dioxide
 gas.
 Continuous wetting shall be replaced by wetting at regular intervals if, in the opinion of the
 Engineer, expected air temperatures could result in freezing of run-off water.
 601.12.3-Protection of Finished Surfaces: All exposed finished surfaces of concrete shall
 be protected to prevent rust stains, paint splotches, scars or other blemishes tending to disfigure
 or discolor the finished surface. Where reinforcing steel bars or other steel inserts are left
 exposed for extended periods or over the winter, they shall be given a coat of neat cement paste
 to prevent rust staining. Water runoff from concrete curing operations shall be deflected away
 from the steel girders and shall not drain onto the substructure concrete after contacting the
 weathering steel.
 Any stains or other blemishes shall be corrected by the Contractor.
 601.12.4-Curing Class H Concrete: It is the nature of Class H concrete material to quickly
 form a plastic film at the surface upon drying. This film is to be protected from drying and cracking
 by prompt covering with wet burlap. Regardless of the type of concrete placed, the use of
 membrane curing compounds will not be allowed. Floor drains shall be immediately unplugged to
 permit the deck to drain.
 The concrete surface shall be completely covered with clean, wet burlap. The burlap shall be
 thoroughly saturated over its entire area, but shall be drained of excess water before application.
 Burlap shall be lapped a minimum of one foot (305 mm) and shall lay flat. Failure to apply wet
 burlap within 30 minutes after discharge of the concrete from the truck and within 10 minutes of
 the completion of finishing operations shall be cause for rejection of the work as determined by the
 Engineer. Care shall be exercised to ensure that the burlap is well drained. Burlap shall be
 continuously wet for a period of seven days by means of automatic intermittent sprinkling or a
 continuous wetting system.
 601.12.5-Protecting Concrete Decks: Construction equipment with an axle load greater than
 20,000 lbs (20 kips) shall not be permitted on bridge deck. Construction equipment or loads that
 are not required to complete the slab, parapets, railing overlay, or other appurtenances shall not be
 allowed on the bridge deck.
 
 329
 
 601.13-PROTECTIVE SURFACE TREATMENT:
 601.13.1-Silane Treatment for Bridge Superstructure: After the concrete has achieved
 a minimum of 80% of the design strength, a silane protective treatment as specified shall be
 applied to the entire top surface of bridge decks, approach slabs when they are included in the
 Contract, concrete bridge medians, top and curb face of bridge sidewalks, and the inside faces
 of parapets. When approach slabs are specified to be overlayed with asphalt, the silane
 treatment is not required.
 The application of this silane protective surface treatment is not required for elements
 constructed from Class H concrete.
 The surface to receive the treatment shall be dry for at least 48 hours before treatment and
 shall be free from sand, surface dust and dirt, oil, grease, chemical films, and other
 contaminants prior to application of the silane. Immediately before application, the entire
 surface shall be air blown to remove any loose dust. The surface, air, and material temperatures
 shall be between 40 and 100° F during application, and temperatures above 40° F, without
 precipitation, must be forecast for the twelve hours following application. Any coating
 damaged by rain or moisture shall be corrected by an additional application.
 The surface treatment shall consist of one of the silane sealers listed on the Division’s
 Approved Product List of Concrete Sealers.
 The surface treatment, including application rate, shall be applied in accordance with the
 requirements listed above and the Manufacturer’s recommendations.
 Metal hand rails shall be protected from spray by shielding or masking.
 The Contractor shall prohibit all pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the structure during the
 drying period of the protective coating.
 601.13.1.1-Silane Treatment for Bridge Substructure: Before placing any steel
 superstructure members on the concrete substructure units, the Contractor shall coat all
 exposed areas of the abutment, tops, sides, and all faces of pier caps and pier stems to the
 ground or water line elevation with an approved silane based concrete sealer except for
 projects where concrete protective or other coatings are specified. Preparation of surfaces,
 application rates, and methods shall be as recommended by the silane manufacturer.
 Upon completion of all superstructure concrete curing operations, the Contractor shall
 remove all stains from substructure units using proprietary chemical stain removers and/or
 mild acid etching. Abrasive blast cleaning shall be used to supplement the other cleaning
 methods to completely remove all stains if the stained areas are severe or extensive. All
 cleaning methods shall be subject to approval of the Engineer.
 Re-coat all areas where stains were removed, regardless of the cleaning method used,
 with an approved silane based concrete sealer as specified above.
 601.13.2-Epoxy Resin Protective Coating: The top surface of abutment bridge seats,
 including drainage areas, and the adjacent bottom 6 inches (150 mm) of the backwall and the
 top surface of pier caps which are located beneath expansion devices shall receive an epoxy
 resin protective coating. The area immediately beneath the bearing masonry plates may be
 omitted at the Contractor's option.
 Concrete surfaces to be coated shall be sound, dry and free of all laitance and curing
 materials. The coating shall not be applied until the concrete has attained the age recommended
 by the manufacturer.
 330
 
 When required by the Engineer in the field, concrete surfaces shall be cleaned of all oil,
 grease and other potential bond inhibiting matter by acid etching with a 10 percent to 15 percent
 muriatic acid solution. The acid solution shall be spread and allowed to react until bubbling
 has subsided, approximately three to five minutes. The surface shall then be thoroughly flushed
 with clear water and allowed to dry. Where, in the opinion of the Engineer, acid etching is
 insufficient to clean the concrete, then sandblasting or an approved method of mechanical
 abrading shall be required.
 The exact indicated amounts of the base polymer and the reacting system, as recommended
 by the manufacturer, shall be measured into mixing container and mixed thoroughly with a
 low-speed paddle-type mixer. After mixing, the material shall stand for an induction period of
 one hour before application.
 Following the one hour induction period, the mixed protective coating may be applied by
 brush, roller or spray. When applied by roller, a first quality, long nap roller is recommended
 for rough surfaces, and a short nap roller for smooth surfaces. If applied by spray, an externally
 atomized spray gun is recommended. If thinning is necessary for spray application, thinner
 shall be of the type and amount recommended by the coating manufacturer.
 Two coats of mixed material shall be applied in thin, uniform coats of approximately 2 to
 3 mil (50 μm to 75 μm) dry film thickness each (4-5 mils wet thickness (100-125 μm wet
 thickness)). The second coat shall be applied approximately 24 hours after the application of
 the first coat. One gallon of the system will cover approximately 275 square feet of smooth
 concrete, first coat; a second coat will cover approximately 400 square feet. One liter of the
 system will cover approximately 6.75 m2 of smooth concrete, first coat; a second coat will cover
 approximately 10 m2.
 In all cases application shall be made at temperatures recommended by the manufacturer.
 601.13.3-Concrete Protective Coating: This section shall apply only when the pay item
 for concrete protective coating is included in the plans.
 601.13.3.1-Concrete Surface Preparation: After the Engineer has inspected and
 accepted the concrete surfaces of bridges and median barriers as having a satisfactory
 ordinary surface finish, clean the concrete surfaces specified hereinafter of all dust, rust,
 foreign matter, and form oil, and apply a Department approved protective coating finish.
 Coat the following surfaces, including all beveled edges:
 1) Bridge Abutments and Wingwalls – Every exposed surface above a point six inches
 below ground or fill line. Exclude where epoxy coating is applied.
 2) Bridge Pier Caps – The tops (including exposed surfaces of pads, pedestals, and
 keys), sides and ends. Do not apply the coating to bearing areas. Exclude where
 epoxy coating is applied.
 3) Bridge Superstructure – The tops, inside and outside faces, and ends of all barrier
 walls, parapets, curbs, and points that will be exposed. Do not apply the coating to
 the riding surface of the bridge deck.
 4) Exposed Surfaces of Substructure and the Superstructure – all surfaces identified
 in 1), 2), and 3) above and the underneath surfaces of slab overhangs that are outside
 of exterior girders and the exterior side and bottom of exterior beams or girders, the
 interior windows of barriers, and all exposed surfaces of piers and abutments.
 Extend the masonry coating from a point six inches below ground line to the top of
 the exposed surface.
 331
 
 Thoroughly clean all surfaces to receive a protective coating and keep them free of oil,
 form oil, grease, dust, dirt, mud, curing compound, release agents, loose patching mortar,
 or any other substance that may prevent bonding. Before applying the protective coating
 material, fill all air holes flush with the surface with the protective coating material or an
 approved mortar to provide a uniform surface.
 Check all surfaces to receive a protective coating for the presence of dust by wiping a
 dark cloth across the surface of the concrete. If a white powder can be seen on the dark
 cloth, clean the concrete by wire brushing, grinding, or water blasting and then allow it to
 thoroughly dry before applying the masonry coating. The Engineer will recheck the
 surface for the presence of dust after cleaning.
 Check all surfaces to receive a protective coating for the presence of oily conditions by
 sprinkling or fogging water on the surface of the concrete. If the water stands in droplets
 without spreading out immediately, this indicates the surface is contaminated with an oily
 substance, and the Engineer will require cleaning using a detergent and water followed by
 thorough rinsing with water. The Engineer will recheck the surface for the presence of oil
 conditions after cleaning.
 Thoroughly dry all surfaces to receive a protective coating before applying the coating,
 unless the coating manufacturer specifically recommends the surface to be wet. The
 Department’s List of Approved Materials contains each manufacturer’s recommendations.
 The Engineer will not consider surfaces to be dry unless an absorbent paper pressed tightly
 against the surface does not show any trace of moisture.
 Suspend coating application any time the ambient temperature or the temperature of
 the concrete does not comply with the coating manufacturer’s recommendations.
 Prior to application of the materials, furnish the Engineer with copies of the coating
 material manufacturer’s brochures or booklets. Apply protective coating materials in strict
 conformity with the manufacturer’s written instructions and apply the material at a uniform
 rate of at least 50± 10 ft2/gal (1.75± 0.35 m2/L).
 Satisfactorily repair or remove any portions of the coating that are not clean, uniform
 in color, texture, thickness, tightly bonded, or that are damaged before final acceptance of
 the project and replace them with an acceptable finish and coating.
 Provide a neat uniform appearance, and prevent the coating from being dripped,
 sprayed, or otherwise deposited upon concrete and surfaces not designated to receive the
 coating. Remove any objectionable deposits or material and repair the surfaces to the
 Engineer’s satisfaction.
 601.13.3.2-Concrete Protective Coating Materials:
 Description: This section covers requirements for materials to be used as surface
 finishes for designated surfaces of cement concrete structures. The protective coatings
 must hide form marks, patches, and other minor irregularities and prevent deterioration,
 spalling, and other damage to the concrete due to the action of the weather and deicing
 chemicals.
 Approval: Select masonry coatings from the Department’s List of Approved
 Materials. Use a material that is readily recognizable by its name, trademark, container, or
 other feature. Conform to the Department’s testing criteria to be placed on or remain on
 the Department’s List of Approved Materials.
 
 332
 
 For initial approval submit representative samples, color chip(s), and duplicate copies
 of certified test reports to the Division of Materials for review and approval. An
 independent testing laboratory acceptable to the Department shall perform the tests
 described herein on representative samples of the material. Tests listed herein are the
 minimum testing requirements to be met. When requested in writing, the Engineer may
 accept materials based on conformance to the same type of test but differing on minor
 procedural points. Attach copies of test procedures which differ from those stated herein.
 In addition to the material, provide brochures or booklets containing detailed instructions
 and explanatory remarks about surface preparation, application procedures, and other
 pertinent operations.
 A. Freeze-Thaw Test. Cast and cure 3 concrete specimens no less than 4 by 6 by 6
 inches (100 by 150 by 150 mm). Moist cure specimens for 14 days and then dry in
 room air at 60° to 80° F (15° to 27° C) for 24 hours before applying protective
 coating. Ensure that there is no excessive oil on specimen forms. Coat sides of
 specimens (brush permitted) according to the manufacturer’s directions at a rate of
 50± 10ft2/gal (1.75± 0.35 m2/L) and cure at room temperature for 48 hours, after
 which:
 1) Immerse in water at room temperature 60° to 80° F (15° to 27° C) for
 3 hours and remove.
 2) Place in cold storage at 5° F (-15° C) for one hour and remove.
 3) Thaw at room temperature, 60° to 80° F (15° to 27° C) for one hour.
 4) Repeat steps 1), 2) and 3) to complete a total of 50 cycles. At the end
 of 50 cycles of the Freeze/Thaw Test, ensure that the coated specimens
 show no visible defects.
 B. Accelerated Weathering. Test according to ASTM D 822. Apply at an application
 rate of 50± 10 ft2/gal (1.75± 0.35 m2/L). Test for 335 hours in the Atlas Type XW
 Sunshine Arc Weatherometer or for 500 hours in an Atlas Type DMC Enclosed
 Violet Carbon Arc Weatherometer or equivalent. Perform the test in 120 minute
 cycles consisting of 102 minutes of light and 18 minutes of light and demineralized
 water. At the end of the exposure test, ensure that there is no checking, cracking,
 or loss in film integrity, and no other film defects. Ensure that the coating shows
 no more than very slight color change.
 C. Salt Spray Resistance. Apply the masonry coating to concrete at a rate of 50±
 10ft2/gal (1.75± 0.35 m2/L), and test the coating according to ASTM B 117. Expose
 the coating to a 5 percent sodium (salt) solution for 300 hours, and maintain it at
 194° ± 4° F (90± 2° C) during the period of exposure. Ensure that it shows no loss
 of adhesion or deterioration at the end of the 300 hours.
 D. Fungus Growth Resistance. Ensure that like protective coatings passes a fungus
 resistance test as described by federal specifications TT-P-29. After a minimum
 incubation period of 21 days, ensure that no growth is exhibited on the coatings.
 601.13.3-Concrete Protective Coatings: In order for a concrete protective coating to be
 placed on the approved list, it must be one which will hide form marks, patches, and other
 minor irregularities and which will prevent deterioration, spalling, and other damage to the
 concrete due to the action of the weather and deicing chemicals. The material shall be one that
 is readily recognizable by its name, trademark, container, or other feature. The material shall
 333
 
 be one which is accompanied by brochures or booklets containing detailed instructions and
 explanatory remarks about surface preparations, application procedures, and other pertinent
 operations. Additionally, materials to be placed on or remain on the approved listing will be
 required to meet testing criteria established by the Materials Control, Soil and Testing Division
 to ensure their durability. These tests shall include: (1) resistance to freezing and thawing; (2)
 resistance to accelerated weathering, (3) resistance to salt spray and; (4) resistance to fungus
 attack.
 See list of approved products.
 601.14-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done for Classes A, B, C, D, H, K, and M concrete will be measured
 in cubic yards (meters), complete in place and accepted as determined by the dimensions on the
 Plans or Contract Documents, subject to adjustments provided for in Sections 104.2 and 109.2.
 The quantity of work done for Class H and Class K concrete will be measured in cubic
 yards (meters), complete in place and accepted, as measured from one end of the bridge to the
 other, fascia to fascia, and from the top of the forms to the finished elevation of the proposed deck
 surface. The volume of concrete required to fill the flutes of stay-in-place forms shall be calculated
 by taking the Contractor’s approved SIPadj factor and multiplying by the square yardage of SIP
 area minus beam widths, expansion dam widths, etc. as applicable.
 No deductions will be made for the volume occupied by pipe less than 8 inches (200 mm)
 in diameter, nor for reinforcing steel, anchors, conduits, weep holes or piling, or other small inserts.
 The cost of copper, copper-nickel alloy or other type of flashing, expansion joint filler,
 preformed joint filler, concrete bearing pads, drain pipes for weep drains through abutments, wings
 and walls or bridge floors, unless otherwise specified, shall be included in the unit prices bid for
 the several classes of concrete.
 All costs associated with the revised mix design and proportions shall be in the unit price
 bid for the class of concrete designated as modified.
 All costs associated with architectural formwork shall be in the unit price bid for the class
 of concrete designated as architectural. No deductions will be made for the volume occupied by
 the architectural formwork.
 The quantity of work done under line items 603.13.3 will include preparation and
 application of concrete protective coating to all exposed surfaces of special bridge railing, outside
 face of exterior prestressed girders, exposed portion of abutments, wingwalls and piers. The area
 to be coated will be measured on a square foot (square meter) basis.
 601.15-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 601.15.1-General: The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the
 contract unit prices bid or at the adjusted percent of contract price as specified for the items
 listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing all the
 materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including
 all labor, tools, equipment, joint filler, field laboratory, supplies and incidentals necessary to
 complete the work.
 The cost of stay-in-place fabricated metal forms and all work associated therewith shall be
 included in the unit price bid for concrete placed as the bridge deck. The amount of concrete
 required to fill the form flutes is included in the plan quantity of the concrete bridge deck
 material, and shall be paid for per Section 601 of the Specifications.
 334
 
 The quantities determined as provided above, complete in place, will be paid under item
 601019-* concrete protective coatings on a square foot (square meter) basis.
 No additional payment will be allowed for concreting under adverse weather conditions
 nor when the use of a higher class concrete than that specified is permitted.
 601.15.2-Price Adjustments: The Contractor will be assessed an equitable deduction of
 twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per square foot. ( two-hundred-seventy dollars ($270.00) per
 square meter) for areas of bridge decks not meeting the specified 1/8 in (3mm) tolerance and
 not specified to be removed nor directed to be ground, and for any areas that have been ground
 but do not meet the specified tolerance. Deviations will be tested with a 10ft (3.048 meter)
 rolling straightedge.
 Concrete found not in compliance with the requirements of 601.4.4 for compressive
 strength will be paid for at a reduced contract price in accordance with the following formula:
 f c - X
 Percent Reduction 
 0.6f c - 
 Where:
 f 'c = Design Strength, psi (MPa)
 X = Observed strength, psi (MPa)
  = Standard Deviation
 The percent reduction shall be applied to the sublot with the low strength.
 601.16-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 601001-*
 601002-*
 601003-*
 601003-*
 601005-*
 601006-*
 601009-*
 601019-*
 601025-002
 601025-003
 601025-005
 601025-006
 601025-007
 601025-008
 601026-002
 601026-003
 601026-004
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Class A Concrete
 Class B Concrete
 Class K Concrete
 Class K Concrete, Architectural
 Class C Concrete
 Class D Concrete
 Class H Concrete
 Concrete Protective Coating
 Modified Concrete, Class A
 Modified Concrete, Class B
 Modified Concrete, Class C
 Modified Concrete, Class D
 Modified Concrete, Class H
 Modified Concrete, Class K
 Modified Architectural Concrete, Class B
 Modified Architectural Concrete, Class H
 Modified Architectural Concrete, Class K
 
 * Sequence number
 
 335
 
 UNIT
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Square Foot (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 
 SECTION 602
 REINFORCING STEEL
 602.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing and placing epoxy coated or uncoated reinforcing
 steel or corrosion resistant reinforcement in accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably
 close conformity with the Plans.
 602.2-MATERIALS:
 Reinforcing steel bars and fabric reinforcement shall meet the requirements of 709.1 and
 709.4 respectively, except rail-steel shall not be used in bridge decks or parapets.
 Epoxy coated reinforcing steel bars shall meet the requirements of 709.1.2, except railsteel shall not be used in bridge decks and parapets.
 Corrosion resistant reinforcing steel bars shall meet the requirements of AASHTO MP18
 with minimum yield level of 100,000 psi. The degree of corrosion resistance for reinforcement
 shall be specified in the plans.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 602.3-ORDER LISTS:
 All order lists and bending diagrams shall be furnished by the Contractor. If requested by
 the Engineer, order lists and bending diagrams shall be submitted for approval. Approval of order
 lists and bending diagrams by the Engineer shall in no way relieve the Contractor of responsibility
 for the correctness of such lists and diagrams.
 602.4-PROTECTION OF MATERIALS:
 Steel reinforcement shall be stored above the well-drained surface of the ground upon
 platforms, skids, or other supports and shall be protected from mechanical injury. Reinforcement
 shall be free from injurious defects such as cracks and laminations. Any loose scale, loose rust,
 dirt, paint, grease, oil or other foreign materials present on the reinforcement shall be removed by
 wire brushing, sand blasting or other approved methods before the placement of concrete.
 Reinforcing steel which will be exposed over the winter shall be protected, within one week
 after the placing of the initial concrete, with a brush coat of neat cement, mixed with water to a
 consistency of thick paint. This coating shall be removed by lightly tapping with a hammer or
 other tool not more than one week before the placing of the adjacent pour.
 602.5-BENDING OF REINFORCING BARS:
 Unless otherwise permitted, all reinforcing bars shall be cold bent in the shop. Bars
 partially embedded in concrete shall not be field bent except when shown on the Plans or permitted
 by the Engineer. Only competent men shall be employed for cutting and bending, and proper
 appliances shall be provided for the work.
 Bending shall be in accordance with the Manual of Standard Practice for Detailing,
 Reinforced Concrete Structures, ACI 315, latest revision. Rail-steel bars shall not be field bent or
 straightened.
 Unless otherwise specified in the plans, bending of all corrosion-resistant reinforcing bars
 shall be per requirements of with the latest edition of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design
 Specifications.
 336
 
 602.6-PLACING AND FASTENING:
 602.6.1-General: All reinforcing steel shall be accurately placed and, during the placing
 of concrete, firmly held by supports in the position shown on the Plans. Reinforcing bars shall
 be securely fastened together. Bars shall be tied at all intersections except where spacing is
 less than 1 feet (300 mm) in each direction, in which case alternate intersections shall be tied.
 Distance from the forms shall be maintained by means of stays, blocks, ties, hangers, chairs,
 or other approved supports. Blocks for holding reinforcement from contact with forms shall
 be precast mortar blocks of approved shape and dimension; the use of pebbles, broken stone,
 metal pipe or wooden blocks will not be permitted. Reinforcement in any member will be
 inspected and approved before any concrete is placed.
 The clear distance between the reinforcing steel and the face of the concrete unless
 otherwise shown in the plans shall be:
 Top of deck slab:
 2.5”
 Bottom of deck slab:
 1.0”
 Bottom of footings:
 3.0”
 All other locations :
 2.0”
 602.6.2-Epoxy Coated Bars: Epoxy coated bars shall be placed on plastic coated wire
 supports. Supports shall be installed in a manner to prevent planes of weakness in the hardened
 concrete. The reinforcing steel shall be held in place by use of plastic or plastic coated tie
 wires especially fabricated for this purpose.
 Any visible damage to the epoxy coating of the reinforcing steel that occurs during
 shipment, storage and installation of the steel shall be repaired. The patching Supplier shall
 furnish patching material to the project with the first shipment of epoxy coated steel. The
 patching material shall be prequalified as required for the coating material and shall be either
 identified on the container as meeting the requirements of AASHTO M284, Annex A or shall
 be accompanied by a Certificate of compliance. Patching of damaged areas shall be performed
 in accordance with the patching material manufacturer's recommendations.
 In the event it is anticipated that the epoxy bars will be stored on the project site, and/or
 placed in final position without the concrete cover for a period of 90 days or more, then the
 bars shall be stored in a temporary shed or covered with plastic to prevent damage to the epoxy
 coating due to ultra-violet rays or other atmospheric conditions. Any temporary storage means
 used, shall provide adequate ventilation to the bars to prevent the build-up of moisture on the
 bar surface.
 602.7-BAR SPLICES:
 602.7.1-Lapping: All reinforcement shall be furnished in full lengths as indicated on the
 Plans. No splicing of bars, except where shown on the Plans, will be permitted without the
 written approval of the Engineer. Lapped splices shall be well distributed or located at points
 of low tensile stress. The bars shall be rigidly clamped or wired at all splices in a manner
 approved by the Engineer. Minimum lengths of lap splices unless otherwise noted shall be:
 
 337
 
 Bar Designation
 #4 Bar
 #5 Bar
 #6 Bar
 #7 Bar
 #8 Bar
 #9 Bar
 #10 Bar
 #11 Bar
 
 Min. Lap Splice (Ft)
 1’-9”
 2’-2”
 2’-9”
 3’-9”
 4’-11”
 6’-2”
 7’-10”
 9’-7”
 
 For epoxy coated bars, the minimum lap splice length shall be increased by 50 percent at
 locations where concrete cover is less than 3 bar diameters and 20 percent at all other locations.
 Lapped splices for corrosion-resistant rebar shall be in accordance with the latest edition
 of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications.
 602.7.2-Welding: Splicing by welding of reinforcement will be permitted only if detailed
 on the Plans or if authorized by the Engineer in writing. Welding shall comply with the current
 specifications of the American Welding Society, D 1.4, and the weld shall develop an ultimate
 strength equal to or greater than that of the bars connected. Welding of corrosion resistant
 reinforcement is not permitted.
 602.7.3-Mechanical Splice Connectors: Mechanical splice connectors shall develop in
 tension or compression at least 125 percent of the specified yield strength of the bar.
 602.8-FABRIC REINFORCEMENT:
 Mesh sheets or uncoated reinforcing steel, except steel mesh, will be measured by the
 pound (kg), based on Plan lengths and numbers of bars, using the unit weights in Table 602.9. The
 quantity for payment will be the number of pounds (kg) calculated and placed as shown on the
 Plans or directed, complete in place and accepted, subject to adjustment as provided for in 104.2
 and 109.2.
 602.9-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Epoxy coated or uncoated reinforcing steel, except steel mesh, will be measured by the
 pound (kg), based on Plan lengths and numbers of bars, using the unit weights in Table 602.9. The
 quantity for payment will be the number of pounds (kg) calculated and placed as shown on the
 Plans or directed, complete in place and accepted, subject to adjustment as provided for in 104.2
 and 109.2.
 
 338
 
 TABLE 602.9
 Bar
 Designation
 
 Weight Per Lin.
 Ft. in Lb. (Mass
 kg per meter)
 
 Bar
 Designation
 
 Weight Per Lin
 Ft. in Lb. (Mass
 kg per meter)
 
 # 3 (10)
 # 4 (13)
 # 5 (16)
 # 6 (19)
 # 7 (22)
 # 8 (25)
 
 0.376 (.560)
 0.668 (.994)
 1.043 (1.552)
 1.502 (2.235)
 2.044 (3.042)
 2.670 (3.973)
 
 # 9 (29)
 # 10 (32)
 # 11 (36)
 # 14S (43)
 # 18S (57)
 
 3.400 (5.060)
 4.303 (6.404)
 5.313 (7.907)
 7.650 (11.38)
 13.600 (20.24)
 
 602.10-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the items listed below, which price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing,
 fabricating, transporting, storing and placing epoxy coated or uncoated reinforcing steel; and the
 furnishing of all other materials and doing all the work described in a workmanlike and acceptable
 manner, including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the
 work.
 602.11-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 602001-* Reinforcing Steel Bar
 602002-* Epoxy Coated Reinforcing Steel Bar
 602003-* Corrosion Resistant Reinforcing Steel Bar
 *
 
 Sequence number
 
 339
 
 UNIT
 Pound (Kilogram)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 Pound (kilogram)
 
 SECTION 603
 PRESTRESSED CONCRETE MEMBERS
 603.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work consists of the construction of precast/prestressed concrete members,
 pretensioned in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the plan details and
 notes. This work shall include manufacturing, inspection, handling, storing, transporting and
 erecting of structural members of precast/prestressed concrete, and, when specified, shall also
 include precast concrete members which do not contain pretensioning steel components.
 Concrete floors, curbs, parapets, curtain walls, and diaphragms shall be cast in place on the
 project unless otherwise provided for on the plans. When the above elements are specified as
 precast members, they shall be manufactured in accordance with this specification.
 603.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sections/Subsections:
 Precast/Prestressed Concrete Materials
 +Admixtures:
 Air Entraining Admixtures
 Retarding Admixtures
 Water Reducing Admixtures
 **Pozzolonic Additives
 Specific Performance Admixtures
 Cement
 Coarse Aggregates*
 Concrete Sealant
 Elastomeric Bearing Pads
 Fine Aggregates #
 Hot-Poured Elastic Type Concrete Joint Sealer
 Mixing Water
 Preformed Expansion Joint Filler
 Prestressing Steel
 Reinforcing Steel
 Shear-Key Grout
 Steel Bolts and Nuts
 Welded Wire Fabric
 #
 *
 
 Sections/Subsections
 707.1
 707.2
 707.3
 707.4
 707.17
 ASTM C150, 701.3
 703.1, 703.2, & 703.3
 707.12
 715.14
 702.1
 708.3
 715.7
 708.1
 709.2
 709.1
 715.5
 709.23
 709.4
 
 When the top surface of a prestressed member is designed as the bridge wearing surface
 The maximum size of coarse aggregate shall not exceed the minimum horizontal or vertical clear spacing
 between pretensioned or reinforcing steel elements divided by 1.33. Lightweight aggregates shall not be used
 unless their use is permitted by the Engineer in writing.
 For Class S-P concrete, a blend of two AASHTO gradations of coarse aggregates can be used. The maximum
 aggregate size permitted is ¾ inches (19 mm). A coarse aggregate gradation using a #67 aggregate is allowed
 only if 100% of the material passes the ¾ inch (19 mm) sieve
 
 **
 
 The use of a pozzolanic additive is not permitted when a blended hydraulic cement is used. For Class S-P
 concrete, a combination of up to two pozzolanic additives is permitted, as shown in Table 603.6.3.1. The
 maximum percent of total cementitious materials permitted in Class S-P concrete mix designs is shown in Table
 603.6.3.1.
 
 +
 
 Calcium chloride or any admixture containing chloride ion in excess of 0.1 percent by weight shall not be used
 in prestressed concrete members.
 
 340
 
 603.2.1-Inspection and Testing: A representative of the Engineer shall have free entry at
 all times, while the work on the Contract is being performed, to all parts of the manufacturer’s
 works which concern the manufacture of the materials ordered. The manufacturer shall afford
 the representative of the Engineer, without charge, all reasonable facilities to satisfy
 themselves that the material is being furnished in accordance with these specifications.
 603.3-PLANT REQUIREMENTS AND APPROVAL:
 603.3.1-Plant Approval: All fabricators of prestressed concrete members shall be certified
 in the appropriate Group and Category in accordance with the Precast/Prestressed Concrete
 Institute (PCI) Plant Certification Program. Fabricators shall be certified in Group B3 or B4
 for manufacture of prestressed straight strand bridge members. For prestressed draped strand
 bridge members, the fabricator shall be certified in Group B4. The Engineer or his authorized
 representative shall approve all plants manufacturing prestressed and precast reinforced
 concrete bridge members before manufacture of the members may be started. Requests for
 such approvals shall be submitted to the Engineer at least three weeks prior to the date of
 manufacture of the members. Requests shall include details of the plant facilities, materials,
 and the production methods the manufacturer intends to use.
 The manufacturer shall have an established quality control program in effective operation
 at the plant. This program shall be submitted to the Engineer for approval at least 30 days prior
 to the start of the production.
 If a contractor/fabricator is found to consistently deviate from PCI guidelines, the
 contractor/fabricator will be required to use independent laboratory quality control testing and
 inspection until it can be shown that conformity with PCI guidelines has been reestablished.
 The laboratory used is subject to the approval by the Engineer. The cost of the independent
 laboratory is to be borne by the contractor/fabricator.
 603.3.2-Supervision: The contractor/fabricator shall provide a PCI Level II certified
 technician, skilled in the use of the system of prestressing to be used, who shall supervise the
 work and give the Engineer or his representative such assistance as may be considered
 necessary.
 603.3.3-Equipment and Tools:
 603.3.3.1-General: All equipment, tools and machinery used in the work shall be
 adequate for the purpose for which it is to be used and shall be maintained in a satisfactory
 working condition. The use of portable pretensioning beds for the manufacture of
 prestressed concrete members is not acceptable.
 The contractor/fabricator shall provide all other equipment and tools necessary for the
 construction and the prestressing.
 603.3.3.2-Equipment: The jacks shall be equipped with instruments for monitoring
 the hydraulic pressure. Electronic pressure transducers with digital indicators may be used.
 All pressure gauges or electronic pressure indicators shall indicate the load directly to one
 (1) percent of the maximum gauge or sensor/indicator capacity or (2) two percent of the
 maximum load applied, whichever is smaller.
 Each jack and its gauge shall be calibrated as a unit with the cylinder extension in the
 approximate position that it will be at final jacking force. The calibration of the jack and
 341
 
 gauge shall be done while the jack is in the identical configuration as will be used on the
 site, e.g., same length hydraulic lines. An independent laboratory shall furnish certified
 calibration charts with each jack and gauge used in the work. Certified calibration of each
 ram shall be made prior to the start of stressing operations and every six (6) months
 thereafter, or as requested by the Engineer. Any repair of the rams, such as replacing seals,
 changing length of hydraulic lines, changing type of pump or using gauges which have not
 been calibrated with the ram, shall be cause for recalibration of the jack and gauge with a
 load cell. No extra compensation will be allowed for the initial or subsequent ram
 calibrations.
 603.3.3.3-Forms and Casting Beds: Forms and casting beds shall be subject to the
 approval of the Engineer. Unless otherwise approved, only metal forms on concrete
 founded casting beds shall be used. The forms and casting beds shall be well constructed,
 carefully aligned, substantial and firm, securely braced and fastened together, sufficiently
 tight to prevent leakage of mortar and strong enough to withstand the action of mechanical
 vibrators. The forms shall be constructed to permit movement of the members without
 damage during release of the prestressing force or movement caused by thermal expansion
 during curing. The casting beds and all form work will be approved before any concrete is
 placed, but such approval shall not relieve the contractor/fabricator of responsibility for the
 results obtained.
 603.4-WORKING DRAWINGS:
 603.4.1-General: The contractor/fabricator shall expressly understand that the Engineer's
 approval of the working drawings submitted by the contractor/fabricator covers the
 requirements for "strength and detail," and that the Engineer assumes no responsibility for
 errors in dimensions.
 Working drawings must be approved prior to performance of the work involved and such
 approval shall not relieve the contractor/fabricator of any responsibility under the contract for
 the successful completion of the work.
 All working drawings shall be in English units. Use of dual (metric and English) units is
 not allowed.
 603.4.2-Shop Drawings: The contractor/fabricator shall submit copies of the detailed shop
 drawings to the Engineer for approval. Shop drawings shall be submitted sufficiently in
 advance of the start of the work to allow time for review by the Engineer and corrections by
 the contractor/fabricator without delaying the work. The size of the original drawings shall be
 22 inches x 34 inches (559 mm x 864 mm) including margins, unless otherwise permitted. The
 shop drawings submitted for approval may be reduced.
 Shop drawings for concrete structures shall give full detailed dimensions and sizes of
 component parts of the structure and details of all miscellaneous parts. Design camber for all
 members shall be shown on the shop drawings.
 603.4.3-Erection Drawings: The contractor shall submit drawings illustrating fully their
 proposed method of erection. The drawings shall show details of all falsework bents, bracing,
 guys, dead-men, lifting devices, and attachments to the bridge members: sequence of erection,
 location of cranes and barges, crane capacities, location of lifting points on the bridge
 342
 
 members, and weights of the members. The plan and drawings shall be complete in detail for
 all anticipated phases and conditions during erection. Design calculations, sealed by a
 Registered Professional Engineer, shall be submitted by the contractor/fabricator to the
 Engineer for approval which will demonstrate that allowable stresses for falsework and
 concrete members being erected are not exceeded and that member capacities and final
 geometry shall be correct.
 When the designated concrete deck overhang exceeds 30 inches (760 mm) , the erection
 drawings submitted by the contractor/fabricator shall include complete details of the forming
 and bracing for the overhang and shall transmit the concrete deck dead load to an area of the
 beam or stringer which will prevent distortion. All forming and bracing procedures are subject
 to approval of the Engineer.
 603.5-REINFORCEMENT:
 All reinforcing bars and welded wire fabric shall meet all requirements of Section 602 and
 shall be free of frost, loose rust, grease, dirt, oil, paint, mill scale, corrosion or other deleterious
 substances. Any steel which cannot be satisfactorily cleaned shall not be used.
 When splicing is required, all reinforcing bars shall be lapped for a length of at least 30 bar
 diameters.
 Reinforcing bars, welded wire fabric and other embedded fixtures shall be accurately
 placed as indicated on the Plans and shall be maintained in their correct position during the
 manufacture of the unit. Reinforcement shall not be held in position by tack welding.
 The minimum concrete cover for reinforcing steel shall be as follows, unless otherwise
 shown on the Plans:
 Main Reinforcement ...................................... 1½ inches (40 mm)
 Slab Reinforcement, top of slab .................... 1½ inches (40 mm)
 Slab Reinforcement, bottom of slab .............. 1 inch (25 mm)
 Stirrups and Ties ............................................ 1 inch (25 mm)
 The longitudinal or main wires of welded wire fabric shall be placed transverse to the
 longitudinal axis of the unit. Laps of welded wire fabric shall be a minimum of 6 inches (150 mm)
 unless otherwise approved by the Engineer.
 603.6-CONCRETE:
 603.6.1-General: The composition, proportioning, and mixing of concrete shall be such
 so as to produce a homogeneous concrete mixture of a quality that will conform to the test and
 design requirements specified and as noted on the Plans. Concrete for all prestressed members
 shall have a minimum compressive strength as may be specified on the plans or in the special
 provisions. Materials used to form voids in the members shall be fabricated from form material
 acceptable to the Engineer or from cardboard, which has been treated with a waterproofing
 agent. Any void made from more than one piece of material shall be glued and banded to
 prevent separation during concreting operations. Any evidence of separation will be cause for
 rejection. All concrete materials including admixtures shall meet requirements specified in
 subsection 603.2 and/or as indicated in the plans.
 603.6.1.1-Class S-P Concrete: Class S-P concrete shall be self-consolidating concrete
 for precast/prestressed applications and may be used for the fabrication of prestressed
 343
 
 concrete box beams. If Class S-P concrete is to be used in the fabrication of prestressed
 concrete I-Beams or Bulb Tee Beams, additional testing, as outlined in Section 603.6.1.1.1,
 shall be required. Class S-P concrete shall meet the requirements of this Section.
 Class S-P concrete shall consist of a homogeneous, flowable mixture of cement, fine
 aggregate, coarse aggregate, chemical admixtures and water. Class S-P concrete may also
 contain fly ash, ground granulated blast furnace slag, and silica fume. The mixture
 proportions shall be such that the Class S-P concrete will resist segregation, bleeding, and
 the generation of foam during placement, and will need no external compaction or
 vibration, unless the mix is qualified as outlined in Section 603.6.1.1.1. While the
 properties of fresh SCC differ significantly from that of conventional fresh concrete, the
 quality in terms of strength, durability, and performance of the hardened SCC shall be equal
 to or better than that of a similar specified conventional concrete mix. Establishment of
 the mixture proportions shall be coordinated with the manufacturer of the admixtures
 which will be used in the Class S-P concrete.
 SCC exhibits self-leveling capabilities. Creating a successful SCC mix requires
 combining ingredients to achieve a highly-flowable product that also has the capability to
 resist dynamic segregation and foaming during placement while resisting static segregation
 and bleeding once in place. SCC mix designs are often achieved using high-range water
 reducing (HRWR) admixtures, and by carefully selecting a proper aggregate gradation,
 incorporating high volumes of powder in the mix, through the use of viscosity-modifying
 admixtures (VMAs), or a combination of the previously mentioned.
 For Class S-P concrete, a combination of admixtures which may be used includes
 water-reducing admixtures, air-entraining agents, water-reducing and retarding
 admixtures, VMAs, shrinkage-reducing admixtures (SRAs), and other specific
 performance admixtures, provided they are on the WVDOH approved list of admixtures.
 These admixtures used shall all come from the same manufacturer, and measures should
 be taken to ensure that no adverse reactions occur. Also, for Class S-P concrete, it is
 permitted to use a combination of up to two AASHTO gradations of coarse aggregate to
 obtain an optimal combination of strength, self-consolidating ability, and passing ability.
 Likewise, a combination of up to two pozzolanic additives may be used in combination
 with Portland cement for Class S-P concrete in order to achieve ideal characteristics for the
 mix.
 603.6.1.1.1-Pre-Qualification of Class S-P Concrete Construction Methods: If
 Class S-P is to be used in the fabrication of prestressed concrete I-Beams or Bulb Tee
 Beams, or if vibration is to be used during fabrication, the Class S-P concrete mix and
 proposed method of construction must be pre-qualified prior to fabrication.
 A full-size test member, at least 10 feet (3 m) in length shall be constructed with the
 Class S-P concrete mix which will be used during fabrication. The full-size test member
 shall represent the “worst-case” member which the Fabricator shall be allowed to fabricate,
 using Class S-P concrete. This “worst-case” member shall consist of the tallest I-beam or
 Bulb Tee shape and shall contain the maximum amount of prestressing strand and
 reinforcing steel which would be encountered in such a member. The type and maximum
 duration of vibration, which will be used during fabrication, shall also be used during
 construction of this test member. All other aspects of construction of this test member,
 including the free fall height of concrete above the beam, shall be identical to those which
 will be used during fabrication of members during production.
 344
 
 After the completion of curing of this test member, three 4-inch (100 mm) diameter
 cores shall be taken from the member at mid-length. One core shall be taken from the top
 flange of the member, one core shall be taken from the web of the member at mid-height,
 and one core shall be taken from the bottom flange or bulb of the member. A point count,
 in accordance with MP 700.03.50 or other equivalent test method approved by the
 Engineer, shall be performed on each of these cores in order to determine if segregation is
 occurring due to the vibration.
 If the results of the point counts show that the percentages of coarse aggregate, fine
 aggregate, air content, and paste vary by more than 15% between any of these three cores,
 that type of member shall not be permitted to be constructed with Class S-P concrete.
 If, at some time after the above mentioned “worst-case” test member is fabricated and
 tested, the Fabricator needs to fabricate a member larger than this “worst-case” member
 (which would now be a new “worst-case” member), the Engineer shall determine, based
 on the test results from the previous “worst-case” member, whether or not the testing
 required in this section will again be required for this new “worst-case” member. If the
 test results from the previous “worst-case” member are within an acceptable margin below
 the allowable test criteria, and if the new “worst-case” member is not significantly larger
 than the previous “worst-case” member, then the Engineer may allow this new “worstcase” member to be constructed with Class S-P concrete without additional prequalification testing required in this section.
 603.6.2-Mix Design: Concrete mixtures must be established initially by methods in
 accordance with ACI 318, Chapter 5. Class S-P concrete mixtures shall be developed in
 accordance with MP 711.03.23 and the requirements of this Section, not the ACI methods.
 Mixes may be designed either by a commercial laboratory or by PCI certified concrete plant
 personnel. Prior to adoption of a mix design as a plant standard, it shall be field tested by use
 of the production plant batching and mixing equipment, construction methods, and curing to
 be used in production of the members. The use of a previous mix design can be approved for
 a project if sufficient test data (30 or more tests) are available from the past year for evaluation
 (ACI 301, Chapter 3, method).
 All design mixes shall be developed using the type of cement, the type and gradation of
 aggregates, and admixtures proposed for use in plant mixes. The mix design shall also include
 either compressive strength tests or a penetration resistance test (in accordance with ASTM C
 403) that verify the amount of time it takes to achieve a compressive strength of 500 psi (3.5
 Mpa). The Engineer shall approve the mix design. When any of these variables are changed,
 or after a three-year time period, the mix shall be re-evaluated and submitted to the Engineer
 for approval.
 603.6.2.1-Class S-P Concrete Mix Design Testing: To ensure repeatability of
 production, two batches of concrete with the same mix proportions shall be created for mix
 qualification testing. The results of this testing shall be submitted to the Division for
 approval at least 45 days prior to the use of the mix in construction.
 The two trial batches at the target cement factor plus one bag (see Section 3.3 of MP
 711.03.23), are not required for Class S-P concrete mixes.
 Batching equipment and curing procedures for test specimens fabricated from these test
 batches should be as close as possible to the techniques that will be used by the Fabricator
 345
 
 during production. The minimum batch size for these trial batches shall be 2.0 yd3 (1.53
 m3), or the largest possible batch when using the mixer that will be used for production, if
 approved by the Division.
 The fresh properties measured at the proposed time of casting for each trial batch shall
 include air content, consistency, Visual Stability Index (VSI), T50, J-Ring Value, Unit
 Weight, Yield, Rapid Assessment of Static Segregation Resistance, and Segregation
 Resistance. Target values and their tolerances for the fresh properties of the trial batches
 shall conform to the requirements in the following table:
 TABLE 603.6.2.1A
 Fresh Property
 Mix Design Batch Acceptance Criteria
 ***Target minus 0.5% ≤ Air Content ≤
 Air Content
 ***Target plus 1.5%
 Target ≤ Spread ≤ Target plus 1.5 inches (38 mm)
 Slump Flow (ASTM C1611)
 2 seconds ≤ T50 ≤ 7 seconds
 Visual Stability Index ≤ 1.0
 Passing Ability (ASTM C1621)
 J-Ring Value ≤ 1 inch (25 mm)
 Rapid Assessment of Static Segregation
 Penetration Depth (PD) ≤ 0.5 inch (13 mm)
 Resistance (ASTM C1712)
 Segregations Resistance (ASTM C1610) Segregation ≤ 12%
 Unit Weight and Yield
 ± 2% of Theoretical
 ***
 
 The target air content of Class S-P concrete shall be determined in accordance with Table 603.6.2.1B
 
 TABLE 603.6.2.1B
 Nominal Maximum Aggregate Size in
 Target Air Content of Class S-P Concrete
 the Class S-P Mix
 3/8 inch (9.5 mm)
 7.5%
 ½ inch (12.5 mm)
 7.0%
 ¾ inch (19 mm)
 6.0%
 After the properties of the trial batches of fresh concrete have been established to be
 within the specification limits in Table 603.6.2.1A, specimens will be cast for compressive
 strength, modulus of elasticity, creep, length change (total shrinkage), rapid chloride
 permeability and freeze-thaw testing. Casting of all Class S-P specimens to be used for
 hardened property testing shall be done in one lift without rodding. Compressive strength
 testing shall be conducted on both trial batches, but modulus of elasticity, creep, length
 change (total shrinkage), rapid chloride permeability and freeze-thaw testing is only
 required on one of the trial batches.
 If steam curing is to be used during the production, the same curing procedure (time,
 temperature, etc.) shall be used on all of the above test specimens except for the shrinkage
 specimens. After discontinuation of steam curing, all specimens shall be cured as noted in
 the footnotes in the table below.
 Target values and their tolerances for the hardened properties of the trial batches shall
 conform to the requirements in Table 603.6.2.1C:
 
 346
 
 TABLE 603.6.2.1C
 Hardened
 Property Test
 Compressive
 Strength
 (AASHTO T22)
 
 Total #
 Specimens
 7
 
 Specimen
 Size
 4”x8”
 (100x200
 mm) or
 6”x12” (150
 x 300 mm)
 cylinders
 6”x12”
 (150 x 300
 mm)
 cylinders
 
 Magnitude
 of Loading
 Load Until
 Failure
 
 Approval
 Condition
 per Design
 
 1 @ 3days ± 2 hrs.
 1 @ 7days ± 2 hrs.
 1 @ 14days ± 2 hrs.
 3 @ 28days ± 4 hrs.
 
 40% of
 compressive
 strength
 (obtained
 above)
 
 ≥ 57,000√f 'c a
 
 Age at Testing
 1 @ 24 ± 2 hrs.
 1 @ 3days ± 2 hrs.
 1 @ 7days ± 2 hrs.
 1 @ 14days ± 2 hrs.
 3 @ 28days ± 4 hrs.
 
 Modulus of
 Elasticityb
 (ASTM C469)
 
 7
 
 Creepb
 (ASTM C512)
 
 8 total
 (3 loaded, 3
 remain
 unloaded, 2
 tested for
 compressiv
 e strength)
 3
 
 6”x12”
 (150 x 300
 mm)
 cylinders
 
 72 ± 2 hours at age
 of initial loading
 
 40% of
 compressive
 strength at
 time of
 loading
 
 Creep
 Coefficient c
 ≤ 1.19 at 90
 days a
 
 3”x3”x11”
 (75 x 75 x
 275 mm)
 prisms
 
 56 days
 
 28-day cure
 per ASTM
 C157 then
 Air Storage
 for 28-days
 
 ≤ 0.0002 at 28
 days of Air
 Storage a
 
 Rapid Chlorideb
 Permeability
 (AASHTO
 T277)
 
 3
 
 4”x2”
 (100 x 50
 mm) disc
 specimen
 
 56 days
 or
 28 days
 
 60.0 ± 0.1 V
 
 Freeze-Thaw
 Resistance
 (ASTM C666Procedure A)b
 
 3
 
 3”x4”x16”
 (75 x 100 x
 400 mm)
 prisms
 
 28 day cure prior to
 testing
 
 300 cycles
 (0oF to 40oF)
 
 ≤ 1500
 coulombs
 (56 days) or
 ≤ 2000
 coulombs (28
 days)
 Durability
 Factor ≥ 80
 
 Length Change
 (ASTM C157)
 
 a.
 
 b.
 c.
 
 If the values obtained from testing the Class S-P mix do not meet the specified values in Table 603.6.2.1C,
 then the Fabricator’s Engineer may submit calculations for prestress losses, camber, and long term deflections
 to the Division for review in accordance with Section 105.2.1.1, the Division Approval Method for shop
 drawings. If the Fabricator’s calculations show that the values exceeding the specified values in Table
 603.6.2.1C will not adversely affect the prestress losses, camber, and long term deflections, and the Division
 approves these calculations, then the Class S-P mix in question may be used to fabricate prestressed bridge
 members.
 After the discontinuation of steam curing, test specimens shall be removed from the molds within 23.5 ± 0.5
 hours and moist cured in the laboratory at a temperature between 73.5 ± 3.5 °F (23.0 ± 2.0 °C) until the time
 of test. Freeze-Thaw Resistance testing shall begin when the specimens are at an age of 28 days.
 The Creep Coefficient shall be defined as the Creep Strain at 90 days divided by the Initial Elastic Strain at the
 Time of Initial Loading. The Initial Elastic Strain shall be determined within 2 minutes after the application
 of the initial load.
 
 347
 
 In addition to the hardened property tests above, at least one trial batch shall be
 subjected to the prestressing strand bond strength testing as outlined in MP 603.06.20. The
 Class S-P mix in question must pass this test.
 Although a concrete mix may meet the necessary strength requirements and exhibit
 acceptable fresh properties at the time of initial testing, the Engineer can require a re-design
 of the mix based on other criteria, such as insufficient retention of the slump flow for the
 mix, excessive foam buildup, etc. The slump flow of the mix must be retained, within the
 limits specified in Table 603.6.4.1, throughout the duration of the concrete placement. The
 submittal for a proposed mix design shall include completed copies of Attachments 1S-P,
 2S-P and 3S-P of MP 711.03.23. All pertinent information supporting these attachments
 and pertaining to the information in them should also be submitted.
 603.6.3-Proportioning of Normal (Non-SCC) Concrete: Materials shall be proportioned
 by weight, unless otherwise authorized by the Engineer. The concrete shall contain the
 minimum water-to-cementitious materials (w/c) ratio required to obtain satisfactory
 workability and the specified minimum strength, but in no case shall this (w/c) ratio exceed
 0.44, including the free water in the aggregate and/or admixtures. The minimum cement factor
 shall be 658 lbs. per cubic yard (390 kg per cubic meter). Concrete for all members shall be
 air-entrained with a target air content of seven percent. A working tolerance of plus or minus
 two percentage points will be allowed. When the ambient temperature is 90 °F (32°C) or
 higher, a mix using a retarding admixture shall be used. Slump shall not exceed 8 inches (200
 mm) with the use of high range water reducers.
 603.6.3.1-Proportioning of Class S-P Concrete: The water-to-cementitious materials
 (w/c) ratio for Class S-P concrete shall fall within a range of 0.32 to 0.40. A water-tocementitious materials (w/c) ratio less than 0.32 may be used if approved by the Engineer.
 The minimum cementitious material factor for Class S-P concrete shall be 658 lbs. per
 cubic yard (390 kg per cubic meter). Unless otherwise approved by the Engineer, the
 maximum cementitious material factor for Class S-P concrete shall be 799 lbs. per cubic
 yard (474 kg per cubic meter).
 Concrete for members cast with Class S-P concrete shall be air-entrained with a target
 air content as shown in Table 603.6.2.1B. A working tolerance of plus or minus 1.5
 percentage points will be allowed during fabrication. Material proportions should be
 selected to ensure an optimal combination of fresh and hardened properties.
 A standard Class S-P concrete shall be designed to have a slump flow of 25 ± 2 inches
 (635 ± 50 mm) in diameter. This 25 inch (635 mm) slump flow diameter will be referred
 to as the target value for mix qualification and site approval. The contractor may request
 that the Engineer approve a different target slump, which must be less than 25 inches (635
 mm). If approved, this requested value will be used as the target value for mix qualification
 and the approval of batches during production.
 
 348
 
 TABLE 603.6.3.1
 Maximum Percent of Total
 Cementitious Materials
 Cementitious Materials in Class S-P
 Concrete by Mass
 Class F Fly Ash
 25
 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag
 
 50
 
 Microsilica
 
 10
 
 Total of Class F Fly Ash and Silica Fume
 Total of Ground Granulated Blast Furnace
 Slag and Silica Fume
 
 35
 50
 
 NOTE:
 Class F Fly Ash shall constitute no more than 25 percent of the total weight of cementitious materials.
 Microsilica shall constitute no more than 10 percent of the total weight of cementitious materials.
 
 603.6.4-Sampling and Test Methods:
 Sampling Freshly Mixed Concrete
 Slump of Hydraulic-Cement Concrete
 Unit Weight and Yield of Concrete
 Air Content of Freshly Mixed Concrete
 Making and Curing Concrete Test Specimens in the Field
 Compressive Strength of Cylindrical Concrete Specimens
 Temperature of Concrete
 Static Modulus of Elasticity and Poisson’s Ratio of Concrete in Compression
 Fabricating Test Specimens with Self-Consolidating Concrete
 Slump-Flow of Self-Consolidating Concrete
 Passing Ability of Self-Consolidating Concrete using J-Ring
 Rapid Assessment of Static Segregation Resistance of Self-Consolidating
 Concrete Using Penetration Test
 Static Segregation of Self-Consolidating Concrete using Column Technique
 Standard Method of Test for Electrical Indication of Concrete’s Ability to
 Resist Chloride Ion Penetration
 Standard Test Method for Resistance of Concrete to Rapid Freezing and
 Thawing
 Standard Test Method for Creep of Concrete in Compression
 Length Change (Drying Shrinkage) of Hardened Concrete
 Standard Test Method for Microscopical Determination of Parameters of the
 Air-Void System in Hardened Concrete
 Standard Method of Microscopical Determination of Air-Void Content
 
 AASHTO T 141
 AASHTO T 119
 AASHTO T 121
 AASHTO T 152
 or
 AASHTO T 196
 AASHTO T 23
 AASHTO T 22
 ASTM C 1064
 ASTM C469
 ASTM C 1758
 ASTM C 1611
 ASTM C 1621
 ASTM C 1712
 ASTM C 1610
 AASHTO T 277
 ASTM C 666
 ASTM C 512
 ASTM C 157
 ASTM C457
 MP 700.03.50
 
 Cylinders shall be manipulated and cured by methods identical to those used in curing
 the concrete members.
 Slump, Temperature, and Air Content tests shall be conducted on the first batch of
 concrete each day and every time that cylinders are fabricated. Slump, Temperature, and
 349
 
 Air Content tests shall also be conducted whenever Quality Control Personnel or the
 Inspector see a variation in the mix.
 Unit Weight and Yield tests shall be conducted on the first batch of concrete each day
 and thereafter, as deemed necessary by Quality Control or Quality Assurance Personnel.
 The Fabricator's Quality Control Personnel shall maintain records of the beam
 number(s) into which each batch of concrete is placed.
 603.6.4.1-Acceptance Testing of Class S-P Concrete: During production, each batch
 of Class S-P concrete shall be tested to determine the air content, slump-flow, passing
 ability using the J-Ring, rapid segregation resistance, and temperature. Unit Weight and
 Yield tests shall be conducted on the first batch of concrete each day and thereafter, as
 deemed necessary by the Quality Control or Quality Assurance Personnel. The fresh
 concrete properties shall meet performance criteria as shown in Table 603.6.4.1.
 TABLE 603.6.4.1
 Production Acceptance Criteria
 Target ±1.5%
 Target Spread ± 2.0 inches (50 mm)
 Consistency (ASTM C1611)
 2 seconds ≤ Measured T50 ≤ 7 seconds
 Visual Stability Index ≤ 1.0
 Passing Ability (ASTM C1621)
 J-Ring Value ≤ 1.5 inch (38 mm)
 Rapid Segregation Resistance (ASTM
 Penetration Depth (PD) ≤ 0.5 inch (13 mm)
 C1712)
 Temperature
 < 90°F (32°C)
 Unit Weight and Yield
 ± 2.0% of Theoretical
 Fresh Property
 Air Content (ASTM C173)
 
 603.6.5-Strength of Concrete: Each strength test (i.e. strand release and 28-day) shall
 consist of the average strength of a minimum of two compressive strength test cylinders
 fabricated from a single randomly selected batch of concrete, as it is being placed in the forms.
 A minimum of one set of cylinders shall be fabricated (at random) for each member cast
 in a form, with a maximum of one set of cylinders per batch of concrete. These cylinders,
 molded during fabrication, shall be the same size specimens as were used in the approved mix
 design.
 Any member, for which the average concrete compressive strength at 28-days is less than
 the 28-day design compressive strength value, may be rejected at the option of the Contractor.
 If the Contractor elects to use such a member, it will be evaluated as to its adequacy for the use
 intended. Any member evaluated as unsatisfactory will be rejected by the Division, and the
 Contractor shall fabricate another member to replace the one which was evaluated as
 unsatisfactory. When the evaluation indicates that the member will be satisfactory for its
 intended use, the Engineer will provide for an appropriate price adjustment under the
 provisions of 603.14.2.1.
 Whenever the compressive strength of a member at 28-days is less than the 28-day design
 compressive strength value, the subject member may still be accepted without a price
 adjustment if the compressive strength at any time prior to shipment (up to a maximum of 56days from the date of fabrication) exceeds the 28-day design compressive strength value. The
 Division shall not be responsible for any project delays incurred due to the delayed strength
 350
 
 attainment, and time extensions under Section 108 of the Specifications are not applicable to
 this scenario.
 603.6.6-Batching and Mixing: Concrete batching plants and their operation shall be in
 conformance with ASTM C 94, “Specifications for Ready-Mix Concrete”. Concrete batch
 plants shall be capable of producing concrete of the quality required and they shall be
 adequately equipped and properly operated. Concrete supplied to the plant by an outside batch
 plant shall meet the same requirements of batch plant facilities. Evidence of conformance will
 be certification of the outside plant by the National Ready-Mix Concrete Association
 (NRMCA).
 Fine and coarse aggregates and cement shall be measured by weight. Water and liquid
 admixture may be measured by either weight or volume. Measurement of the various
 components of concrete, and measuring equipment shall be in accordance with ASTM C 94.
 Concrete shall be mixed by one of the following methods:
 1. Central mixed concrete-concrete mixed in a central stationary mixer and delivered to
 the casting area by appropriate methods.
 2. Shrink mixed concrete-concrete that is partially mixed in a stationery mixer, then mixed
 completely and delivered to the casting site in a truck mixer.
 3. Truck mixed concrete-concrete that is completely mixed in a truck mixer as it is
 delivered to the casting site.
 Mixing times shall be established by uniformity tests in accordance with procedures in
 ASTM C 94.
 Class S-P concrete shall be batched at the site of fabrication of the prestressed members.
 For Class S-P concrete, all wash water must be completely discharged from the mixing drum
 prior to addition of any materials for the subsequent batch. When using Class S-P concrete,
 under no circumstances shall water be used to adjust the consistency of the mix. If it is
 necessary to adjust the Class S-P concrete’s consistency, this shall be done through the addition
 of chemical admixtures only, and adequate mixing after the adjustment, must occur before any
 Class S-P concrete is discharged into the formwork. Two compressive strength specimens,
 from this adjusted batch, shall be fabricated and tested. Also, the concrete tests required in
 Table 603.6.4.1, with the exception of the unit weight and yield tests, shall be performed on
 this adjusted batch. These results must meet the requirements shown in Table 603.6.4.1.
 603.6.7-Placing Concrete: Suitable means shall be used for placing concrete without
 segregation. The concrete mixture shall not be dropped from a distance of more than 4 feet
 (1.2 meters), relative to the top of the form or the reinforcement. Special care shall be taken to
 deposit the concrete in its final position in each part of the form. Working of flowing concrete
 along the forms from the point of deposit will not be permitted. Care must be taken to work
 the concrete under and around the prestressing strands and reinforcement. The plastic concrete
 shall be consolidated in place by either external or internal vibration, or both when necessary.
 The vibrators shall be of a type and design approved by the Engineer, and the size of the
 vibrating head will be governed by the spacing of the prestressing cables and reinforcement.
 Vibrators may be used only to consolidate the concrete after it has been properly placed.
 
 351
 
 Internal vibrators shall be operated vertically and shall be slowly pushed into and pulled
 out of the concrete and shall not be held in one spot long enough to cause segregation. Concrete
 segregated by the vibrator shall be removed and discarded. Partially hardened layers of
 concrete shall not be penetrated or disturbed by the vibrator. Transmission of vibration into
 prestressing cable or reinforcement embedded in partially hardened concrete by the vibrating
 equipment will not be permitted.
 The plans for delivery and placement of Class S-P concrete to the casting beds should
 ensure that construction of the entire member is completed during the workable period of the
 concrete established in MP 711.03.23, such that no vibration of the concrete is necessary at
 any point during construction. If vibration is to be used at any time during fabrication, the
 Class S-P concrete mix and the method of construction must be pre-qualified as outlined in
 Section 603.6.1.1.1. Batching, transportation and delivery of the Class S-P shall be planned
 by the manufacturer such that there is a reasonably continuous feed into the formwork and,
 therefore, at no time shall there be a large pause or delay in the casting process which causes
 the fresh concrete properties to exceed the limits set forth in Table 603.6.4.1.
 603.6.8-Cold Weather Production: In addition to the requirements of Subsection 601.9.1,
 the following requirements shall apply to outdoor casting operations. When ambient
 temperatures below 40° F (4C) are anticipated, the following shall be used as necessary to
 keep the temperature of concrete within the prescribed limits:
 1. Minimum concrete temperature shall be 50º F (10C) after placement.
 2. Concrete shall not be placed on cold forms, steel, or appurtenances. When the
 temperature of these facilities are below 40º F (4C), steam heat or other means
 shall be provided to maintain the temperature to at least 50° F (10C) unless
 concrete is delivered above 60º F (15C) and no frost, snow or ice is present in the
 form.
 3. Placing concrete under covers or in suitable enclosures.
 4. Use of heated mixing water.
 5. Avoidance of the use of frozen aggregate or aggregate containing frost, snow or
 ice.
 6. Use of insulated forms.
 603.6.9-Hot Weather Production: In addition to the requirements of Subsection 601.9.2,
 the following requirements shall apply to outdoor casting operations:
 When the ambient temperature is above 100 F (38C), or other adverse weather conditions
 are present, it is recognized that plastic shrinkage of concrete, or loss of strength below
 specification requirements, or both may occur. If such conditions do occur, the following
 procedures or combination of procedures shall be used as necessary to correct these
 deficiencies:
 1. Water fog spraying of forms, prior to placement of concrete. Forms exposed to
 direct sunlight can be misted for cooling prior to placement of concrete.
 2. Shaded storage for aggregates.
 3. Burying, insulating or shading water supply facilities.
 4. Sprinkling or fog spraying of aggregates.
 5. Use of shaved or crushed ice for a portion of the mixing water. Only so much ice
 shall be used as will be entirely melted at the completion of the mixing period.
 352
 
 6. Use of cold water in batching. Water can be chilled and stored in an insulated tank
 or pulled from a source if temperatures are low enough to aid mix temperature
 reduction.
 7. Application of wet burlap or mats or fog spraying as soon as the water sheen
 disappears from the concrete. This is especially important for hot, windy, exposed
 locations.
 8. Use of white pigmented curing compound for its heat-reflective properties except
 on composite surfaces.
 9. Use of self-retarding admixtures.
 10. Avoidance of the use of cement with temperatures over 170 F (77C).
 11. Shading of product surface during and after casting to avoid heat buildup in direct
 sunlight.
 Concreting operations shall be discontinued when concrete temperatures exceed 100 F
 (38C) at the time of placing.
 603.7-PRESTRESSING:
 603.7.1-Protection of Prestressing Steel: All prestressing steel shall be protected against
 physical damage and rust at all times during storage and manufacturing. Prestressing steel
 shall also be free of deleterious material such as grease, oil, wax, or paint, except where called
 for on the plans. Prestressing steel that has sustained physical damage at any time shall be
 rejected. The use of prestressing reinforcement having kinks, bends, nicks, or other defects will
 not be permitted. The development of pitting, other than slight rusting shall be cause for
 rejection.
 Prestressing steel shall be packaged in containers or shipping forms for the protection of
 the strand against physical damage and corrosion during shipping and storage. A corrosion
 inhibitor which prevents rust or other results of corrosion shall be incorporated in a corrosion
 inhibitor carrier type packaging material, or when permitted by the Engineer, may be applied
 directly to the steel. The corrosion inhibitor shall have no deleterious effect on the steel or
 concrete or bond strength of steel to concrete.
 The shipping package or form shall be clearly marked with a statement that the package
 contains high strength prestressing steel, and the type of corrosion inhibitor used, including the
 date packaged.
 All anchorages, end fittings, couplers, and exposed strands, which will not be encased in
 concrete or grout in the completed work, shall be permanently protected against corrosion.
 If an anti-bonding agent is used on the forms to facilitate member removal, every
 precaution shall be taken to protect the prestressing strands against any ° of coating by the antibonding agent.
 603.7.2-Storing of Prestressing Steel: Prestressing steel shall be stored in a protected area
 which includes a roof (and sides if necessary) to keep moisture off the strand. In addition the
 cover must have a floor or at least the strand must be placed on supports to keep it out of mud
 and water until it is to be used. It shall not be removed from its protective packaging until
 immediately prior to installation in the forms and placement of concrete. Openings in the
 packaging shall be resealed as necessary to protect the unused steel. While exposed, the steel
 shall be protected to prevent corrosion.
 353
 
 603.7.3-Placement of Prestressing Steel: Prestressing shall be accurately installed in the
 forms and held in place by the stressing jack or temporary anchors and, when tendons are to
 be draped, by hold-down devices. The hold down devices used at all points of change in slope
 of tendon trajectory shall be of a low-friction type.
 603.7.4-Safety Measures: Effective safety measures shall be taken to prevent injuries to
 personnel due to the breakage of strands or failure of anchorage devices during the tensioning
 operations. The protection provided shall be adequate and shall permit the inspector to perform
 his normal duties. When the safety precautions, in the opinion of the Engineer, are inadequate
 the contractor will revise the procedures or equipment to the satisfaction of the Engineer. The
 inspector will abide by the safety rules established by the producer.
 603.7.5-Stressing Requirements:
 603.7.5.1-General: The provisions set forth in this section refer to the application and
 measurement of stresses to prestressed concrete members manufactured by the process of
 pretensioning. Prestressing forces shall not be transferred to any member nor shall end
 anchors be released before the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength as
 specified on the plans or in the special provisions as determined by tests of standard
 cylinders cured identically as the member.
 An initial force shall be applied to each strand such as to develop a load of
 approximately 10% of the final prestressing load as shown on the plans. A record shall be
 maintained of the jacking force and elongations thereby. Several prestressed members may
 be cast in one continuous line and stressed at one time.
 Forms shall be removed and members detensioned immediately after steam curing or
 heat curing is discontinued while the concrete is still warm and moist. The elements shall
 be cut or released in an order such that lateral eccentricity of prestress forces will be a
 minimum.
 603.7.5.2-Tensioning of Strands: In all methods of tensioning, stress induced in the
 strands shall be determined by monitoring applied force and independently by
 measurement of elongation. Applied force may be monitored by direct measurement using
 a pressure gauge piped into the hydraulic pump and jack system. The elongation
 measurements shall agree with their computed theoretical values within a tolerance of
 ±5%. If discrepancies are in excess of 5% between the calculated forces, determined by
 elongation measurement and gauge reading, the tensioning operation shall be suspended
 and the source of error determined, evaluated, and corrected by qualified personnel before
 proceeding.
 Calculations for elongation and gauge readings must include appropriate allowances
 for friction in the jacking system, strand seating, movement of bulkheads, bed shortening
 if under load, thermal corrections, and any other compensation for the setup.
 603.7.5.3-Methods of Stress Measurement: Methods of measurement of the stressing
 force consist of pressure gauges to measure force from the pressure applied to hydraulic
 jacks or any other method approved by the Engineer.
 
 354
 
 603.7.5.4-Gauging Systems: Hydraulic gauges shall conform to the provisions set
 forth in Section 603.3.3. All gauges measuring the stressing load shall be graduated so they
 can be read within a tolerance of ±2%.
 Tensioning methods employing hydraulic gauges shall have appropriate bypass valve
 snubbers and fittings so that the gauge pointer will not fluctuate but will remain steady
 until the jacking load is released.
 603.7.5.5-Control of Jacking Force: Pressure bypass valves may be used for stopping
 the jack at the required load or for manually stopping the load with the valve. The accuracy
 of setting of automatic cutoff valves shall be verified by running to the desired cutoff load
 whenever there is reason to suspect improper results, and at a minimum, at the beginning
 of the operation each day.
 603.7.5.6-Wire Failure in Strands: Failure of wires in a pretensioning strand is
 acceptable provided the total area of wire failure is not more than 2% of the total area of
 strands in a member, and providing the breakage is not symptomatic of a more extensive
 distress condition. Failure of any individual wire prior to placing concrete will require
 replacement of the strand.
 603.7.5.7-Calibration Records for Jacking Equipment: All jacking and load
 measuring equipment shall be calibrated as specified in Section 603.3.3. Calibration
 records should show the following data.
 1. Date of calibration.
 2. Agency, laboratory or registered Professional Engineer (PE) supervising the
 calibration.
 3. Method of calibration; i.e. proving ring, load cell, testing machine, etc., and its
 calibration reference.
 4. The full range of calibration with gauge readings indicated against actual load.
 Calibration records for all tensioning systems being used shall be available for
 preparing theoretical tensioning values. Personnel involved in preparing tensioning
 calculations shall have a copy of these records for reference.
 603.7.6-Pretensioning and Strand Debonding: Pretensioning shall conform to the
 provisions set forth in Article 2.2, “Pretensioning” of the latest edition of the PCI Quality
 Control Manual MNL-116.
 Plastic sheathing shall be used for strand debonding and shall be approved by the Engineer
 prior to use. Items such as animal fat, reactive greases, or PVC pipes shall not be used. Any
 other material shall be approved by the Engineer prior to use.
 603.7.7-Detensioning: Detensioning shall conform to the provisions set forth in Article
 2.3, “Detensioning” of the latest edition of the PCI Quality Control Manual MNL-116.
 603.7.8-Concrete Cover: Minimum concrete cover for prestressing steel shall be 1 ½
 inches (40 mm) unless otherwise shown on the plans.
 
 355
 
 603.8-CURING:
 603.8.1 General: Careful attention shall be given to the proper curing of concrete. Prior to
 placing of concrete, the contractor shall submit the proposed curing methods and procedures
 to the Engineer for approval. Elevated temperature curing facilities shall be tested prior to
 approval. Approved equipment and materials for curing shall be available for use prior to
 casting.
 Inadequate curing facilities or lack of attention to the proper curing of concrete shall be
 sufficient cause for the Engineer to stop all concrete placement until approved curing is
 provided. Inadequate curing may be cause for rejection of the member. All test cylinders shall
 be cured in the same environment as the precast/prestressed concrete members.
 Curing shall be commenced prior to the formation of surface shrinkage cracks. The curing
 mats, sheets, or blankets shall be carefully placed in contact with the concrete member to avoid
 damage to the freshly finished concrete.
 The following curing requirements shall apply for precast/prestressed members. Any other
 special method of curing shall meet with the approval of the Engineer. Concrete shall not be
 exposed to temperatures below freezing until the specified minimum strength as shown in plan
 notes has been attained.
 All concrete shall be cured by water curing, accelerated temperature curing, or any other
 method approved by the Engineer.
 603.8.2-Water Curing: All exposed surfaces of the concrete shall be kept wet
 continuously for the required curing time. The water used for curing shall meet the
 requirements of 603.2. Water curing shall be permitted as follows:
 603.8.2.1-Wet Mat Method: For water curing by the mat method, cotton mats,
 polyethylene sheeting, or polyethylene burlap blankets may be used. The mats, sheets or
 blankets shall be adequately anchored and weighted to provide continuous contact with all
 concrete surfaces. Any concrete surfaces which cannot be cured by contact shall be
 enclosed by mats, adequately anchored, so that outside air cannot enter the enclosure.
 Sufficient moisture shall be provided inside the enclosure to keep all of the surfaces of the
 concrete wet for the required curing time, but in no case less than 36 hours.
 603.8.2.2-Saturated Cover Curing: The member, covered as specified for the initial
 phase of curing, shall be maintained on the casting bed in an approved enclosure designed
 and equipped to insure complete saturation of the covering. The temperature within the
 enclosure and that of the covering material shall be maintained to provide a uniform curing
 temperature at the surface of the member, within the limits of 80 F to 130 F (27C) to
 (54C), until the specified strength is attained, but in no case less than 36 hours. The
 covering shall be kept thoroughly saturated throughout the entire curing period and the
 temperature of the water used shall be controlled uniformly to maintain the selected curing
 temperature of the surface of the member.
 603.8.2.3-Water Spray Curing: The member, covered as specified for the initial phase
 of curing, shall be maintained in the casting bed in an approved enclosure. When the
 concrete is sufficiently hardened to resist damage, the covering shall be removed and the
 exposed surfaces of the unit shall be subjected to a continuous fine spray of water. The
 356
 
 temperature within the enclosure and that of the water used shall be controlled to provide
 a uniform curing temperature at the surface of the member, within the limits of 80F and
 130F (27C) to (54C) until the specified member strength is attained, but in no case less
 than 36 hours.
 603.8.3-Accelerated Curing: Accelerated curing of the concrete shall be done by low
 pressure steam curing, or radiant heat curing. Transfer of stress shall be accomplished
 immediately after the heat curing has been discontinued. Accelerated curing shall be applied
 at a controlled rate following initial set of the concrete as per ASTM C403. Accelerated curing
 shall be done under suitable enclosures which minimize all heat losses and maintain uniform
 cure conditions within the enclosed area. Members must be maintained wet during accelerated
 curing time.
 If accelerated curing is used, the contractor/fabricator shall furnish recording thermometers
 showing the time-temperature relationship of the concrete throughout the entire curing period.
 Recording thermometers shall be kept in proper calibration and recalibrated at least annually.
 603.8.3.1-Low-Pressure Steam Curing: Low-pressure steam curing shall be done
 under a suitable enclosure to contain the live steam and minimize moisture and heat losses.
 The concrete shall be allowed to attain its initial set before application of the live steam.
 Application of live steam shall not be directed on the concrete or forms such as to cause
 localized high temperatures. During the initial application of live steam, the concrete
 temperature shall be raised at an average rate not exceeding 80°F (27C)/per hour, until the
 curing temperature is reached. The maximum sustained concrete temperature during the
 curing cycle shall not exceed 160F (70°C). The maximum temperature shall be held until
 the concrete has reached the required release strength. The maximum peak concrete
 temperature during the curing cycle shall be 190°F (88°C). The concrete temperature shall
 be maintained uniformly throughout the extremities of the prestressed member. At the end
 of curing, the concrete temperature shall be reduced at an average rate not exceeding 50°F
 (10°C)/per hour.
 603.8.3.2-Radiant Heat Curing: Radiant heat may be applied by means of pipes
 circulating steam, hot oil or hot water, or by electric heating elements. Radiant heat curing
 shall be done under a suitable enclosure to contain the heat, and moisture loss shall be
 minimized by covering all exposed concrete surfaces with a plastic sheeting or by applying
 an approved liquid membrane curing compound to all exposed concrete surfaces. The heat
 application shall be maintained to create a uniform concrete temperature throughout the
 extremities of the member.
 After the waiting period prior to application of the heat, the concrete temperature shall
 increase at an average rate not exceeding 80F (27°C)/per hour until the curing temperature
 is reached. The maximum sustained concrete temperature within the curing cycle shall not
 exceed 160F (70°C). The maximum temperature shall be held until the concrete has
 reached the required release strength as shown in plan notes. The maximum peak concrete
 temperature during the curing cycle shall be 190°F (88°C). The maximum cooling rate
 from sustained concrete curing temperature shall be 50°F (10°C)/per hour.
 
 357
 
 603.9-FINISHING:
 To assure the production of well-formed matching members, all surfaces of the concrete
 shall be finished, shall be true and even, and shall be free from rough, open, or honeycombed areas,
 depressions or projections. The edges shall be finished or chamfered, or both. Care shall be
 exercised in removing forms to avoid spalling or otherwise damaging the concrete.
 Top surfaces of prestressed members shall be screeded or rough floated to bring mortar to
 the surface and cover all aggregate. The top surface of members that will receive cast-in-place
 concrete on the project site shall be finished as noted on the project plans, or if no finish is noted,
 they shall have either a raked or stiff broom finish. Aggregate shall not be loosened when
 roughening the surface. The fascia surfaces of bridge members shall be finished with a PCI Grade
 A Formed Finish. All other members shall be finished with a PCI Standard Grade Formed Finish.
 Concrete on exposed reinforcing steel and loose laitance on concrete surfaces to be in contact with
 cast-in-place concrete shall be removed from all members.
 Fabrication holes, except box beam vent holes, in the bottom of all beams, shall be filled
 with nonshrink mortar and made flush with the surrounding surface. No patching is required for
 small holes and irregularities on the sides of adjacent box beams that are to be sandblasted prior to
 shipment. Care shall be taken in final cutting the ends of strands to avoid damaging the concrete
 surface.
 603.10-WORKMANSHIP:
 603.10.1-General: Holes and voids in the surface of concrete resulting from bolts, ties, or
 large air pockets shall be wetted and filled with mortar having the same proportion of fine
 aggregate and cement as in the concrete, after which exposed mortar surfaces shall be finished
 smooth and even with a wood float.
 Surfaces to be repaired and finished shall be kept wet for at least one hour before hydraulic
 cement mortar is applied. Immediately following patching work, repaired areas shall be wet
 cured for at least 48 hours. The wet cure may be accomplished by the use of steam, wet burlap
 or continuous spray wetting. A liquid membrane-curing compound may be used on noncomposite surfaces.
 Beams or girders having honeycomb of such extent to affect their strength or resistance to
 deterioration will not be accepted.
 603.10.2-Defects and Breakage: Defective or damaged members which cannot be
 satisfactorily repaired, or which are not acceptable to the Engineer will not be incorporated
 into the work. All other members that sustain damage during fabrication, handling, storage or
 transportation shall be evaluated in accordance with Chapter three of PCI Journal Vol. 30, # 3
 entitled “Fabrication and Shipment Cracks in Precast or Prestressed Beams and Columns”,
 hereinafter referred to as “specification”. This specification is to be used to determine the
 severity of cracks. All cracks with a width of 4 mils (0.1 mm) or less may be repaired by silane
 treatment if the repair section of the specification allows repairs. All cracks over 4 mils (0.1
 mm) to and including 16 mils (0.4 mm) shall be repaired by epoxy injection if allowed by the
 specification. Members with cracks over 16 mils (0.4 mm) shall not be incorporated into the
 work unless approved by the Engineer.
 603.10.2.1-Epoxy Injection of Cracks: The work shall consist of repairing cracks
 with a width greater than 4 mils and up to and including 16 mils on prestressed concrete
 bridge beams.
 358
 
 603.10.2.1.1-Materials: The epoxy material used for epoxy injection crack repair shall
 meet the requirements specified for epoxy resin adhesives in ASTM C 881, Type IV, Grade
 1, and Classes B or C. For the epoxy paste or material used to bond and cover the injection
 ports to the substrate, use the epoxy resin manufacturer’s recommendation.
 603.10.2.1.2-Equipment: The equipment to be used to inject the epoxy shall meet the
 recommendations of the epoxy injection material manufacturer and/or the following
 requirements:
 1. Use equipment that has the ability to automatically proportion the material
 components within the mix ratio tolerances set by the epoxy materials
 manufacturer.
 2. Use equipment that has the ability to automatically mix the epoxy component
 materials within the pump and injection apparatus.
 603.10.2.1.3-Crack Surface Preparation and Cleaning Requirements: After the
 concrete beam has achieved 28 day shipping strength, clean the concrete surface along the
 crack of all deteriorated concrete, efflorescence and other contaminants which would be
 detrimental to the adhesion of the surface sealing epoxy compound. The substrate must be
 sound, dry on the surface, and free from oil and grease. Blow out the crack with oil free
 and dry compressed air.
 603.10.2.1.4-Epoxy Injection: Place the base of the injection ports directly over the
 crack and bond to the substrate with an epoxy paste or the recommended product by the
 epoxy resin manufacturer. The injection ports should be spaced over the length of the crack
 at a spacing that will allow the epoxy resin to seal the entire crack traveling from one port
 to another. The ports spacing is dependent upon the viscosity of the resin.
 Use an epoxy adhesive to seal over the surface ports and exposed cracks. The entire
 exposed crack is to be covered with the epoxy adhesive leaving only the port holes
 uncovered. The cure time for the epoxy will be based upon concrete temperature.
 The temperature requirements of the concrete for the injected resin must be satisfied
 before the process can begin. Begin injecting at the lowest port on the beam and continue
 until the epoxy resin begins to “ooze” out of the port above it. The “ooze” out of the port
 above it is a sign that the crack has been filled to that level. Plug the first port with a cap
 and move up to the next port, repeating this procedure until the entire crack has been filled
 with epoxy. Use slow, constant pressure to inject the epoxy into the crack which will
 reduce the possibility of leaks or blow-outs and allow time for the repair material to fully
 penetrate the crack.
 603.10.2.1.5-Post Epoxy Injection: After a minimum of 24 hours, the injection ports
 can be removed from the beam. Clean the concrete surface areas of excess epoxy injection
 work. Clean so as to not damage the concrete by scraping, light sand blasting, grinding,
 use of solvents, or any other appropriate method approved by the engineer. Clean the
 excess materials so that no epoxy material or injection ports extend beyond the plane
 surface of the concrete.
 
 359
 
 603.11-DIMENSIONAL TOLERANCES:
 All tolerances shall be applied with respect to the theoretical positions and dimensions
 shown in the plans. The tolerances listed in this article represent the total allowable tolerance that
 will be accepted in the finished product.
 The limits of tolerance do not necessarily represent fully acceptable construction; they are
 the limits at which construction becomes unacceptable. In general, workmanship shall be at a level
 of quality that will be well within the tolerance limits. Out of tolerance dimensions shall be
 handled in accordance with MP 603.10.40.
 603.11.1-Prestressed Concrete I-Beams and Bulb Tee Beams:
 Characteristics
 Depth (flanges)
 Depth (Overall)
 Width (flanges)
 Width (Web)
 
 Value
 1/4 inch (± 6 mm)
 +1/2 inch, to -1/4 inch (+15 to -6 mm)
 +3/8, to -1/4 inch (+10 to -6 mm)
 +3/8, to -1/4 inch (+10 to -6 mm)
 1/8 inch per 10 feet, ±1 inch max.
 ( 1 mm/m, 25 mm max)
 
 Length of Beam
 
 Sweep (variation from straight line parallel to
  1/8 inch per 10 ft ( 1 mm/m)
 centerline of member)
  1/8 inch per 10 feet
  1/2 inch max up to 80 feet length
  1 inch max. over 80 length
 Camber variation from design camber
 ( 1 mm/m)
 ( 13 mm max. up to 24 m length)
 ( 25 mm max. over 24 m length)
 3/16 inch per 12 inches ± 1 inch
 Camber variation from design camber
 (15 mm/m,  5 mm max)
 Position of plates
  1 inch ( 25 mm)
 Position of bearing plates
  5/8 inch ( 16 mm)
 Diaphragm Inserts (spacing between centers
 of inserts and from centers of inserts to the
  1/2 in ( 15 mm)
 ends of the beams.)
 Stirrup bars ( Projection above top of beam)
  3/4 inch ( 20 mm)
 Stirrup bars ( Longitudinal spacing)
  2 inches ( 50 mm)
 Concrete Cover
  1/4 in ( 6 mm)
 Position of inserts for structural connections
  1/2 in ( 15 mm)
 Position of hold-down points for draped
  5 inches ( 125 mm)
 strands
 Position of Inserts
  1/2 inch ( 15 mm)
 Position of handling devices:
 Parallel to length
  6 inches ( 150 mm)
 Transverse to length
  1 inch ( 25 mm)
 Prestressing strand position (vertical or
  1/4 inch ( 6 mm)
 horizontal).
 
 360
 
 603.11.2 Precast/Prestressed Concrete Box Beams and Plank Beams:
 Characteristics
 Depth (Overall)
 Depth (top flange)
 Depth (bottom flange)
 Width (Overall)
 Width (Web)
 Length
 Sweep (variation from straight line
 parallel to centerline of member) Up to
 40 feet (12 m) length member
 40 to 60 feet (12 to 18 m) length
 member
 Greater than 60 feet (18 m) length
 member
 Camber variation from design camber
 Variation from specified end Squareness
 of skew:
 Horizontal
 Vertical
 Position of tendons Individual
 Position of Inserts for structural
 connections
 Position of handling devices:
 Parallel to length
 Transverse to length
 Position of stirrups:
 Longitudinal spacing
 Projection above top
 Position of dowels tubes
 Position of hold-down points for draped
 strands
 Position of tie rods tubes:
 Parallel to length
 Vertical
 Position of slab void:
 End of void to center of tie hole
 Adjacent to end block
 Concrete Cover
 
 Value
 1/4 inch (± 6 mm)
 +1/2 inch (+15 mm)
 +1/2 inch to -1/8 inch (+15 to 3 mm)
 ±1/4 inch (±6 mm)
 ±3/8 inch (±6 mm)
  3/4 inch ( 20 mm)
 1/4 inch (± 6 mm)
 ±3/8 inch (±10 mm)
  1/2 in ( 15 mm)
 ±1/8 inch per 10 feet, ±1/2 inch Max.
 (±1 mm/m, ±15 mm Max)
  5/8 inch ( 16 mm)
 ±1/8 inch per 12 inches ± 1/2 inch Max.
 (±1 mm/100 mm, ±15 mm Max)
  1/4 in ( 6 mm)
  1/2 in ( 15 mm)
  6 inches ( 150 mm)
  1 in ( 25 mm)
  1 inch ( 25 mm)
 + 1/4 inch ( 6 mm), - 3/4 inch (- 20 mm)
  5/8 inch ( 16 mm)
  5 inch ( 125 mm)
  1/2 inch ( 15 mm)
 ±3/8 inch (±10 mm)
  1/2 inch ( 15 mm)
  1 inch ( 25 mm)
  1/4 inch ( 6 mm) per 10 feet long.
 Bars (6 mm per 3 m)
 
 361
 
 603.11.3-Prestressed Concrete Deck Panels:
 Characteristics
 Length
 Width
 Nominal Depth
 Horizontal Alignment – Deviation from
 straightness of matting edge of panels
 Deviation of ends from plan dimension
 Horizontal Alignment
 Position of strands :
 Vertical
 Horizontal
 Concrete Cover
 
 Value
  1/2 in ( 15 mm)
  1/2 in ( 15 mm)
 + 1/4 inch - 1/8 in (+6 mm, -3 mm)
 1/8 in (3 mm)
  1/2 in ( 15 mm)
 ±1/8 (±3 mm)
  1/2 in ( 15 mm)
  1/4 inch ( 6 mm) 1/4 inch per 10 feet
 long. Bars (6 mm per 3 m)
 
 603.12-HANDLING, STORING, TRANSPORTING, AND ERECTION:
 The Contractor shall be responsible for proper handling, lifting, storing, hauling, and
 erection of all members so that they are placed in the structure without damage.
 Prestressed members shall be maintained in an upright position at all times and shall be
 handled and supported in a manner which prevents torsion. No member shall be moved from the
 casting yard until the member has been accepted.
 Storing of members shall be done with adequate blocking so that warpage or cracking will
 not occur. Blocking will be such that at least 6 inches (150 mm) clearance is maintained above the
 surface on which the blocking is placed. Placement of the blocking from beam ends shall be at
 locations not greater than (3) percent of the beam length. Concrete box beams shall be supported
 by the solid end block area during handling, storage, hauling, and erection. Members which are
 improperly stored and which become cracked, warped, or otherwise damaged in storage will be
 subject to rejection.
 Members when stacked, shall be separated by blocking capable of supporting the members.
 The blocking shall be arranged in vertical planes. Stacking of members shall be arranged such that
 lifting devices will be accessible and undamaged. Stacking shall not exceed two members high.
 All concrete beams or girders when erected, shall be securely tied and/or braced unless
 otherwise shown on the plans. When railroad or roadway traffic must be maintained beneath
 girders or beams already placed, traffic shall be protected against falling objects during the erection
 of diaphragms and other structural members, during the placing of cast-in-place concrete, and
 during the erection and dismantling of forms. Protection shall consist of nets or flooring with
 openings not larger than 1 inch (25 mm).
 When precast / prestressed concrete adjacent box beams are erected, the fit of mating
 surfaces will be such that excessive grout leakage will not occur. If such fit is not provided the
 joint shall be filled with grout or sealed with an acceptable caulking suitable to the Engineer.
 
 362
 
 603.13-CONSTRUCTION OF DECK:
 The variation in heights between beams shall not be more than 1/2 in (13 mm) between
 adjacent box beams where there is no wearing surface. For adjacent box beam bridges with wearing
 surfaces, the differential shall not exceed 3/4 inches (19 mm).
 Dowel bar and lifting bolt holes shall be filled with non-shrink grout. Adjacent box beam
 units shall be transverse post tensioned by the use of high strength threaded bars, or by other
 methods as shown on the Plans.
 603.14-MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT:
 603.14.1-Method of Measurement: Precast/Prestressed concrete structural members will
 be measured along the member centerline in linear feet (meter). Deck panels shall be measured
 by area in square feet (meter) complete in place.
 Precast reinforced concrete three-sided structures shall be measured along the centerline of
 the erected structure in linear feet (meter).
 Precast reinforced concrete headwalls and wingwalls for use with precast reinforced
 concrete three-sided structures shall be measured in square feet (meter) as measured on the
 exterior face of the member.
 603.14.2-Basis of Payment: Precast/Prestressed concrete beams, deck panels, precast
 reinforced concrete three-sided structures, and precast reinforced concrete headwalls and
 wingwalls will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for the items listed below, which price
 and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all the materials and doing all the work
 prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner including the cost of furnishing and
 manufacturing the concrete members; for labor, concrete, forms, conventional reinforcing
 steel, prestressing strands, inserts, anchorage devices, bearing pads, shims, grout, wingwalls
 and headwall connection hardware, joint sealing/waterproofing, and other devices, and for
 moving, transporting and erecting the finished product in accordance with the Plans and
 Specifications. For precast reinforced concrete three-sided structures where the headwall is
 cast integral with the end structure unit, the headwall will be paid for in square feet (meter) as
 if it were not integral cast. Cast-in-place concrete diaphragms, curb, parapet, railing, and
 reinforcing steel for cast-in-place concrete are not included in this item.
 603.14.2.1-Price Adjustments: Members found not in compliance with the
 requirements of 603.6.5 for compressive strength, but for which the evaluation indicates
 may still be used, will be paid for at a reduced price in accordance with the following
 formulas, depending on who purchased the members:
 FORMULA 1: Use the following price reduction formula when the members are used
 in a project constructed by a Contractor:
 
  ' _
  f X
 Price Reduction =  c '
  0.5 f c
 
 
 
 
  x 40% of the Contract Unit Bid Price
 
 
 
 363
 
 FORMULA 2: Use the following price reduction formula when the beams are used in
 a project constructed by the Division:
 
  ' _ 
  f X
 Price Reduction =  c '  x IC
  0.5 f c 
 
 
 Where:
 f c' = 28-Day Design Compressive Strength, psi (Mpa)
 _
 
 X = Average 28-day Compressive Strength as determined in 603.6.5
 IC(Formula 2 only) = The invoiced cost of the member itself, as billed to the Division by
 the Fabricator. This cost shall not include other items associated
 with the member such as guardrail, bearing pads, etc.
 603.15-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 603016-* “size” Prestressed Concrete Box Beam
 603017-* “size” Prestressed Concrete Plank Beam
 603018-* “size” Prestressed Concrete I Beam
 603019-* “size” Prestressed Concrete Bulb T Beam
 603020-* “size” Prestressed Concrete Deck Panel
 603021-* “size” Precast Concrete Deck Panel
 * Sequence number
 
 364
 
 UNIT
 Linear Feet (Meter)
 Linear Feet (Meter)
 Linear Feet (Meter)
 Linear Feet (Meter)
 Linear Feet (Meter)
 Linear Feet (Meter)
 
 SECTION 604
 PIPE CULVERTS
 604.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the construction or reconstruction of pipe culverts, referred to as
 "conduit", in accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the
 lines, grades, dimensions, and locations shown on the plans or established by the Engineer.
 604.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall conform to the requirements of the following Subsection of Division 700:
 MATERIAL
 Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-styrene (ABS) Pipe
 Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate Arch
 Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate Pipe or Pipe Arch
 Aluminum Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe and Pipe Arch
 Asphalt Cement for Field Paving Structural Plate Pipe or Pipe Arches
 Bituminized Fiber Pipe (non-perforated)
 Bituminous Coated and Paved Invert Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe
 or Pipe Arch
 Bituminous Coated and Paved Invert Corrugated Steel Pipe or Pipe arch
 Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe or Pipe Arch
 Bituminous Coated Structural Plate Arch
 Bituminous Coated Structural Plate Pipe or Pipe Arch
 Bituminous Plastic Cement
 Clay Pipe, Extra Strength
 Clay Pipe, Standard Strength
 Clay-Lined Reinforced Concrete Pipe
 Controlled Low Strength Material
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe or Pipe Arch
 Corrugated Polyethylene (PE) Pipe
 Corrugated Polyethylene Underdrain
 Corrugated Stainless Steel Pipe
 Crushed Aggregate Backfill
 End Section for Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe or Pipe Arch
 End Section for Corrugated Steel Pipe or Pipe Arch
 Fiber Bonded Full Bituminous Coated and Full Paved Corrugated
 Steel Pipe
 Fiber Bonded Full Bituminous Coated and Paved Invert Corrugated
 Steel Pipe
 Fiber Bonded Full Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe
 Fiber Bonded Full Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe Arch
 Fiberglass Reinforced (FRP) Pipe
 365
 
 SUBSECTION
 714.21
 713.18
 713.18
 713.24
 705.5,
 Grade 40-50
 714.14
 713.15
 713.3
 713.3
 713.9
 713.9
 708.9
 714.10
 714.10
 714.9
 219
 713.14
 714.19
 714.19
 713.7
 704.6, Class I
 or Class 3
 713.21
 713.20
 713.6
 713.5
 713.5
 713.5
 714.16
 
 MATERIAL
 
 SUBSECTION
 *
 708.7
 713.4
 716.1.1.2
 708.6
 708.8
 713.2
 715.12
 714.1
 714.20
 714.22
 714.23
 713.23
 713.23
 713.23
 713.23
 714.4
 714.18
 714.18
 714.18
 714.2
 714.3
 714.17
 713.20
 713.10
 713.8
 713.8
 708.5
 
 Fine Aggregate
 Flexible Watertight Gaskets for Circular Concrete Pipe
 Full Bituminous Coated and Full Paved Corrugated Steel Pipe
 Granular Material for Culvert Bedding
 Hot Pour Mineral Filled Joint Sealer
 Joint Mortar
 Metallic Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe or Pipe Arch
 Miscellaneous Concrete
 Non-Reinforced Concrete Sewer Pipe
 Perforated Plastic Semicircular Pipe
 Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box Culverts
 Precoated and Full Paved Metallic Coated Steel Pipe
 Precoated and Paved Invert Metallic Coated Steel Pipe or Pipe Arch
 Precoated, Metallic Coated steel Pipe
 Precoated, Metallic Coated Steel Pipe Arch
 Reinforced Concrete Elliptical Pipe
 Reinforced Concrete End Section for Arch-Shaped Concrete Pipe
 Reinforced Concrete End Section for Elliptical Concrete Pipe
 Reinforced Concrete End Section for Round Concrete Pipe
 Reinforced Concrete Pipe
 Reinforced Concrete Pipe Arch
 Reinforced Plastic Mortar (RPMP) Pipe
 Safety Slope End Sections
 Stainless Steel Structural Plate Pipe
 Structural Plate Arch
 Structural Plate Pipe or Pipe Arch
 Vitrified Clay Pipe Joints
  Fine aggregate used to level the bedding foundation shall consist of crushed or uncrushed natural or
 
 synthetic (blast furnace slag) mineral aggregate and consist of particles smaller than 3/8 inch (10 mm) as
 determined by visual inspection. Other synthetic aggregate may be used at the discretion of the Engineer.
 
 When the locations of manufacturing plants allow, the plants may be inspected periodically
 for compliance with specified manufacturing methods, and material samples may be obtained for
 laboratory testing for compliance with material quality requirements. This may be the basis for
 quality acceptance of manufactured lots.
 All materials will be subject to inspection for acceptance as to condition at the latest
 practicable time the Engineer has the opportunity to check for compliance prior to or during
 incorporation of materials in the work.
 All references to "corrugated steel pipe" are considered applicable to uncoated pipe and the
 various combinations of coated pipes (bituminous coated, fiber bonded, precoated, etc.) and paving
 classes (paved invert, full paved, etc.) for which the base metal conforms to AASHTO M 218 or
 AASHTO M 274.
 
 366
 
 The sheet thickness for corrugated steel pipe and corrugated aluminum alloy pipe shall be
 as designated on the Plans.
 Corrugated metal pipe of 2-2/3 by ½ inches (68 mm by 13 mm) corrugation shall be
 furnished unless otherwise specified.
 Corrugated steel pipe and pipe arch with 2-2/3” x ½”, 3” x 1”, and 5” x 1” (68 mm by 13
 mm, 75 x 25 mm and 125mm x 25mm) corrugations shall be helically fabricated, except for fiber
 bonded pipe which may be fabricated with annular corrugated of 2-2/3” x ½” and 3” x 1” (68 mm
 x 13 mm and 75 mm x 25 mm). Corrugated aluminum alloy pipe with 2-2/3” x ½”, 3” x 1”, and
 6” x 1” (68 mm x 13 mm, 75 mm x 25 mm, 75 mm x 25 mm, and 150 mm x 25 mm) corrugations
 and corrugated aluminum alloy pipe arch with 2-2/3” x ½” (68 mm x 13 mm) corrugations shall
 be helically fabricated. Where 5” x 1” (125 mm x 25 mm) corrugations are specified for corrugated
 steel pipe and pipe arch, 3” x 1” (75 mm x 25) corrugations may be substituted.
 604.2.1-Quality Control Testing: Quality control of the granular material and crushed
 aggregate backfill is the responsibility of the Contractor as specified in 106.1.
 The Contractor shall maintain necessary equipment and qualified personnel to perform all
 sampling and testing necessary to determine the magnitude of the various properties of the
 material governed by the Specifications and shall maintain these properties within the limits
 of the Specifications.
 The Contractor shall submit a quality control plan detailing the methods by which the
 quality control program will be conducted. This plan, prepared in accordance with the
 guidelines set forth in the appropriate portions of MP 307.00.50 and MP 717.04.21, shall be
 submitted to the Engineer at the preconstruction conference. The work shall not begin until
 the plan is reviewed for conformance with the contract documents.
 604.2.2-Acceptance Testing: Quality control sampling and testing performed by the
 Contractor may be used by the Division for Acceptance.
 604.2.3-Sampling and Testing: Frequency of sampling and testing shall be in accordance
 with the contractor’s quality control plan. The minimum sampling and testing frequencies for
 gradation shall be as indicated in Attachment 1 of MP 307.00.50. The material shall be
 sampled in accordance with MP 700.00.06. The minimum sampling and testing frequency for
 compaction will be in accordance with MP 717.04.21.
 604.2.4-Acceptance Plan:
 604.2.4.1-Compaction: Compaction of backfill material shall meet 604.8.
 604.2.4.2-Gradation: Acceptance for gradation shall be on the basis of test results on
 consecutive random samples from a lot. A lot shall be considered the quantity of material
 represented by an average test value, not to exceed five sublots. Generally at the beginning
 of the project, the average shall be started on the second sample in accordance with
 MP 300.00.51. A sublot is the quantity of material represented by a single gradation test.
 In the case where only one sample is taken, this sublot shall be considered the lot. When
 the average, or when the most recent three consecutive individual test values fall outside
 the limits specified in Table 704.6.2A, the lot of material represented will be considered
 nonconforming to the extent that the last of its sublots is nonconforming. When this occurs,
 367
 
 the last sublot shall have its price adjusted in accordance with Table 604.13.1. In the case
 where the average is nonconforming and the last sublot contained is conforming, then there
 would be no price adjustment. In no event, however, shall a sublot of material have its
 price adjusted more than once, and the first adjustment, which is determined, shall apply.
 604.2.4.3-Degree of Nonconformance: When a sublot of material is to have its price
 adjusted, the percentage point difference between the nonconforming test value and the
 specification limit shall be determined for each sieve size determined to be nonconforming,
 and this value shall be multiplied by its appropriate multiplication factor as set forth in
 Table 604.2.4.3
 TABLE 604.2.4.3
 Nonconforming Sieve Size
 Multiplication Factor
 1 ½ in. (37.5 mm)
 1.0
 ¾ in. (19 mm)
 1.0
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 1.0
 No. 40 (425 µm)
 1.0
 No. 200 (75µm)
 2.0
 The total measure of nonconformance of an individual sublot is the sum of all
 nonconformance of an individual sieve sizes of that sublot.
 When the total degree of nonconformance has been established and it is 12.0 or less,
 the material will be for at an adjusted contract price as specified in Table 604.13.1.
 When the degree of nonconformance is greater than 12.0, the nonconforming sublot
 shall be resolved on an individual basis, requiring a special investigation by the Engineer
 to determine the appropriate course of action to be followed.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 604.3-GENERAL:
 Subject to the provisions prescribed, the flow line of a conduit may be altered from that
 shown on the plans. If a firm conduit foundation is not encountered at the specified elevation, the
 unsatisfactory material shall be replaced with suitable material to a depth directed by the Engineer.
 Galvanized steel pipe or bands shall not come in contact with aluminized steel pipe or
 bands.
 The diameter of conduit, as used in this Section, is the largest dimension, horizontal or
 vertical.
 604.4-TRENCH EXCAVATION:
 604.4.1-Conduits 18 Inches (450 mm) Through 54 Inches (1400 mm): In complete or
 partial fill sections, before trenching is begun, the fill shall be constructed for a minimum
 distance of six diameters on each side of the conduit and to a height of 2 feet (600 mm) over
 the top of the conduit or to the surface of the completed embankment if less than 2 feet (600
 mm) above the top of the conduit. The width of the trench, in either cut of fill sections, shall
 not be less than the outside diameter of the conduit or encasement plus 18 inches (450 mm) on
 each side of the conduit measured to the face of the trench or to the sheeting when used.
 368
 
 604.4.2-Conduits 60 Inches (1500 mm) Through 108 Inches (2700 mm): In complete
 or partial fill sections, before trenching is begun, the fill shall be constructed for a distance of
 six diameters on each side of the conduit and to a minimum height of 25 percent of the vertical
 dimension of the conduit. The width of the trench shall not be less than the outside horizontal
 diameter of the conduit plus one diameter on each side of the conduit. When using a Controlled
 low strength material the width of the trench shall not be less than the outside horizontal
 diameter of the conduit plus one half diameter on each side of the conduit.
 In rock or shale cut section, the width of the trench shall not be greater than required to
 obtain the backfill compaction specified. Soil cut trenches shall be treated as complete or
 partial fill sections. For rigid pipe, the width of the trench shall not be less than the outside
 horizontal diameter of the conduit plus 24 inches (600 mm) on each side of the conduit.
 604.4.3-Conduit Greater Than 108 Inches (2700 mm): In complete or partial fill
 sections, before trenching is begun, the fill shall be constructed for a distance of six diameters
 on each side of the conduit and to a minimum height of 25 percent of the vertical dimension
 of the conduit.
 Installation of the conduit shall be as detailed in the plans, including the type and amount
 of backfill and bedding.
 For flexible conduit, the Contractor shall submit shop drawings detailing all erection
 procedures including anticipated movements during backfilling operations. Backfill
 operations shall also be detailed to show lift thicknesses, sequence of lifts and shape of the
 conduit during these operations.
 The Contractor shall submit a plan of field control for the installation insuring the conduit
 is erected in accordance with the shop and erection drawings.
 604.4.4-Structural Plate Arches: Excavation for the foundations of structural plate
 arches shall be as for box culverts and structures and in accordance with 212.3.
 604.5-BEDDING:
 604.5.1-General: The conduit bedding shall conform to one of the classes described below
 as specified. When no bedding class is specified, the requirements for Class B bedding shall
 apply.
 When a firm foundation is not found at grade due to the presence of foreign material or
 trash, or due to the presence of moisture eight percent in excess of optimum, the unsatisfactory
 material shall be removed for the width of the conduit plus 18 inches (450 mm) on each side
 and replaced with granular material.
 604.5.2-Class A Bedding: Class A bedding shall consist of a continuous concrete cradle
 conforming to the plan details.
 604.5.3-Class B Bedding: Class B bedding shall consist of bedding the conduit in an earth
 foundation of uniform density, carefully shaped by means of a template to fit the lower conduit
 exterior for at least 15 percent of the overall height of the conduit. Exception is made in the
 case of structural plate pipe where the length of the bedding arc need not exceed the width of
 the bottom plate. However, if the structural plate pipe is first assembled and then placed in the
 trench, the 15 percent embedment specified above shall apply. Recesses shall be made in the
 369
 
 trench bottom to accommodate the bell when bell and spigot type conduit is used. Fine
 aggregate shall be used to level the foundation. When rock is encountered, it shall be removed
 and replaced with specified material having a thickness under the conduit of 2 inches per foot
 (40 mm per m) height of fill over the top of the conduit, with a minimum thickness of 12 inches
 (300 mm) and a maximum thickness of 24 inches (600 mm).
 604.5.4-Class C Bedding: Class C bedding shall be in accordance with the details shown
 on the Plans. Recesses shall be made in the trench bottom to accommodate the bell when bell
 and spigot type conduit is used.
 604.6-LAYING AND JOINING:
 604.6.1-Rigid and Flexible Conduits: The conduit placing, unless the Contractor is
 otherwise directed, shall begin at the downstream end of the conduit. The lower segment of
 the conduit shall be in contact with the shaped bedding throughout its full length. Bell or
 groove ends of rigid conduits and outside circumferential laps of corrugated steel pipe and
 corrugated aluminum alloy pipe conduits shall be placed facing upstream.
 Paved or partially lined conduit shall be laid so that the longitudinal centerline of the paved
 segment coincides with the flow line.
 Rigid conduits may be of either bell and spigot or tongue and groove design, unless one
 type is specified. The method of joining conduit sections shall be such that the ends are fully
 entered and the inner surfaces are reasonably flush and even.
 Joints for rigid conduits shall be made with (1) Portland cement mortar or grout, (2) flexible
 watertight gaskets, (3) bituminous plastic cement, (4) oakum and mortar, (5) oakum and joint
 compound, (6) vitrified clay pipe joints, (7) hot pour mineral filler joint sealer, or by a
 combination of these types.
 When mortar joints are used for tongue and groove and bell and spigot conduit, they shall
 be made by plastering up to the quarter point the joint mortar before the succeeding joint is
 placed. Thickness of mortar shall be sufficient to maintain proper invert grade. The accessible
 outer joint shall then be filled with an excess of mortar to form a bead around the outside of
 the conduit and finished smooth on the inside. For grouted joints, molds or runners shall be
 used to retain the poured grout. When Portland cement mixtures are used, the completed joints
 shall be protected against rapid drying by suitable covering material. Where oakum in used,
 the joint shall be caulked with oakum and then sealed with the joint compound. When rubber
 or plastic gaskets are used, they shall be installed to form a flexible watertight seal.
 Flexible conduits shall be joined by couplings in accordance with manufacturer’s
 recommendations, and the pipe shall be fastened to preserve the alignment and prevent the
 separation of sections.
 Conduit shall be inspected before any backfill is placed. Any pipe found to be out of
 alignment, unduly settled, or damaged shall be removed and re-laid or replaced.
 604.6.2-Structural Plate Pipe and Pipe Arches: The bottom plates of structural plate
 pipe and pipe arches shall be assembled in a line, placing each section in the order
 recommended by the manufacturer. Side and top plates shall then be placed in the order
 recommended by the manufacturer. Bolts shall be placed in the location and number as
 recommended by the manufacturer. Plates shall lap each other the width of one corrugation,
 and bolts shall be inserted and nuts hand tightened as each plate is placed. Drift pins may be
 370
 
 used to facilitate matching holes. When all the plates are in position and all bolts placed, all
 bolts shall be gone over a second time to insure proper tightening. Steel bolts shall be torqued
 during installation to a minimum of 100 feet-lbs. (135 Newton meters), and a maximum of 300
 feet-lbs. (400 Newton meters) Aluminum bolts shall be torqued during installation to a
 minimum of 100 feet-lbs. (135 Newton meters), and a maximum of 150 feet-lbs. (200 Newton
 meters). For power driven tools, the hold-on period may vary from 2 to 5 seconds. Bolts shall
 be of sufficient length to provide for a full nut. When the structure is bituminous coated, all
 bolts and nuts shall be coated inside and outside of the structure, after completion of bolt
 tightening, with bituminous material conforming to the requirements of 713.3.
 604.6.3-Structural Plate Arches: Plate arches shall be set on footings as shown on the
 Plans. Beginning at the upstream end, the first side plates shall be set on the base angles. Then
 the remaining side plates and the top plates of the arch shall be bolted into place using only
 enough bolts to hold them without tightening securely. Drift pins may be used to assist in
 matching bolt holes. Temporary props may be used to hold plates in place until connections
 are made. After the plates comprising the first arch have been assembled, the next set shall be
 placed in the same manner, finishing each set of side plates with a top plate before placing in
 the same manner, finishing each set of side plates with a top plate before placing the next set
 of side plates. New plates shall be lapped one corrugation on the outside of the preceding
 plates. When all the plates are in position, the remaining bolts shall be inserted and all nuts
 firmly tightened. Steel bolts shall be torqued during installation to a minimum of 100 feet-lbs.
 (135 Newton meters), and a maximum of 300 feet-lbs. (400 Newton meters), Aluminum bolts
 shall be torqued during installation to a minimum of 100 feet-lbs., (135 Newton meters), and
 a maximum of 150 feet-lbs. (200 Newton meters). For power driven tools, the hold-on period
 may vary from 2 to 5 seconds. Bolts shall be of sufficient length to provide for a full nut.
 When the structure is bituminous coated, all bolts and nuts shall be coated inside and outside
 of the structure, after completion of bolt tightening, with bituminous material conforming to
 the requirements of 713.3.
 604.7-ELONGATION:
 When specified on the plans, factory elongation of flexible pipe shall be not less than four
 percent and not more than six percent vertically. Elongation shall be maintained during shipping,
 storing and handling.
 604.8-BACKFILLING:
 Backfill material shall be suitable random material free from particles larger than 3 inches
 (75 mm), crushed aggregate backfill, or controlled low strength material. After the conduit is
 installed, random material and crushed aggregate backfill shall be placed along the conduit in
 layers not to exceed 4 inches (100 mm) compacted. Controlled low strength material shall be
 placed according to Section 219. Any of the types of controlled low strength material may be
 used. For flexible conduit 60 inches (1 500 mm) through 108 inches (2 700 mm), the backfill
 material shall be crushed aggregate backfill or controlled low strength material. Unless otherwise
 specified in the plans, the controlled low strength material can be used as a substitute for random
 material or crushed aggregate backfill at the contractor’s option.
 The quality control testing and acceptance of controlled low strength material shall be
 according to 219.
 371
 
 The quality control testing and acceptance for compaction of the random backfill material
 shall be in accordance with applicable sections of 207 and 716 and crushed aggregate backfill
 according to 717, with the following exception:
 Testing will be conducted on both sides of the conduit and testing within a lot may include
 tests on both sides of the conduit. For conduit installations in an embankment where existing tests
 are on file for the adjacent embankment material, the target percentage of dry density for the
 conduit backfill will be equal to the average of the X values for the tests in the adjacent lots of
 embankment material or a minimum value of 95, whichever is greater. For embankments where
 no tests are on file, the target percentage of dry density will be 95. A lot shall have five (5) density
 tests performed for quality control.
 For conduits less than 60 inches (1500 mm) in diameter, a lot will normally consist of the
 quantity of backfill required for each 75 linear feet (23 m) of conduit installed.
 For conduits 60 inches (1500 mm) in diameter and larger, a lot will normally consist of not
 more than 5 lifts of backfill. For conduit with lifts of backfill placed for the full length of the
 conduit, a sublot will normally consist of a lift of backfill placed on both sides for the full length
 of the conduit. For conduits that are backfilled in segments, a sublot will normally consist of a lift
 of backfill placed on both sides for the length of each segment of conduit backfilled.
 Backfill placed outside embankments and roadbed is to be compacted to or better than the
 average total dry density for the existing soil. An average total dry density will be determined
 from representative density tests conducted for each existing soil. Quality control testing will
 normally consist of one test per 100 linear feet (30 m) of conduit installed and lot evaluations are
 not required. The moisture tolerance is not applicable.
 The use of a bulldozer or other bladed equipment in placing backfill is expressly forbidden.
 Mechanical equipment with various type buckets may be used. Care shall be taken to compact the
 material under the haunches of the conduit, to place the backfill evenly on each side of the conduit
 to retain its vertical axis, and to avoid displacement. This method of backfilling and compacting
 shall be followed until the top of the trench is reached. In the case of conduit 60 inches (1500 mm)
 through 108 inches (2700 mm) in diameter, not in trench condition, this backfilling and
 compacting shall be carried to a height of 2 feet (600 mm) over the top of the conduit and to a
 width not less than the outside diameter of the conduit plus one diameter on each side. Above this
 elevation, the embankment shall be placed and compacted in the normal manner. All conduit, after
 being bedded and backfilled, shall be protected by a four foot (1200 mm) cover of fill, or more if
 necessary, before heavy equipment is permitted to cross during the construction of the roadway.
 The Contractor will be held responsible for any damage to the conduit resulting from movement
 of equipment over the structure.
 604.9-FIELD PAVING:
 When field paving is required for structural plate pipe and pipe arches, the following
 provisions shall govern:
 The surface to be field paved shall be thoroughly cleaned and dried, and the priming
 material shall be sufficiently applied with a brush or a mop to coat the surface and to fill all seams
 or joints. After the priming material has been applied, a wire mesh, having not less than Size # W
 1.4 wire and having openings not more than 4 inches (100 mm) by 6 inches (150 mm), shall be
 placed on top of the corrugations and securely fastened to the bolts with wire or suitable clips.
 The reinforcing mesh shall have a width 1 foot (300 mm) less than the width of the finished
 paving and shall be fastened to the structure near each edge and at the center of the mesh at points
 372
 
 not more than 2 feet (600 mm) apart along the longitudinal barrel of the structure. The paving
 material shall consist of five parts of clean fine sand, three parts of cement or other fine filler such
 as limestone dust or lime, and approximately two parts of asphalt cement. The quantity of asphalt
 may be adjusted to provide a plastic workable mix. Before mixing, the mortar sand shall be dried
 by heating to approximately 300 F (150 C). After drying, the sand shall be mixed with the fine
 filler in a steel mortar box or other suitable equipment and heated to 300 F (150 C). The asphalt
 shall be heated in a separate container to a temperature of 400 F (200 C) and then thoroughly
 mixed with the sand and filler until a workable mix is obtained. All lumps shall be removed by
 mixing with a mortar hoe or other suitable implement. The mixture shall be kept hot and shall be
 applied to the primed surface before cooling. The mixture shall be applied in such a manner that
 smooth pavement will be formed in the invert, filling the corrugations for at least 25 percent of the
 circumference of a pipe or 38 percent of the circumference of a pipe arch. The paving thickness
 shall be sufficient to cover the crests of the corrugations a minimum of 1 inch (25 mm). The
 placing of the mastic shall be followed closely by the application of a seal coat and hot asphalt
 cement to be poured uniformly over the paving. The seal coat shall be applied while the paving
 material is still hot.
 The Contractor may pave with Portland cement concrete or use shotcrete. If practicable,
 such paving shall be delayed until completion of the fill over the structure. Before the placing of
 the paving, the surface of the plates shall be cleaned to the plates or to the asphalt coating if asphalt
 coated plates are used. When paving with Portland cement concrete or shotcrete, mesh
 reinforcement, fastening of mesh, and paving dimensions shall be as specified for bituminous
 paving except that the minimum thickness over the crest of the corrugations shall be 1-½ inches
 (40 mm).
 Concrete used shall have a design 28-day compressive strength of 3,000 psi (21 MPa)
 (equivalent to Class B in 601.3); concrete may be hand mixed and shall be handled and placed as
 directed by the Engineer. After initial set has taken place, the paving shall be flooded or kept moist
 by sprinkling for three days. Liquid membrane-forming compound, conforming to 707.9 may be
 used for curing at a minimum application rate of one gallon per 150 square feet (0.25 liters per m2)
 of concrete surface. Other methods of curing may be used if approved by the Engineer.
 Field paving with shotcrete shall conform to the applicable provisions of 623. When
 paving with shotcrete, the exposed surface shall be brought to a uniform surface by screeding or
 troweling. After completion of the shotcrete paving, the rebound material shall be cleaned from
 the culvert above the paved surface. Shotcrete shall be cured by (a) covering with burlap mats and
 keeping them wet for at least seven days after placing, (b) flooding for a period of at least seven
 days or, (c) applying liquid membrane curing compound, conforming to 707.9, at a minimum rate
 of one gallon per 150 per feet (0.25 liters per m2) of shotcrete surface for each application.
 Shotcrete cured by membrane forming compound shall receive two applications; the second
 application shall be made after the first application has set. Other methods of curing may be used
 if approved by the Engineer.
 After the completion of the fill over the pipe or pipe arch, any gaps which develop between
 the plates and the concrete or shotcrete paving shall be filled by pouring heated bituminous
 material complying with requirements of 713.3.
 When field paving is specified for metal pipes and metal pipe arches, the methods and
 materials used shall be the same as specified except that the wire mesh shall be tied to the
 corrugated metal at points not exceeding 30 inches (750 mm) in any direction and not exceeding
 9 inches (225 mm) from the edges of paving. Attachment may be by use of ½” diameter (12 mm)
 373
 
 (minimum) commercially-available galvanized or cadmium-plated lag screws twisted firmly into
 holes drilled in the valleys of the corrugations or by other approved means.
 Prior to using Portland cement concrete or shotcrete for paving aluminum alloy culverts or
 culverts with coatings containing aluminum, the aluminum-concrete contact area shall be coated
 with commercially-available paint.
 604.10-RELAID CONDUIT:
 The construction requirements in this Section shall apply equally in the case of re-laid
 conduits. All conduits salvaged for relaying shall be cleaned of all foreign material prior to
 reinstallation.
 604.11-JACKING CONDUIT:
 Jacking or tunneling may be designated on the Plans or may be permitted if written
 approval is obtained. Conduit to be jacked may be either reinforced concrete or corrugated steel,
 as called for in the Plans. The strength of conduit designated in the Contract will be designated as
 required for vertical load only. Additional reinforcement or strength of conduit required to
 withstand jacking pressure shall be determined and furnished by the Contractor without additional
 cost to the Division. Variation from theoretical alignment and grade at the time of completion of
 jacking placement shall not exceed 0.2 feet for each 20 feet (10 mm per m) of conduit so placed.
 Corrugated steel pipe section to be jacked shall be prepared for making field joints either by
 riveting or bolting. Concrete pipe to be jacked shall be tongue and groove type.
 An approach trench shall be constructed on the side from which jacking operations shall
 take place. The end of the approach trench away from the jacking face shall be cut perpendicular
 to the axis of the jacking operation to provide bearing surface for the back stop and the jack
 blocking. The length of the approach trench shall be such that the distance between the jack
 blocking and the face of the bore shall be equal to 5 feet (1500 mm) plus the length of the individual
 pipe sections in the case of corrugated steel pipe. When concrete pipe is jacked, the maximum
 length of the approach trench shall be equal to two lengths of pipe plus a minimum of 7 feet (2.1
 m) for jack and blocking. The jacking face shall be a minimum of 3 feet (1 m) above the top of
 the pipe; the face shall be cut vertically and shall be shored to prevent raveling and slipping. A
 sump shall be constructed in one corner of the trench to provide drainage. In the case of corrugated
 steel pipe, a transverse trench shall be constructed at the jacking face to provide clearance for the
 riveting and bolting of joints. The back stop shall be constructed of heavy timbers or steel rails
 capable of withstanding the jacking force.
 In the event the site of jacking operations is such that an approach trench cannot be
 constructed, the jack blocking shall be constructed to carry the reaction of the jack to the ground.
 This may be accomplished by means of timber, steel, or concrete vertical back stops set into the
 ground with the tops supported by diagonal members bearing against an embedded anchorage.
 Directly opposite the approach trench, an exit trench shall be constructed to line and grade.
 The exit trench shall be constructed in the same manner as the approach trench except that no back
 wall is necessary.
 Jacks shall be of sufficient capacity to overcome soil resistance to the jacking operation
 and shall be operated in pairs. As a guide, capacity of jacks for corrugated steel pipe shall be a
 minimum of 35 tons (32 Mg) each and for concrete pipe a minimum of 50 tons (45 Mg) each. For
 large pipe, more than one pair of jacks may be required. Small track jacks may be used to start the
 pipe.
 374
 
 Pipe guides shall be constructed in the approach trench and may be either timber or steel
 rail or concrete guides on a cradle. Since the pipe guides will support the pipe as it enters the
 jacking face, the pipe guides shall be accurately set to line and grade, and excavation for the guides
 shall be made to grade to avoid occurrence of settlement. Guides shall be spaced at ½ the pipe
 diameter inside face to inside face of the guides for corrugated steel pipe and at 4/10 the outside
 diameter for concrete pipe.
 Reaction of the jack to the pipe shall be transmitted by either a jacking frame or jacking
 beams constructed of timber or steel. Jacking frames and beams shall be so placed as to exert
 equal pressure on each side of the pipe. For pipes 36 inches (900 mm) in diameter or smaller, a
 steel jacking ring may be used in lieu of the jacking frame.
 The pressure from the jacking frame or beams may be transmitted to a jacking collar or
 head on the pipe itself. In the case of corrugated steel pipe, a jacking band reinforcing the end of
 the pipe receiving the thrust shall be used. Jacking collars or heads for concrete pipe shall be
 constructed to prevent damage to the pipe ends. Jacking collars and jacking frames shall be
 constructed to allow passage of men and material.
 Joints of concrete pipe shall be cushioned and protected from infiltration of fine materials
 occurring during the jacking operation by insertion of a cushioning material into each pipe joint.
 After the pipe is in position, the joints shall be pointed from the inside with mortar joint compound.
 Steel cutting edges on the lead section of pipe may be used, and the use of a jacking shield
 is permitted.
 To prevent the pipe from "freezing" and becoming incapable of movement, jacking
 operations should, if possible, be carried out on a 24-hour basis. A minimum of two 8-hour shifts
 shall be worked. Alignment and grade of the pipe guides shall be checked at least once each shift.
 To aid in the prevention of "freezing," the pipe may be lubricated in a manner and with a material
 meeting the approval of the Engineer.
 Excavation for the bore shall be to grade at the bottom and approximately 1 inch (25 mm)
 greater than the diameter of the pipe at the top and sides. Initial jacking of concrete pipe shall
 begin with two sections of pipe in the trench. As excavation proceeds, the jacking shall proceed
 until the effective limit of the jacking is reached, at which time additional blocking shall be added.
 This process shall be continued until there is room for an additional pipe section. For long runs of
 pipe, the use of intermediate jacking stations will be allowed as approved by the Engineer.
 Pipe cover shall be a minimum of one diameter or 3 feet (900 mm) from top of pipe to
 bottom of the subgrade of ballast when jacking under a bituminous concrete highway. When
 jacking under reinforced concrete pavement, the cover may be reduced to the depth of the base
 course plus the pavement thickness with a minimum cover of the pavement thickness plus 6 inches
 (150 mm).
 After the pipe has been jacked into place, the backfill shall be tightly compacted around
 both ends of the culvert to prevent erosion. Any departure from the above specifications
 necessitated due to site conditions shall be approved in writing by the Engineer.
 Areas resulting from caving or excavation outside the above limits shall be backfilled with
 sand or grout by a method which will fill the voids. Joints shall be completed as specified for the
 type of conduit being installed.
 604.12-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Conduit of the different types and sizes, both new and re-laid, will be measured by the
 linear foot (m) in place, the measurement being made along the centerline of each pipe installed.
 375
 
 Branch connections, tees, wyes, and elbows will be measured along their centerlines and these
 lengths included in the total lengths of the appropriate conduit. Wyes, tees, and other branch
 connections will be measured along the centerlines to points of intersection. Conduit with sloped
 or skewed ends will be measured along the invert. The portion of pipe extending through to the
 inside face of headwalls of all types, manholes, inlets, boxes, or other structures shall be included
 in the measurement.
 End sections will be measured by the number of units installed.
 Conduit designated on the Plans to be installed by the jacking method will be measured
 separately by the linear foot (m) in place and shall be the actual portion jacked, completed in place,
 and accepted.
 604.13-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed in 604.14, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for
 excavation and bedding, except as otherwise provided, backfilling, jacking when called for,
 furnishing all materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner,
 including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 The unit price bid for end sections shall include excavation and backfill.
 When, by the authority of the Engineer, the flow line of a conduit is lowered from that
 shown on Plans, or due to a lack of a firm foundation, or due to a solid rock foundation,
 unsatisfactory material is removed and replaced with suitable material, the work of excavation,
 replacement, and compaction of material will be paid for in accordance with 109.4.
 1. For conduits less than 48-inches (1200 mm) diameter, the work of excavation, measured in
 excess of 1 foot (300 mm) below the original planned conduit elevation, will be paid for
 under the provisions of 109.4. When suitable material is not available from the project
 excavation, payment for replacement material below final grade line will be made in
 accordance with 109.4.
 2. For conduits 48-inches (1200 mm) diameter or larger, all additional excavation below the
 original planned conduit elevation and for a width not in excess of the outside conduit
 diameter plus 18 inches (450 mm) on each side of the conduit, will be paid for at the unit
 bid price for Item 207001-* "Unclassified Excavation". When no Item 207001-* is included
 in the Proposal, payment for excavation, backfill compaction and replacement material will
 be made in accordance with 109.4. When suitable material is not available from the project
 excavation, replacement material will be paid for in accordance with 109.4.
 604.13.1-Price Adjustment: Crushed aggregate backfill not conforming with the
 gradation requirements as described in 604.2.4.2 will be paid for at the adjusted contract price
 base on the degree of nonconformance as specified in Table 604.13.1.
 A revised unit price for calculation purposes in 307.9.1 will be established based on the
 unit bid cost minus the cost of the pipe.
 
 376
 
 TABLE 604.13.1
 Adjustment of Contract Price for
 Gradation not Within Specifications
 Degree of
 Percent of Contract
 Nonconformance
 Price to be Reduced
 1.0 to 3.0
 2
 3.1 to 5.0
 4
 5.1 to 8.0
 7
 8.1 to 12.0
 11
 Greater than 12
 *
 * The Division will make a special evaluation of the material
 and determine the appropriate action.
 
 604.14-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 604001-* “size” Metallic Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe, YZ
 604002-* “size” Full Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe, YZ
 604003-* “size” Half Bituminous Coated And Paved Invert Corrugated
 Steel Pipe, YZ
 604004-* “size” Full Bituminous Coated And Paved Invert Corrugated
 Steel Pipe, YZ
 604005-* “size” Full Bituminous Coated And Full Paved Corrugated
 Steel Pipe, YZ
 604006-* “size” Fiber Bonded Full Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel
 Pipe, YZ
 604007-* “size” Half Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe Arch, YZ
 604008-* “size” Fiber Bonded Full Bituminous Coated And Full Paved
 Corrugated Steel Sewer Pipe, YZ
 604010-* “size” Metallic Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe Arch, YZ
 604011-* “size” Full Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe Arch, YZ
 604012-* “size” Half Bituminous Coated And Paved Invert Corrugated
 Steel Pipe Arch, YZ
 604013-* “size” Full Bituminous Coated And Paved Invert Corrugated
 Steel Pipe Arch, YZ
 604014-* “size” Fiber Bonded Full Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel
 Pipe Arch, YZ
 604015-* “size” Fiber Bonded Full Bituminous Coated And Paved Invert
 Corrugated Steel Pipe Arch, YZ
 604017-* “size” Structural Plate Pipe, YZ
 604018-* “size” Full Bituminous Coated Structural Plate Pipe, YZ
 604019-* “size” Full Bituminous Coated And Field Paved Structural
 Plate Pipe, YZ
 604020-* “size” Structural Plate Pipe Arch, YZ
 604024-* “size” Full Bituminous Coated Structural Plate Arch, YZ
 604025-* “size” Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe, YZ
 604026-* “size” Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe, Field Paved, YZ
 377
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 
 ITEM
 604027-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 “size” Half Bituminous Coated And Paved Invert Corrugated
 Aluminum Alloy Pipe, YZ
 604028-* “size” Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe End Section,
 604029-* “size” Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe Arch, YZ
 604032-* “size” Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe Arch End Section
 604033-* “size” Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate Pipe, YZ
 604034-* “size” Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate Pipe Arch, YZ
 604036-* “size” Nonreinforced Concrete Sewer Pipe , Class **
 604037-* “size” Reinforced Concrete Pipe, Class **
 604038-* “size” Reinforced Concrete Pipe End Section
 604039-* “size” Reinforced Concrete Pipe Arch, Class **
 604040-* “size” Reinforced Concrete Pipe Arch End Section
 604041-* “size” Reinforced Concrete Elliptical Pipe, Y
 604043-* “size” Clay Lined Reinforced Concrete Pipe, Class **
 604045-* “size” Clay Pipe, Extra Strength
 604050-* “size” Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe,
 604052-* “size” Polyvinylchloride Pipe
 604053-* “size” Relaid Conduit
 604054-* “size” Jacked Conduit, Reinforced Concrete Pipe, Class **
 604057-* “size” Precoated Galvanized Steel Pipe
 604062-* “size” Metallic Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe, Field Paved, YZ
 604065-* “size” Structural Plate Pipe Arch, Field Paved, YZ
 604070-* “size” Precast Concrete Box Culvert
 604071-* “size” Reinforced Concrete Pipe Safety Slope End Section
 604073-* “size” Elliptical Reinforced Concrete Pipe Safety Slope End
 Section, Y
 604074-* “size” Aluminum Box Culvert, YZ
 604075-* “size” Field Paved Aluminum Box Culvert, YZ
 604076-* “size” Aluminum Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe, YZ
 604077-* “size” Aluminum Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe Arch, YZ
 604078-* “size” Half Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe, YZ
 604079-* “size” Half Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe Arch, YZ
 604080-* "size" Aluminum Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe Half
 Bituminous Coated And Paved Invert
 604081-* “size” Steel Box Culvert
 604090-* “size” Corrugated Steel Pipe End Section, YZ
 604091-* “size” Corrugated Metal Pipe Arch End Section
 604092-* “size” Corrugated Steel Pipe Safety Slope End Section
 *
 **
 Y
 Z
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 Sequence number
 Class designated by Roman numerals
 = a letter, if present, designating base metal thickness or type of elliptical concrete pipe in
 accordance with the following table.
 = a one digit number designating metal pipe corrugations or Roman numerals designating
 concrete pipe class or a one digit number designating elliptical concrete pipe class in
 accordance with the following table.
 For Aluminum Box Culverts, haunch and crown plate thicknesses as specified on the Plans
 
 378
 
 Mil Thickness
 Y
 
 Z
 
 Metal Corrugations
 
 Pipe Class
 
 Steel
 
 Aluminum
 
 A
 
 64 (1.63)
 
 60 (1.52 mm)
 
 1
 
 B
 
 79 (2.0)
 
 75 (1.90 mm)
 
 2
 
 C
 
 109 (2.77)
 
 105 (2.67 mm)
 
 3
 
 3” x 1”
 (75 x 25 mm)
 
 ---
 
 D
 
 138 (3.51)
 
 135 (3.43 mm)
 
 5
 
 5” x 1”
 (125 x 25 mm)
 
 ---
 
 6
 
 6” x 2”
 (150 x 50 mm)
 
 ---
 
 7
 
 7½” x ¾” x ¾”
 (190 x 19x 19)
 
 ---
 
 -------
 
 I or 1
 II or 2
 III or 3
 
 -------
 
 I
 II
 III
 
 --
 
 IV or 4
 
 ---
 
 IV
 
 100 (2.54 mm)
 
 V or 5
 
 ---
 
 V
 
 E
 
 F
 G
 H
 J
 
 K
 
 L
 
 168 (4.27)
 
 188 (4.78)
 218 (5.54)
 249 (6.32)
 4 BOLTS/FT
 (13 BOLTS/M)
 280 (7.11)
 6 BOLTS/FT
 (19 BOLTS/M)
 280 (7.11)
 8 BOLTS/FT
 (26 BOLTS/M)
 280 (7.11)
 
 164
 
 1½”x ¼”
 (37.5 x 6.25 mm)
 2/3” x ½”
 (66.8 x 12.5 mm)
 
 125 (3.18 mm)
 
 M
 N
 P
 
 313 (7.95)
 375 (9.52)
 ---
 
 150 (3.81 mm)
 185 (4.41 mm)
 200 (5.08 mm)
 
 Y
 
 Concrete Pipe
 
 Q
 R
 
 -----
 
 225 (5.72 mm)
 250 (6.35 mm)
 
 H
 V
 
 Horizontal Elliptical
 Vertical Elliptical
 
 379
 
 -----
 
 SECTION 605
 MANHOLES AND INLETS
 605.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the construction of new and adjustment of existing manholes
 and inlets in accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the
 lines, grades, dimensions and locations shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer. Types
 of manholes and inlets shall be as shown on the Plans.
 
 605.2-MATERIALS:
 Cast-In-Place concrete and reinforcing steel for manholes and inlets shall meet the
 requirements of 601 (Class B) and 602 respectively. Precast concrete manholes shall conform to
 715.19. Portland cement concrete for precast inlets shall meet the requirements in 715.19. Other
 requirements and details for precast inlets shall be as specified on the Plans.
 Other materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of
 Division 700:
 MATERIAL
 Aggregate for Slot Inlets
 (Aggregate For Fabric Underdrain)
 Clay or Shale Brick
 Concrete Brick
 Concrete Masonry Blocks
 Fabric for Slot Inlets
 Gray Iron Castings
 Joint Mortar
 Manhole Steps
 Pipe for Slot Inlets
 
 SUBSECTION
 606.2
 715.16
 715.17
 715.18
 715.11
 709.10
 708.8
 709.10, 715.19, 715.38
 713.2
 
 Lean grout backfill, where specified on the Plans, shall consist of 3 bags of cement per
 cubic yard (167 kg of cement per m3) of material suitable to the Engineer.
 Component materials shall be sampled, tested, and approved prior to the start of
 manufacture. Manholes and inlets shall be inspected at the manufacturing plant, if acceptable they
 shall be identified in accordance with MP 700.00.01.
 All materials will be subject to inspection for acceptance as to condition at the latest
 practicable time the Engineer has the opportunity to check for compliance prior to or during
 incorporation of materials in the work.
 Covers and frames for manholes and grates, frames, and grate support bars for inlets shall
 be gray iron castings except for Type G Inlets which require structural steel meeting 709.12.
 605.3-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 Concrete construction shall conform to the requirements for 601. Masonry shall conform
 to the requirements for the respective type. Exposed masonry surfaces shall be cured with wet
 burlap for a period of not less than 48 hours. Concrete surfaces shall be cured in accordance with
 601.12.
 380
 
 Metal frames for inlets shall be set in a full mortar bed or cast into the concrete. Pipe
 sections shall be flush on the inside of the structure wall and project outside sufficiently for proper
 connection with the next pipe section. Masonry shall fit neatly and tightly around the pipe. The
 flowline of the outlet pipe shall match the bottom elevation of the inlet or manhole. When the bell
 or groove of concrete pipe is placed in an inlet, the inside of the bell or groove shall be filled with
 concrete up to the flowline.
 Bearing areas of frames, covers, and grates shall be so fitted and finished as to provide a
 firm, even seat for the entire cover or grate in the frame. No projections shall exist on the bearing
 areas of the castings; and the cover or grate shall seat in the frame without rocking.
 Concrete inlets and manholes may be precast when shapes and dimensions conform to
 those shown on the Plans and when final installed top surfaces are flush with adjacent finish
 surfaces such as pavement, gutters, curbs, and sidewalks. Precast units shall include lifting hooks
 which will be out of sight after placement of the units and sufficient reinforcement to resist
 handling stresses.
 Excavation and backfill shall be done in accordance with 212.
 Weep holes shall be installed in the sidewalls of inlets during construction. These weep
 holes shall be constructed of non-rusting material, approximately 4 inches (100 mm) in diameter,
 located at or below subgrade elevation as directed or approved by the Engineer to properly drain
 subsurface material. Loose rock shall be placed around the outside of the structure at the openings
 or similar protective measures taken to prevent excessive backfill material from passing through
 the weep holes. The cost of weep hole installations shall be included in the unit price bid for the
 inlets. No deduction in concrete quantities shall be made for weep holes in the inlets.
 When grade adjustment of existing structures is specified, the work shall be accomplished
 by one of the following methods:
 i. Carefully remove the existing frame; reconstruct the walls as necessary; clean and
 reset the existing frame in a full mortar bed at the required elevation.
 ii. Carefully remove the existing cover or grate and furnish and install an approved
 adjusting ring or casting.
 Upon completion, each structure shall be cleaned of any accumulations of silt, debris, or
 foreign matter of any kind and shall be kept clear of such accumulation until final acceptance of
 the work.
 605.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Manholes and inlets, new or adjusted will be measured by the unit; slot inlets will be
 measured by the linear foot (m) in place.
 605.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for as provided below, which
 prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing the excavation, backfill, concrete,
 aggregate, reinforcing steel, fabric, grates, covers, frames, hardware, and other materials shown
 on the Plans and for doing all the work, including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies and
 incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 When changes in Plans during construction require increases of depth in excess of 1 foot
 (300 mm), the equitable price adjustment will be equal to the bid amount increased by a factor of
 the constructed depth less 1 foot (300 mm) divided by the Plan depth.
 381
 
 When grade and drain contracts are bid separately from paving contracts, the structure may
 be designated to be partially built by the grade and drain Contractor and later completed by the
 paving Contractor.
 605.6-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 605001-*
 605002-*
 605003-*
 605004-*
 605005-*
 605006-*
 605007-*
 605008-*
 605009-*
 605010-*
 605011-*
 605012-*
 605013-*
 605015-*
 605039-*
 605040-*
 605041-*
 605050-*
 605051-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Type A Manhole
 Type B Manhole
 Type A Inlet
 Type B Inlet
 Type C Inlet
 Type D Inlet
 Type E Inlet
 Type F Inlet
 Type G Inlet
 Type H Inlet
 Type J Inlet
 Adjusting Inlet Type, “type”
 Adjusting Junction Box
 Adjusting Manhole Type, “type”
 Junction Box
 “size” Perforated Slot Inlet Riser
 “size” Slot Inlet Riser
 Adjust Concrete Headwall
 Type U Inlet
 
 * Sequence number
 
 382
 
 UNIT
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 
 SECTION 606
 UNDERDRAINS
 606.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of constructing underdrains and free draining base trenches using
 pipe and granular material, blind drains, aggregate filled engineering fabric, prefabricated
 pavement edge drain and underdrain pipe outlets in accordance with these Specifications and in
 reasonably close conformity with the lines, grades, dimensions and locations shown on the Plans
 or established by the Engineer.
 When Item 606025-*, Underdrain Pipe, is included as a pay item in the Contract, any of
 the following pipe types may be furnished for construction of the underdrain: bituminous coated
 corrugated steel underdrain pipe, corrugated aluminum alloy underdrain pipe, nonreinforced
 perforated concrete underdrain pipe, porous concrete pipe, standard strength perforated clay pipe,
 extra strength perforated clay pipe perforated bituminous fiber underdrain pipe, corrugated
 stainless steel underdrain pipe, precoated, galvanized steel pipe for underdrains, corrugated
 polyethylene underdrainage pipe or perforated plastic semicircular pipe.
 606.1.1-Free Draining Base Trench: This work shall consist of constructing free draining
 base trenches and Outlet Pipes in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close
 conformity with the lines, grades, dimensions, and locations shown on the plans or established
 by the Engineer.
 606.2-MATERIALS:
 Material shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division
 700:
 MATERIAL
 
 SUBSECTION
 
 Bituminous Coated Corrugated Aluminum
 Alloy Pipe for Underdrains***
 Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe
 for Underdrains*
 Bituminous Fiber Pipe**:
 Non-Perforated
 Perforated
 Concrete for Miscellaneous Uses
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe for
 Underdrains***
 Corrugated Polyethylene Underdrain
 Corrugated Stainless Steel Pipe for
 Underdrains
 Cradle Invert Clay Pipe
 Crushed Aggregate for Free Draining Base
 Trench*****
 Crushed gravel for Aggregate Filled Fabric
 Underdrains*****
 
 TYPE OR
 GRADATION
 
 713.17
 
 Type I, II, II or IV
 
 713.12
 
 Class I, II or III
 
 714.14
 714.15
 715.12
 713.16
 
 Type I, II, II or IV
 
 714.19
 713.7
 714.10
 703.1, 703.2,
 703.3, 703.4
 703.2 & 703.4
 or 703.2.3
 383
 
 AASHTO 57, 67,
 357, or 467
 AASHTO #2 thru
 #57 or Pea Gravel
 
 MATERIAL
 
 SUBSECTION
 
 Crushed gravel for Underdrains*****
 
 703.2 & 703.4
 
 Crushed Stone for Aggregate Filled Fabric
 Underdrains*****
 
 703.1 & 703.4
 
 Crushed Stone for Underdrains*****
 
 703.1 & 703.4
 
 Engineering Fabric
 
 715.11.8
 
 Extra Quality Clay Drain Tile
 Extra Quality Concrete Drain Tile
 Extra Strength Perforated Clay Pipe
 Heavy Duty Clay Drain Tile
 Metallic Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe for
 underdrains
 Miscellaneous Concrete
 Non-Reinforced Perforated Concrete Pipe
 for Underdrain
 Perforated Plastic Semicircular Pipe
 Porous Concrete Pipe
 Precoated Metallic Coated Steel Pipe for
 Underdrains*
 Prefabricated Pavement Edge Drain
 
 714.8
 714.7
 714.10
 714.8
 713.11
 
 TYPE OR
 GRADATION
 AASHTO Size #
 57, 67, 7 or78
 AASHTO #2 thru
 #57 inclusive
 AASHTO Size #
 57, 67, 7 or78
 
 Class I, II or III
 
 715.12
 714.5
 714.20
 714.6
 713.23
 
 Class 1, 2 or 3
 Class I or II
 Class I or II, Type
 B Coating
 
 715.10.1
 702.1.2,
 702.1.3 &
 702.6
 714.7
 714.8
 714.7
 714.10
 
 Silica Sand for Underdrains
 Special Quality Concrete Drain Tile
 Standard Clay Drain Tile
 Standard Quality Concrete Drain Tile
 Standard Strength Perforated Clay Pipe
 
 * Unless otherwise specified, Class IV, semicircular pipe 4 5/8 inches (117 mm) in
 diameter, may be furnished when 6 inch (150 mm) diameter pipe is called for on the Plans.
 ** Unless otherwise specified. Perforated pipe shall be used.
 *** Unless otherwise specified. Type V, semicircular pipe 4-5/8 inch (117mm) in diameter,
 may be furnished when 6 inch diameter pipe is called for on the Plans.
 **** Plastic semicircular pipe may be furnished only when six inch (150 mm) diameter is called
 for on the Plans.
 ***** Only one size may be used at any one installation.
 
 384
 
 When the locations of manufacturing plants allow, the plants may be inspected periodically
 for compliance with specified manufacturing methods, and material samples may be obtained for
 laboratory testing for compliance with material quality requirements. This may be the basis for
 acceptance of manufacturing lots as to quality. All materials will be subject to inspection for
 acceptance as to condition at the latest practicable time the Engineer has the opportunity to check
 for compliance prior to or during incorporation of materials in the work.
 606.2.1-Quality Control Testing: Quality control is the responsibility of the contractor as
 specified in 106.1. The contractor shall develop a quality control plan in accordance with
 applicable sections of MP 307.00.50 excluding the attachment page.
 Samples will be obtained at a minimum frequency of one sample per day of aggregate
 placement. Aggregate for underdrain shall be evaluated for specification compliance in
 accordance with MP 606.03.50. Aggregate for aggregate filled underdrain shall be evaluated
 for specification compliance in accordance with MP 606.03.50 except Section 6.0 through 6.2
 are excluded.
 606.2.2-Acceptance Testing: Acceptance sampling and testing of aggregates used for
 underdrain is the responsibility of the Division, Except for furnishing the necessary materials.
 Quality control sampling and testing performed by the Contractor may be used by the Division
 for Acceptance.
 606.2.3-Free Draining Base Trench Materials: The perforated pipe as detailed on the
 plans shall meet the requirements of this Section. The Outlet pipe as detailed on the plans shall
 meet the requirements of Subsection 715.10.1.5
 606.3-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 606.3.1-Pipe Installation:
 606.3.1.1-Trenching: Trenches shall be excavated to a width of the outside diameter
 of the pipe plus 1 ft. (300 mm), to a depth of 4 inches (100 mm) below the flow line, and
 to the grade required by the Plans or as directed. Trench walls shall be as nearly vertical as
 practicable.
 606.3.1.2-Bedding and Placing Pipe: A minimum 4 inch (100 mm) bedding layer of
 crushed gravel or crushed stone shall be placed in the bottom of the trench for its full width
 and length.
 Subdrainage pipe of the type and size specified shall be embedded firmly in the bedding
 material. Upgrade ends of all underdrainage pipe installations shall be closed with suitable
 plugs to prevent entry of soil materials.
 Perforated pipe shall normally be placed with the perforations down. Flexible pipe
 sections shall be joined with couplings or bands as recommended by the manufacturer.
 Non-perforated pipe and rigid pipe shall be firmly set and laid with the bell and groove
 ends upgrade and with open joints, wrapped with suitable material when specified, to
 permit entry of water.
 606.3.1.3-Placing Filter Material: After the pipe installations have been inspected and
 approved, crushed stone or crushed gravel shall be placed to a height of 6 inches (150 mm)
 385
 
 above the top of pipe. The trench shall then be filled with silica sand to a minimum
 thickness of 12 inches (300 mm) over the top of the filter stone or crushed gravel. In the
 event damp trench sides indicate the necessity; the Engineer may direct an increase in the
 thickness of the silica and cover. When the underdrain is used to drain the base or subbase,
 course, the sand filter shall be carried vertically to the bottom of the base or subbase. Care
 shall be taken not to displace the pipe or the covering at open joints. When there is a heavy
 percolation of water into the trench at underdrain level, the Engineer may substitute sand
 for the crushed stone or crushed gravel bedding, cover and filter.
 606.3.1.4-Backfill: Above the sand filter, when underdrains are not used to drain the
 base or subbase, the trench shall be filled with suitable random material, as shown on the
 Plans or as directed by the Engineer, in layers not exceeding 4 inches (100 mm) after
 compaction. The use of bulldozers or other blade equipment in backfilling is expressly
 prohibited.
 The quality control testing and acceptance of suitable soil, soft shale or granular
 material will be according to applicable sections of 207 and 716, with the following
 exceptions:
 1. A lot normally consist of the quantity of backfill material required to backfill 100
 linear ft. (30 m) of the installation, or as directed by the Engineer.
 2. For underdrain installations in an embankment, where existing tests are on file for
 the adjacent embankment material, the target percentage of dry density for the
 suitable random backfill will be equal to the X value of the tests in the adjacent lot
 of embankment material or a minimum value of 95, whichever is greater. For
 embankments where no tests are on file, the target percentage of dry density will
 be 95.
 606.3.1.5-Underdrain Outlets: Trenches for underdrain outlets shall be excavated as
 for underdrains, except that the depth of the trench shall be limited to the flow line. Pipe
 shall be laid in the trench with all ends firmly joined by the applicable methods and means.
 The use of perforated pipe may be omitted or, if used, it shall be laid with perforations up.
 No filter material shall be used. After inspection and approval of the pipe installation, the
 trench shall be backfilled with suitable material in layers and compacted as provided for
 underdrains.
 606.3.2-Underdrain Structures:
 606.3.2.1-Underdrain Junction Boxes: Underdrain junction boxes shall be
 constructed to the dimensions and elevations at locations as shown on the Plans or as
 directed.
 606.3.2.2-Slope Walls for Underdrains: Slope walls for underdrains shall be
 constructed of concrete conforming to the requirements of 715.12 of the Specifications and
 shall be constructed to the dimensions and elevations at locations as shown on the Plans or
 as directed.
 606.3.2.3-Spring Control: Underdrain spring boxes and underdrain for spring control
 shall be constructed to the dimensions and elevations at locations as shown on the Plans,
 386
 
 or as directed. Any remaining upper portion of the trench shall be filled and compacted as
 for underdrains.
 606.3.3-Aggregate Filled Fabric Underdrain and Blind Drains: Trenches for aggregate
 filled fabric underdrains and blind drains shall be excavated to the width and depth shown on
 the plans. The trench shall be prepared to a relative smooth state, free of sharp protrusions,
 depressions, and debris.
 When fabric is used, it shall be placed with the long dimension parallel to and centered
 with the alignment of the trench. It shall be placed in the trench in reasonable conformance
 with the shape of the trench and shall be smooth and free of tension, stress, folds, wrinkles or
 creases. The fabric shall be installed so that any splice joints have a minimum overlap of at
 least 2 feet (600 mm) in the direction of flow. The overlap of the closure at the top shall be
 approximately the width of the trench and shall be temporarily used to cover the excavated
 material on either side of the trench.
 The aggregate shall be placed by any method which will result in the trench being
 completely filled to the line shown. The filling process shall not cause the permeability of
 fabric to be impeded.
 The fabric, when used, shall be overlapped at the top of the aggregate. Any portion of the
 trench not filled with aggregate shall be backfilled in accordance with 606.3.4.
 606.3.4-Prefabricated Pavement Edge Drain: Trenches for prefabricated pavement edge
 drain shall be excavated to the dimensions and grade shown on the Plans.
 The edge drain shall be placed against the pavement side of the trench and held firmly in
 place while backfill is placed to a compacted height of not more than 6 inches (150 mm). For
 one-sided drains, the more open side shall be placed toward the pavement. After the first lift is
 compacted and any tears in the fabric have been satisfactorily repaired, the remainder of the
 backfill shall be placed and compacted in layers not exceeding 6 inches (150 mm) deep. All
 compaction shall be accomplished with a vibratory compaction system. The backfill shall be
 the material excavated from the trench. Unless otherwise approved by the Engineer, the
 excavation of the trench, the placement of the edge drain, and the placement of the first lift of
 backfill shall be accomplished in a single continuous operation.
 Each segment of edge drain shall be joined to the adjacent segment prior to installation.
 Splices shall keep the adjoining edge drain in proper alignment and shall not separate during
 installation.
 Four inch (100 mm) diameter non-perforated outlet pipes shall be installed to provide
 positive drainage at low points of sags, at the low ends of all runs and at intervals not exceeding
 500 ft. (150 m) on continuous runs, except edge drains with two separate flow channels shall
 have a crossover coupling at approximately 250 ft (75 m). The manufacturers' recommended
 fitting shall be provided for attaching the edge drains to the outlet pipes. A standard underdrain
 concrete slopewall shall be used at each pipe outlet unless the pipe is connected to a drainage
 structure. Slopewalls shall be fitted with a galvanized rodent screen.
 The outlet pipe trench shall be constructed in accordance with 606.3.1.4 and 606.3.1.5
 using as backfill the material excavated from the trench.
 
 387
 
 606.3.5-Free Draining Base Trench Construction Methods:
 606.3.5.1-Trench: The FDB trench shall be excavated to the width and depth as
 detailed on the plans. Trench walls shall be as nearly vertical as practicable.
 606.3.5.2-Bedding and Placing Perforated Pipe: After excavating the trench,
 Engineering fabric shall be placed in the trench in reasonable conformance with the shape
 of the trench. The Engineering fabric shall be smooth and free of tension, stress, folds,
 wrinkles, or creases. The Engineering fabric shall be installed so that any splice joints have
 a minimum overlap of at least 1 foot (300 mm) any direction. Enough Engineering fabric
 will be placed in order to properly tie to the mainline placement of Engineering fabric (Item
 207034 -*). A 2 inch (50 mm) bedding layer of crushed stone or crushed gravel aggregate
 shall be placed in the bottom of the trench for its full width and length. The pipe shall then
 be placed in the trench. The pipe sections shall be joined with couplings or bands as
 recommended by the manufacturer. After pipe installation, the remainder of the trench will
 be backfilled with crushed stone or crushed gravel aggregate. (refer to table in section 606.2
 for material requirements of aggregate)
 606.3.5.3-Outlet Pipe:
 606.3.5.3.1-Connection to Perforated Pipe: At locations designated on the plans or
 as directed by the Engineer, rigid outlet pipe will be connected to the perforated pipe. A
 drop connection utilizing a tee or wye or other means as satisfactory to the Engineer will
 be used for this connection. This operation may be performed concurrently with the
 placement of the perforated pipe or separately.
 606.3.5.3.2-Trenching: The outlet pipe trench shall be excavated to the depth of the
 flow line of the outlet pipe. Minimum slope of the outlet pipe is to be 3%. Width of the
 trench will be that width which will allow proper room for pipe placement and backfilling
 operations.
 606.3.5.3.3-Placing and Backfilling Pipe: The outlet pipe shall be placed in the trench
 with all ends firmly joined by couplings or bands as recommended by the manufacturer.
 The outlet pipe shall be backfilled with random material in accordance with Subsection
 606.3.1.4.
 606.3.5.3.4-Pipe End Treatment: The outlet end of all outlet pipes not tied to
 drainage structures shall be equipped with a slopewall. Outlet pipes shall be tied to inlets
 or culverts by the use of pipe saddles, grouting Cementing, or other means satisfactory to
 the Engineer.
 606.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be measured by the linear foot (meter) for pipe, including
 outlet pipe, for each of the types and sizes as specified, complete in place and accepted. Length
 will be determined from actual measurements after the pipe is in place. Angles, tees, and wyes,
 and other branches which may be required will be measured from centerline of main pipe along
 the centerline of the branch to the end and the length included in the pipe length. Crushed stone,
 crushed gravel, or silica sand for bedding, filter, and spring control will be measured by the
 388
 
 volume; the volume will be the product of the specified trench width and depth, and the length in
 place, less the volume of the pipe computed on the basis of the outside diameter of the barrel or
 corrugations. Blind drains will be measured by the volume of granular material. The quantity of
 work done for "Aggregate Filled Fabric Underdrains" will be measured in linear feet (meters) of
 trench, complete in place and accepted. The quantity of work done for "Prefabricated Edge Drain"
 will be measured in linear feet (meters) of edge drain and outlet pipe, complete in place and
 accepted. Volume will be computed on the basis of the specified trench depth and width, and the
 length in place. Underdrain junction boxes will be measured by the unit. Slopewalls for
 underdrains will not be paid for separately, but shall be included in the cost of the underdrain pipe.
 606.4.1- Free Draining Base Trench Method Of Measurement:
 606.4.1.1-FDB Trench: The quantity of work done will be measured by the LF (m)
 of FDB 606.3.5.1 trench installed, complete, in place, and accepted. The perforated pipe is
 a component of the FDB trench. Length will be determined from actual measurements once
 the FDB trench is in place. No deductions will be made for placement of the drop
 connection required at outlet pipe locations.
 606.4.1.2-Outlet Pipe: The quantity of work done will be measured by the LF (m) of
 rigid pipe complete in place and accepted. Angles, tees, wyes, and other branches which
 may be required will be included in the length of the outlet pipe. Measurement shall begin
 at the intersection of the perforated pipe and the rigid pipe. Slopewalls for outlet pipe and
 the connection of outlet pipes to drainage structures will not be paid for separately, but
 shall be included in the cost of the outlet pipe.
 606.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for as provided below, which
 prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing the materials, excavation, placing
 pipe, filter material, edge drain, outlet pipe, backfill, disposing all surplus material and doing all
 the work, including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies and incidentals necessary to complete the
 work. Payment for engineering fabric for Free Drain Base Trench will be as Item 207034-*.
 
 389
 
 606.6-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 606001-* Metallic Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe For Underdrains
 606002-* Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe For
 Underdrains
 606003-* Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe For Underdrains
 606004-* Bituminous Coated Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe
 For Underdrains
 606005-* Non-Reinforced Perforated Concrete Underdrainage Pipe
 606007-* Porous Concrete Pipe
 606008-* Standard Quality Concrete Drain Tile
 606009-* Extra Quality Concrete Drain Tile
 606010-* Special Quality Concrete Drain Tile
 606007-* Porous Concrete Pipe
 606008-* Standard Quality Concrete Drain Tile
 606009-* Extra Quality Concrete Drain Tile
 606010-* Special Quality Concrete Drain Tile
 606011-* Standard Clay Drain Tile
 606012-* Extra Quality Clay Drain Tile
 606013-* Heavy Duty Clay Drain Tile
 606014-* Standard Strength Perforated Clay Pipe
 606015-* Extra Strength Perforated Clay Pipe
 606016-* Cradle Invert Clay Pipe
 606017-* Fiber Cement Pipe For Underdrains
 606018-* Prefabricated Edge Drain
 606019-* Bituminized Fiber Pipe For Underdrains
 606020-* Aggregate Filled Fabric Underdrains**
 606021-* Blind Drain
 606022-* Crushed Stone, Crushed Gravel, Or Silica Sand For
 Underdrains
 606023-* Underdrain Junction Box
 606024-* Corrugated Stainless Steel Pipe For Underdrains
 606025-* Underdrain Pipe
 606026-* Precoated, Galvanized Steel Pipe For Underdrains
 606027-* Corrugated Polyethylene Underdrainage Pipe
 606028-* Perforated Plastic Semicircular Pipe
 606029-* Free Draining Base Trench
 606030-* Outlet Pipe, “size”
 * Sequence number
 ** Width in inches
 
 390
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Yard (Meter)
 Yard (Meter)
 Each
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 
 SECTION 607
 GUARDRAIL
 607.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the construction or reconstruction of guardrail in accordance
 with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades shown on
 the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 The types of guardrail are designated as follows:
 Type 1, Galvanized Steel Deep Beam Type Guardrail
 Type 2, Blank
 Type 3, Blank
 Type 4, Blank
 Type 5, Galvanized Steel Double-Faced Guardrail (Deep Beam Type)
 All installations of Type 1 & 5 Guardrail will be classified according to one of the
 designations specified. The guardrail class will be indicated in the pay items and on the Plans,
 Class I:
 Class II:
 Class III:
 Class IV: 3 ft.
 Class V: 3 ft.
 
 –
 –
 –
 –
 –
 
 6 feet - 3 inches (1 905 mm) post spacing with blocks
 12 feet - 6 inches (3 810 mm) post spacing with blocks
 12 feet - 6 inches (3 810 mm) post spacing without blocks.
 1 ½ in. (952 mm) post spacing without blocks.
 1 ½ in. (952 mm) post spacing with blocks.
 
 The construction of the guardrail shall include the complete furnishing, assembling and
 erecting of all component parts and materials at the location shown on the Plans or directed by the
 Engineer.
 A Modified Cut Slope Terminal shall consist of supplying and installing additional length
 guardrail posts, an additional W-beam guardrail section (bottom beam), and standard guardrail cut
 slope terminal components
 Tangent End Terminal Repair and Flared End Terminal Repair shall consist of carefully
 removing, and replacing the damaged components of the End Treatments. All components of the
 end treatment system shall be replaced with the respective manufacture’s parts and are to conform
 to the original design of the system as outlined in the Standard Details Volume I and the
 manufacture’s design.
 607.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections of Division 700:
 
 391
 
 MATERIAL
 SUBSECTION
 Concrete for Footers
 715.12
 Galvanized Steel Deep Beam Type Guardrail
 712.4
 Fasteners and Anchor Bolts
 Miscellaneous Concrete
 715.12
 Offset Blocks
 710.3, 710.5 *
 Pressure Treated Wood Guardrail Posts
 710.3, 710.5
 Retroreflective Sheeting for Traffic Control
 715.9.2.8
 Steel Guardrail Posts
 709.45
 Zinc Rich Primer (Galvanized Repair)
 711.21
 * Other material types may be substituted from the division’s approved list .
 All materials must be protected from damage during storage and handling. All materials,
 including materials which have been approved previously, will be subject to inspection by the
 Engineer as to condition at any time prior to or during incorporation of the material in the work.
 Materials which have been damaged shall not be used.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 607.3-SETTING POSTS AND PLACING FOOTERS:
 607.3.1-General: Unless one type is specified, posts may be of steel, or wood, and the
 Contractor shall indicate at the preconstruction conference the type of post the Contractor
 elects to use and that type shall be used throughout the Project.
 Post dimensions and details shall conform to the requirements shown on the Plans.
 Guardrail posts shall be placed as shown on the Plans.
 Posts shall be set plumb in holes dug by hand or mechanically. When posts are driven, the
 manner of driving shall be such as to avoid battering or distorting of posts. Post holes shall be
 backfilled with acceptance material placed in maximum six inch (150 mm) loose layers and
 thoroughly compacted. All posts damaged during erection or driving shall be removed and
 replaced without additional cost. Any damage to post galvanizing shall be repaired by a
 material meeting the requirements of 711.21.
 Painting, when called for, shall not be done in damp or freezing weather and shall only be
 done when the posts are thoroughly dry.
 607.3.2-Steel Posts: Galvanized steel posts shall not be painted except for touch up
 painting with zinc primer as specified.
 607.3.3-Pressure Treated Wood Posts: All wood posts shall meet the requirements of
 Section 710.
 607.3.4-BLANK
 607.3.5-Offset Blocks: Offset blocks shall be used when called for by the Plans.
 
 392
 
 607.3.6-Footers for Breakaway Cable Terminal and Special Trailing End Terminal:
 Footers for breakaway cable terminal and special trailing end terminal shall be constructed of
 cast-in-place concrete meeting the requirements of 715.12. Concrete shall be placed promptly
 and without segregation after mixing.
 Concrete footers shall be carried down to at least the depth, and shall be not less than the
 dimensions shown on the Plans. The top of all footers shall be not less than the dimensions
 shown on the Plans. The top of all footers shall be flush with the ground line and shall be
 troweled to a smooth finish with a slope to drain away from the post.
 After excavating for the footer, the earth coming in contact with the concrete must be
 moistened to a depth of at least 2 inches (50 mm) just prior to placing the concrete in the hole.
 No curing will be required other than the placing of not less than 4 inches (100 mm) of loose
 moistened earth, free from clods or gravel, over the top of the footer immediately after placing
 the concrete. All excess excavation from footers and loose material used for curing shall be
 disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer.
 607.4-ERECTING RAIL ELEMENTS:
 607.4.1-General: Rail elements shall be erected in a manner resulting in a smooth,
 continuous installation.
 All bolts, except where otherwise required, such as expansion joint bolts and adjustment
 bolts, shall be drawn tight. Bolts through expansion joints shall be drawn up as tight as possible
 without being tight enough to prevent the rail elements from slipping past one another
 longitudinally. Bolts shall be sufficiently long to extend at least 1/4 inch (6 mm) beyond the
 nuts. Except where required for adjustment, bolts shall not extend more than 1/2 inch (13 mm)
 beyond the nuts. Bolts through variable thickness posts shall be cut off a maximum of 1/2 inch
 (13 mm) beyond the nuts.
 All metal guardrail elements shall be fabricated in the shop. Field punching, cutting, and
 drilling of all guardrail elements other than rail may be permitted after it has been demonstrated
 that it will not result in damage to the surrounding metal and if approved by the Engineer.
 When additional slotted holes are required in W-beam to secure rail to post, slotted hole
 shall be per Standard Details Volume I. Slotted hole shall be field punched or shop fabricated
 so that they are free from tears, jagged edges and damage to the surrounding metal. Drilling
 to create slotted holes is prohibited.
 Galvanized surfaces which have been abraded so that the base metal is exposed, any field
 welded surfaces, threaded portions of all fittings and fasteners, and cut ends of bolts shall be
 protected with zinc rich primer or by field galvanizing, when approved by the Engineer.
 607.4.2-Type 1 Guardrail (Galvanized Steel Deep Beam): The rail shall be erected so
 that the bolts at expansion joints will be located near the centers of the slotted holes. The rail
 elements shall be spliced by lapping in the direction of traffic. The rail elements at each splice
 shall make contact throughout the area of the splice. Shop-curved rail shall be used on curves
 with radii less than 150 feet (45 m).
 Any surface damage to galvanized beams shall be repaired with a material meeting the
 requirements of 711.21.
 When called for, guardrail end terminals conforming to the details shown on the Plans shall
 be constructed.
 
 393
 
 607.4.3 through 607.4.4-BLANK
 607.4.5-Type 5 Guardrail (Galvanized Steel, Double-Faced): This rail shall be erected
 in accordance with the requirements of 607.4.2 and as shown on the Plans.
 607.5-GUARDRAIL REMOVED AND REBUILT OR STORED:
 This item shall consist of carefully dismantling, removing, and reerecting or storing, at the
 location specified on the Plans, of existing guardrail. Rebuilt units shall be of the same type,
 spacing of members, etc., as original guardrail.
 New material specified on the Plans shall conform to the requirements for the construction
 of new guardrail of the type being reset.
 All salvageable materials shall be removed and re-erected (or stored if so specified) with
 reasonable care. Posts, rails, fabric, and cables for reerected rails shall be obtained from salvage
 sources, but the Contractor shall furnish whatever additional bolts, clips, or incidental hardware as
 may be necessary to complete the guardrail.
 Methods of re-erection shall conform to the requirements for the construction of new
 guardrail of the type being reset, except as modified on the Plans.
 Where removal and storage is specified, the bolts, cables, and other hardware shall be
 carefully removed from all rails, posts, and other members, and all parts shall be sorted and stored
 at the locations specified. Rails shall be properly stacked, cable shall be free from kinks and
 rewound on the cable spools, and all such reasonable care shall be exercised in the handling,
 storing, and preserving of materials as will insure the maximum salvage value for the entire
 operation.
 607.6-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be measured in linear feet (meters) of guardrail of the type
 indicated on the Plans, complete in place and accepted, measured along the face of the rail from
 center to center of end posts. The linear feet (meters) of double-faced guardrail will be measured
 along the face of one rail only.
 When end terminals or attenuators for steel beam type guardrail are used, they will be
 measured separately and will be the actual number of end terminals or attenuators constructed,
 complete in place and accepted.
 Where 25 feet (1620 mm) sections of steel deep beam guardrail having 3 feet - 1½ inches
 (952.5 mm) or 6 feet - 3 inches (1905 mm) post spacings are utilized at bridges, they will be
 measured and paid for as 6 feet - 3 inches (1905 mm) post spacing with blocks (Class I) and in
 accordance with their appropriate guardrail type.
 Where 18 feet - 9 inches (5 715 mm) sections of guardrail-bridge transitions, having 3 feet1½ inches (952.5 mm) and 1 foot - 6 ¾ inches (476.25 mm) post spacings, are utilized at bridges
 or in conjunction with other structures, these sections shall be measured and paid for as W-Beam
 Guardrail Bridge Transition. The cost of the double, top w-beam (12 feet - 6 inch section (3 810
 mm)), bottom w-beam (rubrail), guardrail end special hardware, connectors and incidentals
 utilized in guardrail - bridge transit shall be included in W-Beam Guardrail Bridge Transition.
 Where w-thrie beam guardrail-bridge transitions consisting of two nested thrie beam
 panels and a transition section from w-bearn to the thrie hewn guardrail having a total length of 18
 feet - 9 inches (5 715 mm) are utilized at bridges or in conjunction with other structures, these
 sections shall be measured, and paid for as Thrie Beam Guardrail Bridge Transition. The cost of
 394
 
 the double thrie beam 12 feet - 6 inch sections (3 810 mm), the 6 feet - 3 inches (1 905 mm) section
 of w-thrie beam transition, the 6 feet - 6 inches (1 901.2 mm) length steel posts, guardrail terminal
 connectors, and all special hardware, connectors, and incidentals utilized in this guardrail - bridge
 transition shall be included in Thrie Beam Guardrail Bridge Transition.
 Where guardrail end terminals, per the Division Approved Source/Product Listing, are
 utilized on projects, these terminals shall be measured and paid for as Flared End Terminal or
 Tangent End Terminal as shown in the plans. The cost of all hardware shown on the pre-approved
 shop drawings for the end terminals and the reflective sheeting on the nose of the terminal shall be
 included in the cost of the Flared End Terminal, per each or Tangent End Terminal, per each.
 607.6.1-Tangent End Terminal Components: Tangent End Terminal Repair will be
 measured from the percentage shown in tables 607.6.1A and 607.6.1B for the parts that are
 used and accepted. The Tangent End Terminal (TET) has two approved manufactures. The
 different components of each system along with how much percentage each part is to the entire
 system can be found in the following tables:
 Table 607.6.1A (SKT 350) Approval #1318593A
 Part #
 S3000
 S1303 /
 1305
 
 Component Description
 Impact Head
 #1 Deep Beam Guardrail 12 GA.
 
 G1203 /
 1205
 
 #2 Deep Beam Guardrail 12 GA.
 
 E735
 
 Foundation Soil Tube
 
 SP600
 
 Soil Plate
 
 E740
 
 Pipe Sleeve
 
 E750
 
 Bearing Plate
 
 E760
 E770
 E780
 
 Cable Anchor Box
 BCT Anchor Cable Assembly
 Ground Strut
 
 P650
 
 Wood Posts
 
 P675
 
 Timber Blockout
 
 E3151
 
 Impact Face Object Marker
 
 12.5’ or 25’
 (3810 mm or 7620 mm)
 12.5’ or 25’
 (3810 mm or 7620 mm)
 6” x 8” x 4’-6”
 (152 x 203 x 1372 mm)
 24” x 18” x ¼”
 (610 x 460 x 6 mm)
 
 Value in
 Percentage
 (per each)
 41.6%
 2.1%
 5.8%
 3.3%
 1.3%
 0.3%
 
 8” x 8” x 5/8”
 (200 x 200 x 16 mm)
 
 0.8%
 2.3%
 2.4%
 2.1%
 
 5.5” x 7.5” x 45”
 (140 x 190 x 1143 mm)
 6” x 8” x 14”
 (150 x 200 x 360 mm)
 
 1.2%
 0.4%
 1.5%
 
 395
 
 Table 607.6.1A (SKT 350) Approval #1318593A-Hardware Package:
 Part #
 
 Component Description
 
 B580122
 
 Splice Bolt
 
 B580754
 
 Hex Bolt
 
 B581004
 
 Hex Bolt
 
 B581002
 
 H.G.R Bolt (Post 2 Only)
 
 B581802
 
 H.G.R Bolt (POST 3-8)
 
 N050
 
 H.G.R (Splice 16/32, soil tubes
 Nut
 22, Strut 2, Post 2-8, 7)
 
 W050
 
 H.G.R Washer
 
 N100
 
 Anchor Cable Hex Nut
 
 W100
 
 Anchor Cable Washer
 
 E350
 
 Lag Screw
 
 SB58A
 
 Cable Anchor Box Shoulder Bolts
 
 N055A
 
 A325 Structural Nut
 
 W050A
 
 A325 STR. Washer
 
 5/8” Dia. x 1 ¼”
 (16 mm Dia. x 32 mm)
 5/8” Dia. x 7 ½”
 (16 mm Dia. x 191 mm)
 5/8” Dia. x 10”
 (16 mm Dia. x 254 mm)
 5/8” Dia. x 10”
 (16 mm Dia. x 254 mm)
 5/8” Dia. x 18”
 (16 mm Dia. x 457 mm)
 5/8” Dia.
 (16 mm Dia.)
 5/8” Dia.
 (16 mm Dia.)
 1”
 (25 mm)
 1”
 (25 mm)
 3/8” x 3”
 (10 x 76 mm)
 1/2 ”
 (10 mm)
 1-1/16” OD x 9/16” ID
 (27 mm OD x 14 mm ID)
 
 396
 
 Value in
 Percentage
 (per each)
 
 4.5%
 
 Table 607.6.1B (ET-2000) Approval #1318592A
 Part #
 
 Component Description
 
 62G
 60G
 
 #1 Deep Beam Guardrail 12 GA.
 #2 Deep Beam Guardrail 12 GA.
 
 740G
 
 Steel Tube
 
 766G
 
 Soil Plate
 
 782G
 
 Bearing Plate
 
 704A
 
 985A
 9918A
 
 Cable Anchor Bracket
 Cable Assembly/ With Hex Nut
 & Washer
 Guardrail Extruder
 Offset Strut
 
 705G
 
 Pipe Sleeve
 
 4147B
 
 Wood Posts
 
 4063B
 
 Wood Posts
 
 4148B
 
 Wood Block
 
 3177A
 
 Object Marker
 
 3000G
 
 Value in
 Percentage
 (per each)
 9%
 5%
 
 6” x 8” x 54” x 3/16
 (152 x 203 x 1372 x 5 mm)
 24” x 18” x ¼”
 (610 x 460 x 6 mm)
 8” x 8” x 5/8”
 (200 x 200 x 16 mm)
 
 3.3%
 1.3%
 1.2%
 5.6%
 
 3/4” x 6’6”
 (75 mm x 1950 mm)
 
 3.5%
 63%
 2.8%
 
 2” Std. x 5 ½”
 (50 mm x 138 mm)
 5.5” x 7.5” x 45”
 (140 x 190 x 1143 mm)
 6” x 8” x 6’
 (150 x 200 x 1800 mm)
 5.5” x 7.5” x 14”
 (140 x 190 x 360 mm)
 
 0.4%
 1.4%
 2.4%
 0.5%
 
 Table 607.6.1B (ET-2000) Approval #1318592A-Hardware Package:
 Part #
 
 Component Description
 
 3478G
 
 Hex Bolt (Soil Plate)
 
 3497G
 
 Hex Bolt (Top Of Tube)
 
 3360G
 
 H.G.R Splice Bolts
 
 3580G
 
 H.G.R Post Bolt
 
 3340G
 
 H.G.R Nut
 
 3300G
 4228G
 
 5/8” Dia. x 7 ½”
 (16 mm Dia. x 191 mm)
 5/8” Dia. x 9 ½”
 (16 mm Dia. x 238 mm)
 5/8” Dia. x 1 ¼”
 (16 mm Dia. x 31 mm)
 5/8” Dia. x 18”
 (16 mm Dia. x 457 mm)
 5/8” Dia.
 (16 mm Dia.)
 5/8” Dia.
 (16 mm Dia.)
 3/8” x 4”
 (10 x 100 mm)
 
 (Splice 16, tubes
 24A/12B, gr-7)
 Washer (2 At Tubes 1 & 2 + 7
 Posts)
 Lag Screw
 
 397
 
 Value in
 Percentage
 (per each)
 
 0.6%
 
 607.6.2-Flared End Terminal Components: The Flared End Terminal (FET) has three
 approved manufactures. The different components of each system along with how much
 percentage the part is to the entire system can be found in the following tables:
 Table 607.6.2A (FLEAT 350) Approval #1318589A
 Part #
 
 Component Description
 
 S3000
 
 Impact Head
 
 F1303
 F1304
 G1203
 
 W-Beam Guardrail End Section, 12 GA
 W-Beam Guardrail Center Section, 12 GA
 W-Beam Guardrail, 12 GA
 6” X 8” X 6’
 Foundation Soil Tube Note 1
 (152 x 203 x 1830 mm)
 
 S730
 Note 1
 
 Value in
 Percentage
 (per each)
 40.4%
 2.8%
 3%
 7.8%
 5.8%
 
 Post 1 and 2 Foundation Tubes maybe substituted with the following options:
 Part #
 S730
 E371
 SP600
 SP600
 
 Component Description
 Split Foundation Tubes
 6’-0” (1830 mm)
 Solid Foundation Tubes
 6’-0” (1830 mm)
 Foundation Tubes S375 W/Soil Plates
 5’-0” (1525 mm)
 Foundation Tubes E735 W/Soil Plate
 4’-6” (1350 mm)
 
 E740
 
 Pipe Sleeve
 
 E750
 
 Bearing Plate
 
 E760
 E770
 E780
 
 Cable Anchor Box
 BCT Cable Anchor Assembly
 Ground Strut
 
 P650
 
 Wood Posts
 
 P671
 
 Wood CRT Posts
 
 P675
 
 Timber Blockout
 
 0.5%
 8” X 8” X 5/8”
 (200 x 200 x 16 mm)
 
 1%
 3.1%
 3.3%
 2.8%
 
 5.5” X 7.5” X 45”
 (140 x 190 x 1143 mm)
 6” X 8” X 6’
 (150 x 200 x 1830 mm)
 6” X 8” X 14”
 (150 x 200 x 360 mm)
 
 398
 
 1.6%
 2.3%
 0.5. %
 
 Table 607.6.2A (FLEAT 350) Approval #1318589A-Hardware Package:
 Part #
 
 Component Description
 
 B580122
 
 Splice Bolt
 
 B580754
 
 Hex Bolt
 
 B581004
 
 Hex Bolt
 
 B581002
 
 Bolt (Post 2 Only)
 
 B581802
 
 H.G.R. Bolt (Post 3-7)
 
 W050
 
 (Splice 24, Soil
 H.G.R. Tubes 2, Strut 2,
 Nut
 Post 2, 1; Post 3
 Thru 7, 5.)
 H.G.R. Washers
 
 N100
 
 Anchor Cable Hex Nut
 
 N050
 
 W100
 E350
 SB58A
 N055A
 N050A
 
 Value in
 Percentage
 (per each)
 
 5/8” DIA. X 1 ¼”
 (16 mm Dia. x 32 mm)
 5/8” DIA. X 7 ½”
 (16 mm Dia. x 191 mm)
 5/8” DIA. X 10”
 (16 mm Dia. x 254 mm)
 5/8” DIA. X 10” H.G.R
 (16 mm Dia. x 254 mm)
 5/8” DIA. X 18”
 (16 mm Dia. x 457 mm)
 5/8” DIA
 (16 mm Dia.)
 
 1”
 (25 mm)
 1”
 Anchor Cable Washer
 (25 mm)
 3/8” X 3”
 Lag Screw
 (10 x 76 mm)
 Cable Anchor Bow Shoulder Bolts
 1/2”
 A325 Structural Nuts
 (13 mm)
 1-1/16” OD X 9/16” ID
 A325 Str. Washer
 (27 mm OD x 14 mm ID)
 
 399
 
 4.9%
 
 Table 607.6.2B (SRT 350) Approval # 1318590A
 Part #
 
 Component Description
 
 3G
 
 Backup (Guardrail) 12 GA
 
 34G
 
 SRT-1 (Guardrail) 12 GA
 
 63G
 
 SRT-350 (Guardrail) 12 GA
 
 9G
 
 (Guardrail) 12 GA
 
 35G
 
 SRT-2 (Guardrail) 12 GA
 
 700A
 
 Cable Anchor Bracket
 
 705G
 
 Pipe
 
 736G
 
 Tube Sleeve
 
 766G
 
 Soil Plate
 
 775G
 
 Bearing Plate
 
 923G
 
 12 GA/Barrier (Terminal)
 
 3000G
 
 Cable With Nut And Washer
 
 9852A
 
 Strut Assembly
 
 4075B
 
 Block
 
 4063B
 
 Posts
 
 9960A
 
 Slot Guard
 
 4147B
 
 Wood Posts
 
 12”
 (3050 mm)
 12’6”
 (3810 mm)
 25’/6’3
 (7620 mm/227 mm)
 12’6/6’3
 (3810 mm/227 mm)
 12’6/6’3
 (3810 mm/227 mm)
 
 Value in
 Percentage
 (per each)
 2.4%
 12.8%
 16.2%
 5%
 12.8%
 2.6%
 
 2” Ø x 5 ½”
 (50 mm Ø x 138 mm)
 5’
 ( 1650 mm)
 24” x 18” x ¼”
 (610 x 460 x 6 mm)
 8” x 6” x 5/8”
 (200 x 150 x 16 mm)
 98”
 (2450 mm)
 3/4 x 6’6
 (75 x 1950 mm)
 
 0.5%
 8.2%
 2.4%
 2.6%
 2.6%
 6.4%
 5.1%
 
 6” X 8” X 14”
 (150 x 200 x 360 mm)
 6” X 8” X 6’
 (150 x 200 x 1830 mm)
 
 1%
 4.4%
 2.1%
 
 5.5” X 7.5” X 45”
 (140 x 190 x 1143 mm)
 
 400
 
 2.6%
 
 Table 607.6.2B (SRT-350) Approval # 1318590A-Hardware Package:
 Part #
 
 Component Description
 
 3360G
 
 Splice Bolts
 
 3500G
 
 Post Bolt
 
 3580G
 
 Post Bolt
 
 3340G
 
 Hex Nut
 
 3300G
 
 Washer
 
 3320G
 
 Washer
 
 3478G
 
 Hex Head Bolts
 
 3380G
 
 Hex Head Bolts
 
 3497G
 
 Hex Head Bolts
 
 9961G
 
 Plate Washer
 
 5968G
 
 16d Standard Nail
 
 3900G
 
 Washer
 
 3910G
 
 Hex Nut
 
 5/8” Dia. x 1 ¼”
 (16 mm Dia. x 31 mm)
 5/8” Dia. x 10”
 (16 mm Dia. x 250 mm)
 5/8” Dia. x 18”
 (16 mm Dia. x 457 mm)
 5/8” Dia.
 (16 mm Dia.)
 5/8” Dia.
 (16 mm Dia.)
 3/16 x 1 ¾ x 3”
 (5 x 44 x 75 mm)
 5/8” Dia. x 7 ½”
 (16 mm Dia. x 187 mm)
 5/8” Dia. x 1 ½”
 (16 mm Dia. x 37 mm)
 5/8” Dia. x 9 ½”
 (16 mm Dia. x 237 mm)
 3/8 x 3 x 4
 (10 x 75 x 100 mm)
 1”
 (25 mm)
 1”
 (25 mm)
 
 401
 
 Value in
 Percentage
 (per each)
 
 10.3%
 
 Table 607.6.2C (REGENT) Approval # 318591A
 Part #
 PTE05
 PLS03
 PFP01
 Regent Post 1
 Regent Post 2
 FAC PLT WLD
 Rein Panel
 Brace
 Brace Support
 FPA01
 FCA01
 CBL Arch SLV
 Bearing SLV
 Regent Line Po
 PDB01
 Regent Rail 1
 Regent Rail 2
 Rwm04a
 Fpp02
 Rwb01a
 
 Component Description
 Foundation Tube, ST, G
 Soil Plate, St, G
 Strut & Yoke Assemble, ST, G
 Regent Post 1
 Regent Post 2
 Regent Face Plate Weldment
 Regent Rein Panel Weldment
 Brace Ch Standard
 Brace Support ¼ x 5” (7 x 125 mm) Bent With Holes
 Cable Anchor Box
 Cable Anchor, Nut And Washers
 Cable &Anchor Sleeve
 Regent Bearing Sleeve, Half
 Regent Line Post, Mod 2 ½” (63 mm) Holes
 Timber Post Blockout
 Regent Rail 1 (Mod Twm14a)
 Regent Rail 2 (Mod Twm14a)
 Regent Rail 3 (Rwm04a Or Rwm02a)
 “L” Shelf Angel Bracket
 W-Beam Backup Plate
 
 402
 
 Value in
 Percentage
 (per each)
 10.5%
 1.5%
 4.5%
 11%
 4%
 3.5%
 4.4%
 4%
 4%
 2%
 1.5%
 3.5%
 6%
 2%
 4%
 12%
 8%
 5.5%
 1.5%
 1.5%
 
 Table 607.6.2C (REGENT) Approval # 318591A –Hardware Package:
 Part #
 FBB01
 FBB03
 FBB04
 FBX16a1
 FBX16a2
 FBX16a3
 FWC16a
 FW4R03
 Standoff
 C Bracket
 Post Breaker
 Post Breaker
 N16D
 
 Component Description
 
 Value in
 Percentage
 (per each)
 
 5/8” Dia. x 1 ¼”
 (16 mm Dia. x 32 mm)
 5/8” Dia. x 10”
 Guardrail Bolt & Nut,
 Hex Head
 (16 mm Dia. x 254 mm)
 5/8” Dia. x 18”
 Guardrail Bolt & Nut,
 Hex Head
 (16 mm Dia. x 457 mm)
 5/8 x 1 9/16
 Hex Bolt & Hex Nut
 (16 mm x 39 mm)
 5/8 x 7 7/8
 Hex Bolt & Hex Nut
 (16 mm x 197 mm)
 5/8 x 9 7/8
 Hex Bolt & Hex Nut
 (16 mm x 247 mm)
 11/16” ID x 1 ¾” OD
 Flat Washer, G
 (17 mm Dia. x 44 mm)
 Rectangular Guardrail Washer
 7/8 x 5/8 x ¼
 Standoff
 (21 mm OD x 16 mm ID x 7 mm)
 1/4 x 6”
 C Bracket Bent With
 Hole
 (7 mm x 150)
 1/4 x 3 x 16
 FTB ST With Holes
 (7 x 75 x 400 mm)
 1/4 x 3 x 3x 9
 ANG ST With Hole
 (7 x 75 x 75 x 225 mm)
 Nail, 16D, G
 
 5.1%
 
 Guardrail Bolt & Rail Nut
 
 607.7-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall constitute full compensation for
 furnishing, preparing, placing, and erecting all materials, and all labor, tools, equipment, supplies
 such as nuts, bolts, washers, cables and any other incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 Tangent End Terminal Repair and Flared End Terminal Repair will be paid for at the
 percentage calculated above of the unit price bid for that item.
 Payment for Cut Slope Terminal Type A shall include extra-length guardrail posts as
 required, rubrail, excavating and backfilling the trench, reshaping, seeding and mulching of the cut
 slope, and either concrete block or soil plate anchor complete and in place. Payment for Cut Slope
 Terminal Type B shall include extra-length guardrail posts as required, drilling holes into the cut
 slope, and furnishing and installing rock bolts (2), end shoes (2), rubrail, and all other necessary
 hardware to complete the installation.
 
 403
 
 607.8-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 607001-* Type 1 Guardrail, Class “class”
 607005-* Type 5 Guardrail, Class “class”
 607006-* Thrie Beam Guardrail Bridge Transition
 607007-* W-Beam Guardrail Bridge Transition
 607009-* “Type” Guardrail, Removed And Reset
 607010-* “Type” Guardrail, Removed And Stored
 607025-* Cut Slope Terminal, Type “type”
 607027-* Bullnose Attenuator
 607030-* Special Trailing End Terminal
 607035-* Guardrail Element
 607036-* Guardrail End Shoe
 607037-* Buffer End Section
 607039-* 6x6x14 In (150x150x350 Mm) Treated Wood Block
 607040-* 8x6x14 In (200x150x350 Mm) Treated Wood Block
 607041-* 13 Ft – 6.5 In (4120 Mm) Curved Rail Element
 607042-* 6 Ft (1800 Mm) Steel Post
 607043-* 8 Ft (2400 Mm) Steel Post
 607044-* 8x6x72 In (200x150x1800 mm) Treated Wood Post
 607045-* 5.5x7.5x44 In (140x190x1100 mm) Treated Wood Post
 607046-* 7 In Round X 6 Ft (175 Round X 1800 mm) Treated
 Wood Post
 607047-* 10x10 In X 6 Ft (250x250x1800 mm) Treated Wood Post
 607048-* Structure Mounted Post, Anchored
 607049-* 10 Ft (300 Mm) Steel Post
 607050-* 8x6 In X 5 Ft (200x150x1500 Mm) Steel Tube Sleeve
 607051-* Remove And Reset Guardrail Post
 607065-* Flared End Terminal
 607066-* Tangent End Terminal
 607081-* Tangent End Terminal Repair, “system name”
 607082-* Flared End Terminal Repair, “system name”
 * Sequence number
 
 404
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 SECTION 608
 RIGHT-OF-WAY FENCE
 608.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the construction of fences and gates of the types designated, in
 accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines, grades,
 locations, and dimensions shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 608.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division
 700:
 MATERIAL
 Aluminum Paint (Aluminum-Coated Repair)
 Barbed Wire
 Chain Link Fence*
 Concrete for Footers
 Farm-Field Fence (Woven Wire)
 Pressure Treated Wood Posts and Braces
 Steel Posts, Post Braces and Gate Frames
 Zinc Rich Primer (Galvanized Repair)
 *
 
 SUBSECTION
 711.9
 712.10
 712.8
 715.12
 712.9
 710.3, 710.5
 709.46
 711.21
 
 Chain link fence fabric may be zinc-coated steel or aluminum-coated steel
 
 Posts for farm-field fence may be of either steel or wood, and the Contractor shall indicate
 at the pre-construction conference the type of post the Contractor elects to use and that type shall
 be used throughout the Project.
 Gate frames shall be constructed of tubing having the dimensions and weights called for
 on the Plans. Gate frames may be constructed using pressed steel corner fittings or die-cast
 aluminum corner fittings, may be provided with heavy malleable iron corner fittings or otherwise
 shall be of an adequate, sturdy design. Gate frame corner attachments may be of welded
 construction, if the gate frame receives its coating protection after fabrication of the gate structure
 is completed. All gate frames shall have truss rods as shown on the Plans.
 All gates shall be equipped with approved latches, stops, suitable locking devices, and
 satisfactory provisions for padlocking. Means shall be provided for securing and supporting the
 free ends of vehicular gates in the open position. Hinges shall be malleable iron, pivot type, heavy
 and strong, with large bearing surfaces for clamping onto the posts, or equal. Hinges shall not
 twist or turn under the action of the gate and shall be so arranged that a closed gate cannot be lifted
 off its hinges to obtain entry. Vehicular gates shall be capable of being operated easily by one
 person and shall be of the full 180 degree open swing type. Pedestrian gates shall be equipped
 with a positive stop which will not permit the gate to swing toward the highway and shall be
 provided with a satisfactory spring or other positive means to maintain the gate in a closed position.
 The filler fabric for pedestrian gates and vehicular gates shall comply with the requirements
 for the fencing fabric of the fence in which the gate is to be installed.
 Miscellaneous hardware and fittings shall conform to the details shown on the Plans or
 other alternate designs acceptable to the Engineer.
 405
 
 When the locations of manufacturing plants allow, the plants will be inspected periodically
 for compliance with specified manufacturing methods, and material samples will be obtained for
 laboratory testing for compliance with materials quality requirements. This may be the basis for
 acceptance of manufacturing lots as to quality.
 All materials must be protected from damage during storage and handling. All materials,
 including materials which have been approved previously, will be subject to inspection by the
 Engineer as to condition at any time prior to or during incorporated of the material in the work.
 Materials which have been damaged shall not be used.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 608.3-GENERAL:
 The Contractor's activities and operation shall be confined to the area immediately adjacent
 to the right-of-way fence and within the highway right-of-way. The Contractor shall be
 responsible for satisfactory arrangements for such permits as required by them from adjacent
 owners in performing the work.
 If the installation of certain portions or lengths of the right-of-way fence is more essential
 than other portions or lengths, the Engineer may designate the portions or lengths of the fence that
 are most essential, and the Contractor shall conduct his operations so as to give priority to the
 erection of such portions or lengths.
 When temporary fence is not provided as a separate bid item in the Contract, the Contractor
 may defer installation of the permanent right-of-way fence by erecting and maintaining adequate
 temporary fence. The Contractor shall be responsible for prohibiting livestock from entering upon
 the work area and to contain livestock in the property residues from which it is necessary to remove
 the existing fence.
 608.4-CLEARING, GRUBBING, AND TRENCH EXCAVATION:
 The Contractor shall perform such clearing and grubbing as may be necessary to construct
 the fence to the required grade and alignment.
 When necessary in areas of irregular ground to secure clearance between the ground line
 and the bottom of the fence fabric, to obtain the established grade, or to permit placing steel barbed
 wire below the bottom of the fence fabric at stream crossings and minor depressions, a trench shall
 be excavated to the grade and line established or designated. In the areas where rock is
 encountered, the rock shall be excavated as may be necessary, in the opinion of the Engineer, to
 the required grade and line. Any excavation of rock below the required grade shall be backfilled
 with suitable materials as directed. Trenches shall be so constructed as to insure proper drainage
 and shall be of the cross section shown on the Plans or as directed. In general, the bottom of the
 fence shall follow the contour of the ground in accordance with usual practice in constructing fence
 of the type specified, and it is not anticipated that a great amount of shallow trench excavation will
 be required.
 608.5-CONCRETE FOOTERS:
 Footers, where required, shall be constructed of cast-in-place concrete meeting the
 requirements of 715.12. Concrete shall be placed promptly and without segregation after mixing.
 Concrete footings shall be carried down to at least the depth, and shall be not less than the
 dimensions, shown on the Plans. The top of all footings shall extend slightly above the ground
 406
 
 line and shall be steel troweled to a smooth finish with a slope to drain away from the post. Posts,
 braces, and other units shall be approximately centered in their footings.
 If the ground is firm enough to permit excavation of a hole to neat dimensions, the concrete
 may be placed without forms by completely filling the hole. In this case, the earth coming in
 contact with the concrete must be moistened to a depth of at least 2 inches (50 mm) just prior to
 placing the concrete in the hole. No curing will be required other than the placing of not less than
 4 inches (100 mm) on loose moistened earth, free from clods or gravel, over the top of the footing
 immediately after placing the concrete.
 Where the ground cannot be satisfactorily excavated to neat dimensions, forms shall be
 used for footings. In this case, where the soil is not moist, not less than one gallon (4.0 liters)
 water shall be placed in the bottom of each hole; and, as soon as the water has been absorbed, the
 concrete shall be placed.
 Forms shall be removed not sooner than 24 hours after placing of concrete. As soon as
 each form is removed, the footing shall immediately be backfilled with thoroughly moistened
 material in six inch (150 mm) loose layers and solidly tamped. The top shall be covered with not
 less than 4 inches (100 mm) of loose moistened earth. All excess excavation from footings and
 loose material used for curing shall be disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer.
 608.6-SPACING AND SETTING POSTS:
 608.6.1-General: Posts shall be spaced in the line of fence as shown on the Plans with a
 tolerance of minus 2 feet (600 mm). Spacing of posts shall be as uniform as practicable under
 local conditions.
 In general, in determining the post spacing, measurements shall be made parallel to the
 ground slope, and posts shall be placed in a vertical position except in unusual locations where
 it would be more satisfactory to place the posts perpendicular to the ground slope and the
 Engineer so directs.
 At all horizontal angle points, vertical angle points, and terminal points of the right-of-way
 fence, corner, pull, or end posts shall be placed, as the situation may demand, along with the
 necessary amount of bracing and number of approach posts as shown on the Plans. Steel line
 posts shall be spaced at a maximum of 10 feet (3 m) center to center, and wooden line posts
 shall be spaced at a maximum of 15 feet (4.5 m) center to center along the fence line. For
 chain link fence with steel posts and farm-field type fence with wooden posts, intermediate
 post assemblies shall be placed at 400 feet (120 m) intervals (maximum) center to center from
 corner, gate, pull, or end posts, except where the distance is 500 feet (150 m) or less between
 any combination of such posts. For farm-field type fence with steel posts, intermediate post
 assemblies shall be placed at 330 feet (100 m) intervals (maximum) center to center from
 corner, gate, pull, or end posts, except where the distance is 400 feet (120 m) or less between
 any combination of such posts. Gate posts shall be placed in the fence line where required and
 as directed by the Engineer. Details of all installations shall be as shown on the Plans.
 Extra length posts shall be required at small ground depressions and also at steam crossings,
 less than 15 feet (4.5 m) for wooden posts and less than 10 feet (3 m) for steel posts, where it
 is not practicable for the fencing to closely follow the contour of the ground. Details of these
 installations shall be as shown on the Plans. The location of extra length shall be as dictated
 by the topography and as directed. Additional bracing shall be provided for extra length posts
 when shown on the Plans or directed. The Contractor shall close the space below the bottom
 of the fence fabric with barbed wire, stretched tautly between posts either on horizontal lines
 407
 
 or fanned, as shown on the Plans or directed. At stream crossings greater than 15 feet (4.5
 feet) for wooden posts and greater than 10 feet (3 m) for steel posts, the fence shall be
 constructed as shown by special detail on the Plans or as directed. No special payment will be
 made for extra length posts, bracing, wire, fittings, etc., required at stream crossings or
 depressions.
 Attention is directed to the fact that some posts may occur at or on existing roadway
 pavements, on old concrete foundations, or similar solid surfaces. There will be no additional
 compensation for breaking up such surfaces to set the posts. The Contractor may adjust the
 spacing to reduce the number of posts occurring on such surfaces subject to the maximum
 spacing specified, and there will be no additional compensation due to any increase in the
 number of posts when the Contractor elects to do so.
 608.6.2-Wooden Posts: At the option of the Contractor, treated wood posts may be driven
 into place, provided the method of driving does not damage the post; or they may be installed
 in drilled or dug holes and backfill and compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer. In any
 event, the posts shall be set solidly and any space left around the posts shall be backfilled and
 compacted as specified.
 When posts are to be driven, the top of the posts shall be tapered to fit the driving head so
 that no gouging of the post will result. Any posts split or broken during driving operations
 shall be replaced at the Contractor's expense.
 All wooden posts shall be placed with their large ends in the ground.
 When setting posts in dug or drilled holes of dimensions larger than the post, the space
 around the posts shall be backfilled in layers of maximum six inch (150 mm) loose thickness,
 and each layer shall be thoroughly tamped. If the backfill material is too dry to compact to the
 satisfaction of the Engineer, it shall be dampened as it is placed.
 608.6.3-Steel Posts: All steel end, corner, pull, gate, approach, intermediate assembly
 posts, and diagonal braces shall be set in concrete footings having the dimensions called for on
 the Plans. The dimensions of the footings may be varied as permitted by the Engineer but shall
 provide an equal volume of concrete. Except where rock is encountered, line posts shall be set
 or driven into the ground; and, in farm-field type fence, line posts shall be furnished with an
 approved plate or other satisfactory anchoring device to hold the post in proper alignment. The
 plate or anchor shall be satisfactory welded or riveted (not less than two rivets) to the post.
 Any post damaged by driving will be rejected.
 608.6.4-Posts Set in Rock: If solid rock is encountered above the required elevation of
 the bottom of a post, a hole shall be drilled into the rock to the normal depth of the post or 18
 inches (450 mm) into rock, whichever is less. In the latter case, the post shall be cut off at the
 bottom, if necessary, to provide the required post height above the ground surface. The
 diameter of post holes in rock shall be at least 3 inches (75 mm) greater than the largest
 dimension of the post.
 For all posts, the portion of the post extending into rock shall be grouted in place. Grout
 shall consist of one part Portland cement and three parts of sand, thoroughly mixed with a
 sufficient quantity of water to bring the mixture to a thick, but workable, consistency. For all
 wood posts and metal line posts, the excavation above the top of the rock shall be backfilled
 with material placed in six inch (150 mm) (maximum) loose layers and each layer thoroughly
 408
 
 compacted. The anchor plate shall be removed when metal line posts (farm-field type) are to
 be set in rock. For all other metal posts, the concrete footings, as previously specified, shall
 be cast-in-place between the top of the rock and the ground surface.
 608.7-ERECTION OF FENCING MATERIALS:
 608.7.1-General: In cases where the controlled access line and the right-of-way line are
 not coincident, fence shall normally be erected along the controlled access line. When fencing
 follows either line, the fence shall normally be erected parallel to and 1 feet (300 mm) inside
 the line. If this would result in undesirable appearances or unsatisfactory operational
 characteristics, the fence location shall be adjusted accordingly. In any case, the fence shall
 be erected to the lines and grades shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 The Contractor shall clear the area, from the line of fence to a line approximately 4 feet
 (1200 mm) within the line of fence, of brush, undergrowth, etc., as directed by the Engineer.
 Such clearing shall be conducted in such a manner as to leave intact valuable trees and selected
 native growth. Only such trees as are directly on the line of the fence or that would otherwise,
 in the opinion of the Engineer, interfere with the construction of the fence, shall be removed
 by cutting then flush with the ground.
 Materials removed in clearing shall be disposed of by the Contractor outside of the rightof-way and out of sight of any part of the highway in a manner approved by the Engineer,
 unless disposal within the right-of-way is specifically approved in writing by the Engineer.
 The tension for stretching the fence shall be applied by use of mechanical fence stretchers
 and single wire stretchers designed and manufactured for that purpose and in accordance with
 the fence manufacturer's recommendations. The finished fence shall be true to line, taut, and
 solid at all points.
 Posts shall be permanently positioned and concrete footings fully set before fabric is
 placed. Unless otherwise permitted, no fencing materials shall be installed on posts until seven
 days have elapsed from the time of placing of the concrete.
 Barbed wire shall be placed at locations indicated on the Plans.
 608.7.2-Farm-Field Fence (Wood Posts): Corner and pull posts shall be braced in two
 directions, and end and gate posts shall be braced in one direction. The braced post and the
 adjacent approach posts shall each be notched 1 inch (25 mm) deep at 8 inches (200 mm) from
 the top of the posts to the center of the notching to receive the horizontal brace. The horizontal
 wooden braces shall then be inserted into the notches and dowelled to the posts with 5/8 inch
 (16 mm) diameter galvanized steel pins 5 inches (125 mm) long.
 Diagonal wire bracing shall consist of double strand # 9 gage wire, installed as shown on
 the Plans, which shall comply with the requirements for the fencing fabric. Two loops shall
 be made around each post at each point of attachment, the wires stapled to the posts, and the
 wires fastened back on themselves by means of at least three twists tightly wrapped. The
 strands of wire shall then be twisted together until the wooden brace is in compression. The
 compression shall not be great enough to cause lateral springing in the brace.
 The placing and connecting of horizontal wooden braces and diagonal wire bracing for
 intermediate post assemblies shall be similar to that described above and shall be as shown on
 the Plans.
 The bottom of the fabric of farm-field fence shall be placed a normal distance of 3 inches
 (75 mm) above the ground line; however, over irregular ground a minimum clearance of 2
 409
 
 inches (50 mm) and a maximum clearance of 6 inches (150 mm) will be permitted for a
 distance not to exceed 8 feet (2.4 m). Any necessary excavation and backfilling required in
 order to comply with these provisions shall be made as specified.
 At all line and approach posts the fencing material shall be securely fastened to the posts
 by means of 1-½ inches (40 mm) minimum # 9 wire galvanized staples. At end, pull, corner,
 intermediate assembly, and gate posts the lateral wires of the fencing material shall be wrapped
 tightly around the posts and the wire fastened back on themselves by means of at least three
 twists tightly wrapped. The fence fabric and barbed wire shall be attached to all posts at the
 vertical spacings shown on the Plans.
 Fence fabric and barbed wire shall be fastened tightly to corner, pull, end, gate, and
 intermediate assembly posts for each straight run of fence, with each wire of the fabric being
 stapled to the posts before the fabric and barbed wire are fastened to the in-between line and
 approach posts. At the line and approach posts, the top and bottom wires and every other inbetween wire of the fabric shall be stapled, alternating the stapling of the in-between wires on
 successive posts.
 608.7.3-Farm-Field Fence (Steel Posts): Corner, pull, and intermediate assembly posts
 shall be braced in two directions, and end and gate posts shall be braced in one direction. These
 posts shall be braced by means of diagonal steel rods, connected to the posts and anchored in
 the ground in concrete footings, installed and having the dimensions as shown on the Plans.
 The bottom of the fabric of farm-field fence shall be placed a normal distance of 3 inches
 (75 mm) above the ground line; however, over irregular ground a minimum clearance of 2
 inches (50 mm) and a maximum clearance of 6 inches (150 mm) will be permitted for a
 distance not to exceed 8 feet (2.4 m). Any necessary excavation and backfilling required in
 order to comply with these provisions shall be made as specified.
 At all end, corner, pull, gate, and intermediate assembly posts, the lateral wires of the ends
 of the fencing material shall be wrapped tightly around the posts and the wires tied back on
 themselves with not less than three twists tightly wrapped. The fencing material shall be
 fastened to line posts by approved ties or clips. The fence fabric and barbed wire shall be
 attached to all posts at the vertical spacing shown on the Plans.
 Fence fabric and barbed wire shall be fastened tightly to corner, pull, end, gate, and
 intermediate assembly posts for each straight run of fence, with each lateral wire of the fabric
 attached, as specified above, before the fabric and barbed wire are fastened to the in-between
 line posts. At line posts, the top and bottom wires and every other in-between wire of the fabric
 shall be fastened by approved ties or clips to the posts, alternating the in-between wires to be
 fastened on successive posts.
 608.7.4-Chain Link Fence: Corner, pull, and intermediate assembly posts shall be braced
 in two directions, and end and gate posts shall be braced in one direction. These posts shall be
 braced as detailed on the Plans. # 7 gage tension wires shall be attached to both the top and
 the bottom of the fence fabric for the entire length of the fence.
 The bottom of the fence fabric shall be placed a normal distance of 1-2 inches (38 mm)
 above the ground line; however, over irregular ground a minimum clearance of 1 inch (25 mm)
 and a maximum clearance of 6 inches (150 mm) will be permitted for a distance not to exceed
 8 feet (2.4 m). Any necessary excavation and backfilling required in order to comply with
 these provisions shall be made as specified.
 410
 
 Top and bottom tension wires shall be placed and fastened to all posts before the fence
 fabric is placed. Tension wires shall be tautly stretched during erection. The ends of the fabric
 shall be secured by the use of stretcher bars threaded through the loops of the fabric and secured
 to corner, pull, end, gate, and intermediate assembly posts by means of clamps with bolts and
 nuts. The number of clamps shall be as indicated on the Plans. The fabric shall be placed by
 securing one end of the fabric to the stretcher bar and applying sufficient tension to remove all
 slack before making the attachment at the other end of the fabric. Following these attachments,
 the fabric shall be fastened to line and approach posts and to top and bottom tension wires with
 tie wires or clips. A sufficient quantity of individual fabric ties or clips shall be furnished to
 provide for attaching the fabric to line posts at 12 inch (300 mm) vertical spaces.
 608.8-PAINTS AND PAINTING:
 Zinc-coated, triple-coated and aluminum-coated metal parts in the fence structure shall not
 be painted. After erection is completed, all fence construction will be inspected by the Engineer.
 All parts of the fence and gates (including bolts and nuts) from which the coating has been abraded
 so that the base metal is exposed shall be spot-painted with a zinc rich primer in the case of zinccoated and triple-coated steel and with aluminum paint in the case of aluminum-coated steel.
 Wood posts and braces shall be painted when called for on the Plans.
 608.9-ELECTRICAL GROUNDS:
 All types of fences shall be grounded where a power line passes over the fence. The ground
 shall be installed immediately below the point of crossing. The ground shall be accomplished with
 a copper clad rod, 8 feet (2.4 m) long and 5/8 inch (16 mm) (nominal) in diameter, driven vertically
 until the top is approximately 6 inches (150 mm) below the ground. A # 6 solid copper conductor
 shall be clamped to the rod and to the fence in such a manner that each element of the fence is
 grounded. Similar grounds shall be installed at a maximum of every 2,000 feet (600 m) length of
 fence, whether or not there are power line crossings. For sections of fence less than 2,000 feet
 (600 m) one ground shall be provided midway between the end posts.
 608.10-JUNCTIONS WITH EXISTING FENCES:
 Where the right-of-way fence intersects or joins existing fence, the Contractor shall make
 the junction between the fences in the manner specified. An end post corresponding in strength to
 the type used in the right-of-way fence shall be set on the line of the existing fence and
 approximately 4 inches (100 mm) outside the centerline of the highway right-of-way fence.
 Existing fencing fabric, or similar, shall be stretched and tied to this end post in conformance with
 the construction requirements for the right-of-way fence. No direct connection shall be made
 between the existing fence and the highway right-of-way fence. All junctions shall be made in a
 workmanlike manner and will be subject to the approval of the Engineer.
 608.11-TEMPORARY FENCE:
 Temporary fence, when called for as a separate bid item, shall be erected at locations as
 shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer.
 The Contractor shall set back and re-erect existing fences, erect temporary fences from
 salvaged fence material, or erect Electric fences at the direction of the Engineer.
 
 411
 
 608.12-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Fence will be measured by the linear foot (m). Measurement will be along the bottom wire
 of the fence from outside to outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence. The lengths
 occupied by gates will not be included in this measurement.
 For farm-field fence with wood posts, the distance between posts for each intermediate
 assembly will be measured only once; the lap in the fencing fabric at intermediate assemblies will
 be included in the cost of the fence.
 Temporary fence and gates, subject to the provisions specified, will be measured along the
 bottom of the fence from outside to outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence.
 Gates, except when used when temporary fence, will be measured as complete units of the
 size and type specified.
 608.13-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The accepted quantities of fencing materials will be paid for at the contract unit price per
 linear foot (meter) for fence and per each for gates of the types and sizes specified, complete in
 place.
 This price will include the cost of clearing, grubbing, excavating, trenching, concrete
 footings, backfilling, drilling in rock, grouting posts in place, painting, electrical grounds,
 connections to existing fences where required, furnishing all materials, labor, equipment, tools,
 and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 When a separate bid item for temporary fence or gate is not provided for in the Contract,
 there will be no compensation for constructing such a fence or gates and the cost will be included
 in the unit price bid for permanent right-of-way fence.
 608.14-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 608001-* “size” Right-Of-Way Fence, Chain Link
 608002-* “size” Right-Of-Way Fence, Farm Field
 608003-* “size” Temporary Fence
 608004-* “size” Pedestrian Gate, Chain Link
 608005-* Vehicular Gate, Chain Link
 608006-* Pedestrian Gate, Farm Field, “size”
 608007-* Vehicular Gate, Farm-Field, “size”
 * Sequence number
 
 412
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 SECTION 609
 SIDEWALKS
 609.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the construction of Portland cement concrete sidewalks in
 accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades
 shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 609.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following subsections of Division
 700:
 MATERIAL
 Asphalt Plastic Cement
 Bed Course Material
 Expansion Joint Filler (Preformed)
 Joint Sealing Material
 Sand
 
 SUBSECTION
 708.9
 704.6 – Class 1 or Class 3
 708.1, 708.2
 708.3
 702.2
 
 Concrete shall meet the requirements of 601, Class B, or 501.
 609.2.1-Detectable Warning Surfaces: Detectable warning panels shall have a detectable
 warning surface meeting Proposed Accessibility Guidelines for Pedestrian Facility in Public
 Right of Way (PROWAG), latest edition, requirements. The panel dimensions shall not
 deviate more than 1/16 in (3 mm). The panel colors shall be as shown in the plans or as
 approved by the engineer. The color shall contrast to the adjacent sidewalk, sidewalk flares
 and pavement. The panels shall maintain a minimum skid resistance of .60 wet when tested
 with ASTM C 1028.
 There shall be two types of warnings surfaces: Panels for fresh concrete surfaces while the
 concrete is still plastic, and products for cured concrete surfaces. A wet or plastic set-in- place
 system shall be installed at the time of the placement of the sidewalk, while the concrete is still
 plastic. Mold-in-place concrete domes, brick pavers, or iron or steel warning systems shall not
 be used. Products must be approved and on the WVDOH Approved Products List. The
 material approval for detectable warning panels will be based on results from WVDOH field
 evaluation tests. Detectable warning systems may also be accepted or rejected based on actual
 performance on WVDOH projects. All materials to be used shall be covered by a 5 year
 warranty under normal conditions.
 609.2.2-Quality Control Testing: Quality control of bed course material is the
 responsibility of the Contractor as specified in 106.1.
 The Contractor shall maintain necessary equipment and qualified personnel to perform all
 sampling and testing necessary to determine the magnitude of the various properties of the
 material governed by the Specifications and shall maintain these properties within the limits
 of the Specifications.
 The Contractor shall submit a quality control plan detailing the methods by which the
 quality control program will be conducted. This plan, prepared in accordance with the
 413
 
 guidelines set forth in the appropriate portions of MP 307.00.50, shall be submitted to the
 Engineer at the preconstruction conference. The work shall not begin until the plan is reviewed
 for conformance with the contract documents.
 609.2.3-Acceptance Testing: Quality control sampling and testing performed by the
 Contractor shall be used by the Division for Acceptance.
 609.2.4-Sampling and Testing: Frequency of sampling and testing shall be in accordance
 with the contractor’s quality control plan. The minimum sampling and testing frequencies for
 gradation shall be as indicated in Attachment 1 of MP 307.00.50. The material shall be
 sampled in accordance with MP 700.00.06.
 609.2.5-Acceptance Plan:
 609.2.5.1-Gradation: Acceptance for gradation shall be on the basis of test results on
 consecutive random samples from a lot. A lot shall be considered the quantity of material
 represented by an average test value, not to exceed five sublots. Generally at the beginning
 of the project, the average shall be started on the second sample in accordance with
 MP 300.00.51. A sublot is the quantity of material represented by a single gradation test.
 In the case where only one sample is taken, this sublot shall be considered the lot. When
 the average, or when the most recent three consecutive individual test values fall outside
 the limits specified in Table 704.6.2A, the lot of material represented will be considered
 nonconforming to the extent that the last of its sublots is nonconforming. When this occurs,
 the last sublot shall have its price adjusted in accordance with Table 609.2.4.2. In the case
 where the average is nonconforming and the last sublot contained is conforming, then there
 would be no price adjustment. In no event, however, shall a sublot of material have its
 price adjusted more than once, and the first adjustment, which is determined, shall apply.
 609.2.5.2-Degree of Nonconformance: When a sublot of material is to have its price
 adjusted, the percentage point difference between the nonconforming test value and the
 specification limit shall be determined for each sieve size determined to be nonconforming,
 and this value shall be multiplied by its appropriate multiplication factor as set forth in
 Table 609.2.5.2.
 TABLE 609.2.5.2
 Nonconforming Sieve Size Multiplication Factor
 1½ in. (37.5 mm)
 1.0
 ¾ in. (19 mm)
 1.0
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 1.0
 No. 40 (425 µm)
 1.0
 No. 200 (75µm)
 1.0
 The total measure of nonconformance of an individual sublot is the sum of all
 nonconformances on the various sieve sizes of that sublot.
 When the total degree of nonconformance has been established and it is 12.0 or less,
 the material will be paid for at an adjusted contract price as specified in Table 609.10.1.
 
 414
 
 When the degree of nonconformance is greater than 12.0, the nonconforming sublot
 shall be resolved on an individual basis, requiring a special investigation by the Engineer
 to determine the appropriate course of action to be followed. Pending resolution of the
 matter, additional lifts of base or pavement shall not be placed over the nonconforming
 material.
 609.3-SUBGRADE PREPARATION:
 The subgrade shall be constructed true to grade and cross section as shown on the Plans or
 directed by the Engineer. It shall be watered, if required, and thoroughly compacted before placing
 the concrete or bed course material. All soft and yielding material shall be removed and replaced
 with suitable material.
 The completed subgrade shall be tested for grade and cross section by means of a template
 supported on the side forms.
 609.4-DRY BED:
 When called for on the Plans, bed course material shall be placed on the subgrade to the
 depth and width specified and compacted.
 609.5-FORMS:
 Forms shall be of wood or metal and shall extend for the full depth of the concrete. All
 forms shall be straight, free from warp, and of sufficient strength to resist the pressure of the
 concrete without springing. Bracing and staking of forms shall be such that the forms remain in
 both horizontal and vertical alignment until their removal. All forms shall be cleaned and oiled
 before being used.
 609.6-MIXING AND PLACING CONCRETE:
 The foundation and surfaces not oiled shall be thoroughly moistened immediately prior to
 the placing of the concrete. The proportioning, mixing, and placing of the concrete shall be in
 accordance with the requirements for the class of concrete specified.
 609.7-EXPANSION JOINTS:
 Expansion joints ¼ inch (6 mm) wide shall be constructed at 30 ft. (9 m) intervals, at all
 returns, and opposite expansion joints in adjacent curb. A longitudinal expansion joint ¼ inch (6
 mm) wide shall be placed between sidewalk and curb. Expansion joints shall be filled with
 preformed joint filler, which shall be shaped to fit the concrete section being placed.
 Where sidewalks are to be placed around or adjacent to manholes, drop inlets, or other
 miscellaneous structures in sidewalk areas, such structures shall not be constructed to final grade
 until after the sidewalk has been constructed for a reasonable distance on each side of the structure.
 Expansion joints, of the type specified above, shall be constructed between all such appurtenances
 and the sidewalk.
 Expansion Joints shall be provided around all sidewalk ramps and ramp flares.
 With the approval of the Engineer, preformed filler in longitudinal expansion joints
 between sidewalks and curbs may be eliminated, and the opening remaining after sidewalk has
 been placed shall be filled with joint sealing material.
 
 415
 
 609.8-FINISHING:
 609.8.1-Concrete: Fresh concrete shall be struck off and compacted until a layer of mortar
 has been brought to the surface. The surface shall be finished to grade and cross section with
 a float, troweled smooth, and finished with a broom. The float shall be not less than 10 feet (3
 m) in length and not less than 6 inches (150 mm) in width. Brooming shall be transverse to
 the line of traffic, and the broom shall be kept clean.
 All outside edges of the slab and all joints shall be edged with a ¼ inch (6 mm) radius
 edging tool.
 The surface of sidewalks shall be marked into rectangles of not less than 12 sq. ft. (1 sq.
 m) with a scoring tool which will form dummy joints and rounded sidewalk edges. The dummy
 joints shall extend into the concrete inch (9 mm) depth and shall be approximately 1/8 inch (3
 mm) wide.
 The finished surface shall not vary more than ¼ inch (6 mm) from a 10 ft. (3 m)
 straightedge, except at grade changes, and shall be free from blemishes.
 609.8.2 Detectable Warning Surface: The detectable warning panels may be designed
 for placement while the concrete is plastic or after the concrete has cured. The sidewalk
 concrete shall cure a minimum of 72 hours prior to placement of the detectable warning
 surface. The area where the surfaces are to be installed in shall be thoroughly cleaned and
 allowed to dry. The joints between the panels shall not exceed 1/8 inch. The panels shall not
 deviate more than 1/16” from the finished grade of the ramp surface. The grade will be
 measured from the top of the panel excluding any texture. The panels shall be cut as
 recommended by the manufacture. The domes shall be aligned in the direction of pedestrian
 travel.
 609.9-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Sidewalks will be measured in square yards (meters), complete in place and accepted,
 which will be determined by the length measured upon the surface times the width constructed, as
 authorized by the Engineer. Removal of existing sidewalks and any excavation shall be considered
 Unclassified Excavation and shall be paid as specified in Section 207. Detectable warning
 surfaces shall be measured and paid for separately complete in place and accepted. Bed course
 material will be measured by the cubic yard (meter), complete in place and accepted.
 Curb Ramps will be measured and paid for separately complete in place and accepted.
 Where a driveway crosses a sidewalk, the intersecting area shall be constructed to the driveway
 typical section and shall be measured and paid for the entire length of the driveway and transitions
 by the pay items shown in the driveway typical section or the Standard Details.
 609.10-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing
 all the materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner,
 including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 
 416
 
 609.10.1-Price Adjustment: Bed course material not conforming to the gradation
 requirements as described in 609.2.5.1 will be paid for a the adjusted contract price based on
 the degree of nonconformance as specified in Table 609.10.1.
 TABLE 609.10.1
 Adjustment of Contract Price for
 Gradation not Within Specifications
 Degree of
 Percent of Contract
 Nonconformance
 Price to be Reduced
 1.0 to 3.0
 2
 3.1 to 5.0
 4
 5.1 to 8.0
 7
 8.1 to 12.0
 11
 Greater than 12
 *
 * The Division will make a special evaluation of the material
 and determine the appropriate action.
 
 609.11-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 609001-*
 609002-*
 609005-*
 609006-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Concrete Sidewalk
 Bed Course Material
 Curb Ramp
 Detectable Warning Surface
 
 * Sequence number
 
 417
 
 UNIT
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 
 SECTION 610
 CURBS, COMBINATION CURBS AND GUTTERS AND MEDIANS
 610.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the construction or resetting of curbs, combination curbs and
 gutters, and medians in accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity
 with the lines, grades, dimensions, and locations shown on the Plans or established by the
 Engineer.
 The types of curbing, combination curbs and gutters, or medians are as follows:
 1. Plain Concrete Curbing
 2. Integral Concrete Curbing
 3. Combination Concrete Curb & Gutters
 4. Reflecting Concrete Curbing
 5. Asphalt Curbing
 6. Medians
 610.2-MATERIALS:
 Except as provided below, materials shall meet the requirements of the following
 Subsections of Division 700:
 MATERIAL
 Asphalt Emulsion for Paint Coat
 Asphalt for Tack Coat
 Expansion Joint Filler Preformed
 Joint Sealing Material
 Joint Tie Bolt Assembly
 PG Binder for Asphalt Curb
 Reinforcing Steel
 
 SUBSECTION
 705.4 or 705.11
 705.4 or 705.11
 708.1
 708.3 or 708.4
 709.7
 705.5*
 709.1, 709.4
 
 * Standard grade specified for local area unless indicated otherwise on the Plans.
 Concrete shall meet the requirements of 601, Class B, or 501. In addition, the requirements
 in 610.4 shall govern when reflecting concrete curbing is called for.
 Concrete, asphalt mixes, and manufactured curbing materials will be subject to inspection
 and tests at the plants for compliance with quality requirements.
 All materials will be subject to inspection for acceptance as to condition at the latest
 practicable time the Engineer has the opportunity to check for compliance prior to or during
 incorporation of materials in the work.
 Asphalt curbing component materials shall meet the applicable requirements of Section
 401 and the composition of the mix shall meet the following Table 610.2:
 
 418
 
 TABLE 610.2 (MASTER RANGE CRITERIA)
 ½ inch (12.5 mm)
 100
 3/8 inch (9.5 mm)
 80 - 100
 # 4 (75 mm)
 50 - 80
 # 8 (2.36 mm)
 30 - 60
 # 16 (1.18 mm)
 20 - 50
 12 - 36
 # 30 (600 m)
 5- 25
 # 50 (300 m)
 3- 9
 # 200 (75 m)
 % Asphalt
 4 - 10
 No mix design approval will be required for asphalt curbing, however, the Contractor shall
 establish a Plant Mix Formula (PMF) for asphalt content and gradation which meets the above
 requirements and submit it to the District for approval. The District shall review the design and
 submit a completed T-400 form to the Materials Control, Soil, and Test Division. The Materials
 Division will assign a laboratory number to the design. This PMF shall also include the percentage
 of any additive that may be used as a stiffener for the curbing mix. If lime or other similar granular
 additive is used, then this material should be included in the PMF gradation. The mix shall be
 produced within the allowable tolerances of the following table.
 Plant Mix
 Formula
 Percentage Passing Sieve Sizes
 3/8 inch (9.5 mm), # 4 (4.75 mm)
 Percentage Passing Sieve
 # 8 (2.36 mm)
 Percentage Passing Sieve Sizes
 # 16 (1.18 mm), # 30(600m)
 Percentage Passing Sieve Size
 # 50 (300m)
 Percentage Passing Sieve Size
 # 200 (75m)
 
 Plant Mix
 Tolerance Range
 ± 7 Percentage Points
 ± 6 Percentage Points
 ± 5 Percentage Points
 ± 4 Percentage Points
 ± 3 Percentage Points
 ± 0.5 Percentage Points
 
 Percentage of Asphalt
 
 The Contractor shall perform quality control sampling and testing of the asphalt curbing
 mix by taking a random sample once per day of production and testing for asphalt content and
 gradation to verify the materials composition. If testing indicates that the plant mix formula
 tolerances are not being met, then production shall halt until the reason for any deficiencies are
 determined and adjustments are made to correct these deficiencies and documented in the plant
 diary.
 
 419
 
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 610.3-PLAIN CONCRETE CURBING, INTEGRAL CONCRETE CURBING, AND
 COMBINATION CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER:
 610.3.1-Excavation: Excavation shall be made to the required depth, and the base upon
 which the curb is to be set shall be compacted to a firm, even surface. All soft and unsuitable
 material shall be removed and replaced with suitable material which shall be thoroughly
 compacted. When called for on the Plans, the base upon which the curb is to be set shall be
 constructed of bed course material in accordance with 609.
 610.3.2-Form: Forms shall be of wood or metal, straight, free from warp, and of such
 construction that there will be no interference with the inspection of grade or alignment. All
 form shall extend for the entire depth of the curb and shall be braced and secured sufficiently
 so that no deflection from alignment or grade will occur during the placing of the concrete.
 Forms shall be cleaned and oiled just prior to placing the concrete.
 610.3.3-Mixing, Placing, and Finishing: Concrete shall be proportioned, mixed, and
 placed in accordance with the requirements for the class of concrete specified. Concrete shall
 not be transported in nonagitating trucks. Compaction of concrete placed in forms shall be by
 vibration or other acceptable methods. Drainage openings shall be made through the curb,
 where indicated, or as directed by the Engineer, at the elevation and of the size required. Forms
 shall be left in place for 24 hours unless the concrete has set sufficiently prior to that time to
 permit their removal without injury to the curbing. Upon removal of the forms, the exposed
 curbing face shall be immediately rubbed to a uniform surface. Rubbing shall be accomplished
 by the use of water and a wood block or carborundum brick. For the purpose of matching
 adjacent concrete finishes or for other reasons, the Engineer may permit other methods of
 finishing. No plastering will be permitted. All damaged and rejected curb shall be removed
 and replaced.
 610.3.4-Sections: All concrete curbing shall be constructed in sections having an
 approximate length of 10 feet (3 m) unless otherwise indicated on the Plans or directed. In the
 construction of integral concrete curb or combination concrete curb and gutter abutting
 concrete pavement, the sections shall be such that the contraction and expansion joints are
 located opposite the contraction and expansion joints respectively in the pavement. Sections
 shall be separated by joints 1/8 in. (3mm) wide except at expansion joints. All joints shall be
 filled with joint sealing material conforming to the requirements of 708.3.
 610.3.5-Expansion Joints: Expansion joints shall be formed at the intervals shown on the
 Plans using a preformed expansion joint filler having a thickness of ¾ inch (19 mm). When
 the curb is constructed adjacent to or on concrete pavement, expansion joints shall be located
 opposite or at expansion joint in the pavement.
 610.3.6-Curing: Immediately upon completion of the rubbing, the curbing shall be
 moistened and kept moist for three days, or the curbing shall be cured by the use of membrane
 forming material. The methods and details of curing will be subject to the approval of the
 Engineer.
 420
 
 610.3.7-Backfilling: After the concrete has set sufficiently, the spaces in front and back
 of the curb shall be refilled to the required elevation with suitable materials, which shall be
 thoroughly tamped in loose layers of not more than 6 inches (150 mm).
 610.3.8-Curb Machine: Where a concrete curb or curb and gutter is not required to be
 constructed integral with or tied to a concrete base and pavement it may be placed with a selfpropelled machine consisting of a hopper and having a power driven screw or screws. The
 proper density and cross section shall be obtained by forcing the concrete through a mold of
 the specified cross section. Where a track is used, the track on which the machine operates
 shall be set and held to the line and grade given by the Engineer. The concrete shall be of such
 consistency that it can be molded into the desired shape and will remain as placed without
 slumping of the vertical or sloping faces.
 The consistency test may be omitted, and the yield determined from the volume required,
 adjusted for waste.
 610.4-REFLECTING CONCRETE CURBING:
 Construction methods for this item shall conform to the requirements of 610.3 with the
 following supplements:
 The reflecting surface of the curbing shall be a mortar mix consisting of one part white
 Portland cement to 1¾ parts of light colored, washed mortar sand. This mortar mix shall have a
 thickness of approximately 1 inch (25 mm). Alternately, the entire curbing may be constructed of
 concrete with white Portland cement. When this alternate procedure is used, it shall conform to
 "Placing of Concrete Curb by Separate Methods" shown on the Plans.
 Washed mortar sand shall meet all the requirements for mortar sand and shall be of a light
 color satisfactory to the Engineer. The reflecting surface mortar shall be placed immediately after
 placing of the base concrete. In no case shall more than 20 minutes elapse between the placing of
 the base concrete and the placing of the reflecting surface.
 Scoring or surface deformation of finish of the reflecting surface shall conform to the
 details shown on the Plans. Care shall be taken to prevent discoloration during and after
 construction of the curb, and, if discolored, it shall be adequately cleaned by a method approved
 by the Engineer.
 610.5- ASPHALT CURBING:
 610.5.1-Equipment & Tools: All equipment, tools, and plant machinery to be used for
 executing the work prescribed will be subject to the approval of the Engineer.
 Asphalt curbing shall be constructed by the use of self-propelled automatic curber or curb
 machine or a paver with curbing attachments. This automatic curber or machine shall meet the
 following requirements:
 i. The weight of the machine shall be such that required compaction is obtained without
 the machine riding above the bed of which curbing is constructed.
 ii. The machine shall form curbing that is uniform in texture, shape, and density.
 610.5.2-Excavation: Excavation, when required, shall conform to the requirements of
 610.3.1.
 
 421
 
 610.5.3-Preparation of Bed: When curbing is to be constructed on a fresh laid asphalt
 surface, the curb shall be laid only after the surface has been cleaned.
 When curbing is to be constructed on a cured or aged Portland cement concrete base,
 asphalt pavement, or asphalt treated base, the bed shall be thoroughly swept and cleaned by
 compressed air. The surface shall be thoroughly dried and, immediately prior to placing of the
 asphalt mixture, shall receive a tack coat of asphalt material. The rate of application of tack
 coat material shall be between 0.05 to 0.15 gallons per square yard (0.226 to 0.679 liters per
 square meter) of surface. The Contractor shall prevent the spread of this tack coat to areas
 outside of the area to be occupied by the curb.
 610.5.4-Mixing and Placing: The asphalt mixture specified in 610.2 shall be
 homogeneously mixed and shall be delivered to the hopper of the curb laying machine at a
 temperature of not less than 200 F (93 C) nor more than 300 F (150 C). Each hopper load
 of asphalt plant mix shall be run through the curb laying machine which has been adjusted to
 form and properly compact the asphalt curb.
 The Engineer may permit the construction of curbing by means other than the automatic
 curber or machine when short sections or sections with short radii are required or for such other
 reasons as may seem to warrant it. The resulting curbing shall conform in all respects to the
 curbing produced by the use of the machine.
 610.5.5-Joints: Unless conditions warrant, asphalt curb construction at the specified
 temperature shall be a continuous operation in one direction to eliminate curb joints. However,
 where conditions are such that this is not possible, the joints between successive days' work
 shall be carefully made in such a manner as to insure a continuous bond between the old and
 new sections of the curb. All contact surface of previously constructed curb shall be given a
 thin, uniform coat of hot asphalt material just prior to placing the fresh asphalt curb material.
 610.5.6-Curing: The newly laid curb shall be protected from traffic by barricades or other
 suitable methods until the heat of the asphalt mixture has dissipated and the mixture has
 obtained its proper degree of hardness.
 610.5.7-Painting Curb: The completed curb shall be painted with a diluted emulsified
 asphalt paint coat or emulsified asphalt slurry to prevent moisture absorption. The paint coat
 shall be prepared with a 50-50 blend of water and emulsified asphalt, grade SS-1.
 610.5.8-Seasonal Limitations: No asphalt material shall be laid when the temperature of
 the air is 50 F (10 C) or less, or during other unfavorable weather conditions.
 610.6-MEDIANS:
 Medians shall be constructed to the details shown on the Plans. Construction methods shall
 conform to the applicable requirements in 610.3.
 610.7-RESETTING CURB:
 610.7.1-Salvage of Curbing: The Contractor shall carefully remove, store, and clean any
 curbing specified for resetting. The Contractor shall replace any existing curbing, specified to
 be reset, which is lost, damaged, or destroyed as a result of their operations or because of their
 failure to store and protect it in a manner that would eliminate its loss or damage.
 422
 
 610.7.2-Excavation:
 610.3.1.
 
 Excavation and bedding shall conform to the requirements of
 
 610.7.3-Placing Curb: The curb shall be set on a firm bed with the front top arris line
 conforming to the required line and grade. All sections of curbing shall be set so that the
 maximum opening between adjacent sections, for the entire exposed top and face, is not more
 than 1/4 inch (6 mm), except that the maximum opening at expansion joints shall be not more
 than ¾ inch (19 mm). Any dressing of the ends of the curbing necessary to meet this
 requirement shall be done by the Contractor.
 Expansion joints shall be filled with ¾ inch (19 mm) thick expansion joint fillers, which
 shall be placed concurrently with the curb.
 610.7.4-Backfilling: The spaces in front and back of the curb shall be refilled to the
 required elevation with suitable material. This material shall be placed in loose layers of not
 more than 6 inches (150 mm) and thoroughly tamped.
 610.7.5-Cutting and Fitting: Cutting or fitting shall be done, when necessary, in order to
 install the curbing at the locations directed.
 610.8-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Curbing will be measured by the linear foot (meter) along the front face of the section at
 the finished grade elevation. Combination curb and gutter will be measured by the linear foot
 (meter) along the face of the curb. No deduction in length will be made for drainage structures
 installed in the curbing. Medians will be measured in linear feet (meters) on the surface and along
 the centerline of the median.
 Bed course material will be measured by the cubic yard (meter).
 610.9-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing
 all the materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner,
 including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 610.10-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 610001-*
 Plain Concrete Curbing, Type “type”
 610002-*
 Integral Concrete Curbing, Type “type”
 610003-*
 Combination Concrete Curb And Gutter, Type “type”
 610004-*
 Reflecting Curbing, Type “type”
 610005-*
 Asphalt Curb, Type “type”
 610006-*
 Median, Type “type”
 610007-*
 Resetting Curb, Curb Type “type”
 610008-*
 Bed Course Material
 * Sequence number
 
 423
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 
 SECTION 611
 PRECAST CONCRETE TRAFFIC DIVIDERS
 611.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing precast white Portland cement concrete traffic
 dividers of the kind and size specified, and installing such dividers at the locations specified in
 accordance with the Plans and these Specifications.
 611.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division
 700:
 MATERIAL
 SUBSECTION
 Joint Mortar
 708.8
 Joint Sealer
 708.3
 Precast Concrete Traffic Dividers
 715.20
 611.3-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 When the traffic dividers are to be placed in bituminous concrete, they shall not be placed
 until the bituminous concrete surface has been completed. The opening remaining between the
 bituminous concrete and the traffic dividers shall be filled with joint mortar or joint sealer.
 When the traffic dividers are to be placed in Portland cement concrete, openings into which
 the traffic dividers are to be set shall be formed by a method acceptable to the Engineer at the time
 the Portland cement concrete pavement is being placed. The opening remaining between the
 Portland cement concrete pavement and the traffic dividers shall be filled with joint mortar or joint
 sealer.
 After the traffic dividers are firmly set in the pavement, the lifting holes shall be filled to
 within ¾ in of the surface with dry sand and either sealed with joint mortar or joint sealer.
 The Contractor shall keep the traffic dividers free of any material tending to deface or
 discolor them. Any dividers damaged shall be removed and replaced at the Contractor's expense.
 611.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be measured as the number of traffic dividers furnished and
 installed in place and accepted.
 611.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for this item, which price and payment shall constitute full compensation for furnishing, preparing,
 and installing the traffic dividers and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and
 acceptable manner, including all labor, tools, materials, equipment, supplies, and incidentals
 necessary to complete the work.
 611.6-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 611001-*
 *
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Precast Concrete Traffic Dividers
 
 Sequence number
 
 424
 
 UNIT
 Each
 
 SECTION 612
 TUNNEL LINER PLATE PIPE
 612.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of tunneling, lining and field paving for tunnel liner plate pipe,
 galvanized and asphalt coated, in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close
 conformity with the lines, grades, dimensions and locations shown on the Plan or established by
 the Engineer.
 612.2-MATERIALS:
 612.2.1-Liner Plates: Tunnel liner plate pipe shall have the neutral axis diameter specified
 on the Plans, shall be hot dipped galvanized and shall be double dipped in asphalt cement. The
 plates shall be of the thickness specified, punched for bolting on both longitudinal and
 circumferential seams, and shall be so corrugated that they have a moment of inertia of not less
 than that specified on the Plans. Moment of inertia shall be expressed in inches (mm) to the
 fourth power per inch (mm) of plate based upon the average for one ring of plates. A minimum
 of 10 percent of the plates shall be provided with grout plugs for grouting the space between the
 excavation and the plates. Base material for tunnel liner plates shall conform to the
 requirements of ASTM A 569. Galvanizing of the plates shall conform to the requirements of
 AASHTO M 167. Plate design shall be such that complete erection of plates can be
 accomplished from the inside of the tunnel.
 Plates shall be fabricated in accordance with the applicable detail drawings on pages 298,
 300, and 301 of "Handbook of Steel Drainage and Highway Construction Products", Latest
 Edition, published by American Iron and Steel Institute.
 612.2.2-Hardware: Bolts and nuts used with lapped seams shall be not less than 5/8 inch
 (16 mm) in diameter. The bolts shall conform to the specifications of ASTM A 449 for plate
 thickness equal to or greater than 0.209 inches (5.3 mm) and ASTM A 307 for plate thickness
 less than 0.209 inches (5.3 mm). The nuts shall conform to ASTM A 563, grade a for A307
 bolts and A563 DH for A449 bolts.
 Bolts and nuts used with four flanged plates shall be not less than ½ inch (12 mm) in
 diameter for plate thicknesses up to and including 0.179 inches (4.5 mm) and not less than 5/8
 inch (16 mm) in diameter for plates of greater thickness. The bolts and nuts shall be quick
 acting coarse thread and shall conform to ASTM A 307, Grade A.
 Hardware shall be galvanized or cadmium plated in accordance with ASTM A 153, or
 ASTM B 766, CI.25 respectively.
 612.2.3-Bituminous Coating: Bituminous coating shall conform to the applicable
 requirements of 713.3. The plates shall be fully coated.
 612.2.4-Paving: Field paving shall be of Class B Concrete, conforming to the applicable
 requirements of 601.3.
 612.2.5-Grout: Grout shall consist of Portland cement and sand conforming to the
 requirements of 218.2 and 218.3.3, except that proportions of cement and sand may be modified
 to suit conditions encountered in the field.
 425
 
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 612.3-GENERAL:
 The Contractor shall furnish shop drawings showing a typical section of the tunnel, details
 of the plates, seams, size and length of bolts, and the moment of inertia of the plates in inches
 (mm) to the fourth power per inch (mm) of width for the ring of plates.
 At all times during the construction period the work shall be under the supervision of a
 superintendent with a proven record of tunneling and the use of tunnel liner plates.
 612.4-TUNNELING AND LINING:
 Work may begin at either the outlet or inlet end. If necessary to reach the entrance grade,
 a shaft of minimum 8 feet (2.5 m) width and 12 feet (3.7 m) length shall be dug and the shaft
 sheeted and shored if necessary. Tunnel mucking shall be carried out not greater than 24 inches
 (600 mm) ahead of the bolting up of plates. Disposal of the removed spoil shall be in accordance
 with the directions of the Engineer. Mucking shall be done smoothly to fit the outside of the liner
 plates. The Contractor shall be responsible for adherence the line and grade, and deviations from
 line and grade more than 3 inches (75 mm) shall require the approval of the Engineer. If necessary,
 due to the type of soil encountered, jacking type shield shall be used.
 At the end of each working day, the Contractor shall construct a bulkhead inside the pipe
 at the construction face.
 612.5-GROUTING:
 Grout blocks shall be installed at each end after bolting up is completed. Grouting shall
 start at one end and shall be carried forward until the area between the excavation and the plates is
 completely filled with grout. Grouting should be performed on a daily basis and progressed
 simultaneously with the installation of the tunnel liner plate.
 612.6-FIELD PAVING:
 Field paving, using Portland cement concrete, shall be accomplished in accordance with
 the applicable requirements of 604.9.
 612.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be measured in linear feet (meters) of Tunnel Liner Plate
 Pipe, complete in place and accepted.
 612.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 per linear foot (meter), which price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing all the
 materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including
 all labor, tools, equipment, supplies and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 
 426
 
 612.9-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 612001-* “size” Tunnel Liner Plate Pipe, 2-Flange Design
 612002-* “size” Tunnel Liner Plate Pipe, 4-Flange Design,
 Type “type”, Y
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 
 * Sequence number
 Y=
 
 a letter designating base metal (zinc-coated) thickness in accordance with the following table:
 Y
 B
 C
 D
 E
 F
 G
 H
 J
 
 MILS (mm)
 79 (2.0 mm)
 109 (2.7 mm)
 138 (3.5 mm)
 168 (4.3 mm)
 188 (4.8 mm)
 218 (5.5 mm)
 249 (6.3 mm)
 280 (7.1 mm)
 
 SECTION 613-BLANK
 
 427
 
 SECTION 614
 PILING WALLS
 614.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing and placing steel piles in predrilled holes, concrete or
 grout, backfill and lagging, of the kinds and dimensions designated, in accordance with these
 provisions and in reasonably close conformity with the lines, grades, dimensions, and locations
 shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer. Painting of the exposed steel is included.
 Careful attention shall be given to assuring the pile wall will tie directly into an existing
 stable slope. Prior to ordering any materials, the contractor in conjunction with the Engineer shall
 conduct a project site review in order to verify the limits of the pile wall.
 614.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall conform to the requirements specified in the following Subsections of
 Division 700:
 MATERIAL
 SUBSECTION
 Fine Aggregate
 702.1
 Fly Ash
 707.4
 Portland Cement
 701.1
 Prestressing Steel
 709.2
 Reinforcing Steel
 709.1
 Steel Lagging and Wales
 709.12
 Steel Piles and Splices
 709.12
 Treated Timber Lagging
 710
 614.3-DRILLING:
 A drilled hole is required for the buried length of the pile.
 A minimum of 1/3 the total pile length or 10 feet (3 m), whichever is greater, is to be placed
 in bedrock/shale. Deviation from this requirement will be controlled by a Plan note. The total
 estimated pile length and the depth to the estimated bedrock/shale line are shown on the piling
 profile. Should the elevation of the actual bedrock/shale vary from the estimated elevation by
 more than 2.5 feet (0.8 m), the Engineer must approve the hole prior to placement of the pile. The
 material from the drilled hole shall be removed and disposed of by the Contractor in an approved
 site.
 Particular care must be taken in the drilling operation to avoid deflecting the bit along a
 sloping bedrock/shale line. To verify proper alignment, the Contractor shall measure and record
 the vertical alignment of the hole using a plumb bob or other acceptable method.
 Preferably, the diameter of the drilled hole shall be a size that will allow the pile, while
 being slowly lowered into the hole, to reach the bottom of the hole under the impetus of the pile
 weight. The minimum hole diameter shall be 2 inches (50 mm) larger than the diagonal distance
 across the pile cross section.
 Light tapping (ten blows with at least 3 inches (75 mm) of penetration per blow) with a
 pile hammer exerting no more than 12,000 ft/lbs (16 kJ) of energy is permitted at the direction of
 the Engineer to advance the pile past minor obstacles in the hole.
 
 428
 
 Temporary casing of holes may be needed to maintain an open clean hole through the soil
 overburden. There will be no additional compensation for temporary casing. The cost of any
 casing used shall be included in the unit price bid for piling.
 614.4-INSTALLATION OF PILES:
 Piles shall be located as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer. Piles shall be
 installed with the pile center within 1 inch (25 mm) of the Plan location. The piles must be
 prevented from rotating, so that the pile axis is within five degrees of the position shown on the
 Plans.
 The maximum permissible vertical deviation for piles shall be one percent of the total pile
 length, as measured at the actual pile location.
 It is desirable that piles be installed without splicing; however, at the direction of the
 Engineer splices may be made. Splice lengths at the top of the piles may be butt welded provided
 the splice lengths are less than the required splice plates. No payment will be made for cut-offs.
 Welding shall be in accordance with 615.5.7.
 Accurate records shall be maintained by the Contractor showing the depth to which each
 pile was placed, the plumbness, the amount of material used, elevation of bedrock/shale, and any
 unusual conditions encountered during the pile installation. These records shall be incorporated
 into the permanent records of the project.
 614.5-CORROSION PROTECTION:
 Piles will be protected from corrosion and sealed by the placement of concrete or grout,
 from the bottom of the hole to the bottom of the lagging or as directed by the Engineer. Vibration
 of the concrete or grout is not required. The Contractor shall complete all concrete or grout
 operations for holes drilled during the work day.
 The drilled hole shall be pumped free of water and shall be reasonably free of fall-in soil
 or other debris prior to the placement of the concrete or grout. The concrete or grout in the
 bedrock/shale portion of the hole will be pumped or tremied through a pipe beginning at the bottom
 of the drilled hole. The pipe shall be slowly raised ensuring the pipe end remains at least 2 feet
 (600 mm) below the surface of the concrete or grout. A means of positively measuring the
 elevation of the concrete or grout as it is placed shall be provided by the Contractor.
 After placing the concrete or grout in the bedrock/shale, the Contractor has the option of
 either pumping or pouring directly into the hole the remainder of the concrete or grout. Placing
 the concrete or grout from the bottom of the hole to the bottom of the lagging shall be accomplished
 in one continuous operation.
 The Contractor will inform the Engineer, at the preconstruction conference, as to the type
 of corrosion protection that will be used. Intermixing of concrete and grout will not be allowed,
 unless approved by the Engineer.
 Concrete shall be in accordance with Section 601, Class B. The job site testing is waived.
 Grout will be furnished and placed in accordance with the requirements specified herein.
 The acceptance sampling and testing of the grout is the responsibility of the Division.
 Quality Control of the concrete or grout is there responsibility of the Contractor as
 designated in Materials Procedure MP 601.03.50. The Contractor shall maintain equipment and
 qualified personnel, who shall direct all field inspection, sampling, and testing necessary to
 determine the magnitude of the various properties of the concrete and grout governed by the
 Specifications and shall maintain these properties within the limits of this Specification. The
 429
 
 Quality Control Plan designated in MP 601.03.50 shall be submitted to the Engineer at the preconstruction conference. Work shall not begin until the Plan is reviewed for conformance with
 the contract documents.
 The required 7-day compression strength of the grout shall be a minimum of 2,000 psi (14
 MPa). Grout which does not attain the 2,000 psi (14 MPa) strength in 7 days but exceeds a strength
 of 1,600 psi (11 MPa) shall be subject to price reduction based on the percentage of strength
 attained.
 A grout strength test shall consist of testing three 6 in x 12 in (150 mm x 300 mm)
 cylindrical specimens. The test results shall be the average of the three specimens. One set of
 three specimens shall be made for each day’s operations.
 The bid price for the piling with grout compressive strengths greater than or equal to 2,000
 psi (14 MPa) will be paid at 100 percent unless the piling installation does not meet Specifications
 for other reasons. Between 1,600 psi (11 MPa) and 2,000 psi (14 MPa) compressive strengths, the
 cost of the grout will be deducted from the actual grout cost on a proportional basis with 2,000 psi
 (14 MPa) being 100 percent and 1,600 psi (11 MPa) being zero percent payment. With 1,600 psi
 (11 MPa) grout, the piling installation would be considered to meet 80 percent of the Specifications
 and the penalty being zero payment for the grout.
 The penalty would involve only the quantity of grout represented by the failing
 compressive strength results.
 The bid price for the piling will be reduced for the piles grouted with grout having less than
 1,600 psi (11 MPa) compressive strengths as follows:
 F = D + [BC - D] 10.80 - (A + E)
 Where:
 A
 B
 C
 D
 E
 F
 
 =
 =
 =
 =
 =
 =
 
 Compressive strength of grout
 Total foot (meter) of piling grouted with
 Unit bid price per foot (meter) of piling
 Cost of grout (from Contractor)
 2,000 psi (14 Mpa)
 Total penalty
 
 614.6-PAINTING:
 All surfaces from the top of the steel pile, down to and including 2.0 feet (600 mm) below
 the top of the anticipated grout line shall be cleaned and painted. The method of surface
 preparation shall be hand tool cleaning to SSPC-SP-2. The paint system shall consist of one-coat
 of aluminum epoxy mastic meeting the requirements of 711.12 applied at a minimum dry film
 thickness of 5 mils (125 μm).
 614.7-LAGGING AND BACKFILLING:
 Lagging of the type and size as specified on the Plans shall be installed between the piles.
 Backfilling and restoration of the roadway template shall be as shown on the Plans.
 Timber lagging shall be Grade # 3 or better treated rough cut oak, 3 in (75 mm) wide by 8
 in (200 mm) deep for heights up to 11 ft (3.4 m); and for wall heights exceeding 11 ft (3.4 m) the
 timber lagging shall be double 3 in (75 mm) wide by 8 in (200 mm) deep. The boards shall be cut
 to their required length prior to preservative treatment.
 The timber lagging shall conform to Sections 710.3 and 710.4 of the West Virginia
 Division of Highways Standard Specifications.
 430
 
 614.8-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of piles will be measured in linear feet (meters) of piles installed and accepted
 for the wall.
 The quantity of lagging will be measured in square feet (meters) installed and accepted as
 measured by the total area of wall as measured through all wall elements, without deductions for
 gaps between lagging, piles, etc.
 614.9-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities will be paid for at the contract unit prices bid for the items listed below,
 which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials and doing all
 the work herein prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor, tools,
 equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work. The cost of drilling,
 concrete, grout, wales, and painting shall be included in the price bid for the piles. The cost of
 painting and welding steel lagging shall be included in the price bid for steel lagging.
 614.10-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 614001-*
 614002-*
 614003-*
 614004-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 “size” Steel Pile
 Steel Lagging, Thickness “thickness”
 Concrete Lagging, Thickness “thickness”
 Timber Lagging
 
 * Sequence number
 
 431
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Square Foot (Meter)
 Square Foot (Meter)
 Square Foot (Meter)
 
 SECTION 615
 STEEL STRUCTURES
 615.1-GENERAL:
 615.1.1-Description: The work shall consist of furnishing, fabricating, and erecting steel
 structures and structural steel portions of other structures in accordance with these
 Specifications, the Special Provisions, and the details shown on the plans.
 Fabricators of bridges that have welded shop splices shall be certified under the American
 Institute of Steel Construction’s (AISC) Quality Certification Program “Major Steel Bridges”
 category. The fabricators of fracture critical members shall be certified as category: “Major
 Steel Bridges” and, in addition, shall possess an “F” endorsement by AISC. Fabrication of
 grades HPS 50W and HPS 70W steel shall only be performed by fabricators possessing an “F”
 endorsement. Fabricators of rolled beam bridges shall be certified by AISC in either the
 “Major Steel Bridges” category or the “Simple Steel Bridges” category. Ancillary bridge
 components such as expansion dams, drains, scuppers, and pedestrian handrail may be
 fabricated in shops that are AISC certified as “Bridge and Highway Metal Component
 Manufacturers.”
 The fabricator shall provide a quality control plan to the Engineer for approval. This plan
 shall contain information concerning the fabricator's internal control process. Information
 concerning the contents of the quality control plan can be found in the FHWA Region Three,
 Structural Committee for Economic Fabrication's Guidelines for the Development of a Quality
 Control Plan. The plan shall be approved by the Division prior to the start of fabrication.
 Structural components designated on the plans or in the special provisions as “fracture
 critical” shall conform to the provisions of Section 12 of the ANSI/AASHTO/AWS Bridge
 Welding Code D1.5.
 Painting shall conform to the provisions of Section 688.
 615.1.2-Notice of Beginning of Work: The Contractor shall give the Engineer a minimum
 of two weeks notice prior to the beginning of work at the fabrication shop, so that inspection
 may be provided. No material shall be manufactured, or work done in the shop, before the
 Engineer has been so notified. Prior to beginning work, Engineer and Contractor
 representatives shall identify individuals who are responsible for the following functions:
 preparation, submittal, review, approval, and distribution of shop drawings; submittal and
 control of material test reports (MTRs). The Engineer will identify individuals or agents
 responsible for handling shop detail drawings, approving welding procedures, providing
 quality assurance, and accepting proposed repairs. Before work begins a prefabrication
 meeting may be held at the discretion of the Engineer or if requested by the Fabricator or
 Contractor.
 615.1.3-Inspection: Structural steel shall be inspected in the fabrication shop. The
 Contractor shall furnish the Engineer with a copy of all mill orders and shop lists showing heat
 numbers to be used for each piece. Mill test reports that document the chemical analysis and
 physical test results for each heat of steel to be used in the work shall also be furnished. Final
 approval of the material in the shop will not be given until the above data is approved.
 With the approval of the Engineer, certificates of compliance shall be furnished in lieu of
 mill test reports for material that normally is not supplied with mill test reports, and for items
 432
 
 such as fills, minor gusset plates and similar material when quantities are small and the material
 is taken from stock.
 Certified mill test reports for steels with specified minimum impact values shall include,
 in addition to other test results, the results of Charpy V-Notch impact tests. When fine grain
 practice is specified, the test report shall confirm that the material was so produced. Copies of
 mill orders shall be furnished at the time orders are placed with the manufacturer. Certified
 mill test reports and Certificates of Compliance shall be furnished prior to the start of
 fabrication of material covered by these reports. The Certificate of Compliance shall be signed
 by the manufacturer and shall certify that the material is in conformance with the specifications
 to which it has been manufactured.
 Material to be used shall be made available to the Engineer so that each piece can be
 examined. The Engineer shall have free access at all times to any portion of the fabrication
 shop where the material is stored or where work on the material is being performed.
 615.1.4-Inspector's Authority: The Inspector shall have the authority to reject materials
 or workmanship which do not fulfill the requirements of these Specifications. In cases of
 dispute, the Contractor may appeal to the Engineer, whose decision shall be final.
 Inspection at the shop is intended as a means of facilitating the work and avoiding error,
 and it is expressly understood that it will not relieve the Contractor of any responsibility in
 regard to defective material or workmanship and the necessity for replacing same.
 The acceptance of any material or finished members by the Inspector shall not be a bar to
 their subsequent rejection, if found defective. Rejected materials and workmanship shall be
 replaced as soon as practical or corrected by the Contractor.
 615.2-WORKING DRAWINGS:
 Working drawings must be submitted in accordance with section 105.2.
 615.2.1-Erection Drawings: The contractor shall submit drawings illustrating fully their
 proposed method of erection. The drawings shall show details of all falsework bents, bracings,
 guys, dead-men, lifting devices, and attachments to the bridge members: sequence of erection,
 location of cranes and barges, crane capacities, location of all lifting points on the bridge
 members, and weights of the members. The plans and drawings shall be complete in detail for
 all anticipated phases and conditions during erection. Design calculations, sealed by a West
 Virginia Registered Professional Engineer, shall be submitted by the Contractor to the
 Engineer seven days prior to commencing work. Receipt of plans, drawings and calculations
 does not constitute review or approval or relieve the contractor of their responsibility to
 satisfactorily design the erection plan. The design calculations shall demonstrate that
 allowable stresses for falsework and steel members being erected are not exceeded and that
 member capacities and final geometry shall be correct.
 When the designated concrete deck overhang exceeds 30 inches from the edge of the beam
 flange, the erection drawings submitted by the Contractor/fabricator shall include complete
 details of the forming and bracing for the overhang and shall transmit the concrete dead load
 to an area of the beam or stringer which will prevent distortion.
 615.2.2-Camber Diagram: A camber diagram shall be furnished to the Engineer by the
 Fabricator, showing the camber at each panel point in the cases of trusses or arch ribs, and at
 433
 
 the location of field splices and fractions of span length (¼ points minimum) in the cases of
 continuous beam and girders or rigid frames. The camber diagram shall show calculated
 cambers to be used in preassembly of the structure in accordance with Section 615.5.3.
 615.3-MATERIALS:
 615.3.1-Structural Steel:
 615.3.1.1-Quality: Steel shall be furnished according to the following specifications.
 The grade or grades of steel to be furnished shall be as shown on the plans or as specified.
 Material meeting equivalent AASHTO and ASTM specifications may be supplied under
 either specification. All steel for use in main load-carrying member components subject
 to tensile stress, including splice plates, shall conform to Zone 2 Charpy V-Notch Impact
 Test requirements of AASHTO M270.
 615.3.1.2-Certifications and verification: Fabricators of structural steel shall provide
 certified mill test reports (MTRs) for all steel materials used in fabrication. MTRs must
 originate from the producer of the material and not a supplier.
 615.3.1.3-High Performance Steel: Structural Steel designated on the plans as grades
 HPS 50W and HPS 70W shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M270/M270M04(or later version). All fabrication for grades HPS 50W and HPS 70W must conform to
 the current edition of the AASHTO/AWS D1.5 2008 Bridge Welding Code and by the
 latest edition of the AASHTO Guide Specification for Highway Bridge Fabrication with
 HPS 70W Steel. Only submerged arc welding (SAW) and shielded metal arc welding
 (SMAW) are permitted when welding grade HPS 70W steel.
 615.3.1.4-Non-Destructive Testing (NDT): All NDT shall be performed in
 accordance with the AASHTO/AWS D1.5 2008 Bridge Welding Code. Whenever
 magnetic particle testing (MT) is performed only the yoke technique will be allowed, as
 described in section 6.7.6.2 of AWS D1.5, modified to test using alternating current only.
 615.3.1.5-Weld procedure qualification: The procedure qualification test record
 (PQR) and proposed welding procedure specification (WPS) must be submitted to the
 Engineer for review and approval prior to the start of fabrication. In general, post weld
 heat treatment shall not be required. If proposed by the Contractor for production or repair
 welding, such post weld heat treatment must be included in the procedure qualification
 testing, or qualified by additional PQR’s, as appropriate.
 615.3.2-High-Strength Fasteners: Bolts, nuts, and washers shall conform to Section
 709.24 and shall be mechanically galvanized in accordance with ASTM B695. Hot-dip
 galvanizing or coating with a zinc rich primer may be used only when specified by the Contract
 documents.
 615.3.2.1-Weathering Steel Bridges: High strength fasteners shall meet Section
 709.24 and shall be Type 3 (weathering steel), per ASTM A325. High strength fasteners
 used in regions of the structure that require painting shall be Type 1 or 3, per ASTM A325,
 and mechanically galvanized in accordance with ASTM B695.
 434
 
 615.3.3-Welded Stud Shear Connectors: When design requires the use of welded stud
 shear connectors, they shall meet the requirements of Section 7 of the ANSI/AASHTO/AWS
 D1.5, Bridge Welding Code.
 The connectors shall be attached in the field. With the exception of worker fall protection
 as described in section 615.3.3.1, no shop installation of welded stud shear connectors shall be
 permitted. The field installation of the welded stud shear connectors shall not commence prior
 to the installation of the deck forms in the area surrounding the welded stud shear connectors.
 Overhanging deck forms may be installed after the welded stud shear connectors are installed.
 The welded stud shear connectors and deck forms shall be installed in a sequence that permits
 workers access through the deck area without walking through installed welded stud shear
 connectors.
 615.3.3.1- Shear Studs for Worker Fall Protection: The Contractor may shop install
 shear studs to the beam or girder for the purpose of attaching a worker fall protection
 system. Only the shear studs required to properly install and support the worker fall
 protection system may be installed in the shop. The remaining shear studs at this location
 for an individual transverse row across the beam or girder flange may also be installed in
 the shop. All shop installed shear studs shall be shown on the drawings.
 615.3.4-Steel Forgings and Steel Shafting:
 615.3.4.1-Steel Forgings: Shall conform to 709.13.1.
 615.3.4.2-Cold Finished Carbon Steel Shafting: Shall conform to 709.13.2.
 615.3.5-Steel Castings: Shall conform to 709.14.
 615.3.6-Iron Castings: Shall conform to 709.10.
 615.3.7-Coating of Anchor Bolts, Nuts and Washers: All anchor bolts, nuts and washers
 shall be hot dip galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M232 after fabrication.
 615.4-FABRICATION:
 615.4.1-Identification and traceability: Ensure that all structural steel materials are
 identified in accordance with ASTM A6. Maintain heat numbers on all primary bridge
 materials until the material is permanently joined into a piece-marked member. Use low stress
 steel die stamps or a firmly attached tag. Maintain documentation of all primary member
 material for shop records and provide this documentation to the Quality Assurance Inspector
 (QAI) for the Engineer’s records.
 615.4.2-Storage of Materials: Steel members must not be gouged, scratched, dented, or
 allowed to rub against other members that would result in damage to the steel member or
 coating. Members shall be handled using softeners and slings instead of chokers and chains.
 Store members in the fabrication shop and on the project site in such a manner as to be kept
 free and clean of all foreign substances such as grease, oil, mortar and concrete splatter , chalk
 and crayon marks, paint, and dirt. All storage must be above ground and sloped to allow free
 drainage of melted snow, rainwater, and dew. If the members are stored for periods longer
 435
 
 than three months, the members must be placed on metal supports. For a period of storage up
 to three months, members may be placed on clean, untreated wood timbers. Do not allow
 treated lumber or treated timber to contact steel members.
 Store plate girders and rolled beams with the web in the upright position. The members
 may be stacked on metal or wood supports provided, as noted above; individual members must
 be kept separate. Under no circumstances shall members be nested together or bundled.
 615.4.3-Plates:
 615.4.3.1-Direction of Rolling: Unless otherwise shown on the plans, steel plates for
 main members and splice plates for flanges and main tension members, not secondary
 members, shall be cut and fabricated so that the primary direction of rolling is parallel to
 the direction of the main tensile and/or compressive stresses.
 615.4.3.2-Plate Cut Edges:
 615.4.3.2.1-Edge Planeing: For primary members more than 5/8 inch in thickness,
 3/16 inch shall be planed off sheared edges that remain exposed after fabrication.
 615.4.3.2.2-Thermal Cutting:
 Shall conform to the requirements of the
 ANSI/AASHTO/AWS Bridge Welding Code D1.5.
 615.4.3.2.3-Visual Inspection and Repair of Plate Cut Edges: Shall conform to the
 requirements of ANSI/AASHTO/AWS Bridge Welding code D1.5.
 615.4.3.3-Bent Plates:
 615.4.3.3.1General: Unwelded, load-carrying, rolled-steel plates to be bent shall
 conform to the following:
 They shall be so taken from the stock plates that the bend line will be at right angles to
 the direction of rolling, except that cold-bent ribs for orthotropic-deck bridges may be bent
 with bend lines in the direction of rolling if permitted by the Engineer.
 Before bending, the corners of the plates shall be rounded to a radius of approximately
 1/16 inch (2 mm) throughout the portion of the plate at which the bending is to occur.
 615.4.3.3.2-Cold Bending: Do not cold bend fracture critical materials. Cold bending
 shall be such that no cracking of the plate occurs. Visibly inspect all load points, and check
 any suspected damage by magnetic particle testing. Material with non-specified kinks or
 sharp bends, cracks, large dents, or visible reduction of section shall be rejected. Minimum
 bend radii, measured to the concave face of the metal, are shown in table 615.4.3.3.2.
 
 436
 
 TABLE 615.4.3.3.2
 Minimum Cold-Bending Radii
 Radius in Terms of Plate Thickness,
 Material
 t mm (in.)
 ASTM
 Specification
 A36/A36M
 A572/A572M
 A709/A709M
 A572/A572M
 A588/A588M
 A709/A709M
 A572/A572M
 A709/A709M
 
 Grade
 --290 (42)
 250 (36)
 345 (50)
 --345 (50), 345W (50W)
 380 (55)
 HPS 485 (70W)
 
 t<25 (1)
 
 25 (1) <t<50 (2)
 
 50 (2)<t
 
 1.5t
 
 1.5t
 
 2.0t
 
 1.5t
 
 2.0t
 
 2.5t
 
 1.5t
 
 2.5t
 
 3.0t
 
 Allowance for springback of Grades 100 and 100W steels should be about three times that
 for Grade 36 steel. For break press forming, the lower die span should be at least 16 times
 the plate thickness. Multiple hits are advisable.
 615.4.3.3.3-Hot Bending: If a radius shorter than the minimum specified for cold
 bending is essential, the plates shall be bent hot at a temperature not greater than shown in
 Table 615.4.7.
 615.4.4-Fit of Stiffeners: Bearing stiffeners for girders and stiffeners intended as supports
 for concentrated loads shall have full bearing (either milled, ground or on weldable steel in
 compression areas of flanges, welded when shown on the plans or specified) on the flanges to
 which they transmit load or from which they receive load and shall meet the requirements of
 paragraph 3.5.1.9 of the 2008 ANSI/AASHTO/AWS Bridge Welding Code D1.5.
 Intermediate stiffeners not intended to support concentrated loads, unless shown or specified
 otherwise, shall have a tight fit against both flanges which is defined as having a gap of no
 more than 1/16 inch between stiffener and flange. Diaphragm, crossframes or floorbeam
 connection plates shall be welded to both top and bottom flanges.
 615.4.5-Abutting Joints: When specified by the contract plans, butting joints in
 compression members of trusses and columns shall be milled or saw-cut to give a square joint
 and uniform bearing. At other joints, not required to be faced, the opening shall not exceed
 3/8 inch (10 mm).
 615.4.6-Facing of Bearing Surfaces: The surface finish of bearing and base plates and
 other bearing surfaces that are to come in contact with each other or with concrete shall meet
 the ANSI surface roughness requirements as defined in ANSI B46.1, Surface Roughness,
 Waviness and Lay, Part I:
 
 437
 
 Steel slabs
 Heavy plates in contact in shoes to be welded
 Milled ends of compression members, milled
 or ground ends of stiffeners and fillers
 Bridge rollers and rockers
 Pins and pin holes
 Sliding bearings
 
 ANSI 2,000
 ANSI 1,000
 ANSI 500
 ANSI 250
 ANSI 125
 ANSI 125
 
 615.4.7-Straightening Material: The straightening of plates, angles, other shapes, and
 built-up members, when permitted by the Engineer, shall be done by methods that will not
 produce fracture or other injury to the metal. Straighten bridge member parts, such as plates,
 angles or shapes, before the parts are assembled. If members are cold straightened, follow the
 applicable provisions of Section 615.4.3.3.2. Distorted members shall be straightened by
 mechanical means or, if approved by the Engineer, by carefully planned procedures and
 supervised application of a limited amount of localized heat, except that heat straightening of
 Grades 70W, 100 and 100W steel members shall be done only under rigidly controlled
 procedures, each application subject to the approval of the Engineer. In no case shall the
 maximum temperature exceed values shown in Table 615.4.7.
 Table 615.4.7
 Maximum Heat Straightening and
 Hot Bending Temperature {ENGLISH}
 Grade 70W > 6" from weld
 1,075° F
 Grade 70W < 6” from weld
 900° F
 Grade 100 or 100W > 6” from weld
 1,125° F
 Grade 100 or 100W < 6” from weld
 950° F
 In all other steels, the temperature of the heated area shall not exceed 1,200° F as controlled
 by temperature indicating crayons.
 Parts to be heat straightened shall be substantially free of stress and from external forces,
 except stresses resulting from mechanical means used in conjunction with the application of
 heat.
 Evidence of fracture following straightening of a bend or buckle will be cause for rejection
 of the damaged piece.
 615.4.8-Bolt Holes:
 615.4.8.1-Holes for High-Strength Bolts and Unfinished Bolts:
 615.5.5 for bolts included in designation "Unfinished Bolts").
 
 (See Section
 
 615.4.8.1.1-General: All holes for bolts shall be either punched or drilled. Material
 forming parts of a member composed of not more than five thicknesses of metal may be
 punched 1/16 inch (2 mm) larger than the nominal diameter of the bolts whenever the
 thickness of the material is not greater than ¾ inch (20 mm) for structural carbon steel, 5/8
 inch (16 mm) for high-strength steel or ½ inch (12 mm) for quenched and tempered alloy
 steel, unless subpunching and reaming are required under Section 615.4.8.5.
 
 438
 
 When there are more than five thicknesses or when any of the main material is thicker
 than ¾ inch (20 mm) for structural carbon steel, 5/8 inch (16 mm) for high-strength steel,
 or ½ inch (12 mm) for quenched and tempered alloy steel, all holes shall either be subdrilled
 and reamed or drilled full size.
 When required, all holes shall be either subpunched or subdrilled (subdrilled if
 thickness limitation governs) 3/16 inch (5 mm) smaller and, after assembling reamed 1/16
 inch (2 mm) larger or drilled full size to 1/16 inch (2 mm) larger than the nominal diameter
 of the bolts.
 When shown on the plans, enlarged or slotted holes are allowed with high-strength
 bolts.
 615.4.8.1.2-Punched Holes: The diameter of the die shall not exceed the diameter of
 the punch by more than 1/16 inch (2 mm). If any holes must be enlarged to admit the bolts,
 such holes shall be reamed. Holes must be clean cut without torn or ragged edges. Do not
 punch holes full size in primary members. Apply these maximum thickness limits when
 punching: Grade 36-3/4 inch; Grade 50/50W-5/8 inch; Grade HPS 70W-1/2 inch.
 615.4.8.1.3-Reamed or Drilled Holes: Shall be cylindrical, perpendicular to the
 member, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 615.4.8.1.1 as to size. Where
 practical, reamers shall be directed by mechanical means. Burrs on the outside surfaces
 shall be removed. Reaming and drilling shall be done with twist drills, twist reamers or
 rotobroach cutters. Connecting parts requiring reamed or drilled holes shall be assembled
 and securely held while being reamed or drilled and shall be match marked before
 disassembling. Parts shall not be held by welding.
 615.4.8.1.4-Accuracy of Holes: Holes not more than 1/32 inch (1 mm) larger in
 diameter than the true decimal equivalent of the nominal diameter that may result from a
 drill or reamer of the nominal diameter are considered acceptable. The slightly conical
 hole that naturally results from punching operations is considered acceptable. The width
 of slotted holes which are produced by thermal cutting or a combination of drilling or
 punching and thermal cutting shall be not more than 1/32 inch (1 mm) greater than the
 nominal width. The thermal cut surface shall be ground smooth. Do not thermally cut
 holes in quenched and tempered steel.
 615.4.8.2-Accuracy of Hole Group:
 615.4.8.2.1-Accuracy Before Reaming: All holes punched full size, subpunched, or
 subdrilled shall be so accurately punched so that after assembling (before any reaming is
 done) a cylindrical pin 1/8 inch (3 mm) smaller in diameter than the nominal size of the
 punched hole may be entered perpendicular to the face of the member, without drifting, in
 at least 75 percent of the contiguous holes in the same plane. If the requirement is not
 fulfilled, the improperly punched pieces will be rejected. If any hole will not pass a pin
 3/16 inch (5 mm) smaller in diameter than the nominal size of the punched hole, this will
 be cause for rejection.
 
 439
 
 615.4.8.2.2-Accuracy after Reaming: When holes are reamed or drilled, 85 percent
 of the holes in any contiguous group shall, after reaming or drilling, show no offset greater
 than 1/32 inch (1 mm) between adjacent thickness of metal.
 All steel templates shall have hardened steel bushings in holes accurately dimensioned
 from the centerlines of the connection as inscribed on the template. The centerlines shall
 be used in locating accurately the template from the milled or scribed ends of the members.
 615.4.8.3-Numerically-Controlled Drilled Field Connections: In lieu of subsized
 holes and reaming while assembled, or drilling holes full-size while assembled, the
 Contractor shall have the option to drill or punch bolt holes full-size in unassembled pieces
 and/or connections including templates for use with matching subsized and reamed holes
 by means of suitable numerically controlled (N/C) drilling or punching equipment. Fullsize punched holes shall meet the requirements of Section 615.4.8.1.
 If N/C drilling or punching equipment is used, the Contractor, by means of check
 assemblies, will be required to demonstrate the accuracy of this drilling or punching
 procedure in accordance with the provisions of Section 615.5.3.3.
 Holes drilled or punched by N/C equipment shall be drilled or punched to appropriate
 size either through individual pieces, or drilled through any combination of pieces held
 tightly together. Pieces shall not be held by welding.
 615.4.8.4-Holes for Ribbed Bolts, Turned Bolts, or Other Approved Bearing Type
 Bolts: All holes for ribbed bolts, turned bolts, or other approved bearing-type bolts shall
 be subpunched or subdrilled 3/16 inch (5 mm) smaller than the nominal diameter of the
 bolt and reamed when assembled, or drilled to a steel template or, after assembling, drilled
 from the solid at the option of the Fabricator. In any case the finished holes shall provide
 a driving fit.
 615.4.8.5-Preparation of Field Connections: Holes in all field connections and field
 splices of main members of trusses, arches, continuous beam spans, bents, towers (each
 face), plate girders, and rigid frames shall be subpunched or subdrilled and subsequently
 reamed while assembled or drilled full size to a steel template. Holes for field splices of
 rolled beam stringers continuous over floor beams or cross frames may be drilled full size
 unassembled to a steel template. All holes for floor beams or cross frames may be drilled
 full size unassembled to a steel template. All holes for floor beam and stringer field end
 connections shall be subpunched and reamed while assembled or drilled full size to a steel
 template. Reaming or drilling full size of field connection holes through a steel template
 shall be done after the template has been located with utmost care as to position and angle
 and firmly bolted in place. Templates used for reaming matching members, or the opposite
 faces of a single member, shall be exact duplicates. Templates used for connections on
 like parts or members shall be so accurately located that the parts or members are duplicates
 and require no match-marking.
 For any connection, in lieu of subpunching and reaming or subdrilling and reaming,
 the fabricator may, at his option, drill holes full size with all thicknesses or material
 assembled in proper position.
 
 440
 
 615.4.9-Pins and Rollers:
 615.4.9.1-General: Pins and rollers shall be accurately turned to the dimensions shown
 on the drawings and shall be straight, smooth, and free from flaws. Pins and rollers more
 than 9 inches (225 mm) in diameter shall be forged rollers and annealed. Pins and rollers
 9 inches (225 mm) or less in diameter may be either forged and annealed or cold-finished
 carbon-steel shafting.
 In pins larger than 9 inches (225 mm) in diameter, a hole not less than 2 inches in (50
 mm) diameter shall be bored full length along the axis after the forging has been allowed
 to cool to a temperature below the critical range, under suitable conditions to prevent
 damage by too rapid cooling, and before being annealed.
 615.4.9.2-Boring Pin Holes: Pin holes shall be bored true to the specified diameter,
 smooth and straight, at right angles with the axis of the member and parallel with each
 other unless otherwise required. The final surface shall be produced by a finishing cut.
 The diameter of the pin hole shall not exceed that of the pin by more than 1/50 0.015
 inch (500 μm) for pins 5 inches (125 mm) or less in diameter, or by 1/32 inch (1 mm) for
 larger pins.
 The distance outside to outside of end holes in tension members and inside to inside of
 end holes in compression members shall not vary from that specified more than 1/32 inch
 (1 mm). Boring of pin holes in built-up members shall be done after the member has been
 assembled.
 615.4.9.3-Threads for Bolts and Pins: Threads for all bolts and pins for structural
 steel construction shall conform to the Unified Standard Series UNC ANSI B1.1, Class 2A
 for external threads and Class 2B for internal threads, except that pin ends having a
 diameter of 1-3/8 inches (36 mm) or more shall be threaded six threads to the inch (25
 mm).
 615.4.10-Eyebars: Pin holes may be thermal cut at least 2 inches (50 mm) smaller in
 diameter than the finished pin diameter. All eyebars that are to be placed side by side in the
 structure shall be securely fastened together in the order that they will be placed on the pin and
 bored at both ends while so clamped. Eyebars shall be packed and match-marked for shipment
 and erection. All identifying marks shall be stamped with steel stencils on the edge of one
 head of each member after fabrication is completed so as to be visible when the bars are nested
 in place on the structure. Steel die stamps shall be low stress type.
 The eyebars shall be straight and free from twists and the pin holes shall be accurately
 located on the centerline of the bar. The inclination of any bar to the plane of the truss shall
 not 0.5 percent.
 The edges of eyebars that lie between the transverse centerline of their pin holes shall be
 cut simultaneously with two mechanically operated torches abreast of each other, guided by a
 substantial template, in such a manner as to prevent distortion of the plates.
 615.4.11-Annealing and Stress Relieving: Structural members which are indicated in the
 contract to be annealed or normalized shall have finished machining, boring, and straightening
 done subsequent to heat treatment. Normalizing and annealing (full annealing) shall be as
 defined in ASTM A941. The temperatures shall be maintained uniformly throughout the
 441
 
 furnace during the heating and cooling so that the temperature at no two points on the member
 will differ by more than 100° F (38° C) at any one time.
 Members of Grades 100/100W or Grade 70W (690/690W or Grade 480W) steels shall not
 be annealed or normalized and shall be stress relieved only with the approval of the Engineer.
 A record of each furnace charge shall identify the pieces in the charge and show the
 temperatures and schedule actually used. Proper instruments, including recording pyrometers,
 shall be provided for determining at any time the temperatures of members in the furnace. The
 records of the treatment operation shall be available to and meet the approval of the Engineer.
 The holding temperature for stress relieving Grades 100/100W and Grade 70W (690/690W
 and Grade 480W) steels shall not exceed 1,125° F and 1075° F (610° C and 580° C,
 respectively.
 Members, such as bridge shoes, pedestals, or other parts that are built up by welding
 sections of plate together shall be stress relieved in accordance with the ANSI/AASHTO/AWS
 Bridge Welding Code D1.5 when required by the plans, specifications, or special provisions
 governing the contract.
 615.4.12-Curved Girders:
 615.4.12.1-General: Flanges of curved, welded girders may be cut to the radii shown
 on the plans or curved by applying heat as specified in the succeeding Sections providing
 the radii is not less than allowed by Article 10.15.2 of Division I of the AASHTO Standard
 Specifications for Highway Bridges.
 615.4.12.2-Heat Curving Rolled Beams and Welded Girders
 615.4.12.2.1-Materials: BLANK
 615.4.12.2.2-Type of Heating: Beams and girders may be curved by either continuous
 or V-type heating as approved by the Engineer. For the continuous method, a strip or
 intermittent strips along the edge of the top and bottom flange shall be heated
 simultaneously depending on flange widths and thicknesses; the strip shall be of sufficient
 width and temperature to obtain the required curvature. For V-type heating, the top and
 bottom flanges shall be heated in truncated triangular or wedge-shaped areas having their
 base along the flange edge and spaced at regular intervals along each flange; the spacing
 and temperature shall be as required to obtain the required curvature, and heating shall
 progress along the top and bottom flange at approximately the same rate.
 For V-type heating, the apex of the truncated triangular area applied to the inside flange
 surface shall terminate just before the juncture of the web and the flange is reached. To
 avoid unnecessary web distortion, special care shall be taken when heating the inside flange
 surfaces (the surfaces that intersect the web) so that heat is not applied directly to the web.
 When the radius of curvature is 1,000 feet (300 m) or more, the apex of the truncated
 triangular heating pattern applied to the outside flange surface shall extend to the juncture
 of the flange and web. When the radius of curvature is less than 1,000 feet (300 m), the
 apex of the truncated triangle heating pattern applied to the outside flange surface shall
 extend past the web for a distance equal to one-eighth of the flange or 3 inches (75 mm),
 whichever is less. The truncated triangular pattern shall have an included angle of
 approximately 15 to 30 degrees, but the base of the triangle shall not exceed 10 inches (250
 442
 
 mm). Variations in the patterns prescribed above may be made with the approval of the
 Engineer.
 For both types of heating, the flange edges to be heated are those that will be on the
 inside of the horizontal curve after cooling. Heating both inside and outside flange surfaces
 is only mandatory when the flange thickness is 1¼ inches (32 mm) or greater, in which
 case, the two surfaces shall be heated concurrently. The maximum temperature shall be
 prescribed as follows.
 615.4.12.2.3-Temperature: Bring the steel within the planned temperature as rapidly
 as possible without overheating. The heat-curving operation shall be conducted in such a
 manner that the temperature of the steel does not exceed 1200° F for grade 36 and grade
 50 steel, and 1100° F for grades HPS 70W and HPS 100/100W steel as measured by
 temperature indicating crayons, pyrometers, or infrared non-contact thermometers.
 Measure the temperature 5-10 seconds after the heating flame leaves the area to be tested.
 The girder shall not be artificially cooled until after naturally cooling to 600° F. Cooling
 with dry compressed air after the steel has cooled to below 600° F is permitted. Do not
 cool the steel with water or mist. Allow steel to cool below 250° F before applying another
 set of heating patterns. Do not handle, support, or load the member in a manner that causes
 material to yield without the application of heat.
 615.4.12.2.4-Position for Heating: The girder may be heat-curved with the web in
 either a vertical or a horizontal position. If the radius is less than 1000 feet, heat curve only
 with the web in the horizontal position or preload to induce stress prior to heating. Do not
 heat curve portions of members where the required radius of curvature is less than 1000
 feet and the flange width exceeds 30 inches. When curved in the vertical position, the
 girder must be braced or supported in such a manner that the tendency of the girder to
 deflect laterally during the heat-curving process will not cause the girder to overturn.
 When curved in the horizontal position, the girder must be supported near its ends and
 at intermediate points, if required, to obtain a uniform curvature; the bending stress in the
 flanges due to the dead weight of the girder must not exceed the usual allowable design
 stress. When the girder is positioned horizontally for heating, intermediate safety catch
 blocks must be maintained at the mid-length of the girder within 2 inches (50 mm) of the
 flanges at all times during the heating process to guard against a sudden sag due to plastic
 flange buckling.
 615.4.12.2.5-Sequence of Operations: The girder shall be heat-curved in the
 fabrication shop before it is painted. The heat curving operation may be conducted either
 before or after all the required welding of transverse intermediate stiffeners is completed.
 However, unless provisions are made for girder shrinkage, connection plates and bearing
 stiffeners shall be located and attached after heat curving. If longitudinal stiffeners are
 required, they shall be heat-curved or oxygen-cut separately and then welded to the curved
 girder. When cover plates are to be attached to rolled beams, they may be attached before
 heat curving if the total thickness of one flange and cover plate is less than 2½ inches (37.5
 mm) and the radius of the curvature is greater than 1,000 feet (30 meters). For other rolled
 beams with cover plates, the beams must be heat-curved before the cover plates are
 attached; cover plates must be either heat curved or oxygen-cut separately and then welded
 to the curved beam.
 443
 
 615.4.12.2.6-Camber: Girders shall be cambered before heat curving. Camber for
 rolled beams may be obtained by heat-cambering methods approved by the Engineer. For
 plate girders, the web shall be cut to the prescribed camber with suitable allowance for
 shrinkage due to cutting, welding, and heat curving. However, subject to the approval of
 the Engineer, moderate deviations from specified camber may be corrected by a carefully
 supervised application of heat.
 615.4.12.2.7-Measurement of Curvature and Camber: Horizontal curvature and
 vertical camber shall be measured for final acceptance after all welding and heating
 operations are completed and the flanges have cooled to a uniform temperature. Horizontal
 curvature shall be checked with the girder in the vertical position.
 615.4.13-BLANK
 615.4.14-Full Size Tests: When full size tests of fabricated structural members or eyebars
 are required by the contract, the Contractor shall provide suitable facilities, material,
 supervision, and labor necessary for making and recording the required tests. The members
 tested in accordance with the contract shall be paid for in accordance with Section 615.7.2.
 615.4.15-Marking and Shipping: Each member shall be painted or marked with an
 erection mark for identification and an erection diagram showing these marks shall be
 furnished to the Engineer.
 The Contractor shall furnish to the Engineer as many copies of material orders, shipping
 statements, and erection diagrams as the Engineer may direct. The weights of the individual
 members shall be shown on the statements. Members weighing more than 3 tons (2.75 Mg)
 shall have the weights marked thereon. Structural members shall be loaded on trucks or railcars
 in such a manner that they may be transported and unloaded at their destination without being
 excessively stressed, deformed, or otherwise damaged.
 High strength bolts, nuts, and washers shall be packaged as required by Section 709.24.9.1.
 Pins and small parts shall be shipped in boxes, crates, kegs, or barrels, but the gross weight of
 any package shall not exceed 300 pounds (136 kg). A list and description of the contained
 material shall be plainly marked on the outside of each shipping container.
 615.5-ASSEMBLY:
 615.5.1-Bolting: Surfaces of metal in contact shall be clean before assembling. The parts
 of a member shall be assembled, well pinned, and firmly drawn together before drilling,
 reaming, or bolting is commenced. Assembled pieces shall be taken apart for the removal of
 burrs and shavings produced by the operation. The member shall be free from twists, bends
 and other deformation.
 The drifting done during assembling shall be only such as to bring the parts into position
 and not sufficient to enlarge the holes or distort the metal.
 615.5.2-Welded Connections: Surfaces and edges to be welded shall be smooth, uniform,
 clean and free of defects which would adversely affect the quality of the weld. Edge
 preparation shall be done in accordance with ANSI/AASHTO/AWS Bridge Welding Code
 D1.5.
 444
 
 615.5.3-Preassembly of Field Connections:
 615.5.3.1-General: Field connections of main members of trusses, arches, continuous
 beams, plate girders, bents, towers and rigid frames shall be preassembles prior to erection
 to verify the geometry of the completed structure of unit and to verify or prepare field
 splices. Attaining accurate geometry is the responsibility of the Contractor and they shall
 propose and appropriate method of preassembly and submit the plan to the Engineer. The
 method and details of preassembly shall be consistent with the erection procedure shown
 on the erection plans and camber diagrams prepared by the Contractor and submitted to the
 Engineer. Receipt of plans, drawings and calculations does not constitute review or
 approval or relieve the contractor of their responsibility to satisfactorily design the erection
 plan. As a minimum, the preassembly procedure shall consist of assembling three
 contiguous panels accurately adjusted for line and camber.
 Successive assemblies shall consist of at least one section or panel of the previous
 assembly (repositioned if necessary and adequately pinned to assure accurate alignment)
 plus two or more sections or panels added at the advancing end. In the case of structures
 longer than 150 feet (45 meters), each assembly shall be not less than 150 feet (45 meters)
 long regardless of the length of individual continuous panels or sections. At the option of
 the fabricator, sequence of assembly may start from any location in the structure and
 proceed in one or both directions so long as the preceding requirements are satisfied.
 615.5.3.2-Bolted Connections: For bolted connections, holes shall be prepared as
 outlined in Section 615.4.8. Where specified by the contract documents, major
 components shall be assembled with milled ends of compression members in full bearing
 and then shall have their subsized holes reamed to the specified size while the connections
 are assembled.
 615.5.3.3-Check Assembly-Numerically Controlled Drilling: When the Contractor
 elects to use numerically controlled drilling, a check assembly shall be required for each
 major structural type, unless otherwise designated on the plans or in the special provisions,
 and shall consist of at least three contiguous shop sections or, in a truss, all members in at
 least three contiguous panels but not less than the number of panels associated with three
 contiguous chord lengths (i.e., length between field splices). Check assemblies should be
 based on the proposed order of erection, joints in bearing, special complex points, and
 similar considerations. Special points could be the portals of skewed trusses, for example.
 More than one check assembly may be required by the Engineer.
 The check assemblies shall include the first sections of each major structural type to be
 fabricated and additional assemblies as required by the Engineer.
 Shop assemblies other than the check assemblies will not be required.
 If the check assembly fails in some specific manner to demonstrate that the required
 accuracy is being obtained, further check assemblies may be required by the Engineer for
 which there shall be no additional cost to the Division.
 615.5.3.4-Field Welded Connections: For field welded connections the fit of
 members including the proper space between abutting surfaces shall be prepared and
 verified with the segment preassembled in accordance with Section 615.5.3.1.
 
 445
 
 615.5.3.5-Assembly Verification: Each assembly, including camber, alignment,
 accuracy of holes, and fit of milled or field welded joints, shall be approved by the Engineer
 before reaming or drilling is commenced or before an N/C drilled check assembly or field
 welded assembly is dismantled.
 615.5.4-Match Marking: Connecting parts preassembled in the shop to assure proper fit
 in the field shall be match-marked, and a diagram showing such marks shall be furnished to
 the Engineer.
 615.5.5-Connections Using Unfinished, Turned or Ribbed Bolts:
 615.5.5.1-General: When unfinished bolts are specified, the bolts shall be unfinished,
 turned, or ribbed bolts, conforming to the requirements of Grade A Bolts of the
 Specification for Low-Carbon Steel Externally and Internally Threaded Standard
 Fasteners, ASTM A 307. Bolts shall have single self-locking nuts or double nuts unless
 otherwise shown on the plans or in the Special Provisions. Beveled washers shall be used
 where bearing faces have a slope of more than 1:20 with respect to a plane normal to the
 bolt axis. The requirements of this Section do not pertain to the use of high-strength bolts.
 Bolted connections using high-strength bolts shall conform to Section 615.5.6.
 615.5.5.2-Turned Bolts: The surface of the body of turned bolts shall meet the ANSI
 roughness rating value of 125. Heads and nuts shall be hexagonal with standard
 dimensions for bolts of the nominal size specified or the next larger nominal size. Diameter
 of threads shall be equal to the body of the bolt or the nominal diameter of the bolt
 specified. Holes for turned bolts shall be carefully reamed with bolts furnished to provide
 for a tight driving fit. Threads shall be entirely outside of the holes. A washer shall be
 provided under the nut.
 615.5.5.3-Ribbed Bolts: The body of ribbed bolts shall be of an approved form with
 continuous longitudinal ribs. The diameter of the body measured on a circle through the
 points of the ribs shall be 5/64 inch (2 mm) greater than the nominal diameter specified for
 the bolts.
 Ribbed bolts shall be furnished with round heads conforming to ANSI B 18.5 unless
 otherwise specified. Nuts shall be hexagonal, either recessed or with a washer of suitable
 thickness. Ribbed bolts shall make a driving fit with the holes. The hardness of the ribs
 shall be such that the ribs do not mash down enough to permit the bolts to turn in the holes
 during tightening. If for any reason the bolt twists before drawing tight, the hole shall be
 carefully reamed and an oversized bolt used as a replacement.
 615.5.6-Connections Using High-Strength Bolts:
 615.5.6.1-General: This specification covers the assembly of structural connections
 using high-strength bolts and nuts with hardened washers where initial tension in the bolt
 produces friction on the contact surfaces of the connected pieces sufficient in magnitude to
 resist shear.
 615.5.6.2-Bolted Parts: Surfaces of bolted parts in contact with the bolt head and nut
 shall not have a slope of more than 1 to 20 with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis.
 446
 
 Bolted parts shall fit solidly together when assembled and shall not be separated by gaskets
 or any other interposed compressible material. Holes may be punched, subpunched,
 reamed or drilled and shall be of nominal diameter not more than 1/16 inch (2 mm) in
 excess of the nominal bolt diameter.
 When assembled, all joint surfaces, including those adjacent to the washers, shall be
 free of dirt, oil, loose scale, burrs, pits, and other defects that would prevent solid seating
 of the parts. All bolted surfaces shall be painted in accordance with Section 688.
 615.5.6.3-Installation: Fasteners shall be protected from dirt and moisture at the job
 site. Only the fasteners anticipated to be installed and tightened during a work shift shall
 be removed from protected storage. Fasteners not used shall be returned to protected
 storage at the end of the shift. Lot identification of all components shall be maintained at
 all times. Galvanized and zinc coated nuts shall be checked to verify that a visible lubricant
 is on the threads and nut faces. Fasteners shall not be cleaned of lubricant that is present
 in the delivered condition. Where galvanized fasteners must be tensioned by turning the
 bolt head, a visible lubricant that meets the requirements of AASHTO M 164, shall be
 applied to the washer that will be placed under the bolt head. The lubricant may be applied
 to the washer by the manufacturer prior to shipment, by the fabricator at the fabrication
 shop, or by the erector in the field. Fasteners which have accumulated rust, dirt or have
 been wet, shall be cleaned and relubricated, prior to installation. Bolt, nut and washer
 combinations as installed shall be from the same rotational-capacity lot.
 A tension measuring device and torque wrench, suitable to the Engineer, shall be
 provided and maintained by the Contractor at all job sites where high-strength fasteners are
 being installed. The tension measuring device shall be used to confirm: (1) the suitability
 to satisfy the requirement of Table 615.5.6.3 A of the completed fastener assembly,
 including lubricant, to be used in the work, (2) rotational capacity testing requirements,
 and (3) that the bolting crew understands proper installation procedures. The tension
 measuring device and torque wrench shall be calibrated by an approved testing agency at
 least yearly. Documentation of calibration shall be provided to the Engineer.
 Immediately prior to installation in the fabrication shop or on the project site, all highstrength fasteners shall be subjected to rotational-capacity testing by the fabricator or the
 contractor. Testing shall be in accordance with Section 709.24.5 and shall be conducted at
 a frequency of two assemblies per rotational-capacity lot number as identified on the
 shipping containers. Test results shall meet the requirements of Section 709.24.5. When
 fasteners have been cleaned and relubricated, the rotational-capacity testing, on the affected
 fasteners, shall be reconducted. The Engineer may request additional tests as necessary to
 provide assurance of product compliance.
 Bolts shall be installed with a hardened washer under the nut or bolt head, whichever
 is the element turned in tightening. A flat washer may be used when the abutting surface
 adjacent to the bolt head or nut does not have a slope of more than 1 to 20 with respect to
 a plane normal to the bolt axis, a smooth beveled washer shall be used to compensate for
 the lack of parallelism.
 The threaded end of bolts shall be placed on the inside, where practicable, to protect
 them from the weather.
 
 447
 
 All fasteners shall be tightened to give at least the required minimum bolt tension
 shown in Table 615.5.6.3 A on completion of the joint. Tightening shall be done by the
 Turn-of-Nut Method.
 TABLE 615.5.6.3 A
 FASTENER TENSION {ENGLISH}
 Required Minimum
 Bolt Size (inches)
 Fastener Tension (kips)
 ½
 12
 5/8
 19
 ¾
 28
 7/8
 39
 1
 51
 1-1/8
 56
 1¼
 71
 1-3/8
 85
 1½
 103
 TABLE 615.5.6.3 A
 FASTENER TENSION {METRIC}
 Required Minimum
 Bolt Size (mm)
 Fastener Tension (kN)
 M16
 91
 M20
 142
 M22
 176
 M24
 205
 M27
 276
 M30
 326
 M36
 475
 Impact wrenches shall be of adequate capacity and sufficiently supplied with air to
 perform the required tightening in approximately 10 seconds. Tightening may be done by
 turning the bolt while the nut is prevented from rotating when it is impractical to turn the
 nut.
 A representative sample of not less than three bolt, nut and washer assemblies of each
 diameter, length, and grade to be used in the work shall be checked at the start of work, by
 the contractor, in a device capable of indicating bolt tension. The test shall demonstrate
 that the method for estimating snug tight condition, and controlling the turns from snug
 tight to be used by the bolting crew will develop a tension at least 5 percent greater than
 the tension required by Table 615.5.6.3 A. All additional fasteners (bolts, nuts, and
 washers) necessary for inspection and testing shall be provided by the Contractor as
 required by Section 105.5.
 Bolts shall be installed in all holes of the connection and brought to "snug tight"
 condition. Snug tight is defined as that tightness which exists when the plies of the joint
 
 448
 
 are in firm contact and a tension is induced in the bolts of approximately 40-50 percent of
 the required tension specified in Table 615.5.6.3 A.
 Snug tightening shall progress systematically from the most rigid part of the connection
 to the free edge, and then the bolts of the connection shall be again retightened to snug tight
 in a similar systematic manner until all bolts are simultaneously snug tight and the
 connection is fully compacted. Following this initial operation, all bolts in the connection
 shall be tightened further by the applicable amount of rotation in Table 615.5.6.3 B. During
 the tightening operation, there shall be no rotation of the part not turned by the wrench.
 Tightening shall progress systematically from the most rigid part of the joint to its free
 edges.
 TABLE 615.5.6.3 B
 a, b
 
 NUT ROTATION FROM SNUG TIGHT CONDITION
 Disposition Of Outer Faces Of Bolted Parts
 Bolt Length in
 Both faces normal One face normal
 Both faces sloped
 Diameters
 to bolt axis
 to bolt axis other
 not more than
 (measured from
 face sloped not
 1:20 from normal
 underside of head
 more than 1:20
 to bolt axis (bevel
 to end of bolt)
 (bevel washers
 washers not used)
 not used)
 Up to &
 1/3 turn
 ½ turn
 2/3 turn
 including 4
 Over 4 but not
 ½ turn
 2/3 turn
 5/6 turn
 exceeding 8
 Over 8 but not
 2/3 turn
 5/6 turn
 1 turn
 exceeding 12c
 a.
 b.
 c.
 
 Nut rotation is relative to bolt, regardless of the element (nut or bolt) being turned. For bolts
 installed by ½ turn and less, the tolerance shall be plus or minus 30 degrees; for bolts installed
 by 2/3 turn and more, the tolerance shall be plus or minus 45 degrees.
 Applicable only to connections in which all material within the grip of the bolt is steel.
 No research or testing has been performed to establish the Turn-of-Nut procedure for bolt
 lengths exceeding 12 diameters. Therefore, the required rotation must be determined by the
 Contractor by actual test in a suitable tension measuring device which simulates conditions
 of solidly fitted steel. Testing is subject to approval by the Engineer
 
 615.5.6.4-Inspection: The Engineer will determine the following requirements are
 met in the work.
 Before the installation of fasteners in the work, the Engineer will check the markings,
 lot identifications, surface condition and lubrication, storage of all bolts, nuts and washers
 and the faying surfaces of joints for compliance with requirements of Sections 615.3.2,
 615.5.6.2, 615.5.6.3 and 709.24.9. The Engineer will observe calibration and testing
 procedures required in Section 615.5.6.3 to confirm the procedure is properly used and,
 when so used with the fastener assemblies supplied, the tensions specified in Table
 615.5.6.3 A are provided. The Engineer will observe the installation of fasteners in the
 work to assure the procedure, as demonstrated in the initial testing to provide specified
 tension, is routinely properly applied. Bolts installed by the turn-of-nut method may reach
 449
 
 tensions substantially above the values given in Table 615.5.6.3 A, but this shall not be
 cause for rejection.
 615.5.7-Welding: Fabrication of welded members, welding, welder qualifications,
 prequalification of weld details and inspection of welds shall conform to the requirements of
 the ANSI/AASHTO/AWS Bridge Welding Code D1.5. Ultrasonic testing (UT) may be used
 for nondestructive testing of butt welded joints in lieu of radiographic testing (RT) at the
 Contractor's option.
 No field welding is permitted unless shown on the plans or approved by the Engineer.
 Exercise caution while making field or shop welds while an elastomeric bearing pad is in
 contact with the steel. In no case shall the elastomer or elastomer band be exposed to
 instantaneous temperatures greater than 400 degrees F. Any damage to the elastomeric bearing
 due to welding will be cause for rejection. The temperature shall be monitored by heat crayons
 furnished by the Contractor.
 Brackets, clips, shipping devices or other material not required by the plans or Special
 Provisions shall not be welded or tacked to any member unless shown on the shop drawings
 and approved by the Engineer.
 All of the above requirements apply equally to both shop and field welding operations.
 615.6-ERECTION:
 615.6.1-General: The Contractor shall provide all tools, machinery, and equipment
 necessary to erect the structure. The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer, plans for
 falsework or for changes in the existing structure necessary for maintaining traffic prior to
 commencing work. The falsework shall be properly designed and substantially constructed
 and maintained for the loads which will come upon it (see 615.2.1). Submission of the
 Contractor’s plans shall not be considered as relieving the Contractor of any responsibility. In
 addition to the above, the Contractor’s West Virginia Registered Professional Engineer shall
 certify to the Engineer that the falsework system has been assembled according to the
 falsework drawings, prior to placing loads on the falsework.
 615.6.2-Handling and Storing Materials: Material to be stored at the job site shall be
 placed on skids above the ground. It shall be kept clean and properly drained. Girders and
 beams shall be placed upright and shored. Long members, such as columns and chords, shall
 be supported on skids placed near enough together to prevent damage from deflection. If the
 contract is for erection only, the Contractor shall check the material against the shipping lists
 and report promptly in writing any shortage or damaged discovered. The Contractor shall be
 responsible for the loss of any material while in their care, or for any damage caused to it after
 being received by the Contractor.
 615.6.3-Bearings and Anchorage’s: Masonry bearing plates shall not be placed upon
 bridge-seat bearings which are improperly finished, deformed, or irregular. Bearing plates
 shall be set level in exact position and shall have a full and even bearing upon the masonry.
 Preformed fabric pads, of the thickness shown on the Plans, shall be placed between the
 bearings and the masonry. The preformed fabric pads or other material when specified, shall
 be included in the price bid for structural steel.
 
 450
 
 The Contractor shall drill the holes and set the anchor bolts, except where the bolts are built
 into the masonry. The bolts shall be set accurately and fixed with Portland cement grout
 completely filling the holes. The location of anchor bolts in relation to the slotted holes in the
 expansion shoes shall correspond with the temperature at the time of erection. The nuts or
 anchor bolts at the expansion ends of spans shall be adjusted to permit the free movement of
 the span.
 615.6.4-Erection Procedure:
 615.6.4.1-Conformance to Drawings: The erection procedure shall conform to the
 erection drawings submitted in accordance with Section 615.2.1. Any modifications to or
 deviations from this erection procedure shall require revised drawings and verification of
 stresses and geometry by the Contractor's registered West Virginia Professional Engineer.
 The proposed revisions shall be approved by a West Virginia Registered Professional
 Engineer.
 615.6.4.2-Erection Stresses: Any erection stresses that are induced in the structure as
 a result of the use of a method of erection or equipment which differs from that shown on
 the plans or specified, and which will remain in the finished structure as locked-in stresses
 shall be accounted for by the Contractor. The Contractor may provide additional material
 at their expense to keep both temporary and final stresses within the allowable limits used
 in design.
 The Contractor will be responsible for providing temporary bracing or stiffening
 devices to accommodate handling stresses in individual members or segments of the
 structure during erection.
 615.6.4.3-Maintaining Alignment and Camber: During erection the Contractor will
 be responsible for supporting segments of the structure in a manner that will produce the
 proper alignment and camber in the completed structure. Cross frames and diagonal
 bracing shall be installed as necessary during the erection process to provide stability and
 assure correct geometry. Temporary bracing, if necessary at any stage of erection, shall be
 provided by the Contractor.
 615.6.5-Field Assembly: The parts shall be accurately assembled as shown on the plans
 or erection drawings, and any match-marks shall be followed. The material shall be carefully
 handled so that no parts will be bent, broken, or otherwise damaged. Hammering which will
 damage or distort the members shall not be done. Bearing surfaces and surfaces to be in
 permanent contact shall be cleaned before the members are assembled. Splices and field
 connections shall have all holes filled with high strength bolts before snug tightening begins.
 Snug tightening and final tightening shall be in accordance with Section 615.5.6.3.
 Fitting-up bolts may be the same high-strength bolts used in the installation provided all
 requirements of Section 615.5.6 are strictly adhered to. If other fitting-up bolts are used they
 shall be of the same nominal diameter as the high-strength bolts, and cylindrical erection pins
 shall be 1/32 inch (1 mm) larger.
 615.6.6-Pin Connections: Pilot and driving nuts shall be used in driving pins. They shall
 be furnished by the Contractor without charge. Pins shall be so driven that the members will
 451
 
 take full bearing. Pin nuts shall be screwed up tight and the threads burred at the face of the
 nut with a pointed tool.
 615.6.7-Misfits: The correction of minor misfits involving minor amounts of reaming will
 be considered a legitimate part of the erection. However, any error in the shop fabrication or
 deformation resulting from handling and transporting will be cause for rejection.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for all misfits, errors, and damage and shall make the
 necessary corrections and replacements. The Engineer's approval shall be obtained by the
 Contractor before any reaming of holes or other corrections are undertaken.
 615.6.8-Removal of Falsework and Cleaning Up of Site: Upon completion of the
 erection and before final acceptance, the Contractor shall remove all falsework, excavated or
 useless materials, rubbish, and temporary buildings, shall restore, in an acceptable manner, all
 property which may have been damaged during the prosecution of the work, and shall leave
 the structure site and adjacent highway in a neat and presentable condition, satisfactory to the
 Engineer. All falsework or other obstructions placed in stream beds shall be removed by the
 Contractor.
 615.6.9-Final Cleaning of Weathering Steel Bridges: Upon completion of all concrete
 curing operations, the contractor shall clean all steel surfaces to remove all grease, oil, concrete
 residue, dirt, and other foreign substances to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
 Cleaning may be by high pressure water, powered or hand wire brushing, or by Brush off
 Blast Cleaning according to SSPC-SP 7. Cleaning shall be followed by a clean water rinse to
 remove all residues of detergents and cleaners if they were used. All grease and oil shall be
 removed prior to the clean water rinse by solvent cleaning.
 Do not use acids to remove stains.
 Areas of the shop applied paint system which are damaged during erection and high
 strength bolted connection areas that were only prime painted shall be properly cleaned and
 painted according to Section 688 of the Standard Specification, Painting Steel Structures, and
 to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
 After completion of all tightening operation, mechanical galvanized fasteners shall be
 solvent cleaned and field painted as specified for the structural steel.
 For integral or semi-integral abutment structures, the crevice/interface between the
 embedded steel and the concrete shall be suitably chamfered to provide for placement of a
 sealant. Sealant material shall meet the requirements of ASTM C920, Type S, Grade NS, Class
 25, Uses NT and M. Sealant shall be suitable for bonding between concrete and the top coat of
 the specified paint system. Acid-cure sealants shall not be permitted.
 615.7-MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT:
 615.7.1-General: Structural steel will be measured on a lump sum basis or on a pound
 (kilogram) basis, as required by the terms of the Contract, but it will be on a lump sum basis
 unless stipulated otherwise on the Plans.
 Under contracts containing an item for structural steel, all metal parts, other than metal
 reinforcement for concrete, such as anchor bolts, nuts, shoes, rockers, rollers, bearing, and slab
 plate, pins and nuts, bolts embedded in concrete cradles and brackets, railing and railing posts,
 waterstops, preformed fabric or other type of bearing pads, and roadway drainage system when
 452
 
 this material is connected to the metal work, will be paid for as structural steel unless otherwise
 noted, stipulated, or listed as separate pay items.
 Steel grid flooring will be measured and paid for as structural steel only if noted on the
 Plans.
 615.7.2-Lump Sum Contracts: In the case of a lump sum bid, it shall be the Contractor's
 responsibility to determine the weight on which he bases his bid, for the weight of structural
 steel shown on the Plans is approximate only. In the event of discrepancy between the Plan
 weight and the actual weight, no increase or decrease in the Contract lump sum price bid for
 the item will be made on account of such discrepancy.
 615.7.3-Pound Price Contracts:
 615.7.3.1-General: The payment in pound-price contracts will be based on the
 computed net weight of metal in the fabricated and erected structures, or on certified scale
 weights when so specified on the Plans. The weight of temporary erection bolts, drift pins,
 shop and field paint, boxes, crates and other containers used for shipping, and materials
 used for supporting members during transportation and erection will not be included.
 615.7.3.2-Computed Weights Net: The weight of the metal work to be paid for under
 the Contract for structural steel will be computed on the following basis:
 
 Aluminum cast or wrought
 Bronze, cast
 Copper-alloy
 Copper sheet
 Iron, cast
 Iron, malleable
 Iron, wrought
 Lead, sheet
 Steel: rolled, cast, copper bearing, silicon, nickel
 and stainless
 Zinc
 
 i.
 
 ii.
 
 iii.
 
 Unit Weights Per
 Cubic Foot
 173.0
 536.0
 536.0
 558.0
 445.0
 470.0
 487.0
 707.0
 
 Unit Kg Per
 Cubic Meter
 2772
 8586
 8586
 8938
 7128
 7529
 7801
 11 325
 
 490.0
 
 7849
 
 450.0
 
 7208
 
 The weights of rolled shapes will be computed on the basis of their nominal weights
 per foot (meter) as shown on the drawings or listed in the handbooks. The weights of
 plates will be computed on the basis of the nominal weight of the width and thickness
 as shown on the drawings, plus an estimated overrun computed as one-half of the
 "Permissible Variation in Thickness and Weight" as tabulated in AASHTO M160.
 The weights of castings will be computed from the dimensions shown on the approved
 shop drawings, deducting for open holes. To this weight will be added five percent
 allowance for fillets and overrun. Scale weights may be substituted for computed
 weights in the case of castings or of small complex parts for which accurate
 computations of weight would be difficult.
 For members comprising both carbon steel and other special steel or material, when
 separate unit prices are provided for such members, the weight of each class of steel in
 each such member will be separately computed and paid for at the Contract unit price.
 453
 
 iv.
 
 In computing pay weight on the basis of computed net weight, the following additional
 stipulations will apply:
 
 The weight of all high-strength bolt heads, nuts, single washers and thread stickthroughs, both field and shop, will be included on the basis of Table 615.7.3.2.
 TABLE 615.7.3.2 {ENGLISH}
 Weight Per 100 Units In Lb
 Nominal Diameter of HighBolt Head, Nut, One Washer
 Strength Bolt in Inches
 and Stick-Through
 ½
 22
 1/8
 33
 ¾
 55
 7/8
 84
 1
 120
 1-1/8
 169
 1¼
 216
 TABLE 615.7.3.2 {METRIC}
 Weight Per 100 Units in kg
 Nominal Diameter of HighBolt Head, Nut, One
 Strength Bolt in Millimeters
 Washer and Stick-Through
 M16
 15.1
 M20
 26.2
 M22
 37.7
 M24
 51.4
 M27
 72.4
 M30
 92.6
 The weight of weld metal will be computed on the basis of the theoretical volume from
 dimensions of the welds.
 615.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing
 all the material and doing all the work herein prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner
 including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, falsework, painting, and incidentals necessary to
 complete the work.
 615.9-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 615001-*
 615002-*
 615003-*
 615004-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Steel Superstructure
 Prefabricated Steel Bridge Superstructure
 Fabricated Structural Steel
 Fabricated Structural Steel
 
 * Sequence number
 
 454
 
 UNIT
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Pound (Kilogram)
 
 SECTION 616
 PILING
 616.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing and driving concrete, or steel bearing piles, of the
 kind and dimensions designated, to the required bearing or penetration in accordance with these
 Specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines and spacing shown on the Plans
 or established by the Engineer.
 616.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall
 sections/subsections:
 
 conform
 
 to
 
 the
 
 requirements
 
 MATERIAL
 Precast Concrete Piles
 Prestressed Concrete Piles
 Steel Bearing Piles and Splices*
 Steel Pile Points
 
 specified
 
 in
 
 the
 
 following
 
 SUBSECTION
 601
 603
 709.12
 709.50
 
 * The piling section shall be of the H form and with total flange width substantially
 equal to the depth of the section. No section shall have a thickness of metal less than
 0.4 inches (10 mm), nor a depth less than 8 inches (200 mm).
 
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 616.3-PREPARATION FOR DRIVING:
 616.3.1-General: Piles shall not be driven until required excavation or embankment is
 completed. Material forced up between the piles shall be removed to correct elevation, without
 cost to the Division, before concrete for the foundation is placed.
 616.3.2-Caps: The heads of all concrete piles shall be protected by caps of approved
 design, preferably having a rope or other suitable cushion net to the pile head, and fitting into
 a casting which, in turn, supports a timber shock block when the nature of the driving is such
 as to unduly injure them. A cast or structural steel cap or driving head shall be used for driving
 steel piles, if required, to keep the pile heads from upsetting excessively under hard driving
 conditions.
 616.4-EQUIPMENT FOR DRIVING:
 616.4.1-General: When a steam or air hammer is used for driving any type of piles, both
 the volume and pressure of steam or air recommended by the manufacturer of the hammer, as
 well as the rated number of strokes per minute, shall be maintained at all times to insure full
 energy of the driving blows.
 Before pile driving is started, the Contractor shall provide written certification to the
 Engineer that the pile hammer, air compressors, and air valves have been inspected and found
 to be in good working condition.
 In case the required penetration is not obtained by the use of a hammer complying with the
 minimum requirements in 616.4.2 and 616.4.3, the Contractor shall provide a heavier hammer
 or resort to jetting at their own expense, unless jetting is specifically prohibited.
 455
 
 616.4.2-Hammers for Steel Piles: Gravity hammers for driving steel piles shall weigh
 not less than 2,000 and 3,000 lb. (907 to 1 360 kg) respectively, and in no case shall the weight
 of the hammer be less than the combined weight of the driving head and pile, unless noted
 otherwise on the Plans. The fall shall be so regulated as to avoid injury to the piles and in no
 case shall exceed 15 ft. (4.5 m).
 Steam or air hammers used for driving steel piles shall develop an energy per blow, at each
 full stroke of the piston, of not less than 12,000 ft.-lb. (16.3 kJ) unless noted otherwise on the
 Plans.
 616.4.3-Hammers for Concrete Piles: Steam or air hammers used for driving precast
 concrete piles with a mandrel shall develop an energy per blow, at each full stroke of the piston,
 of not less than 15,000 ft.-lb. (20.3 kJ) or not less than one foot-pound for each pound of weight
 driven.
 616.4.4-Leads: Pile driver leads shall be constructed in such a manner as to afford freedom
 of movement to the hammer, and they shall be held in position by guys or still braces to insure
 firm support to the pile during driving to the lowest point the hammer must reach.
 616.4.5-Water Jets: When water jets are used, the numbers of jets and the volume and
 pressure of water at the jet nozzles shall be sufficient to freely erode the material adjacent to
 the piles. The plant shall have sufficient capacity to deliver at all times at least 100 psi (689
 kPa) pressure at two ¾ inch (19 mm) jet nozzles.
 616.5-METHOD OF DRIVING:
 Precast concrete piles shall be driven by means of a combination of steam or air hammer
 and water jet, but the water jet may be omitted if approved by the Engineer. Other piles shall
 preferably be driven with an approved steam or air hammer, an approved diesel hammer, or a
 combination of these hammers, and water jet, except that jetting of steel piles will not be permitted
 unless special written permission of the Engineer is obtained. The jets, if used, shall be withdrawn
 before the desired penetration is reached, and the piles shall be driven with the hammer to secure
 the final penetration.
 Pile driver leads shall be used in driving unless otherwise directed by the Engineer in
 writing. Underwater hammers may be used only when held in rigid leads extending to the full
 depth.
 616.6-ACCURACY OF DRIVING:
 All piles shall be driven with a variation of not more than 2% from the vertical or from the
 batter line indicated. The plan elevation for cut off shall be measured from the lowest point of the
 pile head with a maximum deviation of 2 inches (50 mm) above plan cut off providing this
 deviation does not interfere with other construction requirements. The cut off shall be made at
 right angles to the pile. The concrete cover from the face of the concrete to any face of the pile
 shall not be less than 9 inches (225 mm) except on the side the pile penetrates the structure.
 Additional concrete cover may be monolithically added to the structure to maintain the minimum
 9 inches (225 mm) cover at no cost to the Division.
 
 456
 
 616.6.1-Foundations: The location in plan for piles in foundations may have a maximum
 deviation of 6 inches (150 mm) from that shown in the contract documents except as provided
 in 616.6.2.
 616.6.2-Abutments with Single Lines of Piles: The location in plan for piles in an
 abutment with a single line of piles may have a maximum deviation of 3 inches (75 mm) from
 that shown in the contract documents.
 616.6.3-Combination Pile and Trestle Bents: The location of the top of a combination
 pile and trestle bent may have a maximum plan deviation of 1 1/2 inches (38 mm).
 616.7-DEFECTIVE PILES:
 The procedure incident to the driving of piles shall not subject them to excessive and undue
 abuse producing crushing and spalling of concrete or deformation of the steel. Any pile driven out
 of its proper location or any pile damaged by reason of internal defects or by improper driving
 shall be removed or, at the option of the Engineer, a second pile may be driven adjacent thereto if
 this can be done without detriment to the structure. All piles so driven shall be at the expense of
 the Contractor.
 616.8-DETERMINATION OF BEARING VALUES:
 616.8.1-Loading Tests: When required, the size and number of piles shall be determined
 by actual loading tests. In general, these tests shall consist of the application of a test load
 placed upon a suitable platform supported by the pile, together with suitable apparatus for
 accurately measuring the load and the settlement of the pile under each increment of load. The
 safe allowable load shall be considered at 50% of that load which produces a permanent
 settlement not greater than 3 inches (75 mm), measured at the top of the pile, after 48 hours of
 application. This maximum settlement shall not be increased by a continuous application of
 the test load for a period of 60 hours. In general, one pile for each group of 100 piles shall be
 tested.
 616.8.2-From Blow Count at Refusal: The size of piles, energy rating of hammer, and
 design load will be designated on the Plans. All piles shall be driven to refusal into the
 foundation strata as indicated by the estimated pile lengths or pile tip elevations. Refusal is
 defined as the equivalent of 20 blows for 1 inch (25 mm) of penetration with a power hammer
 developing the minimum designated foot pounds per blow. The minimum number of blows in
 the last inch of penetration shall be as specified on the Plans. If a larger hammer is used, the
 Engineer will specify the blow count to determine refusal.
 616.9-PRECAST CONCRETE PILES:
 616.9.1-General: Precast concrete piles shall be constructed in accordance with the size,
 shape, and reinforcement, shown on the Plans.
 Class B concrete shall be used, and the applicable provisions of 601 shall govern.
 616.9.2-Formwork: Forms for precast concrete piles shall conform to the general
 requirements for concrete form work as provided in 601. Forms shall be accessible for tamping
 and consolidation of the concrete. Under good weather conditions, side forms may be removed
 457
 
 24 hours after placing concrete, but the entire pile shall remain supported for at least seven
 days and shall not be subjected to any handling stress until the concrete has set for at least 14
 days or for a longer period in cold weather, according to the judgment of the Engineer. Where
 control cylinders are made, bottom forms may be removed when the concrete has developed a
 compressive strength of 2,000 psi (14 MPa).
 616.9.3-Placing and Finishing: Piling may be cast in either a vertical or horizontal
 position. Special care shall be taken to consolidate the concrete around the reinforcement and
 to avoid the formation of stone pockets, honeycomb, or other such defects. To secure
 uniformity and remove surplus water, the concrete in each pile shall be placed continuously
 and shall be compacted by vibrating or by other means satisfactory to the Engineer. The forms
 shall be overfilled, the surplus concrete screeded off, and the top surfaces finished to uniform,
 even texture similar to that produced by the forms.
 As soon as the forms are removed, concrete piles shall be pointed with a 1 to 2 mortar and
 finished. Trestle piling exposed to view shall be finished above the ground line in accordance
 with the provisions governing the finishing of concrete columns. Foundation piling and that
 portion of the trestle piling which will be below the ground surface shall not be finished except
 by pointing as specified.
 616.9.4-Curing: Concrete piles shall be cured in accordance with the general provisions
 governing the curing of concrete as specified in 601. As soon as the piles have hardened
 sufficiently, they shall be removed from the forms and placed in a curing pile, separated from
 each other by wood spacing blocks. No pile shall be driven until it has cured for at least 21
 days and in cold weather for a longer period as determined by the Engineer.
 616.9.5-Handling: Removal of forms, curing, storing, transporting, and handling precast
 concrete piles shall be done in such a manner as to avoid excessive bending stresses, cracking,
 spalling, or other injurious results. Piles shall be lifted by means of suitable bridles or slings
 attached to the pile along its length. The arrangement shall be such that no stresses in excess
 of 12,000 (82.7 MPa) psi are developed in the reinforcement, and the maximum compressive
 stress in the concrete is not over 600 psi (4 Mpa) allowing 100 % of the calculated load for
 impact and shock.
 616.10-PRESTRESSED CONCRETE PILES:
 Prestressed concrete piles shall conform to the requirements of 603.
 616.11-STEEL PILING:
 616.11.1-General: Steel piles shall consist of structural steel shapes of the kind and size
 specified. Full-length steel piles shall be used where practicable. Splicing of piles is permitted
 subject to the approval of the Engineer and shall be in accordance with this Specification. The
 number of welded connections in the length of a pile shall be preferably as few as practicable.
 616.11.2-Splicing Steel Piles: If splices are made in steel piles by welding, the abutting
 surfaces must be true planes. The top surface of the lower pile shall be straightened if bent
 during the driving process or cut off (flame cutting permitted, 615.4.3.2.2) below the bent
 portion if it cannot be satisfactorily straightened. The bottom surface of the upper pile shall be
 458
 
 beveled on the inside edges of the flanges and along one edge of the web. The bevel shall be
 made at an angle of approximately 40° with the horizontal. A surface of 1/8 inch (3 mm) may
 be left unbeveled. The upper pile shall be securely clamped to the lower pile and separated
 there from 1/8 inch (3 mm), care being taken to make the axis of the two piles coincide. The
 entire periphery of the pile joint shall then be butt welded, by properly certified welders, with
 sufficient passes to completely fill the joint, the slag of each pass being removed before
 beginning the next pass.
 616.11.3-Cutting off Steel Piles: Steel piles shall be cut off at the required elevation. If
 capping is required, the connection shall be made according to details shown on the Plans.
 616.12-PREDRILLED PILING:
 Holes shall be drilled or bored through the fill material to original ground or into the rock
 strata, when specified on the Plans, before driving the piles. The predrilled holes for H-piling shall
 have a diameter of approximately 85 % of the depth of the pile section when the piling is not
 required to penetrate into rock and shall be a minimum of 100 % of the diagonal dimension of the
 pile section when the piling is required to be socketed into rock. Holes for round piles may vary
 from 2 inches (50 mm) less to 4 inches (100 mm) more than the diameter of the pile, the exact
 diameter to be approved by the Engineer to produce satisfactory pile driving results.
 All voids remaining after driving operations shall be filled with concrete sand or other
 aggregate of a size no larger than No. 8. Test requirements for this material are waived, except
 that the material shall be dry and free flowing in order to fill the voids around the piles to the
 satisfaction of the Engineer.
 616.13-EXTENSIONS OR “BUILD-UPS”:
 Extensions, splices or build-ups on concrete piles, when necessary and permitted by the
 Engineer, shall be made as follows:
 After the driving is completed, the concrete at the end of the pile shall be cut away, leaving the
 reinforcement steel exposed for a length of 40 diameters. The final cut of the concrete shall be
 perpendicular to the axis of the pile. Reinforcement similar to that used in the pile shall be securely
 fastened to the projecting steel and the necessary formwork shall be placed, care being taken to
 prevent leakage along the pile. The concrete shall be of the same quality as that used in the pile.
 Just prior to placing concrete, the top of the pile shall be thoroughly wetted and covered with a
 thin coating of neat cement, retempered mortar or other suitable bonding material. The forms shall
 remain in place not less than seven days and shall then be carefully removed and the entire exposed
 surface of the pile finished as specified in 616.9.3.
 616.14-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The number of linear feet (meters) of piles of the type specified to be paid for will be the
 actual length of piles remaining in the finished structure. All cut-offs remain the property of the
 Contractor for disposition.
 Extension, splices, or “build-ups” will not be measured for payment as such, but, they will
 be included as footage in the length of piling remaining in the finished structure. In determining
 the amount to be included, no allowance will be made for cut-offs necessary to accomplish the
 extensions, splices, or “build-ups”.
 
 459
 
 “Pile Loading Tests” will be measured separately and will be the actual number of tested
 piles in place.
 616.15-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing
 all materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including
 all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work. The cost of
 preboring, filling of voids, splicing, and metal shoes or points shall be included in the price bid for
 the piles.
 Loading tests will be paid for at the contract unit price for “Pile Loading Tests”, or, in the
 absence of such a price bid, they will be paid for as extra work.
 616.16-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 616003-* Concrete Piles
 616004-* “size” Steel Bearing Piles, Driven
 616005-* Steel Bearing Piles, Pre-Drilled and Driven
 616007-* Pile Loading Tests
 616016-* Sheet Piling Left In Place
 616017-* Sheet Piling, Driven
 * Sequence number
 
 460
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Per Pile
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 
 SECTION 617
 RAILINGS
 617.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing, constructing, and erecting a pipe railing or other
 fabricated metal railing of the type specified, on a bridge, wall, or other structure, in accordance
 with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines, grades, dimensions,
 and sections shown on the Plans.
 617.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of Division 700.
 All ferrous pipe used for railing shall be wrought iron, and fittings for pipe railing shall be
 in accordance with the requirements for malleable iron castings in 709.10.
 Caulking compounds, for use on surfaces where aluminum is in contact with other metal
 except stainless steel, shall be as approved by the Engineer.
 Elastomeric bearing pads shall conform to the requirements of 715.15.
 Mortar for grouting anchor bolts shall be of the following proportion by weight: one part
 nonshrink aggregate, one part silica sand (702.1), and one part Type I cement (701.1).
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 617.3-LINE AND GRADE:
 The line and grade of railing shall conform to that shown on the Plans and not follow any
 unevenness in the structure. All railing posts shall be vertical.
 617.4-PIPE RAILING:
 Pipe railing shall be built in accordance with details shown on the Plans.
 617.5-FERROUS METAL RAILING:
 617.5.1-Fabrication and Erection: Fabrication and erection of ferrous metal railing shall
 be done in accordance with the applicable requirements of 615. In the case of welded railing,
 all exposed joints shall be finished by grinding or filing, after welding, to provide a neat
 appearance.
 Railings shall be carefully adjusted prior to fixing in place to insure proper matching at
 abutting joints and correct alignment and camber throughout their length. The railing shall be
 so fabricated as to allow for minor adjustments in both horizontal and vertical directions. In
 the bottom of the sealed end, a ½ inch (12 mm) hole for drainage shall be provided.
 617.5.2-Painting: Ferrous metal railing shall be given one shop coat of paint and two coats
 of paint after erection. Painting shall conform to the requirements for painting metal structures
 in 615. No painting is required on railing or posts where galvanizing is specified on the Plans.
 617.6-ALUMINUM RAILING:
 617.6.1-Fabrication and Erection: Post base castings shall be accurately set and the bolts
 tightened to obtain full bearing on the base. Additional aluminum shims shall be furnished to
 permit adjustment in the field to assure compliance with the grade and alignment shown on the
 Plans.
 461
 
 Material ½ inch (12 mm) thick or less may be sheared, sawed, or milled. Material over ½
 inch (12 mm) thick shall be sawed or milled. Cut edges shall be true, smooth, and free from
 excessive burrs or ragged breaks. Reentrant cuts shall be filleted by drilling prior to cutting.
 Flame cutting will not be permitted. Welding will not be permitted except as specifically called
 for in the Contract.
 Rivet or bolt holes shall be drilled or subpunched 3/16 inch (4 mm) smaller than the
 nominal diameter of the fastener and reamed to size. The finished diameter of holes shall not
 be more than seven percent greater than nominal diameter of the fasteners. Anchor bolt holes
 and slotted bolt holes to take care of expansion shall be provided as called for on the Plans.
 617.6.2-Protection: Where aluminum alloys, except anchor bolts, come in contact with
 materials other than aluminum and stainless steel, the surfaces in contact shall be protected as
 follows:
 i.
 The contact surfaces shall be thoroughly coated with a suitable caulking compound
 when in contact with other metals except stainless steel.
 ii.
 Elastomeric bearing pads shall be placed under each post. The pad shall cover the
 entire contact area between the post and concrete and shall be neatly trimmed to the
 shape of the post base. The pads shall meet the requirements of Section 715.15.
 617.6.3-Finishing: After the concreting has been completed, the aluminum bridge railing
 shall be thoroughly cleaned, removing any accumulation of oil, grease, dirt, or other foreign
 materials. An approved solvent cleaner may be used. Where mechanical means are used to
 remove stains, grease, minor scratches, etc., the resulting finish shall be uniform in appearance
 over the entire tube. Tubing for a single structure shall present the same uniform finish at time
 of final acceptance.
 Finished tubing shall be free from grease and stains, gouges, dents and burrs, and shall
 have a minimum of rubs, scratches, and minor extrusion marks from the dies.
 617.7-GROUTING OF ANCHOR BOLTS:
 Where anchor bolts for railing brackets or posts on concrete are not cast-in-place during
 the original pour, they shall be grouted in place with mortar as specified in 617.2
 617.8-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantities of work done will be measured by the linear foot (meter) of "Pipe Railing",
 "Ferrous Metal Railing", or "Aluminum Railing", as the case may be, complete in place and
 accepted, which will be determined by the overall length as shown on the Plans, or as authorized
 by the Engineer. When metal railing is used with concrete posts, the pay length for the railing will
 be the sum of all the net lengths between posts.
 Reinforcing steel required in concrete posts for "Ferrous Metal Railing" will be measured
 and paid for as provided in 602.
 Concrete posts for "ferrous Metal Railing" will be measured and paid for as provided in
 601.
 
 462
 
 617.9-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing
 all the materials and doing all the work described in a workmanlike and acceptable manner,
 including all the labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 617.10-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 617001-*
 617002-*
 617003-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Pipe Railing
 Ferrous Metal Railing
 Aluminum Railing
 
 * Sequence number
 
 463
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 
 SECTION 618
 CAST BRONZE AND ROLLED COPPER-ALLOY EXPANSION PLATES
 618.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing and erecting cast bronze or rolled copper-alloy
 expansion plates, to be used as friction type expansion or bearing plates, in accordance with the
 details and dimensions shown on the Plans and in accordance with this Specification.
 618.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall conform to the requirements specified in the following Subsections of
 Division 700:
 MATERIAL
 Bronze Castings for expansion Plates
 Rolled Copper-Alloy Expansion Plates
 
 SUBSECTION
 709.18
 709.19
 
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 618.3-GENERAL:
 Plates shall be accurately set in position as shown on the Plans and shall have a uniform
 bearing over the entire area. Provisions shall be made to keep the plates in position while masonry
 is being placed. When finishing is indicated on the Plans or directed, the surfaces shall comply
 with the American Standards Association surface roughness requirements as defined in ASA B46,
 1-55, ASA 125.
 618.4-CAST BRONZE PLATES:
 Cast bronze plates shall be cast according to details shown on the Plans. Sliding surfaces
 shall be planed parallel to the movement of the span and polished unless otherwise detailed.
 When self-lubricated bronze plates are specified, they shall conform to 709.18 unless
 otherwise provided. They shall be trepanned in a geometric pattern of recesses to receive a
 lubricating material suitable for long-life service of the bearing face. The lubricated area shall
 comprise a minimum of 25 percent of the bearing face to provide a coefficient of friction for bronze
 on steel of approximately 10 percent for loads of 1,000 to 2,000 psi. (7 to 14 MPa). Only the sliding
 surfaces shall be lubricated.
 618.5-ROLLED COPPER-ALLOY EXPANSION PLATES:
 Rolled copper-alloy expansion plates shall be furnished according to the details shown on
 the Plans. Finishing of rolled plates will not be required if they have a plane true and smooth
 surface. If finishing is indicated on the Plans or directed, it shall be in the direction of the
 movement of the span.
 618.6-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be measured by the pound (kilogram). Unless otherwise
 provided, the weight to be paid for shall be the certified scale weight in pounds (kilograms) of the
 plates placed in the structure but not to exceed the weight as computed from the net dimensions
 shown on the Plans. The weight per cubic foot of cast bronze or copper-alloy plates shall be
 considered as 536 lb. (8.6 Mg per cubic meter).
 464
 
 618.7-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing
 all the materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner,
 including all materials, labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the
 work.
 618.8-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 618001-*
 618002-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 UNIT
 Cast Bronze Expansion Plates
 Pound (Kilogram)
 Rolled Copper-Alloy Expansion Plates Pound (Kilogram)
 
 * Sequence number
 
 465
 
 SECTION 619
 WATERPROOFING
 619.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of waterproofing concrete retaining walls, abutments, earth-filled
 arches, and concrete decks, either in the form of dampproofing (primers with bituminous paint
 coat) or membrane waterproofing (primers with bituminous membrane fabric, with or without
 protection course) as specified on the Plans. Dampproofing shall consist of a primer and two coats
 of bituminous materials. Membrane waterproofing shall consist of a primer, two layers of fabric,
 and three moppings of hot bituminous material. The work shall be done in accordance with the
 Specifications and as shown on the Plans.
 619.2-MATERIALS:
 The materials shall conform to the requirement of the several Subsections of Division 700
 of these Specifications as follows:
 MATERIAL
 
 SUBSECTION
 705.4, 705.11
 705.7
 705.4, 705.11
 or 705.8
 
 Dampproofing Agent
 Dampproofing Primer
 Hot-Poured Elastic Type
 Concrete Joint Sealer
 Membrane Waterproofing
 Membrane Waterproofing
 Reinforcing Steel
 Waterproofing Fabric
 
 TYPE
 SS-1 or SS-1h
 CSS-1 or CSS-1h
 SS-1 or SS-1h
 CSS-1 or CSS-1h
 
 708.3
 705.8
 705.7
 709.3
 715.8
 
 When the dampproofing agent is SS-1, the primer shall be SS-1 to which shall be added a
 maximum of 15 percent water by weight.
 Membrane fabric shall be stored in a dry, protected place. The rolls shall not be stored on
 end.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 619.3-PREPARATION OF SURFACE:
 Before applying the primer coat, all rod holes and other voids shall be pointed, and all
 projections, loose material, and excess dust shall be removed from the surface.
 When emulsion is used, the surface may be damp.
 When asphalt is used, the surface shall be thoroughly dry. Should the surface be damp, it
 shall be covered with a 2 inches (150 mm) layer of hot sand which shall be allowed to remain for
 two hours, after which it shall be swept back, uncovering sufficient surface for beginning of work,
 and the operation repeated as the work progresses. For surfaces too steep to hold sand, other
 satisfactory methods to produce a dry surface shall be used. No waterproofing shall be done in
 wet weather or when the temperature is below 35° F (2° C), without written authority of the
 Engineer.
 466
 
 619.4-DAMPPROOFING:
 The entire surface to be dampproofed shall be covered with the required primer by use of
 a mop. After this primer has been allowed to cure, two successive moppings with an asphalt
 cement or asphalt emulsion shall be applied. All coats shall be of uniform thickness throughout,
 and the total bituminous material used shall be not less than 11 gallons per 100 square feet (4.5
 liters per square meter) of surface. Each coat shall be allowed to dry thoroughly before the
 following coat is applied.
 Before dampproofing is started, all construction joints shall be waterproofed in accordance
 with 619.5, with fabric membranes 24 inches (600 mm) wide for the full length of the joint.
 619.5-MEMBRANE WATERPROOFING:
 The asphalt primer shall be heated to a temperature between 100 and 125° F (38° C and
 52° C), with frequent stirring to avoid local overheating. The asphalt for waterproofing shall be
 heated to a temperature between 300 and 350° F (150° C and 175° C), with frequent stirring to
 avoid local overheating. The heating kettles shall be equipped with thermometers.
 In all cases, the waterproofing shall begin at the low point of the surface to be waterproofed
 so that water will run over and not against or along the laps. The first strip of fabric shall be of
 half width, the second shall be of full width, lapped the full width of the first sheet, and the third
 and each succeeding strip shall be the full width and lapped so that there will be two layers of
 fabric at all points with three-layer lap for a distance not less than 2 inches (50 mm). All two-layer
 end laps shall be at least 12 inches (300 mm).
 The procedure for applying primer and waterproofing with membrane fabric shall be as
 follows:
 i. Beginning at the low point of the surface to be waterproofed, the entire surface shall be
 mopped with a primer of cutback asphalt and allowed to cure.
 ii. A section slightly more than half the width of the membrane fabric and for the full
 length of the surface shall be mopped with an asphalt cement and a half width of the
 fabric pressed into place.
 iii. The half width of fabric and an adjacent section of the surface equal to slightly more
 than half the width of the fabric shall be mopped with an asphalt cement and a full
 width of fabric pressed into place, completely covering the first strip.
 iv. Slightly more than half of this second strip and an adjacent section of the concrete
 surface equal to slightly more than half the width of the fabric shall be mopped with an
 asphalt cement, and the third strip of fabric shingled on so as to lap the first strip more
 than 2 inches (50 mm). This process shall be continued until the entire surface is
 covered with two layers of fabric.
 v. The entire surface shall then be given a final mopping with an asphalt cement.
 The completed waterproofing shall be firmly bonded membrane composed of two layers
 of fabric and three moppings of asphalt, together with a coating of primer. Under no circumstances
 shall one layer of fabric touch another layer at any point, or touch the surface of the structure,
 unless separated from that layer or surface by one coat of asphalt.
 On horizontal surfaces, not less than 13 gallons of asphalt shall have been used for each
 100 square feet (5 liters of asphalt shall have been used for each square meter) of finished work; and
 on vertical surfaces, not less than 16 gallons (6.5 liters) shall have been used. The work shall be
 so regulated that at the close of a day's work all fabric that is laid shall have received the final
 mopping of asphalt. Special care shall be taken at all laps to see that they are thoroughly sealed.
 467
 
 619.6-DETAILS:
 At the edges of the membrane and at any point where it is punctured by drain, pipes, etc.,
 suitable provisions shall be made to prevent water from getting between the waterproofing and the
 surface waterproofed. All flashing at curbs and against girders, spandrel walls, etc., shall be done
 with separate sheets lapping the main membrane not less, than 12 inches (300 mm) Flashing shall
 be closely sealed either with a metal counter flashing or by embedding the upper edges of the
 flashing in a groove poured full of joint sealing material.
 Joints which are essentially open joints, but which are not designed to provide for
 expansion, shall first be caulked with oakum and leadwool and then filled with hot joint sealing
 material.
 Expansion joints, both horizontal and vertical, shall be provided with sheet copper in "U"
 or "V" form, in accordance with the details shown on the plans, and shall be filled with hot joint
 filler sealing material. The membrane shall be carried continuously across all expansion or
 construction joints. At the ends of the structure, the membrane shall be carried well down on the
 abutments and suitable provision made for all movement.
 Care shall be taken to prevent injury to the finished membrane by the passage over it of
 men, wheelbarrows, etc., or by throwing any material on it. Any damage which may occur shall
 be repaired by patching. The first layer of the membrane patch shall extend at least 12 inches (300
 mm) beyond the outermost damaged portion, and the second ply shall extend at least 3 inches (75
 mm) beyond the first ply.
 619.7-PROTECTION COURSE:
 Over the waterproofing membrane constructed as specified above, there shall be placed a
 protection course which shall be 3 inches (75 mm) of Class A concrete. This concrete shall be
 reinforced midway between its top and bottom surface with wire mesh having six inch (150 mm)
 openings each direction and using size # W 1.4 wire. The construction of the protection course
 shall immediately follow the waterproofing operations and shall conform to the applicable
 requirements of 601.
 619.8-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantities of work done will be measured in square yards (meters) of "Dampproofing",
 "Membrane Waterproofing without Protection Course", or "Membrane Waterproofing with
 Protection Course", as the case may be, complete in place and accented, determined from actual
 measurement of the work.
 619.9-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing
 all the materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner,
 including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 619.10-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 619001-* Dampproofing
 619002-* Membrane Waterproofing Without Protection Course
 619003-* Membrane Waterproofing With Protection Course
 * Sequence number
 
 468
 
 UNIT
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Square Yard (Meter)
 
 SECTION 620
 THREE-SIDED REINFORCED CONCRETE BRIDGE/CULVERT
 620.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing the design, construction plans, materials, and
 construction of single piece precast or cast-in-place reinforced concrete three-sided flat-topped
 bridge/culverts or single piece precast reinforced concrete three-sided arch-topped bridge/culverts
 or a two-piece precast reinforced concrete continuous arch bridge/culverts, with headwalls and
 wingwalls, in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the
 lines, grades, design, and dimensions shown in the plans.
 620.2-GENERAL:
 The bridge/culvert design and detail plans for construction shall be submitted to the
 Engineer for approval. The time required for preparation and review of these submittals shall be
 charged to the allowable contract time. Delays caused by untimely submittals or insufficient data
 will not be considered justification for time extensions. No additional compensation will be made
 for any additional material, equipment, or other items found necessary to comply with the project
 specifications as a result of the Engineer's review.
 The proposed bridge/culvert design shall be compatible with the Contractor's proposed
 method of construction, and shall be compatible with any method of construction shown in the
 plans. The Division does not assume nor warrant any bridge/culvert system's compatibility with
 any particular construction methods.
 620.3-DESIGN CRITERIA:
 620.3.1-General: The following data will be provided on the contract plans:
 a. maximum allowable headwater elevation,
 b. maximum allowable velocity though the bridge/culvert,
 c. the tailwater depth used for design,
 d. minimum required open-end area,
 e. bearing capacity to be used for the design of the foundation, at the required location,
 f. design year ADT,
 g. design year percent trucks,
 h. roadway profile and elevation
 i. For tunnels or underpass structures the division will provide the required clearance
 box in addition to the bearing capacity and roadway profile.
 The size of all structural elements shall be determined such that the design load stresses do
 not exceed the allowable stresses found in the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications,
 latest edition. The structural design of the two-piece precast reinforced concrete arch
 bridge/culverts shall provide for a structurally reinforced section at the crown/closure section
 such that the completed arch bridge/culvert is structurally continuous.
 If parapets are used on any portion of the headwalls and wingwalls as shown in the plans,
 they shall be designed to resist traffic loads in accordance with the AASHTO LRFD Bridge
 Design Specifications, latest edition. The load shall be a HL-93 (HS25) test level 3.
 The length and height of the wingwalls and headwalls must be designed to accommodate
 the specified fill slope without fill encroaching on the underlying streambed, waterway or edge
 469
 
 of roadway template. Wingwalls with a tapered bottom surface shall not be used due to
 compaction difficulties beneath the wingwall. Wingwall options other than cast-in-place shall
 only be systems that have been evaluated by HITEC.
 Except those on roads with a design year ADT less than 500 and where the product of the
 design year percent trucks times the ADT is less than 100, all flat-topped structures with less
 than two feet of cover shall have approach slabs per the Divisions Structural Design Manual.
 620.3.2-Precast Three-Sided Bridge/Culvert: The bridge/culvert unit dimension and
 reinforcement details shall be as prescribed in the plan and the shop drawings provided by the
 manufacturer. The minimum concrete compressive strength shall be 4000 psi (28MPa). The
 minimum steel yield strength shall be 60 ksi (414 MPa). The minimum required strength for
 form removal and handling shall be 70% of Design Strength unless otherwise specified by the
 Designer.
 The top exterior surface shall have positive drainage with a minimum slope of 2% from
 the centerline of the span to the exterior corner of the structure.
 Unless noted otherwise on the shop drawings and designed accordingly, a minimum of one
 foot of cover above the crown of the bridge/culvert unit is required in the installed condition.
 620.3.2.1-Placement of Reinforcement: The cover of concrete over the outside
 reinforcement shall be 2 inches (50mm) minimum. The cover of concrete over the inside
 reinforcement shall be 1-1/2 inches (37.5mm) minimum. The clear distance of the end shall
 not be less than one inch (25mm) nor more than two inches (50mm) from the ends of the
 bridge/culvert unit. Reinforcement shall be assembled utilizing single or multiple layers
 of welded wire fabric, or utilizing a single layer of deformed billet-steel bars. The welded
 wire fabric shall be composed of circumferential and longitudinal wires meeting the
 spacing requirements of 620.3.2.3 and shall contain sufficient longitudinal wires extending
 through the unit to maintain the shape and position of the reinforcement. Longitudinal
 distribution reinforcement may be welded wire fabric or deformed billet-steel bars and
 shall meet the spacing requirements of 620.3.2.3. The ends of the longitudinal distribution
 reinforcement shall be not more than 3 inches (75mm) from the ends of the unit.
 620.3.2.2-Bending of Reinforcement: The outside and inside circumferential
 reinforcing steel for the corners of the bridge/culvert unit shall be bent to such an angle that
 is approximately equal to the configuration of the unit's outside corner.
 620.3.2.3-Laps, Welds, and Spacing: Tension splices in the circumferential
 reinforcement shall be made by lapping. Laps may be tack welded together for assembly
 purposes. For smooth welded wire fabric, the overlap shall meet the requirements of ACI
 12.8 and 12.19. For deformed welded wire fabric, the overlap shall meet the requirements
 of ACI 12.7 and 12.18. For deformed billet-steel bars, the overlap shall meet the
 requirements of ACI 12.2. For splices other than tension splices, the overlap shall be a
 minimum of 12 inches (300mm) for welded wire fabric or deformed billet-steel bars. The
 spacing center-to-center of the circumferential wires in a wire fabric sheet shall be not less
 than 2 inches (50mm) nor more than 4 inches (100mm). For the wire fabric, the spacing
 center-to-center of the longitudinal wires shall not be more than 8 inches (200mm). The
 spacing center-to-center of the longitudinal distribution steel for either line of reinforcing
 in the top slab shall be not more than 16 inches (400mm).
 470
 
 620.3.3-Cast-In-Place Three-Sided Bridge/Culvert: Cast-in-place structures shall be
 constructed per section 601.
 620.4-SUBMITTALS:
 620.4.1-General: The Contractor shall submit complete design calculations, explanatory
 notes, and detail plans for the proposed bridge/culvert system. The detail plans shall include
 all details, dimensions, quantities, and cross sections necessary to construct the bridge/culvert
 and shall include but not be limited to the following items:
 1. Hydraulic calculation, using Form 8-1 in the WVDOH Drainage Manual, latest
 edition, to determine the headwater elevation and velocity of flow for the proposed
 culvert, plus all supporting hydraulic calculations on separate sheets.
 2. Structure span and rise.
 3. Bridge/culvert section details showing all concrete dimensions and reinforcing steel
 requirements.
 4. Design computations and details for pedestals, when required.
 5. Footing details showing all concrete dimensions, elevations, and reinforcing steel
 with bar size, length, and spacing indicated. Footing plan and section views shall be
 provided. The soil bearing pressure used in the design shall be noted on the footing
 detail sheets.
 6. Wingwall design computations and details showing all concrete dimensions,
 reinforcing steel and anchorage details. Wingwall plan, elevation, and section views
 shall be provided.
 7. Headwall details, showing all concrete dimensions, reinforcing steel and anchorage
 details. Headwall elevation and section views shall be provided.
 8. Structure backfill type and limits for bridge/culvert units and wingwalls.
 9. Lifting handling points shown on drawings.
 At the time the detail plans are submitted for review, they shall be accompanied by design
 calculations and explanatory notes. These documents shall be legible and shall demonstrate
 that the design criteria have been met.
 The plans shall be prepared on reproducible sheets 11 x 17 inches (280 mm x 432 mm)
 including borders. Each sheet shall have a title block in the lower right hand corner. The title
 block shall include the sheet number of the drawing, name or designation of the structural unit
 detailed on the sheet, the state and federal project designation, project name, fabricator and
 Contractor name. Design calculations and notes shall be prepared on sheets 8½ x 11 inches
 (216 mm x 280 mm), and shall contain the project designation, structural unit designation, date
 of preparation, initials of designer and checker, and page number at the top of the page. The
 Detail Plans, Design Calculations, and Explanatory Notes shall be signed and stamped by a
 Professional Engineer registered in West Virginia and knowledgeable in the proposed
 bridge/culvert system.
 The initial submission shall include three sets of the detail plans, calculations, and notes.
 One set of notes and plans will be returned to the Contractor with any indicated corrections.
 When the plans and notes are stamped approved by the Engineer, the Contractor shall furnish
 the Engineer with the requested number of sets of prints and a Mylar set of the plans for
 distribution by the Division. The Contractor shall perform no work or ordering of materials for
 the structures until the Engineer has approved the submittal.
 471
 
 620.4.2-Precast Three-Sided Bridge/Culvert: The details and material specifications for
 the bridge/culvert system elements and incidental accessories shall be included with the detail
 plans for approval by the Engineer.
 620.4.3-Cast-in-Place Three Sided Bridge/Culvert: The plans for the cast-in-place
 bridge/culvert shall contain a complete reinforcing bar schedule showing all bending details
 and bar marks. The plans shall also show the location of all construction joints, expansion
 joints, or other joints in the bridge/culvert.
 620.5-MATERIALS:
 620.5.1-Concrete: The concrete for the bridge/culvert units shall be air-entrained
 composed of Portland cement, fine and coarse aggregates, admixtures and water. Concrete
 shall contain 7 ± 2 percent air. The air entraining admixture shall conform to section 707.1.
 620.5.1.1-Portland Cement: Shall conform to the requirements of sections 701.1 and
 701.3.
 620.5.1.2-Coarse Aggregate: Shall consist of stone having a maximum size of 1 inch
 (25mm). Aggregate shall meet the requirements of sections 703.1, 703.2 or 703.3.
 620.5.1.3-Water Reducing Admixture: The manufacturer may submit for approval
 by the Engineer, a water-reducing admixture, per section 707.3, for the purpose of
 increasing workability and reducing the water requirement for the concrete.
 620.5.1.4-Calcium Chloride: The addition to the mix of calcium chloride or
 admixtures containing calcium chloride will not be permitted.
 620.5.1.5-Fine Aggregates: Shall conform to section 702.1. Only siliceous sand shall
 be used when the top of the structure is to be the driving surface.
 620.5.1.6-Mixing Water: Shall conform to section 715.7.
 620.5.1.7-Water Reducers / Retarding Admixtures: Shall conform to section 707.2.
 620.5.1.8-Joint Material: Shall conform to Section 708.7.
 620.5.1.9-Pozzolanic Additives: Shall conform to Section 707.4.
 620.5.2-Reinforcing Steel: All reinforcing steel for the bridge/culvert units shall be
 fabricated and placed in accordance with the detailed shop drawings submitted by the
 manufacturer.
 Reinforcement shall be grade 60 or as specified in the plans, and shall comply with sections
 709.1, 709.4 or 709.6. Longitudinal distribution reinforcement may consist of welded wire
 fabric or deformed billet-steel bars.
 Steel reinforcing shall be epoxy coated per AASHTO M-284 or galvanized per AASHTO
 M-111 for structures installed at an elevation such that the top or crown of the structure is
 above the bottom of the subgrade in the pavement section.
 472
 
 620.5.3-Permissible Variations:
 620.5.3.1-Internal Dimensions: The internal dimensions shall not vary from the
 design dimensions by more than 1 percent or 1-1/2 inches (37mm), whichever is less. The
 haunch dimensions shall vary not more than 3/4 inch (19mm) from the design dimension.
 620.5.3.2-Slab and Wall Thickness: The slab and wall thickness not be less than that
 shown in the design by more than 1/4 inch (6mm). A thickness more than that required in
 the design shall not be cause for rejection.
 620.5.3.3-Length of Opposite Surfaces: Variations in laying lengths of the two
 opposite surfaces of the culvert shall not be more than 5/8 inch (16mm) in any
 bridge/culvert unit, except where beveled ends for laying of curves are specified by the
 purchaser.
 620.5.3.4-Length of Unit: The underrun in length of a unit shall not be more than 1/2
 inch (13mm) in any unit.
 620.5.3.5-Position of Reinforcement: The maximum variation in position of the
 reinforcement shall be + 1/2 inch (13mm). In no case shall the cover over the reinforcement
 be less than 1-1/2 inch (38mm) for the outside circumferential steel or be less than 1 inch
 (25mm) for the inside circumferential steel as measured to the external or internal surface
 of the bridge/culvert unit. These tolerances or cover requirements do not apply to mating
 surfaces of the joints.
 620.5.3.6-Area of Reinforcement: The areas of steel reinforcement shall be the design
 steel areas as shown in the manufacturer's shop drawings. Steel areas greater than those
 required shall not be cause for rejection. The permissible variation in diameter of any
 reinforcement shall conform to the tolerances prescribed in the ASTM Specification for
 that type of reinforcement.
 620.5.4-Curing: All Bridge/Culvert units shall be cured in accordance with Section
 601.12 except that curing may be discontinued once 70% of the design Strength is achieved.
 620.5.5-Testing and Inspection:
 620.5.5.1-Precast Three-Sided Bridge/Culvert Units:
 620.5.5.1.1-Type of Test Specimen: Concrete compressive strength shall be
 determined from compression tests made on cylinders or cores. For cylinder testing a
 minimum of 5 cylinders shall be fabricated during each production day. For core testing,
 one core shall be cut from a unit selected at random from each group of 15 units or less of
 a particular size and production run. For each continuous production run, each group of 15
 units of a single size or fraction thereof shall be considered separately for the purpose of
 testing and acceptance. A production run shall be considered continuous if not interrupted
 for more than 3 consecutive days.
 620.5.5.1.2-Compression Testing: Cylinders shall be made and tested as prescribed
 by the AASHTO T-22 and T-23 Specifications. Cores shall be obtained and tested for
 473
 
 compressive strength in accordance with the provisions of the AASHTO T280
 Specification.
 620.5.5.1.3-Acceptability of Cylinder Tests: Each compressive strength test used for
 acceptance shall consist of the average strength of a minimum of two compressive strength
 test cylinders fabricated from a single randomly selected batch of concrete as it is being
 placed in the forms. Failure of any of the individual 28 day test cylinders to meet 90 percent
 of the minimum compressive strength requirement can be cause for rejection. The average
 of all cylinders comprising a strength test must meet or exceed the design strength.
 620.5.5.1.4-Acceptability of Core Tests: The compressive strength of the concrete in
 each group of units as defined in 620.5.4.1.1 is acceptable when the core test strength is
 equal to or greater than the design concrete strength. When the compressive strength of
 the core tested is less than the design concrete strength, the unit from which that core was
 taken may be recored. When the compressive strength of the recore is equal to or greater
 than the design concrete strength, the compressive strength of the concrete in that group of
 units is acceptable.
 When the compressive strength of any recore is less than the design concrete strength,
 the unit from which that core was taken shall be rejected. Two units from the remainder
 of the group shall be selected at random and one core shall be taken from each. If the
 compressive strength of both cores is equal to or greater than the design concrete strength,
 the compressive strength of the remainder of that group of units is acceptable. If the
 compressive strength of either of the two cores tested is less than the design concrete
 strength, the remainder of the group of units shall be rejected or, at the option of the
 manufacturer, each culvert of the remainder of the group shall be cored and accepted
 individually, and any of these units that have cores with less than the design concrete
 strength shall be rejected.
 Plugging Core Holes-The core holes shall be plugged and sealed by the manufacturer
 in a manner such that the unit will meet all of the test requirements of this specification.
 Units so sealed shall be considered satisfactory for use.
 Test Equipment-Every manufacturer furnishing unit under this specification shall
 furnish all facilities and personnel necessary to carry out the test required.
 620.5.5.2-Cast-In-Place Three-Sided Bridge/Culvert:
 inspection shall be per section 601.
 
 Cast-in-place testing and
 
 620.5.6-Joints:
 620.5.6.1-Precast Three-Sided Arch-Topped Bridge/Culvert Units: The
 bridge/culvert units shall be produced with flat butt ends. The ends of the unit shall be
 such that when the sections are laid together they will make a continuous line of units with
 a smooth interior free of appreciable irregularities, all compatible with the permissible
 variations in 620.5.3.
 The joint width shall not exceed 3/4 inches (19mm).
 The outside edges of the ends of each bridge/culvert unit shall be chamfered.
 474
 
 The butt joint made by two adjoining units shall be covered with a piece of preformed
 bituminous joint sealant and a minimum of a nine inch wide joint wrap.
 620.5.6.2–Precast Three-Sided Flat-Topped Bridge/Culvert Units: The
 bridge/culvert units for flat-topped culverts shall be produced with a minimum 4 inches
 (100mm) deep by 1-1/2 inches (38mm) wide keyway joint. Shear key grout in accordance
 with Section 715.5 shall be placed in the keyway joint. Field Testing of shear key grout
 shall be performed by the Contractor in accordance with ASTM C109, as modified by
 ASTM C1107. Compressive strength of the grout shall be at least XXXX psi at X days as
 determined by the average result of three test specimens.
 620.5.7-Workmanship and Finish: The bridge/culvert units shall be substantially free of
 fractures. The ends of the units shall be normal to the walls and centerline of the unit section,
 within the limits of the variations given in 620.5.3, except where beveled ends are specified.
 The inside and outside surfaces of the units shall be a smooth steel form finish.
 620.5.8-Repairs: All repairs are to be performed in accordance with 620.10.2.
 620.5.9-Inspection: The quality of materials, the process of manufacture, and the finished
 bridge/culvert units shall be subject to inspection by the engineer.
 620.5.10-Rejection: Bridge/culvert units shall be subject to rejection on account of any of
 the specification requirements. Individual units may be rejected because of any of the
 following:
 a. Fractures or cracks passing through the wall, except for a single end crack that does not
 exceed one half the thickness of the wall.
 b. Defects that indicate proportioning, mixing, and molding not in compliance with
 Section 5.
 c. Honeycombed or open texture of surfaces greater than 6” x 6” (150mm x (150mm)
 whereby voids greater than ½” (13mm) diameter and over 1” (25mm) deep occur.
 d. Damaged joint mating surfaces where such damage prevents construction of a
 satisfactory joint. For butt type joints, damaged surfaces greater than 12” (300 mm)
 long and over 2” (50mm) deep will be cause for rejection of the units.
 e. For shear key type joints, damages surfaces of the shear key greater than 12” (300mm)
 long and deeper than the shear key may be cause for rejection.
 620.5.11-Marking: Each culvert shall be clearly marked by waterproof paint. The
 following shall be shown on the inside of the vertical leg of the culvert section:
 Bridge/Culvert Unit Span X Bridge/Culvert Unit Rise
 Date of Manufacture
 Name of the manufacturer
 WV State and Federal Project Number
 Project Contract Number
 
 475
 
 620.5.12-Backfill: Backfill material shall be select material for backfilling in accordance
 with 626.5.3. Backfilling shall be according to 626.6.1.3. The backfill material is to be placed
 in a zone with a minimum width that extends to a point located 4 feet (1.2 meters) outside the
 base of each leg and with a height being equal to the outside height of the structure plus two
 feet or the minimum cover, whichever is less. This material is also to be placed to a depth of
 at least 4 feet (1.2 meters) behind each wingwall.
 Additional granular material requirements are the responsibility of the contractor and the
 bridge/culvert supplier.
 620.6-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 620.6.1-Precast Three-Sided Bridge/Culvert:
 620.6.1.1-Footings: The bridge/culvert units shall be installed on cast-in-place
 concrete footings. The elevation of the bottom of the footing shall be equal to or lower
 than the elevation as shown on the plans. A keyway for grouting with a minimum depth of
 3 inches (75mm) shall be formed in the top surface of the footing and the keyway shall
 extend to where 3 inches (75mm) clear of the inside and outside faces of the bridge/culvert
 unit, unless specified otherwise on the plans or by the bridge/culvert system supplier. The
 footings shall be given a rough float finish and shall reach a compressive strength of 2,000
 psi (14 Mpa) before placement of the bridge/culvert units. The completed footing surface
 shall be constructed in accordance with grades shown on the plans. When tested with a 10
 foot (3 meter) straight edge, the top surface of the footings shall not vary more than 1/4
 inch (6mm) in 10 feet (3 meters).
 The foundation is to be constructed in accordance with the approved shop drawings.
 620.6.1.2-Placement of the Bridge/Culvert Units: A representative of the
 manufacturer shall be present during the first three days the structure is being placed. The
 units shall be placed as shown on the Engineer’s plan drawings. Special care shall be taken
 in setting the units to the true line and grade. The units shall be set on masonite or steel
 shims at least 5 inches (125mm) square, or on a concrete leveling pad cast inside the
 keyway. When set on shims a minimum of a 1/2 inch (13mm) gap shall be provided
 between the footing and the base of the unit leg.
 Prior to grouting three sided structures with legs that have a curved exterior surface,
 the legs shall be supported horizontally using hardwood wedges driven between the outside
 of the structure leg and the wall of the keyway. The requirements for the grout will conform
 to 715.5 and testing of the grout shall be performed by the Contractor in accordance with
 ASTM C109, as modified by ASTM C1107. Compressive strength of the grout shall be at
 least XXXX psi at X days as determined by the average result of three test specimens.
 Wedges shall be spaced no more than two feet (600mm) apart along both sides of the
 structure.
 620.6.1.3-External Waterproofing: When specified on the plans and the limits of
 application are shown, a waterproofing membrane as described below shall be applied to
 the top and the sides of the structure unless the top of the structure is to be the driving
 surface. The material should be installed per the waterproofer manufacturer’s instructions.
 
 476
 
 Property
 Strip Tensile
 Puncture Resistance
 Permeance
 Pliability
 
 Value 1
 50 lbs./in. (8.7 kN/m)
 200 lbs. (890 N)
 0.10 perms (max.)
 No cracks in fabric or
 rubberized asphalt
 
 Test Method
 ASTM D 8822
 ASTM E 154
 ASTM E 96, Method B
 ASTM D 1463
 
 1 Minimum average roll values unless otherwise noted
 2 Using 12 in/min (300mm/min) test speed and 1” (25mm) initial distance between grips.
 3 Using 180 bend on ¼ inch (6mm) mandrel at -25F (-32C)
 
 The surface shall be free of dirt before applying the waterproofing material. A primer
 compatible with the waterproofing membrane to be used shall be applied before the
 membrane is installed. The structure should be covered continuously from the bottom of
 one bridge/culvert unit leg, across the top of the structure and to the bottom of the opposite
 bridge/culvert unit leg. The joint between the end unit and the headwall shall also be sealed
 by carrying the membrane up the headwall at least 4 inches (100mm). If precast wingwalls
 are used, the joint between the wingwall and the end units should be covered in a similar
 fashion, or, at the discretion of the engineer, filter fabric can be substituted.
 620.6.1.4-Backfill Placement: Backfill shall be considered as all replaced excavation
 and new embankment adjacent to the precast bridge/culvert units and wingwalls. The
 project construction and material specifications, which include the specifications for
 excavation for structures and roadway excavation and embankment construction, shall
 apply except as modified in this section.
 No backfill shall be placed against any structural elements until they have been
 approved by the Engineer. No backfill shall be placed against the structure until the grout
 has cured for a minimum of 12 hours. On three sided structures with legs that have a curved
 exterior surface the grout shall be cured for a minimum of 72 hours before placing backfill
 against the structure.
 Backfill against the waterproofing membrane when specified on the plans shall be
 placed carefully to avoid damage to the waterproofing material.
 Mechanical tampers or approved compacting equipment shall be used to compact all
 backfill and embankment immediately adjacent to each side of the bridge/culvert and over
 the top of the bridge/culvert until it is covered to a minimum depth of one foot. The backfill
 within 4 feet (1.2 meters) of each side of the bridge/culvert shall be placed in lifts of 8
 inches (200mm) or less (loose depth). Heavy compaction equipment shall not be operated
 in this area or over the bridge/culvert until it is covered to a depth of 1 foot (300mm).
 Lightweight dozers and graders may be operated over culverts having 1 foot (300mm)
 of compacted cover, but heavy earth moving equipment (larger than a D-4 Dozer weighing
 in excess of 12 tons (11 Mg) and having track pressures of eight psi (55 kPa) or greater)
 shall require two feet (600mm) of cover unless the design cover is less than two feet
 (600mm). In no case shall equipment operating in excess of the design load be permitted
 over the bridge/culvert unless approved by the Engineer.
 
 477
 
 Any additional fill and subsequent excavation required to provide this minimum cover
 shall be made at no additional cost to the project. When placing backfill at no time shall
 the difference between the heights of fill on opposite sides of the bridge/culvert exceed 18”
 (450mm). Backfill in front of wingwalls shall be carried to ground lines shown in the
 plans.
 620.6.2-Cast-in-Place Reinforced Concrete: Except as otherwise shown in the plans or
 herein, construction methods for cast-in-place three-sided structures shall comply with the
 Standard Specifications. When specified on the plans, a waterproofing membrane per section
 620.6.1.3 shall be applied to the exterior top and the sides of the structure. Construction
 methods for the following shall be per the indicated section of the Standard Specifications:
 ITEM
 Unclassified Borrow Excavation
 Structure Excavation
 Rock Excavation
 Wet Excavation
 Select Material for Backfilling
 Concrete
 Reinforcing Steel
 
 SECTION
 211
 212
 212
 212
 613.5.11
 601
 602
 
 620.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Excluding headwalls and wingwalls, three-sided bridge/culverts shall be measured by the
 linear foot, the measurement being along the centerline of the bridge/culvert and extending from
 the exposed face to exposed face of the headwalls.
 Wingwalls shall be measured by the unit. A wingwall is the entire end section for the threesided structure including but not limited to headwalls, aprons, foundations for the wingwall, cutoff walls and appurtenances. There shall be no measurement and payment for headwalls.
 Headwalls shall be incidental to and included in the unit bid price of the wingwalls.
 There shall be no separate measurement and payment for the excavation required for
 installing the bridge/culvert, including any undercut to establish an adequate foundation.
 Excavation, whether unclassified, structure, rock or wet excavation shall be incidental to and
 included in the unit bid price for the bridge/culvert and wingwalls.
 There shall be no separate measurement and payment for backfill below an elevation two
 feet above the top or crown of the outside of the bridge/culvert whether such backfill is unclassified
 borrow, select rock fill, select backfill or salvaged existing streambed material. All such backfill
 shall be incidental to and included in the unit bid price for the bridge/culvert and wingwalls.
 There shall be no separate measurement and payment for waterproofing membrane if the
 waterproofing membrane is specified on the plans and the limits of application are shown.
 Concrete and backfill shall be placed under dry conditions. Should cofferdams, pumping
 or other methods be necessary to maintain dry conditions, the cost of these methods shall be
 incidental to and included in the unit bid price for the bridge/culvert and wingwalls.
 If the maintenance of traffic scheme necessitates the use of sheet piling or bulkheads during
 the installation of the bridge/culvert, the cost of piling and bulkheads shall be incidental to and
 included in the unit bid price for the bridge/culvert and wingwalls.
 478
 
 If the design necessitates undercutting the foundation and backfilling to the footing
 elevation with select rock fill, the select rock fill shall be separated from soils with fabric for
 separation per subsection 715.11.8. The cost of the fabric shall be incidental to the unit bid price
 for the bridge/culvert and wingwalls.
 The cost of the construction layout work shall be incidental to and included in the unit bid
 price for the bridge/culvert and wingwalls.
 Additional work arising from changed conditions found during the construction from those
 shown on the approved drawings shall be paid in accordance with 109.4.
 620.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract price per unit
 of measurement, respectively, for each pay item listed below and shown in the bid schedule, which
 prices and payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section.
 620.9-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 620001-*
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Arch-Topped
 Bridge/Culvert, “vendor name”
 620002-*
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Flat-Topped
 Bridge/Culvert, “vendor name”
 620003-*
 Cast-In-Place Reinforced Concrete Culvert
 620004-*
 Wingwall for Concrete Culvert
 620005-*
 Two-Piece Precast Reinforced Concrete Arch
 Bridge/Culvert
 * Sequence number
 
 479
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 
 SECTION 621
 STEEL GRID FLOORING
 621.1-DESCRIPTION:
 Steel grid flooring shall be of the open type or concrete filled type as shown on the Plans.
 The floor shall meet the requirements for the design of steel grid floors of the current issue of
 AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges. Before fabrication or construction is
 undertaken, the Contractor shall submit complete shop and assembly details to the Engineer for
 approval, and no work shall be done until written approval of such details has been received.
 621.2-MATERIALS:
 621.2.1-Steel: All steel except as noted below shall conform to the requirements of ASTM
 A 36 and shall have a copper content of not less than 0.2 percent. Form strips used in concrete
 filled grid floors shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A 569.
 621.2.2-Concrete: All concrete in filled steel grid floors shall conform to the requirements
 for Class A Concrete as specified in 601.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 621.3-ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS:
 All steel shall be straight and true to line and shall be assembled in a workmanlike manner.
 Where the main elements are transverse to the centerline of roadway, the units generally
 shall be of such length as to extend over the full width of the roadway for roadways up to 40 feet
 (12 meters), but in no case shall the units extend over less than four supports. Where joints are
 required, the ends of the main elements shall be welded at the joints over their full cross sectional
 area or otherwise connected to provide full continuity.
 Where the main elements are parallel to the centerline of roadway, the sections shall be as
 long as practicable, but in no case shall the units extend over less than four supports. The ends of
 the abutting units shall be welded over their full cross sectional area or otherwise connected to
 provide full continuity in accordance with the design.
 621.4-PROVISION OF CAMBER:
 Provisions for camber shall be made as follows:
 Rigid units that will not readily follow the roadway camber or the roadway crown, as the
 case may be, shall be cambered in the shop.
 Longitudinal stringers shall be mill cambered or provided with varying thickness bearing
 bars along their centerlines so that the completed floor, after dead load deflection, shall conform
 to the camber shown on the Plans.
 Transverse stringers shall be mill cambered or provided with varying thickness bearing
 bars along their centerlines so that the completed floor shall conform to the crown shown on the
 Plans. These stringers shall also be placed normal to the crown of the roadway to provide even
 bearings for the grid sections.
 Where bars are used, the design span length of the grid shall be governed by the width of
 the bar.
 
 480
 
 621.5-FIELD ASSEMBLY:
 Areas of considerable size shall be assembled before the floor is welded to its supports.
 The main elements shall be made continuous, and sections shall be connected together along their
 edges by welding of bars or by other methods meeting with the approval of the Engineer.
 621.6-CONNECTION TO SUPPORTS:
 The floor shall be connected to its steel supports by welding. Provisions shall be made to
 provide bearing of all sections on the supporting members by shimming or added weldment. The
 location, length, and size of welds shall be as per the Manufacturer's recommendations or as shown
 on the Plans.
 The ends of all the main steel members of the slab shall be securely fastened together at
 the sides of the roadway for the full length of the span by means of steel plates or angles welded
 to the ends of the main elements or by thoroughly encasing the ends with concrete where the main
 members are parallel to traffic; suitable side trim shall be used connecting the cross members.
 621.7-WELDING:
 All shop and field welding shall be done in accordance with 615.5.7.
 Surfaces to be welded shall be free from paint, grease, loose scale, rust and other material
 that will prevent a proper weld. A thin coating of linseed oil, without pigment, need not be
 removed. Any clinkers or slag resulting from flame cutting or other causes shall be removed before
 welding.
 621.8-CONCRETE FILLER:
 Floor types with bottom flanges not in contact shall be provided with bottom forms of sheet
 metal to retain the concrete filler without excessive leakage. These strips shall fit tightly on the
 bottom flanges of the floor members but shall extend a minimum distance on the flanges in order
 that there shall be adequate bearing area of the slab on the support.
 The concrete shall be Class A, mixed, placed, and cured in accordance with the
 requirements outlined in 601. The concrete shall be thoroughly compacted by vibrating the steel
 grid floor in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer.
 621.9-PAINTING:
 All painting shall conform to the provisions in section 688. The paint system shall be
 specified in the contract documents.
 621.10-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Steel grid flooring will be measured by the number of square feet (meters) complete in
 place, not including Class A concrete. The volume of Class A Concrete will be computed on the
 basis of a slab equal to the thickness of the steel grid flooring as called for on the Plans, minus the
 volume of metal in the steel grid flooring. The volume of metal will be determined from the weight
 of the steel grid flooring as listed by the fabricator. The cost of construction of roadway drains,
 scuppers, downspouts, etc., where specified, shall be included in the price bid for Class A
 Concrete. The expansion devices will be included in the item of structural steel.
 
 481
 
 621.11-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the items listed below, which price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all
 the materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including
 all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work; except that
 Class A concrete will be paid for under Item 601001-*.
 621.12-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 621001-* Steel Grid Flooring, Filled Type
 621002-* Steel Grid Flooring, Open Type
 * Sequence number
 
 482
 
 UNIT
 Square Foot (Meter)
 Square Foot (Meter)
 
 SECTION 622
 TIMBER BRIDGE STRUCTURES
 622.1-GENERAL:
 622.1.1-This work shall consist of the fabrication and erection or fabrication and delivery
 of timber bridge structures in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close
 conformity with the lines, grades, dimensions and locations shown on the Plans. All work
 shall be done and all materials shall meet the requirements of this specification and plan notes.
 622.1.2-These specifications apply to the following types of timber bridge structures:
 Type A: Longitudinal Stress-Laminated Plank Deck
 The superstructure is formed by longitudinal vertical sawn lumber laminations which are
 clamped together on their wide faces by high-strength steel stressing thread bars through holes
 in the laminations. Stressing pressure is transferred to the timber by bearing plates located
 along the outer laminations at the edge of the deck and develops sufficient friction between the
 laminations to cause them to perform structurally as a unit.
 Type B: Cellular Structural Glued-Laminated Beams with Longitudinal Stress-Laminated
 Plank Deck
 The superstructure is formed by longitudinal glued-laminated beams which are stresslaminated into two layers of longitudinal vertical sawn lumber laminations. One layer of
 vertical lumber is at the top surface of the glued-laminated beam and forms the deck. The
 second layer is at the bottom surface of the beam. The resulting cross-section is a closed cell
 box beam configuration.
 Type C: Structural Glued-Laminated Beams with Longitudinal Stress-Laminated Plank
 Deck.
 The superstructure is a Tee cross-section formed by longitudinal glued-laminated beams
 which are stress-laminated with a layer of vertical sawn lumber to form the deck.
 Type D: Structural Glued-Laminated Beams with Transverse Glued-Laminated Deck
 Panels.
 The superstructure consists of longitudinal glued-laminated beams with a non-composite
 transverse glued-laminated deck panels over the beams.
 Type E: Structural Glued-Laminated Longitudinal Deck Panels with Transverse GluedLaminated Stiffener Beams
 The superstructure consists of longitudinal glued-laminated deck panels with transverse
 glued-laminated stiffener beams.
 622.2-MATERIALS:
 622.2.1-Stress Laminated Plank Deck, Solid Sawn Curbs, Guardrail Posts and
 Guardrail: All structural lumber used in the bridge construction will be Northern Red Oak
 except when Structural Glued-Laminated Timber is specified on the Plans.
 All lumber and timber shall be graded in accordance with the Standard Grading Rules for
 Northeastern Lumber, as published by the Northeastern Lumber Manufacturer's Association
 Incorporated (NELMA), 272 Tuttle Road, P.O. Box 87A, Cumberland Center, Maine 04021,
 Telephone # (207) 829-6901.
 
 483
 
 Lumber for stress-laminated plank decks shall be # 3 Grade or better except wane shall
 meet # 1 Grade, as specified in the above grading standards Section 20.0 for Structural Joists
 and Planks. Grading may be performed after rough sawing to approximate dimensions,
 however crook shall meet the grading rules after preservative treatment. Stress-laminated deck
 lumber shall be sawed, surfaced two sides (S2S), resawed or otherwise processed so that the
 resulting fit between adjacent planks will meet the applicable Manufacture-Standard as defined
 by the NELMA grading rules for the faces.
 The thickness of planks shall be from 1-½ inches (40 mm) through 2 inches (50 mm) with
 only one size to be used in a bridge deck. Stress-laminated deck lumber shall contain not less
 than 12% nor more than 19% moisture (oven dry basis) after preservative treatment and prior
 to fabrication. Moisture content is to be confirmed in accordance with AWPA A6, using a
 minimum sample size of 40 cores per lot of deck lumber taken at random throughout the lot.
 The length of each core sample shall be one-half the thickness of the deck plank.
 Timber for guardrail posts and blockouts, curbs, curb blocks, and guardrail when specified
 on the Plans shall be "# 2 Grade" or better as specified in the above grading standards Section
 25.0 for Beams and Stringers. Material may be rough saw cut to the approximate dimensions
 shown on the Plans so that after conditioning and preservative treatment the actual dimensions
 are within plus or minus 3/16 inch (5 mm) of plan cross sectional dimensions.
 All lumber and timber shall be graded, approved and stamped or tagged by a lumber grader,
 certified by an agency who has been approved by The Board of Review of the American
 Lumber Standards Committee.
 All dimensions shown on the Plans for structural lumber shall be actual dimensions.
 When structural glued-laminated timber members are specified on the Plans they shall meet
 the requirements of Section 622.2.6.
 622.2.2-Timber Substructures: All beams, stringers, posts, timber and lumber for timber
 substructures shall be "# 2 Grade" or better Northern Red Oak as specified in the above grading
 standards Section 25.0 for Beams and Stringers, Section 26.0 for Posts and Timbers or Section
 20.0 for Structural Joists and Planks as appropriate.
 All beams, posts, timber, stringers and lumber shall be graded, approved and stamped or
 tagged by a lumber grader, certified by an agency who has been approved by The Board of
 Review of the American Lumber Standards Committee.
 All dimensions shown on the Plans for structural beams, stringers, posts, timber and lumber
 shall be actual dimensions.
 When structural glued-laminated timber members are specified on the Plans they shall meet
 the requirements of Section 622.2.6.
 622.2.3-Metal:
 622.2.3.1-Steel Products: Structural shapes, plates and bars (except steel thread bars
 and fabrication bars) shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M 270M Grade 250.
 Components requiring fabrication will be made in accordance with Section 615 of the
 Standard Specifications. Where welded fabrication is required, all work shall be in
 accordance with ANSI/AASHTO/AWS Bridge Welding Code D1.5. Nondestructive
 testing of welds is not required. All steel products shall be hot-dip galvanized, after
 fabrication to AASHTO M 111 except where otherwise noted. Properly documented
 
 484
 
 certified mill test reports shall be provided for all above steel products. Certifications for
 hot-dip galvanizing shall be provided by the galvanizing plant.
 622.2.3.2-Thread Bars: Steel thread bars shall be the size shown in the Plans and shall
 be designed to allow the use of anchor nuts and couplers that thread onto the deformations.
 Anchor nuts and couplers shall be of a design and material recommended by the thread bar
 manufacturer to develop the full tensile strength of the bar. Thread bars shall meet the
 following:
 622.2.3.2.1: Steel thread bars shall be manufactured by a suitable process which will
 produce bars meeting the chemical, mechanical and physical requirements of AASHTO M
 275M, Type II. Where 5/8 inch (15 mm) diameter nominal size bars are specified on the
 Plans, bars may be supplied to the following requirements in lieu of the above.
 622.2.3.2.2: Alternate bars for 5/8 inch (15 mm) size shall meet the following Table:
 Nominal Diameter (max.)
 Effective cross sectional area
 Height of deformations
 Weight per linear meter
 Yield strength (min.)
 Ultimate strength (min.)
 Elongation, min. (20 bar diameters) or
 Elongation, min. (10 bar diameters)
 Heat analysis:
 Phosphorus content (max.)
 Sulfur content (max.)
 
 ¾ inch (19 mm)
 0.28 square inches (181 mm2) min
 0.33 square inches (213 mm2) max.
 0.045 inches (1.14 mm) min.
 0.060 inches (1.52 mm) max.
 1.15 lbs (1.71 kg) min.
 1.35 lbs (2.01 kg) max.
 34,000 lbs (151.2 kN)
 (0.2% offset or 0.7% extension under load)
 40,000 lbs (177.9 kN)
 4.0%
 7.0%
 0.040%
 0.050%
 
 All tension tests to be performed in accordance with AASHTO M 275M.
 622.2.3.2.3: Properly documented certified mill test reports will be provided for each
 heat of steel thread bars. Mill test reports will document compliance with paragraph
 622.2.3.2.1 or 622.2.3.2.2 as applicable.
 622.2.3.2.4: All thread bars, anchor nuts, couplers and ancillary hardware shall be hotdip galvanized to AASHTO M 111. Prior to galvanizing, thread bars shall be blast cleaned
 to Steel Structures Painting Council Surface Preparation Specification Number 6
 (Commercial Blast Cleaning). Acid pickling of thread bars will not be permitted. To
 provide for proper assembly after galvanizing, excess zinc shall be removed by machining
 using suitable thread taps and dies from the threads of nuts, couplings and thread-bars as
 necessary. Removal of excess zinc by heating will not be permitted.
 485
 
 622.2.3.3-Timber Fasteners: Dome head drive spikes and washer head drive spikes
 noted on the Plans shall be Sealtite Dome Head Drive Spikes and Lewis Washer Head
 Timber Drive Spikes as manufactured by Lewis Bolt and Nut Company, Minneapolis,
 Minnesota, or as approved by the Engineer. Round head bolts noted on the Plans shall be
 metric round head square neck bolts (carriage bolts) meeting the requirements of
 ANSI/ASME Specification B18.5.2.2M. Dome head bolts noted on the Plans shall have a
 circular dome shaped head and shall meet the requirements of ASTM A 307, except head
 markings are not required. Hex head bolts shall be hex or heavy hex and shall meet ASTM
 A 307. 1¼ inches (30 mm) dome head bolts shall have a minimum head diameter of 3
 inches (75 mm) and a minimum head height of 9/16 inch (14 mm). Nuts shall be hex or
 heavy hex meeting AASHTO M 291M or AASHTO M 292M. Round washers shall be
 Type A, Wide Series meeting the requirements of ASTM F 844. Washers noted on the
 Plans as "timber washers" shall be oversize in diameter and thickness, manufactured from
 cast or malleable iron, hot-dip galvanized and of a style and design typically used in heavy
 timber construction. Fluted steel dowels (spiral dowels) shall be as manufactured by
 Wadsworth Equipment Company, Akron, Ohio or as approved by the Engineer. All timber
 fasteners shall be hot-dip galvanized to meet AASHTO M 232M. Mill test reports,
 certifications or testing of above fasteners is not required. Acceptance will be based on
 visual inspection at the project site or at the fabricator's plant.
 622.2.3.4-Anchor Bolts at Abutments or Piers: Anchor bolts at bridge abutments or
 piers shall be ¾ inch (20 mm) diameter steel "all thread" rods meeting the requirements of
 ASTM A 307, hot-dip galvanized to AASHTO M 232M. Bolt length is governed by deck,
 timber or steel angle thickness and embedment in concrete as noted on the Plans. Nuts and
 washers shall be as specified in paragraph 622.2.3.3. Mill test reports, certifications or
 testing of anchor bolts, nuts or washers is not required. Acceptance will be based on visual
 inspection at the project site or at the fabricator's plant.
 Anchor bolts in concrete are to be installed using Molly "Parabond" Capsule Chemical
 Anchor System as manufactured by Molly Fastener Group, 504 Mt. Laurel Avenue,
 Temple, Pennsylvania 19560, Telephone: (215) 929-5674, or Sup-R-Set Capsules
 Chemical Anchor System as manufactured by Gunnebo Fastening Corp., P.O. Box 1589,
 York, PA 17405, Telephone (717) 846-2200, or Rawl Chem-Stud #6500 as manufactured
 by the Rawl Plug Co., Inc., Two F.B. Powers Square, New Rochelle, NY, 10802,
 Telephone (914) 235-6300, or approved equal. Installation of anchor bolts is to be in
 accordance with the chemical capsule manufacturer's recommendations. The end of each
 anchor bolt is to be ground to the configuration recommended by the chemical capsule
 manufacturer.
 Certification or testing of chemical anchor system is not required.
 622.2.3.5-Split Rings, Shear Plates and Nails: Split rings shown or noted on the
 Plans shall be TECO Wedge-Fit Split Rings, Type M-2, as manufactured by TECO,
 Colliers, West Virginia or approved equal. Shear plates shown or noted on the Plans shall
 be TECO Shear Plates Type 143-D Galvanized, as manufactured by TECO, Colliers, West
 Virginia or approved equal. Split rings and shear plates shall be furnished hot-dip
 galvanized. Mill test reports, certifications or testing of split rings is not required.
 Acceptance will be based on visual inspection only.
 486
 
 Miscellaneous nails required during fabrication will be sized by the fabricator
 considering the intended function. Certification or testing is not required.
 622.2.3.6-Steel Beam Guardrail: Steel beam guardrail, fasteners and accessories,
 when specified on the Plans, shall be in accordance with AASHTO M 180, Type II, Class
 A, unless otherwise noted. All materials shall be supplied by companies which are
 included on the Division's list of Certified Suppliers of Guardrail and Associated
 Hardware.
 The Contractor will be responsible for drilling additional holes in the rail, if required,
 to fit the post spacing shown on the Plans.
 622.2.3.7-Anchor Bolts For Guardrail and Diaphragm Fasteners: Anchor bolts
 connecting steel beam guardrail to wood guardrail shall meet AASHTO M 164M with
 appropriate nuts and washers, all hot-dip galvanized to AASHTO M 232M. Pipe sleeves
 at guardrail connection are to be DN25 standard galvanized steel pipe, schedule 40, and
 may be cut to specified length by pipe cutter or saw cut without repair of cut surface.
 Lag screws and standard washers for installation of diaphragms between structural
 glued-laminated beams shall be standard hex head lag screws and standard mild steel
 washers all hot-dip galvanized to AASHTO M 232M.
 Steel rods, threaded both ends, for installation of diaphragms and guard rail post
 supports to structural glued-laminated beams shall be manufactured from steel rod meeting
 AASHTO M 270M Grade 250 or AASHTO M 169 Grade 1018 thru 1045. Nuts and timber
 washers shall meet the requirements of Section 622.2.3.3. All materials shall be hot-dip
 galvanized to AASHTO M 232M.
 Mill test reports, certifications or testing of anchor bolts, nuts, washers, lag screws or
 pipe sleeves is not required. Acceptance will be based on visual inspection at the project
 site or at the supplier's plant.
 622.2.3.8-Fabrication bars and accessories for modular construction: Fabrication
 bars shall be nominal ¾ inch (20 mm) O.D. all thread high strength steel bar with the
 following properties:
 Nominal diameter
 Yield Strength (min.)
 Ultimate strength (min.)
 Elongation, min (20 bar diameter) or
 Elongation, min (10 bar diameter)
 Chemical Analysis:
 Phosphorus content (max.)
 Sulfur content (max.)
 
 ¾ inch (19 mm)
 34,000 lbs (151.2 kN)
 (0.2% offset or 0.7% extension under load)
 40,000 lbs (177.9 kN)
 4.0%
 7.0%
 0.040%
 0.050%
 
 Tension tests shall be performed on full size samples in accordance with ASTM A 370.
 Threads shall be 10 Threads per inch (2.5 mm per thread) Unified Coarse Thread Series as
 specified in ANSI B1.1 and shall have Class 2A tolerances.
 Nuts for use with fabrication bars shall be heavy hex series and shall meet AASHTO
 M 291M Grade C, D or DH, or shall meet AASHTO M 292M Grade 2 or 2H.
 487
 
 Bearing and anchor plates shall be carbon steel and shall meet AASHTO M 270M
 Grade 250.
 All material supplied under this paragraph is to be plain, uncoated. Hot dip galvanizing
 is not required.
 The Contractor will provide the Engineer with mill test reports or certifications from
 the material producers which indicate the materials supplied are in conformance with the
 referenced specifications.
 622.2.3.9-Aluminum Deck Bracket: Cast aluminum brackets connecting glulam deck
 panels to glulam stringers shall be of a design and dimensions as shown on the Plans and
 shall meet the requirements ASTM B 108 Alloy 356.0 Temper T6. The Contractor shall
 provide the Engineer with a letter of certification from the foundry producing the castings.
 Acceptance shall be based on the certification and visual inspection at the fabrication plant
 or on the project site.
 622.2.4-Preservative Treatment: Treatment of all sawn timber and umber shall be by the
 Empty Cell process in accordance with the American Wood Preserver's Association (AWPA)
 Standard C2. Treating solution shall be Coal Tar Creosote conforming to AWPA Standard P1.
 Treatment retention shall be 7.0 pcf (112.1 kilogram per cubic meter (kg/m3)) minimum and
 shall be determined by the gauge or weight method.
 All lumber and timber members shall be dimensioned, cut, machined and drilled prior to
 preservative treatment except stress-laminated deck lumber 2 inches (50 mm) or less in
 thickness, which can be drilled or cut to length after treatment. Deck lumber cut to length after
 pressure treatment shall have the saw cut ends treated in accordance with AWPA Standard M4.
 Holes in deck boards drilled to accept steel thread bars, to provide for void drains, or to attach
 guardrail and curbs do not require treatment of holes.
 All surfaces shall be free of excess treatment solutions at the time of delivery to the job
 site.
 622.2.5-Elastomeric Bearing Pads: Elastomeric bearing pads shall be of the size and type
 shown on the Plans and shall conform to the AASHTO M 251 with a durometer hardness of
 60.
 622.2.6-Structural Glued-Laminated Timber (Glulam):
 All structural GluedLaminated Timber members shall be visually graded Southern Pine or visually graded Douglas
 Fir-Larch as shown on the drawings and specified below.
 Materials, manufacture and quality control shall be in accordance with American National
 Standards Institute/American Institute of Timber Construction (ANSI/AITC) Standard A
 190.1, Structural Glued-Laminated Timber, and shall provide allowable design values as
 shown on the Plans. All design values are based on wet condition of service. Adhesives shall
 meet the requirements of wet-use for wet conditions of service. Appearance of the members
 shall be industrial grade. Surfaces of members shall be not sealed and members shall not be
 wrapped. Members shall be marked with a Quality Mark and, in addition, a Certificate of
 Conformance shall be provided to the Engineer to indicate conformance with ANSI/AITC A
 190.1, Structural Glued-Laminated Timber.
 All Structural Glued-Laminated Timber members shall be preservative treated in
 accordance with AITC Standard 109, Standard for Preservative Treatment of Structural Glued488
 
 Laminated Timber and AWPA Standard C28, Standard for Preservative Treatment of
 Structural Glued-Laminated Timber. Treating solution shall be Coal Tar Creosote conforming
 to AWPA Standard P1. Treatment retention shall be 12.0 pcf (192.2 kilogram per cubic meter
 (kg/m3)) minimum, and shall be determined by the assay method. Incising is required prior to
 treatment for members manufactured from Douglas Fir-Larch.
 At the completion of the treating cycle, all structural glued-laminated material shall be
 cleaned by final steaming for three (3) hours at a temperature between 220˚ F (105˚ C) and
 240˚ F (115˚ C).
 All surfaces shall be free of excess treatment solution at the time of delivery to the job site.
 All Structural Glued-Laminated Timber members shall be dimensioned, machined, have
 holes bored and cut to proper length prior to preservative treatment except diaphragms for
 Type B and C bridges may be trimmed to length for up to 1 inch (25 mm) after treatment
 provided the trimming is followed by re-treatment in accordance with AWPA Standard M4.
 Holes bored for lag screws for Type B and C bridges may be done after preservative treatment
 provided all holes are treated in accordance with AWPA Standard M4.
 622.3-QUALITY CONTROL:
 622.3.1-Contractor's Responsibility: The Contractor is responsible for control of the
 product through all manufacturing operations to assure that the completed work is in
 conformance with these specifications.
 As required by paragraphs 622.2.1 and 622.2.2, all lumber and timber shall be graded,
 approved and stamped or tagged by a certified grader. The Contractor shall schedule, contract
 and otherwise arrange for the specified grading inspection. Cost of the inspection is to be
 included as incidental to the work. The Contractor will provide the Engineer suitable reports
 which document the acceptance of the lumber by the certified grader.
 622.3.2-Manufacturers of Structural Glued-Laminated Timber: All manufacturers of
 Structural Glued-Laminated Timber (Glulam) members shall be a "licensed laminator" by the
 AITC as required by ANSI/AITC Standard 190.1. A list of AITC licensed laminators can be
 obtained from the American Institute of Timber Construction, 11818 S.E. Mill Plain
 Boulevard, Suite 415, Vancouver, Washington 98684, Telephone (206) 254-9132 or (800)
 525-1625.
 622.3.3-Wood Preserving Plant: The wood preserving plant shall comply in all respects
 with AWPA Standard M3, Standard Quality Control Procedures for Wood Preserving Plants.
 The quality control inspector's responsibilities and inspection procedures are to be in
 accordance with AWPA Standard M3, Standard Quality Control Procedures for Wood
 Preserving Plants and AWPA Standard M2, Standard for Inspection of Treated Lumber
 Products. The quality control inspector shall conduct all inspections and tests and maintain all
 records and reports required by the above mentioned AWPA Standards and shall provide
 copies to the Engineer. Upon completion of all treating operations the treater will also supply
 a Certificate of Compliance as required by paragraph 7.1 of AWPA Standard M3.
 622.3.4-Division's Inspection: The Division shall conduct routine inspections of all
 laminating, manufacturing, sawing, machining, grading and treating operations to assure the
 Contractor is complying with the specification requirements. Where deficiencies in material
 489
 
 or procedures are noted by the Division inspector, the Contractor shall take immediate steps to
 correct the deficiency. Any materials found defective or deficient will be rejected and shall be
 replaced with acceptable material at no cost to the Division.
 622.4-SHOP AND ERECTION DRAWINGS:
 The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer, in the required number of copies, a complete
 set of shop and erection drawings as required by Section 105.2 of the Standard Specifications. The
 drawings shall consist of such detail Plans as may be reasonably required for the successful
 completion of the work. Shop drawings shall include detailed dimensions and arrangement of the
 stress-laminating system, deck lumber dimensions including joint locations where full length
 boards are not utilized, full dimensions and bolting layout of the curb and guardrail when specified,
 and all bearing details. Shop drawings shall also include details of all Structural Glued-Laminated
 Timber members.
 Upon completion of all fabrication operations and shipment of all material to the project
 site the Contractor shall forward to the Engineer a complete set of as-built shop drawings in
 reproducible quality (Mylar or equivalent). The set will consist of the latest revisions of each
 individual shop drawing that has been previously submitted and approved by the Engineer.
 All drawings shall be submitted to the Engineer for approval a minimum of two (2) weeks
 prior to the start of fabrication. All dimensions shall be in metric units only.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 622.5-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 Stress-laminated and structural glued-laminated timber bridges are to be fabricated and
 erected in accordance with the Plans and these specifications.
 622.5.1-Handling: Treated timber shall be carefully handled without sudden dropping,
 breaking of outer fibers, bruising, or penetrating the surface with tools. Treated members shall
 be handled with web slings. Cant hooks, peaveys, pikes, cables, chains or hooks shall not be
 used. When metal bands are used to bundle members, corner protectors shall be provided to
 prevent damage. Structural glued-laminated beams shall be tipped and lifted on edge using
 web slings at as many points as necessary to prevent damage. Steel spreader beams shall be
 utilized to prevent eccentric loading of long members. Glulam plank deck panels may be lifted
 flat using fabricated steel C-shaped brackets that fit over the member ends. The contractor has
 complete responsibility for utilizing proper shipping and handling techniques. Any damage
 shall be repaired or replaced to the satisfaction of the Engineer at no additional cost.
 622.5.2-Stress-Laminated Deck Assembly: Stress-laminated decks may be prefabricated
 at a manufacturing or fabrication facility. The full width or sections of the deck may be
 prefabricated and stressed, or panels may be fabricated, joined and stressed in the field.
 If decks are fabricated in sections and stressed using bearing plates under the thread bar
 coupler, the bearing plates must be removed after all sections have been joined.
 Butt joints are permitted in the lamination provided: a) Lamination length is not less than
 4 ft (1200 mm); b) No butt joints are located within a distance equal to the deck thickness from
 a stressing bar, and; c) No more than one butt joint occurs in any five adjacent laminations
 within a distance of 2 ft (600 mm). The joint layout is to be shown on the shop drawings.
 490
 
 Gaps between butt ends of deck boards shall be 1 inch (25 mm) or less. The height
 differential between adjacent deck boards shall be ¾ inch (20 mm) or less.
 Holes for stressing bars shall be large enough to allow a bar with a coupler, if used, to be
 removed from the stressed deck, but shall not exceed 20% of the width of the board, but may
 be 1¾ inch (45 mm) maximum on a 7 inches (175 mm) board.
 Holes into the deck for attaching the deck to the substructure and for attaching curbs and
 posts to the deck shall not be drilled until after Stage 2 of the stressing procedure is completed.
 Holes in the substructure shall not be drilled until the deck is in place and after Stage 2 of the
 stressing procedure is completed.
 622.5.3-Stressing: Stressing bars shall be tensioned with a hydraulic jack. The jack shall
 be calibrated at least yearly to provide an accurate indication of load.
 Stressing bars shall be tensioned to the specified load shown on the Plans. Stressing shall
 be done in accordance with the following procedure:
 Stage 1: Load each bar to 50 percent of the specified load using a bar stressing sequence
 which will prevent distortion and maintain a uniform bridge (panel) width for the full length
 of the bridge. Repeat using the full specified load until all bars are properly tensioned.
 Stage 2: A minimum of five (5) days but not more than seven (7) days after the completion
 of Stage 1, reload all bars to the specified load.
 Stage 3: A minimum of four (4) but not more than six (6) weeks after the completion of
 Stage 2, reload all bars to the specified loads shown on the Plans.
 During the stressing procedure, the load in the first bars that were stressed will most likely
 decrease as the other bars are stressed. In all three (3) stages, after the Contractor is satisfied
 that all bars are stressed to the proper load, Contractor shall return to the first three (3) full
 width bars that were stressed and verify on the hydraulic stress gauge that all three (3)
 maintained a minimum of 90% of the specified load. If any of the first three (3) full width bars
 did not maintain at least 90% of the specified load, all the bars on the bridge shall be stressed
 again. The checking of the first three (3) full width bars and subsequent stressing of all bars
 shall be repeated until they maintain at least 90% of the specified load.
 The Engineer shall be notified at least two (2) days prior to beginning each stressing stage.
 No vehicles shall be allowed on the bridge until the completion of Stage 2 stressing.
 622.5.4-Camber: An upward curve or camber shall be provided in each bridge as noted
 on the Plans. The camber shall be a uniform curve in the length of the bridge and shall show
 maximum offset at the approximate center of the span. Camber shall be consistent across the
 bridge width and measurement shall be made at both edges and the centerline.
 622.5.4.1-Type A Bridges: When the full bridge width, or sections, are prefabricated
 and stressed at the fabrication facility, the fabricator shall introduce sufficient initial
 camber, prior to stressing, so that under full dead load the final camber will be as specified.
 When panels or individual members are delivered loose, they shall be erected over a
 temporary support to induce the required camber across the full width of the bridge and
 shall be adjustable so that it can be lowered to allow full dead load on the bridge, or can be
 raised to induce additional camber should it become necessary.
 
 491
 
 If 75% of the final camber is not provided under full dead load the Contractor shall
 support the structure on a temporary support, loosen all stressing bars, induce additional
 camber by raising the support, re-stress all bars and lower support to verify proper camber.
 622.5.4.2-Type B, C, D and E Bridges: Structural Glued-Laminated Timber members
 shall be manufactured with the camber shown on the Plans. The camber specified is with
 no load on the member.
 622.5.5-Modular Construction: When specified on the Plans the bridge will be fabricated
 and erected using modular techniques as described below. The applicable provisions of
 622.5.1 through 622.5.4 also apply to modular fabrication and erection.
 Modular construction does not apply to Type D and E bridges.
 622.5.5.1-Module Assembly: Each module shall consist of the appropriate number of
 rows of individual deck planks so when mated to the exterior glued-laminated beams the
 total module width will be as noted on the Plans after the third stressing. The Contractor
 is responsible for including as many additional rows of deck planks as may be necessary
 to compensate for lumber compression or shrinkage thru all three stages of stressing.
 The deck planks shall be assembled with the two module beams using jigs, pipe guides
 and nails or other means so that proper alignment and beam camber can be maintained
 prior to inserting stressing bars. After the two beams and rows of deck planks are properly
 assembled, steel thread bars meeting the requirements of 622.2.3.2, except the bars need
 not be coated, shall be inserted in all 2 ft (600 mm) center holes. Stage 1 stressing shall be
 performed before each module is moved from the assembly jig or the module is handled in
 any manner. Handling of modules is to be in accordance with 622.5.5.4. In addition, high
 strength steel fabrication bars meeting the requirements of 622.2.3.8 shall be inserted in all
 6 ft (1800 mm) center holes. The 2 ft (600 mm) center bars can be removed before shipping
 from the fabrication shop and must be removed before the modules are erected on the
 project site. The fabrication bars on 6 ft (1800 mm) centers will remain permanently in the
 bridge, except for the exterior (fascia) modules where the bars shall be removed after
 completion of the field stressing operation. Galvanized bearing plates shall be used on the
 outside of the fascia modules for all 2 ft (600 mm) center bars. All other bearing plates
 may be uncoated.
 The Contractor is responsible for maintaining the squareness of each module. This
 may require additional diaphragms, stressing rods, braces, etc. either temporary or
 permanent. All materials required for this purpose shall be clearly shown on the shop
 drawings and shall be noted as either temporary or permanent. Materials noted as
 permanent shall meet all quality requirements of this specification. Attachment of
 temporary materials shall be such that the preservative envelope of the bridge members is
 not damaged in any way. Holes in structural glued-laminated members shall be bored prior
 to preservative treatment and temporary holes shall be filled with treated wood plugs to the
 satisfaction of the Engineer. Regardless of the method chosen by the Contractor to control
 module squareness, each completed and fully stressed module at any cross-section
 throughout its length shall not be out-of-square by more than 1/8 inch (1 mm) per ft (100
 mm) of web depth when measured at the top or bottom outer surface of either module web.
 No more than 0.01 inch (1 mm) of sweep, measured at the module centerline, is allowed
 492
 
 per ft (1000 mm) of length. When fully assembled, no more than 0.03 inch (3 mm) of
 sweep, measured at the bridge centerline is allowed per ft (1000 mm) of length. When
 fully assembled the bridge width shall be at least as wide as the plan dimension but not
 more than 1½ inches (40 mm) wider than the plan dimension at any point. No separate
 payment will be made for these additional materials or labor used to control module
 squareness. Cost to be included in the unit price for the fabricated bridge members.
 622.5.5.2-Shop Module Stressing: All steel thread bars in the 2 ft (600 mm) center
 holes shall be stressed to the load shown on the Plans. All three stages of stressing shall
 be performed in the fabrication shop. Upon completion of each stage of stressing, the hex
 nuts on the fabrication bars on 6 ft (1800 mm) centers shall be fully tightened using the full
 effort of a man on an ordinary spud wrench.
 622.5.5.3-Curbs, Guardrail Posts and Diaphragms: Curbs and guardrail posts for
 Type A bridges shall be shop installed after the second stressing and at any phase for Type
 B or C. Diaphragms shall be shop installed after the third stressing. Diaphragms and end
 blocks shall be fabricated such that a maximum gap of 3/16 inch (5 mm) exists between
 each side of the diaphragm or end block and the webs of the beams. Some trimming to
 length of the diaphragms may be necessary to compensate for the loss of module width due
 to stressing. See 622.2.6 for treating requirements after trimming to length.
 622.5.5.4-Handling, Shipping and Erection: As each module is assembled in the
 fabrication shop, a handling and erection lifting ring system shall be installed after the
 Stage 1 stressing. Details of the lifting ring system are shown on the Plans. All handling
 of the modules shall be performed using the lifting rings. Use of fork lifts under the
 modules, slings, choker cables, grab hooks, etc. is prohibited.
 Two (2) days after the Stage 3 stressing is completed, the bars on 2 ft (600 mm) centers
 (not the bars on 6 ft (1800 mm) centers) can be removed, or, all the bars can remain in for
 shipping. If the Contractor elects to leave all bars in place for shipping, the bars on 2 ft
 (600 mm) centers must be removed prior to erection. After the Stage 3 stressing and prior
 to erection, the fabrication bars on 6 ft (1800 mm) centers shall be saw cut off flush with
 the face of the hex nut, except for the bars on the fascia side of the exterior module which
 can remain long to facilitate removal of the fabrication bars after erection.
 The first module should be positioned on the abutments as precise as possible and
 secured to the bridge seat. Careful alignment of the remaining modules will facilitate
 installation of the full width stressing rods.
 The modules shall be stressed together after inserting stressing rods and placement of
 bearing plates. Only one stressing operation is required in the field, although several passes
 over all the bars may be required to meet the 90% load requirement of 622.5.3.
 Upon completion of erection, the fabrication bars in the fascia modules shall be
 removed and the holes plugged with a treated wood plug.
 The handling and erection lifting ring system components shall be removed and will
 remain the property of the Contractor. Cost of the lifting ring system is considered
 incidental to Item 622020-*, Stressing Hardware. Holes in the stressed deck shall be
 plugged with treated wood plugs.
 Field nailing to any treated bridge component is prohibited.
 493
 
 622.5.6-Backwall Installation: Backwalls shown on the Plans shall not be placed until
 after completion of erection of all superstructure components. The end of the bridge members
 may be used as a form for placement of concrete backwalls provided the preformed joint filler
 is suitably secured to the bridge. The end diaphragms may require additional bracing or
 blocking to prevent damage from use as a concrete form. The Contractor is responsible to
 provide the necessary additional support and will repair any damage to the satisfaction of the
 Engineer.
 622.6-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 622.6.1-Stress-Laminated Timber Bridge Fabricated and Installed: The quantity of
 work done will be measured in 1,000 ft board measure (Mfbm) (cubic meter (m3)) which is
 based on actual plan sizes of all lumber and timber including structural glued-laminated timber
 shown on the Plans, and shall include bearings and bearing pads if specified, preformed joint
 sealer, hot-poured joint sealer, timber connectors and all necessary hardware, except stressing
 hardware and steel beam guardrail, complete in place and accepted in the finished structure for
 the structure type noted on the Plans.
 Stressing hardware will be measured as a separate item.
 Steel beam guardrail and hardware will be measured as Section 607 Items.
 622.6.2-Stress-Laminated Timber Bridge Fabricated and Delivered: The quantity of
 work done will be measured in 1,000 ft board measure (Mfbm)(cubic meter (m3)) which is
 based on actual plan sizes of all lumber and timber including structural glued-laminated timber
 shown on the Plans, and shall include bearings and bearing pads if specified, timber connectors
 and all necessary hardware, except stressing hardware and steel beam guardrail, and delivered
 in the manner and to the site set forth in the contract documents for the structure type noted on
 the Plans.
 Note: Stressing hardware will be measured as a separate item.
 622.6.3-Structural Glued-Laminated Timber Bridge Fabricated and Installed: The
 quantity of work done will be measured in 1,000 ft board measure (Mfbm)(cubic meter (m3))
 which is based on actual plan sizes of all structural glued-laminated members and other timber
 components as shown on the Plans, and shall include bearings and bearing pads if specified,
 preformed joint sealer, hot-poured joint sealer, timber connectors and all necessary hardware,
 except steel beam guardrail, complete in place and accepted in the finished structure for the
 structure Type noted on the Plans.
 Steel beam guardrail and hardware will be measured as section 607 Items.
 622.6.4-Structural Glued-Laminated Timber Bridge Fabricated and Delivered: The
 quantity of work done will be measured in 1,000 ft board measure (Mfbm)(cubic meter (m3))
 which is based on actual plan sizes of all structural glued-laminated members and other timber
 components as shown on the plans, and shall include bearings and bearing pads if specified,
 timber connectors and all necessary hardware, except steel beam guardrail, and delivered in
 the manner and to the site set forth in the contract documents for the structure Type noted on
 the Plans.
 622.6.5-Timber Substructure: The quantity of work done will be measured in 1,000 ft
 board measure (Mfbm)(cubic meter (m3)), computed on the basis of actual plan sizes of all
 494
 
 lumber and timber members shown on the Plans, and shall include all necessary hardware
 complete in place and accepted in the finished structure.
 622.6.6-Stressing Hardware: The quantity of work for "Stressing Hardware" will be
 measured and paid for as lump sum. Stressing hardware includes stressing bars, plates, nuts,
 handling and erection lifting ring system components and any other hardware related to the
 stressing of the timber.
 For 622.6.1 "Stressing Hardware" shall include the initial stressing and restressing at five
 (5) days and four (4) weeks.
 For 622.6.2 "Stressing Hardware" shall include all material delivered in the manner and to
 the site set forth in the contract documents. When modular construction is specified, "Stressing
 Hardware" shall also include the initial stressing and restressing at five (5) days and four (4)
 weeks.
 622.7-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing
 all the materials, except as above noted, and doing all the work herein prescribed in a workmanlike
 and acceptable manner, including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary
 to complete the work.
 622.8-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 622005-* Stressed Timber Bridge, Type A, Fabricated and Installed
 622006-*
 622007-*
 622008-*
 
 Stressed Timber Bridge, Type A, Fabricated and
 Delivered
 Stressed Timber Bridge, Type B, Fabricated and Installed
 
 622009-*
 
 Stressed Timber Bridge, Type B, Fabricated and
 Delivered
 Stressed Timber Bridge, Type C, Fabricated and Installed
 
 622010-*
 
 Stressed Timber Deck, Type C, Fabricated and Delivered
 
 622011-*
 
 Structural Glue-Laminated Timber Bridge, Type D
 
 622012-*
 622013-*
 
 Structural Glue-Laminated Timber Bridge, Type D,
 Fabricated And Delivered
 Structural Glue-Laminated Timber Bridge, Type E,
 
 622014-*
 
 Structural Glue-Laminated Timber Bridge, Type E
 
 622019-*
 
 Timber Substructure
 
 622020-*
 
 Stressing Hardware
 
 * Sequence number
 
 495
 
 UNIT
 Thousand Board Feet
 (Cubic Meter)
 Thousand Board Feet
 (Cubic Meter)
 Thousand Board Feet
 (Cubic Meter)
 Thousand Board Feet
 (Cubic Meter)
 Thousand Board Feet
 (Cubic Meter)
 Thousand Board Feet
 (Cubic Meter)
 Thousand Board Feet
 (Cubic Meter)
 Thousand Board Feet
 (Cubic Meter)
 Thousand Board Feet
 (Cubic Meter)
 Thousand Board Feet
 (Cubic Meter)
 Thousand Board Feet
 (Cubic Meter)
 Lump Sum
 
 SECTION 623
 PNEUMATICALLY APPLIED MORTAR
 623.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of repair of concrete structures, protection of structural steel, or any
 other type of work as may be designated on the Plans, using pneumatically placed mortar, in
 accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions and
 design shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer. It shall include removal of all loose,
 soft, honeycombed, and disintegrated concrete, the removal of sound surface concrete in areas
 designated for repair, the preparation of the surface, the furnished and placing of reinforcing steel,
 including wire fabric, dowels, and expansion anchor bolts, and mixing and applying pneumatically
 placed mortar composed of Portland cement and sand.
 Pneumatically placed mortar will be designated as Shotcrete. Shotcrete shall generally be
 used where the depth of repair does not exceed 6 inches (150 mm).
 623.2-MATERIALS:
 All materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of Division 700, unless
 otherwise indicated.
 For sandblasting operations the sand shall conform to the requirements in 688.2.4.1 and
 688.2.4.3, III.
 The reinforcing wire mesh shall be three inch (75 mm) by three inch (75 mm) by Size # W
 1.4 wire, unless noted otherwise on the Plans.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 623.3-PROPORTIONING AND MIXING:
 Shotcrete shall consist of a mixture of Portland cement and sand (three to five percent
 moisture) in the proportion of one cubic foot or 0.94 cwt of cement to three cubic feet of sand
 (one cement to three sand) (dry, loose measurement, due allowance being made for bulking). The
 materials shall be thoroughly mixed dry in a batch mixer. Before placing the mixture in the hopper,
 all lumps over ¼ inch (6 mm) shall be removed by screening.
 623.4-CLEANING:
 In concrete repair work, disintegrated concrete shall first be removed with pneumatic or
 hand tools. The surfaces shall then be thoroughly blasted to remove all dirt and loose materials,
 special care being taken in concrete repair work to thoroughly clean exposed reinforcing rods.
 Prior to applying each coat of Shotcrete, the concrete surfaces shall be cleaned and washed down
 with water and compressed air.
 Structural steel shall be thoroughly cleaned of paint, rust, grease, and other foreign
 material. The Contractor may be required to Abrasive Blast Clean for this purpose.
 623.5-PLACING REINFORCING MESH:
 623.5.1-Repairing Concrete Work: In repairing concrete work, the reinforcing mesh
 shall be fastened to the concrete with ¼ by 4 (6 x 100 mm) expansion bolts spaced
 approximately 30 inches (750 mm) each way. Lapping of adjacent sheets shall be at least 4
 inches (100 mm) in each direction and all laps shall be firmly tied together at intervals not
 496
 
 exceeding 18 inches (450 mm). Care shall be taken to place the mesh away from the proposed
 finished concrete surface so that approximately a 3/4 inch (19 mm) layer of Shotcrete shall be
 maintained outside of the plane of the mesh. In places where repairs are necessary for depths
 of 3 inches (75 mm) or more over considerable areas, two or more layers of mesh shall be used,
 the first layer being placed about 3/4 inch (19 mm) out from the existing concrete.
 623.5.2-Covering Structural Steel: In placing reinforcing mesh around structural steel,
 the mesh shall be cut in sheets of the proper size and separate sheets shall be bent carefully
 over templates in such a manner as to follow closely the outlines of the members to be covered
 and shall be securely held about 3/4 inch (19 mm) out from the surfaces of the members.
 Adjacent sheets of mesh shall lap at least two meshes.
 In placing the mesh, the rods shown on the Plans shall first be fastened to the steel, and
 subsequently the mesh shall be securely tied outside of these rods with wires spaced at
 approximately 1 foot (300 mm) intervals. To allow for fasteners for holding the rods, holes
 note less than 9/16 inch (14 mm) diameter shall be punched or drilled in the webs of members
 as near as possible to the top and bottom flanges. These holes shall be spaced on approximately
 36 inches (900 mm) centers. Where steel members are more than 48 inches (1200 mm) in
 depth, and additional row of holes, spaced on approximately 36 inches (900 mm) centers, shall
 be provided on the centerline of the web.
 623.6-PLACING SHOTCRETE:
 623.6.1-General: Only experienced men shall be employed in placing Shotcrete.
 No Shotcrete shall be placed during freezing weather or against surfaces on which there
 remains any frost.
 623.6.2-Pressures: The pressure in the lower chamber of the cement gun shall be that
 which will produce a nozzle velocity of 375 to 500 feet (115 to 150 m) per second when a tip
 with a three-fourths or 1 inch (20 or 25 mm) opening is used, and a nozzle velocity of 425 to
 550 feet (130 to 165 m) per second when a tip with a 1¼ inches (32 mm) opening is used.
 These velocities must be steadily maintained and shall be determined by a suitable nozzle
 velocity meter attached to the cement gun.
 Water used for hydration at the nozzle shall be maintained at a uniform pressure, which
 shall not be less than 15 psi (100 kPa) greater than the air pressure in the cement gun. In no
 case shall a greater amount of water be used than that necessary to produce proper hydration,
 especially when vertical surfaces are shotcreted.
 623.6.3-Thickness of Covering: In repairing concrete, the Shotcrete shall be placed to a
 minimum total thickness of 1 inch (25 mm) in two or more coats.
 In covering structural steel, the shotcrete shall be placed to a thickness of 1½ inches (40
 mm) and in two layers.
 In all cases, the final coat shall be shotcreted to a thickness of ½ inch (15 mm) against the
 previously straightened and thoroughly cleaned and wetted surfaces.
 The stream of materials from the nozzle shall impinge as nearly as possible at right angles
 to the surface being covered. Any deposit of loose sand shall be removed prior to placing any
 original or succeeding layers of Shotcrete. After placing, all mortar patches shall be sounded
 and any indications of pockets shall be investigated and repaired as directed by the Engineer.
 497
 
 623.6.4-Joints: At the end of any day's work or similar stopping period, the Shotcrete shall
 be sloped off to a thin edge. Before shooting the adjacent section, the sloped portion shall be
 thoroughly cleaned and wetted. No square joints will be allowed.
 623.6.5-Forms: Forms shall be structurally sufficient and of such design that rebound or
 accumulated loose sand can freely escape or be readily removed. Shooting strips shall be used
 at corners, edges, and on surfaces where necessary to obtain true lines and proper thickness.
 623.6.6-Finishing and Curing: Following applicable layers of Shotcrete, the concrete
 surface shall be wood or steel finished as directed by the Engineer. The Shotcrete shall be
 covered with burlap mats and kept wet for at least one week after placing; but where not
 practicable to use mats, it shall be kept wet by sprinkling for the same length of time.
 623.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 623.7.1-Repairing Concrete Structures: Measurements will be based on the amount of
 cement in hundredweight (cwt) (hundred kilograms) used in the Shotcrete, the pound
 (kilogram) of Shotcrete reinforcing mesh, and the number of hook expansion bolts.
 623.7.2-Covering Structural Steel: Measurement of all areas of Shotcrete shall be based
 on the actual area of the members to be covered, following the lines of the members, and
 payment per square foot (meter) will be made of such basis.
 623.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 623.8.1-Repairing Concrete Structures: The quantities, determined as provided above,
 will be paid for at the contract unit prices bid for the items listed in 623.9.1, which prices and
 payments shall be full compensation for furnishing all the material and doing all the work
 prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor, tools, equipment,
 supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 623.8.2-Covering Structural Steel: The quantity, determined as provided above, will be
 paid for at the contract unit price bid for the item in 623.9.2, which price and payment shall be
 full compensation for furnishing all the materials, including reinforcing mesh and rods, and
 doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor,
 tools, equipment, supplies and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 623.9-PAY ITEMS:
 623.9.1-Repairing Concrete Structures:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 623001-*
 Cement For Shotcrete
 623002-*
 Reinforcing Mesh
 623003-*
 Hook Expansion Anchor Bolt
 
 UNIT
 Hundred Weight (100 Kilogram)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 Each
 
 * Sequence number
 
 623.9.2-Covering Structural Steel:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 623004-* Shotcrete
 
 UNIT
 Square Foot (Meter)
 
 * Sequence number
 
 498
 
 SECTION 624
 PREFORMED ELASTOMERIC JOINT SEALER
 624.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall include furnishing and installing preformed elastomeric joint sealers for
 bridge decks in accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the
 lines and grades shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer. The joint sealer, to serve both
 as a filler and a sealer, shall be furnished in the form of an extruded compartmented tube.
 624.2-MATERIALS:
 Material for preformed elastomeric joint sealer shall conform to the requirements of 708.2.
 624.3-PREPARATION OF JOINT:
 The joint shall be formed to provide the nominal opening at the specified temperature as
 shown on the Plans, edges of concrete or epoxy mortar adjacent to the joint shall be rounded to a
 radius of not more than ¼ inch (6 mm). A joint having insufficient opening may be required to be
 sawed or ground to the proper size. Where a joint opening is larger than that specified, the
 Contractor may be required to build up the joint with epoxy mortar or to furnish a larger size sealer
 as determined by the Engineer. The cost of any such additional work or material shall be borne
 by the Contractor.
 Before placement of the sealer, the joint shall be thoroughly cleaned by brushing,
 compressed air or other means, so that it is free from dust, oil, grease or other foreign materials.
 624.4-INSTALLATION:
 The sealer shall be installed by suitable hand or machine tools which will not cause injury
 to the material during installation. A lubricant or lubricant-adhesive shall be used if, and as,
 recommended by the manufacturer of the sealer. During installation, the sealer shall not be
 subjected to lengthwise stretching; the length to be installed shall be measured prior to installation
 and cut or marked to indicate the installed length. Sealer for transverse joints shall be in one
 continuous length; longitudinal joint sealers may be spliced at intervals of not less than 50 feet (15
 meters) except where intersected by transverse joints. The top surface of the sealer after
 installation shall be ¼ inch (6 mm), with a plus 1/16 inch (2 mm) tolerance, below the adjacent
 roadway surface.
 624.5-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 When this Item is called for on the Plans, the filler and joint sealer will be measured in
 place in linear feet (meters).
 624.6-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The cost of preformed elastomeric joint sealer, complete in place, including lubricant or
 lubricant-adhesive will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for the item listed below, which
 price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all the materials and doing all the
 work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner including all labor, tools, equipment,
 supplies and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 624.7-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 624001-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Preformed Elastomeric Joint Sealer
 
 * Sequence number
 
 499
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 
 SECTION 625
 DRILLED CAISSON FOUNDATIONS
 625.1-DESCRIPTION:
 The work of this section includes the furnishing of all materials and the construction of
 foundations consisting of reinforced concrete caissons placed within drilled excavations. Each drilled
 caisson foundation shall consist of a shaft section, with the lower portion in a drilled rock socket and
 with the upper portion in a steel casing. This casing will normally be removed during concrete
 placement unless otherwise shown in the plans or directed by the Engineer.
 625.2-TESTS AND SUBMITTALS:
 The Contractor shall deliver all submittals required by this specification to the Engineer no
 later than one month prior to constructing any drilled caissons shown in the plans. No drilled
 caissons shall be constructed prior to the Engineer's review and acceptance of all submittals and
 test hole results.
 625.2.1-Experience:
 1. A satisfactory record of experience in drilled caisson construction is considered to be of
 the utmost importance in obtaining a satisfactory drilled caisson installation. The
 installation of the drilled caisson is required to be performed by a contractor or specialty
 subcontractor specializing in installing drilled caissons and having experience with
 caissons of similar length, diameter, and subsurface conditions as those shown in the
 contract documents.
 2. The Contractor shall submit data on at least two projects performed during the past ten
 years, for which the Contractor (or the Subcontractor if applicable) has installed drilled
 caissons of a range of diameters and lengths similar to those shown in the plans, in similar
 quantities, and under similar subsurface conditions. The list of projects shall contain
 names and phone numbers of owners' representatives who can verify the participation in
 those projects.
 3. The Engineer shall review and approve the Contractor’s (Subcontractor’s) caisson
 installation qualifications. If in the opinion of the Engineer the Contractor’s
 qualifications are not adequate, the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer a proposed
 method of obtaining the necessary qualifications.
 4. The installation of all components of the drilled caisson including; drilling, reinforcement
 placement, concrete placement, and required wet hole condition work, casing installation
 and removal, slurry placement, and any other work required to complete the drilled
 caisson, shall be performed by the approved contractor or specialty subcontractor.
 625.2.2-Site Inspection: A signed statement shall be submitted affirming that the Contractor
 (or the Subcontractor if applicable) has inspected the project site and the available subsurface
 information including any available soil or rock samples.
 625.2.3-Installation: The Contractor Shall plan for compliance with applicable
 environmental regulations, including but not limited to the protection of river water from
 degradation due to material excavated from drilled caisson locations or due to other harmful
 erosion, protection of the environment from slurry spillage or discharge if slurry is used, and
 general environmental protection of the area from all operations related to drilled caissons.
 500
 
 The Installation shall be in accordance with the Contractor’s proposed Safety Plan per
 Section 625.5.2.7.
 The Contractor shall provide a projected schedule of work to the MCS&T Division thirty
 (30) days in advance of construction of caissons. This projected schedule shall include start
 date of caisson construction, date of when each caisson would need to be inspected for
 cleanliness and when CSL tests are to be performed for each caisson. This projected schedule
 will be used by the MCS&T Division to project workload and schedule manpower.
 625.2.4-As-Built Records: Within 24 hours of the completed construction of each drilled
 caisson, the Contractor shall submit a report on the actual location, alignment, elevation, and
 dimensions of the drilled caisson, and will also submit a completed drilled caisson log as specified
 herein.
 625.2.5-Test Hole: A test hole shall be drilled at the location and to the diameter and depth
 shown in the plans. The test hole shall be reinforced and constructed the same as other drilled
 caissons in the plans. This shall include casing extraction if required by the project or the
 Contractor’s proposed installation plan. CSL testing will not be required for the test hole, however
 the Contractor may, at his own expense perform CSL testing. The Contractor shall revise his
 methods and equipment as necessary during construction of the test hole when he is unable to
 carry out the requirements of the plans. Completed test holes shall be left in place except that the
 top of the caisson shall be removed to a depth of 2 ft (600 mm) below final ground line. Disturbed
 areas at the site of the test hole shall be restored to their original condition. If the Contractor fails
 to demonstrate the adequacy of his methods or equipment, the Engineer shall require additional
 test holes be provided at the Contractor's expense.
 625.2.6-Nondestructive Testing
 625.2.6.1-General Requirements: The nondestructive testing method known as
 Crosshole Sonic Logging (CSL) shall be used on any drilled caisson which is constructed with
 the placement of concrete underwater or as required in the plans. The testing shall not be
 conducted until at least three (3) days after placement of concrete is concluded in the caisson,
 and will be completed within fourteen (14) calendar days after such placement.
 The CSL tests shall be conducted by the Contractor in conformance with ASTM D6760
 and shall be certified (signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in West Virginia
 knowledgeable in drilled caisson installation). The CSL tests must be performed by one of
 the approved testing companies as listed on the MCS&T approved list. The Engineer may
 approve the use of an alternate company if they show experience and a certification in
 conducting the CSL test procedure. The cost of this testing shall be incidental to the caisson
 installation.
 The Contractor shall give MCS&T Division five (5) calendar days notice prior to
 conducting the actual CSL testing. This will allow MCS&T Division to provide a qualified
 technician to observe the CSL test as it is being performed. MCS&T Division will determine
 if this observation is required. The observation by MCS&T Division is to satisfy the
 division’s Quality Assurance part of the CSL testing.
 625.2.6.2-Preparation for Testing: To accommodate the CSL test requirements, the
 Contractor shall install a number of tubes in each caisson to be tested. The number of tubes
 per caisson shall be as tabulated below:
 501
 
 TABLE 625.2.6.2
 Caisson Diameter
 Number of Tubes
 Up to 42” (1049 mm)
 3
 42” to 60” (1050 mm to 1499 mm)
 4
 60” to 96” (1500 mm to 2399 mm)
 6
 96” (2400 mm) and Larger
 8
 
 Tube Spacing
 120º
 90º
 60º
 45º
 
 The tubes shall be per section 625.4.4. Each tube shall have a round, regular internal
 diameter free of defects or obstructions including defects or obstructions at pipe joints; in
 order to permit the free, unobstructed passage of 1½ inch (35 mm) diameter source and
 receiver probes. The tubes shall be watertight and free from corrosion with clean internal
 and external faces to ensure passage of the probes inside and a good bond with the concrete
 outside.
 Each tube shall be fitted with a watertight shoe on the bottom and a removable cap or plug
 on the top. The tubes shall be securely attached to the interior of the reinforcing steel cage.
 The tubes are typically wire-tied to the reinforcing cage every 40 inches (1 000 mm), or
 otherwise secured such that the tubes stay in position during placement of the cage and during
 placement of concrete. The tubes shall be installed in each shaft in a regular, symmetric pattern
 such that the tube spacing in degrees will correspond to that shown in the table above.
 The tubes shall be as near to parallel as possible. They shall extend from 6 inches (150
 mm) above the caisson bottom to at least 40 inches (1 000 mm) above the caisson top. No
 tube may be allowed to rest on the bottom of a drilled excavation. If the caisson top is subsurface, then the tubes shall extend at least 2 ft (600 mm) above the ground surface or above
 the water surface if the ground surface is below water. Any joints required to achieve full
 length tubes shall be made watertight. Care shall be taken during placement of the reinforcing
 steel cage so as not to damage the tubes.
 After placement of the cage, and before placement of concrete, the tubes shall be filled
 with clean water and the tube tops shall be capped or sealed to keep debris or other foreign
 matter out of the tubes. Care shall be exercised in the removal of caps or plugs so as not to
 apply excess torque, hammering, or other stresses that could break the bond between the tubes
 and the concrete.
 625.2.6.3-CSL Logging Procedures: Before placement of concrete, the Contractor shall
 investigate at least one tube per shaft. This investigation is to make sure that there are no
 bends, crimps, obstructions or other impediments to the free passage of the testing probes. A
 record of the tube length or lengths, including a note of the projection of the tubes above the
 top of the shaft shall be made. The Contractor shall provide information on the shaft bottom
 and top elevations, length and construction dates to the Engineer prior to the CSL tests.
 The Contractor shall conduct the CSL tests. Any defects indicated by tests shall be
 evaluated by the Contractor and further tests may be conducted in regard to the extent of such
 defects. Any time required by such tests will be considered incidental to the work and will
 not be cause for extra compensation related to a claim or extension of contract.
 625.2.6.4-CSL Testing Results: The CSL test results will be compiled into a caisson
 integrity testing report for each caisson. The report will summarize and analyze any defect
 zones indicated on the logs. A copy of each report will be provided to the Engineer.
 502
 
 625.2.6.5-Evaluation of CSL Test Results: The Contractor shall submitted to the
 Engineer a certified (signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in West Virginia
 knowledgeable in drilled caisson installation) caisson integrity testing report contain the CSL
 test results and an Evaluation of each caisson installation determining whether or not the
 drilled caisson as constructed is acceptable. The Engineer shall review the report and if the
 report determines that the drilled caisson is acceptable, he shall submit to the Contractor in
 writing within seven (7) calendar days approval to proceed with the work.
 The acceptance of each drilled caisson shall be the decision of the Engineer, based on the
 results of the caisson integrity testing report and other information on the caisson placement.
 Rejection of a caisson shall require conclusive evidence that a defect exists in the caisson,
 which will result in inadequate or unsafe performance under service loads. If the Non
 Destructive Testing records are complex or inconclusive, the Engineer may require the
 Contractor to verify caisson conditions, in accordance with 625.2.6.6. If a defect is confirmed,
 the Contractor shall pay for all coring and grouting costs. If no defect is encountered,
 compensation for all coring and grouting will be in accordance with 104.3 and 109.4 of the
 Standard Specifications.
 In the case that any caisson is determined to be unacceptable, the Contractor shall submit
 a plan for remedial action to the Engineer for approval. The approval or rejection of the
 remediation plan may take up to fourteen (14) calendar days. If the remediation plan is
 rejected the Contractor shall revise the plan and submit it for approval and the approval time
 is restarted. Any modifications to the foundation caisson and load transfer mechanisms
 caused by the remedial action will require calculations and working drawings stamped by a
 Professional Engineer licensed in the State of West Virginia for all foundation elements
 affected. All labor and materials required to perform remedial caisson action shall be provided
 at no cost to the Division and with no extension of the contract time.
 625.2.6.6-Evaluation by Core Drilling: A drilled caisson that is found to be
 unacceptable shall be cored by the Contractor using double tube core barrels. One or more
 core holes shall be drilled at the location(s) as determined by the Contractor and/or Engineer.
 An accurate log of the core shall be kept and the core shall be crated and properly marked
 showing the caisson depth at each interval of core recovery. The core, one copy of the coring
 log and a revised certified (signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in West
 Virginia knowledgeable in drilled caisson installation) caisson integrity testing report
 indicating the condition of the caisson shall be provided to the Engineer.
 The Engineer shall review the report and if the report determines that the drilled caisson
 is acceptable he shall submit to the Contractor in writing within seven (7) calendar days
 approval to proceed with the work. If the quality of the caisson is determined to be
 unacceptable, then the Contractor shall proceed in accordance with 625.2.6.5.
 625.3-DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
 The dimensional requirements for Placement Tolerances and Caisson Diameters shall be met
 prior to placement of reinforcing steel. The Contractor shall submit his corrective plan for any
 deviation from the caisson location, alignment and elevation tolerances, and reinforcement
 dimensional requirements to the Engineer for approval. This approval may take up to fourteen (14)
 calendar days. The corrective plan shall be certified (signed by a Professional Engineer licensed in
 West Virginia knowledgeable in drilled caisson installation). The cost of any corrective action shall
 be borne by the Contractor.
 503
 
 625.4-MATERIALS:
 625.4.1-Concrete: Concrete for the drilled caissons shall be Class DC and shall conform
 to the requirements of Section 601 of the Standard Specifications.
 The design 28-day compressive strength shall not be less than 4500 psi (31 Mpa) unless
 shown otherwise in the Plans. The Contractor shall prepare a mix design in accordance with
 MP 711.023.23 to attain this strength. Slump for dry placement will be 7 inches (175 mm)
 plus-or-minus 1 inch (25 mm). Unless otherwise specified in the Plans, the cement shall be
 Type I.
 For placement of caisson concrete by tremie or pumping, the cement factor shall be
 increased by 94 lbs. (43 kg) from the original design cement factor, the slump shall be 8 inches
 (200 mm) plus-or-minus 1 inch (25 mm) and shall maintain a slump in excess of 4 inches (100
 mm) throughout the concrete placement.
 625.4.2-Reinforcing Steel: Reinforcing steel for main vertical bars and ties shall conform
 to Section 709.1, deformed type, grade 60 (400). Reinforcing steel for use as spirals shall
 conform to Section 709.1, plain type, grade 60 (400).
 625.4.3-Casing: Metal casing shall be used whenever required to prevent caving of the soil
 material or to exclude ground water. Casing shall be metal, of unit or sectional construction, be
 strong enough to withstand handling stresses, withstand the pressures of concrete and of the
 surrounding earth and ground water, and prevent seepage of water. Also, the casing used shall be
 selected by the Contractor to control dimensions and alignment of excavations within tolerances,
 to seal the casing into impervious materials, and to execute all other construction operations.
 Casing pipe used for permanent applications shall be new material and conform to ASTM
 A 252/A 252M, Grade 2. Casing pipe when used for temporary applications only, will initially
 be required to meet the requirements of permanent pipe but when removed can be transferred
 to the contractors stock and reused on subsequent projects.
 Any required casing splices shall be welded in accordance with Section 625.2.3 e) of this
 specification with no interior splice plates, producing true and straight casing. All welding
 shall be in accordance with ANSI/AWS D1.1.
 Permanent casing is required in all caissons where noted on the plans. All temporary casing
 shall be removed during placement of concrete unless otherwise noted on the plans. Should
 the Contractor be unable to remove the temporary casing or if conditions require the temporary
 casing remain in place, the Contractor shall pressure grout the annular space between the casing
 and soil. Materials and methods for grouting operation shall be submitted to the Engineer for
 approval for the grouting operation. There shall be no additional cost to the Division for the
 grouting operation.
 625.4.4-CSL Testing Tubes: Tubes required for CSL Tests shall be ASTM A53, Grade B,
 nominal 2 inch (50 mm) diameter. Hydrostatic test requirements are waived. Threaded Couplings
 shall be used per ASTM A 865.
 625.5-CONSTRUCTION:
 625.5.1-General: The following sequence describes a generalized construction method that
 is expected to be appropriate for the installation of the drilled caissons. Deviations will be
 permitted with the Engineer's approval.
 504
 
 a. Excavate to top of shaft elevation.
 b. Drilling of a “Preinstallation Core Hole” prior to drilling of caisson hole. The drilling and
 sampling of the preinstallation core holes shall be done by use of double tube core barrels.
 Additional preinstallation core holes in other locations may be required where directed by
 the Engineer. Such additional core holes shall be paid for at the contract unit bid price.
 The preinstallation core hole will be drilled from the ground surface, downward a distance
 equal to the caisson diameter below the expected bottom of rock socket. Its purpose is to
 assure that the rock just below the socket is sound and able to carry the loads that will be
 imposed on it.
 A preinstallation core hole is a 2 inches (50 mm) nominal diameter hole, with coring,
 where the quality of the rock core and the rate of drilling are used to determine if there is
 satisfactory rock of sufficient type and thickness, and to locate the presence of open joints,
 voids, soft rock or other deleterious material. Logs of the core hole shall be provided to
 the Engineer within 24 hours of completion of coring. All cores shall be maintained by
 the Contractor until completion of the project and shall then become the property of the
 Engineer.
 c. Drilling of cased hole through the soil overburden down to top of competent rock. Seating
 bottom of casing to minimize entry of ground water.
 d. Drilling of rock socket to the minimum diameter shown in the plans and to a depth shown
 on the drawings or otherwise directed by the Engineer.
 e. Cleaning of the drilled hole, particularly the rock socket and the inside face of the casing;
 inspection of the hole and approval for placement of the caisson material.
 f. Placement of the pre-assembled cage of reinforcing steel and securing it in place against
 movement during concreting and during casing withdrawal. It also must be secured in
 such a way that the minimum clear cover over the bars is maintained. Placement of tubes
 as required for CSL testing.
 g. Placement of concrete in either dry or wet conditions. If the temporary casing is to be
 removed it shall be withdrawn carefully and slowly so as not to leave any voids in the
 concrete and so as not to dislocate any reinforcing steel. Any concrete not meeting this
 specification's slump requirements shall be rejected.
 h. For any parts of any caisson that extend above either the existing or permanent grade, that
 portion shall be placed by use of forms of the diameters shown in the plans. Curing,
 stripping, and finishing shall be the same as for other structural concrete. Casing may be
 used as forms.
 i. CSL testing if required, corrective measures for any unacceptable caissons, removal of
 water from the CSL tubes and filling with an approved grout. All core holes must be
 filled with an approved gout.
 625.5.2-Excavation:
 625.5.2.1-Scope: The Contractor shall drill one preinstallation core hole at each
 caisson location unless otherwise noted on the plans. The Contractor shall perform all
 excavations required for the caissons and the rock sockets, through whatever materials are
 encountered, to the dimensions shown in the plans, or required by the site conditions, or
 directed by the Engineer. The Contractor shall make each caisson excavation available to the
 Engineer for inspection, providing tools, equipment, and safety measures as hereinafter
 specified. Based on preinstallation core hole information or on general inspection of the rock
 socket, the Contractor shall drill the rock socket deeper if directed by the Engineer.
 505
 
 625.5.2.2-Excavation through Overburden: Unless otherwise shown in the plans,
 drilled caisson excavations in the overburden shall be vertical bored holes extending from the
 ground surface down to the surface of competent rock. Temporary or permanent casings may
 be required down to the competent rock surface and shall be seated in rock in a manner that
 prevents caving and minimizes the entry of ground water. In the event of a groundwater
 condition, appropriate measures shall be taken subject to the Engineer's approval. Such
 measures may include pumping from within the excavation, external dewatering, or
 excavation through a slurry-filled hole until the casing can be seated and sealed. In cases in
 which the water is difficult to control, the Engineer may permit wet excavation which could
 require later inspection by diving methods and would require later placement of concrete by
 underwater methods.
 625.5.2.3-Excavation in Rock: Rock sockets shall be excavated to the dimensions and
 depths shown in the plans, forming a flat bearing area at the bottom of the socket. Each socket
 shall be excavated into continuous rock for the indicated length, by use of methods subject to
 the Engineer's approval. Blasting methods will not be permitted.
 Upon completion of each rock socket excavation, the Engineer may (1) accept the socket,
 or (2) order deeper excavation based upon preinstallation core hole data or general inspection
 of the socket. The adequacy of each socket will depend on the soundness of its bottom surface
 and on the soundness of its underlying layers. The Contractor shall drill required
 preinstallation core holes as directed and shall excavate sockets to the depth directed by the
 Engineer.
 Contractor is cautioned not to over-drill the rock sockets. Unauthorized over-drilling will
 be at the Contractor’s expense. In the case where over-drilling would bring the caisson base
 too close to a coal seam or other weak layer, then drilling must be extended through such
 weak layer, at the Contractor’s expense, to a satisfactory deeper bearing level as determined
 by the Engineer.
 No portion of the rock socket shall be exposed to drilling fluid or groundwater for more
 than 96 hours. Any portion of the rock socket exposed to drilling fluid or water for more
 than 96 hours, and any portion of the rock socket which, in the opinion of the Engineer,
 has deteriorated due to exposure to air or water, shall be reamed with an approved grooving
 tool to a depth of not less than ¼ inch (6 mm), or as directed by the Engineer. Reaming of
 the socket, if necessary, is considered incidental to the cost of drilling the rock socket, and
 no separate payment will be made for this work.
 625.5.2.4-Providing for Socket Inspection: Upon completion of the excavation of each
 rock socket, and upon mechanical cleaning of the socket, the Contractor shall make the socket
 available to the Engineer for inspection. The Contractor shall provide suitable access for
 inspection, electric lighting, devices for checking dimensions, alignment and plumbness,
 ventilation equipment, the protective cage, radio communication, and auxiliary safety line.
 The air in the caisson shall be tested for noxious and/or explosive gases prior to and during
 entry of inspection personnel, to assure a safe working environment.
 625.5.2.5-Disposal of Materials: Disposal of excavated materials shall be
 accomplished under the general provisions of Section 207.6 of the Standard Specifications.
 
 506
 
 625.5.2.6-River Area: Drilled caisson construction in the river shall employ whatever
 special methods the Contractor finds necessary for access and for accomplishing the work.
 These methods may include cofferdams, temporary sand islands, or other suitable measures.
 The Contractor will be responsible for conforming to all regulatory and environmental
 requirements related to the river and for obtaining any permits that are required by his river
 operations.
 625.5.2.7-Safety Measures: Safety of all persons is to be considered an objective of the
 utmost importance on this project. Therefore, the Contractor will take whatever measures are
 necessary to protect his own personnel, his subcontractors' personnel, the Engineer or other
 agents of the state, regulatory personnel, and others including the general public. The
 following list is presented as representative of issues that the Contractor must address. It is
 not intended as all-inclusive and does not relieve the Contractor of conforming to other
 regulations, laws, requirements, or other measures reasonably required for safe excavating
 operations. The Contractor shall develop a safety plan in accordance with these requirements
 and provide this plan to the Engineer for his review.
 a. Any required equipment within an excavation shall be operated by air or electricity.
 The use of gasoline-driven engines or diesel engines within an excavation will not
 be permitted. All lighting shall be electric and precautions shall be taken in regard
 to potential short circuits of electric current within ground water.
 b. The Contractor will take precautions to assure that no explosive or noxious gases are
 present. Fresh air shall be supplied into the excavation and foul air shall be removed
 whenever any personnel are present in the hole.
 c. A safety harness or chair lift, with separate safety line, protective cage, and two-way
 radio communication shall be used for any entry into an excavation.
 d. No open excavation shall be left unattended. During non-working hours excavations
 shall be protected by the use of solid, safe covers that are firmly fastened in place.
 625.5.3-Reinforcing Steel Installation: Prior to installation of reinforcing steel, the steel
 cage shall be checked and cleaned of any materials that would tend to prevent bonding. The
 excavated hole shall also be checked and any remaining or newly deposited debris shall be
 removed. Immediately upon the Engineer's approval of the condition of the cage and his
 acceptance of the socket, and just prior to placement of concrete, the fully assembled cage of
 reinforcing steel shall be installed into the excavation.
 The cage will consist of longitudinal (vertical) bars, spiral or tie bars, cage stiffener bars as
 required, spacing devices, and any other appurtenances required to maintain alignment, shape,
 and clearances. Cages shall include steel tubes in shafts where CSL testing is to occur. Each cage
 shall be placed in one unit by lowering into the hole in a manner that will prevent distortion.
 Concrete spacers or other approved noncorrosive spacing devices shall be used at sufficient
 intervals (near the bottom and at intervals not exceeding 10 ft (3 000 mm) along the caisson) to
 ensure concentric spacing for the entire cage length. The minimum number of centering devices
 at each level shall be three. All steel centering devices with less than 3 inches (75 mm) of concrete
 cover shall be epoxy coated. The cage shall be supported from the top by use of a ground surface
 frame or other positive means. Setting the cage on the socket bottom without support will not be
 permitted. The Contractor may with the approval of the Engineer, remove the top support after
 sufficient concrete has been placed to adequately support the cage vertically and prevent distortion
 or racking of the cage.
 507
 
 The bottom of the reinforcing steel cage shall be a minimum of 3 inches (75 mm) and a
 maximum of 24 inches (600 mm) from the bottom to the drilled caisson excavation. Additional
 clearance may be approved by the engineer.
 All intersections of drilled caisson reinforcing steel shall be tied with cross or “figure 8” ties.
 The reinforcing steel in the caisson shall be 100% tied and supported so that the reinforcing steel
 will remain within allowable tolerances for position. Unless otherwise shown in the plans, splicing
 shall be by mechanical connectors or couplers which develop at least 125% of yield strength of
 the reinforcing bar. No more than 50% of the longitudinal reinforcing shall be spliced within 60
 bar diameters of any lapped splice location or within 2 ft (600 mm) of any mechanical splice or
 coupler location. Cage stiffener bars shall be used as required to provide a reinforcement cage of
 sufficient rigidity to prevent racking, permanent deformations, etc. during installation. If the
 concrete is to be placed by the free-fall method, these bars must first be removed.
 In the event that the caisson has been excavated below the anticipated tip elevation, the
 reinforcing cage may be extended at the tip (low) end by lap splices, mechanical connectors, or
 welded splices in conformance with the Standard Specifications. In this instance, splices need not
 be staggered and 100% of the reinforcing bars may be spliced at a given location. Lap splice
 lengths shall be as shown in the plans or approved by the Engineer.
 Prior to placing the reinforcement cage, the Contractor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
 the Engineer that the fabrication and handling methods to be used will result in a reinforcing cage
 placed in the proper position, with the proper clearances, and without permanent bending or
 racking of the reinforcement cage.
 The elevation of the top of the steel cage shall be checked before and after the concrete is
 placed. If the rebar cage is not maintained within the specified tolerances, corrections shall be
 made by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Engineer. No additional caissons shall be
 constructed until the Contractor has modified his rebar cage support system in a manner
 satisfactory to the Engineer.
 625.5.4-Placement of Concrete: Prior to concrete placement, the Contractor shall make
 all necessary arrangements to assure the uninterrupted delivery of concrete so that there will
 not be any cold joints in the caissons. Placement of concrete shall generally conform to the
 applicable portions of Section 601.10 of the Standard Specifications. The rate of placement of
 concrete, as related to the height of fresh concrete at any time, will be subject to the Engineer's
 approval. The placement method will be developed by the Contractor, taking account of set
 time, hydraulic pressures and casing removal.
 All costs of replacement of defective caissons shall be the responsibility of the Contractor and
 shall be at no cost to the Department.
 After the concrete level has reached the required top elevation, it will be forced to overflow
 in the case of tremie or pump placement, leaving only fresh, uncontaminated concrete. In the case
 of placement by free fall (dry conditions), the concrete will be continued high enough to
 compensate for any settlement due to removal of casing.
 The top 10 ft (3000 mm) of each drilled caisson shall be vibrated except, when more than
 10 ft (3000 mm) is to be exposed above the ground line or the riverbed, then the entire exposed
 portion shall be vibrated. Exposed portions of each drilled caisson shall be cured in accordance
 with Section 601.12 of the Standard Specifications.
 
 508
 
 625.5.5-Removal of Casing: Removal of the casing from a shaft may occur gradually as
 concrete is placed. Insofar as possible, casing extraction shall be done at a slow uniform rate by
 application of a steady vertical upward pull in the direction of the axis of the shaft. To facilitate
 extraction, tapping on the casing, exertion of temporary downward pressure, slight rotation, or the
 controlled use of a vibratory hammer will be permitted, but care must be taken to avoid harmful
 impacts or disturbances to the fresh concrete. Vibration or rodding may not be used to break the
 casing loose for extraction.
 If, during extraction of casing, upward movement of concrete and/or reinforcing steel occurs,
 the Engineer shall be notified immediately. If he considers the movement to be minor, he may
 permit the extraction of the casing to continue. If, however, the movement is deemed significant
 and indicative of squeezing of the surrounding soil thus resulting in a reduction of the caisson
 diameter, then he may order the casing to be left in place, or he may permit extraction to proceed
 and order a later non-destructive load test, or may order other procedures as appropriate at no
 additional cost to the Division.
 For the upper portions of drilled caissons that will be exposed and visible, the casing may
 remain in place as a form until the concrete has attained a strength that enables it to stand alone
 without further deformation. Casing shall then be removed.
 625.6-INSPECTION OF SOCKETS:
 625.6.1-Depth of Rock Socket: Each rock socket shall be drilled to the shaft diameter shown
 in the plans unless otherwise directed by the Engineer based on subsurface conditions
 encountered.
 The top elevation of competent rock must be confirmed as the socket drilling is started.
 The effective "top elevation" is based on observation of the boundary zone where broken or
 weathered rock becomes competent rock, and is also influenced by the presence of any shale
 or coal seams. Based on that elevation, and the information from the preinstallation core hole,
 the Engineer will determine the final depth of socket and bottom elevation. The drilled rock
 socket will then be inspected per 625.5.2.3 and will either be accepted or drilled deeper as
 determined by the Engineer.
 625.6.2-Inspection Under Water: In a case where it is considered unfeasible to dewater
 a caisson, the Contractor shall provide drilled caisson logs and screenings to the Engineer for
 evaluation. If this material is not sufficient for a proper judgement, the Engineer will reserve
 the right to order an inspection by diving or other methods either through a separate specialty
 subcontractor or through the Contractor in which case compensation would be under Sections
 104.3 and 109.4 of the Standard Specifications. Any time required for inspection under water
 will be considered incidental to the work and will not be cause for extra compensation related
 to a claim or extension of contract time.
 625.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Drilled caissons and Rock Socket foundations will be measured by the linear foot (meter).
 Drilled Caissons are the portion from the finished top of each caisson to the top of competent rock.
 Rock Socket is the portion from the top of competent rock to the bottom of the caisson as shown in
 the plans or as directed by the Engineer. Each measured caisson is to be complete in place, accepted,
 and ready to function. "Top of caisson" is the top of concrete as shown in the plans. "Top of competent
 rock" is as tabulated in the drilled shaft schedules in the plans unless a difference of one 1 foot (300
 mm) or more is found during drilling.
 509
 
 Drilled Caisson test hole will be measured in Lump Sum basis.
 Preinstallation core hole shall be measured by the linear foot (meter) based upon actual length
 drilled. The plan quantity shall be based on one core hole, per drilled caisson, measured from the top
 shaft elevation to one caisson diameter below the bottom of rock socket unless otherwise noted in the
 plans. No payment shall be made for additional length of Preinstallation core hole drilled above the
 top of the drilled caisson.
 625.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The accepted quantities of drilled caisson foundations, measured as provided above, will be
 paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot (meter); complete in place including excavation,
 slurry if required, temporary or permanent metal casing, steel reinforcing, concrete, curing, and any
 required forming and finishing. No additional payment will be made for temporary casing that
 remains in place and pressure grouting due to the Contractor's inability to stabilize a drilled
 excavation, for the need to place concrete by tremie or pumping, for the need to use slurry for drilling,
 or for extra excavation and concrete that may be required due to drilling diameters larger than the
 minimum diameters specified. No additional payment will be made for methods employed to gain
 access to drilled caisson construction or for means required to provide a dry working environment
 within the drilled caissons. Tubes for CSL testing, other responsibilities related to testing and
 inspection assistance are incidental, with no separate payment being made.
 Drilled caisson test holes will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for each such hole.
 Preinstallation core hole will be paid for by the linear foot (meter).
 625.9-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 625001-*
 625003-*
 625004-*
 625005-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Drilled Caissons “D” Diameter
 “D” Rock Socket Foundation
 “D” Drilled Caisson Test Hole
 Preinstallation Core Hole
 
 * Sequence number
 D = Diameter of drilled caisson, in inches (millimeters)
 
 510
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Lump Sum
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 
 SECTION 626
 RETAINING WALL SYSTEMS
 626.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing the design, wall construction plans, materials, and
 construction of cast-in-place reinforced concrete or Mechanically Stabilized Earth (MSE) walls in
 accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines, grades,
 design, and dimensions shown in the plans.
 626.2-GENERAL:
 Unless specified otherwise in the contract documents the wall may be, at the Contractor's
 option, any one of the wall systems on the approved source list corresponding to the applicable
 Pay Item; this list is posted on the MCS&T web page under the heading Approved Source/Product
 Listing.
 The Contractor shall indicate which wall system is to be constructed by the bid alternative
 chosen in the proposal. No change of the wall system indicated in the bid proposal shall be
 permitted after the bid opening unless approved by the Engineer.
 The wall design and detail plans for construction shall be submitted to the Engineer for
 approval. The time required for preparation and review of these submittals shall be charged to the
 allowable contract time. Delays caused by untimely submittals or insufficient data will not be
 considered justification for time extensions. No additional compensation will be made for any
 additional material, equipment, or other items found necessary to comply with the project
 specifications as a result of the Engineer's review. The proposed wall design shall be compatible
 with the Contractor's proposed method of construction, and shall be compatible with any method
 of construction shown in the plans. The Division does not assume nor warrant any wall system's
 compatibility with any particular construction methods.
 626.3-DESIGN CRITERIA:
 626.3.1-General: The size of all structural elements shall be determined such that the
 design load stresses do not exceed the allowable stresses found in the AASHTO LRFD Bridge
 Design Specifications, latest edition.
 Analysis of external stability of the in-place retaining wall system will be the responsibility
 of the Division. Any staged or temporary construction affecting wall stability shall be the
 responsibility of the Contractor.
 The parapets on any portion of the retaining walls as shown in the plans shall be designed
 to resist traffic loads in accordance with the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications,
 latest edition.
 626.3.2-Mechanically Stabilized Earth: The design for the MSE wall shall consider the
 internal stability of the wall mass. The design shall conform to the requirements found in
 AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications, latest edition.
 External loads, which affect the internal stability such as those, applied through piling,
 bridge footings, temporary construction, etc. shall be accounted for in the design. A design
 life of 100 years shall be used throughout the design. The factor of safety for pullout resistance
 shall not be less than 1.50 based on pullout resistance at ¾ inch (19 mm) deflection.
 
 511
 
 The allowable bearing pressure under the stabilized mass shall be as shown in the plans.
 The minimum length of the soil reinforcing system, as measured from the back of the front
 face to the end at the back of the soil stabilized mass, shall be as shown in plans, and shall be
 the same from top to bottom of the wall at any cross section.
 All appurtenances behind, in front of, under, mounted upon, or passing through the wall
 such as drainage structures, utilities, or other items shown in the plans must be accounted for
 in the design of the wall.
 626.3.3-Cast-in-Place Reinforced Concrete: When a Cast-in-Place Reinforced Concrete
 option is included in the plans the following shall be applicable.
 The information shown in the plans for the cast-in-place alternative is schematic; however,
 all dimensions shown in the plans shall be considered minimums.
 The allowable bearing pressure of the foundation soils, the unit weight of the retained soils,
 and the characteristics of the retained soils necessary for design purposes shall be as shown in
 the plans.
 626.4-SUBMITTALS:
 626.4.1-General: The Contractor shall submit complete design calculations, explanatory
 notes, and detail plans for the proposed wall system. The detail plans shall include all details,
 dimensions, quantities, and cross sections necessary to construct the wall and shall include but
 not be limited to the following items:
 A plan and elevation sheet or sheets for the wall which shall contain the following:
 1. An elevation view of the wall which shall indicate the elevations at the top of the wall
 at all horizontal and vertical break points and at least every 50 feet (15 m) along the
 face of the wall, all steps in the footings or leveling pads, the original and final ground
 lines, the maximum bearing pressures, and the summary of quantities for each wall.
 2. A plan view of the wall which shall indicate the offsets from the construction centerline
 to the face of the wall at all changes in horizontal alignment and the centerline of any
 drainage structure or drainage pipe behind, passing through, or under the wall.
 3. A typical cross section or cross sections showing elevation relationship between
 existing ground conditions and proposed grades.
 4. All general notes required for constructing the wall. The required batter to compensate
 for the elongation of the soil reinforcing during erection shall be shown for each
 different required height.
 5. All horizontal and vertical curve data affecting the wall.
 6. All details for footings or leveling pads shall be shown including details for steps in the
 footings or leveling pads.
 7. All details for construction of walls with appurtenances behind, under, mounted upon,
 or passing through the wall such as drainage structures or utilities shall be clearly
 indicated.
 8. The wall manufacture shall submit copies of their Quality Assurance/Quality Control
 Manuals on each project.
 9. Required architectural treatments shall be as indicated and as detailed in the plans. All
 details for any required architectural treatments shall be shown including:
 
 512
 
 a. Product data and installation instructions for manufactured form systems, form
 liners, release agents, ties, and accessories. The release agent manufacturer shall
 certify that the products supplied comply with regulations controlling the use of
 volatile organic compounds (VOC's).
 b. Shop drawings for fabrication and erection. These drawings shall show all items
 that visually affect the exposed concrete, including, but not limited to, general form
 construction, jointing, specially formed joints or reveals, and patterns of placement.
 The Engineer's review will be for general architectural applications and features
 only. Formwork design for structural stability and sufficiency is the Contractor's
 responsibility and shall not be submitted for the Engineer's review.
 c. Mockup or Sample Facing elements. The Contractor shall construct a mockup or
 sample facing element using the proposed formwork and facing materials in order
 to demonstrate the required finishes and textures. Actual construction of concrete
 shall not proceed until the Engineer has accepted the sample units.
 At the time the detail plans are submitted for review, they shall be accompanied by design
 calculations and explanatory wall notes. These documents shall be legible and shall
 demonstrate that the design criteria have been met. Specified minimum factors of safety and
 the maximum soil pressure beneath the wall footing or earth stabilized mass shall be clearly
 indicated.
 The plans shall be prepared on reproducible sheets 22 x 34 inches (550 mm x 850 mm)
 including borders. Each sheet shall have a title block in the lower right hand corner. The title
 block shall include the sheet number of the drawing, name or designation of the wall, the state
 and federal project designation, project name, fabricator and Contractor name. Design
 calculations and notes shall be prepared on sheets 8½ x 11 inches (216 mm x 280 mm), and
 shall contain the project designation, wall designation, date of preparation, initials of designer
 and checker, and page number at the top of the page. The Detail Plans, Design Calculations,
 and Explanatory Notes shall be signed and stamped by a Professional Engineer registered in
 West Virginia and knowledgeable in the proposed alternative wall system.
 The initial submission shall include three sets of the detail plans, calculations, and notes.
 One set of notes and plans will be returned to the Contractor with any indicated corrections.
 When the plans and notes are stamped approved by the Engineer, the Contractor shall furnish
 the Engineer with the requested number of sets of prints and a Mylar set of the plans for
 distribution by the Division. The Contractor shall perform no work or ordering of materials
 for the structures until the Engineer has approved the submittal.
 626.4.2-Mechanically Stabilized Earth: The details and material specifications for the
 wall facing elements and incidental accessories shall be included with detail plans for approval
 by the Engineer.
 The designation as to the type of facing element, the length of the soil reinforcing systems,
 the distance along the face of the wall where changes in lengths of the soil reinforcing systems
 occur, and the limit of mesh, strip, or anchor shall be clearly shown in the plans.
 All wall facing elements shall be detailed. The details shall show all dimensions necessary
 to construct the element, all reinforcing steel in the element, and the location of soil reinforcing
 system devices embedded in the elements.
 
 513
 
 626.4.3-Cast-in-Place Reinforced Concrete: The plans for the cast-in-place wall shall
 contain a complete reinforcing bar schedule showing all bending details and bar marks. The
 plans shall also show the location of all construction joints, expansion joints, or other joints in
 the wall. All wall thickness shall be shown and transition details at wall thickness changes.
 626.5-MATERIALS:
 626.5.1-Mechanically Stabilized Earth Components: The Contractor shall make
 arrangements to purchase the facing elements, reinforcing mesh or strips, attachment devices,
 joint materials, and all other necessary components. Materials not conforming to this section
 of the specifications or from sources not listed in the contract documents shall not be used
 without written consent from the Engineer.
 626.5.1.1-Facing Elements:
 626.5.1.1.1-Reinforced Concrete Facing Elements: The facing elements shall be
 fabricated in accordance with Section 601 of the Standard Specifications with the following
 exceptions and additions:
 A. Concrete for the reinforced concrete facing elements shall attain a minimum
 compressive strength of 4,000 psi (27 Mpa) at 28 days. All concrete shall have air
 entrainment of 7 % plus or minus 2.5 % with no other additives. Specified
 concrete properties are to be tested in accordance with applicable provision of
 Section 601.4.1 of the Standard Specifications. Acceptance of a Production Lot
 will be made if the compressive strength test result is greater than or equal to,
 4,000 psi (27 Mpa). A Production Lot is defined as a group of panels that will be
 represented by a single compressive strength test result is greater than or equal to,
 4,000 psi (27 Mpa). A Production Lot is defined as a group of elements that will
 be represented by a single compressive strength sample and will consist of a single
 day’s production. A minimum of two cylinders shall be required for every
 compressive strength sample.
 B. The units shall be fully supported until the concrete reaches a minimum
 compressive strength of 1,000 psi (7 Mpa).
 C. Unless otherwise indicated in the plans or elsewhere in the specifications, the
 concrete surface for the front face shall have a Class 1 finish as define by Section
 601.11 and a uniform surface finish for the rear face. The rear face of the element
 shall be screeded to eliminate open pockets of aggregate and surface distortions in
 excess of ¼ inch (6 mm). The panels shall be cast on a flat area. The clevis loops,
 tie strip guide, or other galvanized devices shall not contact or be attached to the
 face element reinforcement steel.
 D. The date of manufacture, the production Lot number, and the piece mark shall be
 clearly scribed on an unexposed face of each element.
 E. All units shall be handled, stored, and shipped in such a manner as to eliminate the
 dangers of chipping, discoloration, cracks, fractures, and excessive bending
 stresses. Elements in storage shall be supported in firm blocking to protect the
 element connection devices and the exposed exterior finish.
 F. All units shall be manufactured within the following tolerance
 
 514
 
 1. Element Dimensions: Position of element connection devices within 1 inch
 (25 mm), except for coil and loop embeds which shall be 3/16 inch (5 mm).
 All other dimensions within 3/16 inch (5 mm).
 2. Element Squareness: Squareness as determined by the difference between the
 two diagonals shall not exceed ½ inch (13 mm).
 3. Element Surface Finish: Surface defects on smooth formed surfaces measured
 over a length of 5 feet (1.5 m) shall not exceed ¼ inch (6 mm). Surface defects
 on the textured-finished surfaces measured over a length of 5 feet shall not
 exceed 5/16 inch (8 mm).
 Units shall be rejected because of failure to meet any of the requirements specified
 above. In addition, any or all of the following defects shall be sufficient cause for rejection:
 1. Defects that indicate imperfect molding.
 2. Defects indicating honeycombed or open textured concrete.
 3. Cracked or severely chipped elements.
 4. Color variation on front face of panel due to excess form oil or other reasons.
 All reinforcing steel shall be in accordance with Section 602 of: the Standard
 Specifications and shall be epoxy coated.
 626.5.1.1.2-Modular Block Facings: The length and width of each block shall be
 within ±1/8 inch (3.2 mm). The height of each block shall be within ±1/16 inch (1.6 mm).
 Hollow units shall have a minimum wall thickness of 1.25 inch (32 mm). When a broken
 face finish is used the dimension of the front face shall be within 1 inch (25 mm) of the
 theoretical dimension of the unit.
 All units shall be sound and free of cracks or other defects that would interfere with the
 proper placing of the unit or significantly impair the strength or performance of the
 construction. Cracks greater than 1/64 inch (0.5 mm) wide and greater than 25% of the
 block height is grounds for rejection.
 The front fact or faces of units that are to be exposed shall be free of chips, cracks or
 other imperfections that can be seen when viewed from a distance of 30 feet (10 m) under
 diffused lighting. Up to 5% of the shipment may contain slight cracks or small chips not
 larger than 1 inch (25 mm).
 Color and finish shall be shown on the shop drawings and shall be erected with a
 running bond configuration.
 When cap units are used they shall be cast to or attached to the top of the modular block
 wall in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s recommended procedure.
 626.5.1.1.2.1-Modular Block Mix Design: Each manufacturing facility shall
 provide a copy of their mix design, including test results and material sources, to the
 MCS&T Division for each type of block. An approved independent lab shall perform
 the testing when establishing the mix design. The manufacturing facility shall submit to
 MCS&T Division yearly test results, from an approved independent lab, to verify each
 mix design. If there are any changes in the mix, such as changes in material sources, any
 materials such as pigments are added, or the pigment color is changed, then a new mix
 design is required. The modular block units shall conform to the following:
 515
 
 All of the units shall conform to ASTM C 1372, except that:
 (a) The minimum compressive strength requirements shall be 4000 Psi ( 28 Mpa)
 for any individual unit. The average of five units shall be used as the mix
 design strength.
 (b) The maximum 24 hour water absorption shall not exceed 7 %. The average
 of five units shall be used as the mix design absorption.
 (c) The freeze/thaw durability of wall units tested in accordance with ASTM C
 1262 in a 3% saline solution shall be the minimum of the following:
 1. The weight loss of each of five test specimens at the conclusion of 90 cycles
 shall not exceed 1% of its initial weight.
 2. The weight loss of each of 4 of the 5 test specimens at the conclusion of 100
 cycles shall not exceed 1.5% of its initial weight, with the maximum
 allowable weight loss for the 5 th specimen to not exceed 10%.
 (d) The freeze/thaw durability of cap units shall be tested in accordance with ASTM
 C 1262 in a 3% saline solution shall be the minimum of the following:
 1. The weight loss of each of five test specimens at the conclusion of 40
 cycles shall not exceed 1% of its initial weight;
 2. The weight loss of each of 4 of the 5 test specimens at the conclusion of
 50 cycles shall not exceed 1.5% of its initial weight, with the maximum
 allowable weight loss for the 5th specimen not to exceed 10%.
 (e) ASTM C 1262 test results shall be recorded and reported in 10 cycle intervals.
 626.5.1.1.2.2-Modular Block Production: Each manufacturing facility shall
 provide the Engineer with a copy of their quality control plan and procedures.
 Sampling and Testing shall conform to ASTM C 140, except: Section 6.2.4 shall be
 deleted and replaced with the following:
 "The specimens shall be coupons cut from a face shell of each unit and sawn
 to remove any face shell projections. The coupon size shall have a height to
 thickness ratio of 2 to 1 before capping and a length to thickness ratio of 4 to
 1. The coupon shall be cut from the unit such that the coupon height
 dimension is in the same direction as the unit height dimension. Compressive
 testing of full size units will not be permitted. The compressive strength of
 the coupon shall be assumed to represent the net area compressive strength
 of the whole unit."
 Each manufacturing facility is required to sample and test each block type at the rate
 of one sample per 5000 units of continuous production from each mix design or fraction
 thereof (if production is interrupted) as part of their overall quality control testing. Each
 manufacturing facility shall forward all quality control test reports and documentation to
 the MCS&T Division. The manufacturing facility or other testing facilities may perform
 this quality control testing.
 The average compressive strength of each lot of the modular block units shall be a
 minimum of 90% of the mix design strength, and the average absorption of each lot shall
 be between 1.5% less than to 0.5% greater than the mix design absorption. If the
 516
 
 compressive strength or absorption criteria are not met, then the modular block in that lot
 are rejected and cannot be incorporated into the work unless that lot is tested and found to
 be acceptable under section 626.5.1.1.2.1.
 Cap units and wall units shall be sampled and tested as separate block types.
 Minimum manufacturer testing shall include 6 randomly selected units and the
 following testing:
 a. Compressive strength (average of 3 units)
 b. 24 hour absorption (average of 3 units)
 The MCS&T Division will randomly select 6 units for testing by the Division for every
 15,000 units of continuous production from each mix design or fraction thereof (if
 production is interrupted). MCS&T may require the manufacturer to conduct freeze/thaw
 durability testing when inconstancies in the test results arise.
 626.5.1.1.2.3-Modular Block S e al i n g : All m o d u l a r block r e t a i n i n g wall
 surfaces shall be sealed. This work shall consist of preparation, furnishing and applying
 the surface sealer to the exposed front face, of all the wall units, as well as the back
 side of the upper courses of the wall layer of reinforcement, and the top of the uppermost
 block or cap unit.
 Sealers shall be silane and/or siloxane based and specifically formulated for use on
 porous surfaces such as concrete block.
 Sealers shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E514 on a block wall, and shall
 provide a minimum of 90% reduction in leakage.
 Three dry-cast concrete block specimens shall be treated with the sealer and tested for
 absorption in accordance with ASTM C140. The sealer shall provide a minimum of 90%
 reduction in water absorption when tested in this manner.
 Due to the potentially hazardous ingredients contained in sealer formulations extreme
 care must be exercised in their handling and use, and the manufacturer’s
 recommendations shall be closely followed.
 Construction Requirements:
 1. The Contractor shall comply with the manufacturer’s written instructions for
 preparing, handling and applying the surface sealer.
 2. The surface to be treated shall receive a light water-blast to the extent that the
 surface is clean and free of oils.
 3. Before the surface sealer is applied, the surface shall be dry and free of all dust,
 debris, and frost.
 4. Surface sealers shall be applied at the heaviest application rate specified by the
 manufacturer.
 All materials and work performed as specified above will be incidental to the
 construction of the wall.
 626.5.1.1.3-Wire Facings: Wire facing shall be shop fabricated of cold drawn steel
 wire conforming to the minimum requirements of AASHTO M 32 M/M 32 and welded into
 the finished configuration in accordance with AASHTO M 55 M/M 55. Galvanizing shall
 conform to the minimum requirements of AASHTO M 111.
 517
 
 Retention material shall be placed along the back face of the wire facing to retain the
 backfill behind the wall. Retention material shall be capable of retaining the backfill, UV
 resistant and shall have a high permittivity.
 626.5.1.1.4-Soil Reinforcing and Attachment Devices: All reinforcing and
 attachment devices shall be carefully inspected to insure they are true to size and free from
 defects that may impair their strength and durability. Ensure that pins used to align the
 precast components during construction are of the size, shape and material required for the
 wall system chosen.
 626.5.1.1.5-Metal Soil Reinforcing or Attachment Devices: Cutting of reinforcing
 strips or mesh at vertical obstacles shall not be permitted. Care must be taken to avoid
 damage to the galvanized coating during handling, storing, and shipping.
 The following requirements shall apply to all soil reinforcing and attachment devices:
 A. Reinforcing strips shall be hot rolled from bars to the required shape and
 dimensions. Their physical and mechanical properties shall conform to ASTM
 A-36. Galvanization shall be required and shall conform to the minimum
 requirements of AASHTO M-111.
 B. Reinforcing mesh shall be shop fabricated of cold drawn steel wire
 conforming to the requirements of paragraph one of Section 709.4.
 Galvanization shall be applied after the mesh is fabricated and shall conform
 to the minimum requirements of AASHTO M-111.
 C. The tie strips shall be shop fabricated of a hot rolled steel conforming to the
 minimum requirements of ASTM A-570, Grade 50 or equivalent. Galvanization
 shall be required and shall conform to AASHTO M-111.
 D. Loop embedments shall be fabricated of cold drawn steel wire conforming to
 ASTM A-510, UNS G-10350 or AASHTO M-32. Loop embeds shall be
 welded in accordance with ASTM A-185. Both shall be galvanized in
 accordance with ASTM B-633 or AASHTO M-111.
 E. Bolts shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M-164. Nuts shall meet the
 requirements of AASHTO M-291 Grade DH or AASHTO M-292 2H. Fasteners
 shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M-232.
 F. Connector pins and mat bars shall be fabricated from cold drawn steel
 conforming to AASHTO M-32 and welded to the soil reinforcement mats as
 shown in the plans. Galvanization shall be required and shall conform to
 AASHTO M-111.
 626.5.1.1.6-Geosynthetics Soil Reinforcing or Attachment Devices: Cutting of
 geosynthetic reinforcing longitudinal to the wall face at vertical obstacles shall not be
 permitted. End to End splicing of geosynthetic material will not be permitted.
 The geosynthetic used shall meet the minimum requirements shown on the shop
 drawings. Each roll of geosynthetic material shall be labeled as to its properties.
 Geosynthetics shall be made of polypropylene, high-density polyethylene or high tenacity
 polyester fibers having cross-sections sufficient to permit significant mechanical interlock
 with the soil/backfill. Geosynthetics shall have a high tensile modulus in relation to the
 soil/backfill. Geosynthetics shall have a high resistance to deformation under sustained long
 518
 
 term design loads while in service and resistant to ultraviolet degradation, to damage under
 normal construction practices and to all forms of biological or chemical degradation
 normally encountered in the material being reinforced.
 Store the geosynthetics in conditions above 20º F [-7º C] and not greater than 140º F
 [60º C]. Prevent mud, wet cement, epoxy, and like materials from coming into contact with
 and affixing to the geosynthetic material. Rolled geosynthetic may be laid flat or stood on
 end for storage. Cover the geosynthetic and protect from sunlight prior to placement in the
 wall system.
 Carefully inspect all reinforcement to ensure they are the proper size and free from
 defects that may impair their strength and durability.
 The geosynthetic reinforcement structure shall be dimensionally stable and able to retain
 its geometry under construction stresses and shall have high resistance to damage during
 construction. The contractor shall submit a manufacturer’s certification that the
 geosynthetics supplied meets the design criteria shown on the shop drawings, measured in
 full accordance with all test methods and standards specified. In case of dispute over
 validity of values, the Engineer can require the contractor to supply test data from an
 approved laboratory to support the certified values submitted.
 The Contractor’s submittal's package shall include actual test results for tension/creep,
 durability/aging, construction damage, pullout, quality control and a copy of the
 Manufacturers installation procedures. Also included should be the Long-Term Design
 Strength (LTDS) of the Geosynthetic material. The Manufacturer shall also provide written
 certification that all resin used to produce the geosynthetic is virgin and classified as high
 density polyethylene, polypropylene, or high tenacity polyester and is capable of
 withstanding direct exposure to sunlight for 14 days with no measurable deterioration as
 per ASTM D4355.
 The allowable tensile strength shall not exceed 30% for class 1 walls and 25% for all
 other walls of the ultimate tensile strength of the reinforcement used. The allowable tensile
 properties of geosynthetic reinforcement as shown on the shop drawings shall be calculated
 using the following method.
 Property
 Method
 Tensile Strength Ultimate, kN/m ASTM D4595
 Long-term (Ta), kN/m
 FHWA/SA-93-025
 
 519
 
 Where:
 
 Ta= Tult/ {(RFcr) (RFid) (RFdu)}
 
 Tult
 
 Ultimate Tensile Strength shall be the minimum average roll value ultimate
 tensile strength as tested per ASTM D4595.
 
 RFcr
 
 Partial Factor for Creep Deformation is the ratio of Tult to the creep limited
 strength determined in accordance with ASTM D5262. The test results shall
 be extrapolated for a 100 year design life per GRI GG4. Creep performance
 data of a polymer product at a designed temperature is limited to one order of
 magnitude in extrapolation. Creep performance
 data at an elevated
 temperature permits an additional order of magnitude in extrapolation with
 time temperature superposition principals. Elevated temperature testing of the
 specific geogrid for 10,000 hours or creep testing at room temperature for
 100,000 hours is required. Creep limited strength testing is required on
 representative samples of the finished product for each product proposed for
 use and not a single component of the geogrid (i.e. polymer strand). Default
 values for RFcr are not allowed.
 
 RFid
 
 Partial Factor for Installation Damage, shall be determined from construction
 damage tests for each product proposed for use with project specific
 representative or more severe backfill and construction techniques. The
 backfill soil used if other than project specific, shall have a D50 > 1” (30
 mm) sieve. Testing shall be consistent with GRI GG4. A Maximum RFid
 value shall be used if such testing has not been conducted.
 RECOMMENDED VALUES FOR RFid
 Min. RFid Max. RFid
 Geosynthetic
 HDPE uniaxial geogrid
 1.20
 1.45
 PP biaxial geogrid
 1.20
 1.45
 PVC - coated PET geogrid
 1.30
 1.85
 Acrylic-coated PET geogrid
 1.30
 2.05
 Woven geotextiles (PP and PET)
 1.40
 2.20
 Nonwoven geotextiles (PP and PET)
 1.40
 2.50
 Silt – film woven PP geotextiles
 1.60
 3.00
 
 RFdu Partial Factor for Durability / Aging is the combined partial factor for potential
 chemical and biological degradation. RFdu shall be determined from polymer
 specific (HDPE and PP as identified by specific gravity and melt flow index
 and PETP as identified by CEG number and intrinsic viscosity) durability
 testing covering the range of expected soil environments. Prior to approval
 by the Engineer, the manufacturer shall submit test results from a minimum of
 at least four (4) tests conducted in accordance with EPA 9090 at temperatures
 of 73° and 122° F (23° and 50° C). EPA 9090 test results shall include the
 following minimum number of leachate types:
 
 520
 
 PH
 3pH7
 7<pH<9
 9<pH<11
 1pH14
 
 Minimum # of test results
 1
 1
 1
 1
 
 As a minimum, the following tests should be performed for geogrids after immersion in the
 above-described leachates:
 TEST
 Mass per Unit Area
 Dimensions
 Thickness
 Wide Width Strip Tensile
 
 TEST
 PROCEDURE
 EPA 9090
 EPA 9090
 ASTM D374C
 ASTM D374C
 
 MAX % CHANGE
 ALLOWED
 ±1.0
 ±1.0
 ±5.0
 -2.0
 
 FSd shall not be less than the recommended minimum values
 discussed in FHWA/RD-89-186 and listed below:
 High Density Polyethylene (HDPE)
 Coated High Tenacity Polyester (PETP)
 Polypropylene (PP)
 Geotextiles
 Uncoated High Tenacity Polyester (PETP)
 
 1.10
 1.15
 1.25
 1.60
 1.60
 
 1. Composite (flexible/coated) geogrids shall be evaluated based on the durability
 characteristics of the interior reinforcement polymer. Therefore, any protective coating
 shall be removed prior to durability testing unless a minimum 40-micron coating
 thickness is used on flexible geogrids and certified by the manufacturer.
 2. For soils of potential concern, as presented below (modified soils shall i n c l u d e lime
 stabilized soil, cement stabilized soil or concrete), only polymers listed as “no effect”
 shall be used within or adjacent to (3 feet shortest measurable distance) these soil
 environments (Ref: Table 28, FHWA/RD-89-186).
 SOIL ENVIRONMENT PETP PE PP PVC
 Acid Sulfate Soils
 ?
 NE ?
 ?
 Organic Soils
 NE
 NE NE
 ?
 Salt Affected Soils
 ?
 NE NE NE
 Ferroginous
 NE
 NE X
 ?
 Calcareous
 X
 NE NE
 ?
 Modified Soils
 X
 NE NE
 ?
 NE = No Effect
 ? = Questionable Use
 X = Not Recommended
 
 521
 
 RECOMMENDED MINIMUM VALUES FOR RFdu
 Aging Reduction factor, RFdu – 100 years
 Products
 pH ≤ 3
 3 < pH ≤ 5 5 < pH < 8 8 < pH < 9
 PET Geotextiles
 *
 2.0
 1.6
 2.0
 Mn < 20,000
 40<GEG<50
 PET Coated Geogrids
 *
 1.3
 1.15
 1.3
 Mn > 25,000
 GEG<30
 Polypropylene and
 1.1
 1.1
 1.1
 1.1
 HDPE Geogrids
 
 pH > 9
 *
 
 *
 1.1
 
 * Use of materials in this pH range is not recommended but can be used if product specific testing is done.
 626.5.1.3-Joint Materials: Joint materials are to be installed to the dimensions and
 thicknesses in accordance with the plans or approved shop drawings, unless otherwise
 indicated:
 A. Provide either preformed EPDM rubber pads conforming to ASTM D-2000 for
 4AA, 812 rubbers; neoprene elastomeric pads have a Durometer Hardness of 55
 ± 5; or polyethylene bearing p a d s m e et i n g t h e density r e q u i r e m e n t s o f
 ASTM D-1505 in horizontal joints between elements.
 B. Cover all joints between elements on the backside of the wall with a geotextile
 fabric that meets the requirements of Section 715.11.4 of the Standard
 Specifications. The minimum width and lap of the fabric shall be as follows:
 Vertical and horizontal joints: 12” (300 mm); lap-4” (100 mm).
 626.5.1.4-A c c e p t a n c e : The C o n t r a c t o r shall f u r n i s h the Engineer a
 Certificate of Compliance certifying the above materials comply with the applicable
 contract specifications.
 626.5.2-Concrete Leveling Pad: All concrete used in the leveling pad shall as a
 minimum conform to Section 601 of the Standard Specifications for Class C Concrete.
 626.5.3-Select Granular Backfill:
 626.5.3.1-Test Requirements: A11 backfill material used in the structure volume
 shall conform to the following gradation limits as determined by AASHTO T-27:
 Sieve Size
 4 inches (100mm)
 No. 40 (425 µm)
 No. 200 (75 µm)
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 0-60
 0 - 15
 
 Bottom Ash or Fly Ash material will not be considered as select granular backfill
 unless it is specified in the contract documents.
 522
 
 The backfill shall conform to the following additional requirements:
 A. The plasticity index (P.I.) as determined by AASHTO T-90 shall not exceed 6,
 or the material is described as non-plastic.
 B. The material shall exhibit an angle of internal friction of not less than 34 degrees
 (unless otherwise stated in the plans), as determined by the standard Direct
 Shear Test, utilizing a sample of the material compacted to 95% of AASHTO
 T-99, Methods C or D (with oversized correction as outlined in Note 7) at
 optimum moisture content. No angle of internal friction testing is required for
 backfills where 80% of sizes are greater than ¾ inch (19 mm).
 C. Soundness: The materials shall be substantially free of shale or other soft, poor
 durability particles. The material shall have a magnesium sulfate soundness loss
 of less than 30% after Four cycles as determined by AASHTO T-104 or a
 sodium sulfate loss of less than 15% after five cycles as determined in accordance
 with AASHTO T-104.
 D. Electrochemical R e q u i r e m e n t s : The backfill materials shall meet the
 following criteria:
 Requirements
 ***Resistivity greater than 3,000 ohm Centimeters
 **Ph 5-10
 *Chlorides less than 100 parts per Million
 *Sulfates less than 200 parts per million
 Organic Content: 1% maximum
 *
 **
 ***
 
 Test Methods
 AASHTO T-288
 AASHTO T-289
 AASHTO T-291
 AASHTO T-290
 AASHTO T-267
 
 If resistivity is greater than 5,000 ohm-cm, the chlorides and sulfates requirements
 may be waived. Requirement is waived if geosynthetics are used for soil
 reinforcements and attachment devices.
 May be adjusted if geosynthetic material is used for soil reinforcements or
 attachment devices see shop drawings and section 626.5.1.1.6.
 Requirement is waived if geosynthetics are used for reinforcements and
 attachment devices.
 
 E. Steel slag as defined in 703.3.1 shall not be used in this item.
 626.5.3.2-Quality Control Testing: Quality control of the select granular backfill
 material for backfill is the responsibility of the Contractor as specified in 106.1.
 The Contractor shall maintain necessary equipment and qualified personnel to
 perform all sampling and testing necessary to determine the magnitude of the various
 properties of the material governed by the Specifications and shall maintain these
 properties within the limits of the Specifications. The Contractor shall submit a Quality
 Control Plan detailing the methods by which the Quality Control Program will be
 conducted. The plan prepared in accordance with the guidelines set forth in the
 appropriate portions of MP 307.00.50 and MP 717.04.21, shall be submitted to the
 Engineer at the preconstruction conference. The work shall not begin until the plan is
 reviewed for conformance with the contract documents.
 626.5.3.3-Sampling and Testing: Frequency of sampling and testing shall be in
 accordance with the Contractor’s Quality Control Plan. The minimum sampling and
 523
 
 testing frequencies for gradation and Atterberg limits shall be as indicated in Attachment 1
 of MP 307.00.50. The material shall be sampled in accordance with MP 700.00.06. The
 minimum sampling and testing frequency for compaction will be in accordance with
 MP 717.04.21. Material failing gradation requirements during placement shall be
 evaluated immediately and may be subject to retesting to verify the angle of internal
 friction at the expense of the contractor.
 626.5.3.4-Acceptance: The Contractor shall furnish certified test results that the
 select granular backfill meets the contract specifications. The test results for the select
 granular backfill shall not be used to verify compliance for a period exceeding one year.
 The Division may request that the tests be performed at any time if the material changes.
 Additional tests for gradations and plastic limits shall be determined during the
 placement of the material.
 Acceptance for compaction shall be on a lot-by-lot b a s i s . A lot shall be divided
 i n t o five approximately e q u a l sized sub-lots. A sub-lot shall consist of the
 quantity of material to backfill a single lift for 100 feet (30 m) of wall and at least one
 test per lift. One nuclear moisture and density measurement shall be made at a random
 location within each of the five sub-lots; random locations shall be determined in
 accordance with MP 712.21.26. For material having 40% or more retained on the ¾ inch
 (75mm) sieve, MP 700.00.24 shall be used to determine the target maximum dry density.
 For material having less than 40% retained on the ¾ inch (75 mm) sieve, the target dry
 density shall be the maximum dry density as determined by the AASHTO T-99 five point
 laboratory proctor performed on the material in accordance with section 626.5.3.1 (B).
 The moisture content of the material shall be maintained at a level sufficient to facilitate
 compaction. For applications where spread footings are used to support a bridge or
 other structural loads, the target percentage of dry density shall be 100% for other
 applications the target percentage of dry density shall be 95%. If the results of five density
 tests on a Lot indicates that at least 80% of the material, in accordance with 106.3.1
 (West Virginia AP-A), has been compacted to the specified target percentage of dry
 density, the Lot will be accepted. If less than 80 % has been compacted to the specified
 target percentage of dry density and/or the moisture content is outside the tolerance
 range, no additional material shall be placed until the Lot has been reworked to meet
 the specified requirements. Reworking and retesting shall be at the expense of the
 Contractor. When the Division performs the testing in the evaluation of reworked Lots,
 the testing will be at the expense of the Contractor at the unit cost specified in 109.2.2.
 The backfill material must compact to a stable condition. If the material is not stable
 under the weight of construction equipment, the contractor must correct the problem or
 replace the material even if test results indicate that the material meets the moisture and
 density specifications.
 The contractor's gradation data shall be evaluated in accordance with applicable
 sections of Section 307 except that Table 704.6.2 shall not apply. Gradation limits shall
 be in accordance with Table 703.4. The certification is to include the test results. A
 revised unit price for calculation purposes will be established based on the delivered
 quantities and delivered aggregate cost.
 
 524
 
 626.6.1-Mechanically Stabilized Earth:
 626.6.1.1-Foundation Preparation: The foundation for the structure shall be graded
 level for a width equal to the length of reinforcement elements plus one (1) foot (300 mm)
 or as shown in the plans. Prior to wall construction, except where constructed on rock,
 the foundation shall be compacted with a smooth wheel vibratory roller. Any foundation
 soils found to be unsuitable shall be removed and replaced with select granular backfill
 as per Section 614.5.1.4 of the specifications.
 Construction methods for the following shall be per the indicated section of the
 Standard Specifications:
 Item
 Section
 Unclassified Borrow Excavation
 211
 Structure Excavation
 212
 Wet Excavation
 212
 Rock Excavation
 212
 Select Material for Backfilling
 212
 Concrete
 601
 Reinforcing Steel
 602
 626.6.1.2-Wall Erection: A MSE wall supplier representative shall be present a
 minimum of three (3) days and as required thereafter during erection of the wall to assist
 the fabricator, contractor, and Engineer. The cost of the representative shall be
 considered incidental to the unit price of the MSE Wall System.
 When facing elements are handled by means of lifting devices they shall be lifted by
 connecting to the upper edge of the element.
 Facing elements shall be placed so that their final position is vertical or battered as
 shown in the plans. Facing elements shall be placed in successive horizontal lifts in the
 sequence shown in the plans as backfill placement proceeds. As backfill material is
 placed behind the elements, the elements shall be maintained in position by means of
 temporary wedges or bracing according to the wall supplier's recommendations. The
 Contractor shall not have more than two levels of temporary wedges in place at any
 time during wall erection. Concrete facing vertical tolerances and horizontal alignment
 tolerances shall not exceed ¾ inch (19 mm). The overall vertical tolerance of the wall
 (top to bottom) shall not exceed ½ inch (13 mm) per 10 feet (3 m) of wall height.
 Reinforcement elements shall be placed normal to the face of the wall, unless
 otherwise shown in the plans. Prior to placement of the reinforcing elements, backfill
 shall be compacted in accordance with these Specifications.
 626.6.1.3-Backfill Placement: Construction methods shall be in accordance with
 section 212 of the Standard Specifications which requires separation fabric between
 random material and the select granular backfill material. A minimum non woven
 geotextile of 6 ounces per square yard shall be place on the back face of the excavation
 between the granular backfill material and the random excavated material.
 Backfill placement shall closely follow erection of each course of facing elements.
 Backfill shall be placed in such a manner as to avoid any damage or disturbance of the
 wall materials or misalignment of the facing or reinforcing elements. Any wall materials
 that become damaged during backfill placement shall be removed and replaced at the
 Contractor's expense. The Contractor at his expense shall correct any misalignment or
 525
 
 distortion of the wall facing elements due to placement of backfill outside the limits of
 this specification. At each reinforcement level, the backfill shall be placed to the level
 of the connection. Backfill placement methods near the facing shall assure that no voids
 exist directly beneath the reinforcing elements.
 The backfill required to be placed in front of the wall, from the leveling pad to
 finished ground, shall be placed immediately after the select granular backfill is above
 the first layer of soil reinforcing.
 The maximum lift thickness after compaction shall not exceed 6 inches (150 mm)
 unless approved by the Engineer. The Contractor shall decrease this lift thickness, if
 necessary, to obtain the specified density.
 The moisture content of the backfill material prior to and during compaction shall be
 uniformly distributed throughout each layer. Backfill materials shall have placement
 moisture content less than or equal to the optimum moisture content. Backfill material
 with a placement moisture content in excess of the optimum moisture content shall be
 removed and reworked until the moisture content is uniformly acceptable throughout the
 entire lift. The moisture content of the select granular material shall be maintained at a
 level sufficient to facilitate compaction.
 Compaction within 3 ft. (900 mm) of back face of the wall shall be achieved by at
 least three passes of a lightweight mechanical tamper, roller, or vibratory system.
 At the end of each day's operation, the Contractor shall slope the last level of the
 backfill away from the wall facing to rapidly direct runoff away from the wall face. In
 addition, the Contractor shall not allow surface runoff from adjacent areas to enter the
 wall construction site.
 One foot (300 mm) behind the modular block units and the modular block unit
 cores shall be filled with crushed granular material with less than 2% passing the #200
 (75 µm) sieve and shall be consistent with the manufacture recommendation. If the
 modular block unit cores are not accessible the engineer may upon the advice of the wall
 designer omit the fill in the modular block cores.
 626.6.2-Cast-in-Place Reinforced Concrete:
 626.6.2.1-General: Except as otherwise shown in the plans or herein, construction
 methods for cast-in-place retaining walls shall comply with the Standard Specifications.
 Construction methods for the following shall be per the indicated section of the
 Standard Specifications:
 Item
 Section
 Unclassified Borrow Excavation
 211
 Structure Excavation
 212
 Wet Excavation
 212
 Rock Excavation
 212
 Select Material for Backfilling
 212
 Concrete
 601
 Reinforcing Steel
 602
 
 526
 
 626.6.2.2-Architectural Forms:
 626.6.2.2.1-General: Construct forms to sizes, shapes, lines, and dimensions shown,
 and as required to obtain accurate alignment, location, level, and plumb work in finished
 structures. Provide for openings, offsets, keyways, recesses, chamfers, blocking, screeds,
 bulkheads, and other items as required.
 Fabricate forms to prevent cement paste from leaking while placing concrete and for
 easy removal without hammering or prying against exposed concrete surfaces. Provide
 crush plates where stripping might damage cast concrete surfaces. Provide top forms for
 inclined surfaces where slope is too steep to place concrete. Solidly butt joints and provide
 backup material at joints to prevent leakage and fins. Assemble forms so that they
 may be easily removed without damaging exposed concrete surfaces
 Provide temporary form openings where inaccessible formwork interior can be
 cleaned and inspected before placing concrete. Place temporary form openings as
 inconspicuously as possible, consistent with project requirements.
 When drilling forms used for exposed concrete, drill from the contact face to the
 outside to suit the ties used and to prevent leakage of concrete mortar. Do not splinter the
 forms by driving ties through improperly prepared holes.
 Unless otherwise shown in the plans:
 Provide sharp, clean corners at intersecting planes with no visible edges or offsets; or
 provide accurately formed chamfered corners using ¾ x ¾ inch (19 x 19 mm) strips,
 surfaced to produce uniformly straight lines and tight edge joints.
 626.6.2.2.2-Form Coatings: Coat form contact surfaces with form-release agent
 before placing reinforcement. Do not allow excess material to accumulate in forms or
 to come into contact with reinforcement or surfaces that will be bonded to fresh concrete.
 Apply coating according to manufacturer's instructions.
 Coat steel forms with non-staining, rust-preventative release agent, or otherwise
 protect from rusting. Rust-stained steel formwork is not acceptable.
 626.6.2.2.3-Reusing Forms: Split, frayed, delaminated, or otherwise damaged formfacing materials are not acceptable. Clean and apply a new form-release agent to concrete
 contact surfaces.
 626.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 626.7.1- General: The unit of measurements shall be the gross area in square feet (meters)
 lying in a plane outside the front face of the structure as determined by the dimensions in the
 contract documents. The gross area shall not include barriers, footings, or leveling pads. The
 gross area shall be the number of square feet (square meters) measured, subject to adjustment
 as provided in Sections 104.2 and 109.2 of the Standard Specifications. No adjustments of pay
 quantity shall be allowed for changes in wall design to facilitate the Contractor’s methods of
 construction of wall type.
 Unless otherwise specified in the contract documents, items such as concrete barriers
 that are not part of normal retaining wall construction shall be measured separately for
 payment.
 The quantity of earthwork shown in the plans does not include any work within the wall
 pay limits shown in the plans. Any adjustments to the required amount of embankment or
 527
 
 select granular backfill due to the particular wall system proposed by the contractor shall be
 considered incidental to the project. No separate payment shall be made for increased
 embankment or increased select granular backfill requirements. The Contractor shall be
 responsible for any of the cost of changes in waste, borrow, or earthwork quantities from
 those shown in the plans caused by the requirements of the proposed wall system.
 626.7.2-Mechanically Stabilized Earth: The unit price shall include in place: facing
 elements, soil reinforcing and attachment devices and associated hardware, coping and trim,
 o r similar items that are normal parts of wall construction. No separate measurement of these
 items shall be made.
 The unit price shall also include, in place, all the following items shown within the wall
 pay limits in the plans: select granular backfill, fabric for separation, excavation,
 embankment, foundation preparation, and leveling pads. No separate measurement of these
 items shall be made.
 626.7.3-Cast-in-Place Reinforced Concrete: The unit price shall include in place:
 concrete, reinforcing, joint materials, underdrains, weepholes, or similar items that are normal
 parts of wall construction. No separate measurement of these items shall be made.
 The unit price shall also include in place: all the following items shown within the wall
 pay limits in the plans: select material for backfilling, excavation, embankment, fabric for
 separation, and foundation preparation. No separate measurement of these items shall be made.
 626.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract price
 per unit of measurement, respectively, for each pay item listed below and shown in the bid
 schedule, which prices and payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this
 section.
 626.9-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 626001-* Retaining Wall, Cast-In-Place Reinforced Concrete
 626002-* MSE Retaining Wall , “vendor name”
 626003-* MSE Modular Block Retaining Wall , Class “class”
 626004-* MSE Wire Face Retaining Wall, “vendor name”
 
 UNIT
 Square Foot (Meter)
 Square Foot (Meter)
 Square Foot (Meter)
 Square Foot (Meter)
 
 * Sequence number
 “class” = a number designating class in accordance with the following table:
 Class
 Wall Height
 Allowable substitutions for each class
 I
 40 ft. or less
 -----II
 20 ft. or less
 Class I
 III
 10 ft. or less
 Class I or II
 IV
 5 ft. or less
 Class I, II, or III
 See Division Approved Source/Product Listing page for approved vendor list.
 
 SECTION 627 THROUGH SECTION 630-BLANK
 528
 
 SECTION 631
 ELECTRICAL WORK
 631.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing and installing electric motors, control panels, lighting
 systems, traffic control systems, conduits, and other electrical equipment and supplies in
 accordance with this Specification and as shown on the Plans.
 631.2-MATERIALS:
 The Contractor shall submit, in triplicate, an itemized bill of electrical equipment and
 materials, showing the rating, make, style, type, and catalog number of each item, which shall be
 approved by the Engineer before such equipment or materials are purchased or installed. The
 Contractor shall also submit for the approval of the Engineer, before beginning installation of
 conduit or electrical equipment, a complete wiring diagram for the work to be done, unless
 appropriate wiring diagrams are shown on the Plans. All equipment and materials shall meet the
 requirements of the National Electric Code and all local codes.
 631.3-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 All workmanship for electrical work shall be in accordance with the details shown on the
 Plans and with the requirements of the current National Electric Code in addition to any local codes
 as specified under Proposal Requirements.
 631.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Electrical work will be measured as a complete unit on a lump sum basis or in such units
 as indicated on the Plans, Proposal, or by Authorization.
 631.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 Basis of payment will be the contract price bid for the item, which includes all labor, tools,
 equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 631.6-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 631001-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Electrical Work
 
 * Sequence number
 
 529
 
 UNIT
 Lump Sum
 
 SECTION 632
 HORIZONTAL DRAINS
 632.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing and installing plastic horizontal drains and associated
 plastic outlet pipes, in borings drilled into the faces of cuts, fills, and retaining walls. The
 installation shall be at locations and at angles as shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer
 during construction and shall be in accordance with these Specifications. This work shall also
 consist of constructing terminal chambers, or collector pipes, when required, in accordance with
 these Specifications.
 632.2-MATERIALS:
 632.2.1-Horizontal Drains: Horizontal drains shall be constructed of slotted and solid
 plastic pipe. The pipe shall consist of nominal 1½ inch I.D. Schedule 80, Type II PVC 2110
 pipe conforming to the requirements of ASTM Designation D l785.
 The pipe shall have three rows of slots cut circumferentially in the pipe on the third points
 (120 degrees apart). The average configuration shall be from 22 slots, plus or minus one slot,
 per row per foot (300 mm) using 0.050 inch (1 mm) slots, to 46 slots plus or minus one slot,
 per row per foot (300 mm), using 0.010 inch (250 m) slots. The number and width of slots
 will be as specified on the Plans or as approved by the Engineer depending upon the type of
 soil or rock. Perforated pipe shall not be used.
 Solvent cement shall meet the requirements of ASTM D 2564.
 632.2.2-Terminal Chamber: Horizontal drain terminal chambers shall be constructed of
 48 inch (0.109" Th.) (1200 mm (2.7 mm)) metallic coated corrugated steel pipe meeting the
 requirements of 713.2.
 Concrete used for the chamber foundation and incidentals shall meet the requirements of
 715.12.
 Pipe used to drain the chambers shall meet the requirements of 714.22.
 632.2.3-Collector Pipes: Collector pipes, if any, shall be nominal 1½ inch unslotted or
 unperforated PVC pipe meeting the requirements of 714.22.
 Fittings for collector pipes shall be rigid PVC, Type II, high impact fittings and shall be
 the solvent weld type. The fittings shall have a bursting pressure equal to or exceeding that of
 the pipe.
 632.3-GENERAL:
 The Contractor shall provide a method to determine the end elevations of all plastic
 horizontal drains. It shall be the Contractor's responsibility to control the drain elevations to avoid
 all utilities and drainage structures existing at the site.
 632.4-DRILLING:
 The holes shall be drilled with approved rotary equipment capable of drilling three to six
 inch (75 to 150 mm) diameter holes through soil or rock formations or retaining walls to the lengths
 and angles designated on the Plans.
 
 530
 
 Steel drill casing with an expendable bit having a "J" slot adaptor on the first section, or an
 equivalent substitute, shall be used for drilling the hole.
 632.5-INSTALLATION OF HORIZONTAL DRAIN PIPE:
 Prior to removing the casing, the slotted and solid section of the horizontal drain pipe shall
 be inserted. The end of the first section of the horizontal drain pipe inserted into each hole shall
 be plugged with an approved stopper. Each successive length of pipe shall be cemented to the
 previous section.
 The last 10 feet (3 meters) of horizontal drain pipe, nearest the slope or wall face, shall be
 unslotted pipe.
 Each drain shall be identified with a two inch by two inch (50 by 50 mm) or two inch (50
 mm) diameter copper tag with the identification number stamped on the tag. The tag shall be
 permanently attached to the outlet end of the drain.
 After all the horizontal drains are installed, bentonite pellets shall be thoroughly tamped or
 packed in the annuli to eliminate all voids between the drill hole and the plastic pipe. The
 Contractor shall pack the bentonite a minimum of 3 feet (900 mm) into each annulus as measured
 from the surface. To verify this measurement a bulkhead must be fashioned around the pipe at a
 distance of three 3 (900 mm) from the surface. The bulkhead may consist of rope or other similar
 material i.e., oakum.
 632.6-TERMINAL CHAMBER INSTALLATION:
 After the horizontal drains have been installed, the terminal chamber shall be constructed
 of metallic coated corrugated pipe meeting the requirements of 713.2, and placed at the locations
 and elevations shown on the Plans.
 The metal portion of the chamber may be fabricated at the site or in the shop.
 After the chamber is in place and the concrete has cured, the area around the chamber shall
 be backfilled, site graded to drain, seeded, and mulched, as directed by the Engineer. Before the
 backfill is placed around the horizontal drains and the chamber, the Contractor shall ensure the
 bentonite placed between the circumference of the drill holes and the drains is still properly placed.
 When directed by the Engineer, the Contractor shall place and compact more bentonite.
 All bare metal and welded areas shall be thoroughly cleaned and painted with one coat of
 zinc rich paint meeting the requirements of 711.21.
 The horizontal drains, installed at each horizontal drain terminal chamber in location, shall
 be left in a condition that will ensure proper connections can be made to the finished chamber and
 that the water will be drained into and away from the chamber construction area.
 632.7-COLLECTOR PIPE INSTALLATION:
 After the horizontal drains have been installed, the collector pipes shall be attached to the
 horizontal drains as shown on the Plans.
 When a collector pipe system is required, the outlet ends of all horizontal drains shall be
 connected to the collector pipe by means of approved fittings; i.e., tees, plugs, street ells, etc.
 632.8-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done for "Horizontal Drains" will be measured in linear 3 (meters)
 of pipe, which measurement will include the actual length of drain pipe, and outlet pipe, complete
 in place and accepted. The installation shall include the drilling, fittings, and bentonite.
 531
 
 The quantity of work performed in installing the horizontal drain terminal chamber and the
 furnishing of all materials necessary to complete the installation will be measured per each terminal
 chamber in place and accepted.
 The quantity of work performed in installing the collector pipes will be measured per each
 for collector pipes, which will include the total length of all collector pipes and fittings; i.e., tees,
 plugs, street ells, etc., for each installation complete in place and accepted.
 632.9-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the Contract unit bid price
 for the items below, which price and payment will be full compensation for drilling, site grading,
 seeding, and furnishing all materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and
 acceptable manner, including all tools, equipment, supplies, labor and incidentals necessary to
 complete the work.
 632.10-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 632001-*
 632002-*
 632003-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Horizontal Drain
 Horizontal Drain Terminal Chamber
 Horizontal Drain Collector Pipe
 
 * Sequence number
 
 532
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 
 SECTION 633
 CONCRETE GUTTER, INVERT PIPE GUTTER, OR
 DUMPED ROCK GUTTER
 633.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the construction of open flow-ways for surface drainage, using
 concrete, dumped rock, or invert pipe sections of cast iron, corrugated metal, precast concrete, or
 vitrified clay, in accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the
 lines, grades, dimensions, and cross sections shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 633.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall conform to the following Subsections of Division 700, except as modified:
 MATERIAL
 Cement for Grout
 Dumped Rock Gutter
 Expansion Joint Material (Preformed)
 Joint Sealing Material
 Reinforcing Steel
 
 SUBSECTION
 701.1 or 701.3
 704.4
 708.1, 708.2
 708.3
 709.1, 709.4
 702.1.1 through 702.1.5 and
 702.2 or 702.6
 708.10
 
 Sand for Grout
 Waterstops (Elastomer Materials)
 
 Class B concrete for gutters shall meet the requirements of 601.
 Invert pipe gutter shall be of the shape, size and materials shown on the Plans, conforming
 as nearly as practicable to the Specifications for whole pipe of similar radius and material.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 633.3-GENERAL:
 Excavation for all gutters shall be made to the required depth. For invert pipe and concrete
 gutters, the base upon which the gutter is to be constructed shall be compacted to a firm, even
 surface. All soft and unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced with suitable material
 which shall be thoroughly compacted. Where the location of any gutter falls on rock of a suitable
 nature, the Engineer may eliminate the gutter within the limits of the rock. When necessary, the
 rock shall be shaped to direct the flow of water back to the gutter beyond the limits of the rock.
 633.4-CONCRETE GUTTER:
 633.4.1-Forms: Forms shall be of wood or metal of sufficient strength to retain the
 concrete and shall be set and securely fastened in place, true to the lines and grades given.
 633.4.2-Placing and Finishing Concrete: Class B concrete shall be placed and screeded
 true to profile and contour either by hand or machine methods. The surface finish shall be a
 wood float finish when placed by hand methods. When placed by machine method, the hand
 finishing shall be held to the minimum required to attain the Plan profile and cross section.
 533
 
 633.4.3-Joints and Cut-Off Walls: Expansion joints of the type and thickness specified
 on the Plans shall be installed at intervals not to exceed 50-ft unless otherwise shown. If
 adjacent to a pavement in which joints have been used, expansion joints shall be placed
 opposite those in the pavement. Contraction joints shall be provided at approximately 12½
 feet (4 meter) intervals. Contraction joints shall have a minimum depth of one-fourth of the
 specified gutter thickness plus ¼ inch (6 mm) tolerance, shall be 5/8 inch (3 mm) (nominal) in
 width, and shall be formed by using removable templates, scoring, sawing, or other methods
 approved by the Engineer. No filler material will be required for construction or contraction
 joints.
 A concrete cut-off wall, reinforced as detailed on the Plans, shall be constructed at the
 beginning and at the end of each gutter and at locations designated on the Plans or by the
 Engineer. Cut-off walls shall be constructed at approximately 150 feet (45 m) intervals along
 the gutter for grades 5 to 25 percent and at approximately 50 feet (15 m) intervals for grades
 greater than 25 percent.
 633.4.4-Curing: The concrete gutter shall be protected and cured by wetting for a period
 of three days after placing, or it shall be cured by white membrane curing materials in
 accordance with 501.14.4.
 633.4.5-Waterstops: Waterstops shall be placed at all expansion joints in the gutter and
 where a concrete gutter abuts a proposed structure. Provisions shall be made to properly place
 the waterstop in the structure. In case of a concrete gutter which abuts an existing structure, a
 groove 3/4 inch (20 mm) by 2 inches (50 mm) shall be left and filled with joint sealer.
 Waterstops shall conform to the requirements shown on the Plans.
 633.5-INVERT PIPE GUTTER:
 Sections of gutter of the type called for on the Plans, conforming to the segment of circular
 arc of the dimensions designated, shall be set in a manner conforming to the applicable
 requirements of 604, unless otherwise modified by the Engineer. If set in concrete, the base shall
 be of Class C concrete of the dimensions and sections shown and shall be cured as specified for
 concrete gutter.
 633.6-DUMPED ROCK GUTTER:
 Dumped rock gutter may be dumped from trucks and bulldozed into place in a manner
 similar to the placing of rock fill. Hand placement will not be required. The rock gutter shall be
 constructed to the thickness and grade shown on the Plans. A thickness deficiency in excess of 10
 percent will not be permitted.
 The dumped rock gutter may be obtained from the unclassified excavation. If suitable
 material is not available from the unclassified excavation, it shall be the responsibility of the
 Contractor to furnish this material at no additional cost. Locations of probable sources for dumped
 rock gutter will be listed in the Plans.
 633.6.1-Grout for Dumped Rock Gutter: Grout for Dump Rock Gutter shall be defined
 as per Section 633.2 with interstices filled with spalls and grouted cement grout. The grout
 filler shall be composed of a mixture of one part Portland cement and three parts sand, mixed
 with water to produce a workable consistency. The amount of water shall be that designated
 534
 
 by the Engineer. The stone shall be thoroughly wet immediately before grout is applied. As
 soon as the grout is deposited on the surface, it shall be thoroughly worked into the joints. The
 stones shall then be brushed so that their top surfaces are exposed.
 Grouted Dump Rock Gutter shall be cured in accordance with any of the methods specified
 in 501.15, with a blanket of earth kept wet for 72 hours, or by sprinkling with a fine spray of
 water every two hours during the day-light hours for a period of three days.
 633.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done for "Concrete Gutter" will be measured in square yards (meters),
 complete in place and accepted, determined by the length, measured along the centerline, time the
 width. All measurements will be made on the surface of the gutter.
 The quantity of work done for "Invert Pipe Gutter" will be measured in linear feet (meters),
 complete in place and accepted, measured along the centerline and upon the surface of the gutter.
 The quantity of work done for “Dumped Rock Gutter: will be measured in cubic yards
 (meters), complete in place and accepted, determined by the dimensions shown on the Plans or
 established by the Engineer. No excess thickness will be measured for pay quantity.
 The quantity of work done for “Grouted Dump Rock Gutter” will be measured in cubic
 yards (meters), complete in place and accepted as determined by the dimensions as shown on the
 Plans or established by the Engineer. No excess thickness will be measured for pay quantity and
 no separate payment will be made for the cement grout.
 Cut-off walls at the beginning and end of the concrete gutter, those cut-off walls
 constructed on steep grades (five percent or over) in accordance with these specifications and any
 other cut-off walls designated on the Plans will not be measured separately but will be included in
 the cost of the gutter. If additional cut-off walls are required by the Engineer during construction,
 they will be paid for as square yards (meters) of concrete gutter; the area will be measured on the
 vertical face of the cut-off wall and will be the area bounded by the lower extremity of the gutter
 and the sides and bottom of the wall.
 633.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing
 all the materials, including reinforcing steel, expansion joint material, joint sealer, waterstops,
 concrete base for invert pipe gutter when called for on the Plans, and all labor, tools, equipment,
 supplies and incidentals necessary to complete the work. No separate payment will be made for
 the excavation.
 633.9-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 633001-*
 Concrete Gutter
 633002-*
 “size” Invert Pipe Gutter, Type “type”
 633003-*
 Dumped Rock Gutter
 633004-*
 Grouted Dump Rock Gutter
 * Sequence number
 
 535
 
 UNIT
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 
 SECTION 634
 CONCRETE CRIBBING
 634.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the furnishing and installing of precast concrete units to form a
 crib wall or similar structure, including the placing of interior and backfill material, in accordance
 with these Specifications and in reasonably close conformity to the lines, grades, dimensions,
 locations, and sections shown on the Plans.
 634.2-MATERIALS:
 Concrete shall be Class A, meeting the requirement of 601.
 Joint mortar shall conform to 708.8.
 Interior filling material shall conform to the requirements of select borrow as specified in
 211. Shale or cinders shall not be used.
 Reinforcing steel shall conform to 709.1 or 709.3.
 The details of the crib members and their arrangements shall be as shown on the Plans. If
 manufactured on the Project, crib members shall be cured in accordance with 601. All members
 shall be free from depressions and spalled, patched, or plastered surfaces or edges, or any other
 defects which may impair their strength or durability. Cracked, untrue, or otherwise defective
 members will be rejected.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 634.3-PLACING CRIB MEMBERS:
 The prepared foundation bed for the cribbing shall be firm and normal to the face of the
 cribbing and will be approved by the Engineer before any of the crib work is placed. The crib
 members shall be erected as shown on the Plans. Care shall be taken to insure the correct alignment
 and batter on the crib wall. If a slight adjustment is needed, a shim made of shingles may be used.
 Asphalt bearing pads having a thickness of 1/4 inch (6 mm), and having a dimension of ½
 inch (12 mm) greater than the bearing width in any direction, shall be placed between all bearing
 surfaces. When concrete cribbing is placed without batter, the asphalt bearing pads shall be
 eliminated and the cribbing members laid with a 1 to 2 cement mortar joint. The crib members
 shall be handled carefully, and members that become cracked or otherwise damaged shall be
 removed and new members substituted without extra compensation.
 634.4-FILLING CRIB:
 The filling of the interior and backfilling behind the crib shall progress simultaneously with
 the erection of the cribbing. The interior shall be filled with approved granular material. The
 space back of the cribbing shall be filled with suitable random material. All material shall be free
 of particles larger than 3 inches (75 mm), frozen lumps, wood or other extraneous material. All
 material shall be placed in layers not exceeding 4 inches (100 mm) after compaction. This method
 of filling and compacting the interior and backfilling shall be continued until the embankment is
 level with the top of the structure, except, where the backfill is accessible to a roller, the backfill
 shall be compacted in accordance with 212.10. In any event, the greatest care shall be exercised
 in the placing and compacting of material between and back of the crib cells so that damage will
 not occur to the crib members.
 536
 
 The quality control testing and acceptance of the interior and backfill material will be
 according to the applicable sections of 207 and 716 or 717 with the following exceptions:
 A lot will normally consist of the quantity of material required to fill the interior of the
 cribbing and backfill, except where the filling material and backfill material are different and in
 this case, each type of material would constitute a lot. For large installations, a lot should not
 exceed the quantity of material to fill or backfill 100 linear feet horizontal and 20 feet vertical. If
 either of these dimensions is exceeded, a new lot should be established.
 The target percentage of density will be 95 percent, and each lot will have 5 density tests
 performed for quality control.
 634.5-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quality of work done will be measured in cubic feet (meters) of "Concrete Cribbing",
 complete in place and accepted, determined by a tabulation of the number of pieces of each size
 and variety of separate members used, times the volume of the respective members calculated from
 their dimensions.
 "Structure Excavation" will be limited to a plane 18 inches (450 mm) from and parallel to
 the faces of the cribbing.
 634.6-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the item below, which price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all the
 material and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all
 labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work, except that the
 necessary structure excavation with limitations as specified above, will be paid for as Item 212001*, "Structure Excavation". The cost of asphalt bearing pads or joint mortar, granular filling of the
 interior, and backfilling behind the crib shall be included in the bid price for "Concrete Cribbing".
 634.7-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 634001-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Concrete Cribbing
 
 * Sequence number
 
 537
 
 UNIT
 Cubic Foot (Meter)
 
 SECTION 635
 METAL CRIBBING
 635.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the furnishing and installing of metal crib members, including
 the placing of the interior and backfill material, in accordance with these Specifications and in
 reasonably close conformity with the lines, grades, dimensions, locations, and sections shown on
 the Plans.
 635.2-MATERIALS:
 The crib members shall consist of metallic headers and stretchers with the appurtenances
 necessary for complete assembly in the field. Each header and stretcher shall be fabricated
 completely in the plant prior to shipment to the site. If indicated on the Plans, fillers for placing
 between the stretchers on the face of the wall and end caps for the outside ends of the headers shall
 be furnished.
 The sheets from which all headers and stretchers are manufactured shall be made of
 material meeting the requirements for chemical composition and spelter coating specified under
 713.2 for corrugated iron or steel pipe.
 The various members of the crib shall be constructed of metal having a minimum thickness
 of 0.064 inch (1.6 mm).
 The details of the crib members and their arrangements shall be as shown on the Plans.
 Interior filling material shall conform to the requirements of select borrow in 211.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 635.3-PLACING CRIB MEMBERS:
 The prepared foundation bed for the cribbing shall be firm and normal to the face of the
 cribbing and will be approved by the Engineer before any of the crib work is placed.
 The crib members shall be erected as shown on the Plans. The members shall be handled
 carefully, and members that are damaged shall be removed and new members substituted in their
 place without extra compensation.
 635.4-FILLING CRIB:
 The filling of the interior and backfilling of the crib shall progress simultaneously with the
 erection of the cribbing and shall be as specified in 634.
 635.5-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be measured in square feet (meters) of "Metal Cribbing",
 complete in place and accepted, determined by actual overall measurements of the outside face of
 the structure.
 "Structure Excavation" will be limited to a plane 18 inches (450 mm) from and parallel to
 the faces of the cribbing.
 635.6-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the item below, which price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing all the
 538
 
 materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including
 all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work, except that
 the necessary structure excavation, with limitations as specified above, will be paid for as Item
 212001-*, "Structural Excavation". The cost of granular filling of the interior and backfilling
 behind the crib shall be included in the unit price bid for "Metal Cribbing".
 635.7-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 635001-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Metal Cribbing
 
 * Sequence number
 
 539
 
 UNIT
 Square Foot (Meter)
 
 SECTION 636
 MAINTAINING TRAFFIC
 636.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of all necessary measures to maintain and to protect traffic, to
 protect the work in process, to protect adjacent property from excess dust resulting from the
 construction area and to maintain traffic through, around or adjacent to the construction area, in
 accordance with these Specifications or as directed. The work shall include the furnishing and
 maintaining of all traffic control devices, flaggers and pilot truck; construction of temporary
 structures when required; labor, equipment and materials to keep the traveled road smooth; and
 the furnishing and application of dust palliatives.
 636.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall conform to the following requirements of Division 700, except as otherwise
 noted:
 MATERIAL
 SUBSECTION
 Aggregate
 704.6 Class 1 *
 Asphalt Emulsion
 705.4 SS-1, SS-1h, CBAEP, or AEM-1 **
 Calcium Chloride
 715.1
 Cationic Emulsified Asphalt
 705.11 CSS-1 or CSS-1h **
 As used in this Specification, a day is
 Day
 considered to be a 24-hour period.
 A Vehicle of the pick-up or jeep type, equipped
 with a prescribed sign mounted on the rear
 Pilot Truck
 portion of the vehicle in such a manner as to be
 easily visible by following motorists.
 Raised Pavement Markers and
 715.40
 Other Pavement Marking Material
 Traffic Control
 715.9
 Traffic Zone Paint
 711.41 (Type II) or 711.40 (Temporary Paint)
 *
 
 **
 
 When aggregate for maintaining traffic is not to be part of any succeeding base or pavement
 course, the appropriate aggregate size shall be determined by the Engineer. If the aggregate is
 from an approved aggregate source, then it shall be accepted by visual inspection. If the contractor
 elects to use aggregate from an unapproved source, test results shall be provided to show that the
 liquid limit and plasticity index meet the requirements in Table 704.6.2B.
 SS-1, SS-1h, CSS-1 and CSS-1h may be diluted with water.
 
 When aggregate is to become part of any succeeding base, all requirements of Section 307
 for base course shall apply.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 636.3-CONTROL OF TRAFFIC THROUGH WORK AREAS:
 Control and protection of traffic through work areas shall comply with these Specifications
 and the provisions of the Plans. Traffic shall be maintained over the project, over such other routes
 as shown on the Plans, or as directed by the Engineer. The traffic route shall be kept as smooth as
 possible, passable and safe for anticipated speeds.
 540
 
 All traffic control devices shall be fabricated and installed according to the manual, “Manual
 on Temporary Traffic Control for Streets and Highways”, latest version, published by the Division.
 The type of construction operation being performed will dictate the traffic control case (scheme)
 to be used as outlined in this manual and as called for on the Plans.
 All stockpiles of materials shall be located so that they will not interfere with traffic being
 routed through or adjacent to work areas. Stockpiles of materials shall be located a minimum of
 30 feet (10 m) from the edge of the traveled roadway unless traffic is protected by a positive barrier.
 Parking areas for the Contractor's employees, and all other vehicles shall be at locations which do
 not interfere with the safety of the traveling public, and on freeway type facilities shall be a
 minimum of 30 feet (10 m) from the edge of the traveled roadway unless traffic is protected by a
 positive barrier. At the end of a day's operation the Contractor shall have no equipment or materials
 on the traveled roadway, median area or shoulders or in any areas which interfere with the safe
 movement of traffic.
 The traffic control plan specified in the contract for each traffic control situation is
 considered the plan to be followed by the Contractor. However, should the Contractor desire to
 adopt another traffic control plan during construction, this alternate method shall be submitted to
 the Engineer for review and approval at least 14 days in advance of the commencement of work
 in the affected areas.
 The traffic control devices shall be installed immediately before the beginning of
 construction and shall remain in place only as long as they are needed and shall be removed
 immediately. Any traffic control device that does not apply to the existing condition shall be
 removed, covered or turned so as not to be readable by oncoming traffic.
 All traffic control devices erected by the Contractor shall be maintained as indicated by the
 outcome of a weekly inspection, cleaned when directed by the Engineer and removed by the
 Contractor when conditions no longer warrant the devices.
 The Engineer may require more frequent inspections if, in his opinion, the conditions
 warrant this measure.
 Maintaining the traffic control devices shall include keeping them in good condition,
 correct position, and unobscured by weeds, brush, trees, work material or equipment.
 The Contractor shall designate a trained person with authority to take all actions necessary
 for the safe control of traffic through the work zone. If noted on the plans, this person shall be
 American Traffic Safety Services Association (ATSSA) certified as a Traffic Control Technician
 or a Traffic Control Supervisor or shall demonstrate equal qualifications, approved by the Division.
 The Contractor shall provide the Engineer with the telephone number and applicable proofs of
 certification of this person, along with the telephone number of any other person who is in charge
 of traffic control devices, in case of emergencies at night or on weekends.
 All conflicting pavement markings, as determined by the Engineer, shall be eradicated by
 the Contractor as soon as practicable. The eradication shall be performed prior to shifting traffic.
 Positive barriers shall be either temporary concrete barrier, or temporary guardrail barrier.
 Temporary guardrail barrier shall be installed with 6 feet 3 inches (1.905 meter) post spacing with
 block outs, unless otherwise specified. The end treatment for temporary guardrail barrier shall be
 FET or TET as specified on the Standard Details. Payment for the end treatment shall be made
 under the regular pay item. The ends of the temporary concrete barrier shall be either flared or
 protected, as indicated on Plans. Where temporary guardrail barrier is used, a minimum clearance
 behind the barrier of 4 feet (1.2 m) from the face of the guardrail shall be provided.
 
 541
 
 Barricades shall be used only as channelizing devices. When temporary guardrail
 barricades (mounted on barrels) are used, the ends of the guardrail shall be either flared or tapered
 as shown on the Plans.
 636.4-AGGREGATES AND DUST PALLIATIVES:
 Aggregates required for the maintenance of traffic, water, liquid asphalt, asphalt emulsion,
 cationic emulsified asphalt or calcium chloride for use as dust palliatives, shall be furnished and
 applied as directed by the Engineer. Water or other dust palliative shall be used on haul roads and
 any location on the project to minimize pollution from dust, when dust is creating a nuisance to
 the traveling public or adjacent property owners. No payment will be made for other dust control.
 Temporary roads shall be constructed when called for, and such roads, as well as the road under
 construction, shall be surfaced and maintained with aggregates, as shown on the Plans or as
 directed by the Engineer.
 636.5-TEMPORARY STRUCTURES:
 Temporary structures shall be constructed and maintained as shown on the Plans or as
 called for in the Proposal. The use of used material is acceptable; such material shall be inspected
 visually and accepted by the Engineer prior to its use. The design and plans for the temporary
 structure shall be in accordance to Section 105.2.
 636.6-PILOT TRUCK AND DRIVER OR SHADOW VEHICLE:
 636.6.1-Pilot Truck & Driver: A vehicle and a qualified driver shall be furnished by the
 Contractor when shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer.
 636.6.2-Shadow Vehicle: A shadow vehicle shall be furnished by the Contractor when
 called for on the Plans or directed by the Engineer. This vehicle shall be a standard truck
 weighing between 10,000 GVW (4 536 kg) and 24,000 GVW (10 880 kg) maximum, and shall
 be equipped with a flashing or rotary yellow beacon which can be seen in all directions and a
 truck-mounted attenuator mounted on the rear.
 The shadow vehicle shall be used at the locations shown on the Plans where a lane is closed
 and work is in progress. When work is completed for the day, the shadow vehicle shall be
 relocated behind a positive barrier or off the job site in a safe location.
 636.7-ERADICATION OF PAVEMENT MARKINGS:
 All markings which may conflict with desired traffic movement, as determined by the
 Engineer, shall be fully eradicated as soon as practicable. Eradication shall be performed prior to
 shifting of traffic.
 Eradication shall be performed by hydro-blasting, sand blasting, chemicals, burning with
 excess oxygen or other suitable method.
 Full eradication shall be defined as the removal of at least 90 percent of the existing
 marking. A 90 percent removal will be determined by the Engineer by comparison with the
 Eradication Visual Standard. This Standard can be obtained from the Engineer. In addition to the
 visual comparison, the 90 percent removal level is defined such that there will not be any remaining
 surface of the original paint film in the eradicated area. The remaining 10 percent of the existing
 marking will appear to be as part of the texture of the pavement.
 
 542
 
 The method used shall not materially damage the surface or texture of the pavement. Any
 damage caused by the Contractor's operations shall be corrected at the Contractor's expense and in
 a manner approved by the Engineer.
 The Contractor shall take precaution to protect the public from any damage due to their
 operations. Accumulation of sand, water, dust or other residue resulting from the eradication
 operation shall be removed as the work progresses.
 636.8-TEMPORARY PAVEMENT MARKINGS AND RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS:
 Temporary pavement markings and raised pavement markers shall be in accordance with
 663.
 Temporary pavement markings, to be used in delineating pavement lane and edge lines,
 shall be either temporary reflectorized pavement marking tape or reflectorized paint as approved
 by the Engineer.
 When placing temporary pavement lane markings to separate traffic traveling in the
 opposite directions, it should be noted that, if there is no passing in both directions, double-yellow
 solid lines shall be placed; i.e. single-yellow solid lines are prohibited for separating opposite
 flowing traffic. In addition to temporary marking tape or paint, temporary raised, reflectorized
 pavement markers shall be placed, when called for on the Plans, for added delineation, at
 approximately 40 feet (12 meter) intervals along the lane lines that separate traffic traveling in the
 opposite directions, with the markers centered transversely between double-yellow lines, or at the
 spacing required on the Plans.
 When temporary raised pavement markers are specified as an alternate to temporary paint
 or to temporary tape, the configurations shall be as follows: solid line-markers shall be placed on
 five foot (1.5 m) centers along the entire length of line; lane line - four markers shall be placed on
 three foot four inch (1 m) centers with 40-foot (12 m) spacing, first marker to first marker; double
 yellow-markers shall be placed on five foot (1.5 m) centers in pairs.
 Temporary pavement markings and raised markers shall be placed as soon as practicable
 after construction of a detour or other roadway requiring this type of delineation.
 Temporary raised pavement markers shall be shipped, stored, and placed in accordance
 with the recommendations of the marker manufacturer. The Contractor shall supply a copy of the
 manufacturer’s placement recommendations to the project Engineer upon request. If temporary
 raised pavement markers are to be placed on a newly placed asphalt final wearing course or a
 newly placed concrete surface, markers with a manufacturer pre-applied “peel and stick” adhesive
 pad, as allowed for in the Materials Specifications, shall be used.
 636.9-TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
 Traffic control devices for work areas include, but may not be limited to, signs, barricades,
 drums, cones, channelizer cones, delineators, and flashers. They shall be installed in accordance
 with standards detailed in the manual “Manual on Temporary Traffic Control for Streets and
 Highways”, latest version, published by the Division, or as shown on the plans.
 If the Total Contact Bid Amount is over $500,000 or otherwise noted on the plans Traffic
 Control Devices also include work area signs indicating fines. These signs shall be installed 500'
 (150 m) after the first maintenance of traffic sign installed for each project. The signs shall be
 installed in both directions on the road under construction. The sizes, messages, and designs shall
 as shown in the Sign Fabrication Manual or as directed by the Engineer. With the larger size used
 for four lane expressway roadways with speeds of 55 MPH or greater and the smaller sign used
 543
 
 for two lane roadways with speeds of 50 MPH or greater and with an ADT at 3,000 or greater. A
 12' x 6' expressway sign (Item 636011-* - 300 units) placed behind guardrail on 3-4 #BB UChannel or on 3 - 4” x 4” wood post (breakaway) or 8' x 4' - two lane highway sign (Item 636011* - 180 units) placed behind guardrail on 2 - 4 #BB U-Channel or on 2 - 4” x 4" wood post
 (breakaway).
 If the project is on an Interstate Highway, an APD (Appalachian Highway Corridor), a
 controlled access highway with posted speed limit of 40 Miles Per Hour (MPH) or greater, or if
 otherwise noted on the plans, Traffic Control Devices shall include work area signs designated
 “GIVE ‘EM A BRAKE” (GEAB). The sign size, message, and design shall be as shown on Sign
 Fabrication G30-1 or as directed by the Engineer.
 The sign (Item 636011-*, 300 units) shall be installed 500’-1500’ after the first lead-in
 work area sign unless the work zone is greater than one (1) mile, in length, in which case the GEAB
 sign shall be installed approximately ¼ mile in advance of the active work area. At no time shall
 the GEAB sign be closer than 500’ from any other work area signing. The sign shall be installed
 in both directions on the right side of the highway. All GEAB signs shall be installed on three, 3
 pound per foot u-channel posts driven to a depth of 3 ½ feet. The u-channel posts shall be
 continuous in length, or a combination of a stub driven to a depth of 3 ½ feet, an approved splice
 arrangement and an appropriate length supporting post.
 GEAB sign shall only be installed in active work areas where workers are present and
 visible to passing motorists. During periods of inactivity in the work area, the GEAB sign(s) shall
 be covered or removed.
 All traffic control devices installed shall be devices which meet the mandatory crash testing
 performance requirements of National Cooperative Highway Research Program Report 350
 (NCHRP-350) and/or the American Association of State and Highway Transportation Officials
 publication Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware (AASHTO-MASH), latest version. With the
 exception of Category 1 work zone devices, as defined by the FHWA, all devices shall have a
 supporting NCHRP-350 and/or AASHTO-MASH acceptance letter from the FHWA. Category 1
 work zone devices shall have supporting self-certification from the device manufacturer that the
 device meets the mandatory crash testing performance requirements of NCHRP-350 and/or
 AASHTO-MASH.
 All devices shall be assembled and utilized in a manner that is consistent with the crash
 testing of the devices. For example, portable traffic control sign stands shall only be used within
 the parameters of the crash testing of the stands unless otherwise allowed for by the FHWA in the
 FHWA acceptance letter or by other written FHWA guidance or policy. These parameters include,
 but are not necessarily limited to sign mounting height, sign substrate material, maximum sign
 size, and the application of warning lights. Unless included as part of the testing of the device or
 allowed for as part of the manufacturer’s self-certification for Category 1 work zone devices,
 additional ballast added to devices shall only be as allowed for by the FHWA in the FHWA
 acceptance letter or by other written FHWA guidance or policy.
 Devices utilized by the Contractor shall be a model listed on the Division’s Approved
 Products List (APL), as applicable. Devices approved and/or certified at Test Level 2, but not Test
 Level 3, shall not be utilized on roads having a normal posted speed limit greater than forty (40)
 MPH. Devices approved and/or certified at Test Level 1 only shall not be utilized on roads having
 a normal posted speed limit greater than twenty-five (25) MPH.
 
 544
 
 636.10-CLEANING OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
 Cleaning of all traffic control devices, when directed by the Engineer, shall consist of hand
 cleaning with a mild detergent followed by a thorough rinse with clear water. No harsh chemical,
 abrasive cleaner or tool shall be used that will damage the reflectorized surfaces or otherwise
 reduce the useful life of the device.
 636.11-FLAGGER-TRAFFIC DIRECTOR:
 The flagger-traffic director are separate functions and therefore, shall not be interchanged.
 All flaggers shall be furnished by the Contractor, and it shall be the Contractor's
 responsibility to provide flaggers at any location necessary to assure the safety of the travelling
 public. When flaggers are required at locations as a result of operations considered reasonable and
 necessary by the Engineer to complete the project, payment will be made under this provision.
 Hand signaling devices, and approved vests shall be used by the Contractor’s personnel
 assigned to traffic control responsibilities. Approved headgear, if worn, and vests worn by the
 Contractor’s personnel shall not bear the Division symbol. Wireless two-way communication shall
 be provided to the flaggers when they are out of sight of each other.
 The traffic control plan (TCP) and any approved revisions will be strongly considered in
 determining the appropriateness of payment. Flagger-Traffic Director required for operations that
 are not necessary but are initiated by the Contractor for their benefit or ease of operations shall not
 receive payment under this provision. Flagger-Traffic Director required outside of the project
 limits as a result of any of the Contractor's operations shall not receive payment. Flagger-Traffic
 Director required within the project limits in regards to the Contractor's transportation to or from
 waste areas, borrow pits, concrete plants or other necessary sites shall receive payment if
 considered reasonable and necessary as previously discussed.
 636.12-TEMPORARY IMPACT ATTENUATING DEVICE:
 This device shall be a “stationary crash cushion” as described within Section F.82 of the
 manual “Manual on Temporary Traffic Control for Streets and Highways, 2006 Edition”.
 The device utilized shall be a model listed on the WVDOH Approved Products Listing
 (APL) for Safety Devices specifically noted as being approved for temporary work zone use.
 Specific device selection in regards to manufacturer and model shall be at the Contractor’s
 discretion; however, unless the characteristics of the obstacle to be shielded dictate otherwise, the
 device utilized shall be a non-tapered, non-gating device. If it is not possible, based on the width
 of the obstacle to be shielded, to utilize a non-tapered, non-gating device, the Contractor shall
 utilize an approved Sand Barrel system.
 Notes included on the APL characterize non-gating devices by their National Cooperative
 Highway Research Program Report 350 (NCHRP-350) crash testing approval level (Test Level 2
 or Test Level 3). The Test Level certification required for each particular device to be qualified at
 shall be based on the normal (non work zone) posted speed limit in effect at the location of the
 device. A Test Level 2 or Test Level 3 device shall be utilized if the normal posted speed limit is
 40 MPH or less. Otherwise, a Test Level 3 device shall be required. Sand Barrel arrays shall be
 designed for an impact speed 5 MPH greater than the normal posted speed limit.
 All Temporary Impact Attenuating Devices shall be installed and maintained fully in
 accordance with the specifications and recommendations of the device manufacturer. This shall
 include, but shall not be limited to, characteristics of the roadway profile along the approach to the
 nose of the device and along the adjacent (traffic) side of the device, changes in the roadway grade
 within the length of the device, side slope and changes in the side slope at the location of the
 545
 
 device, anchoring (base to be anchored to as well as the anchoring system), backup, attachment to
 the obstacle being shielded, transitioning to the obstacle being shielded, winterization, delineation,
 repair, and cleaning. If the installation requires deviations from the specifications and
 recommendations of the device manufacturer, the Contractor shall obtain written approval from
 the device manufacturer and shall produce this written approval for review upon request.
 Impacted devices shall be maintained and returned to full impact capacity in a timely
 manner. Beginning 12 hours from the time and date upon which the Contractor is given
 documented notice of damage to an Impact Attenuating Device requiring repairs, the Contractor
 shall be subject to a penalty of $1,000 per Calendar Day (24 hrs.), or fraction thereof, until the
 necessary repairs are completed. This penalty shall not be temporarily suspended for any reason
 and shall apply regardless of the cause of the damage to the device.
 All labor, equipment, and materials required for the repair of impact attenuating devices
 shall be incidental to Bid Item 636060.
 636.13-CHANNELIZER CONES:
 If specified in the project plans, Channelizer Cones may be utilized for channelization of
 traffic in lieu of drums. Note, when used for closures that will be in effect at night, these devices
 shall be spaced at a maximum of forty (40) feet where a spacing of fifty (50) feet is normally called
 for in the Traffic Control Manual. In addition, the maximum spacing of these devices in all lane
 or shoulder tapers, day or night, shall be twenty-five (25) feet. Traffic control setups utilizing
 Channelizer Cones are to be reviewed at least once every twelve (12) hours during non-work
 periods by the Contractor responsible for traffic control on the project.
 636.14-TEMPORARY BARRIER:
 Furnish, install, maintain, remove and dispose of temporary barrier in accordance with this
 specification and the contract plans.
 636.14.1-Materials: Temporary Barrier shall meet the requirements of NCHRP Report
 350 and/or MASH-08 for the different test levels as shown in Table 3.1 “Test Matrix for
 Longitudinal Barriers” in NCHRP Report 350. Specific types of temporary barrier will not be
 used unless crash tested and approved by the Engineer. Historical performance will help
 determine use of a product. Poor performance may be grounds for non-acceptance.
 Temporary Barriers shall have adequate drainage slots to allow runoff to pass through.
 Temporary Barrier shall have 8” x 12” Type B-1 Delineators (white or yellow as
 appropriate) facing traffic at 40 foot centers.
 636.14.2-Installation: This barrier type shall conform to the details on the Plans, set as
 directed on the Plans, with the barrier sections securely connected together by satisfactory
 fastening devices to provide a more stable structure against impact.
 A Temporary Barrier Installation Plan shall be approved according to Section 105.2.1.2
 “Contractor Approval Method”. It shall have information adequate to ensure it meets the
 installation conditions below and shall include barrier type, barrier connection type, NCHRP
 test approval and data, individual segment length, anchorage details, end treatments, and
 transition details.
 The temporary barrier shall be placed to match test conditions as determined by the
 Engineer. These conditions may include, but not be limited to, anchorages, total length of
 546
 
 barrier, individual segment length and connection details. Only one type of temporary barrier
 shall be used for any one continuous run of barrier in a project. To clarify, the entire length of
 temporary barrier shall not be intermixed in regard to type of barrier, connection type, or
 individual barrier length unless that configuration has been tested.
 Anchorage spacing and installation, if required, shall be per manufacturer subject to shop
 drawing review and approval and meet or exceed test conditions. Shop drawing information
 shall include details for anchor removal and patching and /or repair of pavement or bridge
 deck.
 Where temporary barrier adjoins guardrail barrier, regardless if one is temporary and the
 other is permanent (newly constructed or previously in existence) or if both are temporary,
 they must be connected with a Temporary Guardrail Connector conforming to 636.16.2.
 Where temporary barrier adjoins bridge parapet or other essentially non-yielding barrier or
 obstacle, they must be joined in a manner to maintain barrier continuity and prevent vehicle
 snagging during impact. If they cannot be joined in this manner, a connection device must be
 used to assure barrier continuity and to prevent vehicle snagging during impact.
 When the temporary barriers are no longer needed, they will become the property of the
 Contractor, unless otherwise noted on the Plans.
 J-J Hook connections shall be tensioned by pulling the barrier segments apart to make this
 type connection “tight”.
 Vehicles, materials or any other equipment shall not be stored in the Temporary Barrier
 buffer area. Unless required as a part of the contract, vehicles and equipment shall not work
 in the Temporary Barrier buffer area and if required, shall be limited to that time that it is
 necessary to be in that area.
 636.15-REMOVING AND RESETTING TEMPORARY BARRIERS:
 Temporary barriers that are to be relocated within a project shall be salvaged and reinstalled
 as specified in 636.14 and set as indicated on the Plans.
 636.16-TEMPORARY GUARDRAIL:
 636.16.1-Temporary Guardrail Barrier: Temporary guardrail barrier shall consist of
 guardrail (beam) mounted on 6 feet 3 inches (1.905 m) post spacing with blockouts,
 conforming to the requirements of 607. Where temporary guardrail barrier adjoins concrete
 barrier, bridge parapet, or other essentially non-yielding obstacle, regardless if one is
 temporary and the other is permanent (newly constructed or previously in existence) or if both
 are temporary, they must be connected with a Temporary Guardrail Connector conforming to
 636.16.2.
 636.16.2-Temporary Guardrail Connector: This connector shall consist of the last 25
 feet (7.62 m) of guardrail (beam) prior to the physical connection to a non-yielding barrier or
 obstacle, mounted on 3 feet 1½ inches (0.9525) post spacing with blockouts, conforming to
 Standard Sheet G.R. 5 and an End Shoe conforming to Standard Sheet G.R. 2A. Four bolts
 shall be used in the End Shoe and standard posts may be substituted for the oversized wood
 posts.
 636.17-REMOVING AND RESETTING TEMPORARY GUARDRAIL BARRIER:
 Temporary guardrail barrier that is to be relocated within the project shall be salvaged and
 reinstalled as specified in 636.16.
 547
 
 636.18-ELECTRIC ARROW:
 The electric arrow panel shall be located as shown in the manual, "Traffic Control for Street
 and Highway Construction and Maintenance Operations", published by the Division, or as shown
 on the Plans. For construction areas, the electric arrow shall be portable, trailer mounted on a
 nonreflective flat black panel 48 inches high by 96 inches (1.2 meters high by 2.4 meters) wide
 with a minimum legibility distance of one mile (1.6 km). Minimum mounting height, measured
 from the roadway to the bottom of the panel, shall be 7 feet (2.1 m) except on vehicle mounted
 panels which shall be as high as practicable. The electric arrow shall have the capability of the
 following mode selection: Left Arrow, Right Arrow, Left and Right Arrow and Caution, with
 Caution mode consisting of four or more lamps arranged in a pattern which will not indicate a
 direction. Arrow panels shall automatically dim 50 percent from their rated lamp voltage during
 hours of darkness. The flashing rate of the lamps shall be between 25 and 40 flashes per minute.
 Minimum lamp "on time" shall be 50 percent.
 636.19-PORTABLE MESSAGE SIGNS:
 636.19.1-General: Portable Message signs shall consist of the furnishing, installing and
 maintaining of a variable message sign on a portable trailer. Each unit shall be self-contained
 and consist of a display board, controller, power supply, electrical cable and adjustable height
 structural support system. It shall be equipped to accept power supply from a completely selfcontained diesel generator, existing commercial electrical service, or battery pack which is
 recharged automatically by solar panels. The trailer system assemblage shall conform to the
 laws of the State of West Virginia and all articles of the licensing regulations presently in
 effect. The sign shall only be attached to its tow vehicle when installation or removal is in
 progress. The trailer and its leveling jacks shall be designed to keep the unit from changing its
 deployed position once placed. Devices that lock the wheels and/or leveling jacks into place
 shall be employed. Sandbagging of the frame and/or leveling jacks is not an acceptable manner
 of lock down.
 The unit shall be kept in good repair at all times. The Contractor shall maintain the device
 if failures occur. Failure, malfunction or damage to the unit for any reason shall require the
 Contractor to expedite the repair and furnish adequate signing and flaggers as deemed
 necessary by the Engineer to safely control traffic through the work area. Maintenance shall
 include periodic cleaning of the unit.
 All parts of the system shall comply with codes annotated in the National Fire Protection
 Association and Underwriters Laboratory and all local electrical codes. Earth ground shall be
 tied to the sign's chassis. Lightning protection shall be supplied for the load site.
 636.19.2-Display: The Portable Message Sign shall be the disc matrix or LED lamp matrix
 panel type capable of operating in temperatures from –30° to +160° F (-36° to 72° C) and
 capable of displaying alphanumeric characters and arrows. The sign panel assembly, including
 the mounting brackets, shall not exceed 128 inches (3.15 meters) in overall width. The bottom
 of the sign panel shall be a minimum of 7 feet (2.13 m) above the roadway. A minimum
 character height of 18 inches (450 mm), and character spacing at a minimum of two dots or
 one half the character width, unless otherwise approved by Engineer.
 The trailer shall be marked with a minimum of 200 square inches (1.29 square meters) of
 four-inch (100 mm) alternating red/white conspicuity marking material (WV Type VI / Fed.
 
 548
 
 Type IX Retroreflective sheeting) to be visible by motorists approaching the trailer from any
 direction.
 If battery backup (in event of power interruption) is called for on the plans, all functional
 operations to include sign lighting shall be operational up to two hours. Fluorescent lighting or
 LED lamp matrix shall be applied to provide nighttime visibility and the intensity of the sign
 shall be adjustable by automatically dimming or manual control.
 636.19.3-Sign Types:
 636.19.3.1-Changeable Message Sign: The Changeable Message Sign system shall
 have three (3) lines, unless otherwise noted on the plans and shall conform to the general
 requirements of 636.19.1. The unit shall have several preprogrammed messages and be
 capable of programming at least fifty new messages and storing such. The controller shall
 be housed in a weatherproof lockable cabinet that is accessible from a suitable mounting
 on the trailer. The controller shall be a microprocessor controller or laptop computer with
 an incorporated keyboard and CRT that allows the users to access, generate, and store
 messages. The controller display shall be a miniaturized approximation of the actual
 display or a message being assembled. The display shall be yellow or amber character on
 black background, a 7 x 5-character font.
 The cycle time and duration of message for a changeable message sign is a function of
 the highway operating speeds and the size letters displayed. The entire message should be
 visible at least twice at the operating speed. When traveling at 65 MPH (105 km/h)
 (freeway speeds), a driver has approximately seven (7) seconds to read the message, the
 message should not be longer than four (4) words or numbers and not longer than two (2)
 units of information. The message displayed from each unit shall be visible from one-half
 mile (805 meters).
 The sign shall be capable of changing to and displaying a programmed default message
 or four corner dots flashing in the event of power failure.
 636.19.3.2-Speed Monitoring Trailer: A Speed Monitoring Trailer system shall
 conform to the general requirements of 636.19 and shall consist of a trailer, radar, and
 display. The unit should be operational only while work is in progress.
 636.19.3.2.1-Radar: The radar unit shall be capable of an output in miles per hour
 (mph) or kilometers per hour (km/h) operating at a frequency of 24.15 GHz (K-Band) ±
 100 MHz accurate to within 3 mph at a target speed of 10 to 199 mph (16 to 230 km/h).
 636.19.3.2.2-Display: The display board shall be a minimum two-digit, high
 brightness, amber display on a black background. The system shall be equipped with a
 violator alert feature. This feature shall change the display from steady amber to flashing
 amber and flash the speed reading when a vehicle exceeds a programmable speed
 threshold. This threshold shall be adjustable. The display shall be mounted a minimum
 height of 4 feet (1.2 meters) above the roadway.
 A 7-inch (175 mm) by 36-inch (900 mm) plaque reading “YOUR SPEED” in black
 letters on a yellow background shall be mounted directly above or directly below the
 display. The rack shall be secured with a lockable fastener and shall provide room to mount
 a minimum 30-inch (750 mm) by 36-inch (900 mm) speed limit sign (R2-1) above the
 display.
 549
 
 636.19.4-Placement: Site selection, protection from traffic, and message displayed shall
 be approved by the Engineer. A changeable message sign and a speed monitoring trailer are
 not to be placed where they conflict with one another.
 The changeable message sign shall always be located behind the channelizing devices or
 barriers away from moving traffic lanes. In work zones, it shall be located in clear buffer
 barricades without reducing the sign's visibility.
 The speed monitoring trailer system shall be located within the area of the reduced work
 zone speed limit, but shall not be located within or before a transition or taper. At locations
 where the shoulder is open, cones shall be tapered at 25 feet (7.5 meters) centers for a distance
 of 200 feet (61 meters) on the approach to the unit to differentiate it to oncoming motorists.
 636.20-TEMPORARY TRAFFIC SIGNAL(S) OR TEMPORARY LIGHTING:
 Temporary traffic signal(s) shall consist of furnishing, installing, maintaining and
 subsequent removal of various types of traffic signal systems as necessary due to the maintenance
 of traffic plan. It shall include, but not be limited to, traffic signals and traffic signal
 interconnections to be installed in accordance with Section 660 and Subsection 715.42 of the
 Specifications. As a minimum, the temporary traffic signal(s) shall be equipped with a three-dial
 fixed time controller. When the temporary traffic signal(s) are no longer needed, they will become
 the property of the Contractor.
 Temporary lighting shall consist of furnishing, installing, maintaining, and subsequent
 removal of various types of lighting systems as necessary due to the maintenance of traffic plan.
 It shall include but not be limited to lighting to be installed in accordance with Section 662 of the
 Specifications. When the temporary lighting is no longer needed, it will become the property of
 the Contractor.
 636.21-TEMPORARY PIPE FOR MAINTAINING TRAFFIC:
 Temporary pipe for maintaining traffic shall conform to the requirements of 604.
 636.22-WARNING LIGHTS:
 Warning lights shall consist of the furnishing, installation and maintenance of a portable,
 lens directed, enclosed light. The warning lights shall be in accordance with the requirements of
 715.9.5 of the Standard Specifications.
 636.23-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantities of work done will be measured as follows:
 636.23.1-Aggregate: The quantity of "Aggregate for Maintaining Traffic" will be
 measured in tons (megagrams) of aggregate applied and accepted.
 The number of tons (megagrams) shall be determined by the total of the weights shown on
 receipted railroad freight bills when materials are shipped by rail; by actual measured
 displacement of barges certified by the producer when water shipments are made, providing
 materials delivered by the methods are not stockpiled or stored; or determined by the
 Contractor from the total of weigh slips for each vehicle load weighed on an approved standard
 scale or from digital printout slips from an automatic batching plant, and certified by the
 Contractor to be correct.
 Truck scales shall be provided by the producer or Contractor, except that truck scales are
 not required where the material is weighed at properly calibrated automatic batching plant
 550
 
 facilities which are equipped with digital print-out equipment. The scales shall be of sufficient
 size and capacity to weigh the heaviest loaded trucks that are used for delivery of the material.
 All truck scales shall be mounted on solid foundations which will insure their remaining
 plumb and level. All truck scales shall be inspected and sealed by the West Virginia Division
 of Labor, Bureau of Weights and Measures, or other appropriate agencies of the State or its
 political subdivisions. The Division may, at its option, accept inspection and sealing by out of
 state agencies when the material is weighed outside West Virginia.
 A weigh person shall be provided by the producer. The weigh person shall certify that the
 weight of the material, as determined either by the truck scales or from the digital print-out of
 the weights, is correct.
 Each truck shall be weighed empty prior to each load, except at automatic batch plants
 approved to operate without truck scales. A digital recorder and print-out shall be required on
 all truck scales. The digital recorder shall produce a printed record of the gross, tare and net
 weights, and the time, date, truck identification and project number.
 Provision shall be made for constant zero compensation and further provision shall be made
 so that scales may not be manually manipulated during the printing process. The system shall
 be interlocked so as to allow printing only when the scale has come to rest. In case of a
 breakdown of the automatic equipment, the Engineer may permit manual operation for a
 reasonable time, normally not to exceed 48 hours, while the equipment is being repaired.
 636.23.2-Bituminous Material: The quantity of "Bituminous Material for Dust
 Palliative" shall be the number of gallons (liters), prior to dilution in the field, incorporated
 into the completed work and will be measured as prescribed in 109.1.
 636.23.3-Calcium Chloride: The quantity of "Calcium Chloride for Dust Palliative" shall
 be the number of tons (megagrams) actually used for the work, determined by the total of the
 weights of the individual units when shipped in packages.
 636.23.4-Temporary Structures: "Temporary Structures for Maintaining Traffic", as
 detailed on the Plans or called for by the Engineer, shall be on a lump sum basis for completing,
 maintaining and removal of the work. Earthwork required for erection or removal of the
 structure, not measured and paid for by a specific item, shall not be measured or paid for and
 shall be incidental to Item 636005-*, Temporary Structure For Maintaining Traffic.
 636.23.5-Pilot Truck and Driver: "Pilot Truck and Driver" shall be on a per day basis
 and shall include auxiliary barriers and warning signs of all necessary types used in conjunction
 with the pilot truck.
 636.23.6-Traffic Control Devices: "Traffic Control Devices" will be measured by the
 number of units of traffic control devices used and accepted. The relative value of each traffic
 control device in units shall be as shown in the traffic control device rate schedule. The total
 units of traffic control devices shown in the Contract is an estimated amount only and may be
 adjusted up or down by the Engineer in accordance with the needs of the project. When more
 than one sign is attached to a post(s), mount(s) or barricade, the signs will be measured as a
 sign assembly and not as individual signs.
 The price bid per unit of traffic control devices shall include furnishing, maintaining and
 removing, filling drums with sand as required, providing sand bags as ballast on barricades,
 551
 
 replacement batteries for flashers, turning, covering or otherwise causing signs to be
 unreadable to traffic when the message does not pertain to the existing condition and all other
 miscellaneous items required for maintaining traffic.
 Traffic control devices completely destroyed by traffic or any other means shall be replaced
 by the Contractor, with no additional payment to the Contractor.
 A payment of ¼ the rate shown shall be made to the Contractor for any traffic control
 devices that the Contractor moves more than 500 feet (150 m) when directed by the Engineer.
 This rate shall not apply for continuous type operations such as resurfacing projects.
 Payment for continuous type operations shall be made for the initial placement only. No
 additional compensation will be made for the moving of traffic control devices made necessary
 due to the nature of continuous type work.
 When Cones are specified as the temporary channelizing device in a project, the Contractor
 may, at their option, utilize Channelizer Cones in lieu of Cones. However, the unit value
 assigned to the Channelizer Cones in this case shall be equal to the established unit value
 assigned to Cones.
 
 Device #
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 11
 12
 13
 1.
 
 2.
 3.
 
 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES RATE SCHEDULE
 Value in Units
 Description
 Each Traffic
 Control Device
 Signs on portable mounts and barricades
 170
 (Total sign area 16 sq. ft. (1.5 sq. meters) or greater)
 Signs on portable mounts and barricades
 80
 (Total sign area less than 16 sq. ft. (1.5 sq.meters))
 Signs on permanent posts
 180
 (Total sign area 16 sq. ft. (1.5 sq. meters) or greater)
 Signs on permanent posts
 90
 (Total sign area less than 16 sq. ft. (1.5 sq.meters))
 Barricades-Type I
 35
 Barricades-Type II
 60
 Barricades-Type III
 90
 Drums
 60
 Cones
 5
 Vertical Panel or Ground Mounted Delineators
 10
 Barrier or Guardrail Mounted Delineators
 0
 (Bid Incidental to Barrier or Guardrail)
 Channelizer Cones
 40
 Oversize signs
 300
 
 Orange sign sheeting to be retroreflective fluorescent-orange. WVDOH approved Type ASTM-VI
 material shall be used for roll-up signs. WVDOH approved Type ASTM-IX or ASTM-XI material
 shall be used for rigid signs on projects advertised prior to April 1, 2019. WVDOH approved Type
 ASTM-XI material shall be used for rigid signs on projects advertised on or after April 1, 2019. All
 other signs shall be manufactured using WVDOH approved Type ASTM-IV material unless
 fluorescent-yellow or fluorescent-yellow-green material is specified, in which case WVDOH
 approved Type ASTM-XI material shall be used.
 Drum and Channelizer Cone sheeting to be six (6) inch WVDOH approved Type ASTM-IV material.
 Barricade and cone sheeting shall be WVDOH approved Type ASTM-IV material.
 
 552
 
 4.
 
 Only those Drums, Channelizer Cones, Sheetings, Soil Anchored Flexible Delineator Posts, Surface
 Mounted Tubular Markers, Guardrail Mounted Flexible Delineators, and B-1 Delineators which
 have been field tested and approved by the Division will be permitted. A list of the approved
 suppliers and their code numbers may be obtained by contacting:
 West Virginia Division of Highways
 Materials Division
 190 Dry Branch Dr.
 Charleston, WV 25306
 
 Payment for furnishing, installing, and maintaining the work area signs indicating fines
 shall be as part of Item 636011-*. “Traffic Control Devices.” And all the previous provisions
 of this Article shall apply.
 636.23.7-Water for Dust Palliative: Water for dust palliative will be measured and paid
 for under Item 637001-*.
 636.23.8-Eradication of Pavement Marking: The quantity of "Eradication of Pavement
 Markings" shall be the equivalent linear feet (meters) of 4 inches (100 mm) solid line actually
 removed from the pavement. As an example, an 8 inches (200 mm) solid line would double
 the linear quantity.
 636.23.9-Temporary Pavement Markings-Paint: The quantity of “Temporary Pavement
 Markings-Paint” shall be the linear feet of 4 in. (100mm), 6 in. (150 mm), or 8 in. (200 mm)
 solid line actually placed on the pavement.
 636.23.10-Temporary Pavement Markings-Tape: The quantity of “Temporary
 Pavement Markings-Tape” shall be the linear feet of 4 in. (100mm), 6 in. (150 mm), or 8 in.
 (200 mm) solid line actually placed on the pavement.
 636.23.11-Temporary Raised Pavement Markers: The quantity of "Temporary Raised
 Pavement Markers" shall be the actual number of markers placed on the pavement. Payment
 shall include the subsequent removal of the temporary pavement markers.
 636.23.12-Cleaning of Project Traffic Control Devices: The quantity of "Cleaning of
 Project Traffic Control Devices" shall be the actual number of times that all of the traffic
 control devices, including all channelizing devices, are cleaned on the entire project. Payment
 will be made for each time all the devices on the whole project are cleaned.
 636.23.13-Cleaning of Individual Traffic Control Devices: The quantity of "Cleaning
 of Individual Traffic Control Devices" shall be the actual number of individual traffic control
 devices cleaned. When temporary guardrail barricades are cleaned, each barrel will be
 considered an individual device when payment is made under this item.
 No additional payment shall be made for the cleaning of any delineator regardless of the
 type of material. Such costs shall be incidental to the cost of cleaning other traffic control
 devices. For cleaning purposes, any traffic control device attached to a barricade shall be
 considered part of the barricade. Similarly, any warning light attached to a sign shall be
 considered part of the sign.
 553
 
 636.23.14-Flagger-Traffic Director: Flagger shall include the cost of furnishing,
 installing, maintaining and moving of the "Advance Flagger" signs along with the actual
 flagging of traffic. The flaggers shall be paid for the actual authorized time controlling traffic
 and up to 30 minutes travel from a previous assignment.
 The quantity "Traffic Director" shall be the actual number of hours worked in traffic
 control. The traffic director shall be paid for the actual authorized time controlling traffic
 which includes the cost for the police vehicle.
 636.23.15 through 636.23.16-BLANK
 636.23.17-Temporary Barrier: The quantity of “Temporary Barrier” shall be the linear
 feet (meters) of barrier actually placed. Payment shall include terminal connecting devices,
 delineators, anchoring, maintaining, dismantling, removal and disposal of the barrier and
 devices when no further use is required.
 636.23.18-Removing and Resetting Temporary Barrier: The quantity of “Removing
 and Resetting Temporary Barrier” shall be the linear feet (meters) of barrier reused in a
 different location. Payment shall include temporary storage if necessary, re-erecting,
 maintaining, dismantling, removal and disposal of the barrier.
 636.23.19-Temporary Guardrail Barrier: The quantity of "Temporary Guardrail
 Barrier" shall be the linear feet (meters) of barrier actually placed, including the last twenty
 five foot (7.62 M) connector section. Payment shall include the dismantling, removal and
 disposal of the barrier and temporary connectors when no further use is required.
 636.23.20-Removing and Resetting Temporary Guardrail Barrier: The quantity of
 "Removing and Resetting Temporary Guardrail Barrier" shall be the linear feet (meters) of
 barrier reused in a different location. Payment shall include temporary storage, if necessary,
 re-erecting, maintaining, dismantling, removal and disposal of the barrier.
 636.23.21-Electric Arrow: The quantity of "Electric Arrow" shall be the actual number
 of days that the arrow is used on the project.
 636.23.22-Portable Message Sign: The quantity of “Changeable Message Sign” and
 “Speed Motoring Trailer” shall be the actual number of days that the sign is used on the project.
 636.23.23-Temporary Traffic Signal(s) or Temporary Lighting: "Temporary Traffic
 Signal(s)" shall include the furnishing, installation, maintaining and subsequent removal of all
 equipment and material necessary to adequately meet the requirements of the Traffic Control
 Plan and shall be measured as complete units and paid by the month, or fraction thereof.
 “Temporary Lighting” shall be on a lump sum basis and shall include the furnishing,
 installing, maintaining and subsequent removal of all equipment and material necessary to
 adequately meet the requirements of the Traffic Control Plan.
 636.23.24-Temporary Pipe for Maintaining Traffic: The quantity of "Temporary Pipe
 for Maintaining Traffic" shall be the linear feet (meters) of pipe actually placed, as detailed on
 the Plans. Payment shall include the removal and disposal of the pipe when no longer needed.
 554
 
 636.23.25-Warning Lights: The quantity of "Warning Lights" shall be the actual number
 of days that a light is used on the project.
 636.23.26-Shadow Vehicle: A shadow vehicle shall be on a per-day basis and shall include
 the flashing beacon, fuel, crew and truck-mounted attenuator used in conjunction with the
 vehicle.
 636.23.27-Temporary Impact Attenuating Device: One unit of “Temporary Impact
 Attenuating Device” shall be paid at the time of initial installation of a device, as described in
 Section 636.12, at each unique location within the project. However, over the life of the project
 the Contractor shall not be paid for a quantity of this item exceeding the maximum number of
 individual devices required to be in place on the project at a specific time. Each installation
 beyond this quantity shall be paid for using the “Remove and Reset Attenuator Device” item.
 636.23.28-Remove and Reset Attenuator Device: This item shall be measured and paid
 for in accordance with the provisions of Section 636.23.27.
 636.24-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the items listed below, which prices and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all
 the materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including
 all labor, tools, equipment, supplies and incidentals necessary to complete the work. When
 aggregate for maintaining traffic, dust palliatives, flagger, traffic director, cleaning of traffic
 control devices or the electric arrow are contained in the contract as pay items, payment for such
 pay items will not be made subsequent to the date of required completion of the project.
 When a portable message sign or speed monitoring trailer is to become the property of the
 Division, each unit shall be delivered with the following items:
 i Operator's manual for sign-raising mechanism and sign operations.
 ii Schematic wiring diagram of the sign, remote control console and the control unit.
 iii Service manual for the sign, sign-raising mechanism control unit and the remote control
 console.
 iv Record of Serial Numbers, Model Numbers, and Model Types for the Portable message
 sign and any attendant diesel engine.
 v Warranty on the sign-raising mechanism, sign remote control console and control unit.
 vi Inspection and operational tests.
 If during the prosecution of the work, additional items under this Section, not included in
 the contract, are found to be necessary as determined by the Engineer, payment for such additional
 items will be made under the provisions of 104.3.
 636.25-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 636002-*
 Aggregate For Maintaining Traffic, ***
 636003-*
 Bituminous Material For Dust Palliative
 636004-*
 Calcium Chloride For Dust Palliative
 636005-*
 Temporary Structure For Maintaining Traffic
 636006-*
 Pilot Truck And Driver
 555
 
 UNIT
 Ton (Megagram)
 Gallon (Liter)
 Ton (Megagram)
 Lump Sum
 Day
 
 ITEM
 636007-*
 636008-*
 636009-*
 636010-*
 636011-*
 636012-*
 636013-*
 636014-*
 636014-*
 636017-*
 636017-*
 636017-*
 636017-*
 636017-*
 636018-*
 636019-*
 636020-*
 636021-*
 636022-*
 636023-*
 636024-*
 636025-*
 636026-*
 636027-*
 636028-*
 636030-*
 636060-*
 636060-*
 *
 **
 ***
 Note 1:
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Eradication Of Pavement Marking
 Temporary Pavement Marking-Paint
 Temporary Pavement Marking-Tape
 Temporary Raised Pavement Marker
 Traffic Control Device
 Project Traffic Control Device Cleaning
 Individual Traffic Control Device Cleaning
 Flagger
 Traffic Director
 Temporary Barrier, TL-1, **
 Temporary Barrier, TL-2, **
 Temporary Barrier, TL-3, **
 Temporary Barrier, TL-4, **
 Temporary Barrier, TL-5, **
 Remove and Reset Temporary Barrier
 Temporary Guardrail Barrier
 Remove And Reset Temporary Guardrail Barrier
 Electric Arrow
 Changeable Message Sign
 Temporary Traffic Signal, “location” Note 1
 Temporary Pipe For Maintaining Traffic
 Warning Lights, Type “Type”
 Temporary Lighting
 Traffic Control
 Shadow Vehicle
 Speed Monitoring Trailer
 Temporary Impact Attenuating Device
 Remove and Reset Attenuator Device
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Unit
 Each
 Each
 Hour
 Hour
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Day
 Day
 Month
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Day
 Lump Sum
 Site
 Day
 Day
 Each
 Each
 
 Sequence number
 Deflection range (see below)
 Example: “636017 Temporary Barrier TL-3, IV ”
 Type of aggregate such as stone, gravel, slag
 “location” shall be designated as “01”, “02”, etc. for each different physical location as
 designated on the plans.
 
 Deflection Ranges:
 Supplemental
 Description
 I
 II
 III
 IV
 
 Deflection Criteria
 Minimal Deflection < 6 in.
 Low Deflection < 24 in.
 Medium Deflection < 60 in.
 High Deflection < 96 in.
 
 Deflection values are based on NCHRP testing for corresponding level
 and is permanent deflection measured at the bottom of the barrier.
 
 556
 
 SECTION 637
 WATER
 637.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing, and applying or incorporating, as the case may be,
 water required for compacting embankments, for stabilizing soils or other materials, as a dust
 palliative, or for any other specially designated purpose, in accordance with these Specifications
 and in accordance with the requirements of the Plans or as directed by the Engineer.
 637.2-MATERIALS:
 Water shall conform to the pertinent requirements set forth in these Specifications for its
 specific uses or, in the absence of such specific requirements for the designated use, the water shall
 be suitable for the purpose intended and shall be free of substances which would be deleterious to
 the work involved.
 637.3-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 The equipment to be used with the water operation involved will be approved by the
 Engineer as adequate and suitable for the purpose intended. Water shall be incorporated in the
 manner, in the amounts, at the times, and for the purposes prescribed in these Specifications or as
 directed by the Engineer.
 637.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 When the Contract includes a separate item for "Water", it will be measured by the gallon
 (liter), expressed in thousand-gallon (liter) units, and the quantity to be measured for payment will
 be the amount of water furnished and used for the purposes specifically designated as being
 included under the pay item. Measurements will be by means of tanks or tank trucks of
 predetermined capacity or by means of satisfactory and approved meters furnished by the
 Contractor.
 Water used by the Contractor for purposes other than those specifically included in the
 item shall not be paid for separately.
 When the excavation is less than 10,000 cubic yards (meters) and separate payment for
 water is not included in the plans the water shall be incidental to the work and shall not be paid for
 separately.
 637.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the item below which price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing all the
 material and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all
 labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 637.6-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 637001-* Water For Dust Palliative
 
 UNIT
 Thousand Gallon (Thousand Liters)
 
 * Sequence number
 
 557
 
 SECTION 638
 PROJECT MARKERS, RIGHT-OF-WAY MARKERS,
 SURVEY MARKERS, AND OUTLET MARKERS
 638.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing, and placing or installing at the points designated on
 the Plans, in the Contractor’s Proposal or by the Engineer, metal (signpost) project markers, rightof-way markers, concrete survey markers, and outlet markers in accordance with these
 Specifications and in reasonably close conformity to the lines, grades, dimensions, locations, and
 sections shown on the Plans, in the Contractor’s Proposal or established by the Engineer.
 638.2-MATERIALS:
 Right-of-way Markers shall consist of # 6 (# 20) deformed reinforcing steel bars meeting
 the requirements of AASHTO M 31 and caps provided by the Division. Materials for project
 markers shall conform to the requirements specified on the Plans. Survey markers shall be
 constructed of concrete conforming to 715.12 or 715.19.
 Survey Markers constructed without reinforcement shall contain sufficient steel near the
 top to provide magnetic detection.
 The materials for Outlet Marker Signs, such as for the sign panels, their supports, and for
 the legend and background, are to be of a type and method of fabrication that will be consistent
 with the conditions and estimated period of use. Signs shall have black letters for the legend on a
 white background. Reflective sheeting will be permitted, but not required.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 638.3-RIGHT-OF-WAY MARKERS:
 638.3.1-Right-Of-Way Marker Installation: Markers shall be set plumb and to a
 minimum depth of 36 inches (1 meter) and shall be flush to the ground. When rock is
 encountered in areas of proposed markers, they shall be grouted to a depth of 18 inches (0.5
 meters) into the rock. Right-of-way markers shall be installed at points designating the rightof-way boundaries and at each break in the right-of-way line as shown on the Plans or as
 directed by the Engineer.
 638.3.2-Installation: Markers shall be set plumb and to the depth shown on the Plans.
 The holes shall be backfilled with suitable material and thoroughly tamped.
 Right-of-way markers shall be set at points designating the right-of-way boundaries and at
 each break in the right-of-way line as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer. Rightof-way markers shall be accurately set to the mark given by means of intersecting strings. If
 approved by the Engineer, other equally accurate methods may be substituted.
 638.4-CONCRETE SURVEY MARKERS:
 Survey markers shall be installed where indicated on the Plans or as designated by the
 Engineer. When locations for survey markers conflict with other construction, the survey markers
 shall be offset as directed by the Engineer. Precast concrete markers shall be set plumb and to the
 depth shown on Plans. Installation shall be backfilled with suitable material and thoroughly
 tamped to obtain a very rigid installation. If a manufactured point on the bronze casting does not
 558
 
 coincide with the survey point after installation, it shall be filed and the actual survey point shall
 be center punched and outlined by a cross.
 638.5-METAL (SIGN-POST) PROJECT MARKERS:
 Project markers shall be constructed in accordance with details and requirements on the
 Plans.
 Project markers shall be placed at the beginning and end of projects, on the right side of
 the road or highway at the points designated by the Engineer. Project markers shall be located at
 the maximum practical distance not to exceed 30 feet (10 meters) from the edge of the pavement
 without obscuring or detracting from the effectiveness of other official signs. Project markers shall
 be driven in place, plumb and to the depth shown on the Plans. Defective or damaged markers
 will be rejected.
 638.6-OUTLET MARKERS:
 638.6.1-General: Outlet Markers Signs shall be furnished by the Contractor and placed
 during the mobilization of the project. The Outlet Marker Sign shall be in accordance with
 Figure 638.6.1 below. The Outlet Marker Signs shall become the property of the Division and
 remain in place upon completion of the project unless otherwise directed by the Engineer. No
 shop drawings shall be required.
 
 Figure 638.6.1: Outlet Marker
 638.6.2-Location And Content: The Outlet Marker Signs for projects shall be placed at
 each discharge point as indicated in the Special Provision for NPDES permits contained within
 the Contractor’s Proposal and conform to the example as shown on the attached drawing.
 The following information shall be placed on the Outlet Marker Signs:
 1. WVDOT-DOH
 2. NPDES Registration Number
 3. Outlet Number
 
 559
 
 638.6.3-Installation: Mounting, transverse location, and similar features for Outlet
 Marker Signs shall be consistent with practices used for the installation in 636.9 on wooden or
 steel U-channel supports to comply with small sign support safety practices. The sign shall be
 mounted as directed by the Engineer.
 638.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be the actual number of "Project Markers", "Right-of-Way
 Markers", "Survey Markers" or “Outlet Markers”, complete in place and accepted.
 638.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for
 excavating, backfilling, disposing of surplus material, furnishing all the material and doing all the
 work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor, tools, equipment,
 supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 638.9-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 638001-*
 638002-*
 638003-*
 638004-*
 *
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Project Marker
 Right-Of-Way Marker
 Survey Marker
 Outlet Marker
 
 Sequence number
 
 560
 
 UNIT
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 SECTION 639
 CONSTRUCTION SURVEYING
 639.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work consists of construction surveying, calculations, and staking, in accordance with
 these specifications.
 639.2-MATERIALS:
 Provide the necessary materials to complete the specified surveying services.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 639.3-CONSTRUCTION LAYOUT STAKES:
 The Division shall provide, to the Contractor, reference points along the line of
 improvement for proper layout of work. The reference points will serve as the horizontal and
 vertical control for the project.
 The Contractor shall provide field forces and shall set all additional stakes needed, such as
 offset stakes, reference point stakes, slope stakes, pavement and curb line and grade stakes, stakes
 for bridges, sewers, roadway drainage, pipe underdrains, paved gutter, fence, culverts or other
 structures, supplementary bench marks, and any other horizontal or vertical controls necessary to
 secure a correct layout of the work. The Contractor shall also do all layout work and shall set stakes
 necessary for carrying out utility changes when such utility changes are an obligation of the
 Contractor under the Contract. The location of the slope stakes for grading work shall be
 determined by a calculation method. Stakes for line and grade of pavement and curb shall be set
 at station intervals of 25 feet (10 meters) maximum distance on curves and at 50 feet (20 meters)
 maximum distance on tangents. Elevation control points with guard stakes shall be set, at a
 convenient distance outside the construction limits, opposite every 50-ft (20 meters) station and all
 stations where original cross-sections have been taken. The centerline station, the distance from
 centerline, and the elevation of the hub shall be recorded on each guard stake. For right-of-way
 staking, iron pins (WVDOT CAP on #5 Bar, 36” in length) with guard stakes shall be set on both
 sides of roadway at all locations where right-of-way changes width; the station number and the
 distance from the centerline shall be marked on each guard stake.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for having the layout staking work conform to the lines,
 grades, elevations, and dimensions called for on the Plans. The Contractor shall furnish a copy of
 their survey records for checking by the Engineer and for the Division's permanent file. These
 records shall be furnished as they are completed during the progress of the work. Any inspection
 or checking of the Contractor's layout by the Engineer and the acceptance of all or any part of it
 shall not relieve the Contractor of their responsibility to secure the proper dimensions, grades, and
 elevations of the several parts of the work.
 The Contractor shall exercise care in the preservation of stakes and bench marks and shall
 have then reset at their expense when any are damaged, lost, displaced or removed. The Contractor
 shall use competent personnel and suitable equipment for the layout work required and shall
 provide that it be done under the supervision of, or directed by, a Registered Professional Engineer
 or Professional Surveyor. The Contractor shall not engage the services of any person or persons
 in the employ of the Division for the performance of any of the work covered by this item.
 
 561
 
 639.4-AS-BUILT UTILITY SURVEY:
 The Contractor shall locate and submit to the Division an “As-Built” survey of all of the
 specified items being performed as part of the project under Sections 631, 657, 658, 659, 660, 661,
 662, and 664. Meeting the following minimum survey requirements:
 a. Coordinate system – UTM Zone 17N with a reference to datum of NAD83 (2011).
 Elevation reference is NAVD88. All units shall be US Survey Feet.
 b. Horizontal and tolerance – No single observed point shall be greater than one foot from
 the true location of the point.
 c. Features to be collected – See Table 639.3.2.
 Survey data shall be submitted in a comma separated value (.csv) formatted file. The file
 structure shall be as defined below:
 POINT NAME, NORTHING, EASTING, SURFACE ELEVATION, CODE,
 ATTRIBUTE, DEPTH
 The elements of the file structure shall are defined below:
 1. POINT NAME: This shall be an alpha or alpha numeric value unique to a single point.
 2. NORTHING: This shall be the reported northing value in US Survey Feet to the nearest
 tenth of a foot.
 3. EASTING: This shall be the reported easting value in US Survey Feet to the nearest
 tenth of a foot.
 4. SURFACE ELEVATION: This shall be the orthometric height referenced to NAVD88
 in US Survey Feet reported to the nearest tenth of a foot.
 5. CODE: This shall be the predefined feature code provided in Table 639.3.2.
 6. ATTRIBUTE: This value shall be a descriptive note specific to this feature used to
 further define the point as described in Table 639.3.2.
 7. DEPTH: This value shall only be applicable to underground conduit and shall be a
 field measured distance from the top of the conduit to the top of the trench in US Survey
 Feet to the nearest tenth of a foot.
 
 562
 
 Feature Code
 
 TABLE 639.3.2
 Feature Codes And Attributes
 Attribute
 Description
 Conduit diameter and material This value shall be for any
 type
 underground conduit, as
 surveyed in the trench.
 Point shall be the location(s) of
 the terminal.
 
 DOH_CNDT
 
 i.e. “6-Inch Plastic”
 Mounting type (Pole or
 ground) and electrical service
 (underground or /overhead)
 
 Intermediate points shall be at
 significant transitions (i.e. –
 elbow, tee, bends, etc.) and/or
 within 75’ of adjacent conduit
 point.
 This value is for a DOH Lighting
 Control Station or DOH Signal
 Control Cabinet.
 
 DOH_CNSTA
 i.e. “Ground -Overhead”
 Box size
 DOH_JBOX
 
 DOH_SGNP
 
 DOH_LITP
 
 DOH_LITSGN
 
 i.e. “18x18”
 Signal Pole Type
 (C1, C1L, A1, A1L, E)
 i.e. “E”
 Light Type
 (I thru VII)
 
 Four (4) corner points of the
 concrete pad or fence whichever
 is the greatest in width.
 This value is a single point in the
 center top of a DOH electrical
 Junction Box
 This value is a single point at a
 DOH Signal Pole
 This value is a single point at a
 DOH Light Pole
 
 i.e. “III”
 Sign Type (advanced flasher,
 school zone, overhead
 cantilever structure, overhead
 truss structure, etc)
 
 This value is a single point at a
 DOH Lighted Sign.
 
 i.e. “Overhead Truss Structure”
 Description of item
 This value is for all other DOH
 Utility items.
 DOH_MISC
 
 Such as CCTV, RWIS, Free
 Pass, Message Sign, Weigh in
 Motion, Signal Loop
 
 i.e. “RWIS”
 
 563
 
 The survey records generated shall be the property of the Division and shall be available
 to the Engineer for inspection or reproduction at all times. All survey records shall be
 transmitted before final project acceptance.
 639.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 "Construction Layout Stakes" will be measured as a complete unit.
 “As-Built Utility Survey” will be measured as a complete unit.
 639.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the item below, which price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing, setting,
 maintaining, and resetting, when necessary, the stakes, and for furnishing all engineering
 personnel, equipment, materials, and all incidentals.
 639.6-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 639001-*
 639003-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Construction Layout Stake
 As-Built Utility Survey
 
 * Sequence number
 
 564
 
 UNIT
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 
 SECTION 640
 FIELD OFFICE AND STORAGE BUILDING
 640.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing and maintaining in good condition suitable offices for
 the exclusive use of the Engineer as a field office or for making field tests, a storage building for
 concrete cylinder curing tanks, and equipment for the field office, all in accordance with these
 Specifications.
 640.2-MATERIALS:
 Not specified.
 640.3-LOCATION AND TIME OF ERECTION:
 The field office and storage building shall be set up at approved locations on or in the
 immediate vicinity of the Project. They shall be separated from any building used by the
 Contractor.
 The field office and storage building shall be set up, equipped, and made ready for use at
 least three days prior to the beginning of the work on the project.
 640.4-FIELD OFFICE:
 640.4.1-General: The office shall be entirely enclosed, waterproofed, and sealed inside
 with wall board which will provide efficient insulation against heat and cold. With the
 exception of a minimal field office, the office must be decent, safe and sanitary in accordance
 with Health Department regulations.
 The office shall be provided with an approved type of heating and cooling equipment that
 will maintain a comfortable seasonable temperature throughout the project life. It shall be
 furnished with satisfactory electric lighting and lighting service. A minimum of two duplex
 convenience outlets shall be provided in each room. The building shall be provided with neat,
 sanitary, enclosed toilet with exhaust fan accommodations for the exclusive use of the
 Engineer, and such facilities shall meet the requirements of the State Department of Health or
 other authorities having jurisdiction. It shall be stocked with lavatory and sanitary supplies at
 all times during the period of the contract. Additionally the Contractor shall provide, maintain,
 and pay for internet access via service such as Cable, DSL, Satellite or other system along with
 a wireless router for the field office. The wireless router and internet specifications such as
 minimum upload and download speeds can be located at the following WVDOH website:
 http://www.transportation.wv.gov/highways/contractadmin/specifications/640.11fieldoffice/P
 ages/default.aspx
 The office shall be attractively painted on the outside and shall be provided with a sign at
 least 4 feet (1.2 m) by 1 ft. (300 mm), with the sign content as follows:
 FIELD OFFICE-THE WEST VIRGINIA
 DIVISION OF HIGHWAYS
 The letters shall not be less than 3 inches (75 mm) high and shall be white on a black
 background. The sign shall have a white border at least 1½ inches (38 mm) wide.
 The office shall be equipped per section 640.10 and shall include OSHA approved steps
 and entrance porch with railing.
 565
 
 640.4.2-Large Field Office: The large field office shall have a minimum floor space of
 800 sq. ft. (80 sq. meters). This may be accomplished by the use of two (2) standard field
 offices or one large equivalent office. The office shall contain the following additional
 equipment:
 1. One office type desk having at least two drawers on each side and one secretarial type
 desk each having minimum top dimension of 30 inches by 60 inches (750mm by 1 500
 mm).
 2. One plan rack.
 3. One utility table 30 inches (750 mm) high and having top dimensions not less than 30
 inches by 72 inches (750 mm by 1 800 mm).
 4. One sanitary-type water cooler supplied with water that shall be kept cooled electrically
 or with gas.
 5. One desk model electronic adding machine with, tape totaling a minimum of 10 digits.
 6. One desk model, and two hand held model electronic calculators (all equipped with
 scientific functions), with a minimum entry of 10 digits and a minimum readout of 10
 digits.
 640.4.3-Standard Field Office: The standard field office shall have a minimum floor
 space of 400 sq. ft. (40 square meters) and shall contain two rooms, each with a minimum plan
 dimension of 20 ft. by 10 ft. (4 by 5 meters). One room shall contain sufficient floor area to
 include such soil equipment necessary to perform the various compaction control tests as may
 be required as the work progresses.
 640.4.4-Small Field Office: The small field office shall have a minimum floor space of
 250 sq. ft. (23.2 sq. m) and shall contain two rooms, each with a floor space of approximately
 10 ft. by 12 ½ ft. (3.1 by 3.75 m).
 640.4.5-Minimal Field Office: The field office shall have a minimum floor space of 100
 square feet (9.3 square meters) with a minimum plan dimension in one direction of 6 ft. (1.8
 m). When a sanitary enclosed toilet is not provided, a chemically treated portable toilet shall
 be provided. The office shall be furnished with a desk, chair, one fireproof filing cabinet
 equipped with locks, one desk top copier capable of producing 8½ x 11 and 8½ by 14 copies
 and a phone, fax and answering (message) machine that utilizes the same phone line. The door
 for the field office shall be provided with a suitable lock. A sanitary water cooler using bottled
 water or approved equal shall be provided. The requirements of sections 640.10 shall not
 apply.
 640.5-STORAGE BUILDING:
 The storage building for concrete cylinder tanks shall have a minimum floor space of 80
 sq. ft. (7.4 m) preferably 8 feet by 10 feet (2.4 by 3.1 m). The ceiling height shall not be less than
 7 feet (2.1 m). The storage building shall be well insulated and capable of maintaining a reasonably
 constant temperature. It shall be provided with water, as required, and satisfactory electric lighting.
 Chairs, tables, and stools, as required, shall be furnished.
 The Contractor shall furnish curing tanks with sufficient capacity to handle peak cylinder
 curing requirements. The tanks shall be equipped with thermostatically controlled units which are
 capable of maintaining specification water temperature in the tanks, and power shall be furnished.
 566
 
 640.6-LIABILITY FOR PROPERTY IN OFFICE/STORAGE STRUCTURES:
 The Contractor shall assume the risk of direct physical damage to or loss of all Division
 property in the project field office and storage building, and shall compensate the Division for any
 such damage or loss valued on a replacement cost basis to a maximum total of twenty thousand
 dollars.
 The contractor’s responsibility for this risk will remain in effect until the Division has
 removed all its property and vacated the office and storage building.
 640.7-MAINTENANCE:
 The Contractor for the duration of the project shall maintain the field office and storage
 building in good condition and appearance. No compensation will be allowed for loss by fire or
 by vandalism caused by non-Division personnel or for loss due to normal wear and tear.
 640.8-REMOVAL:
 After all field records pertinent to the project have been completed, the office and storage
 building shall be removed and disposed of by the Contractor and the site cleaned up and left in a
 neat and acceptable condition. The field office and storage building shall be allowed to remain for
 45 days after final acceptance of the project, and shall be completely removed prior to 60 days
 after final acceptance of the project.
 640.9-ALTERNATE FOR OFFICE BUILDING:
 The Contractor, in lieu of the field office building, may furnish adequate trailer space
 equivalent to the minimum floor space requirements. Minimum requirements for heat, lights, toilet
 facilities, insurance, maintenance, etc., shall be furnished for the trailer as for the office building.
 640.10-EQUIPMENT:
 The following equipment shall be furnished for any field office.
 1. One office-type desk having at least two drawers on each side and one secretarial-type
 desk each having minimum top dimension of 30 inches by 60 inches (750 by 1 500 mm).
 2. One filing cabinet when the total project bid is less than $1,000,000; two filing cabinets
 when the total project bid is $1,000,000 and less than $3,000,000; and three filing cabinets
 when the total project bid is $3,000,000 or more. Cabinets shall be fireproof, four-drawer,
 legal size, and equipped with locks.
 3. One plan rack.
 4. One utility table 30 inches (750 mm) high and having top dimensions not less than 30
 inches (750 mm) by 72 inches (1 800 mm).
 5. One sanitary-type water cooler supplied with water that shall be kept cooled electrically
 or with gas.
 6. One closet extending the full height from floor to ceiling measuring not less than 24 by
 30 inches. (600 by 750 mm) in plan, having at least two shelves, and equipped with a
 lock.
 7. One desk model electronic adding machine with tape totaling a minimum of 10 digits.
 8. One desk model, and two hand held model electronic calculators (all equipped with
 scientific functions), with a minimum entry of 10 digits and a minimum readout of 10
 digits.
 9. Comfortable chairs and stools as required.
 567
 
 10. The Contractor shall provide at their own expense all utilities and janitor service.
 Telephone service, limited to the best available local facilities, shall be furnished unless
 Plan notes require alternate communication facilities. Telephone service shall include
 installation, local monthly charges, long distance service, maintenance and removal costs.
 11. Provide two telephones for a large or standard office and one telephone for a small office.
 One answering (message) machine shall be provided.
 12. If any of the equipment items are included as “in-built” in the field office or trailer, they
 may be omitted from the list.
 13. Provide on project specific weather monitoring system. The minimum requirements for
 the weather monitoring system shall be:
 a. Measure and record total rainfall as well as hourly rainfall averages.
 b. Measure and record wind speed.
 c. Measure and record relative humidity.
 d. Measure and record temperatures.
 e. Present data in a neat and orderly fashion.
 f. The weather monitoring systems sensors shall be located as close to the project limits
 as practical and shall not exceed 1,000 feet without the Engineer’s written approval.
 g. All data collected must be transferable to the Department/ Project’s computer system.
 h. If the weather monitoring system supplied is capable and high speed internet service
 is available at the site, the weather monitoring system shall be connected to the internet
 for remote viewing.
 The weather monitoring system ,including hardware, software and manuals, will be
 furnished and maintained throughout the life of the project and shall be removed when the field
 office has been vacated by the Division of Highways staff in accordance with 640.8.
 640.11-BLANK
 640.12-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The “Large Field Office and Storage Building”, “Standard Field Office and Storage
 Building” shall include the field office and the storage building and shall be measured as one
 complete unit and paid by the month. The “Small Field Office” and “Minimal Field Office” shall
 be measured as one complete unit and paid for by the month. “Building Equipment” will be
 measured as complete unit and paid as a lump sum unit.
 640.13-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing,
 erecting, insuring, maintaining and removing the field office and storage building computer
 system, and sanitary conveniences for the Engineer; all labor and materials, and all other work
 necessary and incidental thereto. All costs associated with the weather monitoring system will be
 paid for by the contractor. The field office, storage building equipment, furniture, fixtures, and
 facilities shall remain the property of the Contractor and shall be removed in accordance with
 640.8 and the area dressed and restored.
 
 568
 
 Telephone service installation, local monthly charges, long distance charges, maintenance
 charges and removal costs will be paid by the Contractor. In the event long distance charges
 exceed the $100.00 per month average for the duration of the project, the Contractor may request
 compensation for the portion above the $100.00 per month average.
 640.14-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 640001-*
 640002-*
 640003-*
 640005-*
 640006-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Standard Field Office And Storage Building
 Large Field Office And Storage Building
 Building Equipment
 Minimal Field Office
 Small Field Office
 
 * Sequence number
 
 569
 
 UNIT
 Month
 Month
 Lump Sum
 Month
 Month
 
 SECTION 641
 MITIGATION DEVICES
 641.1-GENERAL:
 These devices include deflectors, weirs, random bolder placements, and rootball
 placements. These deflectors are to be built in accordance with the details contained in the plans
 and at the location as noted on the plans.
 641.2-PLACEMENT:
 Log deflectors and weirs are to be tied together as shown on the details or by a means
 approved by the Engineer. Double deflectors may be either log or rock and are indicated in the
 plans. The random boulder placements are to be sized in accordance with the data on the detail
 sheet. Placement of these boulders is to be such as to allow free movement of water through and
 around them.
 Rootball placements are to be as shown on the details contained within the plans.
 All the devices with the exception of the rootballs all other devices are to be placed in a
 manner that they raise above normal flow approximately 1'-2' (300 mm-600 mm), unless otherwise
 noted on the plans.
 641.3-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The payment for this work shall include all the materials, doing the work in a workmanlike
 and acceptable manner, labor, tools, equipment, supplies and incidentals necessary to complete the
 work and will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price Bid for the items below.
 641.4-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 641001-*
 641002-*
 641003-*
 641004-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Deflector “type”
 Weir
 Random Boulder Placement
 Rootball Placement
 
 * Sequence number
 
 570
 
 UNIT
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 SECTION 642
 TEMPORARY POLLUTION CONTROL
 The Contractor shall exercise every reasonable precaution throughout the life of the project
 to control water pollution. Construction of permanent drainage facilities as well as performance
 of other contract work which will contribute to the control of siltation shall be accomplished at the
 earliest practicable time during the life of the Contract. Pollutants such as chemicals, fuels,
 lubricants, bitumens, raw sewage, and other harmful waste shall not be discharged into or
 alongside of rivers, streams, impoundments (lakes, reservoirs, etc.) or into natural or manmade
 water courses leading thereto. The Contractor shall also comply with the applicable regulations
 of the Department of Natural Resources and other statues relating to the prevention and abatement
 of pollution. The purpose of these Specifications is to set forth certain temporary water pollution
 control measures which shall be required by the Contract in addition to the above.
 642.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of temporary control measures performed during the life of the
 Contract to control water pollution through use of berms, ditch checks, check dams, sediment
 structures (traps, ponds, or dams), mulches, fiber mats, seeding slope drains, and other erosion
 control devices or construction methods, in accordance with these Specifications and in reasonably
 close conformity with the lines, grades, thickness and typical cross sections shown on the Plans or
 established by the Engineer.
 The temporary pollution control provisions contained shall be coordinated with the
 permanent erosion control features specified elsewhere in the Contract to the extent practical to
 keep total erosion control costs to a minimum. These provisions shall also apply to work
 conducted outside the project right-of-way, such as operations in a borrow pit or waste site, where
 such work occurs as a result of the construction of the project.
 These temporary water pollution control measures shall be continued until; permanent
 controls have been established; the need has been eliminated as determined by the Engineer; or the
 project has been accepted.
 642.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials will be considered acceptable when they are capable of accomplishing the
 intended purpose, do not in themselves contribute to pollution and comply with the following:
 i. Mulches may be hay, straw, wood cellulose fiber, wood chips, bark, matting or other
 material acceptable to the Engineer. Mulch materials shall be reasonably free of noxious
 weeds. Asphalt for anchoring hay or straw mulch shall be of a commercial grade.
 Chemical mulch binders shall conform to the requirements in 715.27.1.
 ii. Slope drains may be constructed of pipe, fiber mats, rubble, Portland cement concrete,
 bituminous concrete, or other material that will adequately control erosion and is
 acceptable to the Engineer.
 
 571
 
 iii. Temporary seed, such as annual ryegrass (Italian ryegrass), weeping lovegrass, cereal rye
 or wheat, barley or oats, and millet, used in temporary seed mixture or seed mixtures B
 or D, shall be of a commercial grade meeting requirements of the State Seed Law,
 Temporary seed labeled with the notation "germination below standard" will not be
 acceptable for use on projects. Temporary seed shall not be used on the project after one
 year from the date of germination test shown on the label. Seed other than that specified
 above shall meet the requirements of 715.28.
 iv. Fertilizer shall be a commercial grade of 1-2-1 ratio, meeting requirements of the
 governing state and federal laws.
 v. Others as shown on the Plans or specified by the Engineer (i.e. Temporary Pipe,
 Temporary Structures, etc.).
 vi. Ground agricultural limestone shall be of a commercial grade.
 vii. Engineering fabric for silt fence shall meet the requirements of 715.11.5 and have a
 minimum width of 3 feet (900 mm). Wood, steel, or synthetic support posts having a
 minimum length of 3 feet (900 mm) plus the burial depth shall be used. They shall be of
 sufficient strength to resist damage during installation and to the support applied loads
 due to material or water build up behind the silt fence.
 viii. Dewatering Device shall meet the requirements of 715.11.10.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 642.3-PRECONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE:
 At the pre-construction conference, the Contractor shall submit for approval their schedules
 and methods for accomplishing the required temporary and permanent pollution control work
 during the construction stages involving clearing and grubbing; grading and drainage; structures;
 bases and pavement; and others as applicable. The Contractor shall also submit for approval
 proposed schedules and method for pollution control on haul roads, borrow pits, waste sites, and
 other project related operations, as applicable, conducted outside the right-of-way.
 No work shall be started until the above pollution control schedules and methods have been
 approved by the Engineer.
 642.4-GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
 The Engineer has the authority to limit the surface area of erodible earth material exposed
 by clearing and grubbing, to limit the surface area of erodible earth material exposed by
 excavation, borrow and fill operations and to direct the Contractor to provide immediate permanent
 or temporary pollution control measures as necessary to prevent contamination of adjacent streams
 or other watercourses, lakes, ponds, or other areas of water impoundment. Such work may involve
 the construction of temporary berms, ditch checks, check dams, sediment structures (traps, ponds
 or dams), slope drains, and use of temporary mulches, mats, seeding or other control devices or
 methods as necessary to control erosion.
 The Contractor shall incorporate all permanent erosion control features into the project at
 the earliest practicable time as outlined in their acceptable schedule. Temporary pollution control
 measures shall be used to correct conditions that develop during construction that were not
 foreseen during the design stage; that are needed prior to installation of permanent pollution
 control features, or that are needed temporarily to control erosion that develops during normal
 construction practices, but are not associated with permanent control features on the project.
 572
 
 Where erosion is likely to be a problem, clearing and grubbing operations shall be so
 scheduled and performed that grading operations and permanent erosion control features can
 follow immediately if the project conditions permit; otherwise temporary erosion control measures
 may be required between successive construction stages.
 The Engineer will limit the area of excavation, borrow and embankment operations in
 progress commensurate with the Contractor's capability and progress in keeping the finish grading,
 mulching, seeding, and other such permanent pollution control measures current in accordance
 with the accepted schedule. Should seasonal limitations make such coordination unrealistic,
 temporary erosion control measures shall be taken immediately to the extent feasible and justified.
 Unless otherwise approved in writing by the Engineer, construction operations in rivers,
 streams, and impoundments shall be restricted to those areas where channel changes are shown on
 the Plans and to those areas which must be entered for the construction of temporary or permanent
 structures. Rivers, streams, and impoundments shall be promptly cleared of all falsework, piling,
 debris or other obstructions placed or caused by the construction operations.
 Excavation from any source shall not be deposited in or near rivers, streams, or
 impoundments or otherwise located in such a manner which might be susceptible to erosion due
 to high water, flooding, or runoff.
 Frequent fording of live streams with construction equipment will not be permitted;
 therefore, temporary bridges or other structures shall be used wherever an appreciable number of
 stream crossings are necessary. Unless otherwise approved in writing by the Engineer,
 mechanized equipment shall not be operated in live streams except as may be required to construct
 channel changes and temporary or permanent structures.
 The location of all local material pits other than commercially operated sources, and all
 waste areas will be subject to the approval of the Engineer, and construction operations shall be
 conducted and pollution control measures implemented so that, both during and after completion
 of the work, erosion will not result in water pollution.
 The Contractor shall, in accordance with the guidance contained in 642.3, submit schedules
 and methods in complete consonance with the intent of this Specification to prevent water
 pollution to the maximum extent possible. To provide a positive guide in this area, no more than
 750,000 square feet (7 hectares) each of erodible soil shall be exposed as a result of (1) clearing
 and grubbing and (2) excavation, embankment, borrow or waste for a maximum cumulative total
 of 1,500,000 square feet (14 hectares) without the approval of the Engineer. Approval to proceed
 beyond this point will be contingent upon (1) the Engineer's satisfaction, based on performance,
 as to the Contractor's ability to proceed with their operation and still maintain pollution control at
 the level contemplated by this Specification, and (2) seeding and mulching of disturbed areas at
 the Contractor's expense.
 It is further understood that regardless of an approval such as the above or compliance with
 an approved schedule as set forth in 642.3, the Engineer may impose whatever limitations deemed
 necessary to assure an operation providing for pollution control consistent with the intent of this
 Specification. Reimbursement for such necessary temporary control measures required to
 eliminate the need for such limitation will be in accordance with the pertinent sections of this
 Specification. There will be no additional reimbursement to the Contractor due to losses from
 delays, production decreases or other causes resulting from the imposition of such a limitation.
 In the event of conflict between these requirements and pollution control laws, rules, or
 regulations of other Federal, State, or local agencies, the more restrictive shall apply.
 
 573
 
 A Dewatering Device shall be installed on a slight slope so incoming water flows downhill
 through the Device without creating more erosion. The neck of the Dewatering Device shall be
 tightly strapped to the discharge hose. The contractor may place the bag on an aggregate or hay
 bale bed to maximize water flow through the surface area of the bag.
 The Dewatering Device is full when it no longer can efficiently filter sediment or pass
 water at a reasonable rate. Flow rates will vary depending on the size of the Dewatering Device,
 amount of sediment discharged into the Dewatering Device, the type of ground, rock, or other
 substance under the bag and the degree of the slope on which the bag lies. The Dewatering Device
 will normally accommodate flow rates of 1000 gallons per minute (3 785 liters per minute). Use
 of excessive flow rates or overfilling the Dewatering Device with sediment will cause ruptures of
 the bag or failure of the hose attachment straps.
 The Dewatering Device shall be disposed of as directed by the engineer.
 642.5-SEEDING AND MULCHING:
 642.5.1-General: Seeding paid for under this section will include seed mixtures as defined
 in 642.5.3. The mixtures to be used will be determined by the Engineer. Seeding and mulching
 shall be performed on a continual basis starting when earth moving begins in the spring and
 stopping when the work stops in the winter or weather becomes too cold to operate seeding or
 mulching equipment. Embankments and cuts constructed during the winter season shall be
 treated as specified under 642.5.4, iii.
 Seeding or mulching, or both, shall be performed on all cut and fill slopes, including waste
 sites and borrow pits, during the construction process. All disturbed areas such as diversion
 ditches, sediment dams, areas around sediment structures, haul road slopes, cleared and
 grubbed areas to remain exposed during a period of critical erosion, storage areas, location of
 batch plants, etc. shall be seeded when and where necessary to eliminate erosion.
 Any areas failing to establish a satisfactory stand of grass due to weather conditions,
 adverse soil conditions, or due to erosion, shall be reseeded, refertilized and remulched as
 directed by the Engineer.
 Final seeding, or second and third step seeding following the original seeding shall be
 performed in accordance with 652.
 642.5.2-Schedule of Seeding Operations: Fill slopes, embankments, and waste sites shall
 be seeded and mulched in 10-ft lifts or once every two weeks, whichever occurs first.
 Cut slopes and borrow pits shall be seeded and mulched each 15-ft depth of excavation or
 once every two weeks, whichever occurs first. However, benched areas shall be seeded after
 completion of each bench, regardless of height.
 642.5.3-Seed Mixtures and Planting Seasons: Temporary seed mixtures shall be used
 on any embankment or area which will be subject to further construction work before the
 project is completed. Seed mixtures B or D shall be used on cut slopes and fill or other areas
 not likely to be destroyed by further construction activities. It is the intent of the specifications
 that fill slopes be constructed to template and seeded with Type B or D mixtures, in successive
 stages, without fill slopes being fine graded or dressed. The type of seed mixture to be used
 on any area will be determined by the Engineer in accordance with Tables 642.5.3.1 and
 642.5.3.2.
 
 574
 
 Varity of Seed
 
 TABLE 642.5.3.1
 Temporary Seeding Mixtures
 Spring
 Summer
 Mar. 1-May 15
 May 15-Aug. 15
 lb per acre
 lb per acre
 (kg per ha)
 (kg per ha)
 10 (11.25)
 
 Annual ryegrass
 Barley or Oats
 50 (56)
 (local seeds)
 Millet (Hungarian,
 German or Japanese)
 Cereal rye or
 Cereal wheat
 TOTAL
 60 (67.25)
 * See Paragraph 642.5.4. iii.
 
 Variety of Seed
 
 Kentucky 31 Fescue
 Red Fescue
 (Pennlawn)
 Crown Vetch
 White Dutch Clover
 Hard Fescue
 Mixture***
 Annual Ryegrass
 Aug 1 to May 15
 or
 Weeping Lovegrass
 May 15 to Aug. 1
 *
 **
 ***
 
 * Fall & Winter
 Aug. 15-Mar. 1
 lb per acre
 (kg per ha)
 10 (11.25)
 
 50 (56)
 50 (56)
 50 (56)
 
 TABLE 642.5.3.2
 Seed Mixtures B, D, & L
 Seed Mixtures
 *Type B
 **Type D
 Median, Shoulders
 Cut and Fill
 (Ditch Slope),
 Slopes
 Waterways, and
 (Including
 Mowable Areas of
 Benches)
 Interchanges
 lb per acre
 lb per acre
 (kg per ha)
 (kg per ha)
 65 (72.9)
 20 (22.4)
 20 (22.4)
 
 20 (22.4)
 
 60 (67.25)
 
 Type L
 All Areas
 
 lb per acre
 (kg per ha)
 41 (46.0)
 
 20 (22.4)
 3 (3.4)
 63 (70.6)
 7 (7.8)
 
 7 (7.8)
 
 12 (13.5)
 
 3 (3.4)
 
 3 (3.4)
 
 5 (5.6)
 
 Areas shall be considered mowable when slopes are 3 to 1 or flatter.
 30 lb. (13.6 kg) of cereal rye or cereal wheat shall be added to Type D mixture when
 wood cellulose fiber is used as a mulch for fall seeding, after October 1, at no additional
 cost to the Division.
 A combination of approved certified varieties with no one variety exceeding 50% of the
 total hard fescue component.
 
 575
 
 642.5.4-Mulch, Fertilizer and Lime: Mulching, fertilizing and liming shall be in
 accordance with the following requirements:
 i. Two tons per acre (4.5 Mg per ha) of straw or hay mulch shall be applied on slopes of
 1½ to 1 or flatter. Asphalt material to anchor the mulch shall be used at the rate of 50
 gallons per ton (210 L per Mg) of straw or hay mulch. Other types of chemical mulch
 binders may be used in lieu of asphalt material. These mulch binders shall be applied
 according to the manufacturer's specifications through the asphalt spray system or by
 agricultural crop sprayer.
 Wood cellulose fiber mulch shall be applied on slopes steeper than 1½ to 1 at the rate
 of 1,500 lb. per acre (1 680 kg per ha).
 Fertilizer shall be applied at the rate of 800 lb. per acre (900 kg per ha) of 10-20-10
 fertilizer or equivalent.
 Lime application rate will be determined by the Engineer based upon pH test conducted
 in accordance with MP 700.04.10.
 ii. Wood chips, recovered from clearing and grubbing operations, or bark will be
 acceptable as a mulch for seeding and shall be used at a rate of 35 cubic yard per acre
 (66 cubic meters per hectare) in lieu of straw or hay.
 iii. Mulch Alone-For embankments or cuts 1½ to 1 or flatter, susceptible to critical erosion
 during periods of cold weather, the Engineer may require a two ton per acre (4.5 Mg
 per ha) application of straw or hay mulch for temporary erosion control and later
 seeding. Asphalt for anchoring mulch shall be at the rate of 50 gallons per ton (210 L
 per Mg) of mulch. The straw or hay may be rolled immediately with a sheep foot roller
 to anchor the mulch in lieu of using asphalt. A chemical mulch binder may be used for
 anchoring mulch in accordance with the provisions in paragraph i. above.
 When the weather becomes favorable in the spring, these areas shall be seeded using
 the normal application rates of seed, fertilizer and lime. If additional mulch is needed,
 wood cellulose fiber, hay or straw shall be used; the rate of application and areas to be
 mulched with wood cellulose fiber, hay or straw shall be as determined by the Engineer.
 642.6-TEMPORARY PIPE, CONTOUR DITCHES, BERMS, SLOPE DRAINS, DITCH
 CHECKS, SILT FENCE, PREMANUFACTURED DITCH CHECKS AND SUPER SILT
 FENCE:
 642.6.1-Temporary Pipe: Temporary pipe and contour ditching shall be provided as
 necessary to control erosion.
 642.6.2-Contour Ditches and Berms: Prior to suspension of construction operations for
 any appreciable length of time due to seasonal or other conditions, the Contractor shall shape
 the top of earthwork in such a manner as to permit and facilitate the runoff of rain water and
 shall construct earth berms along the top edges of embankments to intercept runoff water. The
 berm construction shall not be permitted to decrease the stability of the embankment section.
 In addition, the Contractor shall construct a berm at the end of each day's operation at the top
 edges of the embankment.
 642.6.3-Slope Drains: Temporary slope drains shall be provided to accommodate the
 runoff water intercepted above. These drains shall be located as needed and at no greater than
 500 ft. (150 m) intervals.
 576
 
 642.6.4-Ditch Checks: Silt fence or bales of hay or straw shall be used to control erosion
 and trap sediment as required. Ditch checks shall be constructed in cut or median ditches by
 installing silt fence or by using wood, plywood, logs, rocks, steel, or other devices to control
 velocity and to aid in sediment control.
 642.6.5-Silt Fence: The minimum height above ground for the silt fence shall be 2 feet
 (600 mm). Minimum embedment depth shall be 8 inches (200 mm). The maximum post
 spacing shall be based on elongation of the geotextile as measured in accordance with Test
 Method D 4632. Silt fence geotextile with elongation 50 % shall have a maximum post spacing
 of 4 feet (1.2 m). Silt fence geotextile with elongation < 50 % shall have a maximum post
 spacing of 6.5 feet (2 m). When silt fence is installed in valleys where water can pond behind
 the fence then the post spacing shall be half of the maximum post spacing for the geotextile
 used.
 When silt fence is installed by the trenching method the geotextile at the bottom of the
 fence shall be buried in a "J" configuration to a minimum depth of 8 inches (200 mm) in a
 trench so that no flow can pass under the silt fence. Backfill the trench and compact the soil
 over the geotextile.
 When silt fence is installed by the soil slicing method the geotextile shall be installed in a
 slit in the soil 8 to 12 inches (200 to 300 mm) deep so that no flow can pass under the silt fence.
 Create the slit such that a horizontal chisel point (approx. 3 inches (75 mm) wide) at the base
 of a soil slicing blade (approx. ¾ inches (18 mm) wide) that slightly disrupts soil upward as
 the blade slices through the soil. This upward disruption minimizes horizontal compaction and
 creates an optimal soil condition for mechanical compaction against the geotextile.
 Overturning of the soil shall not be permitted. The geotextile shall be mechanically inserted
 directly behind the soil slicing blade in a simultaneous operation, achieving consistent
 placement and depth.
 The silt fence geotextile shall be spliced together with a sewn seam only at a support post,
 or two sections of fence may be overlapped.
 Silt fence posts shall be driven to a minimum of 20 inches (500 mm) into the ground. This
 depth shall be increased to 2 feet (600 mm) if the fence is placed on a slope of 3:1 (1:3) or
 greater. Where the minimum depth is impossible to attain, the posts shall be adequately secured
 to prevent overturning of the fence due to loading. The geotextile shall be properly fastened to
 the upslope side of the fence posts.
 Silt fences shall be continuous and transverse to the flow. The silt fence shall follow the
 contours of the site as closely as possible. Place the fence such that the water cannot runoff
 around the end of the fence.
 The silt fence trench shall be compacted on the upstream side first, and then the
 downstream side. The silt fence trench shall be compacted to a minimum of 90% of the original
 ground density and the posts must be installed after compaction of the trench. The trench
 compaction will be based on visual inspection and the engineer may require compaction testing
 to verify the visual inspection.
 The contractor shall inspect all silt fences immediately after each rainfall and at least daily
 during prolonged rainfall. The contractor shall immediately correct any deficiencies. The
 contractor shall also make a daily review of the location of silt fences in areas where
 construction activities have altered the natural contour and drainage runoff to ensure that the
 silt fences are properly located for effectiveness. Where deficiencies exist as determined by
 577
 
 the engineer, additional silt fence shall be installed as directed by the engineer. When the
 sediment deposits reaches half the height of the fence the sediment shall be removed or a
 second silt fence shall be installed as directed by the engineer. The cost of this work shall be
 paid as “Sediment Removal” or “Silt Fence”.
 The silt fence shall remain in place until the engineer directs it be removed. Upon removal
 the contractor shall remove and dispose of any excess sediment accumulations, dress the area
 to give it a pleasing appearance, and vegetate all bare areas. Removed silt fence may be used
 at other locations provided the geotextile and other material requirements continue to be met
 to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 642.6.6-Super Silt Fence: Fence shall be in accordance with the latest specifications for
 Section 608: Right-of-Way Fence. The details shall be as shown in the latest version of the
 standards detail book: Standard Detail F4 (Sheet 1 of 2) except as noted below:
 Once sedimentation has reached half of the Super Silt Fence height, all accumulated
 sediment shall be removed and disposed of as directed by the Engineer.
 The Contractor shall inspect all super silt fences after each rainfall event of at least 0.5
 inches or greater. Any deficiencies or damage shall be repaired by the Contractor. If the Super
 Silt Fence is damaged or inadvertently moved during the sedimentation removal process, the
 contractor shall immediately replace and/or repair any Super Silt Fence after the damage
 occurs. The Contractor shall be responsible for all details, devices, accessories and special
 construction necessary to properly furnish, install, adjust and place in continuous satisfactory
 service and complete the work in an acceptable manner.
 642.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The work will be measured for payment at the unit bid prices for the items specified in
 642.9.
 Berms constructed prior to suspension of construction operations and slope drains will be
 measured in linear feet (meters); check dams will be measured by the unit; sediment traps, ponds,
 or dams and sediment removal will be measured by the cubic yard (meter); for sediment dams,
 risers will be measured by the unit and conduit for principal spillway under the dam will be
 measured in linear feet (meters) and included under Item 642008-*; seed will be measured by the
 pound (kilogram); straw, hay and wood cellulose fiber mulch will be measured by the ton
 (megagram); wood chips or bark mulch will be measured by the cubic yard (meter); fertilizer and
 agricultural limestone will be measured by the ton (megagram); matting will be measured by the
 square yard (meter); contour ditching will be measured by the linear foot (meter). Measurements
 will be made on the surface of the work done when applicable. Asphalt for anchoring mulch or
 other chemical binders will not be measured separately, but their cost shall be included in the unit
 price bid for mulch. Cereal rye or cereal wheat added to Type D mixture in fall seeding will not
 be included for payment but its cost shall be included in the unit prices in 642.9.
 Temporary pipe will be measured by the linear foot (meter) complete and in place. If the
 Contractor elects to utilize a series of small pipes in lieu of one large pipe, measurement for
 payment will be made only for a length necessary to extend one conduit under the haul road or
 sediment dam.
 Berms constructed at the end of each day's operation will not be measured for payment but
 their cost shall be included in the unit bid price for Item 207001-*, "Unclassified Excavation."
 Ditch checks will be measured by the unit.
 578
 
 Dewatering Device will be paid per each device used.
 Wood chips or bark will be measured by the cubic yard (meter). It is assumed that 17.5
 cubic yards (14.75 cubic meters) of chips or bark are equal to one ton (megagram) of straw for
 seeding. Wood chips or bark mulch will be measured by the truck load or other loose volume
 measurement, and payment will be made on a one ton (megagram) equivalent of straw for each
 17.5 cubic yards (14.75 cubic meters) of wood chips or bark mulch.
 Quantities reseeded, refertilized, or remulched will be measured and included for payment.
 The bid price for fertilizer shall be based on 10-20-10 type. When other types of fertilizer
 are used, pay quantities will be determined using the following table:
 Type of
 Fertilizer
 5-10-5
 8-16-8
 10-20-10
 12-24-12
 15-30-15
 
 Actual Quantity
 Used Pounds (kg)
 100
 100
 100
 100
 100
 
 Pay Quantity
 Pounds (kg)
 50
 80
 100
 120
 150
 
 When fertilizer types other than those shown above are used, the relationship between the
 pay quantity and the actual quantity used will be established by the Engineer.
 Silt fence will be measured by the linear foot (meter) at the bottom of the fence, excluding
 laps. Decomposed or ineffective fabric in the silt fence which is required to be replaced after six
 months from the installation date will be measured and paid for, however, such replacement prior
 to six months after installation will not be measured for payment.
 In the event that temporary erosion and pollution control measures are required due to the
 Contractor's negligence, carelessness, or failure to install permanent controls as a part of the work
 as scheduled, or as ordered by the Engineer, such work shall be performed by the Contractor at
 their own expense. Temporary erosion and pollution control work required, which is not attributed
 to the Contractor's negligence, carelessness or failure to install permanent controls, shall be
 performed as ordered by the Engineer. Where the work to be performed is not attributed to the
 Contractor's negligence, carelessness or failure to install permanent controls and falls within the
 Specifications for a work item that has a contract price, the units of work will be paid for at the
 proper contract price. Should the work not be comparable to the project work under the applicable
 contract items, the Contractor shall perform the work in accordance with 104.3.
 In case of repeated failure on the part of the Contractor to control erosion, pollution, or
 siltation, the Engineer reserves the right to employ outside assistance or to use their own forces to
 provide the necessary corrective measures. Such incurred direct costs plus project engineering
 costs will be charged to the Contractor and appropriate deductions made from the Contractor's
 monthly progress estimate.
 Temporary pollution control may include construction work outside the right-of-way
 where such work is necessary as a result of roadway construction such as borrow pit and waste
 site operations, haul roads and equipment storage sites.
 Super Silt Fence will be measured by the linear foot complete and in place.
 
 579
 
 642.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 Except where provided for elsewhere in these specifications, the quantities determined as
 provided above, will be paid at the contract unit prices bid for the items listed below, which prices
 and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials and doing all the work
 prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor, tools, equipment,
 supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work, including necessary maintenance, and
 removal where applicable.
 642.9-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 642001-*
 642002-*
 642004-*
 642005-*
 642006-*
 642007-*
 642008-*
 642009-*
 642010-*
 642011-*
 642012-*
 642015-*
 642031-*
 642032-*
 642033-*
 642034-*
 642035-*
 642036-*
 642037-*
 642050-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Temporary Berm
 Slope Drain
 Seed Mixture, “type”
 Mulch, “type”
 Fertilizer
 Fiber Matting
 Temporary Pipe
 Contour Ditch
 Agricultural Limestone
 Hay or Straw Bale
 Silt Fence
 Super Silt Fence
 Ditch Check
 Check Dam
 Sediment Trap
 Sediment Dam
 Riser
 Sediment Removal
 Sediment Pond
 Dewatering Device
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 Ton (Megagram)
 Ton (Megagram)
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Ton (Megagram)
 Each
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Each
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Each
 
 * Sequence number
 
 SECTION 643 THROUGH SECTION 644-BLANK
 
 580
 
 SECTION 645
 REINFORCED SOIL SLOPES
 645.1-DESCRIPTION:
 The following are specification guidelines for Reinforced Soil Slope (RSS) construction.
 Work shall consist of constructing the proposed RSS as specified and furnishing all materials for
 use in construction of reinforced soil slopes. The minimum length of the soil reinforcing as
 measured from the slope face to the back of the soil stabilized mass, is as shown in the plans. Any
 staged or temporary construction affecting the RSS stability shall be the responsibility of the
 Contractor.
 The Engineer shall approve the geosynthetic material and supplier.
 645.2-MATERIALS:
 645.2.1-Geosynthetics Soil Reinforcing: Cutting of geosynthetic reinforcing longitudinal
 to the Slope face or at vertical obstacles shall not be permitted. End to End splicing of
 geosynthetic material will not be permitted.
 The geosynthetic used shall meet the minimum requirements shown on the plans. Each roll
 of geosynthetic material shall be labeled as to its properties. Geosynthetics shall be made of
 polypropylene, high-density polyethylene or high-tenacity polyester fibers having crosssections sufficient to permit significant mechanical interlock with the soil/backfill.
 Geosynthetics shall have a high tensile modulus in relation to the soil/backfill. Geosynthetics
 shall have a high resistance to deformation under sustained long term design loads while in
 service and resistant to ultraviolet degradation, to damage under normal construction practices
 and to all forms of biological or chemical degradation normally encountered in the material
 being reinforced.
 Store the geosynthetics in conditions above 20º F [-7º C] and not greater than 140º F [60º
 C]. Prevent mud, wet cement, epoxy, and like materials from coming into contact with and
 affixing to the geosynthetic material. Rolled geosynthetic may be laid flat or stood on end for
 storage. Cover the geosynthetic and protect from sunlight prior to placement in the wall system.
 Carefully inspect all reinforcement to ensure they are the proper size and free from defects
 that may impair their strength and durability.
 The geosynthetic reinforcement structure shall be dimensionally stable and able to retain
 its geometry under construction stresses and shall have high resistance to damage during
 construction. The contractor shall submit a manufacturer’s certification that the geosynthetics
 supplied meets the design criteria shown on the plans, measured in full accordance with all test
 methods and standards specified. In case of dispute over validity of values, the Engineer can
 require the contractor to supply test data from an approved laboratory to support the certified
 values submitted.
 The Contractor’s submittal's package shall include actual test results for tension/creep,
 durability/aging, construction damage, pullout, quality control and a copy of the Manufacturers
 installation procedures. Also included shall be the Long -Term Design Strength (LTDS) of
 the Geosynthetic material with the assumptions used to calculate it. The Manufacturer shall
 also provide written certification that all resin used to produce the geosynthetic is virgin and
 classified as high density polyethylene, polypropylene, or high tenacity polyester and is
 capable of withstanding 150 hours of testing per ASTM D4355 with no measurable reduction
 in the ultimate tensile strength or the deterioration of the coating of the geosynthetic material.
 581
 
 If the geosynthetic material is to be used to wrap the face of the slope then the testing per
 ASTM D4355 will be 500 hours with no measurable reduction in the ultimate tensile strength
 or the deterioration of the coating of the geosynthetic material.
 The allowable tensile strength shall not exceed 25% of the ultimate tensile strength of the
 reinforcement used. The (LTDS) of geosynthetic reinforcement shall be calculated using the
 following method.
 Property
 Tensile Strength
 Ultimate, kN/m
 Geotextiles
 Geogrids
 Long-Term Design Strength (Ta), kN/m
 
 Method
 ASTM D4595
 ASTM D6637
 FHWA/SA-93-025
 
 Where: Ta = Tult/{(RFcr)(RFid)(RFdu)}
 (as described in FHWA/SA-93-025)
 Tult,
 
 Ultimate Tensile Strength shall be the minimum average roll value ultimate tensile
 strength as tested per ASTM D4595 for geotextiles and for geogrids ASTM D6637
 with the minimum tested value of the single-rib and multi-rib test.
 
 RFcr, Partial Factor for Creep Rupture, is the ratio of Tult to the creep limited strength
 determined in accordance with ASTM D5262 and FHWA NHI-00-043. The test results
 shall be extrapolated for a 100-year design life at 68° F (20° C) per FHWA NHI-00043. Creep rupture data of a polymer product at a designed temperature is limited to
 one order of magnitude in extrapolation. Creep rupture data at an elevated temperature
 can permit an additional order of magnitude in extrapolation with time temperature
 superposition principals. Creep Rupture limited strength testing is required on
 representative samples of the finished product for each product proposed for use and
 not a single component of the geogrid (i.e. polymer strand and / or yarn).
 Default values for RFcr are not allowed. If product specific testing is not provided
 the product shall be rejected for use. However, in no event shall the minimum value for
 Creep Rupture be less than the following:
 MINIMUM VALUES FOR RFcr
 Geosynthetic
 Min RFcr
 High Density Polyethylene (HDPE)
 2.65
 Polypropylene (PP)
 4.50
 High Tenacity Polyester (PET)
 2.00
 RFid, Partial Factor for Installation Damage, shall be determined from construction damage
 tests for each product proposed for use with project specific representative or more
 severe backfill and construction techniques. Testing shall be consistent with GRI GG4.
 A Maximum RFid value shall be used if such testing has not been conducted.
 
 582
 
 RECOMMENDED VALUES FOR RFid
 Geosynthetic
 Min RFid Max RFid
 HDPE uniaxial geogrid
 1.20
 1.45
 PP biaxial geogrid
 1.20
 1.45
 PVC-coated PET geogrid
 1.30
 1.85
 Acrylic-coated PET geogrid
 1.30
 2.05
 Woven geotextiles (PP and PET)
 1.40
 2.20
 Nonwoven geotextiles (PP and PET)
 1.40
 2.50
 Silt-film woven PP geotextiles
 1.60
 3.00
 RFdu, Partial Factor for Durability / Aging is the combined partial factor for potential
 chemical and biological degradation. RFdu shall be determined from polymer specific
 (HDPE and PP as identified by specific gravity and melt flow index and PETP as
 identified by CEG number and intrinsic viscosity) durability testing covering the range
 of expected soil environments. Prior to approval by the Engineer, the manufacturer
 shall submit test results from a minimum of at least four (4) tests conducted in
 accordance with EPA 9090 at temperatures of 73° and 122° F (23° and 50° C). EPA
 9090 test results shall include the following minimum number of leachate types:
 pH
 3pH7
 7<pH9
 9<pH<11
 11pH14
 
 Minimum # of
 test results
 1
 1
 1
 1
 
 As a minimum, the following tests should be performed for geogrids after immersion
 in the above-described leachates:
 TEST
 PROCEDURE
 Mass per Unit Area
 EPA 9090
 Dimensions
 EPA 9090
 Thickness
 ASTM D374C
 Wide Width Strip Tensile ASTM D4595
 TEST
 
 MAX % CHANGE
 ALLOWED
 ±1.0
 ±1.0
 ±5.0
 -2.0
 
 1. Composite (flexible/coated) geogrids shall be evaluated based on the durability
 characteristics of the interior reinforcement polymer. Therefore, any protective
 coating shall be removed prior to durability testing unless a minimum 40 micron
 coating thickness is used on flexible geogrids and certified by the manufacturer.
 2. For soils of potential concern, as presented below (modified soils shall include lime
 stabilized soil, cement stabilized soil or concrete), only polymers listed as “no
 effect” shall be used within or adjacent to (3 feet shortest measurable distance) these
 soil environments (Ref: Table 28, FHWA/RD-89-186).
 
 583
 
 SOIL
 ENVIRONMENT
 Acid Sulfate Soils
 Organic Soils
 Salt Affected Soils
 Ferruginous
 Calcareous
 Modified Soils
 NE
 ?
 X
 
 PETP
 
 PE
 
 PP
 
 PVC
 
 ?
 NE
 ?
 NE
 X
 X
 
 NE
 NE
 NE
 NE
 NE
 NE
 
 ?
 NE
 NE
 X
 NE
 NE
 
 ?
 X
 NE
 X
 ?
 ?
 
 = No Effect
 = Questionable Use
 = Not Recommended
 
 RFdu shall not be less than the recommended minimum values discussed in FHWA/RD89-186 and listed below:
 
 Products
 
 MINIMUM VALUES FOR RFdu
 Aging Reduction factor, RFdu – 100 years
 pH  3 3  pH  5 5  pH  8 8  pH  9 pH  9
 
 PET Uncoated
 Mn  20,000
 40CEG50
 PET Coated
 Mn  25,000
 CEG30
 
 *
 
 2.0
 
 1.6
 
 2.0
 
 *
 
 *
 
 1.3
 
 1.15
 
 1.3
 
 *
 
 HDPE
 
 1.1
 
 1.1
 
 1.1
 
 1.1
 
 1.1
 
 Polypropylene
 Geotextiles
 Mn  20,000
 40CEG50
 
 1.25
 
 1.25
 
 1.25
 
 1.25
 
 1.25
 
 *
 
 2.0
 
 1.6
 
 2.0
 
 *
 
 * Use of materials in this pH range is not recommended but can be used if product specific
 Mn
 CEG
 
 testing is done
 = Number of Molecular Weight
 = Carboxyl End Group
 
 645.2.2-Backfill Material: All backfill material used in the structure volume shall be
 reasonably free from organic or otherwise deleterious materials and shall conform to the
 following gradation limits as determined by AASHTO T-27:
 Sieve Size
 100 mm (4 in.)
 No. 4
 No. 20
 No. 200
 Plasticity Index (PI)  20 (AASHTO T-90)
 584
 
 Percent Passing
 100
 100-30
 0-60
 0-50
 
 A. Backfill pH Testing
 The contractor prior to incorporating the soil into the RSS shall perform one pH test in
 each soil type each day of operation and the pH of the soil shall be within the allowable
 limits of the design for the geosynthetic material used.
 B. Payment
 Payment for the backfill will be incidental to the various excavation items.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 645.3-FOUNDATION PREPARATION:
 All areas immediately beneath the installation area for the geosynthetic reinforcement shall
 be properly prepared for a width equal to the length of reinforcement elements plus one 3 ft (1m)
 or as detailed on the plans or as directed by the Engineer. The surface shall be level, free from
 deleterious materials, loose, or otherwise unsuitable soils. Prior to placement of Geosynthetic
 reinforcement, foundation shall be proof-rolled to provide a uniform and firm surface. Any soft
 areas, as determined by the Engineer, shall be removed and replaced with backfill as per Section
 207 of these specifications. Foundation surface shall be inspected and approved by the Engineer
 prior to fill placement. Benching the backcut into competent soil is recommended to improve
 stability. The backslope shall not be steeper than 1.5:1 (1:1.5).
 645.4-GEOSYNTHETIC INSTALLATION:
 A representative of the geosynthetic supplier shall be present a minimum of three (3) days
 and as required thereafter during construction of the reinforced slope to assist the Contractor and
 Engineer. The cost of the representative shall be considered incidental to the unit cost of the
 geosynthetic reinforcement.
 Geosynthetic reinforcement shall be placed horizontally unless otherwise shown in the
 plans. Prior to placement of the geosynthetic reinforcements, backfill shall be compacted in
 accordance with these specifications.
 645.5-BACKFILL PLACEMENT:
 Backfill placement shall closely follow the installation of each geosynthetic reinforcement
 layer. Backfill shall be placed in such a manner as to minimize the development of wrinkles in
 and/or movement of the geosynthetic material. A minimum fill thickness of 6 inches (150 mm) is
 required prior to the operation of tracked vehicles over the geosynthetic reinforcement.
 Turning of vehicles should be kept to a minimum to prevent tracks from displacing the fill
 and damaging the geosynthetic. Rubber tired equipment may pass over the geosynthetic
 reinforcement at low speeds provided that no sharp turns are made. Geosynthetic material
 damaged during installation shall be replaced by the Contractor at no additional cost.
 The maximum lift thickness after compaction shall not exceed 6 inches (150 mm), The
 Contractor shall decrease this lift thickness, if necessary to obtain the specified density.
 Acceptance for compaction shall be in accordance with Section 626.5.3.4. The moisture
 content of the backfill material prior to and during compaction shall be uniformly distributed
 throughout each layer. Backfill materials shall have placement moisture content as per Section
 716.3.
 At the end of each day’s operation, the Contractor shall slope the last level of the backfill
 away from the slope to rapidly direct runoff away from the slope face and construction area. In
 585
 
 addition, the Contractor shall not allow surface runoff from adjacent areas to enter the reinforced
 soil slope construction site.
 645.6-EROSION CONTROL MATERIAL PLACEMENT:
 The erosion control material shall be placed and anchored on a smooth graded, firm surface
 approved by the Engineer. Anchoring terminal ends of the erosion control material shall be
 accomplished through use of key trenches. The material in the trenches shall be anchored to the
 soil maximum 2 ft (0.5 m) centers. The erosion control material shall meet the specifications of
 section 715.24.
 645.7-ACCEPTANCE:
 The Contractor shall furnish the Engineer a Certificate of Compliance certifying the above
 materials, excluding backfill, comply with the applicable contract specifications. A copy of all
 test results performed by the Contractor necessary to assure contract compliance shall also be
 furnished to the Engineer.
 The backfill shall be in accordance with 626.5.3.4.
 645.8-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The pay items shall be measured in square yards (meters) geosynthetic reinforcement as
 determined by the dimensions in the plans. No adjustment of pay quantity shall be allowed for
 changes in Reinforced Soil Slope design to facilitate the Contractor’s methods of construction or
 geosynthetic type used.
 Any adjustments to the required amount of embankment backfill due to the particular
 geosynthetic reinforcement proposed by the contractor shall be considered incidental to the project.
 No separate payment shall be made for increased embankment backfill requirements. The
 contractor shall be responsible for any of the cost of changes in waste, borrow, or earthwork
 quantities from those shown in the plans caused by the requirements of the geosynthetic
 reinforcement.
 645.9-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract price per unit
 of measurement, respectively, for each pay item listed below and shown in the bid schedule, which
 prices and payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section.
 645.10-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 645001-*
 “type” Reinforcement, “long-term design
 strength” lb/ft (kn/m)
 
 UNIT
 Square Yard (Meter)
 
 *Sequence number
 “type” Primary or Secondary
 
 SECTION 646 THROUGH SECTION 650-BLANK
 
 586
 
 SECTION 651
 FURNISHING AND PLACING TOPSOIL
 651.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of acquiring sites outside the right-of-way from which topsoil can
 be obtained and the hauling and placing of such material, or hauling and placing of topsoil from
 stockpiles within the right-of-way, all in accordance with these Specifications and at locations
 indicated on the Plans or designated by the Engineer.
 651.2-MATERIALS:
 Topsoil shall consist of the uppermost layers of fertile and friable soil that contains humus
 material. This material varies in thickness in accordance with soil groups and usually possesses a
 darker color than the subsoil. The texture of the topsoil may vary within the range of natural loam,
 silty clay loam, and sandy loam. Acceptable topsoil shall contain organic matter in the range of
 1.5% to 20%.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 651.3-STRIPPING TOPSOIL:
 Prior to removal from the site, the soil will be tested by the Division to determine the humus
 and nutrient value. Care shall be exercised as to the depth of stripping, and any loads with an
 excess of subsoil shall be discarded. The Contractor shall mow or otherwise remove all heavy
 grass, weeds, or other vegetation over the areas before stripping. Approval by the Engineer must
 be obtained prior to transporting any material from the stripping site.
 651.4-TRANSPORTING:
 Topsoil material shall not be placed until the entire roadway (including surfacing) has been
 completed, unless otherwise provided for on the Plans or approved in writing. During hauling
 operations, the surface of the highway shall be kept reasonably clean to avoid creating a traffic
 hazard.
 651.5-PLACING AND MANIPULATING:
 Areas to be topsoiled shall be brought reasonably close to the lines and grades shown on
 the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 The Contractor shall scarify the surface of the subsoil before the topsoil is placed, unless
 otherwise permitted, for bonding the topsoil layer with the subsoil.
 Scarification shall be accomplished by disking, harrowing, raking, or other approved
 methods. Depressions and ridges formed by construction equipment, during final grading or
 scarifying, shall be parallel to the contours.
 Topsoil shall not be spread to a greater depth than that required to make the work conform
 to the natural terrain after shrinkage and settlement have taken place. After spreading the soil, all
 deleterious materials (large lumps or clods, brush, litter, or other foreign material, and stones
 exceeding 2 inches (50 mm) approximately in any dimension) shall be raked up and removed from
 the site.
 The Contractor shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid injury to existing plant
 growth, structures, and roadway surface.
 587
 
 651.6-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be measured in cubic yards (meters) of "Furnishing and
 Placing Topsoil" or "Placing Stockpiled Topsoil", which shall be the material actually removed
 from previously selected site or sites outside the right-of-way of from stockpiles within the rightof-way, and acceptably placed and spread on the areas designated to receive it, as determined from
 the net total of load tickets of vehicles.
 651.7-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing
 all the materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner,
 including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 No separate payment will be made for stripping topsoil within the right-of-way limits and
 transporting or stockpiling of such material.
 651.8-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 651001-*
 651002-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Furnishing And Placing Topsoil
 Placing Stockpiled Topsoil
 
 * Sequence number
 
 588
 
 UNIT
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 
 SECTION 652
 SEEDING AND MULCHING
 652.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall cover all operations incidental to the establishment of grass and legume
 vegetation, including the furnishing and sowing of seed, furnishing and applying fertilizer,
 agricultural limestone, and mulch material, all in accordance with these Specifications and at
 locations indicated on the Plans or designated by the Engineer.
 652.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall meet the requirements in the following Subsections of Division 700:
 MATERIAL
 Fertilizers
 Ground Agricultural Limestone
 Inoculating Bacteria
 Matting for Erosion Control
 Mulch Materials
 Water
 *
 
 SUBSECTION
 715.26
 715.25
 715.29
 715.24
 715.27
 *
 
 Water shall be reasonably free from injurious chemicals and other toxic
 substances harmful to plant life. The source of water used is subject to the
 approval of the Engineer.
 
 Temporary seed, such as annual ryegrass (Italian ryegrass) and weeping lovegrass, used in
 the seed mixtures B, C, or D, shall be of a commercial grade meeting the requirements of the State
 Seed Law. Temporary seed labeled with the notation "germination below standard" shall not be
 used. Temporary seed shall not be used after one year from date of germination test shown on the
 label.
 Seed other than that specified above shall meet the requirements of 715.28.
 Asphalt for anchoring mulch shall be of a commercial grade. Chemical mulch binders shall
 conform to the requirements in 715.27.1.
 Topsoil, if called for, shall conform to the requirements in 651. All materials will be
 subject to approval or rejection, in part or in whole.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 652.3-SEASON OF WORK:
 Permanent seeding or second and third seeding following the original seeding, under 652,
 shall be performed between the dates of March 1 to June 15 and August 1 to October 15. Seeding
 under 642 shall be applied following construction at any time the weather will allow seeding
 equipment to operate; without regard to seasons.
 
 589
 
 652.4-AREA PREPARATION FOR SEEDING AND MULCHING:
 Seeding and mulching shall not be applied until the specified areas have been brought to
 lines and grades shown on the Plans. Topsoil, when called for, shall be spread to the depths
 indicated on the Plans.
 The application rate for agricultural limestone will be determined by a pH test after cuts
 and embankments are completed just prior to seeding. The Plans will show the estimated tons
 (megagrams) of lime needed for the job based on general knowledge of the soils in the area. The
 final application rate will be determined by the Engineer based on the pH test, conducted in
 accordance with MP 700.04.10.
 Interchanges, medians and similar areas with 3 to 1 slope or flatter, excluding areas
 involving subsurface drainage from base course material, shall be scarified sufficiently to produce
 a seed bed as directed by the Engineer. All large sticks, brush, loose roots, stones exceeding 2
 inches (50 mm) approximately in any dimension, and other debris shall be removed prior to
 seeding operations. The area shall be back dragged to eliminate depressions, ruts, or equipment
 track marks on slopes. Seed bed preparation will not be necessary on slopes steeper than 3 to 1.
 Preparation of Lawn Type Area for Seeding: All areas to be seeded to "Type C-2" lawn
 mixture, and "Type C-1" mixture in rest areas shall be fine graded. The finished grade shall be
 uniform and free of irregularities or water pockets. The finished grade shall be free of weed and
 plant growth, stones over 1 inches (25 mm) in diameter, or other debris. This debris will be
 disposed of as directed by the Engineer. Immediately prior to seeding, all areas shall be cultivated
 to provide a reasonably firm but friable seedbed. The depth of tillage shall be 3 inches (75 mm)
 or as directed by the Engineer. Limestone as required and fertilizer as specified shall be worked
 into the upper 3 inches (75 mm) of the seedbed before seeding.
 652.5-SOWING SEED:
 Immediately following area preparation, seed shall be sown. Legume seed shall be
 inoculated with approved cultures, in accordance with the instruction of the manufacturer. When
 using a hydroseeder, the inoculant shall be increased to five times the normal rate.
 Seed shall be sown by approved methods which provide for uniform distribution of seed.
 Rates of application and type of seed mixture shall be in accordance with Table 652.5 unless
 otherwise specified on the Plans.
 For lawn areas, the broadcast seeding shall be made in two applications, using one half the
 seed each time and the second sowing to be at right angles to the first. After broadcasting or
 otherwise applying the seed, the seedbed shall be firmed by means of a roller or cultipacker.
 
 590
 
 Variety of Seed
 
 Kentucky 31
 Fescue
 Red Fescue
 (Pennlawn)
 Kentucky
 Bluegrass
 Merion
 Bluegrass
 Crown Vetch
 Hard Fescue
 Mixture***
 White Dutch
 Clover
 Annual Ryegrass
 Aug 1 to May 15
 or
 Weeping
 Lovegrass
 May 15 to Aug 1
 
 TABLE 652.5-SEED MIXTURES
 Type B
 Type C
 C-1
 C-2
 Medians,
 Coarse
 Fine Lawn
 Shoulders
 Lawn Grass
 Grass
 (Ditch Slope)
 --------------------Waterways,
 For Use in
 For Use
 and Mowable Urban and
 where a
 Areas of
 Rest Area
 Fine Lawn
 Interchange
 Locations
 is Desired
 Lb. per acre Lb. per acre Lb. per acre
 (kg per ha)
 (kg per ha)
 (kg per ha)
 65 (72.9)
 
 45 (50.4)
 
 20 (22.4)
 
 20 (22.4)
 
 20 (22.4)
 
 25 (28.0)
 
 40 (44.8)
 
 Type D
 
 Type L
 
 Cut and Fill All areas
 Slopes
 ----------(Including
 Benches and
 Bifurcated
 Median)
 Lb. per acre Lb. per acre
 (kg per ha) (no. per hr.)
 20 (22.4)
 20 (22.4)
 
 41 (46.0)
 
 30 (33.6)
 20 (22.4)
 63 (70.6)
 3 (3.4)
 7 (7.8)
 
 7 (7.8)
 
 3 (3.4)
 
 3 (3.4)
 
 7 (7.8)
 
 7 (7.8)
 
 12 (13.5)
 
 (3.4)
 
 5 (5.6)
 
 * Areas will be considered mowable when slopes are 3 to 1 or flatter. Type C-1 and C-2 seed
 mixtures shall be used in all urban, suburban, and rest areas where lawn type turf is desired
 with mowing maintenance intended. C-2 lawn mixture shall be used along sidewalks, adjacent
 to private lawns.
 *** A combination of approved certified varieties with no one variety exceeding 50% of the total
 hard fescue component.
 
 Reseeding, Refertilizing and Remulching: Any area failing to establish a stand due to
 weather conditions or adverse soil conditions shall be reseeded, refertilized and remulched as
 directed by the Engineer.
 
 591
 
 652.6-APPLYING MULCH AND FERTILIZER:
 652.6.1-General: Whenever permanent or temporary seeding is made on bare soil or
 newly completed construction work, the following criteria shall be followed in regard to
 mulching.
 Straw mulch (including hay) shall be used on all areas and slopes 1½ to 1 or flatter. Wood
 cellulose fiber mulch shall be used on cut slopes steeper than 1½ to 1. The Engineer may make
 adjustments in the type of mulch to meet local conditions on the job.
 When using straw mulch, the mulch shall be anchored with an acceptable binder as
 described in Section 652.6.2 below. The sequence of application, when using straw mulch
 shall be as follows: (1) Seed and fertilizer shall be sown prior to mulching. (2) Mulch and
 mulch binder shall be placed within 24 hours of sowing seed.
 When permanent seeding follows a temporary cover crop, wood cellulose fiber mulch shall
 be used and the quantity of mulch shall be determined by the amount of living and dead plant
 residue on the soil surface in accordance with 652.6.3.2.
 Where the temporary seeding has been destroyed by subsequent construction, the mulch
 will be the same type and amount as required for bare soil or new construction.
 652.6.2-Straw Mulch: Straw shall be applied at the rate of approximately two tons per
 acre (4.5 Mg per hectare). The straw mulch may be anchored with 100 gallons of asphalt per
 acre (93.5 L of asphalt per hectare). The asphalt may be sprayed on the straw as it leaves the
 blower or it may be applied in a separate operation. The Contractor shall be responsible for
 any damage to the structures from the asphalt spray.
 Straw mulch around buildings, sidewalks or other structures may be held in place with a
 form of netting or may be sprayed with asphalt by hand while protecting the structures from
 the asphalt spray.
 Other types of chemical mulch binders may be substituted for asphalt material. These
 mulch binders shall be applied according to the manufacturers' specifications through the
 asphalt spray system or by an agricultural crop sprayer.
 652.6.3-Hydraulic Application of Wood Cellulose Fiber as a Mulching Agent:
 652.6.3.1-Equipment: Hydraulic equipment shall be used for the application of a
 slurry of fertilizer, seed, prepared wood cellulose fiber, and water. This equipment shall
 have a built-in agitation system with an operating capacity sufficient to agitate, suspend,
 and homogeneously mix a slurry of the specified amount of fiber, fertilizer, seed, and
 water. The slurry distribution lines shall be large enough to prevent stoppage. This
 discharge line shall be equipped with a set of hydraulic spray nozzles which will provide
 even distribution of the mixture or slurry in the various areas to be seeded. The slurry tank
 shall have a minimum capacity of 1,000 gal (3 750 L) and shall be mounted on a traveling
 unit which may be either self-propelled or drawn, with a separate unit which will place the
 slurry tank and spray nozzles within sufficient proximity to the areas to be seeded to
 provide uniform distribution without waste.
 652.6.3.2-Preparation of Slurry and Application of Fertilizer, Seed, and Mulch:
 Wood cellulose fiber shall be applied at a minimum rate of 1,500 lbs. (1 680 kg) net dry
 weight per acre (ha) when seeding bare soil or new construction. When seeding into a
 residue or growth where temporary seeding has previously been performed, the rate will
 592
 
 be determined by the Engineer, usually 1,000 lbs. net dry weight per acre (1 120 kg per
 ha). The seed, fertilizer, wood cellulose fiber, and water shall all be combined into the
 slurry tank for distribution of all ingredients in one operation by the hydraulic seeding
 method. The agitator shall be operating at a rate sufficient to keep all materials in
 suspension at the time such material is added. Seed shall be added first, shall be thoroughly
 mixed, and the fertilizer then added and put into suspension. When the tank is 40 percent
 full, the mulch material may be added and shall be in complete suspension by the time the
 tank is 75 percent full. Such increased mixing speed as is necessary for putting the entire
 admixture in suspension shall be maintained until the tank is emptied. Spraying may
 commence at such time as the full complement of water has been mixed into the slurry. It
 is the intent of this Specification to maintain the slurry, during the spraying operation, as a
 homogenous mixture of suspended solids in the tank until the tank is emptied.
 652.6.4-Fertilizer: The kind and amount of fertilizer per acre (ha) shall consist of any type
 with 1-2-1 ratio (nitrogen, phosphoric acid, and potash) providing the minimum nutrient
 equivalent of 1,000 lb. (450 kg) of 10-20-10. In addition, 300 lb. per acre (335 kg per hectare)
 of slow release urea formaldehyde fertilizer shall be added whenever second step seeding and
 fertilizing is not feasible due to the Contract completion date. When hydraulic seeding
 methods are used, the fertilizer shall be applied concurrently with the seeding and mulching
 operation as part of the slurry mix. When commercial fertilizer is applied by the spray or
 hydraulic method, it need not be worked into the soil.
 Fertilizer applications for second and third step seeding shall be in accordance with 652.8.
 652.6.5-Wood Chips: Wood chips, recovered from clearing and grubbing operations, or
 bark will be acceptable as a mulch for seeding and shall be used at a rate of 35 cubic yard per
 acre (66 cubic meters per hectare) in lieu of straw or hay.
 652.7-MAINTENANCE OF SEEDED AND MULCHED AREAS:
 The Contractor shall maintain all seeded areas until final acceptance of the project. All
 areas shall be protected from equipment traffic and any damaged areas shall be repaired and
 reseeded.
 652.8-SECOND AND THIRD STEP SEEDING, FERTILIZING AND MULCHING:
 The Engineer will require second or third step seeding, or both, depending upon the
 completion date and estimated completion time of any remaining items on the project.
 The second application of fertilizer, seed and mulch shall be applied as directed by the
 Engineer. The application rates will be based on the stand of grass, severity of erosion and
 condition or growth of grass as described. Spring seedings shall be refertilized and reseeded as
 needed in the fall from August 15 to October 15. Fall seeded areas shall be given a second step
 seeding and fertilizing, as required, the following spring from March 15, to May 15.
 The following shall be used as a guide for second step application:
 i. For areas with less than 50 percent stand or subject to sever erosion, apply the
 complete amount of seed, fertilizer, and mulch (wood cellulose fiber) as specified in
 the original seeding.
 ii. For areas with over 50 percent of grass and slight to moderate erosion, apply one half
 the original fertilizer and seed. If erosion is a problem apply one half the original wood
 fiber mulch.
 593
 
 The third step seeding, mulching, and fertilizing shall consist of spot application on areas
 not showing a satisfactory stand after the second step application. The quantity of material will be
 determined on the same basis as for the second step application. No urea formaldehyde fertilizer
 will be needed for third step seeding.
 652.9-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Ground agricultural limestone, fertilizer, and mulch will be measured by the ton
 (megagram). Seed will be measured by the pound (kilogram).
 Wood chips or bark will be measured by the cubic yard (meter). It is assumed that 17.5
 cubic yard (14.75 cubic m) of chips or bark are equal to one ton (megagram) of straw for seeding.
 Wood chips or bark mulch will be measured by truck load or other loose volume measurement,
 and payment will be made on one ton (megagram) equivalent of straw for each 17.5 cubic yard
 (14.75 cubic m) of wood chips or bark mulch.
 Second and third step seeding operations will be measured and included for payment under
 items in 652.11.
 Asphalt for anchoring mulch, or other chemical mulch binders, will not be measured
 separately, but their cost shall be included in the unit price bid for mulch.
 652.10-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices bid
 for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be considered full compensation for
 furnishing all materials and performing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable
 manner, including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the
 work.
 Topsoil will be measured and paid for in accordance with the provisions of 651.
 The bid price for fertilizer is based on 10-20-10 type. When other types of fertilizer are
 used, pay quantities will be determined using the following table.
 Type of
 Fertilizer
 5-10-5
 8-16-8
 10-20-10
 12-24-12
 15-30-15
 
 Actual Quantity
 Used Pounds (kg)
 100
 100
 100
 100
 100
 
 Pay Quantity
 Pounds (kg)
 50
 80
 100
 120
 150
 
 When fertilizer types other than those shown above are used, the relationship between the
 pay quantity and the actual quantity used will be established by the Engineer.
 652.11-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 652001-*
 652002-*
 652003-*
 652004-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Agricultural Limestone
 Fertilizer, “type”
 Seed Mixtures, “type”
 “type” Mulch
 
 * Sequence number
 
 594
 
 UNIT
 Ton (Megagram)
 Ton (Megagram)
 Pound (Kilogram)
 Ton (Megagram)
 
 SECTION 653
 VINE AND GROUND COVER PLANTING
 653.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing and planting vine and ground cover of the species
 called for on the Plans and in the manner prescribed or as directed by the Engineer.
 653.2-MATERIALS:
 653.2.1-Topsoil: Topsoil shall conform to the applicable requirements of 651.
 653.2.2-Water: Water shall conform to the requirements of 652.2.
 653.2.3-Ground Agricultural Limestone: Ground agricultural limestone shall conform
 to the requirements of 715.25.
 653.2.4-Fertilizer: Fertilizer for landscape plantings shall conform to the applicable
 requirements of 715.26.
 653.2.5-Mulch and Mulch Anchor:
 conform to the requirements of 715.27.2.
 
 Mulch material for landscape plantings shall
 
 653.2.6-Vine and Ground Cover Plants: Vine and ground cover plants shall conform to
 the requirements specified of 715.33. The vine and ground cover plants shall be true to the
 type and size indicated on the Plans.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 653.3-PLANTING OF VINES AND GROUND COVER PLANTS:
 The method of planting vine and ground cover plants will be determined to a great extent
 by the site conditions, namely soil, slope, and type of cover. Two methods of planting ground
 cover are basically row planting and bed planting, as shown on the Plans.
 Row Planting--On areas covered with grass or weed mass, the equivalent of one square
 foot (300 mm) of sod including roots shall be removed and replaced on the lower side of the plant
 hole to help retain moisture runoff. The foot (300 mm) square area around each individual plant
 shall be mulched as directed by the Engineer.
 Bed Planting--All plant beds shall be free of weeds and grass prior to planting. The bed
 preparation can be accomplished with either herbicide spray or tillage as described on the Plans.
 Bed areas shall be mulched as shown on the Plans.
 Plant backfill mixture for vines and ground covers shall be three parts top soil to one part
 peat moss with one hundred lb. (45.5 kg) fertilizer added per cubic yard (meter) of backfill. For
 plants in containers or pots three inch (75 mm) size or less, the backfill mix shall be applied at the
 rate of one pint per plant. For plants in larger containers, the planting specifications will be shown
 on the Plans. Any other additives will be shown on the Plans. In loose shale or sand without a
 sod cover, selection of plant location shall be where the soil is stable and not subject to rapid
 accumulation or erosion. On steep banks 1½ to 1 or steeper, a slit shall be opened large enough to
 receive the plant roots and the replaced soil tamped leaving a slight depression to collect moisture.
 595
 
 On slopes 2 to 1 or flatter, a small rain basin shall be formed by tamping with the heel and placing
 sod or excess soil on the slopes below the plant. Plants shall be watered during planting operations
 as directed by the Engineer.
 The Contractor shall furnish material and mark location of all vine and ground cover plants
 for future reference. A row shall be identified by a stake at each end and a bed or mass identified
 by stakes around the perimeter. Wire stakes with flags are acceptable as markers.
 Planting Season: All initial planting shall be performed between March 15 and July 1.
 653.4-CARE OF VINES AND GROUND COVER:
 The Contractor shall maintain the plants in a healthy, living condition during the life of the
 contract, and shall maintain an adequate supply of moisture in the root zone at all times.
 The Contractor and the Engineer shall make a monthly inspection of the plantings to
 determine the need for maintenance and water during the first growing season, June through
 October. Any maintenance determined necessary shall be taken care of during the two-week
 period immediately following the inspection. When moisture in the root zone is deficient, watering
 shall be started within 48 hours with sufficient labor and equipment to completely water all the
 plants within a two-week period unless otherwise directed by the Engineer. Other maintenance
 required during the contract period shall include:
 i. The control of weeds and grass growth in beds and around individual plants.
 ii. Protect plants from damage by insects and diseases.
 iii. Any other practices necessary to maintain the plants in a healthy, live condition.
 653.5-REPLACEMENT OF VINES AND GROUND COVER:
 Between August 1 and 10 following the initial planting period, the Contractor and Engineer
 will make an inspection of all vines and ground cover plants to determine the replacement
 necessary.
 If it is estimated that 85 percent or more of the Plan quantity of any individual item in a
 specific area is living, healthy and in good growing condition, replacements will not be required
 for that area. Any specific grouping shall have a reasonable distribution of live plants and the
 allowable 15 percent loss shall not be concentrated.
 If it is determined there is a loss of more than 15 percent in any specific area, the Contractor
 shall be required to replace all the dead, missing or defective plants in the specific area. All
 replacements shall be completed during the period September 1 to 15 and maintained until the
 completion of the Contract.
 653.6-CARE DURING AND AFTER DELIVERY:
 There is a tendency for bare-root plants to dry out during shipment and during the planting
 operation; therefore it is important that the roots of all plant material shall be kept moist during
 shipment and during their planting period.
 653.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Measurement of vines and ground cover plants shall be the number of plants originally
 planted, providing a survival of 85 percent was established, or the necessary replacements were
 made as directed.
 The final acceptance and payment for any particular plant will be made after completing
 proper care and replacement as described in 653.4 and 653.5.
 596
 
 Water for maintenance during the period of establishment will be measured by the gallon
 (liter), expressed in thousand-gallon (liter) units.
 653.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing all
 the materials, including water required during the process of planting, topsoil, ground limestone,
 fertilizer, and mulch, and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner,
 including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 Maintenance work other than watering shall be included in the contract unit price bid for
 each plant.
 The accepted quantities of watering during the period of establishment will be paid for at
 the contract unit price per 1,000 gallons (L), which price shall be full compensation for furnishing,
 delivering, applying and performing all other work. No payment will be made for watering at the
 time of original planting or when planting replacements.
 653.9-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 653001-* Vines, Fast Growing, “scientific name”
 653002-* Vines, Medium Growing, “scientific name”
 653003-* Vines, Clump Type, “scientific name”
 653004-* Ground Covers, “scientific name”
 653005-* Water For Plants
 * Sequence Number
 
 597
 
 UNIT
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Thousand Gallon (Liter)
 
 SECTION 654
 TREE AND SHRUB PLANTING
 654.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing, delivering, and planting nursery-grown or collected
 plants, in accordance with these Specifications and at locations shown on the Plans or designated
 by the Engineer. This work shall include the furnishing of topsoil and related materials together
 with all other work including clean-up of planted areas.
 654.2-MATERIALS:
 654.2.1-Topsoil: Topsoil for plant backfill shall conform to the applicable requirements
 of 651.
 654.2.2-Water: Water shall conform to the requirements in 652.2.
 654.2.3-Ground Agricultural Limestone: Ground agricultural limestone shall conform
 to the requirements of 715.25.
 654.2.4-Fertilizer: Fertilizer for landscape plantings shall conform to the applicable
 requirements of 715.26.
 654.2.5-Mulch and Mulch Anchor: Mulch for landscape plantings shall conform to the
 requirements of 715.27.2.
 654.2.6-Trees and Shrubs: Trees and shrubs shall conform to the requirements of 715.35.
 The trees and shrubs shall be true to the type and size indicated on the Plans.
 Collected plants may be used in place of nursery grown plants only when called for on the
 plans.
 654.2.7-Tree Paint: Tree paint shall conform to the requirements of 715.36.
 654.2.8-Miscellaneous Materials: Wire, hose, stakes, tree wrapping paper, anti-desiccant
 spray, and other incidental materials shall conform to the requirements of 715.37.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 654.3-INSPECTION AND DELIVERY OF PLANT MATERIAL:
 The Contractor shall notify the Engineer at least five days in advance of digging or shipping
 of plants from the nursery or collecting source. All plants will be subject to inspection where
 growing in the nurseries or collecting areas.
 All plants shall be dug with care by experienced workmen, retaining essential roots and
 avoiding mechanical damage to root systems. All plants shall arrive with their roots in a moist
 and healthy condition. Each species or variety shall be handled and packaged in an approved
 manner and as required by soil and climatic conditions at the time of digging, with due regard to
 conditions of shipment and time to be consumed in transit and delivery. All plants shall be legibly
 tagged with name and size. All balled and burlapped plants shall be handled by the earth ball only.
 598
 
 All evergreen and all deciduous trees, regardless of size, and all other plants so designated
 on the Plans shall be balled and burlapped for shipment. All such plants shall be so dug and
 transported as to provide and retain a firm ball of earth. All balled and all bare-root material shall
 be adequately protected from severe changes in temperature and wind-burn while in transit.
 Upon delivery to the Project, plants will be inspected for number, type, species, size,
 quality, and condition. Defects or injuries, such as dried out or broken roots and tops, evidence of
 "sweating", mildew, freezing, or broken or manufactured rootballs, will be cause for rejection, and
 immediate steps shall be taken to replace rejected plants.
 654.4-CARE AFTER DELIVERY:
 Plant material delivered to the Project and accepted shall be planted immediately, or
 "heeled-in" in moist soil or other approved moist material in a manner as shown on the Plans. All
 "heeled-in" plants shall be kept moist and protected until planted.
 654.5-DIGGING HOLES FOR PLANTS:
 Planting holes shall be excavated according to the following table:
 
 Rootball
 Inches (mm)
 (Specified)
 8 (200 mm)
 10 (250 mm)
 12 (300 mm)
 14 (350 mm)
 16 (400 mm)
 18 (450 mm)
 20 (500 mm)
 22 (550 mm)
 24 (600 mm)
 
 Planting Hole Diameter
 Planting Hole
 Rootball
 Inches (mm)
 Inches (mm)
 (Approximate)
 (Specified)
 20 (500 mm)
 28 (700 mm)
 22 (550 mm)
 32 (800 mm)
 24 (600 mm)
 38 (950 mm)
 28 (700 mm)
 42 (1050 mm)
 32 (800 mm)
 48 (1200 mm)
 34 ( 850 mm)
 54 (1350 mm)
 36 (900 mm)
 60 (1500 mm)
 38 (950 mm)
 72 (1800 mm)
 42 (1050 mm)
 ---
 
 Panting Hole
 Inches (mm)
 (Approximate)
 49 (1225 mm)
 56 ( 1400 mm)
 66 (1650 mm)
 73 (1825 mm)
 84 (2100 mm)
 94 (2350 mm)
 105 (2625 mm)
 126 (3150 mm)
 ---
 
 The depth of the hole shall extend 8 inches (200 mm) below the depth of the rootball.
 During normal weather conditions, digging and planting holes may be allowed as much as two
 weeks in advance of planting. During hot dry weather, the planting holes shall be dug just prior
 to planting. When holes present a hazard along the highway, they should be dug immediately prior
 to planting.
 Planting holes for container grown plants shall be dug to the size required for the equivalent
 balled and burlapped plants.
 654.6-PLANT BACKFILL:
 All backfill for planting shall be four parts topsoil mixed with one part peat moss (loose
 measurement) or other approved additive. Eight pounds (4.75 kg) of fertilizer shall be added per
 cubic yard (meter) of backfill and bulk mixed with the topsoil and peat moss.
 Any adjustment needed in the pH reaction of the backfill material will be specified in the
 Plans.
 599
 
 The rate of fertilizer application for individual plant replacement shall be as follows:
 Deciduous trees-1 lb/in. (0.02 kg/mm) diameter
 Evergreen trees-One pound (0.5 kg) per tree
 Small flowering trees-One pound (0.5 kg) per tree
 Shrubs-One-half pound (0.25 kg) per plant.
 No backfill in a frozen or muddy condition shall be used.
 654.7-PLANTING:
 654.7.1-Planting Season: Planting season for balled and burlapped evergreens shall begin
 September 15. Planting season for all deciduous balled and burlapped plants and all bare root
 plants shall begin October 15. No bare root plants shall be planted during freezing temperature.
 The cut-off date for fall planting and the starting date for spring planting will be determined
 by the Engineer. All initial planting shall be completed by May 20.
 Any extension of time granted due to a delay in giving notice to proceed, as indicated in
 the Proposal, is not intended to extend the initial planting deadline of May 20. It is the intent
 of this specification that all plants shall be in the planting holes by May 20. Should there be a
 delay in giving notice to proceed, the staking, guying, wrapping, and other incidental items
 may be deferred by the Engineer until all plants are placed in the planting holes. Such approval
 of the planting procedure will not relieve the Contractor of their responsibility for loss of any
 plants.
 654.7.2-Planting Method: All balled and burlapped plants shall be planted so the top of
 the ball is slightly above the natural ground level to allow for normal settlement unless
 otherwise specified on the Plans. When planting beds, the individual plants shall be selected
 and arranged according to spread and height to present a uniform appearance.
 Backfill material under the rootball or roots shall be tamped prior to placing the plant in
 the hole.
 When planting balled and burlapped plants, the burlap and twine may be left intact;
 however, any twine attached to the stem and considered to have a girding or detrimental effect
 shall be removed. Bare-rooted plants shall be placed in the planting holes with the roots spread
 out in a natural position while the specified backfill is placed. Nonplantable containers shall
 be carefully removed from all container grown or potted plants immediately prior to planting.
 Planting beds shall be prepared by destroying the existing vegetation before excavating the
 planting holes. Recommendations for control of existing vegetation will be shown on the
 Plans.
 Sufficient amounts of water, without puddling, shall be used in the process of planting to
 settle the backfill material around the roots or ball. Additional backfill material shall be placed
 and further compaction accomplished by tamping. This watering is not to be confused with
 the maintenance procedure in 654.14.1.
 During the initial planting period, September 15 to May 20, any plant determined by the
 Engineer not to be in an acceptable growing condition, or failing to meet other requirements
 of these specifications, shall be removed from the project and replaced immediately with
 nursery stock meeting the specifications. It is the intent of this specification that all plants shall
 be alive at the beginning of the growing season.
 
 600
 
 654.8-PRUNING:
 Primarily, all dead and broken branches shall be removed from deciduous and evergreen
 plant material during the process of planting. Further pruning shall be carried on in accordance
 with the normal nursery practice or as directed by the Engineer. All cuts over 1 inch (25 mm) shall
 be painted with a tree paint.
 654.9-STAKING AND GUYING:
 All deciduous and evergreen trees and all ornamental flowering trees (including multiple
 stem) shall be staked in accordance with tree staking details shown on the Plans and to the
 satisfaction of the Engineer.
 654.10-MULCHING:
 Mulch material shall be furnished and placed around the plants a soon as possible after
 planting. However, during extremely wet periods, the application of mulch shall be delayed and
 placed as directed by the Engineer.
 The mulch shall be applied in the saucer areas of individual trees and shrubs and over the
 entire area of shrub beds. Heavy mulches like woodchips and wood bark products shall be applied
 to a depth of 3 inches (75 mm). Light mulch material shall be applied 4 inches (100 mm) deep.
 When black polyethylene film is specified for weed control, the mulch depth shall be reduced to 2
 inches (50 mm).
 654.11-WRAPPING AND FOLIAGE PROTECTION:
 The trunks of all deciduous and small flowering trees shall be wrapped with four inch (100
 mm) waterproof sisal paper. The wrapping shall start from the ground and extend up the trunk in
 a spiral manner with one-third overlap, ending with one wrap above the lowest branch. The
 wrapping shall be neatly secured with binder twine at approximately 18-in spacing and at the top
 and bottom.
 All evergreens shall be thoroughly sprayed at the nursery prior to delivery, with an antidesiccant spray (protective emulsion) at the rate specified by the manufacturer. All deciduous
 trees and shrubs in any stage of leafing out, at the time of delivery, shall receive the anti-desiccant
 spray. Certification of this spray application will be required by the Division. Deciduous trees
 and shrubs that have leafed out while in the "heeling-in" area will require the anti-desiccant spray
 before being transported to the planting site.
 654.12-RAIN BASINS:
 A shallow rain basin equal to the diameter of the planting hole shall be formed by shaping
 the soil around each tree or shrub and shall be maintained until final inspection and acceptance of
 the work.
 654.13-CLEAN-UP AFTER PLANTING:
 After the planting has been completed, all planting sites shall be cleaned up. Subsoil, rock,
 excess topsoil, and other waste material shall be removed and disposed of as directed.
 All holes dug and not used, or areas disturbed in attempting to find a suitable planting site,
 shall be refilled by the Contractor, and the area shall be restored to its original condition and
 reseeded.
 
 601
 
 654.14-CARE AND REPLACEMENT OF PLANTS:
 654.14.1-Care: The Contractor shall maintain the plants in a healthy, living condition
 during the life of the Contract, which includes any warranty period indicated in the Contract,
 and shall maintain an adequate supply of moisture in the root zone at all times.
 The Contractor and the Engineer shall make a monthly inspection of the plantings to
 determine the need for maintenance and water during the first growing season, June through
 October. Any maintenance determined necessary shall be taken care of during the two-week
 period immediately following the inspection. When moisture in the root zone is deficient,
 watering shall be started within 48 hours with sufficient labor and equipment to completely
 water all the plants within a two-week period unless otherwise directed by the Engineer.
 Other maintenance required during the contract period shall include:
 i. The control of weed and grass growth, by destroying the top growth as well as roots,
 in plant beds and individual plant saucers.
 ii. Protect plants from damage by insects and diseases.
 iii. Repair rain collars and replace any lost mulch.
 iv. Maintain stakes and guys supporting trees, and any other practices necessary to
 maintain the plants in a healthy, living condition.
 654.14.2-Replacement of Plants: The Contractor and the Engineer will make an
 inspection of the plantings between September 1 and 10 following the initial planting period,
 to determine the number of dead, missing or defective plants, for which replacement will be
 required.
 During this fall replacement period, September 15 through November 30, all maintenance
 including stake and wire tightening, mulch replacement, rain collar repair, pruning or
 trimming, trunk wrapping, and removal of any wire tags shall be accomplished.
 The replacement plants shall be planted in the same manner as the original plants with
 necessary backfill and mulch added to accomplish the job. The fertilizer shall be added in the
 hole prior to replacing the plant. However, when a plant has been lost due to poor drainage or
 other adverse soil condition, the replacement shall be planted at a more acceptable location,
 and the old site shall be restored to its original condition.
 All replanting and maintenance shall be completed by November 30 for final acceptance
 of the Contract by December 15.
 654.15-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of plants to be paid for will be the number of living trees or shrubs planted in
 accordance with these Specifications and accepted. Only living plants in healthy condition at the
 time of final inspection will be accepted.
 Progress payment for the initial planting of trees and shrubs will be based on the premised
 that 90 percent of the work has been completed when the plants have been completely planted.
 The remaining 10 percent withheld will be considered for maintenance, plant replacement, and for
 any delayed mulching when authorized by the Engineer. Retainage, from the amount determined
 as above, will be in accordance with 109.6.
 The final acceptance and payment for any particular plant will be made after completing
 proper care and replacement as described in 654.14.
 Water for maintenance during the period of establishment will be measured by the gallon
 (liter), expressed in thousand-gallon (liter) units.
 602
 
 654.16-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The number of plants, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit
 prices bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments will constitute full compensation
 for furnishing and delivering plants and all incidental materials including water required during
 the process of planting, topsoil, mulch, fertilizer, ground agricultural limestone, and additives; for
 planting, staking, pruning and for performing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and
 acceptable manner, including all labor, equipment, tools, and incidentals necessary to complete
 the work.
 Maintenance work other than watering will be included in the contract unit prices bid for
 each plant.
 The accepted quantities of water used during the period of establishment will be paid for
 at the contract unit price per 1,000 gallons (L), which price shall be full compensation for
 furnishing, delivering, applying, and performing all other work. No payment will be made for
 watering at the time of original planting or when planting replacements.
 654.17-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 654001-* Tree, Deciduous, “scientific name”
 654002-* Tree, Ornamental Flowering, “scientific name”
 654003-* Shrub, Deciduous, “scientific name”
 654004-* Shrub, Evergreen, “scientific name”
 654005-* Tree, Evergreen, “scientific name”
 654006-* Water For Plants
 * Sequence number
 
 603
 
 UNIT
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Thousand Gallon (Liter)
 
 SECTION 655
 MATTING FOR EROSION CONTROL
 655.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing and placing erosion control matting in accordance
 with these specifications and at the locations shown on the plans or designated by the Engineer.
 655.2-MATERIALS:
 The matting shall meet the requirements specified in 715.24. Devices used to anchor the
 mat shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the matting and be of sufficient strength and
 size to secure the mat until it is anchored by vegetation, siltation, etc.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 655.3-PLACING:
 The area to be covered shall be prepared as a fine seedbed, fertilized and seeded before the
 matting is applied.
 The erosion control mat shall be placed and anchored in accordance with the
 recommendations of the manufacturer of the matting. The mat shall be adequately watered to
 firmly bond the mat to the soil and aid in the germination of the seed.
 655.4-MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS:
 The Contractor shall maintain the areas upon which the matting is placed until all work on
 the Contract has been completed and accepted.
 Maintenance shall include the repair of areas damaged by erosion, wind, fire, or other
 causes. Repair may include reestablishing the condition and grade of the soil, replacement of the
 matting, and refertilizing and reseeding in accordance with the applicable portions of 652.
 655.5-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be measured by the square yard (meter) of matting placed.
 Measurements will be made on the surface of the matting exclusive of laps and material that may
 have been placed in slots.
 655.6-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing
 all the materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner,
 including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 655.7-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 655001-*
 Matting
 655002-*
 Permanent Erosion Matting, Type “type”
 *
 
 Sequence number
 
 604
 
 UNIT
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Square Yard (Meter)
 
 SECTION 656
 SEEDLING PLANTING
 656.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing and planting seedlings of the species called for on the
 Plans and in the manner prescribed or as directed by the Engineer.
 656.2-MATERIALS:
 656.2.1-Topsoil: Topsoil shall conform to the applicable requirements of 651.
 656.2.2-Water: Water shall conform to the requirements in 652.2.
 656.2.3-Ground Agricultural Limestone: Ground agriculture limestone shall conform
 to the requirements in 715.25.
 656.2.4-Fertilizer: Fertilizer for landscape plantings shall conform to the applicable
 requirements in 715.26.
 656.2.5-Seedling Plants: Seedling plants shall conform to the requirements specified in
 715.34. The seedling plants shall be true to the type and size indicated on the Plans.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 656.3-PLANTING SEEDLING PLANTS:
 The method of planting seedling plants will be determined to a great extent by the site
 conditions, namely soil, slope, and type of cover. On areas covered with grass or weed mass, the
 equivalent of about one square foot (300 square mm) area shall be cleared, including roots. The
 cleared material shall be placed on the lower side of the plant hole to help retain moisture runoff.
 A hole large enough for the plant roots shall then be dug, and the plant placed and backfilled with
 one pint backfill mix and completed with excavated material. The soil then shall be packed around
 the roots with the foot or heel.
 Plant backfill mixture for seedlings shall be three parts topsoil to one part peat moss, with
 100 lbs. of fertilizer adder per cubic yard (60 kg of fertilizer adder per cubic meter) of backfill. Any
 other additives will be shown on the Plans. In loose shale or sand without sod cover, selection of
 plant location shall be where the soil is stable and not subject to rapid accumulation or erosion.
 On steep banks a slit shall be opened large enough to receive the plant roots and the replaced soil
 shall be tamped with the heel.
 Seedling plants shall be individually mulched and watered during the planting operations
 as directed by the Engineer.
 The Contractor shall furnish material and mark the location of all seedling plants for future
 reference. A row shall be identified by a stake at each end and a bed or mass identified by stakes
 around the perimeter. Wire stake flags will be accepted as markers.
 656.4-REPLACEMENT OF SEEDLING PLANTS:
 At the discretion of the Engineer, or in the event that it is determined that the survival is
 not satisfactory, replacement may be required. Only such replacements as are ordered and
 605
 
 countered by the Engineer shall be made. All replacement planting shall be in accordance with
 the requirements of the Contract application to initial plantings.
 656.5-CARE DURING AND AFTER DELIVERY:
 There is a great tendency for bare-root plants to dry out during shipment and during the planting
 operation; therefore it is extremely important that the roots of all plant material shall be kept moist
 during shipment and during the construction period.
 656.6-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Measurement of seedling plants will be by the number of plants initially planted in an
 acceptable manner and all such replacements as are ordered and planted in accordance with this
 Specification.
 656.7-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing
 all the materials, including water, topsoil, peat moss, limestone, fertilizer, and mulch, and doing
 all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor, tools,
 equipment, supplies and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 All replacements ordered by the Engineer will be paid for at the contract unit price for the
 item listed.
 656.8-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 656001-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Seedling, “scientific name”
 
 * Sequence number
 
 606
 
 UNIT
 Each
 
 SECTION 657
 ROADSIDE SIGN SUPPORTS
 657.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the fabrication and erection of all supports for roadside mounted
 signs in accordance with the requirements of the Plans and of these Specifications. This shall
 include the supports for all signs which are located outside of the shoulder and do not extend over
 the shoulder.
 All details not specified or not shown on the Plans shall conform to the details and
 requirements set forth in the following specifications and publications:
 i. The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, latest issue,
 as printed by the Federal Highway Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation.
 (Referred to as the MUTCD).
 ii. Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaires and
 Traffic Signals, latest issue, including revisions, American Association of State
 Highway and Transportation Officials.
 657.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials furnished by the Contractor shall be of new stock, shall be the product of
 reputable manufacturers of signing equipment, shall conform to the Division's Specifications, and
 shall meet the approval of the Engineer.
 All materials shall conform to Division 700 of the Standard Specifications and specifically
 as follows. All referenced specifications for materials shall be understood to mean the latest
 available specifications and revisions at the time of award of the Contract.
 657.2.1-Aluminum:
 657.2.1.1-Tapered Tubular Supports: Supports shall be void of circumferential
 welding except at the base. Subject to the Engineer's approval, other alloys may be used
 in place of those called for. The Contractor shall submit, for approval of the Engineer,
 design calculations for the above substitutions prior to the fabrication of the supports.
 Tapered tubular aluminum supports shall be fabricated from Alloy 6063-T6, ASTM B
 221, or ASTM B 429. Taper of the supports shall be uniform and continuous from the base
 to the top of the support.
 657.2.1.2-Structural Supports: Structural aluminum supports shall be of a standard
 wide-flange shape and of Alloy 6061-T6, conforming to ASTM B 308. Each support shall
 be fabricated from one piece of metal.
 Posts built up by welding short pieces together will be rejected. The support shall
 include a base plate which shall be designed for anchoring to a concrete footing with
 galvanized steel bolts as shown on the Plans.
 657.2.1.3-Support Bases: Bases for roadside mounted signs shall be fabricated from
 either plates, Alloy 6061-T6, ASTM B 209, or from castings Alloy SG70B-T61, ASTM B
 108, or Alloy SG70A-T6, ASTM B 26, or ASTM B 108. Only one of the above type bases
 will be used on a project. The underside of the bases shall be coated with an alkali-resistant
 bituminous paint.
 607
 
 657.2.1.4-Support Caps: Castings form aluminum support caps shall be Alloy S5A,
 ASTM B 26, or Alloy SG70A, ASTM B 26 or ASTM B 108 and shall be held in place by
 stainless steel set screws. The same type cap must be used throughout a project.
 657.2.2-Steel: All steel items shall be galvanized in accordance to ASTM A 123 or ASTM
 A 153, unless otherwise specified.
 657.2.2.1-Tapered Tubular Supports: Supports shall be void of circumferential
 welding except at the base. Subject to the Engineer's approval, other types of steel may be
 used in place of those called for. The Contractor shall submit, for the approval of the
 Engineer, design calculations for all substitutions prior to the fabrication of the supports.
 Tapered tubular supports shall be fabricated from SAE 1020 sheet. These sheets shall
 be formed and welded, using only one longitudinal weld, then cold processed to the final
 shape and to minimum yield strength of 55,000 psi. (380 MPa) Taper of the supports shall
 be uniform and continuous from the base to the top.
 657.2.2.2-Structural Supports: Galvanized structural steel supports shall be standard
 wide flange shapes fabricated from steel conforming to ASTM A36 or ASTM A572 Grade
 50 as specified (Breakaway Supports). These supports shall be galvanized in accordance
 with ASTM A123.
 Each wide-flange section shall be fabricated from one piece of metal. Those supports
 built up be welding short pieces together will be rejected. The steel base plate shall be
 welded to the support and shall be designed for anchoring to a concrete footing with
 galvanized steel bolts or to an embedded post stub for break-away sign supports as shown
 on the Standard Drawings.
 657.2.2.3-Pipe Posts: Pipe shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A 53, TYPE
 E or S, Grade B. Hydrostatic tests are not required.
 The steel base plate shall be welded to the support and shall be designed for anchoring
 to an embedded post stub or anchor bolts as shown in the Plans.
 657.2.2.4-Channel Bar Supports: Steel channel post shall comply with the
 requirements of ASTM A499, Grade 60 and shall be galvanized in accordance with the
 requirements of ASTM A123. Steel channel posts shall be supplied to the WVDOT in
 accordance with MP707.02.13.
 657.2.2.5-Support Bases: Bases shall be fabricated from steel plate conforming to
 ASTM A 36 or from cast steel meeting the requirements of ASTM A 27, Grade 65-35.
 Only one type base shall be used throughout a project.
 657.2.2.6-Friction Caps for Pipe Post: Caps shall be fabricated from a good
 commercial grade steel of either hot rolled or cold rolled steel sheets. Caps shall have an
 electrodeposited coating of zinc in accordance with the requirements of B 663, Class 12.
 657.2.2.7-Support Caps: Support caps castings shall be cast steel conforming to
 ASTM A 27, Grade 60-30, or cast aluminum Alloy S5A, ASTM B 26, or Alloy SG70A,
 608
 
 ASTM B 26 or ASTM B 108. Caps shall be held in place by stainless steel set screws.
 Only one type cap shall be used throughout the project.
 657.2.2.8-Reinforcing Steel: Reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of
 602.
 657.2.2.9-Anchor Bolts: Anchor bolts shall be of sufficient size and strength to fully
 develop the bending moment of the shaft. Anchor bolts (unless otherwise directed on the
 Plans) shall be fabricated from high strength steel, meeting the requirements specified in
 ASTM F 1554, Grade 55. Each bolt shall have the threaded end galvanized for a length
 sufficient to extend down through the grout and into the concrete foundation. Nuts shall
 be hot-dipped galvanized and meet the physical, chemical and dimensional requirements
 of ASTM A-563, Grade A.
 657.2.3-Wood:
 657.2.3.1-Posts: Material for wood sign posts shall conform to the requirements of
 710. The posts shall meet the structural requirements of the current AASHTO Standard
 Specifications for Highway Bridges for the grade specified. They shall consist of select
 structural grade posts, seasoned and treated in accordance with these Specifications and the
 Standard Drawings. Prior to the preservative treatment, the posts shall be cut as indicated
 on the drawings. Preservatives for treatment shall conform to the requirements of 710.
 657.2.4-Concrete: Concrete for sign foundations shall be Class B in accordance with 601.
 657.2.5-U-Channel Breakaway Mounting Device: When specified to be used in the
 project plans, this device shall be used in order to enable either 2# per foot or 3# per foot
 flanged “U-channel” to be installed into an anchor, which shall be imbedded in an existing
 asphalt or concrete surface. The device shall be designed as described in Materials Section
 709.51.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 657.3-FABRICATION:
 657.3.1-General: Fabrication of all parts of supports shall be in accordance with
 dimensions shown on the Plans and Standard Drawings. Work shall be done in a uniform
 workmanlike manner.
 657.3.2-Shop Drawings: If supports vary from the Standard Drawings, the Contractor
 shall submit for the Engineer's approval complete detail drawings, eight copies, showing all
 structural steel, structural aluminum, aluminum castings, light fixtures and supports, sign
 brackets and any miscellaneous accessories.
 657.3.3-Packaging: All aluminum supports shall be protected by tire wrapping during
 shipment and storage. The wrapping shall be adequate to prevent damage to the support.
 Supports delivered for use on a project shall be stored off the ground and under cover in a
 manner meeting the approval of the Engineer.
 609
 
 657.4-ERECTION:
 657.4.1-General: All signs and delineators shall be supported at the points designated on
 the Plans or by the Engineer in accordance with these specifications and approved shop
 drawings and shall be erected in reasonably close conformity to the locations, elevations, and
 angles shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 The Contractor shall take full responsibility for checking all cross sections at approved sign
 locations to determine final support lengths.
 Before starting the excavation for footings, the Contractor shall establish the location of
 each sign in accordance with the Plans or as directed by the Engineer, and shall mark each site
 with construction stakes. The Contractor shall furnish stakes, paint, other materials, and labor
 for performing the locating and staking as described. When the sites have been staked and are
 ready for inspection, the Contractor shall inform the Engineer, who will check and approve the
 site or make necessary changes. Centerline station information will be furnished to the
 Contractor by the Engineer.
 Galvanized coating damaged for any reason shall be repaired by the application of a zincrich paint conforming to Military Specification MIL-21035 or Federal Specification TIP-461
 or as directed by the Engineer.
 657.4.2-Setting Posts: All sign posts shall be set vertically so that the sign will be level
 and at the proper angle with the roadway as shown on the Plans. Posts with bolt-down plates
 shall be securely bolted to the cast-in-place concrete footings. Leveling shall be accomplished
 by the use of two nuts and washers on each anchor bolt. One nut with washer shall be turned
 on each anchor bolt to its approximate position. After setting, the post top nuts and washer
 shall then be turned into place loosely and the post adjusted to the vertical position by adjusting
 both upper and lower nuts. The upper nuts shall then be snugly tightened. After leveling the
 posts, the space between the base plate and the concrete footing shall be filled with grout
 consisting of one part cement to 1-½ parts of sand, with the addition of an approved admixture
 to produce high strength and minimum shrinkage grout, or other nonshrink grout approved by
 the Engineer. Exposed edges of the grout shall be finished to present a neat appearance.
 Channel posts shall be driven either by hand or by mechanical devices to the required line
 and grade, and they shall be plumb above the ground. During driving, posts shall be protected
 by a special driving cap. Any post bent or otherwise damaged so as to be unfit for use in the
 finished work shall be removed from the site and replaced by the Contractor at their expense.
 All channel posts which are to be erected back-to-back shall be bolted together with 5/16
 inch (8 mm) steel bolts for the entire length of the post at the following spacing:
 i. From the ground level to the top of the posts, shall be spaced at 18 inches (457 mm)
 centers.
 ii. From the ground level to the bottom of the posts, bolts shall be spaced at four inch (102
 mm) centers.
 iii. All bolts shall be sufficiently tightened.
 When posts are to be located in existing concrete such as dividers or islands, the concrete
 shall be carefully opened by drilling or other suitable methods. The post shall then be placed
 to the required depth of embedment and backfilled with base course material to a point
 approximately 2 inches (50 mm) from the top of a liquid, rubberized asphalt compound in
 accordance with 708.3. Alternatively, if specified to be used in the project plans on either
 610
 
 existing concrete or asphalt surfaces, the supports shall be installed using U-channel
 Breakaway Mounting Device shall be installed as specified by the device manufacturer.
 Post mounted delineators shall be supported by channel bar posts of the material, design,
 and dimensions specified, driven in earth or inserted in concrete dividers or island. Posts shall
 be driven plumb in undisturbed earth to a minimum of 24 inches (600 mm) and with the top 4
 feet (1.2 m) above the near pavement edge, as shown on the Standard Drawings, and faced
 toward approaching traffic.
 Posts shall be spaced laterally 2 feet (600 mm) beyond the shoulder; in curbed sections 2
 feet (600 mm) behind the face of curb; in areas protected by guardrail, in the line of guardrail
 posts; and in the center of dividers less than 8 feet (2.4 m) in width or as shown on the Standard
 Drawings.
 657.4.3-Structural Excavation: The Contractor shall do all excavation for each sign
 installation to the levels and dimensions shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer to
 obtain a suitable foundation. Excavation may be accomplished manually or by mechanical
 means. The Contractor is advised that the grading specifications permit the construction of
 embankment of rock fill to at least 12 inches (300 mm) below the bottom of subbase.
 If rock or a boulder is encountered in excavation, it shall be removed to a depth sufficient,
 in the opinion of the Engineer, to obtain the stability which would have been obtained had the
 excavation been made in earth to the depth required by the Plans.
 The Contractor shall remove all excavated material from the site that is not needed to
 backfill and level the disturbed area and restore the site to its original condition.
 The Standard Drawings are compiled on the basis of average soil conditions. When, in the
 opinion of the Engineer, soil conditions will permit lesser foundations or require larger
 foundations, the Contractor shall propose to the Engineer for written approval the necessary
 revisions to either post or foundations, or both. Any work in such cases shall be performed
 without change in the unit bid price.
 If the soil tends to cave in, forms shall be used to support the sides of the excavation. The
 forms shall be placed in such a manner as not to disturb the adjacent soil. If the Contractor
 elects to remove the form, the removal shall be done immediately after the concrete is poured
 so that the flowing concrete may fill the space occupied by the form. Otherwise, the form shall
 become a permanent part of the installation. In the latter case the top portion of the form shall
 be removed to a minimum of 6 inches (150 mm) below the ground.
 The Engineer will determine when forms are necessary. This form work shall be performed
 at the expense of the Contractor and no compensation will be allowed therefor.
 657.4.4-Footings: Concrete footings are required for all sign supports, except for those
 specified to be driven. Footings for each sign will vary according to the size of the sign. The
 Contractor shall construct footings based on the size of the sign and in accordance with these
 Specifications and the Standard Drawings and Plans, unless otherwise directed by the
 Engineer. Both circle data as supplied by the manufacturer of the supports shall be followed
 by the Contractor. All concrete footings shall be flush with the uphill side of the ground line
 as shown on the Plans or approved drawings. The tops of foundations for embedded posts
 shall be flush with the ground and sloped to assure proper water drainage away from the posts.
 When forms for encasement above ground are used, they shall not be removed for at least 18
 hours after the concrete is poured.
 611
 
 The concrete footing shall not be loaded by mounting sign support on the anchor bolts until
 the concrete has cured in accordance with 601 for a period of seven days.
 All concrete pedestals shall be given an ordinary finish.
 657.4.5-Backfilling: All excavations shall be backfilled with suitable random material in
 horizontal layers not to exceed 4 inches (100 mm) after compaction. Each lift shall be
 compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer. Testing is not required. All surplus material
 shall be removed from the right-of-way and the backfill finished flush with surrounding natural
 ground, including replacement of any damaged facilities or appurtenances. The Contractor
 shall restore all areas disturbed by this excavation or other operations to their original
 conditions including grading, seeding, mulching and fertilizing as directed by the Engineer.
 No separate payment will be made for backfilling materials.
 657.4.6-Field Painting of Posts: All aluminum and steel supports shall be painted as
 specified below. No painting shall begin until the concrete foundations are firmly set.
 657.4.6.1-Channel Posts: The 4 inches (100 mm) of a channel post above the concrete
 foundation shall receive sufficient coats of an asphaltic paint, conforming to the
 requirements of 705.7, to provide a film of paint approximately 5/8-in. (3 mm) thick. Three
 coats shall be lapped onto the concrete foundations to provide seal between the post and
 concrete. Care shall be taken to cover no more of the footing than necessary to provide a
 proper seal.
 657.4.6.2-Aluminum: Protection of aluminum is required where aluminum members
 are to be attached to steel members or concrete masonry. To avoid the possibility of
 galvanic corrosion, aluminum members attached to steel shall be coated at the points of
 contact with a zinc chromate primer. The surface of non-galvanized steel members shall
 be coated at the points of contact with suitable paint, followed by a coat of aluminum paint.
 Where aluminum surfaces are to be in contact with concrete or masonry, they shall first be
 given a heavy coat of an alkali-resistant bituminous paint.
 657.5-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 657.5.1-Class B Concrete Footing, Plain: The quantity of work done for Class B
 Concrete Footing, Plain will be measured in cubic yards (meters), complete in place and
 accepted, as determined by the dimensions on the Plans or Contract documents, subject to
 adjustment as provided for in 104.2 and 109.2.
 Payment will be made at the contract unit price per cubic yard (meter) for "Class B
 Concrete Footing Plain". Such price will be full compensation for furnishing all labor,
 materials, and equipment necessary to construct all footings, including staking out footings
 and stakes for this purpose; excavation for footings regardless of the type of material
 encountered; constructing and removing forms when required; furnishing, placing, finishing,
 and curing the concrete; and all other incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 657.5.2-Class B Concrete Footing, Reinforced, Roadside: The quantity of work done
 for Class B Concrete Footing, Reinforced, Roadside will be measured in cubic yards (meters),
 
 612
 
 complete in place and accepted, as determined by the dimensions on the Plans or Contract
 documents, subject to adjustment as provided for in 104.2 and 109.2.
 Payment will be made at the concrete unit price per cubic yard (meter) for "Class B
 Concrete Footing, Reinforced, Roadside". Such price will be full compensation for furnishing
 all labor, materials, and equipment necessary to construct all footings, including staking out
 footings and stakes for this purpose; excavation for footings regardless of the type of material
 encountered; constructing and removing forms; furnishing and installing reinforcing steel,
 anchor bolts, washers and nuts; furnishing and installing electrical grounding and conduit
 sleeves when required; furnishing, placing, finishing, and curing the concrete; furnishing and
 placing grout as required by the Plans; and all other incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 657.5.3-Wood Supports: Measurements for payment for "Wood Supports" will be based
 on the linear feet (meters) of wood supports for each size necessary to complete the work. The
 quantity to be paid for shall be the Plan quantity unless the Engineer orders changes in the
 lengths of posts or determines the Plan quantity is in error. In such cases the Plan quantity
 shall be recomputed to the nearest foot (0.25 meter).
 Payment will be made at the contract unit price per linear foot (meter) of support and shall
 be full compensation for furnishing and erecting the supports, furnishing and installing the
 galvanized steel sleeve inserts in footings if required on the Plans, furnishing and installing
 aluminum angles, and all other materials, equipment, tools, and labor necessary to complete
 the work.
 657.5.4-Channel Posts: Measurement for payment of "Channel Posts" will be based on
 the linear feet (meters) of steel channel post of each size necessary to complete the work. The
 length shall be the Plan quantity unless the Engineer orders changes in the lengths of posts or
 determines that the Plan quantity is in error. In such case the Plan quantity shall be recomputed
 to the nearest foot (meter).
 Payment will be made at the contract unit price per linear foot (meter) for each size of post
 required by the Plans. For back to back installations the price per linear foot (meter) shall
 include all necessary hardware. Such price and payment shall be full compensation for
 furnishing and erecting the posts, and all labor, equipment, tools, materials, and incidentals
 necessary to complete the work.
 657.5.5-A 36 Supports: Measurement for payment of "A 36 Supports", a specified for A
 36 steel in 657.2.2.2, will be based on the number of linear feet (meters) of supports for each
 size necessary to complete the work. The quantity to be paid for shall include the supports and
 base plates. The length shall be the Plan quantity unless the Engineer orders changes in the
 lengths of posts or determines that the Plan quantities are in error, in which cases the Plan
 quantities will be recomputed. Lengths will be computed to the nearest ½ foot (150 mm) for
 each installation and the nearest 1 foot (300 mm) for the total length. This item does not
 include brackets or clamps for attaching the sign to the supports.
 Payments will be made at the contract unit price per linear foot (meter) of supports for each
 size and shall be full compensation for furnishing and erecting all supports and materials, tools,
 labor, and equipment necessary to complete the work.
 
 613
 
 657.5.6-Structural Supports, Aluminum: Measurement for payment of "Structural
 Supports, Aluminum" for Alloy 6061-T6 as specified in 657.2.1.2 will be based on the number
 of linear feet (meters) of supports for each size necessary to complete the work. The quantity
 to be paid for shall include the supports and base plates. The length shall be the Plan quantity
 unless the Engineer orders changes in the lengths of posts or determines that the Plan quantities
 are in error, in which cases the Plan quantities will be recomputed. Lengths will be computed
 to the nearest ½ foot (150 mm) for each installation and the nearest 1 foot (300 mm) for the
 total length. This item does not include brackets or clamps for attaching the sign to the
 supports.
 Payment will be made at the contract unit price per linear foot (meter) of support for each
 size and shall be full compensation for furnishing and erecting all supports and materials, tools,
 labor, and equipment necessary to complete the work.
 657.5.7-Tubular Supports: Measurement for payment of "Tubular Supports" will be
 based on the number of linear feet (meters) of supports for each size necessary to complete the
 work. This material shall be either steel or aluminum, as required by the Plans. The quantity
 to be paid for shall include the supports, base plates, and pole caps. The length shall be the
 Plan quantity unless the Engineer orders changes in the lengths of posts or determines that the
 Plan quantities are in error, in which cases the Plan quantities will be recomputed. Lengths
 will be computed to the nearest ½ foot (150 mm) for each installation and the nearest 1 foot
 (300 mm) for the total length. This item does not include brackets or clamps for attaching the
 sign to the supports.
 Payments will be made at the contract unit price per linear foot (meter) of supports for each
 size and shall be full compensation for furnishing and erecting all supports and materials, tools,
 supplies, labor, and equipment necessary to complete the work.
 657.5.8-A572 Supports, Galvanized: Measurement for payment of "A572 Supports,
 Galvanized" as specified for A572 Grade 50 steel in 657.2.2.2 will be based on the number of
 linear feet (meter) of supports for each size necessary to complete the work. The quantity to
 be paid for shall include the supports and all special items included in the break-away support
 design configuration. The length shall be the Plan quantity unless the Engineer orders changes
 in the lengths of posts or determines that the Plan quantities are in error, in which cases the
 Plan quantities will be recomputed. Lengths will be computed to the nearest ½ foot (150 mm)
 for each installation and the nearest 1 foot (300 mm) for the total length. This item does not
 include brackets or clamps for attaching the sign to the supports.
 Payment will be made at the contract unit price per linear foot (meter) of support for each
 size and shall be full compensation for furnishing and erecting all supports and materials, tools,
 labor, and equipment necessary to complete the work.
 657.5.9-A572 Supports, Painted: Measurement for payment of "A572 Supports, Painted"
 as specified for A572 Grade 50 steel in 657.2.2.2 will be based on the number of linear feet
 (meter) of supports for each size necessary to complete the work. The quantity to be paid for
 shall include the supports, all special items included in the break-away support design
 configuration, and painting of these supports. The length shall be the Plan quantity unless the
 Engineer orders changes in the lengths of posts or determines that the Plan quantities are in
 error, in which cases the Plan quantities will be recomputed. Lengths will be computed to the
 614
 
 nearest ½ foot (150 mm) for each installation and the nearest 1 foot (300 mm) for the total
 length. This item does not include brackets or clamps for attaching the sign to the supports.
 Payment will be made at the contract unit price per linear foot (meter) of support for each
 size and shall be full compensation for furnishing and erecting all supports and materials, tools,
 labor, and equipment necessary to complete the work.
 657.5.10-Pipe Posts: Measurement for payment of "Pipe Posts" will be based on the actual
 number of pipe posts of each type necessary to complete the work. This quantity shall be the
 Plan quantity unless the Engineer determines the Plan quantity to be in error and changes the
 quantity of pipe posts per type.
 Payment will be made at the contract unit price per type of pipe post and shall be full
 compensation for furnishing and erecting all posts and materials, tools, labor, and equipment
 necessary to complete the work.
 657.5.11-Post Removal: Measurement for payment of "Post Removal" will be based on
 the actual number of posts that are designated on the Plans and are necessary to complete the
 work. This quantity shall be the Plan quantity unless the Engineer determines the Plan quantity
 to be in error and changes the quantity of posts to be removed.
 Payment will be made at the contract unit price per post. This price shall also be full
 compensation for the removal and disposal of the signs and sign assemblies, including
 hardware and bracing, the removal and disposal of the post supports and the restoration of the
 ground surface to its original condition.
 657.5.12-U-Channel Breakaway Mounting Device: Any U-channel Breakaway
 Mounting Devices specified to be installed in the project plans shall be paid incidental to either
 Bid Item 657008-001 2.00 Lb Channel Post, or Bid Item 657010-001 3.00 Lb Channel Post,
 as applicable. This shall include all labor, materials, equipment, or other incidental expenses
 associated with the installation of the devices.
 657.6-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided, will be paid for at the contract unit price for the
 items listed below, which prices and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all the
 material and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all
 tools, equipment, supplies and incidentals necessary to complete the work. All incidental work
 and materials for which no basis of payment is provided will be considered as completely covered
 by the prices bid for the items included in the Contract.
 
 615
 
 657.7-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 657001-*
 “size” A36 Support, **
 657002-*
 Structural Support, Aluminum, **
 657003-*
 Tubular Support, Steel, **
 657004-*
 Tubular Support, Aluminum, **
 657005-*
 Wood Support, **
 657006-*
 “size” , A572 Support, Galvanized, **
 657007-*
 “size” A572 Support, Painted, **
 657008-*
 2.00 Lb Channel Post
 657010-*
 3.00 Lb Channel Post
 657012-*
 4.00 Pound Back to Back Channel Post
 657014-*
 6.00 Pound Back to Back Channel Post
 657016-*
 Class B Concrete Footing, Plain
 657017-*
 Class B Concrete Footing, Reinforced, Roadside
 657018-*
 Post Removal
 657019-*
 Pipe Post, **
 657021-*
 Breaksafe Couplings For A572 Support
 657022-*
 Breaksafe Couplings For Channel Post
 *
 **
 
 Sequence number
 Key number
 
 616
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 SECTION 658
 OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES
 658.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This item shall consist of the fabrication and erection of overhead bridge, cantilever, and
 butterfly sign supports and fastening accessories in accordance with the requirements of the Plans
 and of these Specifications. All details not specified or not shown on the Plans shall conform to
 the details and requirements set forth in the following Specifications and publications:
 The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, latest issue,
 including revisions, as printed by the Federal Highway Administration, U.S. Department of
 Transportation. (Referred to as the MUTCD).
 Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaires and Traffic
 Signals, latest issue, including revisions, American Association of State Highway and
 Transportation Officials.
 658.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials furnished by the Contractor shall be of new stock conforming to the requirements
 of the Standard Specifications, and shall meet with the approval of the Engineer.
 All materials shall conform to the requirements of Division 700 of the Standard
 Specifications and shall also conform to the following requirements unless otherwise modified on
 the Plans. All referenced specifications for materials shall be the latest available specifications
 and revisions at the time of award of the contract.
 658.2.1-Aluminum: Tubular aluminum supports of a uniform diameter shall be fabricated
 from Alloy 6061-T6 or Alloy 6063-T6, ASTM B221, B429, or B 241 for extruded sections or
 ASTM B 209 for sheet sections.
 Structural shapes and bars shall be Alloy 6061-T6, ASTM B 221, or B 308. Plates shall
 be Alloy 6061-T6, ASTM B209.
 Castings for support top caps and horizontal member end caps shall be ASTM B 26 Alloy
 356-F or Alloy 43, and shall be held in place by stainless steel set screws. The same type cap
 must be used throughout a project.
 Aluminum hardware shall meet the requirements of 661.2.1.3. Steel nuts, bolts and
 washers used on aluminum structures shall be stainless.
 Welding wire shall be in accordance with 658.4.
 658.2.2-Steel:
 658.2.2.1-Galvanized Steel: All steel items shall be galvanized in accordance with
 ASTM A 123 or ASTM A 153, unless otherwise specified.
 Vertical poles, transverse horizontal beams and horizontal arms shall be tapered tubular
 sections or tubular sections of uniform diameter and shall have a minimum yield strength
 of 55,000 psi (380 MPa) after fabrication. All tubular sections shall have only one
 longitudinal weld. Any taper shall be uniform and continuous. Other tubular structural
 members shall be uniform in diameter and shall be fabricated from seamless or welded
 pipe conforming to ASTM A 501 or ASTM A 53, Type E or S, Grade B (hydrostatic tests
 are waived).
 
 617
 
 Tubular sections of a uniform diameter shall be fabricated from seamless and welded
 pipe conforming to ASTM A 501 or ASTM A 53, Type E or S, Grade B (hydrostatic tests
 not required).
 Steel for other structural members, plates and structural shapes shall conform to ASTM
 A 36, except plates over 1 inch (25 mm) thick shall conform to ASTM A 572, Grade 42.
 Support top and horizontal end cap castings shall be ASTM B 26 Alloy S5A or Alloy
 356-F. Caps will be held in place by stainless steel set screws. The same type cap shall be
 used throughout the project.
 Stainless steel bolts, nuts and washers for splicing flanges shall be AISI 300 series,
 commercial grade and passivated. High strength bolts and nuts for splicing flanges shall
 conform to ASTM A 325 of ASTM A 193-B7.
 Reinforcing materials shall be in conformance with 709.1 to 709.4, inclusive, except
 that welded wire fabric may be furnished in rolls.
 Anchor bolts shall be of sufficient size and strength to fully develop the bending
 moment of the shaft. Anchor bolts (unless otherwise directed on the Plans) shall be
 fabricated from high strength steel, meeting ASTM F 1554, GRADE 105. Each bolt shall
 have the threaded end galvanized for a length sufficient to extend down through the grout
 and into the concrete foundation. Each bolt shall be provided with two heavy hex nuts and
 two heavy washers. Both nuts and washers shall be hot-dipped galvanized in accordance
 with ASTM A 153 and the nuts shall meet the physical, chemical and dimensional
 requirements of ASTM A 563, Grade DH or ASTM A 194-2H.
 Detailed properties, dimensions, bolt circles and appropriate backup calculations for
 any proposed alternate design anchor bolts shall be submitted to and approved by the
 Division before fabrication.
 658.2.2.2-Weathering Steel: All components of the overhead sign supports including
 miscellaneous fixtures, shall be fabricated from plates, bars, standard W, M, and S shapes
 produced from steel conforming to AASHTO M270, Grade 50W T-2, and tubes produced
 from steel conforming to ASTM A 618, Grade 1 with AASHTO M270 supplementary
 section S83, zone 2 toughness requirements.
 Expanded metal screen shall be fabricated from steel sheets conforming to ASTM A
 606, Type 4, with special alloys to provide weathering properties equivalent to ASTM A
 588 or ASTM A 618 steel. Framing plates for expanded metal screen shall be fabricated
 from steel conforming to ASTM A 588 or ASTM A 242.
 Bolts, nuts and washers for field splices and connections shall conform to ASTM A
 325, Type 3. When allowed by the Engineer, they shall conform to ASTM A 325, Type 1
 or 2, with hot-dipped galvanizing in accordance with ASTM A 153. Etching and painting
 shall be performed to match 595 standard color 20062.
 The truss of post connections for box truss overhead supports shall be cast steel
 conforming to ASTM A 486, Class 90. Pins shall conform to ASTM A 108, Grade 1118.
 Pin holes in the casting shall be reamed to true size.
 Reinforcing materials shall be in conformance with 709.1 to 709.4, inclusive, except
 that welded wire fabric may be furnished in rolls.
 Anchor bolts shall be of sufficient size and strength to fully develop the bending
 moment of the shaft. Anchor bolts shall be fabricated from high strength steel having a
 minimum yield strength of ASTM A1554, Gr. 105 Each bolt shall be provided with two
 618
 
 heavy hex nuts. Both nuts shall be hot-dipped galvanized and, as a minimum, meet the
 physical, chemical and dimensional requirements of ASTM A 307. Washers shall be of
 standard commercial grade steel having the dimensions shown on the Detail Drawings and
 be hot-dipped galvanized in accordance with ASTM A 153.
 Filler metal for welds shall conform to the requirements of 615.5.7.
 658.2.3-Concrete: Concrete for sign foundations shall be Class B in accordance with 601.
 658.2.4-Reinforcing Steel Bars: Reinforcing steel bars shall conform to the applicable
 requirements of 602.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 658.3-FABRICATION:
 658.3.1-General: Before fabrication of any sign structure, the Contractor shall submit for
 the Engineer's approval complete detail drawings, eight copies, of each structure. This shall
 include drawings of all structural steel or aluminum framing and bracing, aluminum or steel
 castings, lighting fixtures and supporting brackets, sign brackets and any miscellaneous
 accessories for the above. It is expressly understood that the review by the Engineer of these
 drawings relates to the requirements for strength and general details, and will not relieve the
 Contractor from responsibility for errors in detail, dimension, or quantity of materials, etc.
 Overhead sign supports shall be fabricated in accordance with the Plans and this
 Specification. Any alternate design or significant departure from the Plans proposed by the
 Contractor must be presented in written or plan form for approval. The Division will approve
 or disapprove alternate proposals in writing. All materials in any alternate proposal which is a
 significant departure from the Specifications shall conform to the requirements of current
 AASHTO and ASTM Specifications. The Division will not approve substitution of material or
 design detail changes which constitute a reduction in quality, workmanship or strength of the
 structures.
 Ends of sections shall be cut true and smooth, free from burrs and ragged breaks. Open
 ends of tubular sections shall be capped as shown on the Plans. Drain holes and handholes
 shall be provided wherever shown or necessary.
 Sign supports, either aluminum or steel, shall be void of circumferential welding except at
 the base, flanges, or intersection of diagonals.
 The welding of steel shall be in accordance with the requirements of American Welding
 Society D1.1 and shall be done by qualified welders. Aluminum Alloy Welding shall be
 accomplished in accordance with 658.4.
 The loading, transporting, unloading, and piling of structural materials shall be conducted
 so that the metal will be kept clean and free from injury in handling. Structural materials shall
 be stored above the ground upon platforms, skids, blocks, or other supports. They shall be
 kept free from accumulation of dirt, oil, acids, or other foreign matter. Any structural material
 which has been deformed shall be straightened by approval methods before being laid out,
 punched, drilled, or otherwise worked upon in the shop. Sharp kinks or bends will be cause
 for rejection.
 Where required or indicated on the Plans, a sufficient number of reinforced handholes and
 electrical wire inlets and outlet fittings shall be built into the structures. Where a cable passes
 through a hole or runs along a surface at any point through or on the complete assembly, such
 619
 
 holes and surfaces shall be deburred and void of any sharp edges through or along the surface.
 A "J" hook shall be provided on the inside of the top of the vertical support on which the
 electrical wiring shall be placed as shown on the Detail Drawings.
 658.3.2-Structures Utilizing Galvanized Steel: The flanges at the center of the cross
 beam and at the ends of the horizontal arms shall be fastened to the tapered or straight sections
 by means of two circumferential welds. One of the circumferential welds shall firmly weld
 the outside of the flange to the tube. Any alternate flange connection offered shall be designed
 to develop fully the strength of the tubular sections being jointed together by means of the
 flange connection.
 It is essential that all exposed surfaces of the completed steel structure by finished with a
 galvanized coating. The frame shall be fabricated into sections as large as can be handled in
 pickling and galvanizing tanks and then dipped as complete units, ready for field bolted
 connections wherever possible. Field welding and the need for repairing zinc coatings
 damaged by assembly shall be kept to an absolute minimum.
 Galvanized coatings damaged for any reason shall be repaired by the application of a zinc
 rich paint conforming to the requirements of 711.21.
 The places to be painted shall be thoroughly cleaned before the paint is applied.
 658.3.3-Structures Utilizing Weathering Steel: Overhead sign structures of weathering
 steel are to have a natural weathering finish and shall be kept clear of all paint, grease, or other
 agents which will tend to cause an uneven finish on the posts. Any identification marks shall
 be painted on the bottom of the base plates, inside faces of loose column components and the
 top surface of horizontal members. All structures shall be delivered to the job site at least three
 months prior to completion of the work and stored in a manner that will allow them to obtain
 initial natural weathering. If they are stacked on the job site during this period, they shall be
 rotated at least once each two months. All members shall be shop cleaned in accordance with
 615.6.4, utilizing commercial blast cleaning throughout. No corrosion inhibitors shall be used
 in the processes.
 All welding shall conform to the requirements of AWS D1.1.
 658.4-WELDING OF ALUMINUM ALLOYS:
 These specifications apply to the welding of aluminum alloys used in sign structures,
 bridge rails, lamp posts, etc.
 The welding terms used in these specifications shall be interpreted in accordance with the
 definitions given in the latest edition of AWS Definitions--Welding and Cutting (AWS A3.0) of
 the American Welding Society.
 The welding symbols used on plans shall be those shown in the latest edition of Standard
 Welding Symbols (AWS A2.0) of the American Welding Society. Special conditions shall be
 fully explained by added notes or details.
 658.4.1-Base Metals: The aluminum alloys to be welded under these specifications may
 be any of the following alloy designations (ASTM designations):
 
 620
 
 i. Wrought non-heat-treatable alloys
 Alloy 3003
 Alloy 3004
 Alloy 5052
 Alloy 5083
 Alloy 5086
 Alloy 5456
 ii. Wrought heat-treatable alloys
 Alloy 6061
 Alloy 6063
 iii. Cast heat-treatable alloys
 Alloy 356.1
 Alloy A356.2
 658.4.1.1-Materials used for permanent backing shall be at least equivalent in
 weldability to the base metal being welded.
 658.4.2-Welding Processes: These Specifications include provisions for welding by the
 gas metal-arc process and the gas tungsten-arc process. Other processes shall not be used
 except as permitted by the Engineer.
 658.4.3-Filler Metal: Bare wire electrodes for use with gasmetal-arc process and welding
 rods for use with the gas tungsten-arc process shall conform to the requirements of the latest
 edition of Specifications for aluminum and aluminum alloy rods and bare electrodes AWS
 A5.10.
 Tungsten electrodes for the gas tungsten-arc process shall conform to the requirements of
 the latest edition of Specifications for Tungsten-Arc-Welding Electrodes, AWS A5.12.
 Filler metals to be used with particular base metals shall be as shown in Table 658.4.3.
 Other filler metals may be used as approved by the Engineer.
 TABLE 658.4.3
 Base Metal
 3003 to 3003
 3004 to 3004
 5052 to 5052
 5083 to 5083
 5086 to 5086
 5456 to 5456
 5670B to 6061
 5670B to 6063
 356.1 to 6061
 A356.2 to 6063
 6061 to 6063
 6061 to 6061
 6063 to 6063
 *
 
 Filler Material
 ER1100
 ER4043
 ER5356*
 ER5183
 ER5356*
 ER5556
 ER4043*
 ER4043*
 ER4043
 ER4043
 ER4043 or ER5356
 ER4043 or ER 5356
 ER 4043 or ER5356
 
 ER5183, ER5356, and ER 5556 may be used interchangeably for these base metals.
 
 621
 
 Filler metals shall be kept covered and stored in a dry place at relatively uniform
 temperatures. Original rod or wire containers shall not be opened until time to be used. Rod
 and wire shall be free of moisture, lubricant, or other contaminants. Spools of wire temporarily
 left unused on the welding machine shall be kept covered to avoid contamination by dirt and
 grease collecting on the wire. If a spool of wire is to be unused for more than a short length of
 time, it shall be returned to the carton and the carton tightly resealed.
 658.4.4-Shielding Gases: Shielding gases shall be welding grade or better.
 Shielding gas for gas metal-arc welding shall be argon, helium, or a mixture of the two
 (approximately 75 percent helium and 25 percent argon).
 Shielding gas for gas tungsten-arc welding done with alternating current shall be argon.
 Shielding gas for gas tungsten-arc welding done with direct current, straight-polarity, shall
 be helium.
 Hose used for shielding gases shall be made of synthetic rubber or plastic. Natural rubber
 hose shall not be used. Hose which has been previously used for acetylene or other gases shall
 not be used.
 658.4.5-Preparation of Materials: Joint details shall be in accordance with design
 requirements and detail drawings. The locations of joints shall not be changed without the
 approval of the Engineer.
 Edge preparation shall be by sawing, machining, clipping, or shearing. Gas tungsten-arch
 or gas metal-arc cutting may also be used. Cut surfaces shall meet the American Standards
 Association surface roughness rating value of 1,000. Oxygen cutting shall not be used.
 Surfaces and edges to be welded shall be free from fins, tears, and other defects which
 would adversely affect the quality of the weld.
 Dirt, grease, forming or machining lubricants or any organic materials shall be removed
 from the areas to be welded by cleaning with a suitable solvent or by vapor degreasing.
 On all edges and surfaces to be welded, the oxide shall be removed just prior to welding
 by wire brushing or by other mechanical methods such as rubbing with steelwool or abrasive
 cloth, scraping, filing, rotary planing, or sanding. If wire brushing is used, the brushes shall
 be made of stainless steel. Hand or power driven wire brushes which have been used on other
 materials shall not be used on aluminum.
 Where mechanical methods of oxide removal are found to be inadequate, a standard
 chemical method shall be used. Welding shall be done within 24 hours after chemical
 treatment.
 When gas tungsten-arc welding with direct current, straight polarity is being used, all edges
 and surfaces to be welded shall have the oxide removed by a standard chemical method.
 Welding shall not be done on anodically treated aluminum, unless the condition is removed
 from the joint area to be welded.
 658.4.6-Welding Procedure: All butt welds requiring 100 percent penetration, except
 those produced with the aid of backing, shall have the root of the initial weld chipped or
 machined out to sound metal before welding is started from the second side. Butt welds made
 with the use of backing shall have weld metal thoroughly fused with the backing. Where
 accessible, backing for welds that are subject to computed stress or which are exposed to view
 on the completed structure and which are not otherwise parts of the structure, shall be removed
 622
 
 and the joints ground or machined smooth. In tubular members, butt welds subjected to
 computed stresses shall be made with the aid of permanent backing rings or strips.
 The procedure used for production welding of any particular joint shall be the same as used
 in the procedure qualification for that joint.
 All welding operations, either shop or field, shall be protected from air currents or drafts
 so as to prevent any loss of gas shielding during welding. Adequate gas shielding shall be
 provided to protect the molten metal during solidification.
 The work shall be positioned for flat position welding whenever practicable.
 In both shop and field, all weld joints shall be dry at the time of welding.
 The size of the electrode, voltage and amperage, welding speed, gas or gas mixture, and
 gas flow rate shall be suitable for the thickness of material, design of joint, welding position
 and other circumstances attending the work.
 Gas metal-arc welding shall be done with direct current, reverse polarity.
 Gas tungsten-arc welding shall be done with alternating current or with direct current
 straight polarity.
 When the joint to be welded requires specific root penetration, the Contractor shall make a
 sample joint and a macroetched cross section of the weld to demonstrate that the joint welding
 procedure to be used will attain the required root penetration. The sample joint shall have a
 length of at least 1 foot (300 mm) and shall be welded with the electrode, polarity, amperage,
 voltage, speed, gas mixture and gas flow rate that are proposed to be used in production
 welding. The Engineer, at their discretion, may accept evidence on record in lieu of the
 preceding test.
 Where preheat is needed, the temperature of preheat shall not exceed 350° F (175 ° C) for
 heat-treated alloys or 600° F (315° C) for non-heat-treated alloys. The temperature shall be
 measured by temperature indicating crayons or by pyrometric equipment. Heat treated alloys
 shall not be held at the maximum preheat temperature or at temperatures near the maximum
 for more than 30 minutes.
 658.4.7-Weld Quality: Regardless of the method of inspection, the acceptance or rejection
 of welds shall be determined by the following conditions:
 i Cracks in welds or adjacent base metal will not be acceptable.
 ii Copper inclusions will not be acceptable.
 iii Porosity in excess of that permitted by Appendix IV, Section of the ASME Boiler and
 Pressure Vessel Code will not be acceptable.
 iv Lack of fusion, incomplete penetration, or tungsten or oxide inclusions will be
 acceptable only if small and well dispersed.
 Undercut shall not be more than 0.01 inch (250 μm) deep when its direction is transverse
 to the primary stress in the part that is undercut.
 Undercut shall not be more than 1/32 inch (800 μm) deep when its direction is parallel to
 the primary stress in the part that is undercut.
 No overlap shall be allowed.
 All craters shall be filled to the full cross section of the welds.
 Welds having defects greater than the levels of acceptance specified above shall be
 considered as rejected unless corrected in accordance with 658.4.9.
 
 623
 
 658.4.8-Inspection: To determine compliance with 658.4.7, all welds shall be visually
 inspected and, in addition, all welds subjected to computed stress shall be inspected by the dye
 penetrant method except as specified in 658.4.8.3.
 658.4.8.1-For highway sign structures, the dye penetrant method shall be used on butt
 welds in columns and main chord members, and on fillet welds connecting columns to
 bases and main chord members, including the associated flanges, gussets, or main load
 carrying brackets or members; also, on fillet welds connecting flanges to the main truss
 chord members.
 658.4.8.2-The dye penetrant tests shall be performed in accordance with the
 requirements of ASTM E 165, Method B, Procedures B-2 or B-3.
 658.4.8.3-Dye penetrant inspection may be omitted provided that the inspector
 examines each layer of weld metal with a magnifier of 3X minimum before the next
 successive layer is deposited.
 658.4.9-Corrections: In lieu of rejection of an entire piece or member containing welding
 which is unacceptable, the corrective measures listed below may be permitted by the Engineer,
 whose approval shall be obtained prior to making each repair.
 658.4.9.1-Defective welds shall be corrected by removing and replacing the entire
 weld, or as follows:
 i.
 Cracks in welds or base metal: Determine full extent of crack by dye penetrant
 method or other positive means. Remove crack throughout its length and depth,
 and reweld.
 ii.
 Excessive porosity, lack of fusion: Remove defective portions and reweld.
 iii. Copper or tungsten inclusions: remove defective portions and reweld.
 iv.
 Excessive concavity of crater, undercut, undersize weld: Clean and deposit
 additional weld metal.
 v.
 Overlap: Reduce by removal of excess weld metal.
 658.4.9.2-The defective areas shall be removed by chipping or machining. Oxygen
 cutting shall not be used. Before rewelding, the joint shall be inspected to assure that all
 the defective weld has been removed. If dye penetrant has been used to inspect the weld,
 all traces of penetrant solutions shall be removed with solvent, water, heat, or other suitable
 means before rewelding.
 658.4.10-Qualification of Procedures, Welders and Welding Operators: Joint welding
 procedures which are to be employed in executing contract work under these specifications
 shall be previously qualified by tests prescribed in Part B, Section IX, of the ASME Boiler and
 Pressure Vessel Code. The qualifications shall be at the expense of the Contractor. The
 Engineer, at their discretion, may accept evidence of previous qualification of the joint welding
 procedures to be employed.
 All welders and welding operators to be employed under these specifications shall be
 previously qualified by tests as prescribed in Part B, Section IX, of the ASME Boiler and
 624
 
 Pressure Vessel Code. The Engineer, at their discretion, may accept evidence of previous
 qualification of the welders and welding operators to be employed. The same process and type
 of equipment that is required for execution of the construction work shall be used in qualifying
 welders and welding operators.
 658.5-ERECTION:
 Erections of sign structures shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
 current edition of the Standard Specifications and the requirements given below. The Contractor
 shall provide all tools, equipment and appliances necessary for the expeditious handing of the
 work, all of which shall be subject to the approval of the Engineer. Materials and workmanship
 not previously inspected will be inspected on the site of the work and all rejected material shall be
 removed from the site of the work.
 In order to reduce the hazards of performing work over roadways and to provide sign loads
 to sign bridges immediately, the sections of a horizontal strut of any bridge shall be spliced together
 for the full length of one span and all sign panels, lighting and other accessories required thereon,
 as described elsewhere in these Specifications, shall be fully installed before erecting the complete
 assembly between the previously erected columns or as directed by the Engineer. The fully
 assembled structure shall be handled and erected in such a manner as not to damage any of the
 installations thereon.
 Overhead sign supports shall provide a vertical clearance, between the bottom edge of the
 sign or luminaire support for the full width of the pavement and shoulders of not less than 17 feet
 (5.2 m).
 The Contractor shall take full responsibility for checking all cross sections at approved sign
 locations to determine final sign structure dimensions.
 Where cylindrical concrete footings are used, the concrete shall be placed against
 undisturbed earth. Earth augers, if used shall be of the same diameter as the footings. Where a
 trench is required, it shall be only as wide and long as is necessary to accommodate the work. The
 excavation shall be made in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Standard
 Specifications. All excavations shall be backfilled with suitable random material in horizontal
 layers not to exceed 4 inches (100 mm) after compaction. Each lift shall be compacted to the
 satisfaction of the Engineer. Testing is not required. All surplus material shall be removed from
 the right-of-way and the backfill finished flush with surrounding natural ground, including
 replacement of any damaged facilities or appurtenances. The Contractor shall restore all areas
 disturbed by this excavation or other operations to their original conditions including grading,
 seeding, mulching and fertilizing as directed by the Engineer.
 If rock or boulders are encountered during the excavation, they shall be removed to a depth
 sufficient, in the opinion of the Engineer, to obtain the stability necessary to support the complete
 sign structure.
 The footings shall be of Class B concrete, reinforced, of the types shown on the Plans.
 Steel reinforcement, anchor bolts and conduit for the footings shall be as shown on the Plans.
 All overhead sign structures shall have ground rods, irregardless of whether they have sign
 lighting or other electrical components. Ground rods shall be copperclad steel, ¾ inches (19 mm)
 in diameter with a minimum length as noted on the Plans and shall be one piece. Sectional or
 segmented ground rods are not permitted. The ground rods shall be complete with ground clamp
 and square head bolt.
 
 625
 
 The anchor bolts shall be set accurately, by means of a template in the position shown on
 the drawings and held rigidly in the forms so as to avoid displacement during the pouring of
 concrete. The steel reinforcement and conduit shall have been properly placed and secured before
 the pouring of concrete. The Contractor shall make periodic checks of the bolt positions and
 elevations during concreting operations. It is essential that the distance between the centers of
 anchor bolt groups of the two or three foundations of a frame be exactly the span lengths shown
 on the Plans.
 Two inch (50 mm) diameter galvanized conduit shall be furnished and installed in the post
 foundations at locations as specified on the Plans. The conduit shall terminate above the top of
 the foundation and shall be fitted with a 2 inches (50 mm) capped grounding bushing above the
 foundation. The lower end of the conduit shall emerge from the side of the footing to be joined to
 conduit from the junction box.
 The entire structure shall be erected and adjusted for plumbness, grades and alignment by
 the manipulation of the leveling nuts on the anchor bolts.
 Electrical materials and other installations need not be in place on the columns at the time
 of column erection.
 Brackets for attaching signs shall be spaced as shown on the Standard Drawings or the
 Plans. There shall be a minimum of two brackets per sign.
 The field assembling of the component parts of a structure shall be done in a manner not
 likely to produce damage by twisting, bending, or otherwise deforming the metal. Any member
 slightly bent or twisted shall have all defects corrected in an approved manner before being placed.
 Members seriously damaged will be rejected. All exposed surfaces shall be free of blemishes and
 scratches. Painting will not be allowed. Just prior to erection, the aluminum shall be thoroughly
 cleaned and any accumulations of oil, grease, dirt or foreign materials shall be removed by the use
 of an approved solvent cleaner.
 Protection of aluminum is required where aluminum members are to be attached to
 concrete masonry or steel which is neither galvanized nor stainless. To avoid the possibility of
 corrosion, aluminum members attached to such bare steel shall be coated at the points of contact
 with a zinc chromate primer or as called for on the Plans. The surfaces of steel members,
 nongalvanized, shall likewise be coated at the points of contact with a suitable priming paint and
 this shall be followed by a coat of aluminum paint. Where aluminum surfaces are to be in contact
 with concrete or masonry, they shall first be given a heavy coat of an alkali-resistant bituminous
 paint.
 658.5.1-Erection of Columns or Cantilever Uprights:
 I. Place leveling nuts, then washers on anchor bolts at level position.
 II. Insure anchor bolts and the bolt holes in base plate are properly aligned.
 a. No cold working of bolts will be allowed.
 b. No cutting or reaming of holes will be allowed without prior approval from the
 Traffic Engineering Division.
 III. Place column or cantilever upright onto the anchor bolts.
 IV. Hold column or cantilever upright at true plumb.
 a. Adjust leveling nuts as necessary (column may not always be exactly
 perpendicular to base plate due to welding distortion, etc.).
 
 626
 
 V. All bolts will be coated with either of the following waxes; Jon Cote 639 or
 MacDermid Torque ‘N Tension Control Fluid. The top anchor bolt nuts must be
 installed the same day that the wax is applied to the anchor bolts.
 VI. Place washers, then the top anchor bolt nuts on the anchor bolts.
 VII. Snug the anchor bolt nuts alternating corner-to-corner and side-to-side. Snug tight
 is defined as the tightness which exists due to the full effort of a man using a spud
 wrench with the appropriate length handle for the bolt being tightened. The
 following chart indicates the size of the wrench to be sued when snugging bolts:
 BOLT DIAMETER
 3/4 in (19.05 mm)
 7/8 in (22.23 mm)
 1 in (25.40 mm)
 1-1/4 in (31.75 mm)
 1-1/2 in (38.10 mm)
 1-3/4 in (44.45 mm)
 2 in (50.80 mm)
 2-1/4 in (57.15 mm)
 
 HANDLE LENGTH OF WRENCH
 23” (575 mm)
 23” (575 mm)
 23” (575 mm)
 23” (575 mm)
 36” (900 mm)
 36” (900 mm)
 36” (900 mm)
 36” (900 mm)
 
 VIII. Apply 1/3 turn to each nut in the same sequence as snugging. Mark top anchor bolt
 nuts, anchor bolts, and base plate for reference to insure proper rotation is achieved.
 A hydraulic torque wrench meeting the minimum requirements specified must be
 used to properly tension the anchor bolt nuts. Breaker bars, cheater bars, air
 wrenches, or other mechanical devices will not be allowed as they cannot achieve
 the proper tension.
 IX. Release any load by crane or other erection device. The anchor bolt nuts must be
 properly tightened before removal of the crane.
 X. Check structure. If problems exist such as the anchor connections are loose, then
 repeat the nut tightening procedure.
 658.5.2-Connection of Spans:
 I. Lift span, with signs, lighting and other accessories attached, to columns and insure
 bolts and bolt holes properly aligned.
 II. Insure connecting plates fit with no burrs or other seating inhibitors.
 III. Install bolts, nuts, and washers to snug tight, corner-to-corner and side-to-side. Use
 the above chart to determine a proper size wrench for snugging bolts. All bolts will
 be properly waxed before the nuts are installed.
 IV. Apply appropriate rotation to turning element in the same sequence as snugging
 and for high strength bolts in accordance with Table 615.3.214B of the Standard
 Specifications.
 V. Check structure. If problems exist, such as loose arm connections or showing gaps,
 the load must be removed from the area in question and steps repeated as necessary.
 658.5.3-Hydraulic Torque Wrench Specifications: Anchor bolt nuts may only be
 tightened by a hydraulic wrench with a Minimum Capacity of 5300 feet lbs. (7,180 Newton
 Meter), and must be capable of tightening or loosening.
 
 627
 
 658.5.4-Verification of Contractor’s Equipment and Personnel: The Contractor will
 contact the Materials Control, Soils and Testing (MCS&T) Section ten working days prior to
 erection of the first sign structure. MCS&T personnel will meet with the inspector and
 contractor to verify installation procedures.
 658.6-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 658.6.1-Class B Concrete Footing, Reinforced, Overhead: The quantity of work done
 for Class B Concrete Footings, Reinforced, Overhead will be measured in cubic yards (meters),
 complete in place and accepted, as determined by the dimensions on the Plans or Contract
 documents, subject to adjustment as provided for in 104.2 and 109.2.
 658.6.2-Overhead Sign Structures: Measurement for payment for overhead sign
 structures will be based on each unit complete in place, which will include the various elements
 of the structure consisting of vertical end support units, horizontal units, vertical sign brackets,
 structural framing for signing if required, sign lighting support hardware if required (horizontal
 brackets, pads, bolts, nuts, plates, etc.) and any other accessories or hardware as required to
 make a complete installation as called for on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer.
 658.7-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, shall be paid for at the contract unit price
 for the items listed below, which prices and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all
 the materials and doing all work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including
 staking out footings and stakes therefore; excavating for footings regardless of the type of material
 encountered; constructing and removing forms; furnishing and installing reinforcing steel, anchor
 bolts, washers and nuts; furnishing and installing electrical grounding and conduit sleeves;
 furnishing, placing, finishing and curing the concrete; furnishing and placing grout as required by
 the Plans; fabrication, delivery and erection of each overhead sign; and including all tools,
 equipment, supplies and incidentals necessary to complete the work. All incidental work and
 materials for which no basis of payment is provided will be considered as completely covered by
 the prices bid for the items included in the contract.
 658.8-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 658001-* Class B Concrete Footings, Reinforced, Overhead
 658002-* Overhead Sign, Steel-Aluminum Combination
 658003-* Overhead Sign, Galvanized Steel
 658004-* Overhead Sign, Weathering Steel
 * Sequence number
 
 628
 
 UNIT
 Cubic Yard (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 SECTION 659
 SIGN LIGHTING
 659.1-DESCRIPTION:
 Sign lighting shall consist of furnishing and installing or modifying sign illumination
 systems, including all necessary accessories, in accordance with the Plans and the following
 Specifications or as directed by the Engineer.
 All electrical equipment shall conform to the standards of the National Electrical
 Manufacturers Association (NEMA), the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. (UL), or the Electronic
 Industries Association (EIA), whichever is applicable. In addition to the requirements of the Plans
 and these Specifications, all materials and workmanship shall conform to the requirements of the
 National Electrical Code (NEC), referred to as the Code; the American Society for Testing
 Materials (ASTM); the American National Standards Association (ANSI); The American Wire
 Gauge (AWG), and any local ordinances which may apply.
 Wherever reference is made in these Specifications to the Code or to the standards
 mentioned above, the references shall mean the code or standard, including revisions, that is in
 effect at the time of the award of the contract.
 659.2-MATERIALS:
 The materials furnished and used shall be new, except as may be specifically provided on
 the Plans. The materials shall be manufactured, handled, and used in a workmanlike manner to
 insure a completed installation in accordance with the Plans and Specifications.
 All electrical materials shall conform to the special requirements and to the Standardization
 Rules of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, IPCEA and, when governing, shall
 also conform to the National Electrical Code, local and special laws or ordinances, and the
 Underwriter's Laboratories.
 659.2.1-Equipment Lists and Drawings: The Contractor shall submit to the Engineer for
 approval detailed drawings in duplicate of switch box and luminaire equipment and of any
 proposed deviations from the Plans. Following checking, correction, and approval, not less
 than eight complete sets shall be submitted to the Engineer. The Division will not be liable for
 any material purchased, labor performed, or delay to the work prior to such approval.
 If ordered by the Engineer, the Contractor shall submit for approval sample articles of the
 materials proposed for use. Parts list, service instructions, and all apparatus warranties
 packaged with or accompanying the electrical equipment to be installed on the project shall be
 delivered to the Engineer.
 659.2.2-Conduit: All conductors shall be run in conduit, except for overhead or temporary
 installations and where conductors are run inside poles. Conduit to be installed underground,
 on the surface of poles, or in structures, except as shown on the Plans, shall be Type R, Type
 F, or Type P as follows:
 i. Type R (Rigid Steel Conduit) shall meet the requirements of Section 715.42.10.1.
 ii. Type F (Flexible, Liquid-Tight Conduit) shall meet the requirements of Section
 715.42.10.2.
 iii. Type P (Polyvinyl Chloride Conduit) shall meet the requirements of Section
 715.42.10.3.
 629
 
 Standard and expansion couplings and other fittings for the Type P conduit shall all be of
 the same materials as the conduit.
 Other fittings for metal conduit shall be threaded malleable iron conforming to the
 requirements of ASTM A 338 and shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of
 ASTM A 153.
 The size of conduit used shall be as shown on the Plans or as specified. If size is not shown
 on the Plans, the National Electrical Code shall govern as to the necessary conduit size.
 659.2.3-Pull or Junction Boxes: Pull or junction boxes for structure installation shall be
 as shown on Plans or Type L. Boxes for ground (including sidewalk) installation shall be Type
 H (10x10). Type L shall meet the requirements of 715.42.11.1. Type H (10x10) shall meet
 the requirements of Section 715.42.11.2.
 659.2.4-Cable: All wire and cable for sign lighting branch circuits shall conform to the
 requirements of the current edition of the National Electrical Code and shall meet all relevant
 ASTM Specifications. Conductors shall be coated softdrawn copper, unless otherwise noted
 on the Plans or in these Specifications. Insulation shall be Type THWN. Cable shall be UL
 approved. Conductor sizes shall be standard American Wire Gauge sizes and shall be as noted
 on the Plans. All conductors shall be stranded. Stranded wire shall have a minimum of 19
 strands.
 Wire and cable for sign lighting projects included with roadway lighting projects shall be
 the same type as specified for the roadway lighting project.
 All wire and cable shall have
 the size, voltage rating, and type of insulation and manufacturer's name permanently marked
 on the outer covering at regular intervals. The Manufacturer shall furnish to the Engineer and
 the Contractor all splicing or terminating information necessary for proper installation of the
 cable.
 Color coding for sign lighting cables shall be permanent solid color as follows:
 Single Phase
 Leg A
 Black
 Leg B
 Red
 White or
 Neutral
 Natural Gray
 Equipment
 Green
 Ground
 
 Three Phase
 Phase A
 Black
 Phase B
 Red
 White or
 Phase C
 Natural Gray
 Equipment
 Green
 Ground
 
 Color coding of electrical conductors by use of phase tape or field paint is not acceptable.
 Conductors shall be manufacturer-colored, striped or ridge-marked.
 Bare ground conductors shall be softdrawn copper, unless otherwise specified.
 659.2.5-Connectors: Cable connections in boxes and handholes shall be made by means
 of connector kits, fused or non-fused, as indicated on the Plans. Splices for the signs shall be
 made by means of straight through or "Y" connector kits as required and as noted on the Plans.
 Where these connector kits cannot be used, as verified by the Engineer, connections on cables
 in junction boxes shall be made by splicing as described elsewhere.
 Fused "Y" connectors, if required, shall be composed of "Y" line side housing assembled
 with a load side and fuse terminal housing.
 630
 
 The housing shall be formed from water-resistant synthetic rubber. Each housing shall
 provide a water seal around the cables and when fully assembled shall form a watertight
 connector.
 The interior shall be arranged to receive and retain line side wiring and the fuse contacts.
 The fuse contacts shall be spring-loaded copper designed for 30 amperes, 600 volts; shall have
 90 percent minimum conductivity and shall be suitable for gripping a 10 amp, 600 volt
 cartridge-type midget fuse, 13/32 inch (10.3 mm) in diameter and 1-1/3 inches (33.9 mm) long.
 The contacts shall be fully annealed. The load side conductors shall be connected by crimping
 and the line side conductors shall be connected with screws. The connector shall be of the
 nonlocking type that will break off under extreme tensile stress leaving no exposed metal
 contacts on the line side of the connector.
 The cable diameters used shall determine the size of each housing. The load side housing
 shall retain the fuse when disconnected.
 Non-fused connectors shall be similar to the fused "Y" connectors. The cable diameter shall
 determine the size of each housing of each connector.
 Fuses for connectors shall be rated at 10 amperes, unless otherwise noted.
 659.2.6-Bonding and Grounding: Metallic cable sheaths, conduit, transformer cases,
 anchor belts, and metal poles and pedestals shall be made mechanically and electrically secure
 to form a continuous system and shall be effectively grounded. Bonding and grounding
 jumpers shall be copper wire or copper strap of the same cross sectional area as #4 AWG for
 all lighting systems.
 Ground rods shall be copper clad steel, ¾ inches (19 mm) in diameter with a minimum
 length as noted on the plans and shall be one piece. Sectional or segmented ground rods are
 not permitted. The ground rods shall be complete with ground clamp and square head bolt.
 659.2.7-Service: Service equipment for a sign lighting system shall be provided as
 required by the Plans unless changed by the Engineer to meet a local condition. Where a meter
 is required, a meter base complete with sealing rings shall be installed by the Contractor.
 Installation of electric meter and final hookup shall be done by the serving utility company. A
 circuit breaker mounted in a NEMA Type 4 (dust and moisture proof) enclosure shall be
 installed as indicated on the Standard Drawings.
 659.2.8-Wood Poles: All wood poles shall meet the requirements of Section 710.8.
 659.2.9-Enclosures: Pole mounted enclosures for sign lighting shall of the type shown on
 the Plans and shall be NEMA Type 4 (dust and moisture proof). The design shall be of AISI
 300 Series stainless steel with a flange mounted switch handle and a double defeater cover lock
 mechanism. Enclosure locks shall be such that all enclosures on the project can be opened
 with the same key. Locks shall be of quality bronze construction with bronze keeper chains.
 Enclosure mounting brackets for mounting the enclosure on the sign support shall be as
 shown on the Plans.
 659.2.10-Sign Lighting Fixtures: Type 3 (Mercury Vapor Sign Light) 100, 175 or 250
 Watt:
 
 631
 
 The Type 3 luminaire shall be of the remote ballast, 100, 175 or 250-watt as indicated on
 the plans, mercury vapor type, furnished complete with housing, mounting bracket, reflector,
 refractor, lamp socket, ballast and lamp; Hollophane, Guth, G.E. or equal as approved by the
 Engineer. The luminaire shall be 250 watt unless otherwise indicated.
 The housing shall be die-cast aluminum with captive closed cell neoprene and felt double
 gasketing. Closure shall be positive by use of stainless steel pressure latches and stainless steel
 hinges.
 The reflector shall be asymmetric polished aluminum. The refractor shall be molded
 prismatic thermal shock resisting borosilicate glass.
 The lamp socket shall be of a heavy duty type and be provided with adjustable settings for
 varying beam pattern.
 The ballast shall be 100, 175 or 250 watt high power factor constant wattage or constant
 wattage auto transformer for use with appropriate lamp and system voltage.
 The lamp shall be 100, 175 or 250 watt deluxe white mercury vapor heavy glass type with
 rated life of 24,000 hours, equal to ANSI Code H38-4HT (100), H39-22KB (175) or H37-5KB
 (250).
 The complete luminaire optical assembly consisting of reflector, refractor, lamp socket
 position and lamps shall produce a light distribution conforming to the Isofootcandle and
 Utilization Curves of Guth Vertol Signliter, Hollophane 780 Express lite or equal as approved
 by the Engineer.
 659.2.11-Photoelectric Controls (For Independent Sign Light System Only):
 WVDOH shall not need or require a photocell at each overhead sign structure containing sign
 lighting to turn sign lights On and Off if a control station running the sign lights already
 contains a photocell either by design in the Plans or previously field installed. Photoelectric
 controls shown on the Plans shall be capable of switching multiple fluorescent luminaires
 directly.
 The photocell shall consist of a light-sensitive element connected directly to a control relay
 and shall be equipped with circuitry designed to accept a supply voltage of 120 volts, unless
 otherwise indicated on the Plans.
 The unit shall be preset to “turn on” between 1.0 and 3.5 foot candles. “Turn off” shall be
 at least two times the “turn on” level; however, “turn off” must be greater than 3.0 and less
 than 15.0 foot candles.
 The unit shall meet all relevant NEMA standards and shall be twist-lock type equipped for
 pole-top mounting using a slip fitter or conduit stem, or where pole-top mounting is impossible,
 bracket mounting to the side of the pole. The unit shall be north oriented. The unit shall be
 utility grade locking-type photo controls with a 2 to 5 second time delay.
 659.2.12-Marking: Each overhead sign structure containing sign lighting shall be
 identified by control station number (as applicable) and circuit number (as applicable) with
 adhesive labels applied 6 feet (1.8m) above the grade line normal to the roadway. Adhesive
 labels shall be designed to be exposed to the weather. Legend shall be 3 inches (75mm) black
 on white. Also, each corresponding control station feeding sign lighting shall be identified by
 “WVDOH” label and control station number (as applicable) and corresponding voltage (as
 applicable) with adhesive labels on the control station door. The same adhesive label
 specifications apply as are stated above for the sign lighting labels.
 632
 
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 659.3-GENERAL:
 Existing electrical systems (traffic signal, highway and street lighting, flashing beacon, and
 sign illumination), or approved temporary replacements thereof, shall be in effective operation for
 the benefit of the traveling public during the progress of the work, except when shut-down is
 permitted to allow for alterations or final removal of the systems.
 All systems shall be complete and in operation to the satisfaction of the Engineer upon
 completion of all the work. This includes field focusing of lamp fixtures.
 659.3.1-Excavating and Backfilling: The excavations required for the installation of
 conduit, foundations, and other appurtenances shall be performed in such a manner as to cause
 the least possible damage to streets, sidewalks, landscaping, and other improvements. The
 trenches shall not be excavated wider than necessary for the proper installation of the electrical
 appurtenances and foundations. Excavation shall not be performed until immediately before
 the installation of conduit and other appurtenances. The material from the excavation shall be
 placed in a position that will not cause damage or obstruction to vehicular and pedestrian traffic
 or interfere with surface drainage.
 All excavations shall be backfilled with suitable random material in horizontal layers not
 to exceed 4 inches (100 mm) after compaction. Each lift shall be compacted to the satisfaction
 of the Engineer. Testing is not required. All surplus material shall be removed from the rightof-way and the backfill finished flush with surrounding natural ground, including replacement
 of any damaged facilities or appurtenances. The Contractor shall restore all areas disturbed by
 this excavation or other operations to their original conditions including grading, seeding,
 mulching and fertilizing as directed by the Engineer.
 The Contractor shall employ hand excavation methods in areas where underground
 facilities exist, in order to avoid damaging these facilities. Any damage caused by the
 Contractor to existing facilities shall be repaired by the Contractor at his own expense, to the
 satisfaction of the Engineer. The Contractor will be responsible for all claims and damages for
 interrupted service and all other damage suits which may result from such interrupted service.
 659.3.2-Removing and Replacing Improvements: Improvements such as sidewalks,
 curbs, gutters, Portland cement and asphalt concrete pavement, bituminous surfacing, base
 material, lawn and plants, and any other improvements removed, broken or damaged by the
 Contractor's operations shall be replaced or reconstructed with materials of equal quality. The
 new work shall be left in a serviceable condition satisfactory to the Engineer.
 Whenever a part of a square or slab of existing concrete sidewalk or driveway is broken or
 damaged, the entire square or slab shall be removed and the concrete reconstructed as specified.
 The outline of all areas to be removed in Portland cement concrete pavements shall be cut
 to a minimum depth of 4 inches (100 mm) with an abrasive type saw prior to removing the
 pavement material. The cut for the remainder of the required depth may be made by a method
 satisfactory to the Engineer. Cuts shall be neat and true with no shatter outside the removal
 area.
 
 633
 
 659.3.3-Conduit Installation:
 659.3.3.1-Type R Conduit: Where pull boxes are installed adjacent to the base of a
 standard or a sign structure post, conduit installed between pull boxes and base shall not
 be less than 2 inches (50 mm) in diameter.
 It shall be the option of the Contractor, at his expense, to use conduit of larger size than
 specified and where used, the larger size shall be for the entire length of the run from outlet
 to outlet. No reducing coupling will be permitted.
 The ends of all conduits, whether shop or field cut, shall be reamed to remove burrs and
 rough edges. Cuts shall be made square and true so that the ends will butt or come together
 for the full circumference. Slip joints or running threads will not be permitted for coupling
 conduit. When a standard coupling cannot be used, an approved threaded union coupling
 shall be used. The treads on all conduit shall be painted with a compound meeting
 specification MIL-P-21035 before the couplings are made up. All couplings shall be
 screwed up until the end of the conduits are brought together, providing a good structural
 connection throughout the entire length of the conduit run. Where the coating on the
 conduit has been damaged in handling or installation, such damaged places shall be painted
 with an approved rust preventative paint.
 So far as practical, all conduit shall be run without traps. Where dips are unavoidable,
 a pull box or drainage tee shall be placed at each low point to drain any moisture
 accumulation. Conduit runs shall be made with as few couplings as standard length will
 permit and the total angle of all bends between any two boxes shall not exceed two quarter
 bends (180 degrees) unless otherwise approved by the Engineer.
 Two cubic feet (600 cubic mm) of coarse aggregate (crushed stone or gravel) of a size
 and grade approved by the Engineer shall be placed at drainage tees for underground
 conduits.
 Conduit bends, except factory bends, shall have a radius of not less than six times the
 inside diameter of the conduit. Where factory bends are not used, the conduit shall be bent
 without crimping or flattening, using the longest radius practicable.
 Conduit shall be laid at a depth of not less than 18 inches (450 mm) below the curb
 grade in the sidewalk area, 36 inches (900 mm) below the highway pavement grade in the
 road areas, and 24 inches (600 mm) below the finished grade an all other areas. All conduit
 placed under paved roads shall have a minimum diameter of 2 inches (50 mm).
 Conduit shall be placed under existing pavement by jacking or drilling methods.
 Pavement shall not be disturbed without the approval of the Engineer. All local
 subterranean utility maps shall be checked before any jacking or drilling operations begin.
 The near side of the jacking or drilling pits shall have a four foot (1.2 m) horizontal
 clearance from the edge of any type of pavement wherever possible. Water jetting will not
 be permitted.
 Conduit terminating in standards or pedestals shall have a projection above the foundation
 of 4 inches (100 mm) and shall be sloped towards the handhole opening.
 Conduit ends shall extend into concrete Junction boxes at least 1½ inches (40 mm) and
 be equipped with approved bonding bushings. Conduit shall be 2 inches (50 mm) above
 the bottom, and shall be sloped to facilitate pulling of conductors. Conduit entering
 through the bottom of a pull box shall be located near the end walls to leave the major
 portion of the box clear. At all outlets, conduits shall enter from the direction of the run.
 
 634
 
 Expansion or deflection fittings, or both, shall be installed in metallic conduit runs at
 all joints in the structure to compensate for deflection and expansion. Expansion fittings
 shall be bonded with approved flexible tinned copper bonding jumpers.
 Where new pull boxes are placed in existing conduit runs, the conduit shall be fitted
 with threaded bushings and bonded as shown on the Plans.
 Conduit run on the surface of bridge structures shall be secured with approved strapping
 spaced not more than 5 feet (1.5 m) apart. Expansion fittings, as detailed on the structure
 Plans, shall be installed where the conduit crosses an expansion joint in the structure. Each
 expansion fitting shall be provided with a bonding jumper of at least # 6 AWG copper wire
 or equal.
 Conduit leading to soffit, wall or other lights or fixtures below the grade of the pull box
 shall be sealed by means of an approved sealing fitting and sealing compound.
 A # 12 AWG copperclad pull wire shall be installed in all conduits which are to receive
 future conductors. At least 2 feet (600 mm) of pull wire shall be doubled back into the
 conduit at each termination.
 After backfilling is completed and prior to the installation of cable, all conduits,
 existing and new, shall be rodded throughout their entire lengths with a mandrel ¼ inch (6
 mm) smaller in diameter than the conduit and 2 inches (50 mm) in length, and with a
 cylindrical wire brush the same diameter as the conduit.
 659.3.3.2-Type P Conduit: Type P conduits shall be installed in accordance with the
 applicable methods as prescribed for Type R conduits, with regard to parallel conduit
 installations, coordinated with the existing or newly installed facilities.
 Type P conduit shall be made watertight by joining with solvent in accordance with
 manufacturer's specifications. Ends terminating in junction boxes shall be terminated with
 expansion couplings and end bells. Ends joining to metal conduit elbows at lighting
 standard foundations shall be connected through expansion couplings and adapters.
 659.3.4-Luminaires: No luminaire shall be installed until the lamp socket position has
 been inspected and approved by the Engineer for conformance to the manufacturer's
 recommended position for the specified distribution.
 The connections between the luminaire and connector kits shall be made with # 10 wires.
 659.3.5-Pull Boxes: Pull boxes shall be installed at the locations shown on the Plans or,
 in long runs, shall be spaced at not more than 250 feet (75 meters). It shall be the option of the
 Contractor, at his expense, to install additional pull boxes to facilitate his work.
 Pull boxes shall be installed so that the covers are flush with the curb or sidewalk or 2
 inches (50 mm) above the surrounding ground when no finished grade is established.
 659.3.6-Cables: The Contractor shall provide adequate equipment for installation of cable,
 shall pull all wires through conduits in such a manner as not to overstress or stretch any wire,
 and shall use precautions so as not to score, cut, twist or damage the protective covering or
 insulation. In the pulling of cables in conduits, where the strain on the cables is likely to prove
 excessive, the Contractor shall use soapstone powder or other approved lubricant. Where two
 or more cables are to occupy the same conduit, they shall be drawn in together and kept parallel
 to each other by the use of a pulling head.
 635
 
 The Contractor, in connecting sockets, outlets and other similar equipment, shall ground
 the most accessible bare parts of each piece of equipment. In order to ensure that this has been
 done, each piece of equipment shall be tested after installation, and under the supervision of
 the Engineer, with a test lamp, one leg of which has been connected to a definite ground, or by
 other approved means of testing.
 All cables in pull boxes and handholes shall be tested for circuit connections which shall
 be in conformity with those indicated on the detail drawings. All cables in junction boxes (pull
 boxes), manholes and standard bases shall be provided with individual non-corrosive metal
 (minimum 1½ inches (40 mm)) tags, die-stamped with control station, circuit and phase
 designation as applicable. Similarly designed tags shall be used in the switch boxes. The tags
 shall be securely attached to the cables with nylon cord of 1/16 inch (2 mm) minimum
 diameter.
 Splices where necessary to form continuous circuits, complete and ready for operation,
 shall be made by the Contractor. Cable splices will be permitted only in accessible locations.
 Cable splices shall be accomplished by the use of manufactured splice kits. Splice design with
 a final wrap of tape will not be acceptable. Splice kits shall be installed strictly in accordance
 with the manufacturer's instructions.
 Upon the completion of each wiring system, and before any connection is made to
 operating equipment, it shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to perform, in the presence
 of the Engineer, the following tests of each circuit to determine whether the installations are in
 acceptable working order:
 i. Tests for continuity
 ii. Tests for grounds
 iii. Tests for insulation resistance between circuit wires and from circuit wires to ground.
 Upon completion of the electrical system, with fuses removed and before energizing, the
 insulation resistance shall be not less than five megohms.
 659.3.7-Grounding:
 659.3.7.1-General: The necessary conduit, conductors, bonding jumpers, clamps,
 connectors, ground rods, etc. for the grounding system shall be furnished, installed and
 connected by the Contractor.
 Conduit systems must be effectively and permanently grounded with a cross section as
 required by the National Electrical Code and of capacity sufficient to ensure continuity and
 continued effectiveness of the ground connections for fault current. Ground conductors
 shall be as short and straight as possible, protected from mechanical injury and, if
 practicable, without splice or joint.
 659.3.7.2-Codes and Approvals: All grounding work shall be done in accordance
 with the latest edition and revisions of the National Electrical Code and the regulations of
 State and local codes.
 All connections in ground network shall be those of a type approved by NEC, Article
 250.
 
 636
 
 659.3.7.3-Metal Conduits: All metal conduit ends shall be bonded and grounded by
 means of a # 4 bare copper cable. The grounding shall be accomplished by driving ground
 rods as detailed on the Plans and connecting it through a # 4 copper conductor in the
 foundation as shown on the Plans; or by driving ground rods through the junction box
 drainhole, and connecting it through a # 4 copper connector attached to a grounding stud
 on the sign lighting standard junction box frame, etc. The connection of the bonding cable
 to the junction box frames and to the shafts of the metallic sign lighting standard shall be
 done by means of a grounding stud, Burndy's Type K2C, Dossert Type DCM, or approved
 equal. Where the supply voltage is greater than 120/140, the neutral conductor shall be
 grounded at the service panels only with the neutrals of dry transformers.
 At each service point, a ground electrode shall be furnished and installed. Ground
 electrodes shall be one-piece lengths of copperclad rod, diameter and length as shown on
 the Plans. Ground electrodes shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the
 Code and as indicated on the Plans.
 659.3.8-Service: Service points shown on the Plans are approximate only. The Contractor
 shall determine the exact locations from the serving utility.
 Poles shall be placed in the ground to a depth of at least 5 feet (1.5 m).
 The Contractor shall furnish conduit, conductors and all other necessary material to
 complete the installation of the service riser. Service riser conduit shall terminate with a
 weather head to prevent the entrance of water, as approved by the serving utility.
 Where a meter is required, a meter base, furnished by the serving utility, shall be installed
 by the Contractor.
 Each multiple service installation shall be grounded in accordance with the provisions in
 the Code.
 Where an approximate service point is shown on the Plans, installation and materials for
 the connection between the actual service point, as established by the serving utility, and the
 nearest pull box of the electrical system shown on the Plans, shall be paid for by the Contractor.
 Where a service point is omitted from the Plans, installation and materials for the
 connection between the service point, as established by the serving utility, and the nearest pull
 box of the electrical system shown on the Plans, shall be paid per section 109.4 and 104.3.
 Upon request of the Contractor, the Engineer will arrange with the serving utility to
 complete the service connections and the Contractor shall pay all costs and fees required.
 Upon request of the Contractor, the Engineer will arrange for furnishing electrical energy.
 Energy used prior to the completion of the contract will be charged to the Contractor, except
 that the cost of energy used for the public benefit, when such operation is ordered by the
 Engineer, will be borne by the Division.
 When the power service is within a roadway lighting system, it shall be necessary only to
 provide the connections as shown on the Plans.
 659.3.9-Field Tests: Prior to the completion of the work, the Contractor shall cause the
 following tests to be made on all lighting circuits, in the presence of the Engineer.
 i. Each circuit shall be tested for continuity.
 ii. Each circuit shall be tested for unspecified grounds.
 iii. A megger test shall be made on each circuit between the circuit and the ground. The
 insulation resistance shall not be less than the values specified in the provisions of the
 Code.
 637
 
 iv. A functional test shall be made in which it is demonstrated that each and every part
 of the system functions as specified or intended.
 After the installation is completed, the Contractor shall conduct a continuous 24-hour
 operating test for approval. In addition, final acceptance of an installation will not occur until
 30 days of operation termed satisfactory by the Engineer.
 During the 30 days of operation, the Contractor shall be responsible for repairing or
 replacing any defective equipment within 24 hours after being notified by the Engineer. After
 any malfunctioning equipment has been repaired or replaced, the 30-day test shall begin anew.
 Where the sign lighting installation is a part of, and connected to, a roadway lighting
 installation, the functional test shall be the same as the functional test for the roadway lighting
 system.
 659.3.10-Ballasts and Isolating Transformers: Splices at ballasts and transformers shall
 conform to the Code. Where more than one conductor enters a ballast or transformer sleeve,
 the insulation and taping shall be applied between the conductors in such a manner as to
 provide a watertight joint. The splice installation shall be capable of satisfactory operation
 under continuous submersion in water.
 659.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Measurement for payment for sign lighting will be based on each individual lighting system
 (normally one per overhead sign structure) complete in place, which will include power service,
 service poles, meter bases, switch box, pole mounted enclosure, transformers, photoelectric
 controls, disconnects, junction boxes, cable, conduit, luminaires, lamps, ballasts, impact-proof
 shields and any other accessories or hardware as required to make a complete installation as called
 for on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer.
 659.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, shall be paid for at the contract price for each
 installation for the item listed below, which price and payment shall be full compensation for
 furnishing all the materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable
 manner. This price shall include all compensation for fabrication, delivery, erection and for any
 additional materials, tools, equipment, incidentals and labor not shown on the Plans or called for
 which are necessary to complete the installation of the various systems and as directed by the
 Engineer, including any necessary excavating and backfilling, restoring sidewalk, pavement and
 appurtenances damaged or destroyed during construction, salvaging existing materials and making
 all required tests.
 659.6-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 659001-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Sign Lighting, Type “type”
 
 * Sequence number
 
 638
 
 UNIT
 Lump Sum
 
 659-SIGN LIGHTING-APPENDIX A
 Standard Spacing For Type 3 Luminaire Using Delux White Mercury Lamp
 (Where two or more signs have 3.0 feet (1 m) or less
 between the two signs, treat as one sign.)
 Sign Or Group
 Number Of
 Distance Of First
 Distance Between
 Length Feet
 Luminaries
 Luminaire From Left
 Luminaires Feet
 (Meter)
 Edge Feet (Meter)
 (Meter)
 1
 5.0 (1.5 m)
 2.5 (0.750 m)
 6.0 (1.80 m)
 
 1
 
 3.0 (0.900 m)
 
 7.0 (2.10 m)
 
 1
 
 3.5 (1.05 m)
 
 8.0 (2.40 m)
 
 1
 1
 
 4.0 (1.200 m)
 
 1
 
 5.0 (1.50 m)
 2.75 (0.825 m)
 
 9.0 (2.70 m)
 10.0 (3.00 m)
 10.5 (3.15 m)
 11.0 (3.30 m)
 12.0 (3.60 m)
 13.0 (3.90 m)
 14.0 (4.20 m)
 15.0 (4.50 m)
 15.5 (4.65 m)
 16.0 (4.80 m)
 17.0 (5.10 m)
 18.0 (5.40 m)
 19.0 (5.70 m)
 20.0 (6.00 m)
 20.5 (6.15 m)
 21.0 (6.30 m)
 22.0 (6.60 m)
 23.0 (6.90 m)
 24.0 (7.20 m)
 25.0 (7.50 m)
 26.0 (7.80 m)
 27.0 (8.10 m)
 28.0 (8.40 m)
 29.0 (8.70 m)
 29.5 (8.85 m)
 30.0 (9.00 m)
 31.0 (9.30 m)
 32.0 (9.60 m)
 33.0 (9.90 m)
 34.0 (10.20 m)
 35.0 (10.50 m)
 
 2
 2
 2
 2
 2
 2
 2
 2
 2
 2
 2
 2
 3
 3
 3
 3
 3
 3
 3
 3
 3
 3
 4
 4
 4
 4
 4
 4
 4
 
 4.50 (1.35 m)
 
 3.0 (0.90 m)
 3.50 (1.05 m)
 4.0 (1.20 m)
 4.50 (1.35 m)
 5.0 (1.50 m)
 3.25 (0.975 m)
 3.50 (1.05 m)
 4.0 (1.2 m)
 4.50 (1.35 m)
 5.0 (1.50 m)
 5.50 (1.65 m)
 1.25 (0.375 m)
 1.50 (0.45 m)
 2.0 (0.60 m)
 2.5 (0.75 m)
 3.0 (0.90 m)
 3.50 (1.05 m)
 4.0 (1.20 m)
 4.50 (1.35 m)
 5.0 (1.50 m)
 5.50 (1.65 m)
 1.25 (0.375 m)
 1.50 (0.45 m)
 2.0 (0.60 m)
 2.50 (0.75 m)
 3.0 (0.90 m)
 3.50 (1.05 m)
 4.0 (1.20 m)
 
 639
 
 5.0 (1.5 m)
 5.0 (1.5 m)
 5.0 (1.5 m)
 5.0 (1.5 m)
 5.0 (1.5 m)
 5.0 (1.5 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 
 659-SIGN LIGHTING-APPENDIX A
 Standard Spacing For Type 3 Luminaire Using Delux White Mercury Lamp
 (Where two or more signs have 3.0 feet (1 m) or less
 between the two signs, treat as one sign.)
 Sign Or Group
 Number Of
 Distance Of First
 Distance Between
 Length Feet
 Luminaries
 Luminaire From Left
 Luminaires Feet
 (Meter)
 Edge Feet (Meter)
 (Meter)
 4
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 36.0 (10.80 m)
 4.50 (1.35 m)
 37.0 (11.10 m)
 
 4
 
 5.0 (1.50 m)
 
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 
 38.0 (11.40 m)
 
 4
 
 5.50 (1.65 m)
 
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 
 38.5 (11.55 m)
 
 5
 5
 
 1.25 (0.375 m)
 
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 
 5
 
 2.0 (0.60 m)
 2.50 (0.75 m)
 
 39.0 (11.70 m)
 40.0 (12.00 m)
 41.0 (12.30 m)
 41.5 (12.45 m)
 42.0 (12.60 m)
 43.0 (12.90 m)
 43.5 (13.05 m)
 44.0 (13.20 m)
 45.0 (13.50 m)
 46.0 (13.80 m)
 47.0 (14.10 m)
 48.0 (14.40 m)
 49.0 (14.70 m)
 49.5 (14.85 m)
 50.0 (15.00 m)
 51.0 (15.30 m)
 52.0 (15.60 m)
 53.0 (15.90 m)
 54.0 (16.20 m)
 55.0 (16.50 m)
 56.0 (16.80 m)
 56.5 (16.95 m)
 57.0 (17.10 m)
 58.0 (17.40 m)
 59.0 (17.70 m)
 60.0 (18.00 m)
 
 5
 5
 5
 5
 5
 5
 5
 5
 5
 6
 6
 6
 6
 6
 6
 
 1.50 (0.45 m)
 
 2.75 (0.825 m)
 3.0 (0.90 m)
 3.50 (1.05 m)
 3.75 (1.125 m)
 4.0 (1.20 m)
 4.50 (1.35 m)
 5.0 (1.5 m)
 5.50 (1.65 m)
 1.50 (0.45 m)
 2.0 (0.60 m)
 2.25 (0.675 m)
 2.50 (0.75 m)
 3.0 (0.90 m)
 
 6
 
 3.50 (1.05 m)
 4.0 (1.20 m)
 
 6
 6
 6
 7
 7
 7
 7
 7
 
 4.50 (1.35 m)
 5.0 (1.5 m)
 5.50 (1.65 m)
 1.25 (0.375 m)
 1.50 (0.45 m)
 2.00 (0.60 m)
 2.50 (0.75 m)
 3.0 (0.90 m)
 
 640
 
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 9.0 (2.7 m)
 
 SECTION 660
 TRAFFIC SIGNALS
 660.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of furnishing and installing various types of traffic signal systems.
 It shall include, but not be limited to, traffic signals and traffic signal interconnection systems to
 be installed in accordance with this Specification, as shown on the Plans or as directed by the
 Engineer.
 All electrical work shall conform to current requirements of the National Electrical Code,
 latest edition, all local codes and Section 631 of the Standard Specifications.
 All details not specified or not shown on the Plans shall conform to the requirements of the
 latest issue of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, (referred to as the MUTCD). This
 Manual is published by the Federal Highway Administration of the U.S. Department of
 Transportation and supplemented by the publication "Official Ruling on Request" and the West
 Virginia Division of Highways Traffic Engineering Division Directives.
 660.2-MATERIALS:
 All materials shall be new and shall conform to the requirements of the following
 subsections of 715.42, Traffic Signals.
 MATERIALS
 Adjustable Face Signal Heads
 Auxiliary Traffic Signal Equipment
 Cabinets
 Conductors
 Electrical Conduit
 Junction Boxes
 Local Coordinating Units
 Messenger Cable
 Pre-Timed, Fixed Cycle Traffic Signal Controllers
 Priority Control System Detector
 Priority Control System Emitter
 Signal Supports
 Solid State Traffic Actuated Signal Controllers
 Supplemental Flashing Beacons & Mountings
 Traffic Adjusted Master Controller (Type OPV)
 Traffic Detectors
 
 SUBSECTION
 715.42.6
 715.42.7
 715.42.8
 715.42.13
 715.42.10
 715.42.11
 715.42.4
 715.42.12
 715.42.1
 715.42.7.4
 715.42.7.4
 715.42.9
 715.42.2
 715.42.14
 715.42.3
 715.42.5
 
 Within 15 day following the award of the Contract, the Contractor shall submit to the
 Engineer a list of equipment and materials which the Contractor proposes to install. The list shall
 be complete as to the name of manufacturer, size, and identifying number of each item. The list
 shall be supplemented by such other data as may be required, including detailed scale drawings
 and wiring diagrams of any special equipment. A signed statement shall accompany the materials
 list stating that the materials meet the applicable requirements of these Specifications.
 641
 
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 660.3-GENERAL:
 Construction methods shall conform to the requirements of the Plans and the latest issue
 of the West Virginia Division of Highways Standard and Supplemental Specifications, except as
 modified.
 660.4-MAINTAINING TRAFFIC:
 During the installation of traffic signals and appurtenances, the roadway shall be kept open
 to all traffic by the Contractor in such a way that both local and through traffic will be adequately
 and safely accommodated through the work area. See the Manual, "Traffic Control for Street and
 Highway Construction and Maintenance Operations", and applicable sections of the Standard
 Specifications.
 660.5-REMOVING EXISTING SIGNAL EQUIPMENT:
 Existing traffic signal equipment at the intersection shall be removed by the Contractor. If
 there is not a pay item in the proposal, the Contractor shall remove the signal heads, controller and
 poles and render the equipment unusable as traffic control devices. If there is a pay item in the
 Proposal for signal removal, the Contractor shall remove the controller, signal heads, hardware
 and poles, if required, in such a manner so as not to damage the equipment. These heads,
 controllers and poles shall be turned over to the Engineer and become the property of the Division.
 Salvaged wire and conduit shall become the property of the Contractor.
 When a foundation is to be abandoned, the top of foundation, anchor bolts, and conduits
 shall be removed to a depth of not less than 6 inches (150 mm) below the surface of the sidewalk
 or unimproved ground. The resulting hole shall be backfilled with material equivalent to the
 surrounding material.
 660.6-REMOVING AND REPLACING IMPROVEMENTS:
 Existing improvements, such as sidewalks, curbs, gutter, Portland cement and asphalt
 concrete pavement, underlying material, lawns and plants, and any other improvements removed,
 broken or damaged by the Contractor's operations, shall be replaced or reconstructed with the same
 kind of material as found on the work or with materials of equal quality. The new work shall be
 left in a serviceable condition.
 Whenever a part of a square or slab of existing concrete sidewalk, curb, gutter, or driveway
 is broken or damaged, the entire square, section or slab shall be removed and the concrete
 reconstructed as specified above.
 The outline of all areas to be removed in Portland cement concrete sidewalks and
 driveways and in pavements shall be cut to a minimum depth of 2 inches (50 mm) with an abrasivetype saw prior to removing the sidewalk, driveway and pavement material. Cuts shall be neat and
 true with no shatter outside the removal area.
 660.7-EXCAVATING AND BACKFILLING:
 Excavations required for the installation of foundations, conduit and other appurtenances
 shall be performed in such a manner as to avoid any unnecessary damage to streets, sidewalks,
 landscaping, and other improvements. Pavement cuts and excavations shall be no wider than
 
 642
 
 necessary for the proper installation of the electrical appurtenances and foundations, or as required
 for the proper replacement of pavements or other improvements.
 Excavation shall not be performed until immediately before installation of conduit,
 foundations or other appurtenances. The material from the excavation and the equipment used in
 the excavation shall be placed in a position that will least interfere with surface drainage and that
 will least obstruct vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
 At the end of each day's work, and at all other times when construction operations are
 suspended, all equipment and other obstructions shall be removed from the portion of the roadway
 open for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic. All surplus excavation material shall be removed
 and disposed of, within 48 hours, outside of the highway right-of-way, unless otherwise directed
 by the Engineer.
 All excavations shall be backfilled with suitable random material in horizontal layers not
 to exceed 4 inches (100 mm) after compaction. When the trench width is less than 12 inches (300
 mm), each lift shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer. Testing is not required.
 When the trench width is 12 inches (300 mm) or greater, each lift shall be compacted to 95 percent
 of the maximum dry density. All surplus material shall be removed from the right-of-way and the
 backfill finished flush with surrounding natural ground, including replacement of any damaged
 facilities or appurtenances. The Contractor shall restore all areas disturbed by this excavation or
 other operations to their original conditions including grading, seeding, mulching and fertilizing
 as directed by the Engineer.
 660.8-FOUNDATIONS:
 Foundations for controller cabinets and signal support structures shall be of Class B
 Portland cement concrete and shall be proportioned, mixed and placed in accordance with Section
 601 of the Standard Specifications or as specified.
 All reinforced material used in signal support structures shall be in conformation with
 Sections 602 and 709 of the Standard Specification.
 The Contractor shall inform the Engineer when the excavation is complete and no concrete
 shall be placed until the Engineer has approved the excavation for each individual foundation. No
 foundation shall be set over recent fill of extensive depth or muck except by the approval of the
 Engineer. For foundations set in solid rock see Standard Details.
 Foundations shall conform to the sizes and shapes shown on the Plans and shall be
 monolithic. Forms shall be used for the top 12 inches (300 mm) of a foundation; they shall be true
 to line and grade and securely braced in place. Tops of foundations shall be finished to curb or
 sidewalk grade or as directed by the Engineer.
 When embedded poles are used, a pre-cast concrete block or concrete cast in place 24 hours
 before setting the pole, shall be set in the bottom of the foundation excavation as shown on the
 Standard Detail sheet. Suitable anchoring devices to hold the embedded pole in the proper
 positions, until the surrounding concrete has set for at least 12 hours, must be provided. These
 devices must be approved by the Engineer and the pole shall not be allowed to be set without such
 devices.
 Anchor bolts shall be accurately set in accordance with a detail furnished by the pole
 manufacturer. Conduit ends and anchor bolts shall be held in the proper position and to the proper
 height by means of a template until the concrete sets.
 
 643
 
 Forms shall be oiled and excavation surfaces that come in contact with the concrete shall
 be thoroughly moistened before concrete placement. Forms shall not be removed until the concrete
 has thoroughly set.
 Ordinary surface finish as described in Section 601 of the Standard Specifications shall be
 applied to exposed surfaces of concrete.
 All concrete foundations shall be allowed to set for 72 hours before any support structures
 are installed.
 Support structures shall be plumb or raked as directed by the Engineer.
 Foundations for wooden poles shall be excavated to dimensions slightly larger than the
 pole diameter and the excavation around the pole shall be backfilled with suitable random material
 in horizontal layers not to exceed 4 inches (100 mm) after compaction. Each lift shall be
 compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer. Testing is not required.
 Depth of the pole foundation shall be as specified on the Plans. A device to hold the
 wooden pole in place with the proper rake until backfilling is complete shall be provided. Blocks
 wedged between the excavation and the pole are not acceptable.
 Ground rods shall be ¾ inch in diameter with a minimum length as shown on the Plans and
 shall be one piece. Sectional or segmented ground rods are not permitted. All signal supports
 shall have ground rods. The ground rods shall be complete with ground clamp and square head
 bolt.
 660.9-LOOP TRAFFIC DETECTORS:
 Installation shall conform to the details and notes shown on the Plans.
 Slots cut in the pavement for the loop conductor shall be neat and true to the dimensions
 shown on the Plans. Slots shall be blown out and dried before loop conductors are installed.
 The # 14 THWN stranded loop conductor shall run continuous and unspliced from the
 roadway loop to a junction box or condulet as indicated in the Plans. Each loop shall consist of a
 single separate wire and shall be connected to the detector by a separate lead-in wire. The loops
 shall consist of three turns of wire, unless otherwise specified.
 All loop wire installation shall be made without damage to the wire or its insulation and all
 damaged wires shall be replaced. The wire must be so placed that there are no kinks or curls and
 no straining or stretching of the insulation. It shall be installed and secured as deep in the slot as
 possible. A blunt object, similar to wooden paint stirrer shall be used to seat the loop wire. A
 screwdriver or other sharp tool shall not be used for this purpose.
 Prior to placing the loop slot sealant, the loop wire shall be checked for continuity,
 resistance and insulation integrity. Insulation integrity shall be checked by applying a megger
 between each end of the loop wire and the nearest reliable electrical-ground street light, fire
 hydrant, etc. If no available ground exists, a suitable ground shall be established for the
 measurement, (e.g., driven metal spike). The megger reading shall be in excess of ten megohms
 under all conditions, (500 volts DC). The continuity and megger checks shall be recorded by the
 Engineer.
 Lead-in wire from the loop conductor to the detector terminal strip shall be two # 14 AWG
 solid copper.
 The lead-in wire shall also be continuous and unspliced from junction box or condulet to
 the detector terminal strip in the cabinet.
 Splices between the loop conductor and the lead-in wire shall be soldered with fuseable
 metal or alloy. These splices shall first be joined and made mechanically secure and tested
 644
 
 electrically. No spring connectors will be allowed for splicing. When the mechanical connection
 has been shown to be electrically functional under operational conditions, it shall then be soldered.
 Each splice shall then be insulated with a permanent, waterproof covering as specified or as
 approved by the Engineer. Waterproof adhesive shall be applied to the splice and on at least 2
 inches (50 mm) of loop wire and lead-in wire insulation on both sides of the splice. The splice
 shall then be covered with half-lapped, ¾ inch (19 mm), self-bonding electrical tape; starting at
 the center of the splice and proceeding to ¾ inch (19 mm) onto the wire insulation, returning to
 the center of the splice. The entire splice shall then be wrapped with half-lapped, ¾ inch (19 mm),
 all-weather electrical tape using the same procedure as above. When both ends of the loop wire
 and lead-in wires are so spliced and wrapped, both splices shall then be wrapped together with ¾
 inch (19 mm), all-weather electrical tape. The entire splice area to the end of the adhesive coating
 shall be covered. The splice shall then be completed by inserting a four-inch (100 mm) piece of
 all-weather electrical tape into the "V" formed by the loop wires.
 The loop slot cuts in the pavement shall be filled with a permanent, flexible weatherproof
 sealant after the placement of the loop wire in the slots. The sealant shall be resistant to traffic,
 water, gasoline, chemical fumes, mild alkalies, oils and mild acids; no noticeable deterioration of
 the sealant shall be apparent after exposures to temperatures ranging from minus 20° F (-6° C) to
 plus 160° F (71° C). Before sealing the loop, slots must be clean and dry and blown out with oilfree air. The sealant shall be placed to within 5/8 inch (3 mm) of the pavement surface and surplus
 sealant shall be removed from the adjacent road surfaces without the use of solvents.
 The loop slot sealant shall be of "Weatherban 101 Sealer" as manufactured by the 3-M
 Company or an approved equal.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for replacement of damaged loops and lead-in cable to
 the existing splice box or otherwise designated junction box.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for replacing all damaged traffic signal loops within
 the construction limits within fourteen (14) calendar days of when damage occurs.
 Standard (6 foot x 6 foot) detector loops shall consist of three (3) turns of stranded #14
 AWG copper wire, with Quadrupole presence loops consisting of two (2) turns of stranded #14
 AWG copper wire meeting IMSA conductor specifications. All detector loops shall conform to
 WVDOH Standard Specifications 715.42.2 and 715.42.13.
 660.10-SIGNAL HEADS:
 All signal heads shall be either plumb or level, symmetrically arranged, and securely
 assembled. All suspended heads shall be provided with leveling hangers and balance adjusters.
 In addition, all signal head faces shall be aimed and secured in the direction of traffic they control.
 Signal heads suspended from messenger cable and mast-arm suspended heads that are not
 rigidly mounted shall be attached directly to the cable or mast-arm hanger and balance adjuster. If
 approved by the Engineer, one head per span or mast arm may be lowered to the proper height by
 use of 1½ inches galvanized steel piping connecting the signal head to the cable or mast-arm
 hanger. If piping is used, it must be painted to match the signal-head housing and a positive
 permanent means of securing the head to the pipe to prevent rotation shall be provided. In all
 cases, piping of signal heads should be avoided if possible.
 All red sections of signal heads on a single span or mast arm shall be at the same elevation.
 Optically programmed signal heads shall have a permanent, rigid mount fitting to assure
 reliable control of visibility. Programmed heads shall be aimed, fixed and programmed to control
 
 645
 
 vehicle or pedestrian traffic only in the cut-off area specified on the Plans and as directed by the
 Engineer.
 All type signal heads that are installed before a signal system is made operative shall be
 hooded with a black plastic material that will completely conceal the signal faces (even when lit)
 as well as cover the entire signal head. The material shall be weather resistant and fastened in such
 a way that it will be completely wind resistant.
 660.10.1-Light Emitting Diode Signal Modules (L.E.D.):
 1. When specified, L.E.D. traffic signal modules shall be used for replacement of either
 eight or twelve inch heads operating at 120 Vac. Total power consumption at each
 section shall not consume more than 22 watts.
 2. L.E.D. traffic signal modules shall be designed for new or existing signal lamps which
 shall not require special tools for installation. Retrofit replacement L.E.D. signal
 modules shall fit into existing traffic signal housings built to VTCSH (Vehicle Traffic
 Control Signal Heads) standard without modification to the housing.
 3. Installation of a retrofit replacement L.E.D. signal module into an existing signal
 housing shall only require the removal of the existing optical unit components, i.e.,
 lens, lamp module, gaskets, and reflector; shall be weather tight and fit securely in the
 housing; and shall connect directly to existing electrical wiring.
 4. The L.E.D. signal module shall be a single, self-contained device. The power supply
 must be designed to fit and mount inside the traffic signal module.
 5. The assembly and manufacturing process for the L.E.D. signal assembly shall be
 designed to assure all internal L.E.D. and electronic components are adequately
 supported to withstand mechanical shock as per MIL-STD-883.
 6. The L.E.D. signal module shall be rated for use in the ambient operating temperature
 range of -40C to +74C degrees.
 7. The L.E.D. signal module shall be protected against dust and moisture intrusion per the
 requirements of NEMA Standard 250-1991, for Type 4 enclosures to protect all internal
 L.E.D. electronic, and electrical components.
 8. The L.E.D. single module lens shall be UV stabilized.
 9. Each module shall comprise a smooth surface convex UV stabilized polycarbonate
 outer shell. A mechanical alignment and assembly mechanism shall ensure that each
 L.E.D. shall be maximized by an internal beam controlling optical faceted lens
 designed and patented to meet the 44 points measurement of the VTCSH standard.
 10. The multiple L.E.D. light source should be the latest technology available on the
 market. Materials shall meet all applicable ASTM specifications.
 11. The measured chromaticity coordinates of L.E.D. signal modules shall conform to the
 chromaticity requirements of Section 8.04 and Figure 1 of the VTCSH standard.
 12. All wiring and terminal blocks shall meet the requirements of Section 13.02 of the
 VTCSH standard. Two secured, color coded, 36 inch long 600V, 20 AWG minimum,
 jacketed wires, conforming to the NEC, rated for service at +105C, are to be provided
 for electrical connection.
 13. The module shall operate on a 60 Hz AC line voltage ranging from 80 volts rms to 135
 volts rms with less than 10% light intensity variation. Nominal rated voltage for all
 measurements shall be 120+/- volts rms. The circuitry shall prevent flickering over
 this voltage range.
 646
 
 14. The individual L.E.D. light sources shall be wired so that a catastrophic failure of one
 L.E.D. light source will result in the loss of not more than 20 percent of the signal
 module light output.
 15. The L.E.D. lamp shall contain a disconnect that will show an open switch to the conflict
 monitor when less than 80% of the L.E.D. in the unit are operational.
 16. The L.E.D. signal module shall be operationally compatible with NEMA TS-1 or later.
 17. The power supply must permit the regulation of the current supplied to the L.E.D.s to
 maintain a constant current.
 18. The L.E.D. signal and associated on-board circuitry must meet Federal
 Communications Commission (FCC) Title 47, SubPart B, Section 15 regulations
 concerning the emission of electronic noise.
 19. The L.E.D. signal module shall provide a power factor of 0.90 or greater at 25C degrees
 and at the nominal operating voltage.
 20. Total harmonic distortion, current and voltage, induced into an ac power line by a signal
 module shall not exceed 20 percent, over the operating voltage range specified in
 Section 14 and within the ambient temperature range specified in Section 4.
 21. The signal module on-board circuitry shall include voltage surge protection to
 withstand high-repetition noise transients and low-repetition high-energy transients as
 stated in Section 2.1.6.NEMA Standard TS-2, 1992.
 22. The L.E.D. signal module shall operate from a 60+/-3 Hz ac line over a voltage range
 from 80 Vac to 135 Vac, drawing a minimum of 100 mA rms over the entire voltage
 range. Load switches shall be compatible with NEMA TS-1 or later.
 23. All L.E.D. signal modules shall be energized for a minimum of 24 hours, at 100 percent
 on-time duty cycle, in an ambient temperature of 60C degrees.
 24. Manufacturers shall provide a Certificate of Compliance to this specification for each
 shipment of L.E.D. signal modules to an end user. Each L.E.D. signal module shall be
 identified with a serial number.
 25. Warranties shall include the replacement or repair of an L.E.D. signal module that fails
 to function as intended due to workmanship or material defects within the first 60
 months from the date of delivery. Also, replacement or repair of L.E.D. signal modules
 that exhibit luminous intensity of less than the minimum values specified in Table 1 of
 ITE August, 1997, draft specification within the first 36 months from the date of
 delivery.
 660.11-CABINETS:
 The cabinets for all types of traffic controllers or flasher units shall be mounted and
 installed at the location shown on the Plans and in accordance with typical installation details. No
 mounting holes or special outlets shall be made through the cabinet walls without the specific
 approval of the Engineer.
 Adjustable steel bands or universal cabinet mounting bands shall not be used for mounting
 cabinets to poles or pedestals. Cabinets mounted on wood poles shall be attached with wood pole
 mounting brackets, secured with lag screws.
 
 647
 
 660.12-SUPPORT STRUCTURES:
 Strain and mast-arm poles shall be installed with the amount of rake recommended by the
 pole manufacturer. The rake shall assure a substantially vertical set when the load is applied. For
 anchor base type poles, threaded adjusting nuts shall be used to establish the rake. The use of
 shims or other leveling devices is not permitted. Hardware and fittings shall be installed as shown
 on the manufacturer's installation drawings. When embedded or wooden poles are used, the rake
 shall be established as the pole is set.
 Pedestal poles supporting only a vertical dead load shall be installed in a true vertical plane.
 The Contractor shall take full responsibility for checking all cross sections to determine
 final support lengths.
 660.13-MESSENGER CABLE:
 When completely loaded the messenger cable, cable rings and conductor wire shall present
 a straight, clean, neat appearance. Excessive slack shall be pulled out of conductor wire and the
 ring supports shall be set at 15-in. (375 mm) centers.
 Span wire sag shall be kept at a practical minimum and in no case exceed five percent of
 the span.
 660.14-CONDUIT:
 Conduit runs shown on the Plans may be changed to avoid underground obstructions with
 the written approval of the Engineer. Approximate lengths of conduit are shown on the Plans. The
 Contractor shall determine the exact lengths of conduit in the field.
 The ends of all conduits, whether shop or field cut, shall be reamed to remove burrs and
 rough edges. Cuts shall be made square and true so that the ends will butt or come together for
 the full circumference thereof. Standard conduit couplings shall be used for joining all metal
 conduit. Slip joints or running threads will not be permitted for coupling conduit. However,
 expansion fittings shall be installed where the conduit crosses an expansion joint on a structure.
 Continuity through the expansion fitting shall be provided by means of # 6 AWG copper wire
 jumper. Conduit runs on the surface of structures shall be secured with galvanized malleable iron
 clamps spaced not more than 5 feet (1.5 m) apart.
 The threads on all ferrous metal conduit shall be painted with rust preventative paint before
 couplings are made up. All couplings for metal-type conduit shall be tightened until the ends of
 the conduit are brought together, providing a good electrical connection throughout the entire
 length of the conduit run. Where the coating on metal conduit has been damaged in handling or
 installing, such damaged places shall be painted with an approved rust preventive paint. Exposed
 ungalvanized threads on metal conduit resulting from field cuts shall be painted with an approved
 rust preventative paint.
 All metal-type conduit ends shall be threaded and shall be capped with a standard pipe caps
 until wiring is started. When caps are removed, the threaded ends shall be provided with conduit
 bushings.
 Conduit bends, except factory bends, shall have a radius of not less than six times the inside
 diameter of the conduit. Where factory bends are not used, conduit shall be bent, without crimping
 or flattening, using the longest radius practicable.
 A # 12 AWG galvanized pull wire shall be installed in all conduits which are to receive
 future conductors. At least 2 feet (600 mm) of pull wire shall be doubled back into the conduit at
 
 648
 
 each termination. All conduit runs shall be free of dirt, debris and excessive moisture before cable
 is pulled.
 Existing underground conduit to be incorporated into the new system shall be cleaned with
 a mandrel or cylindrical wire brush and blown out with compressed air.
 Conduit shall be laid to a depth of not less than 18 inches (450 mm) below finished grade
 in all areas, except that conduit may be laid on top of and secured to the existing pavement within
 new curbed medians being constructed on top of the pavement.
 Rigid metal conduit shall be placed under existing pavement by approved jacking or
 drilling methods. Pavement shall not be disturbed without permission from the Engineer. In the
 event obstructions are encountered, upon approval of the Engineer, small test holes may be cut in
 the pavement to locate obstructions. Jacking or drilling pits shall be kept 2 feet (600 mm) clear of
 the edge of any type of pavement wherever possible. Water jetting will not be permitted.
 Conduit terminating in pile or pedestal bases shall extend 4 inches (100 mm) vertically
 above the foundation and shall be sloped towards the hand-hole opening. At all conduit termini,
 the conduit shall enter the outlet from the direction of the run. Conduit size shall be the same for
 terminal point to terminal point. No reducing couplings will be permitted.
 If it is determined by the Engineer that it is impractical to bore the conduit under concrete
 or asphaltic pavement due to unforeseeable obstructions, the Contractor may, with the Engineer's
 permission, cut the existing pavement. The pavement shall be cut along neat and true lines by
 means of a concrete saw. The depth of the trench shall be as specified and the width shall be the
 minimum required for proper excavation and backfilling. The trenching operation, along with
 replacement operation, shall be performed according to Standard Detail TES-04. Concrete shall
 be allowed to set for a minimum of 49 hours without being exposed to traffic. At no time shall
 more than one-half of the roadway be closed for any conduit placement operations.
 Conduit to be placed beneath railroad tracks shall comply with the following:
 The conduit shall be rigid metal type, 2 inches (50 mm) minimum size and shall be placed
 to a minimum depth of 5 feet (1.5 m) below the bottom of the tie. The near side of each conduit
 jacking pit shall be constructed not less than 12 feet (3.6 m) from the centerline of track. When
 the jacking pit is to be left overnight it shall be covered with substantial planking.
 660.15-JUNCTION BOXES:
 Junction boxes shall be installed at the locations shown on the Plans or, in long runs, they
 shall be spaced at not over 200 feet (60 m) intervals. The Contractor may, at his own expense and
 with the approval of the Engineer, install additional junction boxes to facilitate his work
 The tops of junction boxes installed in the ground or in sidewalk areas shall be flush with
 the surrounding grade or pavement.
 Concrete junction boxes shall be poured in place. However, pre-cast junction boxes may
 be used, when in the opinion of the Engineer, the surrounding subgrade has sufficient bearing
 qualities to support the box and cast iron frame.
 All junction boxes shall be set on at least 12-in. (300 mm) bedding of aggregate base
 material as shown on the Plans. Grouting shall be done prior to the installation of conductors. No
 junction boxes shall be set on uncompacted ground.
 Concrete work shall be done in accordance with the applicable requirements of 660.8.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for reconstruction and/or replacement of all damaged
 junction boxes. Damage junction boxes shall be defined as any junction box more than two (2)
 inches below grade, or is covered by the area roadway surface.
 649
 
 The adjustment of the junction box shall include the complete excavation and shall conform
 to WVDOH Standards Specifications, Section 660.8 and 660.15. All conduit, cable and attached
 appurtenances shall be incidental to this junction box.
 The adjustment of the junction box shall be as per detail and shall conform to WVDOH
 Standards and Specifications Section 660.8 and 660.15.
 660.16-WIRING:
 Sufficient five-conductor signal light cables shall be provided to perform the functional
 operation of the signal system and, in addition thereto, one spare conductor of a size equal to the
 largest signal light conductor in the run, except neutral, shall be provided throughout the signal
 light system.
 No more than two signal heads shall be on the same conductor run. When two signal heads
 are on the same conductor run, they must be of the same signal color sequence.
 All signal light conductors shall be run continuously without splices from the terminal
 block located in a cabinet, compartment, or signal head, to a similarly located terminal block,
 unless otherwise specified on the Plans. Signal light conductors shall not run to a terminal block
 on a standard unless they are to be connected to a signal head that is mounted. All spare wires
 shall be placed on a special terminal block mounted in the controller cabinet for this purpose.
 Five-conductor IMSA cable as specified shall be provided for all signal light circuits. This
 cable shall consist of red, orange, green, black and white insulated wires. The insulation color
 shall correspond as nearly as possible to the associated signal sequence color.
 Permanent identification labels shall be attached to all controller and detector cabinet
 wiring to identify circuit and associated phase. Sequence color need not be identified if clearly
 indicated by conductor insulation color.
 Wiring diagrams, detailing on one sheet all wires in the controller cabinet that are external
 to the controller itself, must be included with all signal systems. The diagrams must be complete
 and show all connections including switches, terminal block, connectors, relays and all other
 mechanisms in the cabinet. Other wiring for the controller shall be as required by the wiring
 diagrams and instructions furnished with the controller by the manufacturer.
 Connection to each terminal of a pedestrian push button shall be by # 14 AWG single
 conductor in two-wire IMSA cable as required. The neutral for pedestrian push button circuits
 shall be separate from the signal light circuit neutral. Pedestrian push button circuits shall be
 limited to 12 volts AC or DC.
 Conductors shall be pulled into conduit by hand. The use of winches or other power
 actuated pulling equipment will not be permitted. Powdered soapstone, talc, or other inert
 lubricants shall be used in placing conductors in conduit. When conductors are to be added to
 existing conductors in a conduit, all conductors shall be removed; the conduit shall be cleaned as
 provided in 660.14, and both old and new conductors shall be pulled into the conduit as a unit.
 Where signal conductors are run in lighting standards containing high-voltage series street
 lighting conductors, either the signal conductors or the lighting conductors shall be encased in
 flexible or rigid metal conduit, to a point where the two type of conductors are no longer in the
 same raceway. Where telephone circuits are installed adjacent to signal and lighting circuits, the
 telephone conductors shall be encased in UL approved flexible metal conduit.
 All wiring shall be installed in a neat and workmanlike manner. Conductors within fixtures
 or cabinets shall be cabled together with self clinching nylon cable ties, waxed lacing or other
 method permitted by the Engineer. Wiring within the controller cabinet shall be firm, neatly
 650
 
 arranged and laced, or enclosed in plastic tubing or raceways. The finished wiring shall present a
 neat, clean appearance so that individual wires may be easily traced to their terminal points.
 Unnecessary slack in the conductor wires will not be permitted. Wiring workmanship shall be
 subject to the approval of the Engineer.
 The ends of wires which are to be attached to terminal blocks of the barrier screw type shall
 be provided with solderless terminals that meet the requirements of the National Electrical Code.
 These terminals shall be the pre-insulated positive grip type. The terminal crimping tool shall
 produce a transverse crimp on the wire. Wires which insert into a positive wire insert type terminal
 block will not require terminals. No more than two conductors shall be brought to any one
 terminal.
 On all pin and receptacle type connections, the receptacle shall be on the line side of the
 circuit.
 Conductor splices may be permitted only in the following types of circuits at the following
 locations:
 i. Loop conductor and lead-in wire in junction boxes at traffic detectors.
 ii. In modified traffic signal systems where shown on the Plans (low voltage only).
 Splices, where permitted, may only be made at points of access in conductor runs or
 raceways (handholes, junction boxes, etc.) and no splices shall be permitted in controller cabinets.
 All splices, with or without connectors, shall be soldered by the pouring or dipping method, except
 that soldering of pressure connectors and terminals may be omitted provided the connectors and
 terminals are applied with the proper type tool as recommended by the manufacturer of the
 connector or terminal being applied. Finished connections and terminals shall comply with the
 requirements of Military Specification MIL-T-7928. Splices shall be insulated by one of the
 following methods:
 i. Cast insulation of self-curing epoxy resin which is compatible with the wire insulation
 to form a moisture resistant joint. The resin shall be resistant to weather, with aromatic,
 straight chain solvents, and shall not sustain combustion. The resin shall be cured into
 molds of dimensions suitable for the splice.
 ii. A minimum of two thicknesses of electrical insulating pad, composed of a laminate of
 0.085-in. (2 mm) thickness of electrical grade polyvinyl chloride and a 0.125-in. (3
 mm) thickness of butyl splicing compound with removable liner. Pads shall be applied
 to the splice in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. The ends of the
 applied pad shall be wrapped with the polyvinyl chloride tape half lapped over the
 conductor insulation.
 iii. Heat shrinkable insulating tubing shall be applied after completing the splicing
 procedure shown on the Plans. Insulation over the connector shall consist of a heat
 shrinkable, mastic lined, heavy wall polyolefin cable sleeve or cover, to which heat
 shall be applied at a temperature greater than 120EC until the sleeve or cover shrinks
 and covers the connector, and the mastic material has flowed completely around the
 cable to form a waterproof insulation.
 Electrical tape shall be UL approved and be one of the following types:
 i. Self-fusing, oil and flame-resistant, synthetic rubber.
 ii. Pressure sensitive, adhesive, polyvinyl chloride, 0.007 inch (178 µm) minimum
 thickness.
 651
 
 Where polyvinyl chloride tape is used for a final layer, an electrical insulating coating shall
 be used which shall be fast drying, resistant to oil, acids, alkalies and corrosive atmospheric
 conditions and compatible with the tape.
 All splices shall be noted on the Plans and approved by the Engineer.
 Unless otherwise specified, shown on the Plans or directed by the Engineer all signal
 system conductors shall run continuous and unspliced from terminal to terminal. Signal system
 conductors shall include but not be limited to power service wires, signal circuit conductors,
 controller panel wiring, controller wire harness, loop lead-in and loop wire. System interconnect
 cable shall be continuous and unspliced from controller cabinet terminal to controller cabinet
 terminal.
 660.17-POWER SERVICE:
 The power connection shall be made to a single-phase 120/240 volt, three-wire, 60Hz, AC
 supply. The approximate location of utility service points may be shown on the Plans; however,
 the Contractor shall determine the exact location of the power supply. Each signalized intersection
 or control unit shall have a separate power service and no more than one power service shall be
 utilized per intersection or unit.
 Electrical service installation and materials shall conform to the requirements of the serving
 utility. The service equipment shall be installed as soon as possible to enable the utility to schedule
 work well in advance of the completion of the project.
 Enclosed circuit breakers, external to the controller cabinets, shall be provided in the power
 service. Four single-pole breaker units rated at 30 amps each are required. The breaker enclosure
 shall be weathertight with a top hinge cover, hasp for sealing cover and provisions for padlocking
 the cover. The Contractor shall provide an all-weather padlock and two sets of keys with each
 power service. Circuit breakers shall be approved and listed by the Underwriter's Laboratory.
 Breakers # 1 and 2 shall provide power for the signal control equipment (controller
 cabinet). Specifically circuit breaker # 1 shall power the controller circuits and # 2 shall power
 the flasher and associated circuitry. These two circuits must be of the same polarity. Breakers #
 3 and 4 are spare terminals to accommodate future lighting circuits and breakers 3 and 4 must be
 of opposite polarity to provide a 240 volt circuit.
 The Contractor shall make all arrangements for connection to the power supply and shall
 obtain a meter and meter socket from the power company at the time these are required. The
 Contractor shall furnish, install, pay installation fee and provide all materials necessary for the
 power connection not provided by the power company.
 All external power service wiring from the service head or service point on shall be
 enclosed in rigid metal conduit; this includes equipment ground wires.
 When complete and in place the power service shall provide in the signal controller cabinet,
 two separate fused 120 VAC, 60 Hz power sources rated at 30 amps each of the same polarity or
 phase.
 660.18-TESTING:
 660.18.1-Operational Field Tests: Upon completion of the installation of a traffic signal
 system, operational field tests shall be run on each and every part of the system. After the
 initial field tests are run satisfactorily, the Contractor shall conduct a continuous 12-hour
 operating test for approval.
 
 652
 
 Upon successful completion of the 12-hour test and with the approval of the Engineer, a
 30-day test period will then be initiated. Final acceptance of an installation will not occur until
 30 days of system operation are completed and termed satisfactory by the Engineer.
 A final inspection may be conducted by the Division at any time prior to completion of the
 30-day test. At the option of the Engineer, equipment found to be defective during this
 inspection may warrant the renewal of the full or any part of the operational test period.
 In addition, the Contractor shall be responsible for equipment malfunctions that occur
 during any test period. The Contractor shall repair or replace any defective equipment within
 24 hours after being notified by the Engineer. After the repair has been effected, the Engineer
 may at his option renew any or all of the operational test period.
 660.19-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 660.19.1-Signal Controllers: Signal controllers shall be measured as a complete unit in
 place by intersection or control location. This item shall consist of the complete electrical
 mechanism for controlling the operation of traffic control signals, including the timing
 mechanism and all necessary auxiliary equipment mounted in a cabinet or other enclosure.
 Included under signal controllers shall be traffic adjusted master controllers and computers
 and associated equipment. This item shall include cabinets or other enclosures as required.
 660.19.2-Traffic Detectors: Traffic detectors shall be measured per unit complete and in
 place, mounted in a cabinet or enclosure as required. This item shall consist of the detector
 tuning unit only. Roadway traffic sensors such as loops, probes, etc. shall be considered
 "Miscellaneous Signal" items. Cabinets or other enclosures as required for the detector tuning
 units shall also be included in "Miscellaneous Signal".
 660.19.3-Signal Sections: Signal heads shall be measured complete and in place by signal
 head section. Red, yellow, green, arrow and walk-don't walk signal sections shall be
 considered complete when assembled on the support structure in accordance with the signal
 head configuration shown on the Plans. Both vehicular and pedestrian heads shall be included
 in this item. In addition, this item shall include all the necessary hardware for mounting the
 signal heads to the support structures. Optical programming shall be included in this item.
 660.19.4-Signal Supports: Signal supports shall be measured as a complete unit in place,
 per mast arm structure or per pole support, including foundation. This item includes guys,
 messenger cable and anchor bolts for support structures, but does not include such items as
 controller cabinet mounting brackets and signal head mounting hardware covered in other
 sections.
 660.19.5-Junction Boxes: Junction boxes shall be measured as a complete unit in place.
 This item includes aggregate base, concrete, iron frame and cover as required. All junction
 boxes shall be included under this item, both units constructed for the signal system as well as
 those required for the signal interconnect.
 660.19.6-Signal Interconnect: Signal interconnect shall be measured as a complete unit
 in place per interconnected system. This item includes most of the materials and construction
 related to the signal interconnection system only. Supports and wire-ways constructed
 653
 
 primarily for other purposes shall not be included in this item. Conduit, support structures,
 support hardware wire and messenger cable installed solely for the interconnect system shall
 come under this item. This item shall not include coordinating units or interconnect system
 junction boxes.
 660.19.7-Miscellaneous Signal: Miscellaneous signal items as required to complete a
 traffic signal system in accordance with the Plans or these Specifications shall be measured
 complete in place by intersection or control location. This item shall include but not be limited
 to power services, electrical conduit, vehicle sensors (loops, probes, etc.), pedestrian push
 buttons and all wiring, appurtenances and work not included in other Contract items.
 660.19.8-Signal Removal: Signal removal shall be measured as a complete unit by
 intersection. It shall include the furnishing of all necessary equipment and labor to adequately
 remove the existing signal equipment as necessary to meet the requirement of the Plans. The
 existing roadway and traffic control devices shall be maintained or revised as required during
 construction to assure the safe and expedient movement of traffic (See 660.4).
 660.19.9-Priority Control System Emitter: Bid includes the furnishing, installation
 (mounting of EO on vehicle/structure), and testing of a P.C.S. emitter and measured per unit
 complete and in-place. This item shall include driver’s training which will consist of one (1)
 hour of system management to the receiving agency, per intersection, by a qualified
 representative as designated by the P.C.S. manufacturer.
 660.19.10-Priority Control System Detector: Bid includes the furnishing, installation
 and testing (1) P.C.S. detector, the mounting of this unit, all necessary wiring, card rack and
 interface unit, confirmation light and all other materials to operate the P.C.S. intersection
 system. This item shall be measured complete and in-place by intersection.
 660.20-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 660.20.1-General: When accepted as complete, the quantities determined as provided
 above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for the items listed below, which prices and
 payments shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials and doing all the work
 prescribed in a workmanlike manner, including excavating, backfilling, replacing sidewalks
 and pavements, replacing curb and gutter, disposal of waste and debris and for furnishing all
 labor, equipment, tools, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 Unit bid prices shall be submitted as indicated on the Plans per code unit, type or
 intersection number.
 660.20.2-Traffic Detectors: Pay item codes shall be as follows:
 (LPS)-Loops
 (PBS)-Probes
 
 654
 
 660.20.3-Signal Sections: Pay item codes shall be as follows:
 (V-8)--8” ((V-203) --203 mm) Vehicle Signal Sections (R, Y or G)
 (V-12)--12” ((V-305) -- 305 mm) Vehicle Signal Sections (R, Y, G or ARROW)
 (V-8P)--8” ((V-203) --203 mm) Programmed Vehicle Signal Sections (R, Y or G)
 (V-12P)--12” ((V-305) -- 305 mm) Programmed Vehicle Signal Sections (R, Y, G or
 Arrow)
 (P-9)--9” ((P-229) -- 229 mm) Pedestrian Signal Sections (W-DW)
 (P-12)--12” ((V-305) -- 305 mm) Pedestrian Signal Sections (W-DW)
 660.20.4-Signal Supports: Pay item codes shall be as follows:
 (Type)--Poles and Mast Arms
 (PED)--Pedestal
 660.20.5-Junction Boxes: Pay item codes shall be as follows:
 (Type)--H or L
 660.20.6-Signal Removal: Payment for traffic signal removal shall be in accordance with
 one of the following:
 i. If there is a pay item in the Contract for Signal Removal, the Contractor shall remove
 the equipment as specified and payment shall be one lump sum, per intersection basis.
 ii. If there is not a pay item in the Contract for Signal Removal, and removal is required
 for completion of the Contract, existing signal equipment shall be removed by the
 Contractor unless otherwise specified. No additional compensation will be paid and
 removal work as well as salvage value of equipment if applicable, shall be considered
 in the bid price for “Miscellaneous Signal” items.
 Removal and disposition of salvaged equipment shall be in accordance with 660.5 of these
 Specifications.
 660.21-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 660001-* Signal Controller
 660002-* Traffic Detector, “type”
 660003-* Signal Section, “type”
 660004-* Signal Support, “type”
 660005-* Junction Box, Type “type”
 660005-* Adjust Junction Box, Box Number “number”
 660006-* Signal Interconnect
 660007-* Miscellaneous Signal
 660007-* Miscellaneous Signal Loop Number “number
 660008-* Signal Removal
 660010-* Priority Control System Detector, “OE”
 660010-* Priority Control System Emitter, “code”
 * Sequence number
 
 655
 
 UNIT
 Lump Sum
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Each
 Each
 
 SECTION 661
 TRAFFIC SIGNS AND DELINEATORS
 661.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This item shall consist of the fabricating, furnishing, and erecting of a complete system of
 traffic signs and delineators in accordance with the requirements of the Plans and of these
 specifications. All details not specified or not shown on the Plans shall conform to the details and
 requirements set forth in the following specifications and publications:
 i. Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaires and
 Traffic Signals, latest issue, including revisions, American Association of State
 Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
 ii. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, latest issue,
 including revisions, as printed by the Federal Highway Administration, U.S.
 Department of Transportation. (Referred to as the MUTCD).
 iii. Standard Alphabets for Highway Signs, as printed by the Federal Highway
 Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation. West Virginia Manual of Uniform
 Traffic Control Devices, Fabrication Details, latest issue, including revisions.
 (Referred to as the Fabrication Manual).
 661.2-MATERIALS:
 The criteria for sampling, inspection, and acceptance of signing material are documented
 in MP 661.02.40.
 661.2.1-Aluminum:
 661.2.1.1-Sign Panels: Panels shall be of the type specified in the Plans and shall meet
 the following Specifications:
 661.2.1.1.1-Sheets: Aluminum for sheet sign panels shall be Alloy 6061-T6, ASTM
 B 209 or Alloy 5052-H38, and shall meet the ASD fabrication requirements for mill
 products. For signs using porcelain enamel background on sheet aluminum, the Contractor
 shall use an alloy which has been recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the
 Engineer, specially designed and prepared for the application of porcelain enamel.
 661.2.1.1.2-Extrusions: Aluminum for the extruded panels shall be Alloy 6063-T6,
 ASTM B 221.
 661.2.1.2-Structural Shapes: Structural shapes, rolled or extruded, used for sign
 framing or mounting brackets shall be of Alloy 6061-T6 or Alloy 6063-T6, ASTM B 211
 or B221.
 661.2.1.3-Hardware: Aluminum for hex lock nuts for use with post clip bolts and
 stitch bolts shall conform to Aluminum Alloy 2017-T4. Lock nuts shall have anodic
 coating conforming to MIL-A-8625. Thread fit shall be as recommended by the
 manufacturer.
 
 656
 
 Flat washers for use with stitch bolts and post clip bolts shall conform to current ASTM
 B 209, aluminum alloy 2024-T4 or Alclad 2024-T4. Washers shall be used with all lock
 nuts and stitch bolts.
 Spring, lock-washers shall conform to current ASTM B 211, Alloy 7075-T6, aluminum
 alloy bars, rods and wire.
 Post clips shall conform to current ASTM B 108, Alloy 356-T6, aluminum base alloy
 permanent mold castings.
 Post clip bolts and stitch bolts shall conform to current ASTM B 211, Alloy 2024-T4,
 aluminum alloy bars, rods and wire. Bolts shall have an anodic coating and shall be
 chromate sealed in accordance with MIL-A-8625.
 Nuts, ¼ inch (6 mm) top and under, and all bolts and machine screws shall be made
 from Alloy 2024-T4, ASTM B 211. Nuts 5/16 inch (8 mm) and over, shall be Alloy 6262T9, ASTM B 211. All nuts, bolts and machine screws shall have an anodic coating with a
 chromate seal conforming to MIL-A-8625.
 U-bolts shall be fabricated of 2024-T4 aluminum alloy conforming to ASTM B 211
 and connecting clips shall be fabricated of 6061-T6 aluminum alloy conforming to ASTM
 B 221.
 661.2.1.4-Demountable Copy: Demountable copy, including all items of legend and
 border, shall be fabricated of aluminum 0.040 inch (1 mm) thick sheet conforming to
 ASTM B 209, Alloy 5052 H38.
 Demountable copy shall be coated with white type II high-intensity sheeting unless
 another color is specified on the Plans.
 Demountable legend shall be in accordance with the current MUTCD. Combined
 upper and lower case alphabets shall be Series E modified by widening the stroke width to
 approximately one-fifth of the letter or numeral height of the upper case alphabet. Capital
 alphabets shall be Series D modified by widening the stroke width to approximately onefifth of the letter or numeral height.
 661.2.1.5-Rivets: All rivets used for the attachment of demountable copy shall be
 blind, dome head, self-plugging or pull through type mandrel, made of aluminum alloy that
 will not produce streaking or discoloring of the sign face. The manufacturer of the rivets
 shall determine the method of rivet application.
 All rivets used for the attachment of delineators shall be blind, dome head, selfplugging or pull through type mandrel. The rivets shall be an aluminum alloy.
 661.2.2-Steel: Hardware-Low carbon steel bolts and nuts shall be in accordance with
 ASTM A 307. Manufacturer's markings on A 307 bolts will not be required. High strength
 steel bolts, nuts, and washers shall be in accordance with ASTM A 325. Stainless steel bolting
 materials shall be in accordance with ASTM A 320 and shall be of the type recommended by
 the manufacturer of the material. Galvanizing, if required, should conform to ASTM A 153.
 Cadmium plating, if required, should conform to ASTM B 766, Class 12 (0.47 mils) (12° m).
 Material used for banding and buckles, clamps, bolts, and lockwashers shall be stainless
 steel.
 Steel clamps for attaching sign to tubular supports shall be of two types. Type I, a light
 duty clamp shall be capable of withstanding loads equivalent to a sign area of 20 square feet
 657
 
 (2 square m) and shall be fabricated from material meeting the requirements of ASTM A 575
 of A 576, Grade 1020. Type II, a heavy duty clamp, shall be capable of withstanding the loads
 equivalent to a sign area of 80 square feet (7.5 square m) and shall be fabricated from material
 conforming to the requirements of ASTM A606, A607 or ASTM A242.
 Steel shapes and plates used as mounting hardware or as sign framing shall be Grade 1020
 conforming to ASTM A 575 or A 576.
 Steel for delineator supporting brackets shall be commercial quality steel galvanized in
 accordance with ASTM A 123.
 661.2.3-Enclosed Lens Reflective Sheeting: The reflective sheeting shall conform to
 715.9.2.1.
 661.2.4-Reflex Reflectors: The reflectors shall conform to 715.9.2.4.
 661.2.5-Delineators: The soiled anchored plastic delineator post or guardrail mounted
 plastic delineator post installed shall be a model post from the latest approved products listing
 (APL) for such. The posts supplied shall also meet the requirements noted on the APL. Unless
 otherwise noted, color shall be either white with white on the front or yellow with fluorescent
 yellow sheeting on the front. All soil anchored, guardrail mounted, and xs delineators shall
 utilize either type ASTM IX or TYPE ASTM XI Reflective Sheeting. All B-1 delineators shall
 be 8" x 12" and utilize type ASTM III Sheeting.
 Mounting hardware for guardrail mounted plastic delineator posts on steel posts – self
 tapping screws shall be pan head and shall be manufactured of 410 or 410C stainless steel with
 a square drive. The screws shall meet the dimensional requirements of SAE J78. The fender
 washers shall be manufactured using 18-8 stainless steel. Mounting hardware for guardrail
 mounted plastic delineator posts on wood posts – the lag screws and fender washers shall be
 manufactured using low carbon steel. The bolts shall be hot dip galvanized per ASTM F2329
 or in accordance with Class C of ASTM A 153. The bolts shall meet the dimensional
 requirements of ASME B18.2.1. Galvanizing for the fender washers shall be Class 25, Type
 1, per ASTM B695.
 Anchors used for surface mounted tubular delineators to concrete surfaces shall be self
 threading anchors meeting the requirements described herein, and shall exhibit performance
 and durability equal to or greater than ITW Redhead LDT Anchors. Anchor bodies shall be
 made of hardened carbon steel, plated with zinc or equal corrosion resistant coating. The
 anchors shall have a finished hex washer head with anti-rotation serrations to prevent anchor
 back-out. The head of the anchor shall be stamped with a length identification code for easy
 inspection. The anchors shall be installed with carbide tipped hammer drill bits made in
 accordance with ANSI B212.15. The anchor diameter shall be based on the pre-drilled holes
 provided in the marker base. The overall anchor length shall be sufficient to provide a
 minimum embedment depth of two inches into the concrete. All other components shall be
 those supplied and recommended by the manufacturer.
 661.2.6-Inks: Inks for reflective sheeting shall meet the requirements of Section 711.13.
 661.2.7-Nylon Washers: Nylon washers shall be of commercial grade.
 
 658
 
 661.2.8-Route Markers for Guide Signs: Route marker shields to be mounted on guide
 signs shall be fabricated using aluminum alloy 6061-T6 or 5052-H38, ASTM B209. The
 minimum thickness of the aluminum sheet shall be 0.040 inches (1.02 mm). All shields shall
 be attached to the guide signs using approved rivets.
 661.2.8.1-Reflective Guide Signs: U.S. and State route marker shields shall have
 white encapsulated lens, reflective sheeting background, with black nonreflective sheeting
 numerals.
 Interstate shields shall have red and blue encapsulated lens, reflective sheeting
 background, with white numerals and border.
 661.2.9-Nonreflective Sheeting:
 requirements of 715.9.2.2.
 
 Nonreflective sheeting shall conform to the
 
 661.2.10-Encapsulated Lens Reflective Sheeting: The reflective sheeting shall conform
 to 715.9.2.3.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 661.3-FABRICATION:
 661.3.1-General: Fabrication of all sign parts shall be in accordance with the dimensions
 shown on the Plans and approved shop drawings. Work shall be done in a uniform
 workmanlike manner.
 661.3.2-Shop Drawings: If not as shown on the Plans, the Contractor shall submit to the
 Engineer for approval scale drawings, eight copies, of those signs having variances, showing
 arrangement and spacing of all letters, symbols and borders for all signs having demountable
 legend, attachment of sign panels, and copies of all layout templates for silk screen signs.
 If a method of attaching sign panels to supports is other than as shown on the Standard
 Drawings, the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer for approval detailed drawings, eight
 copies, showing the proposed method of attaching each type of sign panel to each type of
 support.
 661.3.3-Metal Cutting and Refinishing: Panels one-half inch (13 mm) thick or less shall
 be cut by one of the following methods: sheared, blanked, sawed or milled. Panels over onehalf inch (13 mm) thick shall be sawed or milled. Re-entrant cuts shall be filleted by drilling
 prior to cutting. No flame cutting will be permitted. Cut edges shall be refinished to present
 a true and smooth edge that is free from burrs and ragged breaks. Holes shall be made in such
 a manner as not to affect the finished surface.
 661.3.4-Sign Panel Preparation: Prior to application of ink or reflective sheeting to the
 sign panels, they shall be given a chemical conversion treatment meeting the requirements of
 ASTM B449, Class 1 or 2.
 All fabrication, including cutting, welding, riveting, and punching of holes other than
 mounting holes for demountable letters, numerals, symbols and borders, shall be completed
 
 659
 
 prior to surface preparation. However, it will be permissible to weld studs to panels after
 application of sheeting.
 661.3.4.1-Handling: Sign panels shall not be handled, except by mechanical devices
 or clean canvas gloves, between all cleaning and etching operations and the application of
 reflective sheeting. There shall be no opportunity for metal to come in contact with grease,
 oils, or other contaminates after cleaning and etching and prior to the application of the
 background material.
 661.3.5-Application of Reflective Sheeting: The application of reflective sheeting to the
 backing material shall be in full accordance with instructions of the manufacturer of the
 reflective sheeting used.
 Reflective sheeting shall cover one entire side of the flat sheet blank, which side shall be
 the sign face. When applied to extruded sign panels, reflective sheeting shall be rolled over
 each edge of the extrusion ¼ inch (6.35 mm) (plus 1/16 inch (1.6 mm), minus 0 inch (mm)) to
 prevent an opened surface on the sign face.
 Reflective sheeting shall be applied mechanically in a manner specified by the
 manufacturers of the reflective sheeting.
 Signs 48 inches (1.2 m) and less on the shorter side shall be covered by a single piece of
 reflective sheeting. On signs larger than 48 inches (1.2 m), adjacent pieces shall be carefully
 matched for color to provide uniform reflective quality. All seams shall be straight and the
 edges of adjustment pieces shall be overlapped a minimum of 3/16 inch (5 mm) the length of
 the seam.
 661.3.6-Application of Copy:
 661.3.6.1-Demountable Copy: Each letter, symbol and border shall be supplied with
 mounting holes and shall be secured to the sign surface with approved rivets. The use of
 tape, glue or other substance to secure the copy to the sign face during fabrication or in its
 final form, other than approved rivets, will not be allowed.
 Demountable letters, digits, borders and alphabet accessories shall be attached flush
 against sign faces after background material has been applied.
 Spacing of all legends and borders shall be as specified with an allowable tolerance of
 plus or minus 2 percent on any individual measurement as shown on the Plans or approved
 shop drawings. A sufficient number of rivets shall be used to securely fasten demountable
 legends and borders to sign panels.
 661.3.6.2-Screen Processing: All legends or borders on signs, except demountable
 letters or borders, shall be applied by screen processing, reverse screen processing, or cut
 out letters after the reflective sheeting is applied to the panels. All screening shall be done
 in a workmanlike manner and as recommended by the manufacturer of the reflective
 sheeting. The Contractor may apply legends and borders to signs having reflectorized
 backgrounds by equally effective methods after approval of the Engineer. All legends,
 borders and backgrounds shall be of the color specified and placed on the sign as shown
 on the Plans.
 The screening shall be done in a manner which results in a uniform color and tone, with
 sharply defined edges of legend and border and without blemishes on the sign background.
 660
 
 Where screening is required, free hand painting will not be permitted. Proper size screen
 mesh shall be used in reverse screening to ascertain that the finished colors match the
 prescribed Standard Interstate Colors.
 661.3.7-Sign Panels:
 661.3.7.1-Flat Sheet: Flat sheet signs shall be fabricated of a single piece of sheet
 material without joints. The height or width of the sign shall be within plus or minus 5/8
 inch (3 mm) tolerance of the dimensions indicated on the Plans. Corner radii shall be
 within plus or minus 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) tolerance of the dimensions shown on the Plans.
 Panels shall have dimensions and corner radii in accordance with the Standard Details
 and shall be punched only with the holes necessary for proper mounting. Signs shall be
 free of buckles, warp, dents, and burrs prior to the application of reflective sheeting or other
 background material. Dimples or indentations shall not be noticeable from a distance of 10
 feet (3 m) normal to the sign.
 
 Width
 (Inches)
 Up to 30 Inclusive
 31 to 37 Inclusive
 38 to 47 Inclusive
 48 to 60 Inclusive
 61 to 72 Inclusive
 
 {ENGLISH}
 Thickness Based On
 Single Post
 Two Post
 Mounting (Inches)
 Mounting (Inches)
 0.080
 ---0.100
 ---0.100
 0.800
 0.100
 0.100
 0.100
 0.100
 
 Width
 (mm)
 Up to 750 Inclusive
 751 to 925 Inclusive
 926 to 1 175 Inclusive
 1 176 to 1 500 Inclusive
 1 501 to 1 800 Inclusive
 
 {METRIC}
 Thickness Based On
 Single Post
 Two Post
 Mounting (mm)
 Mounting (mm)
 2.03
 ---2.54
 ---2.54
 2.032
 2.54
 2.54
 2.54
 2.54
 
 Panels shall have dimensions and corner radii in accordance with the Standard
 Drawings and shall be punched only with the holes necessary for proper mounting. Signs
 shall be free of buckles, warp, dents, and burrs prior to the application of reflective sheeting
 or other background material. Dimples or indentations shall not be noticeable from a
 distance of 10 feet (3 m) normal to the sign.
 661.3.7.2-Extruded Panels: Extruded panel signs shall consist of extruded aluminum
 channel sections, bolted together at the flanges, to form a surface of the length, width, and
 depth required, to which the legend, border, and background have been applied.
 The panel sections shall be of the shape, dimensions, and weight shown on the Standard
 Drawings. This section as shown is nominal and an alternate extruded panel section of
 661
 
 equal or greater section modulus and having dimensions suitable to utilize hardware as
 shown on the Standard Drawings may be supplied by the Contractor upon receipt of the
 written approval of the Engineer. No splicing of sections will be permitted.
 The sections shall be within the established commercial tolerances of the aluminum
 industry.
 Each panel shall be flat and true within ¼ inch (6.35 mm) tolerance on an 8 feet (2.4
 m) length, with proportionately greater allowance on longer lengths. Flatness across the
 face of each panel shall be limited to 0.004 inch per inch (100 m per 25.4 mm) of width.
 The panels shall be assembled in the shop and firmly bolted to form a sign of the length
 and width required. Before bolting, the webs of the panels shall be in the same plane to
 form a smooth and uniform surface and the ends shall be free from projections. Adjacent
 panels shall be color matched both day and night.
 It is intended that the sign shall be fabricated as a single unit. If the largest signs cannot
 be shipped as a single unit, they may be sectionalized as approved by the Engineer. All
 signs must be completely shop assembled but if field joining of panels is permitted, legend
 and border units which overlap the joining must be removed and replaced in the field.
 661.3.7.3-BLANK
 661.3.7.4-Clear Coating and Edge Sealing: Signs to which reflective sheeting has
 been applied shall not be clear coated, except when it is recommended by the manufacturer
 of the sheeting. Edge sealer shall be applied to all splices and edges as recommended by
 the sheeting manufacturer.
 661.3.7.5-Packaging: All signs shall be protected by packaging during shipment and
 storage. The packing shall be adequate to prevent damage to any part of the sign, including
 any demountable legends or borders. Before packaging, all signs shall be free of moisture
 and all paints shall be thoroughly dry. Adhesive tapes shall not be applied to any sign
 surfaces. All packaged signs shall be kept entirely dry.
 Signs delivered for use on a project shall be stored off the ground and under cover in a
 manner meeting the approval of the Engineer.
 Signs reflectorized with encapsulated lens sheeting shall be packaged and stored as
 specified, with careful consideration to avoid friction or rubbing between signs; shall be
 kept dry and at an ambient temperature not to exceed 150° F (66 C); and shall be stored
 on edge to prevent excessive pressure on the surface of the sheeting.
 661.3.8-Application of Nonreflective Film: Nonreflective film shall be mechanically
 applied and processed in accordance with the recommendation of the film manufacturer.
 Nonreflective sheeting shall be clear coated and force cured as recommended by the
 manufacturer of the sheeting.
 661.4-ERECTION:
 661.4.1-General: All signs and delineators shall be erected at the points designated on the
 Plans or by the Engineer in accordance with these Specifications and in reasonable close
 conformity to the locations, elevations and angles shown on the Plans or established by the
 Engineer.
 662
 
 Before starting the erection of signs, the Contractor shall establish the location of each sign
 in accordance with the Plans or as directed by the Engineer, and mark each sign site with
 construction stakes, having clearly indicated the sign number of the respective sign. The
 Contractor shall furnish stakes, paint, other materials and labor for performing the locating and
 staking as described. When the sites have been staked and are ready for inspection, the
 Contractor shall inform the Engineer, who will check and approve the site or make necessary
 changes. Centerline station information will be furnished to the Contractor by the Engineer.
 The Contractor shall take full responsibility for checking all cross sections at approved sign
 locations to determine final support lengths. The supports shall not be fabricated until such
 time as the above measurements prove acceptable to the Engineer. Upon approval of location
 and support length, the Contractor shall erect the proper sign at the staked location and
 complete all work.
 After installation of the signs, they shall be inspected at night by the Engineer. If specular
 reflection is apparent on any sign, its positioning shall be adjusted by the Contractor at his
 expense to correct this condition.
 661.4.2-Location of Ground Mounted Signs: Signs shall be oriented to minimize or
 eliminate specular reflection.
 Ground mounted signs longer than 48 inches (1.2 m) shall normally be mounted at 93
 degrees away from the direction of, and facing, the traffic that they are intended to serve.
 On curves, structural posts shall be located and erected so as to face the sign at an angle of
 85 degrees from the line of sight. The line of sight is defined as the line between the center of
 the sign and the centerline of the traffic lane adjacent to the sign. Its length in feet is equal to
 50 (meters is equal to 0.6) times the letter height, in inches (mm), of the smallest legend in the
 major line of copy. (Example: 50 by 12 inches letter equals 600 feet in the line of sight).
 (Example: 0.6 by 300 mm letter equals 180 meters in the line of sight).
 Ground mounted signs shorter than 48 inches (1.2 m) shall normally be mounted
 approximately at right angles to the direction of, and facing, the traffic that they are intended
 to serve.
 661.4.2.1-Multi-lane Roadways: Signs on the thru roadway and on ramp entrances
 and exits at the thru roadway shall have the following clearance from the roadway:
 In ground installations, the signs shall be erected at a height, measured from the edge
 of the pavement to the bottom of the sign, as indicated in the following table, unless
 otherwise specified on the Plans. If, however, a secondary sign is mounted below a guide
 sign, the major sign shall be at least 8 feet (2.4 m) and the secondary sign at least 5 feet
 (1.5 m) above the level of the pavement edge unless otherwise specified on the Plans.
 SIGNS
 Route Marker Assemblies
 Regulatory Signs
 Warning Signs
 Truck Weight Station Signs
 All other signs
 
 HEIGHT (Ft)(m)
 7 (2.1 m)
 7 (2.1 m)
 7 (2.1 m)
 7 (2.1 m)
 7 (2.1 m)
 
 663
 
 MEASURED TO
 Bottom of Lowest Sign
 Bottom of Sign
 Bottom of Sign
 Bottom of Sign
 Bottom of Sign
 
 Overhead signs shall provide a clearance of not less than 17 feet (5.2) over the entire
 width of the pavement and shoulders.
 For roadways with no curbs or mountable curbs, the minimum horizontal clearance to
 any roadside sign or overhead sign structure shall be 4 feet (1.2 m) beyond the edge of the
 paved roadway shoulder, to either the right or left. Where there is an unmountable curb or
 guardrail, the horizontal clearance shall be at least 2 feet (600 mm) beyond the face of the
 curb or guardrail.
 Mileposts shall be located in line with delineators and at a height of 4 ½ feet (1.350 m),
 measured between the grade of the pavement and the bottom of the sign panel.
 661.4.2.2-Other Roadways: Signs on frontage roads, roads or streets affording access
 to the multi-lane roadway, and on ramps (other than at the multi-lane roadway) shall have
 the following clearance from the roadway.
 The bottom of the roadside signs shall be 7 feet (2.1 m) above the level of the roadway
 edge. If however, a secondary sign is mounted below the major sign, the secondary sign
 shall be at least 6 feet (2.1 m) above the level of the pavement edge.
 When signs are placed over the pavement, a clearance of 17 feet (5.2) shall be provided
 between the surface of the pavement and the bottom of the lowest part of the sign structure.
 Roadside signs and overhead structures shall be placed at the edge of the road shoulders
 and normally shall have a horizontal clearance of two to twelve feet (0.6 to 3.6 m) beyond
 the edge of the pavement or travelway, except where conditions do not permit, or where
 otherwise shown on the Plans. Where a raised curb, guardrail, or paved shoulder is present,
 a sign shall ordinarily be placed with its nearest edge at least 2 feet (0.6 m) outside such
 curb line, guardrail, or paved shoulder.
 661.4.3-Location of Delineators: The reflective units of the delineators shall be
 positioned to be clearly visible for a distance of 1,000 feet (300 m) wherever possible during
 night time under normal weather and atmospheric conditions when illuminated by the upper
 beam of standard automobile headlights with the vehicle located in the right hand traffic lane
 approaching the delineator.
 Reflective units shall be attached with aluminum rivets of suitable length as follows:
 i. One white unit shall be attached to posts or brackets located along the right side
 of the main roadway.
 ii. One white unit shall be attached to posts or brackets along the right of the main
 roadway through interchange areas and on the right side of the connecting
 roadways and ramps through the interchange area.
 iii. One amber unit shall be attached to posts or brackets along the left side of the
 connecting roadways and ramps as necessary through the interchange area.
 iv. Two white units shall be attached vertically to all posts along the right side on
 acceleration and deceleration lanes.
 v. Two amber units shall be attached vertically on each face of posts or brackets
 located in the center of dividers less than 8 feet (2.4 m) in width on ramps.
 Post mounted delineators shall be supported by flanged channel bar posts of the material,
 design, and dimensions specified in 657.
 
 664
 
 When the required longitudinal spacing of posts falls on a structure, delineator brackets,
 Type A, Type B, or Type C shall be installed instead of a post as shown on the Standard
 Drawings. Bracket mounted delineators shall be supported on aluminum or steel brackets of
 the materials, design, and dimensions in accordance with these Specifications and the Standard
 Drawings. Type A delineator brackets shall be used on bridge railing with horizontal members
 having a round section. Type B delineator brackets shall be used on bridge railing with
 horizontal members having a rectangular section. Type C delineator brackets shall be used on
 bridges having no horizontal bridge rail members.
 When the delineators are located above the top rail, the bracket shall be mounted on the
 fascia side of the railing. The required height of the top of the bracket shall be measured from
 the surface of the roadway at the edges of the traveled lane as projected from the adjacent fill
 sections, or as indicated by the pavement edge markings. Brackets shall be fastened to the
 member of the bridge rail by means of a stainless steel band and hardware as indicated on the
 Standard Drawings.
 Delineators, three per unit or nine per unit, shall be attached as shown on the Standard
 Drawings to the post at the approach end of channelizing islands within the roadway or at other
 locations as designated by the Engineer.
 661.4.4-Attaching Sign Panels:
 i. Flat sheet: Flat sheet signs shall be attached to supports, after the supports are
 erected, using a nylon washer and a flat steel washer between the sign face and
 bolt head, a lock washer between U channel posts and nuts as shown on the
 Standard Drawings. Bolts, nuts and flat and lock washers shall be cadmium
 plated.
 ii. Extruded Panel: After the supports are firmly set, the signs shall be mounted as
 shown on the Standard Drawings and Plans or as recommended by the
 manufacturer of the panels. All panels shall be horizontal, the faces shall be flush
 within commercial tolerances, and the face of the sign shall be flat. All hardware
 used in erection of the sign shall conform to the Standard Drawings and these
 Specifications. Any appreciable buckling, warping, or other defects in the panels
 shall be cause for rejection of the entire sign.
 661.4.5-Final Clean Up: Before final inspection, the Contractor shall perform any
 touching up on paint finishes, cleaning of exposed sign and support surfaces, and leveling and
 repair of the site as may be deemed necessary by the Engineer to insure the effectiveness and
 neat appearance of the work.
 661.5-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 661.5.1-Signs: Measurement for payment for all types of signs will be based on the area
 in square feet (meters) of the sign faces. Areas shall be calculated to the nearest 0.01 square
 foot (m) for each sign and to the nearest square foot (m) for the total quantity. The area of any
 sign shall be the area of the smallest rectangular, triangular or trapezoidal shape that will
 encompass the entire sign; except for extruded panel signs, which shall have an area equal to
 the smallest combination of rectangular, triangular, or trapezoidal shapes that constitute the
 sign.
 
 665
 
 661.5.2-Delineators: Measurement for payment for delineators will be based on the actual
 number of delineators necessary to complete the work.
 661.5.3-Delineator Brackets: Measurement for payment for delineator brackets will be
 based on the actual number of delineator brackets necessary to complete the work.
 661.5.4-Installation of Reusable Signs: Measurement for payment for installation of
 reusable signs will be based on the actual number of reusable signs that are designated on the
 Plans, and are necessary to complete the work. This quantity, shall be plan quantity, unless
 the Engineer determines the plan quantity to be in error and changes the quantity of reusable
 signs to be installed.
 661.6-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, shall be paid for at the contract unit price
 for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing all
 the materials and doing all work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including
 all tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work. All incidental work
 and materials for which no basis of payment is provided will be considered as completely covered
 by the prices bid for the items included in the Contract.
 661.6.1-Signs: Payment will be made at the contract unit price per square foot (m) of sign
 for the appropriate type of sign. This price shall be full compensation for fabricating,
 furnishing, and attaching the sign or sign assembly to the post or posts as shown on the Plans
 or specified. It shall include the furnishing of the aluminum sign panels; all framing, bracing,
 attachment, and connections necessary to attach the signs to the supports; furnishing and
 applying the reflective sheeting, or other sign facing material; furnishing and applying the
 demountable copy or the process material and screens for screening the legend and border to
 the sign face as required by the Plans; furnishing all hardware required for the above; and all
 labor, equipment, tools, and incidentals necessary to complete the work. This item does not
 include posts.
 661.6.2-Delineators: Payment will be made at the contract unit price per reflective unit
 for each color actually installed. The price shall include fabrication, furnishing and installing
 the reflective unit, suitable length aluminum rivets, aluminum rivet collar, and all other
 material, labor, equipment, and tools necessary to complete the installation. This item does
 not include the post or Type A, Type B, or Type C brackets.
 Payment will be made at the contract unit price per installation for soil anchored plastic
 delineator post, guardrail mounted plastic delineator post, or surface mounted plastic delineator
 posts, hardware and labor. The construction details, material and labor will be in accordance
 with the applicable sections of standard specification sections 657 and 661, The Standard
 Details Book, Volume II-Signs, Signals, Lighting, and Marking (latest edition), and the
 Contract Plan Special Details.
 661.6.3-Delineator Brackets: Payment will be made at the contract unit price per bracket
 for each type actually installed, which price shall include the fabrication, furnishing and
 
 666
 
 installing of the bracket, all necessary hardware and all other materials, equipment, labor and
 tools necessary to complete the installation.
 661.6.4-Installation of Reusable Signs: Payment will be made at the contract unit price
 per installation of reusable sign. This price shall be full compensation for transporting the sign
 to the nearest possible location shown on the Plans and erection of the sign, including
 furnishing the necessary hardware and all other material, labor, equipment and tools necessary
 to complete the installation.
 661.7-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 661001-*
 “size” Flat Sheet Sign
 661002-*
 Extruded Panel Sign
 661004-*
 Delineator, Reflex Reflector, Single,
 661004-*
 Delineator, Encapsulated Lens, Single,
 661006-*
 Delineator, Nine Per Unit,
 661007-*
 Delineator, Three Per Unit,
 661008-*
 Delineator Bracket, Type “type”
 661011-*
 Installation of Reusable Sign
 661013-*
 Plastic Delineator Posts, “color, type”
 * Sequence number
 
 667
 
 UNIT
 Square Foot (Meter)
 Square Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Unit
 Unit
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 SECTION 662
 ROADWAY LIGHTING
 662.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This item shall consist of manufacturing, furnishing and installation of a lighting system in
 accordance with the requirements of the Plans and of these Specifications. All details not specified
 or not shown on the Plans shall conform to the details and requirements set forth in the following
 specifications and publications:
 i.
 Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaires and
 Traffic Signals, latest issue, American Association of State Highway and
 Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
 ii. National Electrical Code
 iii. American National Standards Institute
 In addition to the Plans, these Specifications and the above noted publications, any
 applicable local code shall apply.
 662.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials furnished by the Contractor shall be of new stock, shall be the product of the
 reputable manufacturers of lighting equipment, shall conform to Division of Highways'
 Specifications and shall meet the approval of the Engineer.
 All materials shall conform to Division 700 of the Standard Specifications and specifically
 as follows, unless otherwise modified on the Plans. Reference specifications for materials shall
 be understood to be the latest available specification and revision at the time of award of the
 contract.
 662.2.1-Concrete: All concrete shall conform to Standard Specifications, Section 601,
 Types B or K (Bridge Superstructure).
 662.2.2-Reinforcing Steel Bars: Reinforcing steel bars shall conform to the applicable
 requirements of Section 602 of the Standard Specifications.
 662.2.3-Electrical Conduit: Electrical Conduit shall meet the requirements of Section
 715.42.10.
 662.2.3.1-Type R (Rigid Steel Conduit): Type R (Rigid Steel Conduit) shall meet the
 requirements of Section 715.42.10.1.
 662.2.3.2-Type F (Flexible, Liquid-Tight Conduit): Type F (Flexible, Liquid-Tight
 Conduit) shall meet the requirements of Section 715.42.10.2.
 662.2.3.3-Type P (Polyvinyl Chloride Conduit): Type P (Polyvinyl Chloride
 Conduit) shall meet the requirements of Section 715.42.10.3.
 662.2.4-Junction Boxes: The following Specifications shall set forth minimum design
 requirements for junction boxes for lighting cable and other electrical wiring. The type shall
 be noted on the Plans.
 668
 
 Junction boxes as shown on the Plans shall be installed where indicated. The Contractor
 may, with the approval of the Engineer and at his own expense, install additional junction
 boxes to facilitate the work of installing conduit and pulling cable.
 662.2.4.1-Types A, B and C: Types A, B, and C shall meet the requirements of Section
 715.42.11.4.
 662.2.4.2-Type L (Light Duty): Type L (Light Duty) shall meet the requirements of
 Section 715.42.11.1.
 662.2.4.3-Type H (Heavy Duty): Type H (Heavy Duty) shall meet the requirements
 of Section 715.42.11.2.
 662.2.5-Manholes: Manholes shall be constructed to the dimensions shown in the Plans.
 Unless otherwise noted on the Plans, all units shall be completely equipped with the necessary
 cable racks, rack insulators, frames and covers, and all other appurtenances detailed on the
 Plans and approved by the Engineer.
 Concrete manholes shall be monolithic construction and maybe either precast or cast in
 place.
 662.2.5.1-Cable Rack: The cable rack assembly shall be a combination of Line
 Material Company Catalog Nos. DU17B2, DU581 or DU582, DE11U1, and WDU4M1,
 Joslyn Catalog Nos. J5124, J5131 or J5132, and J5122, or equal.
 662.2.5.2-Pulling Iron: The pulling iron shall be Line Material Company Catalog #
 DU2T2, Joslyn Catalog # J8119, or equal.
 662.2.5.3-Ground Connector: The ground connector shall be Burndy Company Type
 KC22B1, Dossert #DGN-5, or equal.
 662.2.6-Ground Rods: Ground rods shall be copperclad steel, ¾ inches (19 mm) in
 diameter with a minimum length as noted on the plans and shall be one piece. Sectional or
 segmented ground rods are not permitted. The ground rods shall be complete with ground
 clamp and square head bolt.
 662.2.7-Roadway Luminaires: All castings shall be smooth, clean and free from cracks,
 blisters, pockets, voids, rough or chipped spots, or other similar defects.
 The luminaire shall have a slipfitter capable of accepting mounting tenons made from 2
 inches (50 mm) pipe and adjustable plus or minus three degrees about the tenon axis. No
 additional parts shall be required to accomplish the adjustment.
 The luminaire shall have a terminal block prewired into the electrical system so that only
 two connections from the # 10 AWG tap wires need be made.
 The ballast compartment shall be immediately accessible via a separate cover door such
 that the lamp area need not be opened to service the ballast.
 The luminaire shall have a removable, parabolically formed aluminum reflector system
 with a finish as recommended by the manufacturer.
 669
 
 The luminaire shall have a porcelain mogul base socket capable of being adjusted along
 both the longitudinal and vertical axis of the lamp proper. A lamp grip shall also be provided
 at the socket.
 The reflector-refractor chamber shall be gasketed with synthetic rubber or dacron felt
 gasket and filtered, when available for fixture type, with a replaceable activated charcoal or
 fiberglass filter such that the chamber shall be waterproof and dust-tight.
 The refractor lens shall be cast for borosilicate glass or, when specified on the Plans, vandal
 resistant polycarbonate resin. It shall be temperature, shock and ultraviolet resistant and shall
 be free from visible cracks, blisters, bubbles, flashed or sharp flanges, or other similar defects.
 The optical system shall produce the IES standard distribution patterns as specified and
 shall be capable of accepting internal, external, or internally molded-in shielding.
 When so designated on the Plans, the luminaire shall be of a total cut-off type design,
 specially fabricated to recess the lamp and having a flat lens.
 662.2.7.1-Luminaire Wattages: The luminaires shall be manufactured by General
 Electric, McGraw-Edison, Sylvania, American Electric or shall be approved equal.
 The luminaires shall be designed to accommodate the appropriate lamps as called for
 on the Plans and Listed in 662.2.9.
 662.2.7.2-Luminaire Ballasts: Luminaire ballasts shall be designed to rapidly restrike
 the lamp in the event of an outage and shall start the lamp at a minimum temperature of –
 20° F (-29 C).
 The ballasts for high pressure sodium lamps shall be of the high power-factor type (93
 to 99 percent), similar to constant wattage type, and shall be rated to the circuit voltage and
 lamp wattage specified. The ballasts shall deliver rated lamp current at line-voltage
 variation of plus or minus 10 percent, with no more than plus or minus 5 percent of lamp
 wattage regulation. Starting aids shall be of the encapsulated type.
 662.2.7.3-Area Luminaires: The luminaire requirements for "area" and "walkway"
 lighting shall be as called for in the Plans and in accordance with the latest edition of
 Special Provisions, Section 662, "Safety Rest Area Lighting" Subsection 662.11, Area
 Lighting Luminaires. Other portions of 662.2.7 above named shall not necessarily apply.
 When incorporated as part of a Roadway Lighting project, the "area" or "walkway"
 type luminaire shall be Post Top Mounted on Type VII aluminum poles in accordance with
 662.2.13.3. In this case, the "area" or "walkway" type luminaire shall be paid for under
 Item 662070-*, "Luminaires", per each.
 662.2.8-Underpass Luminaires: The luminaire housing shall be die-cast aluminum and
 shall be gasketed to form a weatherproof and dusttight unit. All castings shall be smooth and
 clean and free from cracks, blisters, pockets, voids, rough or chipped spots, or other similar
 defects.
 The assembly shall be prewired. The refractor shall meet the requirements set forth in
 662.2.7, and the refractor holder shall be hinged to the housing and secured by stainless steel
 latches and safety chain. The reflector shall be anodic finished polished aluminum. The socket
 shall be an adjustable porcelain mogul-base type with lamp grip. The ballast shall meet the
 requirement set forth in 662.2.7.2.
 670
 
 The luminaire shall be manufactured by Guth, General Electric, Holophane or shall be
 approved equal. The luminaire shall be designed to accommodate the appropriate lamp as
 called for on the Plans and listed in 662.2.9.
 662.2.9-Lamps: The high pressure sodium lamps shall be as manufactured by General
 Electric, Crouse-Hinds, Hollophane or approved equal. Any lamp shall be of the
 manufacturer's latest specification and shall meet the following minimum characteristics:
 For the following chart: Life = minimum rated life hours; Initial Lumens = minimum initial
 lumens in horizontal position; Relamping Factor = estimated lamp lumen depreciation at the
 end of relamping period.
 Type/Watts
 H.P.S./50-clear
 H.P.S./70-clear
 H.P.S./100-clear
 H.P.S./150-clear
 H.P.S./250-clear
 H.P.S./400-clear
 H.P.S./1000-clear
 
 Life-Hours
 24,000
 24,000
 24,000
 24,000
 24,000
 24,000
 24,000
 
 Initial Lumens
 4,000
 5,800
 9,500
 16,000
 30,000
 50,000
 140,000
 
 Relamping Factor
 0.73
 0.73
 0.73
 0.73
 0.73
 0.73
 0.73
 
 662.2.10-Wire and Cable: All wire and cable for feeder and branch circuits shall conform
 to the requirements of the current edition of the National Electric Code and shall meet all
 relevant ASTM Specifications. Conductors shall be coated softdrawn copper, unless otherwise
 noted on the Plans or in these Specifications. Insulation shall be type THWN or XHHW. Cable
 shall be UL approved.
 Conductor sizes shall be standard American Wire Gauge sizes and shall be as noted on the
 Plans. All conductors shall be stranded. Stranded wire shall have a minimum of 19 strands.
 The 15 KV wire and cable shall be single conductor G.E. Catalog # S1-58224, Anaconda
 AP-15315, Hatfield, Okonite, or approved equal. This cable shall have an approved stress
 cone at the terminating point.
 All wire and cable shall have the size, voltage rating, type of insulation and manufacturer's
 name permanently marked on the outer covering at regular intervals. The manufacturer shall
 furnish to the Engineer and the Contractor all splicing or terminating information necessary
 for proper installation of the cable.
 Color coding for the roadway lighting cables shall be permanent solid color as follows:
 Single Phase
 Leg A
 Black
 Leg B
 Red
 White or
 Neutral
 Gray
 Equipment
 Green
 Ground
 
 Three Phase
 Phase A
 Black
 Phase B
 Red
 Phase C
 
 Blue
 
 Equipment
 Ground
 
 Green
 
 Color coding of electrical conductors by use of phase tape or field paint is not acceptable.
 Conductors shall be manufacturer-colored, striped or ridge-marked.
 Bare ground conductors shall be softdrawn copper.
 671
 
 662.2.10.1-Connectors: Cable connections in lighting support bases (except for Type
 IV and Type X) shall be made by means of connector kits, fused or nonfused, as indicated
 on the Plans. Underpass luminaires will be fused individually in the nearest accessible
 junction box.
 Fused "Y" connectors shall be composed of a "Y" line side housing assembled with a
 load side and fuse terminal housing. The housings shall be formed from water-resistant
 synthetic rubber. Each housing shall provide a watertight seal around the cables and when
 fully assembled, shall form a watertight assembly. The cable size shall determine the
 connector size. Fuses shall be sized in accordance with nominally rated loads.
 The line side housing shall contain a wye-tap having crimp or screwlug type connectors
 for the line wires and spring-loaded fuse contacts. The assembly shall have 90 percent
 minimum conductivity.
 The load side housing shall contain a crimp-type connector for the load wire and spring
 loaded fused contacts. The assembly shall have 90 percent minimum conductivity.
 When a load-side wire is pulled or jerked, the load-side housing and assembly,
 including the fuse and any protruding contacts, shall separate from the line-side housing
 and assembly, leaving no exposed contacts in the line-side housing.
 All wire to wire connections shall be made by the use of connector kits. Unfused
 connectors shall be used on all neutral wire. All wire to wire connections must be made in
 accessible locations with workable wire slack as required. Accessible locations include
 manholes, junction boxes and bases.
 662.2.10.1.1-Splices: In special cases, such as conductor sizes in excess of #1/0 AWG
 and with written approval of the Engineer, wire splicing may be permitted. As with
 connector kits, splicing shall be done only in accessible, workable areas. Electrical
 splicing, when approved, shall be used at specific locations only and the number of splices
 shall be kept at a minimum.
 When connector kits are not used, the following splicing method shall be used. Splices
 on all wire and in all boxes shall be made mechanically and electrically secure by means
 of an approved split bolt connector only. It shall then be wrapped with layers of insulating
 tape and in opposite directions. Over the insulating tape, two layers of friction tape shall
 be applied, followed by several layers of jacket tape, two final layers of friction tape and
 two coats of an electrical waterproofing paint. The insulating tape shall be wrapped to a
 wall thickness equal to 12 times the wall thickness of the cable insulation. Similarly, the
 jacket tape shall be wrapped to a thickness equal to 12 times the thickness of the cable
 jacket.
 662.2.10.2-Aerial Cable: Aerial cable shall be either aluminum NSD or lashed
 galvanized messenger construction. Cable assembly shall be self-supporting.
 662.2.10.2.1-Conductors: Insulated conductors shall conform to the requirements
 noted in 662.2.10. Insulation shall be XLP.
 662.2.10.2.2-Messenger Cable: Messenger for the aluminum N-SD cable shall be
 bare, stranded, steel reinforced aluminum.
 
 672
 
 Messenger for the lashed galvanized cable shall be extra high strength galvanized steel
 wire with a breaking strength of not less than 11,000 lb (49 kN). Lashing shall be stainless
 steel, ANSI 300 series.
 662.2.11-Cable-in-Duct:
 662.2.11.1-Description: The work under this item covers the installation of a system
 as described in the Plans and Special Provisions suitable for an installation buried directly
 in the earth.
 662.2.11.2-Materials and Testing: The materials furnished and the testing necessary
 shall be as prescribed in the Plans.
 662.2.12-Service and Control Stations:
 662.2.12.1-General: The Contractor shall furnish and install service and control
 stations as noted on the Plans to serve the roadway lighting circuits. Service and control
 stations shall consist of cabinet (enclosure), all-weather padlock, control panel, conduit,
 cable, rock and earth excavation, backfill, concrete and steel reinforcement for the
 equipment pad, fencing and gate, transformer, grounding and all other incidentals for a
 complete and operable system as called for on the Plans.
 Cabinets, electrical equipment, grounding and miscellaneous items shall conform to
 size, rating and description shown on the Plans and applicable NEMA and ANSI Standards
 as well as the usual practices of the local utility company and the National Electrical Code.
 Conductors shall be neatly arranged in a workmanlike manner and laced with nylon cable
 straps.
 Cabinets (enclosures) shall be provided with nameplates and a wiring diagram of the
 circuits installed within the service and control station, sealed with a plastic cover and
 permanently attached to the inside of the door under a metal frame at a height of not less
 than one-half the door height.
 Photoelectric controllers shall be the twistlock type, 120 volt, preset to "turn on"
 between 1.0 and 3.5 footcandles. "Turn off" shall be at least two times the "turn on" level;
 however, "turn off" must be greater than 3.0 and less than 15.0 footcandles. The unit shall
 meet all relevant NEMA Standards and shall be north oriented.
 Transformers shall be built in accordance with the latest revision of the ANSI-NEMA
 standards for outdoor type distribution transformers, as manufactured by G.E.,
 Westinghouse or shall be approved equal.
 Two prints of shop drawings indicating the proposed dimensions and material
 specifications for the control center, cabinet (enclosure), and transformer, if required, shall
 be submitted for approval purposes within three weeks after the award of the Contract.
 These drawings will be reviewed by the Division at the earliest possible date and one print
 will be returned marked "Approved" or "Returned for Revisions as Noted." Eight sets of
 drawings shall then be submitted for final approval. Resubmission of drawings to obtain
 final approval by the Division shall not be considered as being just cause for delay in
 completion of any contract.
 662.2.12.2-Ground Mounted Cabinets:
 requirements of NEMA Type 4 Standards.
 673
 
 The entire assembly shall meet the
 
 Framed overlapping doors shall be installed in the front of each cabinet for access to
 the panel interior, and they shall be hung on a substantial set of stainless steel hinges. The
 doors shall be provided with three-point and two-point, vault-type latch and padlock lugs.
 The cover joints shall have returned lips and shall be provided with gaskets which shall
 prevent water from entering the panels. A rain shield shall be provided over the doors.
 Mounting plates and channels shall be provided within the cabinet for installing
 contractors, panelboards, auxiliary transformers, etc. The wiring shall be neatly arranged,
 laced and securely fastened in an approved manner.
 Chain link fences shall conform to the requirements of 712.8 of the Specifications and
 shall contain at least four signs (one per center of each of the four sides) with the legend
 `DANGER-HIGH VOLTAGE.'
 Rock and earth excavation shall be in accordance with 207 of the Specifications, as
 revised and amended.
 Adequate stainless steel screens and louvers shall be provided for the ventilation of
 internal equipment.
 662.2.12.3-Pole Mounted Cabinets: The lighting circuit protector and disconnect
 switch shall have a NEMA Type 4 enclosure with operator capable of being locked in either
 position. Disconnect switch and fuse, or circuit breaker shall be rated and furnished with
 fuse or breaker size as shown on the Plans.
 The framework steel and hardware used in the cabinet shall be stainless steel.
 662.2.12.4-Service Poles: Service points shown on the Plans are approximate only.
 Final location of service poles shall be determined in the field. Materials and costs for the
 connections to the service point will be paid for by the Contractor. The Contractor shall
 conform to utility company requirements for this item. The service pole grounding system
 shall be installed as part of the pole in accordance with the requirements of the local power
 company.
 All wiring on the poles shall be installed in steel conduits of sizes as shown on the Plans
 and shall be securely fastened to the service pole with pipe straps at not over four-foot (1.2
 m) maximum spacing. All pole line hardware used in the service poles and control stations
 shall be hot-dipped galvanized.
 662.2.13-Lighting Supports:
 662.2.13.1-Lighting Pole Type I, II and III-Steel:
 662.2.13.1.1-General Description: Each Lighting Pole, Type I, II and III shall consist
 of a pole shaft, removable pole top, luminaire support arm, base, support base (if required),
 anchor bolts, removable anchor bolt covers and any other accessories or hardware as
 required to make a complete installation as called for on the Plans or as directed by the
 Engineer. Spreads and mounting heights shall be as detailed on the Plans; tolerance for
 mounting heights shall be plus or minus 6 inches (150 mm). All wiring shall be concealed
 within the pole shaft and luminaire support arm.
 Lighting Poles Type I, II, and III shall be certified to equal or exceed the requirements
 of AASHTO “Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs,
 Luminaires and Traffic Signals”, based on at least 90 mph (145 km/hr) wind loads, a
 luminaire weight of 50 lb. (22.7 kg) and a luminaire projected area of 1.1 sq ft (0.1 sq m).
 674
 
 The maximum allowable pole deflection from vertical at the top of the pole, due to the
 weight of the arm and luminaire, shall be two percent of the total shaft length. The pole
 deflection from vertical is defined as the horizontal distance between the pole top centerline
 when the pole alone is installed plumb and the pole top centerline after the arm and
 luminaire combination is installed on the previously plumb pole, the measurement to be
 made without additional shaft adjustment. The fabricator shall certify to the above and
 maintain results of computations or tests to document compliance, for each type of lighting
 pole supplied.
 662.2.13.1.2-Pole Shaft: The pole shaft shall be an ASTM A 595 Grade A Tube or
 fabricated from weldable grade, hot-rolled, commercial quality steel, meeting the
 requirements of ASTM A 607, with a minimum yield strength of 55,000 psi (380 MPa)
 after fabrication. The round shaft shall be fabricated in one piece from not less than # 11
 manufacturer's standard gauge steel and be continuously tapered at 0.14 or 0.10 inch per
 foot (3.04 mm/m). Two piece shafts, that assemble by telescoping the upper section over
 the lower section with a firm tapered fit, may be used for 40, 45, 50, 55 and 60 feet (11.7
 or 8.33 mm per meter) mounting heights. Each pole shaft shall include a J-hook wire
 support welded inside near the top, a handhole with cover as noted on the plans (except for
 transformer bases), and a ground connector near the bottom. An opening shall be provided
 near the top of the shaft to provide a cable entrance from the shaft into the luminaire support
 arm.
 662.2.13.1.3-Luminaire Support Arm Types I and II: Luminaire support arms for
 Lighting Poles Types I and II shall be of constant diameter and fabricated from 2 inches
 pipe, having a wall thickness equal to Schedule 40 pipe and meeting the requirements of
 ASTM A 501, or from 2-3/8 inches steel tubular members with a nominal wall thickness
 equal to Schedule 40 pipe and having a minimum yield strength equal to ASTM A36. For
 arm spreads 12 feet (3.6 m) and less, the fabrication of the lower member may be of 1½ in
 pipe, having a wall thickness equal to Schedule 40 pipe. For arm spreads over 18 feet (5.5
 m), the fabrication may be of 2½ inches pipe, having a wall thickness equal to Schedule 40
 pipe, or a combination of 2½ inches and 2 inches meeting the above requirements. The
 arm shall be attached to the pole so that it can transfer the full strength of the arm to the
 
 pole shaft.
 The truss type arm (Type I) shall consist of an upper and lower member joined near the
 luminaire end of the arm and securely joined with vertical strut(s). The upper member
 shall be continuous and the wiring member. The vertical strut(s) shall be either oval,
 circular, rectangular or square in cross section and shall be made of steel meeting the
 physical requirements of ASTM A 36.
 A 2 inches (50 mm) slip fitting arrangement shall be provided at the tip of all arms.
 662.2.13.1.4-Luminaire Support Arm Type III: Luminaire support arms for
 Lighting Pole Type III shall be an ASTM A 595 Grade A Tube or fabricated from weldable
 grade, hot rolled, commercial quality steel, meeting the requirements of ASTM A 607, with
 a minimum yield strength of 55,000 psi (380 MPa) after fabrication. The arm shall be
 cylindrical in cross section and uniformly tapered from butt to tip at 0.14 or 0.10 inches
 per feet (11.67 or 8.33 mm per meter). The arm shall be fabricated in one piece from not
 675
 
 less than # 11 (3.04 mm) manufacturer's standard gage steel. The arm shall be attached to
 the pole so that it can transfer the full strength of the arm to the pole shaft.
 Two-piece arms may be used for spreads greater than 34 feet (10.4 m). The outside
 luminaire support arm shall be a round tapered tubular member fabricated from material
 with a minimum yield strength of 36,000 psi (10.4 m) after fabrication. Two-piece arms
 shall assemble by a telescoping joint. The telescoping length of the joint shall not be less
 than 1½ times the diameter of the arm at the joint. The telescoping field joint shall not be
 welded but shall be keyed with a through bolt.
 A 2 inches (50 mm) slip fitting arrangement shall be provided at the tip of all arms.
 662.2.13.1.5-Bases: Anchor, support and approved breakaway bases shall be
 constructed of sufficient size and strength to fully develop the bending moment of the shaft.
 Each base shall be provided with four holes (slip base may have three) of sufficient size to
 accommodate the proper size anchor bolts to resist at yield stress, the bending moment of
 the shaft at its yield stress. All bases, except the transformer type, shall have the handhole
 centered approximately 18 inches (450 mm) above the bottom of the shaft located
 downstream of oncoming traffic.
 Anchor bases shall be one-piece fabricated from material meeting ASTM A 27 Grade
 65-35 or ASTM A 36 of sufficient cross section to fully develop the ultimate strength of
 the pole. Galvanizing shall be in accordance with ASTM A 123.
 Breakaway bases (e.g. aluminum transformer, cast aluminum, fluted aluminum
 breakaway couplings, slip, etc.), if required, shall meet the dimensions and requirements
 as required by the Plans. All breakaway bases shall be certified for conformance to the
 AASHTO breakaway performance criteria.
 The aluminum transformer bases shall be nominally 20 inches (500 mm) high with an
 access door secured in place by stainless steel locking screws. All bearing plates shall be
 hot-dipped galvanized in accordance with ASTM A 123. Washers shall be hot-dipped
 galvanized in accordance with ASTM A 153. A tapped hole shall be provided for
 grounding. When aluminum transformer bases are used with unpainted weathering steel
 poles and bases, both the bottom of the steel anchor base and the top of the aluminum
 transformer base shall be coated with a heavy film of zinc-rich paint.
 662.2.13.1.6-Anchor Bolts: Anchor bolts shall be of sufficient size and strength to
 fully develop the bending moment of the shaft. Anchor bolts (unless otherwise directed on
 the Plans) shall be fabricated from ASTM F 1554, GRADE 55. Each bolt shall have the
 thread end galvanized for a length sufficient to extend down through the grout and into the
 concrete foundation. Each bolt shall be provided with a regular hex nut or heavy hex nut
 (anchor bases to have two hex nuts) that shall be hot dipped galvanized. Hex nuts shall be
 regular meeting ASTM A 563 Grade A for ¼ inch-1½ inches (6 through 38 mm) sizes and
 shall be heavy hex for sizes over 1½ inches to 4 inches (38 to 102 mm).
 662.2.13.1.7-Galvanizing: The pole shaft, luminaire support arm, pole top, handhole
 cover, anchor base and slip base shall be galvanized in accordance with ASTM A 123.
 Galvanized coatings damaged for any reason shall be repaired by the application of a zinc
 rich paint conforming with 711.21 of the Specifications. The places to be painted shall be
 thoroughly cleaned before the paint is applied.
 676
 
 662.2.13.1.8-Marking: Each pole shall be identified by control station number (as
 applicable), circuit number (as applicable), wattage and pole number with adhesive labels
 applied 6 feet (1.8 m) above the grade line normal to the roadway. Adhesive labels shall
 be designed to be exposed to the weather. Legend shall be 3 inches (75 mm) black on
 white.
 662.2.13.1.9-Drawings for Approval Purposes: Two prints of shop drawings
 indicating the proposed dimensions and material specifications for each of the components
 involved shall be submitted by the Contractor for approval purposes within three weeks
 after the award of Contract. These drawings will be reviewed by the Division at the earliest
 possible date and one print will be returned marked "Approved" or "Returned for Revisions
 as Noted." Eight sets of drawings shall then be submitted for final approval. Appropriate
 action shall be taken by the Contractor after final approval to insure that the earliest
 possible erection of these items can be achieved.
 Resubmission of drawings to obtain final approval by the Division shall not be
 considered as being just cause for delay in the completion of any contract.
 662.2.13.1.10-Mill Test Reports and Certification: Mill test reports or certifications
 of conformance to specifications for materials and design will be required for all materials
 incorporated into the work. The following shall be supplied by the Contractor prior to
 acceptance of the structures:
 i.
 Mill Test Reports (M.T.R.) for MAJOR structural items only, as noted in the
 following chart, shall include both physical and chemical descriptions of the
 material as supplied to the fabricator. When physical properties are altered
 during fabrication, the M.T.R. covering chemical composition will be
 supplemented by certified test reports indicating the physical properties of this
 material after fabrication.
 ii. Certification of Conformance to the Specifications for all remaining material
 not covered by M.T.R. as noted in the following chart.
 iii. Certification that all welding was performed by operators qualified as follows:
 steel welders to AWS and aluminum welders to ASME.
 iv.
 Certification of Conformance to the Specifications for the Design of all
 components not completely dimensioned and detailed on the Standard Drawing.
 TABLE 662.2.13.1.10
 COMPONENT MATERIALS
 M.T.R.
 Tubes for arms and poles
 X
 Base castings
 X
 Anchor bolts
 X
 Pole tops, misc. fittings and hardware
 Fabricated or cast-type arm connections
 X
 Galvanizing
 Welding Rod
 X
 
 677
 
 CERTIFICATIONS
 
 X
 
 662.2.13.2-Lighting Pole Type IV-Wood:
 662.2.13.2.1-General Description: Each Type IV Wood Pole shall consist of an
 upright shaft fitted with necessary hardware to make the installation complete as detailed
 on the contract Plans.
 All wood poles shall meet the requirements of Section 710.8.
 662.2.13.2.2-Luminaire Support Arms: Luminaire support arms for Type IV
 Lighting Poles shall be of constant diameter and fabricated from 2 inches pipe, having a
 wall thickness equal to Schedule 40 pipe and meeting the requirements of ASTM A 501,
 or from 2-3/8 inch OD steel tubular members with a nominal wall thickness equal to
 Schedule 40 pipe and having a minimum yield strength equal to ASTM A 36. For arm
 spreads over 18 feet (5.5 m), the fabrication may be of 2½ inches pipe having a wall
 thickness equal to Schedule 40 pipe, or a combination of 2 ½ inches and 2 inches, meeting
 the above requirements.
 The method of attachment to the pole shall be that as suggested by the support arm
 manufacturer and approved by the Engineer.
 A 2-in. (50 mm) slip fitting arrangement shall be provided at the tip of all arms.
 662.2.13.3-Lighting Pole Type V and VII-Aluminum:
 662.2.13.3.1-General Description: Each Lighting Pole Type V "Luminaire Support
 Arm Mounted" shall consist of a pole shaft, removable pole top, luminaire support arm,
 base, support base (if required), anchor bolts, removable anchor bolt covers and any other
 accessories or hardware as required to make a complete installation as called for on the
 Plans or as directed by the Engineer. Each Lighting Pole Type VII "Luminaire Post Top
 Mounted" shall consist of a pole shaft, base, anchor bolts, removable anchor bolt covers
 and any other accessories or hardware as required to make a complete installation as called
 for on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer. Spreads and mounting heights shall be as
 detailed on the Plans; tolerance for mounting heights shall be plus or minus 6 inches (150
 mm). All wiring shall be concealed within the pole shaft and luminaire support arm.
 Lighting Poles Type V and VII shall be certified to be equal or exceed the requirements
 of AASHTO “Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs,
 Luminaires and Traffic Signals”. Type V shall be based on at least 90 mph (145 km/hr)
 wind loads, a luminaire weight of 50 lb. (22.7 kg) and a luminaire projected area of 1.1 sq.
 feet (0.1 sq. m). Type VII shall be based on 90 mph (145 km/hr), ignore the weight and
 2.5 sq. feet (0232 sq. m).
 The maximum allowable pole deflection from vertical at the top of the pole, due to the
 weight of the arm and luminaire, shall be two percent of the total shaft length. The pole
 deflection from vertical is defined as the horizontal distance between the pole top centerline
 after the arm and luminaire combination is installed on the previously plumb pole, and
 measurement to be made without additional shaft adjustment. The fabricator must certify
 to the above and maintain results of computations or tests to document compliance for each
 type of lighting pole supplied.
 662.2.13.3.2-Pole Shaft: The pole shaft shall be one-piece, cylindrical, tapered
 seamless (or one continuous longitudinal weld) tubing which shall have mechanical
 properties not less than that listed for ASTM B221, B429, B241, Alloy 6061 T-6 or Alloy
 678
 
 6063-T6 after fabrication. Two-piece shafts that assemble by telescoping the upper section
 over the lower section with a firm tapered fit, may be used for 40, 45, and 50 ft. (12.13,
 13.72, and 15.42 meter) mounting heights. Each pole shaft shall have a J-hook wire support
 inside near the top, a handhole with cover as noted on the Plans (except for transformer
 bases) and a ground connector near the bottom. Minimum wall thickness (unless otherwise
 approved by the Engineer) shall be 0.188 inch (4.775 mm) for Type V Poles and 0.125
 inch (3.175 mm) for Type VII poles. The top of shaft OD for “Luminaire Post Tope
 Mounted” shall be 3 inches (75 mm) unless otherwise approved by the Engineer.
 662.2.13.3.3-Luminaire Support Arm: The Luminaire Support Arm shall be
 aluminum pipe or tapered aluminum tubing which shall have the mechanical properties not
 less than that listed for ASTM B221, B429, B241 Alloy 6061 T-6 or Alloy 6063-T6 after
 fabrication. A 2 inch (50 mm) slip fitting arrangement shall be provided at the tip of all
 arms.
 662.2.13.3.4-Bases: Anchor, support and approved breakaway bases shall be
 constructed of sufficient size and strength to fully develop the bending moment of the shaft.
 Each base shall be provided with four holes (three if approved by the Engineer) of sufficient
 size to accommodate the proper size anchor bolts to resist at yield stress, the bending
 moment of the shaft at its yield stress. All bases, except the transformer type, shall have a
 handhole centered approximately 18 inches (450 mm) above the bottom of the shaft located
 downstream of oncoming traffic.
 Anchor bases shall be made from Alloy ASTM B108 as detailed on the Plans or as
 directed by the Engineer. Support bases shall be fabricated from steel conforming to
 ASTM A 36, with galvanizing in accordance with ASTM A 123. Aluminum transformer
 bases shall meet the requirements as identified in the fourth paragraph of 662.2.13.1.5.
 Breakaway bases (e.g. aluminum transformer, cast aluminum, fluted aluminum
 breakaway couplings, slip etc.), if required, shall meet the dimensions and requirements as
 required by the Plans. All breakaway bases shall be certified for conformance to the latest
 AASHTO breakaway performance criteria.
 662.2.13.3.5-Anchor Bolts: Anchor bolts shall be of sufficient size and strength to
 fully develop the bending moment of the shaft. Anchor bolts (unless otherwise directed on
 the Plans) shall be fabricated from ASTM F 1554, GRADE 55. Each bolt shall have the
 threaded end galvanized for a length sufficient to extend down through the grout and into
 the concrete foundation. Each bolt shall be provided with a regular hex nut or heavy hex
 nut (anchor bases to have two hex nuts) that shall be hot dipped galvanized. Hex nuts shall
 be regular meeting ASTM A 563 Grade A for ¼ inch (6 mm) to 1½ inches (38 mm) sizes
 and shall be heavy hex for sizes over 1 ½ inches to 4 inches (38 to 102 mm).
 662.2.13.3.6-Marking: Each pole shall be identified as required in 662.2.13.1.8.
 662.2.13.3.7-Drawings for Approval Purposes: Shop Drawings shall be submitted,
 approved and applied as required in 662.2.13.1.9.
 
 679
 
 662.2.13.3.8-Mill Test Reports and Certification: Mill test reports or certifications
 of conformance to specifications for materials and design shall be supplied as required in
 662.2.13.1.10.
 662.2.13.4-Lighting Pole Type X-Steel High Mast:
 662.2.13.4.1-General Description: Each Lighting Pole Type X shall consist of pole
 shaft, anchor base, anchor bolts and nuts, lowering devices and any other accessories or
 hardware as required to make a complete installation as called for on the Plans or as
 directed by the Engineer. Mounting heights, number and type of luminaires shall be as
 detailed on the Plans. Tolerance for mounting heights shall be plus or minus 12 inches
 (300 mm). Any manufacturer's warranties, expressed or implied, shall become the property
 of the Division.
 A complete service manual including instruction on installation, operation and
 maintenance shall be furnished for each lowering device, winch assembly and power drive
 system furnished on each project.
 Lighting Poles Type X shall be certified to be equal or exceed the requirements of
 AASHTO "Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaires
 and Traffic Signals," based on the Final Deflected Pole Position Method and the following:
 Wind Velocity = 90 mph (144.8 km/hr)
 Number of Luminaires = 8
 Weight of Luminaires = 70 lbs. Each (560 lbs. total)
 2.0 sq. ft Each (16.0 sq. ft. total)
 Area of Lumiares =
 (0.18 sq. meter each (1.472 sq. meters total)
 Weight of Mounting Head = 370 lbs. (167.8 kg)
 Area of Mounting Head = 3.5 sq. ft. (0.325 sq. meter)
 662.2.13.4.2-Pole Shaft: The pole shaft shall be made from one to six continuously
 tapered circular or twelve sided sections which shall either telescope with each other or be
 shop buttwelded by electric arc welding. Steel used in fabricating the shaft shall be either
 galvanized steel (hot-dipped according to ASTM A 123) or weathering steel with a
 minimum yield strength of 55,000 psi (380 MPa) after fabrication and shall have one or
 two longitudinal welds. Materials shall be galvanized steel unless otherwise indicated on
 the Plans as weathering steel. All poles on any one project shall be of the same type
 construction for pieces and sections. Straightness tolerance shall be ½ inch in 20 feet (2.08
 mm per meter). The inside surface of the shaft shall be relatively smooth to provide a cable
 raceway. Projections on the inside of the pole (such as backup rings) shall not exceed 3/8
 inch (9.5 mm) projection in the area between the handhole and the top flange.
 Minor sections of galvanized coatings (of pole shaft, pole support assembly and circular
 luminaire ring assembly) damaged for any reason shall be repaired by the application of a
 zinc rich paint conforming with 711.21 of the Standard Specifications. The places to be
 painted shall be thoroughly cleaned before the paint is applied.
 The lap joint produced by telescoping shall have a minimum length of one and onehalf diameters of the shaft at the joint measured at the minimum diameter of the inner
 telescoping section. No transverse welding shall be permitted to secure the overlapping
 telescoping joints. Overlap areas on weathering steel poles shall be shop painted in
 680
 
 accordance with 688. The outside of the lower pole shall be coated so a minimum of 1
 inch (25 mm) below the bottom edge of the upper pole is covered (after erection). The
 inside of the upper pole shall be coated so a minimum of 6 inches (150 mm) above the top
 edge of the lower pole is covered (after erection). In addition the intersection of each
 overlap joint on the outside shall be sealed with a commercial silicone building sealant
 such as Dow Corning 795. The numbering shall be applied in such fashion that the marks
 shall be unobtrusive after assembly.
 In the bottom section of the shaft shall be an access door with stainless steel hinged
 door, neoprene door gasket and hasp (welded inside to the reinforcing frame, sleeve or
 plate) with an all-weather padlock. The door shall be sufficient size to allow the internal
 machinery (winch and gear box) to be disconnected from its mountings and removed
 through the door. An additional handhole may be provided for wiring access. All
 handholes or openings in the shaft shall be properly designed and fabricated to avoid stress
 risers by use of an internal reinforcing sleeve or a reinforcing frame with full penetration
 welds or other approved method.
 Each pole shall be identified by control station number (as applicable), circuit number
 (as applicable), wattage and pole number with adhesive labels applied 8 feet (2.4 m) above
 the base plate normal to the nearest roadway. Adhesive labels shall be designed to be
 exposed to the weather. This legend shall be 5 inches (125 mm) black on white.
 662.2.13.4.3-Anchor Base: The anchor base (cast or rolled steel) shall be constructed
 of ASTM A 36 minimum for galvanized steel or ASTM A 588 for weathering steel and
 shall be of sufficient size and strength to fully develop the bending moment of the shaft. It
 shall be welded to the shaft by a full penetration weld. The weld must be made with a
 backup ring, or other approved procedure, or be welded from both sides.
 662.2.13.4.4-Anchor Bolts: Anchor bolts shall be of sufficient size and strength to
 fully develop the bending moment of the shaft. Anchor bolts shall be fabricated from
 ASTM A1554 Gr.55. Each bolt shall have the threaded end galvanized for a length
 sufficient to extend down through the grout and into the concrete foundation. Each bolt
 shall be provided with two heavy hex nuts and two heavy washers. Both nuts and washers
 shall be hotdipped galvanized. Detailed properties, dimensions, bolt circles and
 appropriate backup calculations for anchor bolts for each type pole supplied shall be
 submitted to and approved by the Division before fabrication.
 662.2.13.4.5-Miscellaneous Hardware: Miscellaneous other hardware not covered
 by other specifications shall as a minimum comply with the following:
 1. Galvanized steel structures:
 2. Miscellaneous plates, bars and structural shapes shall be ASTM A 36. Pipe shall
 be ASTM A 501.
 3. Weathering steel Structures:
 4. Miscellaneous plates, bars and structural shapes shall be ASTM A 588. Pipe shall
 be Yoloy high strength, low alloy steel or approved equal.
 662.2.13.4.6-Welding: All welding shall conform to AASHTO "Standard
 Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaires and Traffic Signals",
 681
 
 Section l.4.2 (A) through (D). Welding must be certified to performance by operators
 qualified as follows: Steel welders to AWS and aluminum welders to ASME. Longitudinal
 joints in the tapered sections of the pole shaft shall be made only by automatic electric arc
 welding. Transverse butt-welds may be used, but only under closely controlled shop
 conditions. Winch mount plate and emergency stop ring wields shall be fillet welds.
 All welds in the shaft shall be tested and certified by close visual inspection or approved
 alternate methods (such as ultrasonic or magnetic particle). One hundred percent of the
 full penetration sections of longitudinal seam welds shall be radiographically inspected and
 a random ten percent of the partial penetration section of the longitudinal seam welds shall
 be inspected by the magnetic particle method.
 662.2.13.4.7-Lowering Devices:
 662.2.13.4.7.1-General Description: The integral luminaire lowering mechanism or
 devices shall be compatible with the pole design and shall consist of a head frame assembly,
 a luminaire ring assembly and a hoisting assembly. The system shall permit luminaire
 maintenance at ground level, provide for disconnection of the electrical service at the pole
 base, provide a convenient means of energizing the lighting assembly when it is at ground
 level, support eight 70 lb. (31.75 kg) luminaires in a symmetrical arrangement and include
 power cables and all miscellaneous electrical equipment in the pole necessary to provide a
 complete and workable device. All bolts and machine screws shall be secured in a manner
 that will preclude their becoming loosened by vibration. Star washers, jam nuts, selflocking nuts, locktite, etc., may be used to secure nuts and machine screws. Sheave pins
 shall be secured by means of washers and cotter keys or pins, not welded.
 662.2.13.4.7.2-Head Frame Assembly: The head frame structure shall be galvanized
 steel, attached to the pole by a steel slipfitter and secured by the appropriate stainless steel
 setscrews. It shall consist of all necessary pulleys and rollers to guide the hoisting cables
 and electrical cable. The head frame shall support six, 6 inches (142.4 mm) diameter steel
 hoist cable sheaves or six, 5 inches (127.0 mm) diameter cast aluminum hoist cable sheaves
 with oil-impregnated, sintered bronze bushing with stainless steel shafts. The three
 hoisting cables shall be stainless steel 7 x l9 aircraft cord of 3/l6 inch (4.7625 mm)
 diameter. The minimum tread diameter for the hoisting cable sheaves shall be 20 times the
 cable diameter for galvanized cable and 25 times the cable diameter for stainless steel
 cable. The hoisting cable sheave groove cross-section shall be semicircular with a radius
 of one-half the cable diameter plus l/64 inch (396 m).
 The power cable shall not be bent at a radius less than five times the cable diameter and
 the groove cross-section shall prevent the cable from rolling out of the groove if the cable
 is twisting. All power cable sheaves and rollers shall be suspended on stainless steel shafts
 fitted with self-lubricating bushings or be fabricated of self-lubricating material.
 All head frame sheaves will have keepers to keep cables engaged during operation.
 The head frame assembly shall be protected from the weather by an aluminum cover.
 Positive latching devices shall be incorporated into the luminaire ring assembly. These
 devices shall be designed to prevent any movement of the luminaire ring assembly when it
 is latched to the top of the pole and tension is removed from the luminaire ring support
 cables. Latching shall be accomplished by the alternate raising and lowering of the
 luminaire ring assembly by the winch and hoisting assembly and there shall be no moving
 682
 
 latch parts or springs attached to the head frame assembly. Reflectors or flags shall be
 provided to indicate when the luminaire ring assembly is completely and securely latched
 to the head frame assembly. All moving parts of the latching mechanism shall be attached
 to the luminaire ring assembly and serviceable from the ground.
 662.2.13.4.7.3-Luminaire Ring Assembly: The luminaire ring shall be fabricated of
 6 inches (150 mm) steel channel, hot dipped galvanized with the appropriate number of 2
 inches (50 mm) nominal galvanized steel pipe mounting arms. The luminaire ring shall be
 wired with Type S.O. power cable or equivalent and Type ST distribution cable with
 insulation suitable for at least l05 C.
 All electrical cords shall be attached to the weathertight wiring chamber through
 weathertight cable connections. A prewired 600 volt terminal block and a secondary
 lightning arrester shall be provided in the weathertight chamber. A weathertight twistlock
 power inlet shall be provided on the chamber to allow testing of the luminaires while in the
 lower position.
 Roller-contact, spring-loaded centering arms shall be provided to stabilize and center
 the luminaire ring during raising or lowering operations and to eliminate shock to the lamps
 from impact of the luminaire ring with the pole. The rollers for the centering arms shall be
 of a water-resistant, non-marking material with oil-impregnated sintered bronze bushings.
 All axle shafts for arms and rollers shall be stainless steel.
 662.2.13.4.7.4-Housing Assembly (Winch Assembly): The winch shall have an
 ultimate strength of five times the lifted load with the number of layers of cable with which
 it will be used. The winch shall have a 30 to l worm gear reduction ratio and include an
 integral drag brake on the worm shaft to prevent free spooling of the winch. The winch
 shall be designed for at least intermittent power operation, but also have hand crank
 capability.
 The winch shall be prewound with galvanized steel ¼ inch (6.35 mm), 7 x l9 aircraft
 cord of sufficient length to maintain at least four complete wraps on the drum after the
 device has been lowered to its lowest position. The drum shall be supported at both ends
 and keepers shall be provided to ensure that uncoiled cable will rewrap onto the drum.
 A portable power unit is required (one per project). Its motor shall be the heavy-duty
 reversing type with a stalling torque at least twice that required to operate the device. The
 motor shall drive the winch through the torque limiter coupling to limit the lifting force.
 The hoisting rate shall be between 12 and 25 feet (3.6 and 7.5 m) per minute. The motor
 shall be controlled by a reversing switch connected by a 20 foot (6.1 m) remote cord. The
 portable power unit shall be provided with a portable enclosed and encapsulated
 transformer to stepdown the parent voltage to 120 volts to operate the power unit. All
 electrical connections from the transformer to the power cord and from the transformer to
 the power unit shall be twistlock caps and plugs.
 662.2.13.4.8-Wire Rope:
 662.2.13.4.8.1-Materials for the stainless steel cables shall conform to the Chemistry
 of ASTM A492 type 302 or 304.
 The wire used in steel cable shall be cylindrical and smooth and of uniform high quality.
 The finished cable shall be uniform in construction and securely laid, free from kinks, loose
 683
 
 wires, loose strands, splits, cold shuts or other defects. A suitable type of frictionpreventive compound having noncorrosive properties shall be impregnated into the wire
 rope. The individual wires and strands composing the wire rope shall be shaped into the
 exact helical position they will have in the finished wire rope, so that if the wire rope is cut
 or severed there is no tendency for the measured diameter of the wire rope at the unseized
 cut ends to increase by more than the amount specified in Table 662.2.13.4.8.
 TABLE 662.2.13.4.8 {ENGLISH}
 Construction, Physical Properties of Stainless Steel Wire Rope
 Nominal
 Tolerance
 Allowable
 Nominal Break Approximate
 Diameter of on Diameter
 Increase of
 Strength
 Weight per
 Wire Rope
 (Plus Only)
 Diameter
 Stainless Steel
 100 feet
 (Inches)
 (Inches)
 (Inches)
 (Pounds)
 (Pounds)
 5/32
 .016
 .017
 2,400
 4.50
 3/16
 .018
 .019
 3,700
 6.50
 7/32
 .018
 .020
 5,000
 8.60
 1/4
 .018
 .021
 6,400
 11.00
 5/16
 .022
 .024
 9,000
 17.30
 3/8
 .026
 .027
 12,000
 24.30
 TABLE 662.2.13.4.8 {METRIC}
 Construction, Physical Properties Of Stainless Steel Wire Rope
 Nominal
 Tolerance
 Allowable
 Nominal Break Approximate
 Diameter of on Diameter
 Increase of
 Strength
 Weight per
 Wire Rope
 (Plus Only)
 Diameter
 Stainless Steel
 30.48 meters
 (millimeters) (millimeters)
 (millimeters)
 (kilograms)
 (kilograms)
 3.96
 0.4064
 0.4318
 1090
 0.16
 4.762
 0.4572
 0.4826
 1680
 0.90
 5.556
 0.4572
 0.5080
 2270
 1.19
 6.350
 0.4572
 0.5334
 2900
 1.52
 7.935
 0.5588
 0.6096
 4080
 2.39
 9.525
 0.6604
 0.6858
 5445
 3.36
 Flexible steel wire rope covered by this specification shall be of 7 x 19 construction.
 The type of construction for the respective diameters, the dimensional tolerances and the
 physical properties shall be as specified in Table 662.2.13.4.8. Wire rope shall be 7x19
 aircraft cable.
 662.2.13.4.8.2-Quality conformance testing shall consist of all the inspections such as
 workmanship and physical appearance previously specified. The sample wire rope shall
 pass the breaking strength test and stretch tests as specified below.
 i. Sampling-When conducting the tests, one sample shall be taken after any discard
 has been removed from the head or starting end of the first manufacturing reel for
 each lot of wire rope.
 684
 
 ii. Lot-A lot shall consist of not more than 20,000 feet (6 100 meters) of wire rope of
 the same construction and diameter produced continuously by one machine or by
 one series of progressive processing machines.
 662.2.13.4.8.3-Breaking Strength: The wire rope specimen shall be selected from the
 sample from each lot. The specimen shall be no less than 24 inches (600 mm) in length,
 and where necessary, swaged terminals conforming to MIL-T-781 (do not use ball end
 fitting) and accompanying hardware may be used to facilitate installation of the specimen
 in the jaws of the testing machine. The distance between the jaws of the testing machine
 with the sample shall be no less than 10 inches (250 mm). The breaking strength shall be
 determined by use of a tensile testing machine in accordance with applicable requirements
 of ASTM E 8. The breaking strength shall conform to the requirements of Table
 662.2.13.4.8 for qualification.
 662.2.13.4.8.4-Stretch Test: One specimen from each sample of wire rope selected as
 specified in 662.2.13.4.8.2 shall be tested to determine the percent stretch. The total length
 of the wire rope specimen to be tested shall not be less than 24 inches (600 mm). Where
 necessary, swaged terminals and accompanying hardware may be used to facilitate
 installation of the specimen in the jaws of the test machine. The amount of stretch shall be
 determined on a tension testing machine in accordance with ASTM E 8. The specimen
 shall be loaded to one percent nominal breaking strength shown in Table 662.2.13.4.8 to
 straighten the wire rope. While the specimen is under tension, an adequate gauge length
 shall be marked off the wire rope between the jaws of the testing machine. The specimen
 shall then be loaded to 60 percent of minimum breaking strength and measured to
 elongation under load. From this data the stretch shall not exceed 1.5 percent.
 662.2.13.4.8.5-Certification: Upon request, the wire rope manufacturer shall furnish
 a certified test report showing that the wire rope manufacturer's product satisfactorily
 conforms to this Specification. The test report shall include, as a minimum, actual results
 of the tests specified.
 662.2.13.4.9-Drawings for Approval Purposes: Two prints of shop drawings
 indicating the proposed dimensions and material specifications for the poles and lowering
 devices shall be submitted by the Contractor for approval purposes within three weeks after
 the award of the Contract. These drawings will be reviewed by the Division at the earliest
 possible date and one print will be returned marked "Approved" or "Returned for Revisions
 as Noted." Eight sets of drawings shall then be submitted for final approval. Appropriate
 action shall be taken by the Contractor after final approval to insure that the earliest
 possible erection of these items can be achieved. Resubmission of drawings to obtain final
 approval by the Division shall not be considered as being just cause for delay in the
 completion of any contract.
 662.2.13.4.10-Mill Test Reports and Certification: Mill test reports or certificates
 of conformance to specifications for materials and design will be required for all materials
 incorporated into the work. The following shall be supplied by the Contractor prior to
 acceptance of the structures:
 685
 
 i. Mill Test Reports (M.T.R.) for MAJOR structural items only, as noted in the
 following chart, shall include both physical and chemical descriptions of the
 material as supplied to the fabricator. When physical properties are altered during
 fabrication, the M.T.R. covering chemical composition will be supplemented by
 certified test reports indicating the physical properties of this material after
 fabrication.
 ii. Certification of Conformance to the Specifications for all remaining material not
 covered by M.T.R. as noted in the following chart.
 iii.Certification of Conformance to the Specifications for the design of all components
 not completely dimensioned and detailed on the Standard drawing.
 TABLE 662.2.13.4.10
 COMPONENT MATERIALS
 M.T.R.
 Tubes for poles
 X
 Base Castings
 X
 Anchor bolts
 X
 Pole tops, lowering devices,
 cable, misc., fittings, and hardware
 Galvanizing
 Welding Rod
 X
 
 CERTIFICATIONS
 
 X
 X
 
 662.2.14-Navigation Lighting System: The Contractor shall furnish and install a
 navigation lighting system as indicated on the Plans. The navigation lighting system shall
 consist of control center, enclosure, power service, conduit, cable, junction boxes,
 navigation light unit, photoelectric unit, electrical work, electrical tests and all other
 incidentals for a complete and operable system as called for on the Plans.
 662.2.14.1-General: The installation, equipment, materials and workmanship, except
 as specifically modified, shall be in accordance with applicable provisions of the following
 publications, codes and regulations in effect on the date of the invitation for bids:
  National Electrical Code
  American National Standards Institute
  National Electrical Manufacturer's Association
  Insulated Power Cable Engineers Association
  U.S. Coast Guard Publication, "A Guide to Bridge Lighting"
  Enclosure 6 to COMDTINST Ml6590.5
  Federal Aviation Administration, “Obstruction Marking and Lighting" AC70/7460-lF
  Regulations of local power company
 In the event of conflict in any requirements of the above standards, the Engineer will
 determine which authority is applicable.
 Two prints of shop drawings indicating the proposed dimensions and material
 specifications for the control center, enclosure, transformer, if required, and navigation
 light unit shall be submitted for approval purposes within three weeks after the award of
 the Contract. These drawings will be reviewed by the Division at the earliest possible date
 and one print will be returned marked "Approved" or "Returned for Revisions as Noted".
 686
 
 Eight sets of drawings shall then be submitted for final approval. Resubmission of
 drawings to obtain final approval by the Division shall not be considered as being just cause
 for delay in completion of any contract.
 After the installation is completed, the Contractor shall conduct a continuous 24-hour
 operating test for approval. In addition, final acceptance of any installation will not occur
 until 30 days of operation termed satisfactory by the Engineer.
 662.2.14.2-Navigation Lighting (Surface):
 662.2.14.2.1-General: Navigation lights shall be securely mounted to the bridge
 structure or substructure and shall show through a horizontal arc of 360° for green lights
 and show through a horizontal arc of l80° for red lights as specified or detailed in the Plans.
 They shall be pivot-swivel mounted or pedestal mounted as specified. The pivot mounted
 lights shall have a locking mechanism and service-retrieving chain made of corrosionresistant non-plastic material.
 The navigation lights shall have one or two lenses with one or two lamps as specified
 but unless otherwise noted, are to have one lens with one lamp.
 The lamps shall be 100-W, 120-V, rated at 5-years. The lenses shall be fresnel glass
 eight inches (203 mm) (177 mm minimum I. D.). The signal housing shall be made of
 aluminum, silicon bronze or cast bronze and shall be watertight with weather-proof
 gaskets.
 The hangar stem shall be 1½ inches (40 mm) minimum galvanized steel pipe or 1½
 inches (40 mm) minimum stainless steel pipe. The mounting bracket and hangar housing
 shall be cast silicon bronze with stainless steel pivot and shall be watertight.
 The cable shall be #16 S. O. minimum and all connections shall be watertight. Any
 other structural connections shall be watertight and of good quality non-corrosive
 construction.
 The pedestal mounted light shall meet all of the aforenamed light, lamp, lens, signal
 housing, cable and structural connection requirements. The pedestal mounted stem itself
 shall be similar to and meet the requirement of the pivot mounted hangar stem
 requirements.
 Navigation lights shall be provided with supports constructed of steel meeting ASTM
 A 36. Each fixture shall be individually protected by "in the line" fuses as manufactured
 by ESNA Corporation, Bussman Manufacturing Division of McGraw-Edison Company,
 HOMAC, or approved equal.
 The photoelectric control for navigation lights shall provide automatic switching of
 circuits. The unit shall be oriented as nearly as possible to face the northern sky. Initial
 settings shall be 35 footcandles for "turn on" and 58 footcandles for "turn off". The unit
 shall be housed in a weatherproof enclosure of the twistlock type. The unit shall be "fail
 safe", i.e., failure of the electronic circuit will "turn on" the navigation lights. The unit
 shall be suitable for operation in three-wire, 120/240 Volt, 60 Hz. circuits.
 662.2.14.2.2-Power Service: Power shall be received at a location noted on the Plans
 or as directed by the Engineer. Power will be 120/240 Volt single phase, 60 Hz., threewire from the Power Company. Materials to be furnished and installed by the Contractor
 will be as designated on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer.
 
 687
 
 662.2.14.2.3-Cable: Cable shall be single conductor, stranded copper, 600 Volt, Type
 THW. Cable for the final connection to swivel mounted navigation lights shall be three or
 four conductor stranded copper, 600 V, Type S. O. Cable splicing will be permitted in
 junction boxes only.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 662.3-GENERAL:
 The Plans show, in general, the location of the roadway lighting systems and other
 incidental work to be performed. They are diagrammatic only, but shall be followed as closely as
 actual site conditions will permit.
 Any alternate design or significant departure from the Plans proposed by the Contractor
 must be prepared by the Contractor in written or plan form, or both, and presented in writing to
 the Division for approval. The Division will not approve substitution of material or design detail
 changes which constitute a reduction in quality, workmanship, or strength of the materials
 involved.
 662.4-CONCRETE:
 Concrete shall be mixed and placed in accordance with Section 601 of the Standard
 Specifications.
 662.5-CONDUIT:
 Conduits shall be of the size and type noted on the Plans. Conduit shall be installed at a
 minimum depth of 18 inches (450 mm) and at a distance of at least 6 inches (150 mm) from any
 utility line. Conduit runs shall be continuous in size from terminal point to terminal point. No
 reducing coupling will be permitted. All unused conduits shall be threaded and capped. Unused
 conduits terminating underground shall also be marked with a concrete marker.
 The threads on all steel pipe conduit shall be painted with rust preventative paint meeting
 Military Specification MIL-P-21035 before couplings are made. All couplings shall be tightened
 until the ends of conduits are brought together. Conduits stubs, caps, exposed threads, or damaged
 galvanized areas shall be painted with rust preventive paint meeting Military Specification MILP-21035.
 Expansion deflection fittings shall be installed in metallic conduit runs in bridge structures
 and in retaining walls at all expansion joints and all stringer (stress) relief joints and all other
 locations as specified on the Plans. These fittings shall be bonded with approved flexible tinned
 copper bonding jumpers.
 Conduit shall be placed under existing pavement by approved jacking or drilling methods.
 Pavement shall not be disturbed without permission of the Engineer. In the event obstructions are
 encountered, upon approval of the Engineer, small test holes may be cut in the pavement to locate
 obstructions. Jacking or drilling pits shall be kept 2 feet (600 mm) clear of the edge of any type
 of pavement wherever possible. Water jetting will not be permitted.
 PVC conduit shall be made water tight by joining with solvent as per the manufacturer's
 recommendations. Ends terminating in junction boxes shall be terminated with end bells. Ends
 joining to metal conduit elbows at foundations shall be connected through expansion couplings
 and adapters.
 Approximate lengths of conduit are shown on the Plans. It is the responsibility of the
 Contractor to determine exact lengths of conduit runs in the field.
 688
 
 A number 12 AWG (minimum) galvanized pull wire shall be installed in all conduits which
 are to receive future conductors. At least 2 feet (600 mm) of pull wire shall be doubled back into
 the conduit at each termination.
 662.6-BACKFILL:
 All excavations shall be backfilled with suitable random material in horizontal layers not
 to exceed 4 inches (100 mm) after compaction. Each lift shall be compacted to the satisfaction of
 the Engineer. Testing is not required. All surplus material shall be removed from the right-ofway and the backfill finished flush with surrounding natural ground, including replacement of any
 damaged facilities or appurtenances. The Contractor shall restore all areas disturbed by this
 excavation or other operations to their original conditions including grading, seeding, mulching
 and fertilizing as directed by the Engineer.
 662.7-MANHOLES AND JUNCTION BOXES:
 Boxes shall be located as shown on the Plans. Manholes and junction boxes shall be set so
 that the top of cover will be level with the surface without using an excessive amount of mortar
 for setting the metal frames.
 Fill material for drainage shall be laid 12 inches (300 mm) minimum depth under the entire
 manhole or junction box. The aggregate used shall be stone or gravel of a grade approved by the
 Engineer and shall be by visual inspection a uniformly graded mixture of particles from 3/8 to 3/4
 inch (10 to 20 mm) in nominal diameter.
 The Contractor may, with the approval of the Engineer and at his own expense, install
 additional manholes or junction boxes to facilitate the work of installing conduit and pulling cable.
 662.8-LUMINAIRES:
 No luminaire shall be installed until the lamp socket position has been inspected and
 approved by the Engineer for conformance to the manufacturers recommended position for the
 specified distribution.
 All luminaires shall be properly adjusted to produce the maximum illumination on the
 roadway surface, without disrupting the intended light distribution patter.
 The connection between the luminaire and connector kits shall be made with # 10 wires.
 662.9-CABLES:
 The Contractor shall provide adequate equipment for installation of cable, and shall pull
 all wires through conduits in such a manner as not to score, cut, twist or damage the protective
 covering or insulation. In the pulling of cables into conduits, where the strain on the cables is
 likely to prove excessive, the Contractor shall use soapstone powder as a lubricant. Where two or
 more cables are to occupy the same conduit, they shall be drawn in together and kept parallel to
 each other by the use of a pulling head.
 Without exception, cables in manholes, junction boxes and bases shall be provided with an
 adequate amount of slack for subsequent connects and shall be arranged as ordered by the
 Engineer. After the cables have been installed and pending permanent connection, the end of each
 section of cable in manholes, junction boxes, bases and panel boxes shall be carefully sealed, using
 rubber tape, and painted with a sealing type of waterproof compound. Cables in manholes and
 junction boxes shall be placed on cable racks while waiting permanent connection. Ends of cable
 not connected to any device, which are to remain after completion of construction, shall be
 689
 
 insulated and sealed in a manner similar to a special splice. Cables in manholes and junction boxes
 shall be neatly arranged in a workmanlike manner and laced with nylon cable straps.
 The Contractor, in connecting sockets, outlets and other similar equipment, shall ground
 the most accessible bare parts of each piece of equipment. In order ensure that this has been done,
 each piece of equipment shall be tested after installation, and under the supervision of the Engineer,
 with a test lamp, one leg of which has been connected to a definite ground, or by other approved
 means of testing.
 All cable in junction boxes and lighting supports shall be tested for circuit connections
 which shall be in conformity with those indicated on the detail drawings. All cables in junction
 boxes, manholes and lighting supports/lighting support bases shall be provided with individual
 non-corrosive metal (minimum 1 ½ inch (40 mm) diameter) tags, die stamped with the control
 station (as applicable), circuit and phase designation. Similarly designed plastic tags shall be used
 in control stations. The tags shall be securely attached to the cables with nylon cord of 1/16 inch
 (2 mm) minimum diameter.
 Upon completion of each wiring system, and before any connection is made to operating
 equipment, it shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to perform, in the presence of the
 Engineer, the following tests of each circuit to determine where the installations are in acceptable
 working order:
  Tests for continuity
  Tests for grounds
  Tests for insulation resistance between circuit wires and from circuit wires to ground
 Upon completion of the electrical system, with fuses removed and before energizing, the
 insulation resistance shall be not less than five megohms.
 662.10-CABLE-IN-DUCT:
 At sign bridges where no sign lighting is contemplated under this contract, a sufficient
 length of cable shall be brought out of the ground or conduit system and extended up to the
 handhole or junction box of the sign bridge to permit future connections to sign lighting circuits
 without the need for splicing in additional underground cable.
 Underground cable shall be installed at a depth of not less than 30 inches (750 mm) below
 finished grade or within the protection of galvanized metal conduit under roadways or in structures.
 Cable to be placed within the protection of conduit in structures may be installed without the
 polyethylene duct specified, provided that the duct originating from an underground location is
 continuous to the first junction box or other terminal connection on the structure. The general
 location of the cable is shown in the details of the Plans. However, the Contractor shall locate all
 underground cable in a manner that will preclude damage to cable resulting from subsequent
 construction operations. The conductor size indicated in the Plans is the minimum size permitted.
 Cable placed in continuous conduit raceways shall be terminated with an appropriate splice
 connection at each junction box provided in the conduit system even though a lighting unit does
 not exist at that location, unless directed otherwise by the Engineer in the field.
 A 5/8 inch by 8 feet (15.88 mm by 2.4 m) copper weld ground rod shall be installed at each
 ground mounted sign bridge. Installation and connections to units shall be as directed by the
 Engineer. The grounding conductor shall be connected to the grounding lug in each lighting
 support and sign bridge column.
 The polyethylene ducts, where required, shall be continuous to within 6 inches (150 mm)
 of a terminal connection.
 690
 
 The Contractor shall exercise care in the installation of the cable-in-duct to insure that the
 completed duct raceway is smooth and free of sharp bends and that the cables inside the duct are
 free and are capable of being removed and replaced in the completed cable-in-duct assembly.
 Connections and terminations of cable required at existing distribution centers including
 fuses, hardware and site restoration as required to make the lighting circuits complete and operable,
 and installation of ground rods to sign bridges shall be considered incidental to this item
 662.11-LIGHTING SUPPORTS:
 Lighting supports shall be located in accordance with the details shown on the Plans
 governing the spacings and set backs to provide continuously aligned lighting support installation,
 unless otherwise ordered by the Engineer. All anchor bolts shall be installed, tightened and tested
 in accordance with sections 658.5.1, 658.5.3, and 658.5.4.
 662.11.1-Types I, II, III, IV, V and VII: Luminaire support arms shall be set normal to
 the roadway unless otherwise directed by the Plans or the Engineer. Each lighting support
 (except for twin arm poles and Type VII) shall be raked a horizontal distance from vertical at
 the top of the pole equal to the taper of the pole in inches per foot (millimeters per meter) times
 the height of the pole in feet (meters), unless otherwise directed by the Plans or the Engineer.
 Lighting support wiring shall consist of # 10 AWG single conductor, THWN insulated wire
 for both neutral and phase legs, and shall conform to the requirements for cables outlined in
 the preceding paragraphs.
 When Type V lighting supports are to be erected on bridges, the entire assembly, including
 support arms and luminaires, shall be fully installed as a complete assembly at one time. When
 Types V or VII lighting supports are to be in contact with dissimilar materials: e.g., nongalvanized steel or concrete, the contacting parts shall be protected from corrosion by
 appropriate painting as noted in Section 1.5.4 of AASHTO "Standard Specifications for
 Structural Supports for Highway Signs, Luminaires and Traffic Signals".
 Aluminum surfaces that are to be in contact with concrete shall be given a heavy coat of
 alkali-resistant bituminous paint before installation.
 The Contractor shall take full responsibility for checking all cross sections to determine
 final support lengths.
 662.11.2-Type X: The loading, transporting, unloading and piling of structural materials
 shall be conducted so that the metal will be kept clean and free from injury in handling.
 Structural materials shall be stored above the ground upon platforms, skids, blocks or other
 supports. They shall be kept free from accumulation of dirt, oil, acids, or other foreign matter.
 The manufacturer shall supply the Division with complete written instructions for the
 installation, operation and maintenance of the lighting supports and also complete parts lists
 for all items included by manufacturer and part number. The Contractor shall install the
 lighting supports strictly in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Extreme care
 should be exercised during lifting and plumbing. The manufacturer shall supply factory
 assistance in field assembly and installation when deemed necessary by Division. After the
 lighting support with all devices has been fully erected, the lowering devices shall be subjected
 to repetitive cycles of operation as a test.
 
 691
 
 662.12-FOUNDATIONS:
 Footers shall conform to the sizes and shapes shown on the Plans, and shall be poured
 monolithically. The excavation shall conform to the neat lines of the footer. The top 12 inches (300
 mm) and upper portion of the foundation shall be formed and floated and finished smooth on all
 sides. Castings may be used when deemed necessary by the Engineer to prevent caving of the soil.
 When casings are used, it is preferable that they be withdrawn as the shaft is filled with concrete.
 A concrete head of at least 2 feet (600 mm) should be maintained above the bottom of the casing.
 If any upward movement of the concrete or reinforcement cage occurs at the beginning of the
 casing pulling operation or at any time during casing pulling, removal should be stopped
 immediately and the casing left in place.
 The conduit bends and anchor bolts shall be accurately set (by template) in the forms and
 rigidly held in position during concreting operations. No welding shall be permitted on anchor
 bolts, except at the bottom. Anchor bolts for Type X lighting supports shall be caged into a unit
 and shall include a steel template at the bottom for presetting. Reinforcement (vertical bars and
 hooping) shall be completely assembled and placed into position as a unit. The unit must be
 adequately supported in the excavation to insure centering for the entire length of the shaft.
 662.13-GROUNDING:
 662.13.1-General: The necessary conduit, conductors, bonding jumpers, clamps,
 connectors, ground rods, etc. for the grounding system shall be furnished, installed and
 connected by the Contractor. The grounding system shall be considered as an integral part of
 the system to which it belongs, e.g. conduit, manholes, junction boxes, luminaires, lighting
 supports, service and control stations, navigation lighting system, structures, etc. as
 appropriate.
 In general, alternating current circuits, enclosures and frames of electrical apparatus, and
 conduit systems must be effectively and permanently grounded with a cross section as required
 by the National Electrical Code and of capacity sufficient to ensure continuity and continued
 effectiveness of the ground connections for fault current. Ground conductors must be as short
 and straight as possible, protected from mechanical injury and, where practicable, without
 splice or joint.
 662.13.2-Codes and Approvals: All grounding work shall be done in accordance with the
 latest edition and revisions of the National Electrical Code and the regulations of State and
 local codes.
 All connections in ground network shall be done of a type approved by NEC, Article 250.
 662.13.3-Metal Conduits: All metal (rigid steel) conduit ends shall be bonded and
 grounded by means of a # 8 bare copper cable. The grounding shall be accomplished by driving
 ground rods as detailed on the Standard Drawings or the Plans. Grounding from the conduit to
 the ground rod in a junction box or manhole shall be accomplished by use of a # 8 bare copper
 cable. Grounding from the conduit to a lighting support shall be accomplished by use of an
 insulated (green) copper conductor equal in size to the largest adjoining phase wire except
 where otherwise called for on the Plans. The connection of the bonding cable to the junction
 box frames and to the shafts of the lighting supports shall be done by means of a grounding
 stud. The neutral conductor shall be grounded at the service and control station.
 
 692
 
 662.13.4-Lighting Supports on Bridges: The lighting supports installed on bridge
 structures shall be grounded by bonding the grounding bushings of the metal conduit
 terminating to the ground connector in the pole shaft or parapet bracket. The other end of this
 conduit, which terminates in a junction box, shall be bonded to the junction box frame and to
 an insulated ground conductor which shall be installed in the same conduit as the lighting
 circuit conductors. This ground conductor shall be continuous across each bridge, and it shall
 be attached to the ground rod in the junction box or lighting support adjacent to each end of a
 bridge.
 662.13.5-Service and Control Stations: Grounding of all service and control stations shall
 be accomplished by means of a ground connector installed in the service cabinets where shown
 on the Plans and bonding all conduit ground bushings, metal casing of equipment, and neutral
 conductors by means of individual # 4 conductors, as elsewhere specified to the above
 mentioned ground connector. The other ends of these conduits shall be bonded together and
 connected to the ground rod in the adjacent concrete junction boxes.
 662.14-TESTING:
 The Contractor is advised that before proceeding with any work under this Contract, the
 Contractor shall conduct the necessary continuity and insulation tests to establish the integrity of
 cable runs already in place. The Contractor shall report any cable fault found to the Engineer. In
 case any fault is located while contract work is in progress, and which has not been reported by
 the Contractor as prescribed, then the Contractor shall be responsible for the correction of any such
 fault without any extra compensation.
 Continuity and insulation tests shall also be performed in a manner satisfactory to the
 Engineer on cable runs to be placed under this contract. The Contractor shall be responsible for
 the correction of any fault discovered.
 With all equipment connected to the wiring system, a functional test shall be performed by
 the Contractor in the presence of the Engineer to demonstrate that the system as a whole and all
 parts thereof function as specified or intended. Any defective materials or faulty or improper
 installation shall be permanently corrected by repairs or replacements to be made by the Contractor
 to the satisfaction of the Engineer at no additional cost.
 Lighting circuits shall then be subjected to such other tests as may be required, including
 additional insulation resistance testing as detailed in 662.9, and shall be the responsibility of the
 Contractor to perform these tests in the presence of the Engineer or authorized representative. All
 tests shall be performed at the expense of the Contractor.
 After the installation is completed, the Contractor shall conduct a continuous 24-hour
 operating test for approval. In addition, final acceptance of an installation will not occur until 30
 days of operation termed satisfactory by the Engineer.
 During the 30 days of operation, the Contractor shall be responsible for repairing or
 replacing any defective equipment within 24 hours after being notified by the Engineer. After any
 malfunctioning equipment has been repaired or replaced, the 30 day test shall begin anew.
 The Contractor shall inspect and certify to the replacement of all damaged traffic signal
 loop conductors and to the proper functioning of the traffic signal, and that the junction boxes
 within the project limits comply with section 660.15. The inspection shall be performed before
 project completion and after all the work has been completed in the area of the traffic signal system
 and related components.
 The Electrical Inspection shall be paid as item 662015-*, Electrical Test, per Lump Sum.
 693
 
 662.15-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 662.15.1-Conduit: Galvanized steel conduit and PVC conduit will be measured as a
 complete and operable conduit system on a lump sum basis per service.
 662.15.2-Manholes: Manholes will be measured as a complete unit in place on a per each
 basis.
 662.15.3-Junction Box: Junction Box Type A, B, C, H, or L will be measured as a
 complete unit in place on a per each basis.
 662.15.4-Luminaires: Luminaires will be measured as a complete unit in place on a per
 each basis including lamp of wattage called for on the Plans.
 662.15.5-Cable: Cable will be measured as a complete and operable cable system on a
 lump sum basis per service, including all connector kits necessary.
 662.15.6-Cable-in-Duct: Cable-in-Duct will be measured as a complete and operable duct
 system on a lump sum basis per service.
 662.15.7-Lighting Supports: Lighting supports will be measured per each per type
 furnished and installed, including support base and foundation as required for each support.
 662.15.8-Service and Control Station: Service and control station will be measured as a
 complete and operable unit in place on a per lump sum per service basis.
 662.15.9-Incidental Electrical Work: Incidental electrical work will be measured as a
 complete unit on a lump sum basis. Measurement of the unit will be based upon the amount of
 incidental work shown on the Plans and as necessary to complete the work.
 662.15.10-Electrical Tests: Electrical tests will be measured as a complete unit on a lump
 sum basis per service, including all tests performed as required by the Plans and Specifications.
 662.15.11-System Modification: System modification will be measured as a complete unit
 on a lump sum basis. Measurement of the unit will be based upon the actual amount of changes
 performed on previously installed systems as called for on the Plans and as necessary to
 complete the work.
 662.15.12-Navigation Lighting System: Navigation lighting system will be measured as
 a complete and operable system in place on a lump sum per service basis. If the project requires
 temporary protection of any existing or new structure/substructure for an interim period of
 construction, all such temporary items/facilities shall be included in the pay item.
 
 694
 
 662.16-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for furnishing all
 the materials and doing all work in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor,
 tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work. All incidental work
 and materials for which no basis of payment is provided will be considered as completely covered
 by the prices bid for the items included in the contract.
 662.17-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 662002-*
 662003-*
 662006-*
 662007-*
 662008-*
 662010-*
 662013-*
 662014-*
 662015-*
 662016-*
 662020-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Galvanized Steel Conduit
 Polyvinylchloride Conduit
 Junction Box , Type “type”
 Luminaires
 Cable
 Lighting Support, Type “Type”
 Service And Control Station
 Incidental Electrical Work
 Electrical Test
 System Modification
 Navigation Lighting System
 
 * Sequence number
 
 695
 
 UNIT
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Each
 Each
 Lump Sum
 Each
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 
 SECTION 663
 PAVEMENT MARKINGS
 663.1-DESCRIPTION:
 Pavement markings shall consist of furnishing and installing various types of markings. It
 shall include, but is not limited to, edge lines, lane lines, center lines, channelizing lines,
 intersection markings, stripes, curb markings, island markings, and raised markers, or
 combinations thereof, in accordance with Contract plans and the following specifications or as
 directed by the Engineer.
 All details not specified or shown on the Plans shall conform to the details and requirements
 set forth in the following publications. These publications shall collectively be referred to as the
 “pavement marking standards” throughout the remainder of this Section:
 1. The WVDOH Standard Details Book, Vol. II, Signing, Signals, Lighting, and Marking,
 latest issue date
 2. The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, latest issue,
 as printed by the Federal Highway Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation.
 (Referred to as the MUTCD.)
 663.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall conform to the following Subsections of Division 700 of the Standard
 Specifications:
 MATERIAL
 Interim Pavement Markings, Type VIIA
 Preformed Traffic Markings, Type V
 Raised Pavement Markers
 Temporary Pavement Marking Tape, Types VIIB and VIIC
 Temporary White or Yellow Traffic Paint
 White or Yellow Fast-Dry Traffic Paint, Type II
 
 SUBSECTION
 715.40.3
 715.40.2
 715.40.6
 715.40.4
 711.40
 711.41
 
 663.3-TYPES OF PAVEMENT MARKINGS:
 663.3.1-Edge Lines: Edge lines shall be continuous or dashed, white or yellow beaded
 stripes, six (6) inches (100 mm) or eight (8) inches (150 mm) in width, as specified on the
 Plans or otherwise in the pavement marking standards. Color to be specified on the Plans.
 Center of stripe shall be located six (6) inches (150 mm) from the edge of the pavement or as
 otherwise specified on the Plans.
 Dashed edge lines shall be applied in lengths of two (2) feet (0.6 m), separated by gaps of
 six (6) feet (1.8 m), or as otherwise specified on the Plans.
 663.3.2-Lane Lines and Centerline: Lane lines and centerlines shall be lines between
 contiguous lanes of pavement. They shall be continuous, broken, or dashed, white or yellow
 beaded stripes six (6) inches (150mm) or eight (8) inches (200mm) in width, as specified on
 the Plans or otherwise in the pavement marking standards.
 Lane lines and broken centerline lines shall be applied in lengths of ten (10) ft. (3m),
 separated by gaps of thirty (30) ft. (9m). Dashed lane lines shall be applied in lengths of two
 (2) ft. (0.6m) separated by gaps of thirteen (13) ft. (4m), or lengths of three (3) ft. (0.9m)
 696
 
 separated by gaps of nine (9) ft. (2.7m), as specified on the Plans or otherwise in the pavement
 marking standards.
 When applied to bituminous surfaces, the center of single stripes shall be centered about
 the dividing line between the contiguous lanes. When applied to Portland cement concrete
 pavement, the near edge of single stripes shall be offset to the left and four (4) inches (100
 mm) from the longitudinal joint. Double yellow centerlines shall be centered about the dividing
 line between the contiguous lanes, with the gap between the stripes being equal to the width of
 the stripes.
 663.3.3-Railroad Crossing Marking: Railroad Crossing Markings shall be white beaded
 markings located as shown on the Plans or otherwise in the pavement marking standards.
 Dimensioning shall be in accordance with the pavement marking standards.
 663.3.4-Channelizing Lines: Channelizing lines shall be continuous white beaded stripes,
 eight (8) inches (200mm) in width. The length of the line shall be as detailed on the Plans.
 663.3.5-Stop and Crosswalk Lines: Stop lines shall be solid white beaded lines, twelve
 (12) inches (300 mm) or twenty-four (24) inches (600 mm) wide, as specified on the Plans or
 otherwise in the pavement marking standards. Crosswalk lines shall be solid white beaded
 lines, twelve (12) inches (300 mm) wide by six (6) feet (1.8 m) in length.
 663.3.6-Stripes: These markings are transverse, diagonal or longitudinal white or yellow
 beaded lines, twelve (12) inches (300 mm) wide. They are used to increase the visibility of
 pedestrian crosswalk areas and to designate neutral traffic zones formed by channelizing lines
 or edge lines. Location, spacing and use of these stripes shall be shown on the Plans or
 otherwise in the pavement marking standards.
 663.3.7-Curb and Island Markings: Where specified, exposed surfaces of curbs and
 paved islands shall be painted solid with yellow or white fast-dry traffic zone paint (Type II)
 and covered with glass beads. Color to be specified on the Plans.
 663.3.8-Arrows: Arrows shall be white beaded markings located as shown on the Plans
 or otherwise in the pavement marking standards. Dimensioning shall be in accordance with the
 pavement marking standards. Arrows may be one of the following:
 1. One Directional Lane Assignment Arrows
 2. Multi Directional Lane Assignment Arrows
 3. Ramp Wrong Way Arrows
 4. Lane Drop Arrows
 663.3.9-Lane Letters: Lane letters shall be white beaded markings located as shown on
 the Plans or otherwise in the pavement marking standards. Dimensioning shall be in
 accordance with the pavement marking standards.
 663.3.10-Raised Pavement Markers (RPM’s): RPM’s include reflective Type P-2
 markers and reflective Type R-4 markers. The type to be installed and general placement
 guidelines shall be as shown on the Plans or otherwise in the pavement marking standards.
 697
 
 663.3.11-Yield Triangles: Yield Triangles shall be white beaded markings located as
 shown on the Plans or otherwise in the pavement marking standards. Dimensioning shall be in
 accordance with the pavement marking standards.
 663.3.12-Handicapped Symbols: Handicapped symbols shall be white beaded markings
 located as shown on the Plans or otherwise in the pavement marking standards. Dimensioning
 shall be in accordance with the pavement marking standards.
 663.3.13-Bicycle Symbols: Bicycle symbols shall be white beaded markings located as
 shown on the Plans or otherwise in the pavement marking standards. Dimensioning shall be in
 accordance with the pavement marking standards.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 663.4-PAVEMENT PREPARATION-PREMARKING, CODING:
 The Contractor shall clean all debris from the surface to be marked by means of a power
 broom, compressed air or other mechanical means to the satisfaction of the Engineer. Markings
 and markers shall be applied only when the surface is clean and dry and when ambient and other
 roadway conditions are within any specified requirements herein.
 If pavement markings are included in the contract, they shall be applied in a timely manner
 and in the patterns directed by the Plans or pavement marking standards.
 All materials shall be applied as recommended by the material manufacturer. This shall
 include surface pre-treatment, if required.
 All surface cleaning, surface pre-treatment and premarking shall be performed by the
 Contractor prior to the installation of the proposed markings, or markers, and shall be subject to
 approval by the Engineer.
 Coding and premarking changes in traffic flow patterns, i.e., passing, no passing zones, is
 very critical and should always be approved by the Engineer.
 663.5-APPLICATION:
 663.5.1-General: The Contractor shall supply all of the marking material, equipment, and
 traffic control devices required for the completion of the project.
 The Contractor shall provide and have approved by the Division a plan for traffic control
 and maintenance for all phases of the marking operations. The plan must be approved by the
 Division prior to the beginning of work. All traffic control plans shall be in conformance with
 provisions in the WVDOH publication "Manual on Temporary Traffic Control for Streets and
 Highways”, latest Edition.
 663.5.1.1-Interim Traffic Control, Temporary Marking, and Permanent Marking
 Placement Schedule: The Contractor shall adhere to specific guidelines provided herein
 for scheduling the placement of interim traffic control, temporary pavement markings, and
 permanent pavement markings. These guidelines are based on various factors such as
 facility type, ADT, and time of season. All interim, temporary, and permanent pavement
 markings shall be in conformance with specifications herein, the project Plans, or otherwise
 the pavement marking standards. The Contractor shall be responsible for maintaining both
 interim traffic control signs and temporary pavement markings until such time as the
 698
 
 permanent markings are placed or for the duration of the thirty (30) calendar day warrantied
 performance period for the temporary markings, whichever is less. No separate payment
 will be made for maintenance of these items but shall be included in the applicable pay
 items for initial installation.
 If it becomes necessary to open the roadway to traffic prior to the completion of the
 final paving course for longer than fourteen (14) calendar days, the Contractor shall install
 full compliance temporary pavement markings in conformance with Section 636 and the
 specifications herein.
 663.5.1.1.1-Interim Traffic Control Placement Schedule: Interim Traffic Control
 includes interim pavement markings and may also include “Do Not Pass” regulatory signs.
 Interim markings are markings applied to freshly resurfaced roadways between lifts and
 after placement of the final lift prior to opening the portion of the roadway being resurfaced
 to traffic. These markings are intended to provide the minimum amount of delineation
 required for safe navigation of the roadway. Interim markings shall be Type VIIA material
 applied as described in Section 663.5.6 and shall meet the requirements of Material Section
 715.40.3. All interim markings shall be installed by the end of the work day by placing the
 markings as the paving operation progresses within 1000 feet (300 meters) of the paver.
 Removal of interim markings shall not be required between lifts or after placement of the
 subsequent markings. Payment of interim markings shall be incidental to the Paving Items.
 The specific interim traffic control to be placed shall be in accordance with the following.
 663.5.1.1.1.1-Two-Lane, Two-Way Roadways: Prior to any work which will cover
 the centerline, the Contractor shall install twenty-four (24) inch (600mm) x thirty (30) inch
 (750mm) “Do Not Pass” (R4-1) signs on permanent posts at the beginning of each no
 passing zone throughout the length of the project. These signs shall be placed at the
 beginning of each no passing zone and shall be repeated every 2,500 feet (762 m) as
 required. Payment shall be made under the “Traffic Control Devices” item.
 To delineate the centerline of the roadway, the Contractor shall install yellow interim
 markings measuring four (4) inches (100mm) x four (4) inches (100mm) along the
 centerline of the roadway on twenty (20) foot (6 m) centers.
 663.5.1.1.1.2-One-Way Multilane Roadways: On all one-way multilane roadways,
 the Contractor shall install white interim markings measuring four (4) inches (100mm) x
 forty-eight (48) inches (1200mm) along the lane line. Interim markings shall be placed on
 forty (40) foot (12 m) centers.
 663.5.1.1.1.3-Two-Way Three-Lane Roadways: Prior to any work which will cover
 the centerline and/or lane lines, the Contractor shall install twenty-four (24) inch (600mm)
 x thirty (30) inch (750mm) “Do Not Pass” (R4-1) signs on permanent posts at the beginning
 of each no-passing zone throughout the length of the project as required. “Do Not Pass”
 signs in both directions will be required when the center lane is a two way left turn lane.
 These signs shall be placed at the beginning of each no-passing zone and shall be repeated
 every 2500 feet (762 m) as required. Payment shall be made under the “Traffic Control
 Devices” item.
 
 699
 
 The Contractor shall install interim markings measuring four (4) inches (100mm) x
 forty-eight (48) inches (1200mm). On such roadways having two thru lanes in one
 direction, the centerline shall be marked with two parallel yellow lines separated by a four
 (4) inch (100mm) space placed on forty (40) foot (12 m) centers. Lane lines shall be marked
 with white lines placed on forty (40) foot (12 m) centers. On such roadways having a two
 way left turn lane, the center lane shall be marked on both sides with two parallel yellow
 lines separated by a four (4) inch (100mm) space, and placed on forty (40) foot (12 m)
 centers.
 663.5.1.1.1.4-Two-Way Four-Lane and Five-Lane Roadways: On all two-way fourlane and five-lane roadways, the Contractor shall install interim markings measuring four
 (4) inches (100mm) x forty-eight (48) inches (1200mm) along the lane line and centerline
 where required. Centerlines shall be marked with two parallel yellow lines separated by a
 four (4) inch (100mm) space placed on forty (40) foot (12 m) centers. On five-lane
 roadways these markings shall be placed on both sides of the two way left turn lane. Lane
 lines shall be marked with white lines placed at forty (40) foot (12 m) centers.
 663.5.1.1.2-Temporary Pavement Marking Placement Schedule: Interim markings
 are to be succeeded by temporary markings within a three (3) to fourteen (14) day period,
 based on the type of roadway and ADT, as specified herein. Temporary markings are
 markings, typically short-lived in nature, which supplant interim markings. Temporary
 markings shall be applied as specified herein and in Section 636, and shall meet the
 requirements of Materials Section 711.40. Payment for Temporary pavement markings
 shall be made under the “Temporary Pavement Marking Paint” pay item.
 Interim Markings shall be permitted only for a period of up to three (3) calendar days
 after completion of the final course. The only exception to this shall be for two-way, twolane roadways having an ADT < 3,000, in which case fourteen (14) Calendar Days shall
 be permitted after completion of the final course.
 Full compliance temporary centerline and edge lines in conformance with Section 636
 and the specifications herein shall be installed on two-way, two-lane roadways within the
 time frame specified above. Two-way three-lane, two-way four-lane, and two-way fivelane roadways shall have full compliance temporary centerline, lane line, and edge lines
 installed in conformance with Section 636 and the specifications herein within the time
 frame specified above.
 On one-way multilane roadways, the Contractor shall install a full compliance
 temporary yellow edge line after paving is first completed in the left lane and prior to the
 left lane being opened to traffic. Prior to the remaining lanes being opened to traffic, the
 Contractor shall install a full compliance temporary white lane lines and white edge line.
 These markings shall be installed in conformance with Section 636 and the specifications
 herein.
 663.5.1.1.3-Permanent Pavement Marking Placement Schedule: Permanent
 markings are the final pavement marking application within a project. Permanent markings
 shall be placed as specified herein and shall meet the requirements of Materials Sections
 711.41, 715.40.2, 715.40.6, and/or any other material specifications made part of the
 Contract.
 700
 
 The Contractor shall be required to place full compliance permanent pavement
 markings within sixty (60) calendar days after the placement of temporary pavement
 markings. In addition, there shall be a minimum thirty (30) calendar day period between
 the placement of temporary and permanent markings when the temporary markings are
 placed on or after April 15th and prior to November 1st. There shall be a minimum fifteen
 (15) calendar day period between the placement of temporary and permanent markings
 when the temporary markings are placed on or after November 1st and prior to April 15th
 of the following year. Full compliance markings shall consist of all centerline, lane line,
 channelizing line, edge line, and intersection markings.
 663.5.2-Temporary and Permanent White or Yellow Traffic Zone Paint: Pavement
 marking lines shall be straight or of uniform curvature and shall conform to the tangents,
 curves, and transitions as specified in the Plans, the pavement marking standards, and/or as
 directed by the Engineer.
 The finished lines shall have well-defined edges and be free of horizontal fluctuations. The
 lateral deviation shall not exceed 0.5 inch (13 mm) from the proposed location alignment as
 specified herein, on the Plans, in the pavement marking standards, and/or as directed by the
 Engineer.
 When striping interchanges and intersections, material shall be applied for the full length
 of all ramps and the entire perimeter surrounding islands and gore areas. When striping atgrade intersections, yellow edge lines shall be placed completely around and shall be connected
 at the median ends.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for removing all pavement marking materials spilled
 upon the roadway surface or adjoining area. The Contractor shall use methods acceptable to
 the Engineer for removing the spilled material.
 Any pavement marking which is crossed by a vehicle and tracked shall be replaced and
 any subsequent marking made by the vehicle shall be removed by methods acceptable to the
 Engineer and at no additional cost to the Department.
 Unless otherwise specified, the Contractor shall be responsible for coding and spotting per
 the Plans or otherwise the pavement marking standards. The Contractor’s coding and spotting
 shall be reviewed and approved by the Engineer prior to application.
 The Contractor will be responsible for cleaning any Raised Pavement Marker (RPM) lenses
 that are painted during this Contract. If the RPMs are not able to be cleaned, the Contractor
 shall replace the effected RPM lenses.
 Permanent Traffic Paint shall be Type II, White or Yellow Fast- Dry Traffic Paint as
 described in Materials sections 711.41, unless otherwise specified in the Contract Plans. In
 regards to ambient air temperature, the Contractor shall utilize an appropriate pavement
 marking material such that the ambient air temperature at the time of application is within the
 recommended ambient air application temperatures specified by the material manufacturer.
 This requirement shall apply to both temporary and permanent traffic zone paint. The
 Contractor shall not be granted any time extensions to the requirements for the application of
 temporary or permanent markings, based on ambient air temperature, when the ambient air
 temperature is thirty-five (35) degrees Fahrenheit (1.7 degrees Celsius) or above. The
 Contractor shall not be paid any additional monies in order to provide materials suitable for
 cold weather application. Whenever temporary or permanent traffic zone paint is applied at an
 ambient air temperature below fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit (10 degrees Celsius), the
 701
 
 Contractor shall provide, upon request by the WVDOH, a certification letter from the marking
 material manufacturer. This certification letter shall reference the project number, shall identify
 the marking material supplied for the project, and shall state the minimum acceptable ambient
 air temperature for application of the material.
 Temporary traffic paint shall be applied at the same width as will be used for the permanent
 markings.
 663.5.2.1-Approved Equipment and Personnel: The following provisions shall
 apply to the application of permanent traffic zone paint only:
 The Contractor (prior to commencement of the project) shall submit to the Engineer a
 detailed list of all equipment and the resumes of all personnel within the confines of the
 project. The Contractor shall also provide certification from the binder manufacturer that
 the Contractor is qualified to apply the manufacturer's material in conformance with these
 specifications. Drivers and operators with less than one year of experience shall not be used
 on this project.
 The Contractor's striper shall be equipped with electrical foot counters. The counters
 shall individually tabulate the amount of footage applied by each striping gun whether solid
 or dashed. The counters shall be six digit types with a reset feature. The Contractor shall
 determine the accuracy of the foot counters and establish an adjustment factor as required
 to determine the pay item quantities. The foot counters shall be periodically checked to
 assure accurate measurements No paint shall be applied without the accurate operation of
 the foot counters. The Contractor shall provide the Engineer with a certified document on
 these calibrations.
 The Contractor shall use an accurate dashing mechanism, capable of being adjusted to
 retrace existing lane or center line markings.
 Glass beads applied to the surface of the completed marking material shall be applied
 by an automatic bead dispenser attached to the pavement marking equipment in such a
 manner that the beads are dispensed uniformly and almost instantly upon the marking as
 the marking is being applied to the road surface. The bead dispenser shall be equipped with
 an automatic cut-off control, synchronized with the cut-off of the pavement marking
 equipment.
 663.5.2.2-Contractor’s Warranty: The Contractor shall warranty the performance of
 temporary traffic zone paint for a period of thirty (30) Calendar Days after application, and
 shall warranty the performance of Type II permanent traffic zone paint through October
 31st. If the Type II markings are placed on or after November 1st, the markings shall only
 be required to meet the initial performance requirements specified in the Materials Section.
 The required performance level of the markings are described in Section 711.41.
 During the warranty periods, if any markings greater than 1000 feet (305 m) are found
 to be deficient for any reason, the Contractor will be given notification stating the locations
 and the type of deficiency. These notifications will be given at any time within the specified
 warranty periods for the markings. The Contractor shall completely replace the deficient
 markings, as directed by the Engineer, within twenty (20) calendar days of the written
 notification. Retroreflectivity and color may be checked after re-application of the
 pavement marking to ensure that segment meets the minimum values specified in Section
 711.41.
 702
 
 If the Contractor does not complete the replacement of all of the deficient
 pavement markings by the end of the twenty (20) calendar day replacement
 period, and the Contract has not been finalized, the Contractor shall be subject to liquidated
 damages as described within Section 108.7 until replacement is completed. These
 liquidated damages shall not stop during the winter shut-down period. No direct payment
 shall be made for the replacement of any deficient pavement marking during the warranty
 period as such work shall be considered as incidental to the
 work as paid for by the various pavement marking items in the Contract.
 663.5.3 through 663.5.4-BLANK
 663.5.5-Type V Preformed Intersection Traffic Markings: Type V preformed
 intersection traffic markings shall be affixed to bituminous or Portland cement concrete
 pavements as specified in the Contract Plans, or as otherwise specified on the pavement
 marking details.
 Care shall be taken by the Contractor to follow the installation recommendations of the
 material manufacturer. Preformed tapes used as Type V material are particularly sensitive to
 ambient air temperatures and road surface temperatures. Both preformed tapes and
 thermoplastics are highly sensitive to extraneous materials on the road surface and moisture
 contained on and within the road surface. Type V materials shall not be applied if the
 manufacturer’s recommendations are not met.
 The Contractor shall provide the Engineer with certification from the Manufacturer that
 they have been adequately trained through the Division of Highway's approved training
 seminar to apply this material. This certification shall be valid for a period of four (4) years
 after being issued, after which recertification shall be required.
 663.5.5.1-Contractor’s Warranty: If the material has been identified by the Division
 as having failed the skid resistance (when applicable), adherence, road presence, color,
 and/or retroreflectivity requirements described in Materials Section 715.40.2 prior to
 finalization of the Contract, the material shall be corrected by the Contractor in a manner
 acceptable to the Division and in accordance with the Manufacturer’s recommendations at
 no additional cost to the Division if the failure is determined by the WVDOH to be caused
 by improper installation or defects in the manufacturer’s materials.
 If the material has been identified by the Division as having failed the skid resistance
 (when applicable), adherence, road presence, color, and/or retroreflectivity requirements
 described in Materials Section 715.40.2 after finalization of the Contract, and less than one
 (1) year from the date of application, the material shall be corrected by the Contractor in a
 manner acceptable to the Division and in accordance with the Manufacturer’s
 recommendations at no additional cost to the Division if the failure is determined by the
 WVDOH to be caused by improper installation.
 All warranty related work required shall be completed within sixty (60) calendar days
 of notification. In the event that the Contractor fails to meet this time requirement,
 liquidated damages will be charged for each Calendar Day in the amount of $120 per day.
 The Contractor may, but shall not be required to replace preformed thermoplastic Type
 V material between December 1st and March 1st of the following year. The Contractor
 may, but shall not be required to replace preformed marking tape Type V material between
 703
 
 October 1st and May 1st of the following year. Calendar Days falling within the time
 frames specified above will not be counted against the Contractor.
 In addition to any liquidated damages, non-compliance with the warranty requirements
 specified above may result in the Division’s temporary non-recognition of the Contractor’s
 material application manufacturer certifications, as described in Section 663.5.5 and as
 they pertain to other ongoing and/or future Contracts, until the failed materials are
 corrected.
 663.5.6-Interim Pavement Markings (Type VIIA Material): Interim Pavement
 Markings shall be Type VIIA Interim Pavement Marking Tape. Type VIIA Marking shall be
 installed in accordance with the manufacture’s recommendations.
 The Contractor shall remove all dirt, debris, and loose particles from the road surface
 application areas immediately prior to the installation of Interim markings.
 While in place, Type VIIA pavement markings shall remain adhered to the pavement, and
 shall meet the color and retroreflectivity requirements described in Materials Section 715.40.3.
 Any material that fails to meet the above provisions shall be corrected by the Contractor in a
 manner acceptable to the Engineer at no additional cost to the Division. If necessary, the
 material shall be tested and evaluated for deficiencies, with the devices described in the
 Materials Section, based on an adequate sampling to be determined by the Engineer.
 663.5.7-Temporary Pavement Marking Tape (Types VIIB and VIIC Material):
 Temporary Pavement Marking Tape shall be either Type VIIB or VIIC, as called for in the
 Contract plans, and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
 The pavement surface shall be dry at the time of pavement marking application. The
 Contractor shall remove all dirt, debris, loose particles and heavy oil residues from the road
 surface application areas immediately prior to installation of pavement markings.
 Care shall be taken by the Contractor to follow the installation recommendations of the
 material manufacturer. The Contractor shall be responsible for determining if a surface primer
 is necessary. Type VIIB and VIIC temporary pavement marking film shall be applied with a
 mechanical applicator to provide pavement lines which are neat, accurate and uniform. The
 mechanical applicator shall be equipped with a film cut-off device. The pavement marking
 film shall be rolled or tamped to facilitate adhesion to road surface.
 While in place, all temporary pavement markings shall remain adhered to the pavement
 and shall meet the color and retroreflectivity requirements described in Materials Section
 715.40.4. These provisions shall also apply to Type VIIC materials in wet conditions, as
 described in the Materials Section. Any materials that fail to meet the above provisions shall
 be corrected by the Contractor in a manner acceptable to the Engineer at no additional cost to
 the Division. If necessary, the materials shall be tested and evaluated for deficiencies, with the
 devices described in the Materials Section, based on an adequate sampling to be determined
 by the Engineer.
 Beginning on November 1st, the adherence, color, and retroreflectivity requirements
 referenced in the previous paragraph shall no longer apply to temporary tape materials which
 were installed prior to this date. In addition, the adherence, color, and retroreflectivity
 requirements shall at no point apply to temporary tapes placed on or after November 1st and
 prior to April 1st of the following calendar year.
 
 704
 
 When temporary pavement markings are no longer required as approved or determined by
 the Engineer, the plastic pavement marking film shall be neatly removed in its entirety. The
 cost for this work shall be included in the Contractor’s bid price for installing the temporary
 markings.
 663.5.8-BLANK
 663.5.9-Raised Pavement Markers (RPM’s): Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer,
 RPM’s shall be placed as specified in the Plans or as otherwise specified in the pavement
 marking details. The proposed placement of all RPM’s shall be reviewed and approved by the
 Engineer prior to proceeding.
 In all cases, the reflective faces of RPM’s shall be perpendicular to a line parallel to the
 roadway centerline.
 Up until the time of installation, Type P-2 and R-4 markers should be stored indoors and
 should be protected from any source of moisture both during shipment to the jobsite and at the
 jobsite. The markers should be maintained at a high enough temperature as to preclude
 moisture condensation and, at the time of placement, both the markers and their containers
 shall be dry.
 The color(s) of the lenses and bodies (Type R-4 only) of the markers shall be in accordance
 with the Plans or as otherwise specified in the pavement marking details.
 Unless otherwise specified in the Plans, markers supplementing a broken line, such as a
 lane line, shall be placed in line with the pavement marking and within the gaps along the line
 at the appropriate spacing. Markers supplementing a solid line, such as a channelizing line,
 shall be installed immediately adjacent to the line with the edge of the marker against the edge
 of the line. If a Type R-4 marker is to be installed in line with the normal location of a solid
 line pavement marking, no painted or Type V pavement marking shall be installed at the
 locations where the R-4 markers are to be installed. R-4 markers shall not be placed on top of
 existing pavement markings.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the replacement of any markers having failed due
 to non-conformance with any portion of the specifications herein, and shall incur all associated
 costs. The Contractor shall also be responsible for the repair of any pavement surfaces
 damaged and requiring repair, as determined to be necessary by the Engineer and by a method
 approved by the Engineer, due to non-conformance with any portion of the specifications
 herein, and shall incur all associated costs.
 663.5.9.1-Type P-2 Marker Installation: At the time of installation, the exposed
 surfaces of Type P-2 castings shall be free of scale, dirt, rust, oil, grease, or any other
 contaminant which may impair adhesion. If upon inspection the Engineer determines that
 one or more of the markers are not sufficiently in conformance with this requirement, the
 Contractor shall clean each contaminated holder by sand blasting or other means acceptable
 to the Engineer in order to remove all such foreign matter prior to installation.
 The location of placement for each Type P-2 marker shall be of a constant slope
 longitudinally and laterally, and homogeneous. The location shall show no visible signs of
 distress or failure, such as cracking or delamination. All edges of the marker shall be placed
 a minimum of two (2) inches (50 mm) from any portion of the road surface showing such
 signs of distress or failure. Type P-2 markers shall be placed such that all edges are a
 705
 
 minimum of (2) inches (50 mm) from any lateral construction joint. In addition, Type P-2
 RPM’s shall not be placed within an intersection with a public street or highway where the
 placement of the marker creates a likelihood that the marker will be plowed in a direction
 other than that which the marker is designed for. If it is determined during pre-installation
 planning that a marker would be placed at a point with one of the aforementioned pavement
 surface defects, or at a lateral construction joint, or within the intersection of a public street
 or highway as a result of typical marker spacing, the affected marker may be relocated
 longitudinally a sufficient distance to be approved by the Engineer. The distance the marker
 may be relocated shall not exceed ten (10) % of the typical marker spacing. Where it would
 be necessary to relocate the marker a distance greater than ten (10) % of the typical marker
 spacing, the affected marker shall be deleted.
 With the exception of markers installed to supplement yellow centerline markings
 along undivided roadways, all Type P-2 markers shall be installed such that the near edge
 of the casting is a minimum of two (2) inches (50 mm) from the nearest longitudinal
 construction joint. Individual markers may be shifted laterally up to two (2) inches (50
 mm), and up to ten (10) % of the typical marker spacing longitudinally in order to meet
 this requirement. Where it would be necessary to shift the marker a greater distance
 laterally and/or longitudinally as allowed above, the affected marker shall be deleted.
 The recesses for P-2 markers shall be machine cut fully in accordance with the marker
 manufacturer’s specifications pertaining to, but not limited to, dimensions and blade
 configuration. All P-2 markers shall be installed within seven (7) days of cutting the
 recesses. All recesses shall be dry at the time of installation of the markers, and the
 pavement and ambient air temperature shall be a minimum of fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit
 (10 degrees Celsius) and rising. Prior to installation of the markers, the recesses shall be
 brushed or blown clean of any loose material.
 Epoxy adhesive recommended by the marker manufacturer and meeting the
 requirements of Materials Section 715.40.6 shall be used to adhere the Type P-2 marker
 castings in the recesses. Unless otherwise specified by the adhesive manufacturer, the
 epoxy adhesive shall be mixed by combining components A and B in a ratio of 1:1 by
 volume. The epoxy adhesive requires that the mixing operation and placing of the
 pavement markers be done rapidly. Any mixed batch that becomes so viscous that it cannot
 be readily extruded from under the casting under light pressure shall not be used. Unless
 otherwise specified or allowed by the adhesive manufacturer, the adhesive shall be
 maintained at 60 to 80 degrees Fahrenheit (15 to 27 degrees Celsius) before mixing, and
 shall not be heated above 120 degrees Fahrenheit (49 degrees Celsius) once mixing starts.
 Any heating of the epoxy shall be by the application of indirect heat. The Contractor shall
 insure that the epoxy is thoroughly mixed until it is one homogeneous color. The epoxy
 shall be placed fully in accordance with the epoxy manufacturer’s specifications. Any
 requirements made by the adhesive manufacturer which are more stringent than those
 contained herein shall take precedence.
 The Contractor shall install P-2 marker castings in the recesses using the epoxy
 adhesive fully in accordance with the marker manufacturer’s specifications. Sufficient
 epoxy shall be placed in the recess to ensure that all voids beneath and around the casting
 are filled so as to create a watertight seal around the casting. The casting shall be hand
 placed into the recesses. The Contractor shall insure that each of the lugs on the sides of
 the casting are resting on the pavement and that the tips of the casting snowplow deflecting
 706
 
 surface(s) are below the pavement surface. The Contractor shall take reasonable steps to
 avoid buildup of epoxy on either the pavement surface or the casting lip in front of the lens
 as this buildup will affect the maximum visibility distance of the markers. There shall be
 no epoxy on the marker lens. If this occurs, the Contractor shall replace the marker lens in
 accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations and will incur all costs associated
 with this.
 Newly installed P-2 markers shall not be exposed to traffic until the epoxy adhesive
 has sufficiently cured. The amount of cure time required is based on the ambient air
 temperature. The Contractor shall follow the recommendations of the adhesive
 manufacturer. In no case shall the newly installed markers be exposed to traffic within a
 time period less than that which is shown in the following table:
 Ambient Air Temperature, Minimum Protection Time
 °F (°C)
 (minutes)
 100 (38)
 15
 90 (32)
 20
 80 (27)
 25
 70 (21)
 30
 60 (16)
 35
 50 (10)
 45
 663.5.9.3-Type R-4 Marker Installations: Type R-4 markers shall be placed such
 that all edges are a minimum of (2) inches (50 mm) from any lateral construction joint. If
 during pre-installation planning, it is determined that a marker would be placed at a lateral
 construction joint, the affected marker may be relocated longitudinally a sufficient distance
 to be approved by the project Engineer. The distance the marker may be relocated shall not
 exceed ten (10) % of the typical marker spacing. Where it would be necessary to relocate
 the marker a distance greater than ten (10) % of the typical marker spacing, the affected
 marker shall be deleted. In addition, Type R-4 markers shall not be installed spanning a
 longitudinal pavement joint. Affected markers may be shifted if necessary such the edge
 of the marker bodies are along the edge of the joint.
 All applications shall be made on dry pavement surfaces free of extraneous materials
 such as, but not limited to, dirt, dust, grease, oils, existing pavement markings, and
 excessive remnants of previous delineation or channelization device adhesives. Extraneous
 materials shall be removed prior to placement by means approved by the Engineer, such as
 sweeping, high pressure air, scraping, or grinding. The Engineer shall make the final
 determination as to when the existing surface has been sufficiently cleaned for placement
 of the markers.
 Type R-4 markers shall be applied to the asphalt or concrete surface fully in accordance
 with the manufacturer’s recommendations using an adhesive recommended by the marker
 manufacturer. The adhesive shall be either 1) a rapid set epoxy adhesive, 2) a standard set
 epoxy adhesive, or 3) a bitumen adhesive, and shall meet any applicable requirements
 contained in Materials Section 715.40.6. The Contractor is cautioned in regards to the
 application of markers to new asphalt or concrete surfaces. If the markers are to be applied
 to a new asphalt surface, the Contractor shall consult with the adhesive manufacturer and
 follow all recommendations of the adhesive manufacturer in regards to special surface
 707
 
 preparation steps or recommended waiting periods between the completion of paving
 operations and adhesive application. In no case shall the markers be placed until the new
 asphalt surface has cured for a minimum period of fourteen (14) Calendar Days. If the
 markers are to be applied to a new concrete surface less than ninety (90) Calendar Days
 after concrete placement, any remaining curing compound on the application surface shall
 be removed by an Engineer approved method and procedures such as sandblasting, hydroblasting, shot blasting, or grinding. Regardless of the type of adhesive used, type R-4
 markers shall not be placed under the following conditions:
 1. When either the pavement or air temperature is 32°F (0°C) or less when using rapid
 set epoxy, 50°F (10°C) or less when using standard set epoxy, or 40°F (4.4°C) or
 less when using bitumen adhesive.
 2. If the relative humidity of the air is greater than 80 %
 3. If the pavement is not surface dry or if there has been rainfall in the previous 24
 hours
 If the markers are to be applied using an epoxy adhesive, this requires that the mixing
 operation and placing of the markers be done rapidly. If standard set epoxy adhesive is
 used, the Contractor may mix this material by hand; however, not more than one (1) qt. (1
 L) shall be mixed at one time and the markers shall be aligned and pressed into place within
 five (5) minutes after mixing operations are started. Any mixed batch which becomes so
 viscous that the adhesive cannot be readily extruded from under the marker on application
 of slight pressure shall not be used. Rapid set epoxy adhesive shall not be mixed by hand;
 it shall be mixed by a 2-component type automatic mixing and extrusion apparatus.
 Automatic mixing equipment for the epoxy adhesive shall use positive displacement pumps
 and shall properly meter the two components in the specified ratio. At any time requested
 by the Engineer, the ratio shall be checked by the Contractor in the presence of the
 Engineer. This check shall be made by disconnecting the mixing heads, or using suitable
 bypass valves, and filling two suitable containers with the unmixed components. The
 mixing head shall properly mix the two components so that there is no trace of black or
 white streaks in the mixed material. Voids in a cured, undisturbed sample of the mixed
 adhesive obtained from the extrusion nozzle should not exceed four (4) %.
 When machine mixing standard or rapid set epoxy adhesives, the markers shall be
 placed within sixty (60) seconds after the adhesive has been mixed and extruded, and no
 further movement of the marker shall be allowed. No more than ninety (90) seconds shall
 be permitted between the time the adhesive is in place on the roadway and the marker is
 no longer subjected to further movement. The mixed adhesive should not remain in the
 mixing head for more than forty-five (45) seconds. Adhesive remaining in the mixing head
 longer than this period shall be wasted before resuming the operation.
 When applying the markers with epoxy adhesive, the adhesive shall be placed
 uniformly on the cleaned pavement surface or on the bottom of the marker in a quantity
 sufficient to result in complete coverage of the area of contact of the marker with no voids
 present and with a slight excess after the marker has been lightly pressed in place. Ideally
 there will be approximately 0.060 in. (1.5 mm) adhesive between the marker and the
 pavement. Excess adhesive around the edge of the marker, excess adhesive on the
 pavement, and adhesive on the exposed surfaces of the markers shall be immediately
 removed. Soft rags moistened with mineral spirits in accordance with Federal Specification
 708
 
 TT-T-291 or kerosene may be used to remove adhesive from exposed faces of pavement
 markers. No other solvent shall be used. The markers should be protected against impact
 until the adhesive has hardened to a sufficient degree, as determined by the Engineer.
 Bituminous adhesive shall be dispensed from a thermostatically controlled melterapplicator at a temperature of 375 to 425 degrees Fahrenheit (141 to 218 degrees Celsius).
 The material shall be stirred frequently to ensure even heating. The adhesive shall be
 dispensed in a puddle slightly larger than the bottom of the marker, and the marker shall
 be dropped onto the puddle as quickly as possible, preferably within five (5) seconds of
 adhesive placement. The marker shall then be pressed lightly onto the adhesive. The
 adhesive will set up in approximately two (2) minutes and typically no longer requires
 protection from traffic.
 Any requirements made by the adhesive manufacturer which are more stringent than
 those contained herein shall take precedence.
 663.6-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Pavement markings shall be measured complete in place in the units designated below.
 Length measurements shall exclude gaps. Calibrated and verified odometer measurements will be
 acceptable as method of measurement on edge lines (mainline only), lane lines, and centerlines
 only for plan quantities in excess of 10,000 linear feet (3 000 m) or two linear miles (3.2 km).
 Island marking will be measured by the square foot (meter) of island area painted.
 Type P-2 markers, Type S markers, and Type R-4 markers shall be measured in units of
 each, completely installed as specified herein. Payment for the installation of Type P-2 and Type
 S markers shall include payment for the marker lens, regardless of whether the lens is factory or
 field installed.
 Yield Triangle, Handicapped symbol, Bicycle Symbol, Arrow, Lane Letter, and Railroad
 Crossing Marking intersection markings shall be measured in units of each, completely installed
 as specified herein. One unit of the Railroad Crossing Marking shall consist of the large “X” and
 the two “R” letters necessary to install the complete marking in one direction.
 663.7-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 663.7.1-General: The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the
 Contract unit prices less adjustments provided for in the Contract, which shall constitute full
 compensation for furnishing all materials and doing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike
 and acceptable manner, including the furnishing of all the auxiliary vehicles, labor, tools,
 equipment, supplies and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 The payment for Temporary Pavement Markings includes removal of the pavement
 marking film.
 
 709
 
 663.8-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 663001-*
 Edge Line, Type “type”, “size” In, “color”
 663002-*
 Lane Line, Type “type”, “size” In
 663002-*
 Center Line, Type “type”, “size” In
 663004-*
 Channelizing Line, Type “type”, “size” In
 663005-*
 Stop Line, Type V, “size” In
 663006-*
 Crosswalk Line, Ty V, 12 In x 6 Ft
 663007-*
 Stripe, Type V, 12 In, “color”
 663008-*
 Yield Triangle, Type V
 663009-*
 Handicapped Symbol, Type V
 663009-*
 Bicycle Symbol, Type V
 663010-*
 One Direction Lane Arrow, Type V**
 663010-*
 Multi Direction Lane Arrow, Type V***
 663010-*
 Ramp Wrong Way Arrow, Type V
 663010-*
 Lane Drop Arrow, Type V
 663011-*
 Lane Letter, Type V
 663012-*
 Raised Pavement Marker, Type “type”
 663015-*
 Railroad Crossing Markings, Type V
 *
 **
 ***
 “type”
 “size”
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot or Miles
 Linear Foot or Miles
 Linear Foot or Miles
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 Sequence number
 Single headed lane assignment arrow. Typically left or right turn
 Multi-headed lane assignment arrow with two to three arrow heads
 Pavement marking type
 Pavement marking size or width
 
 710
 
 SECTION 664
 TRAFFIC SAFETY DEVICES
 664.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the furnishing and installing of various types of traffic safety
 devices in accordance with these Specifications and the Plans or as established by the Engineer.
 This work shall include, but not be limited to impact attenuating devices.
 664.2-MATERIALS:
 Materials shall conform to the requirements of the following subsections of Division 700.
 MATERIALS
 Crash Cushion Terminal Impact Attenuating Device (Type VI)
 Quad Guard Terminal Device (Type VIII)
 Reusable Energy Absorbing Crash Terminal Device (Type I)
 Sand Barrel Impact Attenuating Device (Type V)
 SCI Impact Attenuating Device (Type III)
 TAU-II Impact Attenuating Device (Type IX)
 Trinity Attenuating Crash Cushion (Type II)
 Truck Mounted Attenuating Devices (Type VII)
 
 SUBSECTION
 715.41.2
 715.41.4
 715.41.5
 715.41.1
 715.41.7
 715.41.8
 715.41.6
 715.41.3
 
 Unless otherwise specified in the project plans, the appropriate model Type II, III, VIII, or
 IX device listed on the Division’s APL may be utilized for any installation for which Bid Item
 Number 664001-016 is to be used for payment.
 664.3-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 664.3.1-Impact Attenuating Devices: Fabrication and installation of Impact Attenuating
 Devices shall be as detailed on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer. All work shall be
 done in a uniform, workmanlike manner.
 The devices shall be located on a hard, flat surface, preferably concrete. The lateral slope
 of the installation site should be as level as possible and still provide adequate drainage.
 The nose of the device shall have a XS-15 marker attached with alternating black and
 reflectorized yellow stripes in accordance with Section 3C-2 of the latest edition of the Manual
 on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. The width of the alternating
 stripes shall be 6 inches (152.4 mm). The stripes for construction zone attenuating devices
 shall be as above except the stripes shall be reflectorized white and reflectorized orange.
 Type V devices shall be protected from freezing by mixing sodium chloride with the sand
 in a ratio of 1:10 by volume. Clean concrete on building sand with a moisture content of less
 than three percent shall be used. The sand shall weigh 100  5 pounds per cubic foot (1 270 ±
 60 kg per cubic meter). Type V devices shall be winterized in accordance with 715.41.
 664.3.1.1-Crash Cushion, Quad Guard Terminal Devices, Reusable Energy
 Absorbing Crash Terminal, Trinity Attenuating Crash Cushion, SCI Impact
 Attenuating, and TAU-II Impact Attenuating Devices:
 A backup structure
 accommodating the width of the impact cushion and providing adequate length for the
 cushion must be constructed or modified into the existing structure as shown on the plans.
 711
 
 The backup structure must be capable of resisting the imposed forces brought upon it by
 the unit.
 664.3.1.2-Sand Barrel Devices (Type V): The assembly of all parts of the device,
 including filling with sand, shall be in the sequence and according to the recommendations
 of the manufacturer. The weight and location of each module and overall arrangement of
 each installation shall be as shown on the Plans. The figures within each circle on the Plans
 indicate the amount of sand, in pounds (kg), contained in each module. Leave one to 6
 inches (24 to150 mm) clearance between modules to facilitate lid installation. Each barrel
 location shall be painted on the pavement with a circle and the weight of sand in pounds
 (kg).
 "Core-type" modules of 2,100 pound (953 kg) design require a sand seal to be placed
 on the bottom before the sand is added. "Wine glass-type" modules on structures require
 a stem block. If modules are preassembled before delivery to the site, the modules must
 be shipped upright on their bottom and not forced into an oval shape.
 664.3.2-Rumble Strips: This work consists of furnishing a machine capable of cutting or
 milling rumble strips on the centerline or edge of roadways in accordance with the details and
 notes on the plans and as directed by the Engineer.
 The Contractor shall pre-mark the location of the center of each cut, and the beginning and
 ending points of the sections, prior to the installation of the Rumble Strips. The Engineer shall
 review and approve the locations.
 Rumble Strips shall not be installed on bridge decks, loop detector saw-cut locations,
 structures, approach slabs or in other areas identified by the Engineer.
 The method and equipment for constructing ground-in indentations shall be selected by the
 Contractor and shall meet the requirements of 664.3.2.1.
 Rumble Strips shall be constructed within two (2) inches of the required alignment.
 Indentations shall not vary from the dimensions shown on the plans by more than 0.10 inch
 in depth and five percent (5%) in width.
 Finished Rumble Strips not meeting the specified tolerances shall be brought within
 tolerance by either abrasive grinding, or removal and replacement. The corrective method will
 be selected by the Engineer. Ground surface areas shall be neat and uniform in appearance.
 The corrective work shall be at the Contractor’s expense.
 All removed material shall become the property of the Contractor and disposed of in
 conformance with provisions in Section 415, “Milling of Asphalt Surfaces” of the Standard
 Specifications or as approved by the Engineer.
 664.3.2.1-Rumble Strip Equipment: The machine shall consist of a rotary type
 cutting head with a maximum outside diameter of 12 (twelve) inches (305mm). The cutting
 tool shall have the cutting head(s) arranged in such a pattern as to provide a relatively
 smooth cut per milled section without tearing or snagging and be equipped with guides to
 provide uniformity and consistency in alignment of each cut with respect to the roadway.
 The strips shall be cut in accordance with the dimensions as detailed on the Plans, and
 materials resulting from cutting the pavement shall be disposed of and the slots shall be
 properly cleaned.
 
 712
 
 664.4-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 664.4.1-Impact Attenuating Devices: This work shall be measured as a unit, complete
 and in place.
 664.4.2-Rumble Strips: This work shall be measured for payment by the actual linear feet
 of rumble strips placed and accepted, without regard to the width of the strip. This distance
 shall be measured longitudinally along the centerline of pavement with deductions for bridge
 decks, drainage structures, raised pavement markers, loop detector saw-cut locations, and any
 other sections where Rumble Strips were not installed.
 664.5-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, shall be paid for at the contract unit price
 for the items listed below, which prices and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all
 the materials and doing all work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including
 all tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete and, where required, winterize
 the items. All incidental work and materials for which no basis of payment is provided will be
 considered as completely covered by the prices bid for the items included in the contract.
 The Contract unit price per foot for Rumble Strips will be paid for the pay items listed in
 Section 664.6. The price shall include furnishing all equipment, tools, labor, and work incidental
 thereto and also disposal of any waste material resulting from this operation.
 664.6-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 664001-*
 Impact Attenuating Device, Type “type”
 664002-*
 Edge Line Rumble Strip, “pavement”
 664003-*
 Centerline Rumble Strip, “pavement”
 664004-*
 Rumble Strip, ADAB
 * Sequence number
 “pavement” Asphalt or Concrete
 
 713
 
 UNIT
 Each
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 
 SECTION 665
 PLUGGING GAS, OIL, AND DRILLED WATER WELLS
 665.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of plugging oil wells as designated on the Plans. This work shall
 also consist of plugging drilled water wells unless otherwise noted on the Plans.
 665.2-MATERIALS:
 665.2.1-Oil and Gas Wells: All materials used for plugging the oil wells and gas wells
 shall meet the requirements of the laws of the State of West Virginia.
 665.2.2-Drilled Water Wells: Materials for plugging water wells shall meet the
 requirements of Division 700 as follows:
 MATERIAL
 Aggregate
 Bentonite
 
 SUBSECTION
 703
 715.45
 
 Concrete shall be class D conforming to applicable requirements of 601 and may be with
 or without air entrainment at the option of the Contractor. The concrete shall be placed in
 accordance with current regulations of the Oil and Gas Division of the Department of Mines
 when a coal seam is involved.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 665.3-GENERAL:
 The Division will obtain all necessary permits, bonds and licenses required for this work.
 665.4-PLUGGING GAS AND OIL WELLS:
 The Contractor shall plug the gas well or oil well prior to starting any other construction in
 the vicinity of the well. The well shall be plugged using bentonite mud and neat cement as
 provided for by law, and the work shall be accomplished by a qualified service company meeting
 the approval of the Gas and Oil Division of West Virginia Department of Mines. All work
 pertaining to plugging the well must be performed under the supervision of the representative of
 the Division of Mines. The Contractor shall notify the Project Engineer and the Division of Mines
 at least 14 days in advance of the date on which the Contractor intends to begin work.
 The Division will make available upon request copies of Sections 9 and 10, Article 4,
 Chapter 22 of the Gas and Oil Laws.
 665.5-PLUGGING DRILLED WATER WELLS:
 The Contractor shall plug all drilled water wells within the right-of-way limits prior to
 starting any other work in the vicinity of the wells. The wells shall be filled from the bottom with
 a mixture of aggregate and bentonite mud to within 20 feet (6 m) of the surface. The aggregate
 for each specific site may be any of the following AASHTO sizes: 7, 57, or 67. The bentonite
 shall be proportioned with fresh water as follows: eight percent bentonite by volume (minimum)
 714
 
 to 92 percent by volume fresh water (maximum). The final in-place product shall be a consistent
 mixture of bentonite mud and aggregate. The upper 20 feet (6 m) shall be plugged using Class D
 or other suitable concrete. All coal seams of 24 inches (600 mm) or more in thickness or a seam
 that is being mined that the well encounters or passes through shall have Class D concrete placed
 from 30 feet (9 m) below the seam, if the well passes through the coal, or from the base of the coal
 seam, if the well ends within the coal seam, to 20 feet (6 m) above the coal seam.
 The Contractor at their option may plug all drilled water wells from the bottom of the well
 to the surface with Class D or other suitable concrete in lieu of the bentonite mud and aggregate.
 665.6-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 Plugging gas wells, oil wells, and drilled water wells will be measured by the unit.
 665.7-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantity, determined as provided above, will be paid for as provided below, which
 price and payment shall constitute full compensation for furnishing all material, labor, tools,
 equipment and all incidentals necessary to complete this work.
 665.8-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 665001-*
 665002-*
 665003-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Plugging Gas Well
 Plugging Oil Well
 Plugging Drilled Water Well
 
 UNIT
 Each
 Each
 Each
 
 * Sequence number
 
 SECTION 666 THROUGH SECTION 669-BLANK
 
 715
 
 SECTION 670
 WATERLINE INSTALLATION
 670.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of the construction or relocation of waterlines, including installation
 of gate and valve boxes, casing pipe, fire hydrants, water meter, meter boxes, and in reasonably
 close conformity with lines, grades, dimensions and locations shown on the Plans or established
 by the Engineer.
 670.2-MATERIALS:
 The material shall meet the requirements of the following subsections.
 MATERIAL
 Casing Pipe (Steel)
 Cement lining
 Controlled Low Strength Material, Type A
 Copper Service Line
 Copper Service Line Fittings
 Ductile Iron Pipe
 Fire Hydrants
 Fittings
 Flanged Joints
 Gate Valves
 Mechanical Joints
 Meters
 Miscellaneous Steel
 Plastic Pipe (Polyethylene)
 Plastic Pipe (PVC)
 Plastic Pipe Fittings
 Push-On Joints
 Valve Boxes
 
 SUBSECTION
 718.12
 718.1.1
 219
 718.9
 718.9.1
 718.1
 718.13
 718.1.2
 718.1.4
 718.10
 718.1.3
 718.14
 718.15
 718.7
 718.5
 718.8
 718.1.3
 718.11
 
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 670.3-GENERAL:
 The Contractor shall furnish all materials, perform all excavation and backfill, construct all
 necessary joints and connections, install all valves, construct all necessary joints and connections,
 construct all appurtenances, install all temporary lines and dispose of all surplus excavation and
 discarded material and perform all work as may be necessary to complete the water line relocations
 and installations as set forth in these Specifications and as shown on the Plans.
 The Contractor shall assume all risk and bear any loss or injury to property or persons
 occasioned by neglect or accident during the progress of the work. The Contractor shall exercise
 special care during the water line relocation so as not to damage any existing utility line or
 appurtenances.
 
 716
 
 It is of prime importance that the Contractor, in the performance of their work, does not
 disrupt the operation of the existing water facilities in any manner or at any time without the
 express prior approval of the Engineer. Prior notice shall be given to the Engineer by the
 Contractor of their intention to begin any work that will disrupt or appreciably alter normal system
 operation so that ample opportunity may be given to the Engineer to notify the owner to prepare
 for emergency operation, if necessary. The Engineer, upon advice of the owner, will have the sole
 right of determining at what times and in what order the Contractor shall undertake work involving
 connections and modifications to the existing system.
 The Contractor shall dig test pits as necessary to determine the size of fittings required for
 connections to existing lines. All material necessary for tie-ins shall be at the work site prior to
 any disruption of service. Once a connection is started, work shall be continuous until completion.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the unloading, storing, hauling, and distribution of all
 materials and shall replace, at their own expense, all such material that is damaged, destroyed or
 lost during or after unloading. All pipe, pipe fittings, valves and accessories shall be handled in a
 manner in order to avoid shock and to protect the coating material. Material not needed for
 immediate construction shall be stored in a safe manner at places provided by the Contractor and
 approved by the Engineer.
 If the Contractor should observe either proposed or existing sewers or water lines in close
 proximity the Contractor shall notify the Engineer. The Engineer will determine if the observed
 situation lacks conformity to the State Department of Health's Design Standards for Water
 Distribution Systems, its magnitude and the course of action. Additional costs necessitated by a
 modification in the plan of construction will be paid for in accordance with 109.4.
 670.4-WATER PIPE:
 670.4.1-Trench Excavation: Excavation of the trench may be done either by hand or by
 the use of suitable trenching equipment. The invert profile as shown on the Plans shall be
 followed except where changes are authorized in writing by the Engineer to avoid existing
 structures or to suit topography. The depth of trench shall be increased where necessary to
 procure a smoothly curved profile or to avoid existing structures. The trench shall be excavated
 in such a manner as to provide uniform and continuous bearing and support for the pipe and
 shall be excavated to the depth required to give a minimum of 42 inches (1050 mm) cover from
 finished grade to the top (outside) of the pipe barrel, except under roadways where minimum
 cover shall be 30 inches (750 mm) from subgrade to the top of the pipe barrel. The depth of
 cover may be modified at creek crossings or at other dips in the profile, when approved by the
 Engineer, providing it does not extend more than 100 feet (30 m) with a cover of less than 42
 inches (1050 mm). In the event it is required to decrease the cover to less than 2 feet (600
 mm), the pipe line shall be insulated for that distance.
 Where stones, dry clay, hard pan, shale or cemented gravel are exposed at the bottom of
 the trench, the trench shall be excavated to at least 3 inches (75 mm) and not more than 6 inches
 (150 mm) below the specified grade. Where the bottom of the trench at grade is found to be
 unstable or include ashes, cinders, all types of refuse, vegetable or other organic material, the
 Contractor shall excavate and remove such unsuitable material to the width and depth ordered
 by the Engineer. The trench shall be backfilled to grade with approved material; replacement
 material shall consist of random material, as directed by the Engineer. Each layer shall not
 exceed 4 inches (200 mm) compacted depth and shall be compacted in accordance with
 
 717
 
 670.4.5. The bedding shall be finished by means of hand tools to provide a uniform and
 continuous bearing and support for the pipe.
 Where the bottom of trench at grade is found to consist of material which is unstable to
 such a degree that in the opinion of the Engineer it cannot be removed and replaced with
 material suitable to support the pipe properly, the Contractor shall construct a foundation for
 the pipe, consisting of concrete, pilings, timber or other materials or as directed by the
 Engineer.
 Where excavation is made in rock or boulders, the rock shall be removed to provide a
 clearance of at least 6 inches (150 mm) for pipe 24 inches (600 mm) in diameter or smaller
 and at least 9 inches (225 mm) for pipe larger than 24 inches (600 mm) in diameter, below and
 on each side of all pipe, valves and fittings. The trench shall be backfilled to grade with
 approved material in 4 inches (200 mm) layers loose depth. Each layer shall be thoroughly
 compacted in accordance with 670.4.5 and the bedding shall be finished by means of hand
 tools to provide a uniform and continuous bearing and support for the pipe. The width of the
 trench shall be ample to permit the pipe to be laid and jointed properly and to permit the backfill
 to be placed and compacted as specified. Trench widths shall be in accordance with Table
 670.4.1. Excessive trench widths will not be permitted. Where necessary for protection of
 workers or to avoid undermining or otherwise damaging structures or property, the trench shall
 be properly and sufficiently shored and braced to prevent caving, slipping or cracking of the
 sides. Where bracing, sheeting or shoring are required or extra width is required for handling
 of specials, the trench shall be of such extra width to accommodate these items.
 TABLE 670.4.1
 Pipe
 Diameter
 Inches (mm)
 
 Trench
 Width
 Inches (mm)
 
 Pipe
 Diameter
 Inches (mm)
 
 Trench
 Width
 Inches (mm)
 
 Pipe
 Diameter
 Inches (mm)
 
 Trench
 Width
 Inches (mm)
 
 2
 (50)
 3
 (75)
 
 18-26
 (450-650)
 18-26
 (450-650)
 
 10
 (250)
 12
 (300)
 
 22-34
 (550-850)
 24-36
 (600-900)
 
 20
 (500)
 24
 (600)
 
 32-44
 (800-1 100)
 36-48
 (900-1 200)
 
 4
 (100)
 
 18-28
 (450-700)
 
 14
 (350)
 
 26-38
 (650-950)
 
 30
 (750)
 
 42-54
 (1 050-1 350)
 
 6
 (150)
 
 18-30
 (450-750)
 
 16
 (400)
 
 28-40
 (700-1 000)
 
 8
 (200)
 
 20-32
 (500-800)
 
 18
 (450)
 
 30-42
 (750-1 050)
 
 Blasting for excavation will be performed only after securing the approval of the Engineer
 and only when proper precautions are taken for the protection of persons or property. The hours
 of blasting will be fixed by the Engineer. Any damage caused by blasting shall be repaired by
 the Contractor at their expense. The Contractor's method of procedure relative to blasting shall
 conform to local and state laws.
 The Contractor shall exercise reasonable care to avoid damage to trees and hedges; electric,
 telephone and gas lines and installations; sewer lines; buildings; roads and all appurtenances
 718
 
 thereto. Care shall be used to maintain driveways to permit free access to and from the different
 properties by the owners.
 All excavated material shall be piled in a manner that will not endanger the work and will
 not obstruct sidewalks and driveways. Fire hydrants under pressure, valve boxes, service stop
 boxes, fire and police boxes or other utility controls shall be left unobstructed and accessible.
 Gutters shall be kept clear or other satisfactory provisions made for drainage, and natural
 watercourses shall not be obstructed. All trenches, material piles, equipment and pipe which
 may cause a hazard or serve as obstructions to either vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be
 enclosed by fences or barricade, adequately lighted, to protect persons from injury and to avoid
 property damage. Where traffic must cross open trenches, the Contractor shall provide suitable
 bridges, which will be subject to approval by the Engineer. The Contractor shall furnish
 temporary support, adequate protection and maintenance of all underground and surface
 structures, drains, sewers and other obstructions encountered in the progress of the work.
 670.4.2-Laying and Joining: Proper implements, tools and facilities satisfactory to the
 Engineer shall be provided and used for the safe and convenient prosecution of the work. All
 pipe, fittings, valves, specials, and fire hydrants shall be carefully lowered into the trench piece
 by piece by means of a derrick, ropes or other suitable tools or equipment in such a manner as
 to prevent damage to the water main materials and protective coating and linings. Under no
 circumstances shall water main materials be dropped or dumped into the trench.
 All pipe and fittings shall be carefully examined for defects and no pieces shall be laid
 which are known to be defective. Any defective or damaged pipe will be rejected. If any
 defective piece shall be discover after having been laid, it shall be removed and replaced at the
 Contractor's expense. All pipes and fittings shall be thoroughly cleaned before they are laid
 and shall be kept clean until accepted in the completed work. Pipe which has been
 contaminated by mud or soil shall be cleaned with a swab.
 The pipe shall be supported its full length by the uniform grade of the trench. Pipe ends
 shall not be left open, such as at the end of a day's work or during temporary suspension of
 construction, but shall be securely covered to prevent the entry of foreign matter or small
 animals. Kinks or sharp bends giving excessive deflection or which put pipe joints in strain
 will not be permitted. Table 670.4.2 shows the Maximum permissible for various types of
 joints or pipe.
 
 719
 
 TABLE 670.4.2
 MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE DEFLECTION PER JOINT
 A. "Push On" Type Joint Pipe:
 Pipe Diameter
 in (mm)
 
 *Maximum Deflection
 for 18-ft (5.5 m) Length
 in (mm)
 19 (475)
 11 (275)
 
 4 (100) thru 12 (300)
 14 (350) thru 24 (600)
 
 * Permissible deflection per joint for lengths more or less than 18 feet (5.5 m) are proportional.
 
 B. Mechanical Joint Pipe:
 Pipe
 *Maximum Deflection
 Diameter
 for 18-ft (5.5 m) Length
 in (mm)
 in (mm)
 2 (50)
 31 (775)
 3 (75)
 31 (775)
 4 (100)
 31 (775)
 6 (150)
 27 (675)
 8 (200)
 20 (500)
 10 (250)
 20 (500)
 
 Pipe
 Diameter
 in (mm)
 12 (300)
 14 (350)
 16 (400)
 18 (450)
 20 (500)
 24 (600)
 
 *Maximum Deflection
 for 18-ft (5.5 m) Length
 in (mm)
 20 (500)
 13.5 (340)
 13.5 (340)
 11 (275)
 11 (275)
 
 * Permissible deflection per joint for lengths more or less than 18 feet (5.5 m) are proportional.
 
 C. Flexible Joint Pipe:
 The maximum permissible deflection per joint shall be in accordance with the
 manufacturer's recommendations
 D. Plastic Pipe:
 The maximum permissible deflection per joint shall be in accordance with the
 manufacturer's recommendations.
 When cutting short lengths of copper pipe, a pipe cutter shall be used and care shall be
 taken to make the cut at right angles to the centerline of the pipe. In the case of "push on" pipe,
 the cut ends shall be tapered with a portable grinder or coarse file to match the manufactured
 taper.
 Rigid plastic pipe such as acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene or polyvinyl chloride shall be
 jointed and laid in accordance with the manufacturers' recommendations. Plastic pipe may be
 sawn. Thrust blocking, pads, straps and clamp and rod assemblies shall be provided at fittings,
 valves or specials at the location and in the manner set forth on the Plans.
 
 720
 
 Joints shall be as follows:
 I. "Push on" Type Joint: "Push on" type joints such as "Bell Tight", "Tite On" or equal
 joints shall be prepared by removing all dirt or foreign material from the bell end of pipe
 and inserting the gasket. The spigot end of the pipe shall be prepared by cleaning and
 applying a thin coat of approved lubricant after which the spigot end shall be centered in
 the bell and jacked on by using a special jack and choker sling. The procedure in making
 up this joint shall be performed in accordance with the recommendations of the
 manufacturer.
 II. Mechanical joint: When "making up" mechanical joints, the spigot end of each pipe
 shall be centered into the adjoining bell to within 5/8 inch of the total depth of the bell.
 The pipe shall be properly centered and have uniform space all around for reception of
 the packing material. The packing material, bolts, nuts and other accessories used in
 making mechanical or sleeve type joints shall be obtained from the manufacturer of the
 pipe and joint.
 The surfaces of the spigot and bell shall be brushed thoroughly with a wire brush
 just prior to assembling. The spigot end shall be brushed with soapy water just prior to
 slipping the gasket on and entering into the bell.
 When tightening bolts the gland shall be brought up toward the pipe flange evenly,
 maintaining approximately the same distance between the gland and the face of the flange
 at all points around the socket. This shall be done by partially tightening the bottom bolt
 first, then the top bolt, next two bolts at either side and last, the remaining bolts. This
 cycle shall be repeated until all bolts are within the range of the torques listed below:
 Bolt size, Inches (mm)
 
 Range of Torque, Pounds
 (Newton meters)
 40 (54)-60 (81)
 60 (81)-90 (122)
 70 (95)-100 (140)
 90 (122)-120 (165)
 
 5/8 (16)
 ¾ (20)
 1 (24)
 1¼ (30)
 
 If the effect of sealing is not obtained at the maximum torques indicated above, the
 joint must be disassembled and reassembled after thorough cleaning. A calibrated torque
 wrench shall be furnished by the Contractor and made available to the Engineer.
 IV. Flanged joint: When making up flanged joints, a gasket shall be put in place, the flanges
 butted together and the bolts tightened in the manner as prescribed for mechanical joints.
 V. Flexible joint: Flexible joints shall be "made up" and installed in the manner prescribed
 by the manufacturer of the joint.
 VI. Coupled joints: Coupled joints shall be constructed in accordance with the
 recommendations of the manufacturer.
 
 721
 
 VII. Plastic Pipe joints: Joints in plastic pipe formed of polyvinyl chloride may be cemented,
 threaded or "push on" type. Joints in pipe formed of flexible polyethylene shall be
 constructed utilizing a plastic, nylon or brass insert secured by stainless steel clamp may
 be butt fussed or any other method recommended by the manufacture.
 VIII. Copper Pipe joints: Copper pipe joints shall be made by use of copper flanged joint
 couplings or fittings unless otherwise specified in the Plans or in the Bill of Materials.
 670.4.3-Thrust Blocking: Thrust blocks shall be constructed where called for and to the
 dimensions shown on the Plans. Concrete used for thrust blocking shall be Class C concrete;
 however, Class B concrete may be used with no increase in cost.
 670.4.4-Nuts, Bolts, Washer, Rods, Straps and Clamps: Where the use of nuts, bolts,
 washers, rods, straps and clamps is required due to the peculiarities of the installation, these
 items shall be installed and be of the size and dimension shown on the Plans or recommended
 by the manufacture.
 670.4.5-Backfilling: Backfill material shall consist of suitable random material or
 controlled low strength material, type A. All material shall be free of particles larger than 3
 inches (75 mm) and free from cinders, ashes, refuse, vegetable or other organic material.
 Controlled low strength material shall meet the requirements of Section 219. Unless otherwise
 specified on the plans or by the utility, controlled low strength material can be used as a
 substitute for random material at the option of the contractor.
 The backfill material shall be deposited in the trench for its maximum width in layers not
 exceeding 4 inches (100 mm) after compaction. Quality control testing and acceptance of the
 backfill material will be according to the applicable sections of 207 and 716 with the following
 exceptions: The lot size will be one day’s production or 500 linear feet (150 m) whichever is
 less for a continuous section of conduit backfilled. The target percentage of dry density will be
 95% for the backfill material and each lot shall have 5 density tests performed for quality
 control.
 Backfill placed outside embankments and roadbed is to be compacted to or better than the
 average total dry density for the existing soil. An average total dry density will be determined
 from representative density tests conducted for each existing soil. Quality control testing will
 normally consist of one test per 500 linear feet (150 m) of conduit installed and lot evaluations
 are not required. The moisture tolerance is not applicable.
 Backfilling shall not be done in freezing weather, except by permission of the Engineer,
 and frozen material shall not be used. No backfilling shall be made where the material already
 in the trench is frozen.
 From the bottom of the trench to the centerline of the pipe, the backfill material shall be
 placed by hand and compacted by approved hand tamps. From the centerline of the pipe to a
 height of 1 foot (300 mm) above the pipe, the backfill shall be placed by hand and compacted
 by use of approved mechanical tampers. The Contractor shall use special care in placing this
 portion of the backfill to avoid damaging or moving the pipe. The remainder of the backfill in
 the trench shall be placed by hand or mechanical means and compacted by approved
 mechanical tampers. All pipe after being bedded and backfilled shall be adequately protected
 before heavy equipment is permitted to cross during construction of the roadway. The
 722
 
 Contractor will be held responsible for any damage to the pipe resulting from movement of
 equipment over the pipe. Prior to testing, the pipeline shall be backfilled in accordance with
 the Specifications.
 The Contractor shall maintain the surface of the trench to the original ground surface until
 accepted by the Engineer. The job site shall be left in a neat and orderly condition to the
 satisfaction of the Engineer.
 Excess material not needed for backfill and material unsuitable for backfill shall be
 removed from the site and disposed of as directed by the Engineer. Additional backfill material
 as required to make up deficiency or to replace unsuitable excavated material shall be furnished
 by the Contractor at no additional cost, from approved borrow pits or from excavations on the
 roadway.
 670.4.6-Testing: Where any section of the main is provided with concrete thrust blocking,
 the hydrostatic pressure test shall not be made until at least the concrete has reached 2000 psi
 compressive strength.
 Each completed section of pipe line relocation shall be plugged at both ends, and connected
 to the existing main by means of temporary 1 inch (25 mm) corporation stops and 1 inch (25
 mm) copper service lines. After the main has been slowly filled with water in preparation for
 the hydrostatic pressure test, all air shall be expelled from the pipe. If fire hydrants or blowoffs
 are not available at high places, the Contractor shall make the necessary taps at points of
 highest elevation and insert the necessary corporation stops and copper service line in order
 that the air may be expelled. The main shall be subjected to the hydrostatic test pressure,
 indicated on the Plans for a period of time pressure shall be applied to the main by means of a
 hand pump for small lines or by use of a gasoline pump or fire engine for larger lines. During
 the duration of the test, the lines shall be thoroughly examined for leakage at the joints and
 elimination of leakage effected where necessary. "Make up" water shall be measured with a
 displacement meter. Any cracked or defective pipes, fittings, valves or fire hydrants discovered
 in consequence of the pressure test shall be removed and replaced by the Contractor at their
 own expense. After replacing or correcting cracked or defective pipe, fittings or valves
 discovered in the test or correcting any leakage, the Contractor shall retest the pipe. The
 allowable leakage for a period of one hour shall be as shown in Equation 670.4.6. In the event
 the pipe line is tested in sections and temporary thrust blocking is required, a temporary plug
 or cap shall be installed and blocked with a screw jack firmly braced against the end of the
 trench or against a heavy timber embedded into the side of the trench.
 Where pipe line construction ties into existing lines, and where it is not practicable to make
 a hydrostatic test testing shall not be required. Any leakage discovered in these sections shall
 be immediately corrected by the Contractor.
 Upon completion of the testing, the temporary corporation stops and lines shall remain in
 place until the pipeline is disinfected, after which they shall be removed and the line plugged.
 
 723
 
 Equation 670.4.6
 {English} L  ND P
 7,400
 Where:
 L =
 N =
 D =
 P =
 
 allowable leakage, in gallons per hour
 number of joints in the length of pipeline tested
 nominal diameter of the pipe, in inches
 average test pressure during the leakage test, in
 pounds per square inch (gauge)
 {Metric} Lm  ND P
 130,400
 
 Where:
 
 Lm = allowable leakage, in liters per hour
 N =
 D =
 P =
 
 number of joints in the length of pipeline tested
 nominal diameter of the pipe, in millimeters
 average test pressure during the leakage test, in
 kilovolts per ampere
 
 670.4.7-Disinfection: The requirements for disinfection during construction and previous
 to placing the line in service shall be in compliance with the requirements of the Public Utility
 involved. In the event the Public Utility has no requirements for disinfection; the following
 requirements shall govern:
 Each completed section of pipeline constructed shall be sterilized by the addition of one
 pound (kg) of calcium hypochlorite powder containing 70 percent available chlorine for each
 1,600 gallon (10 000 L) of water treated. Table 670.4.7 shows the length of pipe that one pound
 (0.75 kg) of calcium hypochlorite powder will disinfect. This may be introduced by pumping
 a liquid solution into the main as it is being filled, or it may be introduced dry by measured
 amounts placed inside the pipe at each joint immediately before the joint is made. In the latter
 case the pipe line must be filled from the low point and at a rate not to exceed 20 gallons (75
 L) per minute. Water treated with calcium hypochlorite shall remain in the pipeline for a period
 of 24 hours. After the treated water is retained for the required time, the chlorine residual at
 the pipe extremities and other representative points shall be at least 50 PPM. Following
 chlorination all treated water shall be thoroughly flushed from the newly laid lines until the
 replacement water throughout its length shall be comparable to the quality of water served
 from the existing system.
 
 724
 
 Pipe
 Diameter
 Inches(mm)
 2 (50)
 3 (75)
 4 (100)
 6 (150)
 8 (200)
 10 (250)
 
 TABLE 670.4.7-DISINFECTION CHART
 Pipe
 Pipe
 Length
 Diameter
 Feet (m)
 Inches (mm)
 10,000 (6 700)
 12 (300)
 4,300(2 900)
 14 (350)
 2,500 (1 680)
 16 (400)
 1,100 (740)
 18 (450)
 600 (400)
 20 (500)
 400 (268)
 24 (600)
 
 Pipe
 Length
 Feet (m)
 270 (180)
 200 (135)
 150 (100)
 120 (80)
 100 (70)
 70 (45)
 
 * Length of pipe that one pound (kilogram) of calcium hypochlorite will disinfect.
 
 In lieu of the liquid solution or dry application of calcium hypochlorite, a chlorine gaswater mixture may be introduced by means of a solution-feed chlorinating device or a dry gas
 may be fed directly through proper devices for regulating the rate of flow and providing
 diffusion of the gas into the water within the pipe treated. Devices for feeding the gas-water
 mixture or dry gas shall provide means for preventing backflow of water into the chlorine
 cylinder. The duration of treatment and chlorine residual shall be as previously stated.
 The Contractor shall contact the County Health Department prior to public use of the
 drinking water so they may perform sampling and testing in accordance with Health
 Department requirements.
 Disinfection and testing shall be accomplished by the Contractor prior to performing any
 work in connecting to the existing main.
 Where connecting into existing mains and it is not practicable to include the connecting
 pieces, i.e.; pipe, fittings, valves in the normal disinfecting process, the connecting pieces shall
 be swabbed with a chlorine solution containing not less than 1% Hypochlorite solution prior
 to making the connection.
 670.5-GATE VALVES AND VALVE BOXES:
 Gate valves shall be installed in accordance with 670.4. The valve box shall be set in such
 manner that no shock or stress is transferred to the valve. The valve box shall be centered and
 plumbed over the wrench nut of the valve. The valve box cover shall be set flush with the finished
 surface.
 670.6-CASING PIPE:
 Construction methods shall be as described under 670.4, where open trench construction
 is feasible. In the event that boring and jacking methods are specified in the Contract or are
 otherwise necessary to complete the installation, the applicable provisions of 604.11 shall govern.
 670.7-FIRE HYDRANTS:
 The work shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of 670.4. When
 relocating hydrants, no work shall be started on removing a hydrant until the pressure on the
 hydrant has been shut off. Before relocating a hydrant, it shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt and
 foreign matter.
 All hydrants shall be provided with a concrete thrust block or anchorage as shown on the
 Plans and care shall be taken that the concrete does not obstruct any hydrant drain openings. All
 725
 
 hydrants shall be set upon 0.5 cubic yard (meter) of AASHTO # 3 stone to provide drainage for
 the hydrant. The stone shall extend above the hydrant drain opening to prevent entrance of soil
 into the hydrant barrel. The thrust blocking and stone shall be placed as shown on the Plans.
 670.8-METERS, METER BOXES, AND SPECIAL VALVES AND APPURTENANCES:
 The construction method shall be as set forth in 670.4.
 When removing and relocating a meter box and lid, the Contractor shall exercise care in
 order to avoid damaging the box. In the event the box or lid is damaged in performing the work,
 the Contractor shall furnish replacements in kind.
 670.9-SPECIAL STRUCTURES:
 Special structures for waterline appurtenances, such as meter pits, special valve pits, etc.,
 shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of 605.
 670.10-HOUSE CONNECTION:
 The work to be performed under this item shall consist of furnishing and installing all pipe,
 taps, couplings and fittings necessary to provide a connection from the relocated line to a point
 where the existing house connection is reconnected. Construction methods shall be as described
 in 670.4.
 670.11-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 670.11.1-Water Pipe: Water pipe will be measured by the linear foot in place. The
 measurement will be made along the centerline of such pipeline, before backfilling, to or from
 the following described points:
 i At the centerline of the connection where work begins or ends and connection is made to
 an existing pipe or special.
 ii At the centerline of the special casting or connection that is part of the new pipeline.
 iii At the centerline of a fire hydrant or at the face of a dead plug, dead cap, flange, or spigot
 at the end of the new pipe line.
 iv At the ends of new inserted material, where connection is made by breaking and insertion
 in an existing pipeline. This inserted material, regardless of size, will be considered being
 of the same size as the connecting pipe and paid for as such.
 No deduction in length will be made for valves or fittings.
 670.11.2-Casing Pipe: Casing pipe will be measured by the foot (meter) in place. The
 measurement will be made along the centerline of each pipe installed.
 670.11.3-Gate Valve and Valve Box, Fire Hydrants, Meters, Meter Valves and
 Appurtenances, and Special Structures: These items will be measured by the unit.
 670.11.4-House Connections: House connections will be measured foot (meter) of pipe,
 measured along the centerline, complete in place including all taps and all couplings, goose
 necks, corporation stops, curb cocks, curb boxes or other material necessary to complete the
 work.
 
 726
 
 670.12-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit prices
 bid for the items listed in 670.13, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for
 excavation and backfill, except as otherwise provided, testing, disinfecting, thrust blocking,
 connecting to valves and fire hydrants, all branch connections, fittings, drains, blowoffs and
 service connections, reinforcing steel, manhole frame and cover, the repair and repaving of areas
 not otherwise provided for in the Plans, the removal of all surplus material and clean up, furnishing
 of all materials and doing all work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including
 all labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 When unsatisfactory foundation materials encountered at the bottom of the trench, there
 will be no additional compensation for such excavation and backfill, unless the required excavation
 and replacement exceeds 1 foot of depth. Excavation and replacement material in excess of 1 foot,
 and any special foundation not called for on the Plans will be paid for in accordance with 109.4.
 When boring and jacking of casing pipe is specified in the Contract, the cost of the boring
 and jacking operations will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the unit price bid for
 the respective casing pipe pay items. If the Engineer determines that field conditions necessitate
 the boring and jacking of casing pipe not so specified, the casing pipe pay item as originally
 specified will be non-performed and the cost for such boring and jacking operations, including the
 cost of the casing pipe, will be paid for in accordance with 109.4.
 670.13-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 670001-* “size” Cast Iron Pipe Type, “type**” , Class “class”
 670004-* “size” Ductile Iron Pipe, Type “type**”, Class “class”
 670007-* “size” Plastic Pipe, Class “class”
 670008-* “size” Copper Service Pipe
 670009-* “size” Gate Valve And Valve Box
 670010-* “size” Steel Casing Pipe, Thickness “thickness”
 670013-* “size” Fire Hydrant
 670014-* Relocate Fire Hydrant
 670015-* “size” Meter
 670016-* Relocate Meter
 670017-* Meter Box
 670018-* Relocate Meter Box
 670019-* Special Valve, Type “type”
 670020-* Special Structure
 670021-* “size” House Connection
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 
 * Sequence number
 “type**” in accordance with the table below:
 Type I-Push On Type Joint
 Type II-Mechanical Joint
 Type III-Bell And Spigot Joint
 Type IV-Flanged Joint
 Type V-Flexible Joint
 
 SECTION 671 THROUGH SECTION 674-BLANK
 727
 
 SECTION 675
 SANITARY SEWERS
 675.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This work shall consist of construction or reconstruction of sanitary sewers and
 appurtenances in accordance with these Specifications and in reasonable close conformity with the
 lines, grades, dimensions, and locations shown on the Plans or established by the Engineer.
 675.2-MATERIALS:
 The material shall meet the requirements of the following subsections.
 MATERIAL
 Bedding Material
 Casing Pipe
 Cement Lining
 Concrete Brick and Block
 Controlled Low Strength Material (CLSM)
 Ductile Iron Pipe
 Fine Aggregate
 Fittings
 Flanged joints
 Manholes
 Manholes, Frames and Grates
 Mechanical joints
 Plastic Pipe (PVC)
 Plastic Pipe Fitting
 Push-On Joints
 Structural Concrete
 
 SUBSECTION
 718.21
 718.12
 718.1.1
 715.17
 219
 718.1
 718.20
 718.1.2
 718.1.3
 605
 605
 718.1.3
 718.5
 718.8
 718.1.3
 601
 
 Quality control testing of the bedding material is the responsibility of the Contractor as
 specified in 106.1.
 In the event any material does not conform to the specified gradation requirements the
 contractor’s written certification shall reflect said nonconformance with quantities thereof. The
 contractor's gradation data shall be evaluated in accordance with applicable sections of Section
 307 except that Table 704.6.2 shall not apply. Gradation limits shall be in accordance with Table
 703.4. The certification is to include the results of testing from samples obtained at a minimum
 frequency of one sample per day of aggregate production or stockpiling or one sample per
 placement day, sampling from the working face of an existing stockpile.
 A revised unit price for calculation purposes will be established based on the delivered
 quantities and delivered aggregate cost.
 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
 675.3-GENERAL:
 These Specifications shall apply to the furnishing and installation of all material necessary
 to complete sanitary sewer relocations and installations in accordance with the Plans.
 728
 
 The Contractor shall furnish all materials, perform all excavation and backfill, construct all
 necessary joints and connections, construct all appurtenances, install all temporary facilities and
 dispose of all surplus excavation and discarded material as may be necessary to complete the
 sanitary sewer relocations and installations.
 If the Contractor should observe either proposed or existing sewers or water lines in close
 proximity the Contractor shall notify the Engineer. The Engineer will determine if the observed
 situation lacks conformity to the State Department of Health's Design Standards for Water
 Distribution Systems, its magnitude and the course of action. Additional costs necessitated by a
 modification in the plan of construction will be paid for in accordance with 109.4.
 The Contractor shall also perform the work of permanently plugging existing sanitary
 sewers at the locations shown on the Plans or as required due to the field conditions at the time of
 construction. The plug shall consist of CLSM, type C, or concrete block or brick capped with
 CLSM, type C, and shall extend a minimum of 1 foot (300 mm) into the existing pipe. The
 plugging of sanitary sewers, except as provided in 675.16, shall be considered incidental work and
 its cost shall be included in the unit price bid for sanitary sewer pipe.
 The Contractor shall assume all risk and bear any loss or injury to property or persons
 occasioned by neglect or accident during the progress of the work. The contractor shall make every
 effort to avoid damaging any existing utility lines or appurtenances.
 In the performance of their work, it is of prime importance that the Contractor not disrupt
 the operation of the existing sanitary sewer facilities in any manner or at any time without the prior
 written approval of the Engineer. Prior notice shall be given to the Engineer by the Contractor of
 their intention to begin any work that will disrupt or appreciably alter normal system operation so
 that the Engineer will have ample opportunity to notify the owner to prepare for any emergency
 operations that may be required. The Engineer upon advice of the owner will have the sole right
 of determining at what times and in what order the Contractor shall undertake work involving
 connections and modifications to the existing system.
 The Contractor shall excavate as necessary to determine the number and size of fittings
 and specials required for connections to existing lines. All material necessary for tie-ins shall be
 at the work site before discontinuing service. Once the work of connection is begun it shall be
 continuous until the connection is complete.
 675.3.1-Maintenance of Local Services: The Contractor shall exercise utmost care to
 avoid damage to trees and hedges, electric, telephone, gas and water lines and other operating
 sewer lines, buildings, roads and all appurtenances thereto. The interruption of free access to
 streets, roads and driveways due to trench excavation shall be kept to a minimum. Where
 possible, a minimum opening of one lane shall be maintained at all times for these
 appurtenances. All excavated material shall be piled in a manner that will not endanger the
 work and will not obstruct access to sidewalks and driveways.
 Fire hydrants under pressure, valve boxes, service stop boxes, fire and police boxes or other
 utility controls shall be left unobstructed and accessible throughout the duration of the work.
 Gutters shall be kept clear or other satisfactory provisions made for drainage. Natural water
 courses shall not be obstructed. All trenches, material piles, equipment and pipe which may
 cause a hazard or serve as obstructions to either vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be enclosed
 by fences or barricades, adequately lighted, to protect persons from injury and to avoid
 property damage. Where traffic must cross open trenches, the Contractor shall provide suitable
 bridges, which will be subject to approval of the Engineer. The Contractor shall furnish
 729
 
 temporary support, adequate protection and maintenance of all underground and surface
 structures, drains, sewers and other obstructions encountered in the progress of the work.
 675.3.2-Removal of Water: The Contractor shall at all times during construction provide
 proper and satisfactory means and devices for the removal of all water entering the excavated
 area, and the Contractor shall remove all such water as fast as it may collect to avoid
 interference with the prosecution of the work or the proper placing of masonry or other
 materials.
 675.3.3-Hauling and Storing Materials: The Contractor shall be responsible for the
 unloading, storing, hauling and distribution of all material and shall replace at their expense all
 such material that is damaged, destroyed or lost. All pipe, pipe fittings and accessories shall be
 handled so as to avoid shock. Pipe having factory applied joint material shall be stacked and
 blocked to prevent damage to the joint material. Material not needed for immediate use shall
 be stored in a safe manner at places provided by the Contractor and approved by the Engineer.
 675.4-TRENCH EXCAVATION:
 675.4.1-General: Excavation of the trench may be done either by hand or by the use of
 suitable trenching equipment. Safety requirements for trenching shall comply with the West
 Virginia Safety Code, published by the West Virginia State Division of Labor.
 675.4.2-Trench Width: The width of the trench shall be ample to permit the pipe to be
 laid and jointed properly, and to permit the backfill to be placed and compacted as specified.
 Excessive trench widths will not be permitted. Recommended maximum trench widths at top
 of pipe are given in Table 675.4.2. Where necessary for protection of workers or to avoid
 undermining or otherwise damaging structures or property, the trench shall be properly and
 sufficiently sheeted or braced to prevent caving, slipping or cracking of the sides in accordance
 with applicable provisions of the West Virginia Safety Code. Where bracing or sheeting is
 required or extra width is required for handling of specials, the trench shall be of such extra
 width to accommodate this work.
 TABLE 675.4.2
 Recommended Trench Widths At Top Of Pipe
 Pipe Diameter Inches (mm)
 Trench Width Inches (mm)
 6 (150)
 21 (525)
 8 (200)
 24 (600)
 10 (250)
 27 (675)
 12 (300)
 30 (750)
 15 (375)
 33 (825)
 18 (450)
 36 (900)
 21 (525)
 42 (1 050)
 24 (600)
 45 (1 125)
 27 (675)
 48 (1 200)
 30 (750)
 54 (1 350)
 33 (825)
 57 (1 425)
 36 (900)
 60 (1 500)
 730
 
 675.4.3-Blasting: Blasting for excavation will be performed only after securing the
 approval of the Engineer and only when proper precautions are taken for the protection of
 persons or property. The Engineer will set the hours of blasting. The Contractor at his expense
 shall repair any damage caused by blasting. The Contractor's method of procedure relative to
 blasting shall conform to the West Virginia Safety Code.
 675.5-BEDDING:
 675.5.1-General: Bedding of the pipe shall conform to class 'B' as follows:
 The trench shall be excavated to a depth that will provide a granular bed of at least 4 inches
 (100 mm) or the pipe diameter divided by four, whichever is greater, below the pipe in soil.
 The trench shall then be backfilled with bedding material. The granular bed shall be extended
 to the spring line of the pipe.
 The pipe shall be bedded in an earth foundation of uniform density, carefully shaped by
 means of a template to fit the lower pipe exterior for at least 15 percent of the overall height of
 the pipe. Fine aggregate shall be used to level the foundation.
 675.5.2-Unstable Foundation: Where the bottom of the trench at grade is found to be
 unstable or include ashes, cinders, all types of refuse, vegetable or other organic material, the
 Contractor shall excavate and remove such unsuitable material to the width and depth ordered
 by the Engineer. The trench shall be backfilled to the invert grade, in 6 inch (150 mm) loose
 layers, with suitable earth or granular material from unclassified excavation. Each layer shall
 be thoroughly compacted in accordance with 675.10, and the bedding shall be in accordance
 with 675.5.1.
 There will be no additional compensation for such excavation and backfill, unless the
 Required excavation and replacement exceeds 1 foot in depth. Excavation and replacement
 material in excess of 1 foot in depth will be paid for in accordance with 109.4.
 Where the bottom of trench at grade is found to consist of material which is unstable to
 such a degree that, in the opinion of the Engineer, it cannot be removed and replaced with
 material suitable to support the pipe properly, the Contractor shall construct a foundation for
 the pipe, consisting of concrete, pilings, timber or other materials or as directed by the
 Engineer. A special foundation, if not called for on the Plans, will be paid for in accordance
 with 109.4.
 675.5.3-Rock Foundation: Where rock (or boulders) is encountered, the rock shall be
 removed to provide a clearance, below and on each side of all pipe, fittings and appurtenances,
 of at least 6 inches (150 mm) for pipe 24 inches (600 mm) in diameter or smaller and at least
 9 inches (225 mm) for pipe larger than 24 inches (600 mm) in diameter. The trench shall be
 backfilled to invert grade with bedding material in 4 inch (100 mm) loose layers. Each layer
 shall be thoroughly compacted in accordance with 675.10, and the bedding shall be in
 accordance with 675.5. 1.
 675.6-PIPE LAYING:
 Proper implements, tools and facilities satisfactory to the Engineer shall be provided and
 used for the safe and convenient prosecution of the work. Line and grade of the pipeline shall be
 maintained and checked by use of laser beam for relocation’s less than 100 ft (30 m) batter boards,
 grade line and grade rods or methods of equivalent accuracy may be utilized. Batter boards for
 731
 
 gravity sewers shall be set at intervals of not greater than 25 feet Pipe shall be laid from the lowest
 point upgrade with the spigot or tongue ends pointing downgrade in the direction of flow.
 All pipe, fittings and appurtenances shall be carefully lowered into the trench, piece by
 piece, by means of a derrick, ropes or other suitable tools or equipment in such a manner as to
 prevent damage to the sewer line materials, protective coating, and linings. Under no
 circumstances shall sewer line materials be dropped or dumped into the trench.
 All pipe and fittings shall be carefully examined for defects and no pipe or fitting shall be
 laid which is known to be defective. Any defective, damaged or unsound pipe will be rejected. If
 any defective piece is discovered after laying, it shall be removed and replaced at the Contractor's
 expense. All pipes and fittings shall be cleaned before they are laid and shall be kept clean until
 accepted in the completed work.
 The pipe shall be supported its full length by the uniform grade of the trench. Pipe ends
 shall not be left open at the end of a day's work or during temporary suspension of construction,
 but shall be securely covered to prevent the entry of foreign matter or animals.
 When cutting short lengths of cast iron pipe, a pipe cutter shall be used and care shall be
 taken to make the cut at right angles to the centerline of the pipe. For "push-on" pipe, the cut ends
 shall be tapered with a portable grinder or coarse file to match the manufactured taper. Plastic and
 composite pipe may be sawed.
 675.7-JOINTING:
 Jointing of all pipes is to be preformed in accordance with the manufacturer’s
 recommendations.
 675.8-CASING PIPE:
 Construction methods shall conform to the applicable requirements of the Specification,
 except that in the event that boring and jacking methods are specified in the Contract or are
 otherwise necessary to complete the installation, the applicable provisions of 604.11 shall govern.
 Damaged coating on the outside of the pipe shall be repaired by hand brushing a thick coat
 of the same type as the original coating material when placed by open trench construction; outside
 repair coating is waived for casing pipe to be placed by boring and jacking operations. Inside
 coating damage shall be repaired, as specified above, for all pipe except as limited by
 inaccessibility to damage areas for small diameter casing pipe.
 675.9-THRUST BLOCKING AND ANCHORAGE:
 Thrust blocking or anchorage of sewer force main as shown on the Plans shall be
 constructed in accordance with 670.4.3 and 670.4.4.
 675.10-BACKFILLING:
 Backfilling shall be in accordance with 670.4.5
 675.11-TESTING INSTALLATIONS:
 Exfiltration or air tests shall be made on all sections of new gravity sewer extending from
 manhole to manhole. New installations that become a part of an existing line and testing is not
 practical then testing shall not be required. All pressure lines shall be subjected to a pressure test
 at the pressure shown on the Plans. An infiltration test shall be made only when called for on the
 Plans. All new manholes shall be tested.
 732
 
 In the event the allowable test rates are exceeded, the Contractor shall determine the
 location of the leaks and shall repair the sewer or manholes, or both, in a manner satisfactory to
 the Engineer. The sewer line shall be retested until the leakage in the sewer is within the allowable
 limits. The Contractor shall include in the unit bid price the cost of all bulkheads, plugs, pipe
 stoppers, pumps, water, weirs, labor, delay and any other items of cost necessary for the
 performance and completion of the required tests and for the cost of any repairs or adjustments
 which may be necessary to make the installations conform to the required allowable leakage rates.
 All leakage tests shall be conducted under the supervision of the Engineer or representative.
 675.11.1-Exfiltration Testing: In conducting the exfiltration test, the line shall be plugged
 in the lower manhole and filled with water until the water level in the upper manhole is 2 feet
 (600 mm) above the top of the pipe. The line shall then be left for a period of two hours to
 allow for absorption of water into pipes and structures, after which it shall be refilled to the
 specified height and the test begun. Readings shall be taken on the level of the water at one
 hour intervals, the manhole refilled to an elevation of 2 feet (600 mm) above the top of the pipe
 and the amount of replacement water recorded. Duration of the test shall be four hours, and the
 allowable exfiltration shall not exceed that shown in Formula 675.11.1.
 Pressure tests for force mains (sewers under pressure) shall be performed in accordance
 with 670.4.6.
 Formula 675.11.1 - Allowable Loss Rate
 (Based on Loss Rate of 500 Gallons per Inch Diameter per One Mile per 24 Hours)
 Loss
 
 =
 
 {English}
 0.00395 (D)L
 
 Where
 Loss = Gallons per Hour
 D = Nominal diameter of the pipe, in inches
 L = Length of pipe in feet
 Loss
 
 =
 
 {Metric}
 0.00193 (D)L
 
 Where
 Loss = Liters per Hour
 D = Nominal Diameter in Millimeters
 L = Length of pipe in Meters
 675.11.2-Infiltration Testing: The infiltration test shall be made by installing a weir or
 other measuring device approved by the Engineer in the lower end of the sewer section to be
 tested. The incoming sewer or sewers in the upper end of the test section shall be securely
 sealed. The quantity of ground water infiltration into the test section shall be measured and
 shall not exceed that shown in Equation 675.11.1
 675.11.3-Low Pressure Air Testing: Low pressure air test conforming to these
 specifications shall be conducted between consecutive manholes. All Wye branches in the test
 section shall be plugged. The duration of the test shall be as shown in Table 675.11.3.
 The drop in pressure during the prescribed test time shall not exceed 1.0 psi, from 3.5 psi
 to 2.5 psi testing pressure. A drop below 2.5 psi shall be indication of a failure in the section
 being tested.
 733
 
 Time required for pressure drop from 3.5 PSI (24.1 kPa) to 3.0 PSI (20.7 kPa).
 The required test time shall be the minimum test time or test duration whichever is greater.
 Pipe Diameter
 inches (mm)
 4 (100)
 6 (150)
 8 (200)
 10 (250)
 12 (300)
 15 (375)
 18 (450)
 21 (525)
 24 (600)
 
 TABLE 675.11.3 - Air Test Table
 {English}
 Minimum Test
 Test Duration
 Time Min: Sec
 L = Feet Sec
 1:53
 0.190 L
 2:50
 0.427 L
 3:47
 0.760 L
 4:43
 1.187 L
 5:40
 1.709 L
 7:05
 2.671 L
 8:30
 3.846 L
 9:55
 5.235 L
 11:20
 6.837 L
 
 {Metric}
 Test Duration
 L = Meters Sec
 0.623 L
 1.401 L
 2.493 L
 3.894 L
 5.607 L
 8.763 L
 12.618 L
 17.175 L
 22.431 L
 
 675.11.3.1-Safety Precautions during Air Testing: The air test may be dangerous if
 a line is improperly prepared. It is extremely important that the various plugs be installed
 and braced in such a way as to prevent blowouts. Inasmuch as a force of 250 pounds (113.4
 kg) is exerted on an 8-inch (200 mm) plug by an internal pipe pressure of 5 psi (34.5 kPa),
 it should be realized that sudden expulsion of a poorly installed plug or of a plug that is
 partially deflated before the pipe pressure is released can be dangerous.
 As a safety precaution, pressurizing equipment should include a regulator set at 10 psi
 (69 kPa) to avoid over pressurizing and damaging an otherwise acceptable line. No one
 shall be allowed in the manhole during testing.
 For sewers 30 inches (750 mm) and greater in diameter, joint testing is an acceptable
 method of testing. Joint testing shall be accomplished by isolating each joint and applying
 low pressure air. The line shall be acceptable if each joint passes the air test. The joint will
 be considered acceptable if the air pressure being applied to the joint drops less than 1 psi
 (7 kPa) in three minutes. The air pressure applied shall be 4 psi (27.6 kPa) over and above
 the groundwater back pressure. Groundwater shall be compensated by increasing the 4 psi
 (27.6 kPa) test pressure by 0.433 psi (9.8 kPa) for each foot (meter) of groundwater. It is
 the Contractor's responsibility to determine the groundwater level.
 675.11.4-Manhole Testing: The test shall consist of plugging all inlets and outlets and
 filling the manhole with water to a height determined by the Engineer. Leakage in each
 manhole shall not exceed 0.2 gallons per hour per foot (2.48 liters per meter) of head above
 the invert. A manhole may be filled 24 hours prior to time of testing, if desired, to permit
 normal absorption into the pipe walls to take place. Repair all manholes that do not meet the
 leakage test, or are unsatisfactory from visual inspection, to conform to the requirements
 herein.
 The Contractor may request to test manholes for leakage by the vacuum testing procedure
 developed by Perer A.Glazier and Associates of Worcester, Massachusetts, 01603. This test
 shall not be used until the Engineer has given written approval. The Engineer reserves the right
 to refuse to permit this procedure or to place any condition upon the procedure he deems
 appropriate.
 734
 
 675.12-RECONSTRUCTED SANITARY SEWER:
 Sections of existing sanitary sewers so specified shall be removed and replaced in the same
 locations. The reconstructed sewer shall be of the type and size as shown on the Plans and shall be
 laid on a uniform grade between points of removal.
 Construction methods shall conform to the applicable requirements of this Specification.
 Tests shall be performed as set forth in 675.11.
 This work shall also include construction and maintenance of temporary lines, as required,
 to avoid disrupting operation of the existing sanitary sewer system. Temporary service may be
 maintained by use of pumps and hose lines or in any other manner satisfactory to the Engineer.
 675.13-MANHOLE:
 Construction of manholes shall conform to the applicable requirements of 605.
 675.14-ABANDONING MANHOLES:
 Upon completion of the new gravity sewer and placing it in service, or upon abandonment
 of an existing sewer line, the existing manholes to be abandoned shall be cut down to 2 feet (600
 mm) below the proposed finished grade, the inlet and outlet ends of existing pipe plugged with
 CLSM, Type C, and the manhole backfilled to subgrade elevation with material from the
 unclassified excavation and compacted.
 675.15-ADJUSTING MANHOLES:
 Construction methods shall conform to the applicable requirements of Section 605.
 675.16-CAPPING MANHOLES:
 The existing manhole shall be removed to a minimum depth of 1.5 ft (450 mm) below the
 subgrade elevation. Permanent forms of sheet or corrugated sheet steel shall be used to form over
 the manhole opening. Side forms may be undisturbed earth. No form work shall be placed inside
 the manhole which will interfere with the flow of the existing sewer. Steel shall be set and the cap
 poured to Plan dimensions. No finish is required.
 675.17-JUNCTION BOXES:
 Construction methods for junction boxes shall conform to the applicable requirements of
 Section 605.
 675.18-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 675.18.1-Sanitary Sewer Pipe: Pipe of the different types and sizes, both new and
 reconstructed, will be measured by the linear foot (meter) in place. Measurement will be made
 along the centerline of each pipe installed. Branch connections, valves, tees, wyes, and elbows
 will be measured along their centerlines and these lengths included in the total lengths of the
 appropriate conduit. Wyes, tees, and other branch connections will be measured along the
 centerlines to points of intersection. Pipe with sloped or skewed ends will be measured along
 the longitudinal axis through the center of the pipe. The portion of pipe extending through to
 the inside face of manholes, boxes, or other structures will be included in the measurement.
 675.18.2-Manholes: Manholes will be measured as a complete unit in place, including
 frame, cover and cover castings.
 735
 
 675.18.3-Abandoning Manholes, Adjusting Manholes and Capping Manholes:
 "Abandoning Manhole", "Adjusting Manhole", and "Capping Manhole" will be measured as a
 complete unit in place.
 675.18.4-Junction Boxes: "Junction Box" will be measured as a complete unit in place,
 including, if called for, manhole frame and cover casting (ring type).
 675.18.5-Steel Casing Pipe: Steel casing pipe will be measured by the linear foot (meter)
 complete in place.
 675.19-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the items listed below, which prices and payments shall be full compensation for excavation
 and bedding, except as otherwise provided. Backfilling, testing, construction and maintenance of
 temporary service when required, repair and repaving of areas not otherwise provided for in the
 contract, removal of surplus material and clean-up, furnishing all materials and doing all the work
 prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor, tools, equipment,
 supplies, and incidentals necessary to complete work.
 When boring and jacking of casing pipe is specified in the Contract, the cost of the boring
 and jacking operations will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the unit price bid for
 the respective casing pipe pay items. If the Engineer determines that field conditions necessitate
 the boring and jacking of casing pipe not so specified, the casing pipe pay item as originally
 specified will be non-performed and the cost for such boring and jacking operations, including the
 cost of casing pipe, will be paid for in accordance with 109.4
 675.20-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 675007-*
 “size” Plastic Sewer Pipe
 675008-*
 “size” Ductile Iron Sewer Pipe, Type “type”, Class
 “class”
 675013-*
 “size” Reconstructed Sanitary Sewer, Type “type”
 675014-*
 Manhole Complete, Including Casting
 675015-*
 Drop Manhole Complete, Including Casting
 675016-*
 Special Manhole Complete, Including Casting
 675017-*
 Abandoning Manhole
 675018-*
 Adjusting Manhole
 675019-*
 Capping Manhole
 675020-*
 Junction Box
 675021-*
 “size” Steel Casing Pipe, Thickness “thickness”
 
 UNIT
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Each
 Linear Foot (Meter)
 
 * Sequence number
 
 SECTION 676 THROUGH SECTION 678-BLANK
 
 736
 
 SECTION 679
 OVERLAYING OF PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE BRIDGE DECKS
 679.1-DESCRIPTION:
 The work shall consist of furnishing and placing a specialized concrete overlay to a designated
 grade line. Unless otherwise indicated on the plans, the Contractor may place any one of the
 specialized overlays allowed by the terms of this specification. Only one type of overlay will be
 allowed on any one structure.
 679.1.1-Other Work: The following work, as required by the contract plans, may also be
 performed under the terms of this section:
 a) Clean the bridge deck
 b) Bridge deck repair
 c) Clean exposed reinforcing steel
 d) Support and tie reinforcing steel
 e) Place slab reconstruction concrete
 f) Abutment backwalls and approach slabs repair (same as bridge deck or as shown
 in the plans.)
 g) Hydrodemolition of existing deck surface
 679.1.2-Definitions:
 679.1.2.1-Specialized Concrete Overlay: Two types of specialized concrete overlay are
 permitted as follows:
 1) Latex Modified Concrete: A Portland cement concrete to which an approved styrene
 butadiene latex admixture has been added.
 2) Microsilica Concrete: A Portland cement concrete to which an approved Microsilica
 admixture has been added.
 679.1.2.2-Slab Reconstruction Concrete: Slab reconstruction concrete is that concrete
 placed completely around exposed reinforcing bars.
 679.1.2.3-Curing Hour: A curing hour is any hour, beginning with the hour of
 placement, during which the temperature of the concrete surface remains at, or above, 50° F
 (10° C) as measured by a recording thermometer.
 679.1.2.4-Curing Temperature: This is the air temperature at the concrete surface, or
 the air temperature between the concrete surface and its protective covering.
 679.2-MATERIALS:
 679.2.1-General: Materials used in the manufacture of specialized concrete overlays shall
 meet the requirements specified in Section 601.2 of the Specifications and as required herein.
 679.2.1.1-Fine Aggregate: Fine aggregate shall be silica sand meeting the
 requirements of Sections 702.1.2 through 702.1.5 and 702.6 of the Specifications.
 
 737
 
 679.2.1.2-Coarse Aggregate: Coarse aggregate shall be AASHTO Size No. 8 crushed
 stone or gravel conforming to Section 703 of the Specifications.
 679.2.1.3-Latex Admixture: Formulated latex modifier shall meet the requirements
 of Section 707.5 of the Standard Specifications.
 679.2.1.4-Microsilica Admixture:
 Microsilica Admixture shall meet the
 requirements of Section 707.4.3 of the Standard Specifications.
 679.2.1.5-Bonding Grout: Bonding Grout shall not be used on Reconstruction
 Projects. On New Construction Projects Bonding Grout shall consist of the actual modified
 concrete used with coarse aggregates removed. The consistency of the slurry shall be such
 that it can be applied to the prepared concrete surfaces with a stiff bristle broom in a thin,
 even coating that will not run or puddle. The bonding grout shall be applied using a stiff
 broom and worked into all areas of the slab. The rate of applying this coating shall be
 controlled so that the brushed material does not become dry before it is covered with
 additional material.
 679.2.1.6-Class K Concrete: Class K Concrete shall meet the requirements of Section
 601 of the Specifications except that coarse aggregate shall meet the requirements of
 679.2.1.2.
 679.2.1.7-Curing Materials:
 Burlap: This shall meet the requirements of Section 707.7 of the Specifications.
 Quilted Covers: These shall be clean and free of defects, providing a water
 retention blanket over the concrete. Acceptance will be based on visual inspection.
 Polyethylene Curing Covers: These shall meet the requirements of Section 707.6
 of the Specifications.
 Plastic Coated Fiber Blankets: These shall be clean and free of defects, providing
 a water retention blanket over the concrete. Acceptance will be based on visual
 inspection.
 679.2.1.8-Replacement Bars: Reinforcing bars shall be Grade 60 and shall meet the
 material requirements of Section 602 of the Specifications. Replacement bars shall be
 spliced to existing bars using either minimum 30-bar diameter lap splices or approved
 mechanical connectors.
 679.2.2-Specialized Concrete Mix Design and Testing: Specialized concrete shall
 consist of a homogeneous mixture of cement, fine aggregate, coarse aggregate, latex or
 microsilica admixture, chemical admixtures and water.
 The Contractor shall determine mixture proportions in general accordance with ACI 211.1,
 "Standard Practice for Selecting Proportions for Normal, Heavyweight and Mass Concrete."
 Establishment of mixture proportions shall be coordinated with the manufacturer of the latex
 or microsilica admixture.
 Prior to the start of construction, the Contractor shall design and submit to the Engineer for
 approval the proportion of materials, including admixtures, to be used which will result in a
 738
 
 workable concrete having the applicable properties enumerated below, including those of
 section 679.2.2.1 or 679.2.2.2. This mix design shall be prepared in accordance with MP
 711.03.23.
 Design mixture testing shall include air content, slump, and compressive strength results
 at 28 days and results of rapid chloride permeability tests. Compressive strength cylinders for
 microsilica concrete shall be cured in accordance with ASTM C 192 for 28 days, but
 compressive strength cylinders for latex modified concrete shall be moist cured in accordance
 with ASTM C 192 for 2 days then air cured in the lab at a temperature between 73.5 ± 3.5 °F
 (23 ± 2 °C) for 26 days. For establishment of mixture proportions, rapid chloride permeability
 tests for microsilica concrete shall be made on representative samples cured for 56 days in
 accordance with ASTM C 192, then allowed to air dry in the lab at a temperature of 73.5 ± 3.5
 °F (23 ± 2 °C) until the time of test. These specimens shall be prepared and tested in
 accordance with AASHTO T277 at an age of 56 to 90 days. For establishment of mixture
 proportions, rapid chloride permeability tests for latex modified concrete shall be made on
 representative samples moist cured in accordance with ASTM C 192 for 2 days, air cured at in
 the lab at a temperature between 73.5 ± 3.5 °F (23 ± 2 °C) for 54 days, then prepared and tested
 in accordance with AASHTO T277 at an age of 56 to 90 days. The final rapid chloride
 permeability test result shall consist of the average of the two individual test results. This
 average shall not exceed 750 coulombs.
 For establishment of mixture proportions, as an alternative to the curing methods for rapid
 chloride permeability testing outlined in the previous paragraph, microsilica concrete
 specimens may be moist cured for 7 days in accordance with ASTM C 192, then cured for 21
 days in lime-saturated water at 100.0 ± 3.5 °F (38.0 ± 2.0 °C), then tested at an age of 28 days.
 For establishment of mixture proportions, as an alternative to the curing methods for rapid
 chloride permeability testing outlined in the previous paragraph, latex modified concrete
 specimens may be moist cured for 2 days in accordance with ASTM C 192, then cured for 26
 days in air at 100.0 ± 3.5 °F (38.0 ± 2.0 °C) and a minimum of 50% relative humidity, then
 tested at an age of 28 days. These methods of curing shall be noted as the accelerated RCPT
 curing methods.
 The 28-day compressive strength of the test mix that satisfies the 750 coulomb threshold
 shall be used as the basis for acceptance of the Specialized Concrete Overlay permeability
 requirements. Concrete for any slump test shall be deposited in a manner and location that
 excludes the effects of vibrations caused by traffic and concrete placement operations.
 The total concrete constituents shall contribute less than 0.10% water soluble chloride ion
 by weight of cement. Use one brand and/or one source for any concrete constituent.
 The Contractor shall obtain a written statement from the manufacturer of the latex or
 microsilica admixture that confirms the compatibility of the material combination and the
 sequence in which they are combined. The written statement, along with the results of all
 required tests, shall be furnished to the Engineer prior to the pre-construction meeting (refer to
 679.2.2.3). Substantiating data showing compliance with the requirements of this specification
 shall also be submitted. This data shall also include the sources of coarse and fine aggregates
 as well as the brands of all admixtures to be used.
 Contractor’s Quality Control: Quality control of the specialized concrete is the
 responsibility of the Contractor as designated in MP 601.03.50. The Contractor shall maintain
 equipment and qualified personnel, including at least one certified Portland Cement Concrete
 739
 
 Technician who shall direct all field inspection, sampling, and testing necessary to determine
 the magnitude of the various properties of concrete governed by the Specifications and shall
 maintain these properties within the limits of this Specification. The Contactor’s personnel
 who conduct the field sampling and testing shall be a certified Portland Cement Concrete
 Inspector. The quality control plan designated in MP 601.03.50 shall be submitted to the
 Engineer at the preconstruction conference. Work shall not begin until the plan is reviewed
 for conformance with the contract documents.
 Compressive strength specimens shall be made and cured in accordance with AASHTO T
 23 and MP 601.04.20 at the frequency required in MP 601.03.50 except that specimens for
 latex modified concrete shall be moist cured for 2 days and air cured at a temperature of 73.5
 ± 3.5 °F (23 ± 2 °C) for 26 days.
 During construction, a minimum of four specimens shall be fabricated for rapid chloride
 permeability testing in accordance with AASHTO T277 every time that a set of compressive
 strength specimens is fabricated.
 If the 28-day compressive strength of the in-place concrete, obtained from specimens made
 as outlined in the previous paragraph, is less than or equal to eighty percent of the compressive
 strength of the approved test mix, these rapid chloride permeability test specimens shall be
 tested, as outlined in the following two paragraphs. Otherwise, testing of these specimens is
 not required.
 When microsilica concrete is used, these specimens shall be moist cured for 56 days and
 then allowed to air dry at a temperature of 73.5 ± 3.5 °F (23 ± 2 °C) until the time of test. Two
 of these specimens shall be tested at an age of 90 days in accordance with AASHTO T277,
 and if necessary, the remaining two specimens shall be tested at an age of 180 days in
 accordance with AASHTO T277, and the average result of the two vales from these specimens
 shall be reported as the result required in Note (a) in section 679.2.2.2.
 When latex modified concrete is used these specimens shall be moist cured for 2 days and
 then air dried at a temperature of 73.5 ± 3.5 °F (23 ± 2 °C) until the time of test. Two of these
 specimens shall be tested at an age of 90 days in accordance with AASHTO T277, and the
 average result of the two values from these specimens shall be reported as the result required
 in Note (a) in section 679.2.2.1. If necessary, the remaining two specimens shall be tested at
 an age of 180 days in accordance with AASHTO T277, and the average result of the two values
 from these specimens shall be reported as the result required in Note (a) in section 679.2.2.1.
 Gradation testing shall be performed in accordance with Section 601.3.2.4.
 679.2.2.1-Latex Modified Concrete: The following test criteria must be met for all latex
 modified concrete pours placed at the structure. This testing shall be performed by the
 Contractor or his designated representative and certified results provided to the Engineer prior
 to final acceptance of the project.
 
 740
 
 Chloride Permeability (a)
 Compressive Strength (b)
 Water/Cement Ratio (c)
 Portland Cement Content
 Latex Admixture Content (d)
 Air Content (e)
 Slump
 Note (a)
 
 Note (b)
 
 Note (c)
 Note (d)
 Note (e)
 
 Table 679.2.2.1
 1000 coulombs @ 90 or 180 days,
 maximum (per AASHTO T277)
 not less than 80% of 28-day compressive
 strength of the approved test mix
 0.40 by weight, maximum
 658 lb/cu. yd., minimum
 (390 kg/m³, minimum)
 24.5 gal/cu. yd., minimum
 (121 liters/m³, minimum)
 6.5% maximum (Per AASHTO T152)
 4.0 inches ± 2.0 inches
 (100 mm ± 50 mm)
 
 When required, as outlined in the Contractor’s Quality Control Section of Section
 679.2.2, rapid chloride permeability tests shall be performed and the results
 tabulated and submitted to the Engineer. Chloride permeability of the in-place
 concrete shall be considered acceptable if the 28-day compressive strengths
 obtained in Section 679.2.2 are greater than eighty percent of the 28-day
 compressive strength of the approved test mix. If the compressive strength
 requirements noted in Table 679.2.2.1 are not satisfied, and the permeability value
 noted in the Table 679.2.2.1 is exceeded, then the concrete represented by these
 strength and permeability values may be removed and replaced by the Contractor. If
 the Contractor elects to leave the material in place, the Engineer shall evaluate it as to
 the adequacy for the use intended. All concrete evaluated as unsatisfactory for the use
 intended shall be removed and replaced by the Contractor. When the Engineer’s
 evaluation indicates that the work may satisfactorily remain in place, the subject
 material shall be paid for at a reduced unit price based on Table 679.2.2.3.
 The minimum compressive strength for the overlay concrete shall be 80% of the 28day compressive strength of the approved test mix. However, the minimum 28-day
 compressive strength shall be 4,000 psi (28 Mpa). Overlay concrete with a
 compressive strength of less than this acceptance level may be removed and replaced
 at the contractor’s expense.
 The amount of added water shall be adjusted to provide slump at or below the
 prescribed limit. The water portion of all admixtures shall be included as part of the
 water/cement ratio.
 Latex sampling shall be in accordance with 707.5.
 The initial mix design shall be based on an expected air content range of 3% to 6%.
 The mixture proportions shall be determined using actual conditions for fineness
 modulus and bulk specific gravities (saturated surface dry for aggregates).
 
 679.2.2.2-Microsilica Concrete: The following test criteria must be met for all
 microsilica concrete pours placed at the structure. This testing shall be performed by the
 Contractor or his designated representative and certified results provided to the Engineer prior
 to final acceptance of the project.
 
 741
 
 Table 679.2.2.2
 Chloride Permeability (a)
 Compressive Strength,(b)
 Water/( Cementitious Materials) Ratio (c)
 Portland Cement Content (d)
 Microsilica Content (e) (Dry Weight)
 Air Content
 Slump
 High Range Water
 Reducer(Superplasticizers) (f)
 Note (a)
 
 Note (b)
 
 Note (c)
 Note (d)
 
 Note (e)
 Note (f)
 
 1000 coulombs @ 90 days or 180 days,
 maximum (per AASHTO T277)
 not less than 80% of 28-day compressive
 strength of the approved test mix
 0.37 by weight, maximum
 680 lb/cu.yd., minimum
 (404 kg/m³, minimum)
 50 lb./cu. yd., minimum
 (30 kg/m³, minimum)
 7.0% (plus or minus 1.5%) (Per AASHTO
 T152)
 6.5 inches ± 1.5 inches
 (165 mm ± 40 mm)
 As needed for workability, slump and
 water/cementitious ratios
 
 When required, as outlined in the Contractor’s Quality Control Section of Section
 679.2.2, rapid chloride permeability tests shall be performed and the results
 tabulated and submitted to the Engineer. Chloride permeability of the in-place
 concrete shall be considered acceptable if the 28-day compressive strengths
 obtained in Section 679.2.2 are greater than eighty percent of the 28-day
 compressive strength of the approved test mix. If the compressive strength
 requirements noted in Table 679.2.2.2 are not satisfied, and the permeability value
 noted in the Table 679.2.2.2 is exceeded, then the concrete represented by these
 strength and permeability values may be removed and replaced by the Contractor. If
 the Contractor elects to leave the material in place, the Engineer shall evaluate it as to
 the adequacy for the use intended. All concrete evaluated as unsatisfactory for the use
 intended shall be removed and replaced by the Contractor. When the Engineer’s
 evaluation indicates that the work may satisfactorily remain in place, the subject
 material shall be paid for at a reduced unit price based on Table 679.2.2.3.
 The minimum compressive strength for the overlay concrete shall be 80% of the 28day compressive strength of the approved test mix. However, the minimum 28-day
 compressive strength shall be 4,000 psi (28 Mpa). Overlay concrete with a
 compressive strength of less than this acceptance level may be removed and replaced
 at the contractor’s expense.
 The amount of added water shall be adjusted to provide slump at or below the
 prescribed limit. The water portion of all admixtures shall be included as part of the
 water/cement ratio.
 An equal volume of fly ash may be substituted for cement to a maximum of 1 ¼ bags
 per cubic yard. An equal volume of ground granulated blast furnace slag (GGBFS)
 may be substituted for cement to a maximum of 3 bags per cubic yard (meter). When
 fly ash or GGBFS are used, equivalent volumes of fly ash or GGBFS shall be
 considered as cement for purposes of determining the proportioning ratios.
 Microsilica sampling shall be in accordance with 707.4.3.
 A high range water-reducing admixture is required to improve workability. No more
 than two additions of the admixture shall be made, and the total quantity shall not
 exceed the manufacturer's maximum dosage rate. Each time high range water reducer
 is added, the concrete shall be mixed an additional minimum of 30 revolutions. The
 total number of revolutions shall not exceed 300.
 
 742
 
 Table 679.2.2.3
 Permeability result obtained in
 Percent of unit bid price paid
 Table 679.2.2.1 or 679.2.2.2.
 according to Section 679.6.3
 See Note (a) (values expressed which will be paid for material
 in Coulombs)
 in question
 >1,000 – 1,500
 95%
 >1,500 – 2,000
 90%
 >2,000 – 2,500
 85%
 >2,500 – 3,000
 80%
 >3,000 – 3,500
 70%
 >3,500 – 4,000
 60%
 >4,000
 Remove and replace
 679.2.2.3-Pre-Pour Meeting: The Contractor shall schedule a meeting prior to the start
 of the concrete work. The Engineer, Construction Manager, Prime Contractor, Concrete
 Contractor, Concrete Finisher, the Concrete Supplier and the Individual or Agency that will
 perform the quality control testing of the concrete shall attend. Topics of discussion shall
 include specialized concrete mixture proportions, batching, transporting, handling, placing,
 finishing and curing.
 679.2.2.4-Test Slab Requirements: After obtaining the Engineer's approval of mixture
 proportions and at least one week before any slab reconstruction concreting or overlay is to
 be placed, the Contractor shall make one or more trial batches of the specialized concrete of
 the size to be hauled or mixed at the site. The trial shall simulate transportation and job site
 conditions, utilizing proposed material and methods of placing, finishing, and curing,
 including the application of bonding grout when required.
 The test slab shall be constructed the same as the actual work (depth, reinforcing steel,
 etc.) and shall be at least one lane width wide and of a length to allow the use of the
 contractor’s entire paving train from placement to finishing. The test slab location shall be as
 shown in the plans or as approved by the Engineer. The prime intent is to familiarize the
 concrete finishing crew with the handling, finishing and curing characteristics of the concrete.
 Batching, placement and texturing shall be in strict accordance with this specification.
 Additional reference test slabs may be constructed as necessary to provide an acceptable
 standard of reference. This standard of reference shall serve throughout the project
 construction period as the basis of acceptance of the actual as-built work. This Item may be
 deleted at the discretion of the Engineer.
 679.2.3-Equipment: All equipment proposed for use shall have the Engineer's approval
 prior to its usage.
 679.2.3.1-Cutting Equipment: Shall consist of a high pressure water jet
 (hydrodemolishing) system per the following requirements.
 679.2.3.1.1-Hydrodemolishing Equipment: The hydrodemolishing system shall be
 self-propelled, completely programmable, designed for high production concrete removal,
 743
 
 and capable of removing precise depths of sound concrete. Hydrodemolishers shall be
 capable of removing concrete from around and below the steel reinforcement. Lances shall
 be of a type intended to remove rather than scarify concrete. Individuals certified by the
 equipment manufacturers shall operate the removal equipment.
 All removal equipment shall be capable of operating at a noise level of less than 90
 decibels at a distance of 50 feet (15 m) from the noise source. The Contractor shall monitor
 noise levels throughout the project to insure compliance, if required by the Engineer. No
 separate or additional payment will be made for monitoring -noise levels.
 Potable or filtered water may be used. Filtered water shall have all visible solids and
 oils removed that could prevent a proper bonding with the remaining concrete. When
 filtered water is used, the Contractor shall wash the bridge deck with potable water in water
 blasting equipment as soon as all the concrete debris has been cleaned up. This water
 blasting shall be in addition to any other water blasting that may be required.
 The Contractor shall shield his operations to prevent injury or damage from flying or
 falling debris. The Contractor shall provide a method for handling expected and unexpected
 blow-through of the deck. This method shall provide for the containment of runoff water
 and debris, and the protection of the area under the bridge deck. The Contractor shall be
 responsible for any injury or damage caused by his operations.
 679.2.3.1.2-Hydrodemolishing Equipment Demonstration: Two trial areas will be
 designated by the Engineer to allow the Contractor to demonstrate that the equipment,
 personnel, and methods of operation can meet the requirements of this specification. The
 demonstration shall follow any roto-milling permitted by this specification. No separate or
 additional payment will be made for this demonstration.
 The first trial area will consist of approximately 30 square feet (9 m²) of sound concrete.
 The hydrodemolisher shall be calibrated to remove sound concrete to the depth specified
 in the contract documents without damaging the underlying sound concrete. After
 removing the sound concrete in the first trial area, the hydrodemolisher shall be moved to
 the second trial area. This area will consist of deteriorated or defective concrete. This trial
 will determine whether this unsound concrete will be completely removed with the above
 calibration.
 If the equipment is deemed inadequate for use, the Contractor shall obtain another
 hydrodemolisher for a subsequent demonstration. When satisfactory results are obtained,
 production removal may proceed. No adjustment in the completion date of the project will
 be considered due to delays in obtaining suitable equipment.
 If concrete is not being adequately removed during production work, recalibration of
 the equipment will be required.
 679.2.3.2-Blastcleaning Equipment: Blastcleaning Equipment shall be capable of
 removing rust from reinforcing bars, laitance, and small chips of partially loosened
 concrete. Certain qualities of rust are not necessary to be removed (refer to Section
 679.3.3).
 679.2.3.3-Proportioning and Mixing Equipment: Handling, Measuring, and Batching
 of materials shall conform to the requirements specified in 501.7.
 Proportioning and Mixing Equipment shall consist of the following:
 744
 
 679.2.3.3.1-Latex Modified Concrete: Self-contained, continuous mixing and
 proportioning mobile units shall be used. A minimum of two units shall be supplied. The
 requirements of Sections 679.2.3.4 and 679.2.3.5 shall apply.
 679.2.3.3.2-Microsilica Concrete: An approved concrete batch plant, mobile mixer or
 truck mixer shall supply all concrete. The requirements of Section 601 of the Specifications
 shall apply, except as modified herein.
 When microsilica densified powder is used, the densified powder shall be weighed
 using an approved cement scale or supplied in bags, the weight of each bag shall be clearly
 marked on the bag. The densified powder shall be last in the weighing sequence and the
 tolerance for each material draw weight shall be based upon the total weight of cement plus
 densified powder. Batching tolerance for the cement plus densified powder shall be 1%.
 679.2.3.4-Mobile Mixer Units: Each unit shall be self-propelled and shall be capable
 of carrying sufficient unmixed material to produce on site, no less than 6 cubic yards (4.5
 cubic meters) of specialized concrete.
 Volumetric mixers shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M241, except as
 otherwise specified.
 The Engineer will inspect each unit. A unit not functioning in a manner the Engineer
 considers acceptable shall be repaired. If repair is impractical, the unit shall be replaced.
 All costs associated with delays attributable to mobile mixer replacement shall be borne by
 the Contractor. No extension of time, for the purpose of replacing unacceptable mixers,
 will be granted. Conditions which will automatically designate a unit unacceptable are:
 hydrated cement deposits; broken, bent, loose or scalloped mixing paddles; mixing paddles
 worn 20% in any dimension; mixing paddles heavily caked with mortar; and admixture or
 water delivery system out of tolerance.
 Proportioning devices shall deliver the materials within the following tolerances:
 Coarse Aggregate
 Fine Aggregate
 Cement + fly ash
 Water
 Cement + microsilica powder
 Latex Admixture
 Other Admixtures
 
 ±2%
 ±2%
 0% to +4%
 ±1%
 1%
 1%
 3%
 
 The unit shall be capable of positive measurement of cement being introduced into the
 mix.
 There shall be positive control of the flow of water into the mixing chamber. Water flow
 shall be indicated by a flowmeter and readily adjustable to provide for minor variations in
 aggregate moisture. The system shall be equipped with a bypass valve, or hose, for
 determining proportioning accurately. Also, there shall be a positive control of the flow of
 admixture into the mixing chamber. The admixture discharge pipe shall be readily accessible
 for determining proportioning accuracy.
 The units shall be capable of being calibrated to automatically proportion and blend all
 components of indicated composition on a continuous or intermittent basis as required by the
 745
 
 finishing operation, and shall discharge mixed material through a conventional chute directly
 in front of the finishing machine.
 A sufficient number of self-propelled mixers shall be available at the job site to insure that
 not more than 30 minutes shall elapse between the placement of batches.
 679.2.3.5-Mobile Mixer Unit Testing: The units shall be calibrated by the Contractor
 to accurately proportion the approved mix design prior to placing the mix. The Engineer may
 require recalibration of any mixer as deemed necessary. Yield tests shall be performed by the
 Contractor for each mixer for each day's operation and when there appears to be a change in
 the mix. Certification of the calibration by an approved testing authority will be accepted as
 evidence of this accuracy if the yield is shown to be true within a tolerance of 1.0% according
 to the following test:
 With the cement yard set on zero and all controls set for the approved design mix,
 activate the mixer and discharge mixed material into a 0.25 cubic yard (meter) container 1
 yard (meter) square by 9 inches (250 mm) tall. When the container is level-struck full,
 making provision for settling the material into all corners, the cement yard shall show the
 discharge for a 0.25 cubic yard (meter) pour within the tolerance specified (refer to
 679.2.3.4). No calibration shall be performed while it is raining.
 679.2.3.6-Placing and Finishing Equipment: This shall include adequate hand tools for
 the placement of plastic concrete and for working down to approximately the correct level for
 the auger strike-off. A self-propelled finishing machine will be required to place and finish
 all concrete, except in areas inaccessible to the machine.
 The finishing machine shall be capable of forward and reverse motion under positive
 control. Provisions shall be made for raising the screeds to clear the screeded surface, if
 traveling in reverse.
 The machine shall be capable of placing full width, in one operation, the pours shown in
 the plans. The finishing machine shall be equipped with a vibrating device to consolidate the
 concrete, a power driven strike-off auger, a power driven finishing roller, and a pan float. The
 vibrating device shall vibrate at a frequency between 50 Hz and 115 Hz. A sufficient number
 of suitable portable lightweight or wheeled work bridges shall be required and used behind
 the finishing operation for touch-up work, surface texturing and curing cover placement.
 Approved manual type screeds, metal plates equipped with electric vibrators, or hand held
 vibrators shall be used to consolidate and finish small inaccessible areas and slab
 reconstruction concrete.
 Supporting rails shall be required. Rails may be two inch by 2 inch (50 mm) perforated
 steel bar stock, 2 inch (50 mm) pipe rail, or approved equal. They shall exhibit no bends or
 kinks. Rail supports shall be fully adjustable (not shimmed) to obtain the correct profile. Rail
 supports are subject to the requirements of 679.3.7.2.
 When placing concrete adjacent to a previously completed pour, the side of the finishing
 machine adjacent to the completed pour shall be equipped to travel on the completed lane on
 rail supports only.
 The placing and finishing equipment shall be designed so that the elapsed time between
 depositing concrete and final finishing shall not exceed 10 minutes.
 
 746
 
 679.2.3.7-Recording Thermometer: The Contractor shall supply a continuous recording
 thermometer capable of recording temperatures in the 30 - 150 F (2° - 66° C) range. It shall
 likewise provide a recording capability over a 24-hour continuous period, minimum. The
 Contractor shall provide any ancillary equipment, supplies and labor necessary for calibration
 of this equipment.
 679.2.3.8-Compressors Or Water Flushing Equipment: Equipment used for surface
 preparation shall be of such size and capacity to thoroughly remove all foreign material from
 the surface being prepared.
 679.2.3.9-Saw Cutting Equipment: Only multi-bladed saw cutting equipment, using
 circular saw blades, will be permitted for final deck finish operations. The Engineer may allow
 the use of single blade circular saw equipment only where such equipment is necessary to
 complete the work as required.
 679.2.3.10-Fogging Equipment: Fogging equipment shall be available for use in
 accordance with these specifications. The fogging nozzles shall produce an atomized mist.
 Fogging nozzles shall incorporate compressed air to create the mist. Hand held or hand
 operated equipment shall be permitted when the Contractor has demonstrated that his operator
 has been trained in its use.
 679.3-CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
 679.3.1-Removal of Existing Deck Surface: All asphaltic patches or bituminous overlays
 shall be removed by hydrodemolishing, roto-milling, or other approved methods. All debris
 from patch or overlay removal shall be legally disposed. Unless otherwise directed by the
 engineer, prior to concrete deck removal operations, the Contractor shall sound the deck using
 chain drags.
 679.3.1.1-Removal of Existing Deck Surface Phase I: The Contractor shall determine
 the depth to the top mat of reinforcing steel using methods acceptable to the Engineer. The
 existing deck shall be removed down to the top mat of rebar by roto-milling,
 hydrodemolishing, or any means acceptable to the Engineer. When full depth removal of
 material is necessary, the forming shall be incidental to the cost of the concrete deck
 overlay.
 After removal to the top mat of reinforcing steel, the Contractor shall sound the deck
 using chain drags and delineate remaining areas of delaminated and unsound concrete for
 removal subject to the approval of the Engineer. Aerosol spray paint for delineating shall
 be provided by the Contractor. Edges around these concrete removal areas shall be vertical
 or slightly undercut. Upon completion of removal, the Contractor shall provide a
 hydrodemolished surface on which to install the new concrete Overlay.
 When full depth removal of material is necessary, the forming shall be performed in
 accordance with Sections 104.3 and 109.4 of the Specifications.
 
 747
 
 679.3.1.2-Removal of Existing Deck Surface Phase II: Unless waived by the
 Engineer, immediately prior to placement of new concrete overlay, the Contractor shall
 sound the deck using chain drags and delineate any additional areas that may have become
 delaminated or unsound. Edges around these concrete removal areas shall be vertical or
 slightly undercut. These areas shall be removed prior to placement of the new concrete
 overlay.
 The Division is not responsible for delays caused by the concrete removal described
 here in 679.3.1.2.
 When full depth removal of material is necessary, the forming shall be performed in
 accordance with Sections 104.3 and 109.4 of the Specifications.
 679.3.1.2.1-Full Depth Removal of Material: When full depth removal of material
 is necessary it shall be handled in accordance with section 679.6.2.3.
 679.3.1.3-Use of Chipping Hammers: When encountering locations of delaminated
 and unsound concrete that need to be removed but not easily accomplished or accessible
 as described in sections 679.3.1.1 and 679.3.1.2, chipping hammers may be used when
 permitted by the Engineer to remove concrete.
 679.3.1.4-Disposal: Debris shall be removed directly following any concrete removal
 operations. Removal of debris shall be accomplished by hand and vacuum methods. All
 debris shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be legally disposed. The
 Contractor shall exercise care to avoid damage to the remaining concrete or exposed
 reinforcement.
 The Contractor shall provide for the collection, treatment and/or disposal of all runoff
 water generated by the removal process. The Contractor will provide the Engineer with
 evidence and documentation of disposal means and/or that any discharge does not exceed
 water quality standards. No payment for item 679001 Concrete Deck Overlay will be made
 until the Engineer receives evidence of satisfactory disposal and/or treatment. Should the
 disposal and/or discharge of material occur within the State’s Rights-Of-Way without
 satisfactory evidence of maintaining the current water quality standards, the Engineer will
 have the authority to suspend the work wholly or impart as described in section 105.9. The
 Contractor shall obtain all required permits and shall comply with applicable local, state,
 and federal regulations concerning such water disposal. The Contractor shall make
 provision for the safe handling of runoff water insofar as it may constitute a physical hazard
 on the adjacent or underlying traveled roadway surface.
 Water will not be allowed to enter storm sewers, bridge drainage, downspouts,
 fingerdams, or any other drainage area of the deck surface. The Contractor shall exercise
 care to protect existing berm slopes from scouring by water jets or runoff water.
 In addition to the requirements mentioned above, to temporarily discharge wastewater
 from activities associated with hydroblasting demolition of concrete on a bridge deck. The
 wastewater shall be treated prior to discharging to natural drainage.
 The authorization being granted herein is contingent upon strict adherence to the
 following conditions.
 
 748
 
 1. The Contractor shall provide via email to the West Virginia Department of
 Environmental Protection (DEP) with carbon copies to the WVDOH personnel as listed
 in the plan notes, the following information for review:
 2. Project Name, Project Number, County, Route number, layman’s description of
 location, Contractor’s Name, description of work, description of discharge, a list of
 Best Management Practices to be used to protect water quality, and estimated start &
 stop dates of discharging activity.
 The Contractor will allow the DEP seven (7) days to review the submitted information
 and respond.
 a) All materials and equipment required to perform the work shall be on site prior to
 the initiation of the work activities.
 b) The Contractor shall immediately implement the necessary procedures needed to
 mitigate any adverse impacts resultant to the temporary discharge occurrence.
 c) Collected solids shall be disposed of in a manner consistent with any, and all,
 appropriate laws and regulations.
 d) The work activities and temporary discharge shall be managed in a manner that will
 provide for the maximum alleviation of impact to, and maximum protection of,
 aquatic life and human health.
 e) The Contractor shall notify the applicable DEP’s Environmental Enforcement’s
 District field office, 24 hours prior to the initiation of any procedures. This will
 afford the DEP with an opportunity to have personnel available to observe the
 activities.
 f) The Contractor shall, further, notify the Emergency Response Spill Alert System at
 1-800-642-3074 in the event of an accidental discharge that did not go through the
 appropriate devices.
 679.3.1.5-Miscellaneous: The Contractor shall provide adequate lighting to allow for
 the safe conduct of night removal operations, and shall obtain the Engineer's approval for
 same, exercising care to avoid any hazardous glare in the direction of oncoming traffic.
 679.3.2-Removal of Newly Placed Deck Surface: The finished deck surface shall be
 shotblasted in preparation for a mechanically bonded surface. Burlap shall be continuously
 wet for a period of 168 curing hours by means of automatic intermittent sprinkling or a
 continuous wetting system. This may require approximately 1/8 inch to ¼ inch (3 to 6 mm) of
 the concrete to be removed. In all cases the surface laitance shall be removed to provide a solid
 profile on which to bond the overlay. The cost of shot-blasting of the concrete deck shall be
 considered incidental to the Specialized Concrete Overlay.
 679.3.3-Preparation of Surface: Blastcleaning shall be performed to thoroughly clean all
 horizontal and vertical receiving surfaces. Surfaces, which will be in contact with the
 specialized concrete overlay, shall have laitance and partially loosened chips of concrete
 removed by blastcleaning, which shall produce a bright, clean appearance. The edge of
 previously placed pours shall be similarly treated to promote bond.
 
 749
 
 All reinforcing steel, or other steel, which is to be in contact with the new concrete, shall
 be cleaned of all grease, dirt, concrete mortar and injurious rust. Injurious rust is defined as all
 scale, loose rust deposits, or all rust not firmly bonded to steel. Rust and concrete deposits,
 which in the Engineer's opinion cannot be removed by blastcleaning, will be considered firmly
 bonded and may remain. Any portion of a reinforcing bar judged by the Engineer to have any
 more than 50% section loss shall be replaced at no additional cost to the Division. A light
 coating of orange colored rust that forms on the reinforcing steel after blast cleaning is not
 considered detrimental to bond and may remain unless the time limit that follows is exceeded,
 or if ordered to be removed by the Engineer.
 All debris from the blastcleaning operation shall be removed. After removal, the exposed
 reinforcing steel shall be supported and tied. Rustproof chairs shall be provided. If a
 continuous length of 6 ft. (1.8 m) or more of reinforcing bar is exposed, the Engineer may
 require supports and positive tie-downs at a maximum spacing of 4 ft. (1.2 m). Positive tiedowns shall consist of anchors drilled into the structural slab and connected to the reinforcing
 bars. Replacement bars shall be spliced to existing bars using either minimum 30 bar diameter
 lap splices, approved mechanical connectors, or a welded splice as directed by the Engineer.
 Welded splices, if approved, shall be in accordance with ANSI/AWS Structural Welding Code
 - Reinforcing Steel D1.4. The Engineer shall be allowed sufficient time to inspect the work
 after the supporting and tying of the reinforcing steel has been completed.
 Blastcleaning operations may be commenced in an area after necessary concrete removal,
 per Section 679.3.1 or Section 679.3.2, as applicable, has been completed. If more than 48
 hours elapse from the termination of any blastcleaning operation to slab wetting, blastcleaning
 shall be repeated per the Engineers direction regardless of the apparent condition of the
 receiving surfaces.
 679.3.4-Structural Slab Wetting: The structural slab surface and any other porous
 surface, which will be in contact with new concrete, shall be prewetted with water. All
 standing water in depressions or areas of concrete removal shall be blown out with oil-free
 compressed air. The surface shall be thoroughly wetted to a saturated surface dry condition
 and shall be visibly moist when placement begins.
 679.3.5-Placement Preconditions: Slab reconstruction concrete, or overlay concrete,
 shall be placed only after all of the following preconditions are satisfied:
 The Contractor has submitted to the Engineer, in writing, the proposed sequence of
 operations, equipment, number of personnel, and category of personnel to be used during the
 concrete placement.
 a) All concrete removal operations in the placement area are complete and approved.
 b) Deck drains have been cleaned of all debris and plugged.
 c) Blastcleaning has been completed on an area large enough to require one working day for
 concrete overlay placement. In no case shall this be less than one span long.
 d) Any additional blastcleaning, if required, has been completed and approved on an area
 large enough to require one working day for concrete overlay placement. In no case shall
 this be less than one span long.
 e) Slab temperature and wetting requirements are met.
 
 750
 
 679.3.6-Placing, Finishing and Curing Slab Reconstruction Concrete:
 Slab
 reconstruction concrete shall be placed separately from overlay concrete except when both of
 the following conditions are, in the opinion of the Engineer, present:
 a) Areas of exposed reinforcing steel do not exceed 5% of the total slab area ready to be
 overlaid.
 b) Individual areas of exposed reinforcing shall not exceed 25 square feet (7.5 m) in area.
 When these two conditions are present, slab reconstruction concrete may be placed
 integrally with overlay concrete.
 The Contractor has the following choices of concrete placed as slab reconstruction
 concrete:
 Overlay Type
 Slab Reconstruction Concrete
 Latex Modified
 Latex Modified or Class K
 Microsilica
 Microsilica or Class K
 Slab reconstruction concrete placed integrally with overlay shall match the Specialized
 Concrete Overlay.
 The horizontal and vertical surfaces on which the slab reconstruction concrete is being
 placed shall be in a saturated surface dry condition immediately prior to placing any concrete.
 When Class K Concrete is used as reconstruction concrete, a self-contained mobile mixer
 meeting the requirements of 679.2.3.4 may be used to provide the concrete.
 After blastcleaning is completed, the Contractor shall place slab reconstruction concrete in
 the locations where reinforcing bars have been exposed. The concrete shall be consolidated
 by internal vibration in accordance with Section 601.10.3 of the Specifications. It shall be
 finished to the level of the surrounding concrete, or to the middle of the reinforcing steel,
 whichever is higher. The surface of the new concrete shall be intentionally roughened to a
 raked finish. Placement of slab reconstruction concrete in accordance with this subsection
 shall not relieve the Contractor of the requirements to provide the minimum required thickness
 of overlay material.
 679.3.6.1-Slab Reconstruction Concrete Curing Requirements: Curing shall be
 accomplished in the following manner:
 Latex Modified Concrete. Curing shall be performed in accordance with 679.3.7.5.1.
 Microsilica and Class K Concrete. Curing shall be by means of quilted covers, or
 plastic coated fiber blankets. Quilted covers, if used, shall be kept wet for the entire curing
 period in accordance with 679.3.7.5.2. The wet curing period shall be 72 curing hours.
 The use of membrane curing compounds shall not be allowed.
 679.3.6.2-Removal of Slab Reconstruction Concrete Surface:
 The slab
 reconstruction concrete surface shall be blastcleaned per the requirements of Section
 679.3.3 prior to the placement of the overlay.
 
 751
 
 679.3.7-Placing and Finishing Specialized Concrete Overlay:
 679.3.7.1-General: The following requirements shall apply for specialized concrete
 overlay placements:
 a) The normal overlay thickness shall be as shown on the plans. Under any
 circumstances, the overlay shall not be less than 1 ¼ inches (31 mm).
 b) The prepared surface of the structural slab shall be protected from contamination by
 any source and shall be in a saturated surface dry condition immediately prior to
 concrete placement.
 c) Concrete may be mixed at the point of deposition.
 d) When placing Specialized Concrete Overlays on a newly placed deck, the deck
 concrete shall be a minimum of 28 days old. The sidewalks, parapets, or curbs shall
 be a minimum of 7 days old.
 679.3.7.2-Finishing Equipment: Supporting rails upon which the finishing machine
 travels shall be placed outside the area to be overlaid. Said rails shall be supported at spacings
 sufficient to prevent any deflections. If deflections occur, support spacings shall be reduced,
 or rails shall be replaced by more resistant rail material. Anchorage of supporting rails shall
 provide for horizontal and vertical stability. The Engineer may require positive anchorage.
 A hold-down device shot into the prepared surface, or new overlay, will not be permitted.
 Supporting rails shall not be treated with parting compounds or release agents to facilitate
 their removal.
 Immediately prior to the beginning of overlay operations, the finishing machine shall be
 operated over the full length of the bridge segment to be overlaid. This test run shall be made
 with the screed adjustment set to its finishing position. While operating the finishing machine
 during the test, the screed rails shall be checked for deflection and the minimum overlay
 thickness confirmed. The clearance shall be checked with the use of 1¼ inches (31 mm) thick
 filler blocks attached to the bottom of the screed during the test run. All necessary corrections
 shall be made prior to any concrete placement.
 679.3.7.3-Placement: The following requirements shall apply during placement of the
 Specialized Concrete Overlay:
 No concrete shall be placed unless surface slab temperature requirements of 679.4.6
 and 679.4.7 are met. So that the use of hand tools will be kept to a minimum, concrete shall
 be deposited as nearly as possible to its final position. Internal vibrators shall not be used
 for moving concrete into position.
 a) A pencil type vibrator shall be used along all construction joints and edges to further
 consolidate the concrete to prevent voids.
 b) The new concrete shall be placed slightly above final grade. It shall then be struckoff, screeded, and finished to final grade.
 c) The finished surface, before texturing, shall be uniformly smooth, dense and even.
 Variations in pavement surface in excess of 1/8 in. (3 mm) above, or below, the proper
 finished elevation, or surface irregularities of more than 1/8 in. in 10 feet (3 mm in 3
 m), will not be accepted.
 
 752
 
 d) At transverse and longitudinal construction joints, the overlay placement shall be
 continued beyond the joint location a distance at least equal to the placement depth,
 and shall be allowed to stand free or shall be formed. After the overlay has cured, the
 concrete shall be sawed to a depth of ¾ in. ± 1/8 in. (19 mm ± 3 mm). The overlay
 material beyond the saw cut shall be chipped out to the level of the original prepared
 surface, or to the level of the reinforcing bars, whichever is higher. The chipped face
 of the construction joints shall not undercut the saw cut and shall have a slope of
 approximately 45°. Chipping hammers shall use only chisel bits.
 e) A construction dam, or bulkhead, shall be installed in case of a delay in the placement
 operations exceeding 30 minutes duration. During any delays of 30 minutes or less,
 the placement shall be protected from drying with several layers of wet burlap. If the
 concrete placement is stopped, or delayed, for 90 minutes or more, further placement
 shall be discontinued and may be resumed only upon the approval of the Engineer.
 When a placement delay greater than 90 minutes occurs, the Contractor shall saw and
 seal a control joint in the overlay.
 f) Adequate precautions shall be taken to protect freshly placed concrete from rainfall.
 All placement operations shall stop when it starts to rain. The Engineer may order
 removal and replacement of material damaged by rainfall in accordance with
 679.4.9.
 g) The addition of superficial water to the surface of the concrete to assist in finishing
 operations will not be permitted.
 679.3.7.4-Surface Texturing: The surface of the specialized concrete overlay shall be
 uniformly smooth, dense and even. The surface shall then be given a suitable texture with an
 approved burlap drag.
 The Contractor shall texture in a transverse or longitudinal direction. Once begun, the
 direction of texturing shall not change. All texturing shall be performed prior to the beginning
 of curing operations. Only one pass of the drag over the finished area will be permitted.
 Texturing shall be in strict accordance with the time requirements of 679.3.7.5 for applying
 wet burlap.
 If texturing is done in the transverse direction, the Contractor shall texture by hand
 methods as soon as practical after finishing machine passage.
 If texturing is done in the longitudinal direction, the burlap drag shall be a seamless strip
 and shall be attached to the work bridge such that the surface of the concrete is textured as
 soon as practical after finishing machine passage. Small areas, inaccessible to the attached
 drag, may be textured by hand methods.
 The finishing movement and resulting progress of the burlap drag shall be done in a
 manner so as to prevent ridges or gouges from forming in the concrete surface. The drag shall
 be weighted and the contact area changed as required to produce a texture acceptable to the
 Engineer. The drag shall be cleaned as required; to remove all hardened concrete particles.
 Texture resulting from the drag shall stop within 1 ft. (300 mm) of curbs or parapets.
 
 753
 
 679.3.7.5-Curing: It is the nature of specialized concrete overlay material to quickly
 form a plastic film at the surface upon drying. This film is to be protected from drying and
 cracking by prompt covering with wet burlap. Regardless of the type of concrete placed, the
 use of membrane curing compounds will not be allowed. Floor drains shall be immediately
 unplugged to permit the deck to drain.
 The overlay surface shall be completely covered with clean, wet burlap. The burlap
 shall be thoroughly saturated over its entire area, but shall be drained of excess water before
 application. Burlap shall be lapped a minimum of 1 ft. (300 mm) and shall lay flat. Failure
 to apply wet burlap within 30 minutes after discharge of the concrete from the truck and within
 10 minutes of the completion of finishing operations shall be cause for rejection of the work as
 determined by the Engineer. Care shall be exercised to ensure that the burlap is well drained.
 Burlap shall be continuously wet for a period by means of automatic intermittent sprinkling or
 a continuous wetting system
 679.3.7.5.1-Curing Latex Modified Concrete: A layer of 4-mil (0.1 mm) thick white
 polyethylene film shall be placed over the burlap as soon as possible. The overlay shall
 then be wet cured for 48 curing hours. Care shall be exercised to ensure the burlap remains
 saturated for the 48-hour cure period. Plastic coated fiber blankets may be substituted for
 the polyethylene film, but shall not replace the initial wet burlap. The film (or fiber
 blankets) shall be anchored along all edges and internally to prevent the loss of moisture
 and from being displaced. After the wet cure, the polyethylene film and burlap shall be
 removed and the concrete shall be air-cured for 48 hours.
 679.3.7.5.2-Curing Microsilica Concrete: Care shall be exercised to ensure that the
 burlap is well drained. Burlap shall be continuously wet for a period of 168 curing hours by
 means of automatic intermittent sprinkling or a continuous wetting system.
 679.4-CONSTRUCTION LIMITATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
 679.4.1-Stockpiling Aggregates: All aggregates shall be stockpiled at the concrete mixing
 site or another location approved by the Engineer. No stockpiling shall be permitted on the bridge
 deck unless approved in writing by the Engineer.
 Stockpiles shall be completely covered and no additions to approved stockpiles are permitted.
 The free moisture content of each aggregate type, at the time of batching, shall not exceed 7%
 of the saturated-surface dry weight of the fine or coarse aggregate or 8% total for both aggregates.
 Fine and coarse aggregates, which are stored in piles or bins, shall be kept entirely separated.
 679.4.2-Storage and Handling of Cement: Suitable provisions shall be made to prevent the
 loss of cement during handling. Cement to be stored shall be kept in suitable weatherproof
 enclosures, which will protect the cement from dampness. Cement, which has developed lumps
 in storage, shall not be used.
 679.4.3-Vehicular and Equipment Restrictions: The operation of vehicles and equipment
 on or over, the structural slab area where concrete removal operations have been started is subject
 to the following restrictions:
 
 754
 
 679.4.3.1-Vehicle Weight Limits: Vehicular traffic is limited to necessary construction
 equipment. No vehicle or construction equipment weighing in excess of 7000 lb., (3175 kg),
 shall be allowed to operate on, or over, any area of structural slab which exhibits unprotected,
 fully exposed reinforcing steel.
 679.4.3.2-Runways: Properly supported runways shall be provided where concrete
 transporting devices operate over exposed reinforcing steel and expansion devices.
 679.4.3.3-Reinforcing Steel Protection: Exposed reinforcing steel shall be protected
 from concrete transporting devices so that no debonding, loosening, bending, or breaking
 occurs. Reinforcement that is damaged by any of the Contractor's operations shall be
 removed and replaced to the satisfaction of the Engineer and at no additional cost to the
 Division.
 679.4.3.4-Loading Limitations during Curing: No construction load shall be permitted
 on new concrete until the specified curing period(s) has been completed. No structural slab
 concrete removal work shall be performed on structural slab areas adjoining new concrete
 during the time the new concrete is curing and until the overlay concrete has attained a
 compressive strength of at least 4,000 psi (28 Mpa) as outlined below.
 No newly placed concrete shall be opened to traffic until the overlay concrete has attained
 a compressive strength of at least 4,000 psi (28 Mpa). This strength shall be determined by
 an average of three compressive strength specimens which have been cured in conditions as
 similar as possible to the concrete which they represent.
 679.4.4-Concrete Placement Limitations: The temperature of the plastic concrete, as
 discharged from the mobile mixer or delivery unit, shall be at least 50˚F (10˚C) but not more
 than 85˚F (30˚C). If conditions are such that, in the opinion of the Engineer, these temperature
 requirements may not be met, the provisions of either Section 601.9.1 or 601.9.2 of the
 Specifications will apply. If the evaporation rate exceeds 0.05 lb./sq. ft. per hour (0.25 kg/sq.
 m per hour) (see Figure 1), the Contractor shall make provisions (i.e. wind breaks, fogging,
 etc.) to reduce the rate to 0.05 lb/sq. ft (0.25kg/sg.m) prior to placing concrete. These provisions
 shall be maintained during the placement of the concrete. If the evaporation rate obtained from
 Figure 1 is close enough to the maximum allowable value of 0.05 lb./sq. ft. per hour (0.25 kg/sq.
 m per hour) that there may a discrepancy in the exact numerical value, the equation listed below
 (EQ 679.4.4) shall be used to obtain a more accurate value. The Evaporation rate shall be checked
 every hour of placement and the results given to the Division.
 Equation 679.4.4:
 𝑬 = (𝑻𝒄𝟐.𝟓 − (𝑯𝑻𝒂𝟐.𝟓 )) ∗ (𝟏 + 𝟎. 𝟒𝑾)(𝟏𝟎−𝟔 )
 Where:
 E = evaporation rate (lb/ft2/h)
 Tc = concrete temperature (F)
 Ta = air temperature (F)
 H = relative humidity % / 100
 W = wind velocity (mph)
 755
 
 679.4.5-Concrete Pavement at Night: If placement of any concrete is to be made at night,
 a plan which provides adequate lighting for the work area shall be submitted at least 14 days
 before concrete is placed for the Engineer's approval.
 679.4.6-Hot Weather Provisions: The requirements of section 601.9.2 and ACI 305R,
 Hot Weather Concreting shall apply except as modified in this section. No concrete shall be
 placed when the ambient air temperature or deck surface temperature, after prewet, is above
 756
 
 85° F (30° C). Concrete may be placed at an ambient air temperature of 85° F (30° C), if the
 deck temperature, after prewet, is no higher than 85° F (30° C), and falling temperatures are
 predicted, and then only if the prediction indicates a temperature of under of 85° F (30° C) for
 the placement period. The time limitations for the placement of wet burlap, as required by
 679.3.7.5, shall also apply.
 679.4.7-Cold Weather Provisions: The requirements of section 601.9.1 shall apply
 except as modified in this section. No concrete shall be placed if the ambient air temperature
 or deck surface temperature after prewet, is below 50° F (10° C), except as noted. Concrete
 may be placed at an ambient air temperature of 50° F (10° C) if the deck surface temperature,
 after prewet, is no less than 50° F (10° C) and rising air temperatures are predicted, and then
 only if the prediction indicates a temperature of over 50° F (10° C) for the eight hours
 immediately after placement. If air temperatures are such that the minimum temperature will
 not be met, the Contractor may place concrete if external heat is provided (refer to 679.4.8).
 If the curing temperature, as defined in section 679.1.2.4, drops below 45° F (7° C) during
 the curing period, then the surface shall be enclosed and external heat shall be provided in
 accordance with the provisions of 679.4.8. The time required for tenting will not be counted
 as curing time. Once external heat provisions are required, they shall remain on the surface
 until curing is complete, regardless of the ambient air temperature.
 If curing temperature falls below 32° F (0° C), at any time during the curing period, the
 concrete will be rejected.
 Continuous wetting shall be replaced by wetting at regular intervals if, in the opinion of
 the Engineer, expected air temperatures could result in freezing of run-off water.
 679.4.8-External Heat Provisions: The provisions of ACI 306, Cold Weather Concreting,
 and the following modifications shall apply:
 a. Temperature limits shall be maintained for 168 curing hours.
 b. If the concrete is latex modified concrete, then steam equipment shall not be used to
 supply external heat after the initial 48 curing hours.
 c. Enclosures for heat retention shall be properly vented to prevent surface disintegration
 from carbon dioxide gas.
 d. Continuous wetting will not be required, but the burlap shall be kept wet by wetting at
 regular intervals in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer for microsilica concrete.
 679.4.9-Defective or Damaged Concrete: After the overlay has been cured, the Contractor
 in the presence of the Engineer shall sound the deck in order to detect delaminated areas. All
 defective or damaged concrete, as determined by the Engineer, shall be repaired or replaced at no
 additional cost to the Division. Defects shall include but not be limited to delaminations, cracking,
 tearing, damage or other imperfections. The Contractor shall propose repair methods for approval
 by the Engineer. All concrete requiring removal and replacement, as determined by the Engineer,
 shall be removed by sawcutting the perimeter to a depth of ¾ in. ± 1/8 in. (19 mm ± 3 mm).
 Damaged concrete shall then be chipped out to the level of the original prepared surface. The
 chipped face shall not undercut the sawcut and shall have a slope of approximately 45°. Chipping
 hammers shall use only chisel bits. The prepared surface shall be blastcleaned prior to reapplying
 the overlay concrete.
 
 757
 
 679.5-FINAL BRIDGE DECK FINISH:
 679.5.1-Straightedge Test: After defective or damaged concrete has been repaired and
 cured in accordance with 679.4.9 and before opening to traffic, the bridge deck shall be
 grooved perpendicular (or radial) to the centerline of the roadway. Prior to grooving, the entire
 deck shall be checked by the Contractor in the presence of the Engineer with an approved
 rolling straightedge as outlined in section 601.11.4.
 679.5.2-Finished Deck Grooving: After corrective grinding and before opening to traffic,
 grooves shall be cut into the concrete using a mechanical saw. These grooves shall be 0.10 inch
 (2.5 mm) wide and 0.25 inch (6 mm) deep. Groove spacing shall be 1.5 inches (37 mm) center
 to center. No later than one week prior to grooving operations, the Contractor shall provide
 the Engineer with two accurate, easily readable gauges with which to verify groove
 dimensions. Groove depth and spacing tolerances are limited to ±1/16 inch (1.5 mm). Groove
 width tolerances are +0.02 inch (0.5 mm) and -0.0 inch (0 mm). Grooves shall be cut
 continuously across the deck to within 1 ft. (300 mm) of gutter lines or drainage structures.
 Grooves shall also be continuous across the full width of the deck surface including
 construction joints. Grooves shall terminate within 1 in. (25 mm) of any exposed metal
 component or elastomeric concrete of an expansion joint. When the deck is skewed and the
 contractor is using gang blades to saw the grooves, the maximum distance (measured
 perpendicular to the centerline of the expansion joint) from the last groove termination in the
 pass to the expansion joint shall be 1 ft., 8 inches (200 mm). Radial grooving shall be
 performed in increments limited to 12 ft. (3.6 m) of bridge length.
 679.6-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 679.6.1-General: The quantity of work performed for Concrete Deck Overlay shall be
 measured in square yards (meters). This quantity includes the removal of the existing deck
 surface and delivery of newly installed deck surface.
 679.6.2-Removal of Existing Surface:
 679.6.2.1-The removal of the existing deck surface as described in section 679.3.1.1
 shall be one half ( ½ ) the field measured deck area to be removed and paid at the unit bid
 price for Item 679001 Concrete Deck Overlay.
 679.6.2.2-The removal of the existing deck surface as described in section 679.3.1.2
 shall be the actual field measured areas in square yards (meters) of the locations and paid
 at the unit bid price for Item 679001 Concrete Deck Overlay.
 679.6.2.3-Full Depth Removal: It is reasonably expected that full depth removal of
 material will be encountered on the project at various locations.
 The Contractor will be required to fully repair such locations accounting for up to and
 including 2% (two percent) of the deck area for the individual bridge deck being overlaid
 at no additional cost to the Division.
 As determined by the Engineer, when full depth repairs exceed 2% of the each bridge
 deck area being overlaid, the Contractor shall be paid $200 per square yard (SY) for each
 square yard (or fraction thereof) in excess of the 2% described above.
 
 758
 
 For clarity, the phrase “each bridge deck being overlaid” is not a cumulative Project
 total bridge area, but instead refers to a single bridge’s total deck surface area. It is likely
 a project will contain multiple bridges to be overlaid. Expansion dam area locations shall
 not be included in the bridge deck surface area measured.
 679.6.3-Newly Installed Deck Surface: The concrete and other materials used in the
 installation of the new deck surface once accepted by the Division shall be paid as one half (½)
 the field measured deck area as measured in section 679.6.2.1 and paid at the unit bid price for
 Item 679001 Concrete Deck Overlay
 679.6.3.1-Blast Cleaning: During New Construction projects only where no removal
 of existing surface is required, Blastcleaning of the deck surface as described in section
 679.3.3, shall be paid at the unit bid price for 679001 Concrete Deck Overlay.
 Measurement shall be in square yard (meters) at one half (½) the actual field measured area
 to be Blastcleaned.
 679.6.4-Test Slab: will be measured on a lump sum basis complete in place. This shall
 include the complete execution of work required herein, regardless of the number of test slabs
 constructed. This item may be deleted at the discretion of the Engineer.
 679.6.5-Slab Reconstruction Concrete: The quantity of work performed for Slab
 Reconstruction Concrete shall be incidental to Item 679001 Concrete Deck Overlay. Slab
 Reconstruction Concrete placed monolithic with the overlay shall be included in the overlay
 quantity.
 679.7-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price bid
 for the items listed below. The price and payment shall be full compensation for all material
 removal and for furnishing and placing all the materials and doing all the work herein prescribed
 in an acceptable manner including materials and doing all the work herein prescribed in an
 acceptable manner including all labor, tools, equipment, supplies and incidentals necessary to
 complete the work.
 679.7.1-Rideability Price Adjustments: Section 601.15.2 of the Standard Specifications
 shall apply to the finish requirements of the specialized concrete overlay.
 679.8-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 679001-*
 679006-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Concrete Deck Overlay
 Test Slab
 
 * Sequence number
 
 SECTION 680-BLANK
 759
 
 UNIT
 Square Yard (Meter)
 Lump Sum
 
 SECTION 681
 ASBESTOS ABATEMENT
 681.1-GENERAL:
 681.1.1-Description of Work: The work to be performed under this section of the
 specifications comprises the furnishing of all labor, materials and equipment for completion of
 all work as shown elsewhere within this Special Provision and/or the Contract Plans. This
 work includes handling and removal of asbestos containing materials, and the incidental
 procedures, materials and equipment required to protect workers and/or occupants of the
 structure and adjacent areas from contact with airborne asbestos containing materials.
 All asbestos materials shall be disposed of in a landfill approved by the West Virginia
 Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Water and Waste Management, Solid
 Waste.
 This work is to be performed by a Certified/West Virginian Licensed Asbestos Abatement
 Contractor.
 681.1.2-Definitions: Except as specifically defined otherwise, the following definitions
 apply generally to the work of this section.
 Abatement: Procedures to control fiber release from asbestos containing materials,
 including removal of asbestos containing material (ACM) as per this specification.
 Air Monitoring: The process of measuring the fiber content of a specific volume of air in
 a stated period.
 Amended Water: Water to which a surfactant has been added.
 Asbestos: Fibrous silicates with a crystalline structure, including chrysotile, amosite,
 crocidolite, tremolite, anthophyllite and actinolite.
 Asbestos Abatement Contractor: Certified/WV Licensed Asbestos Contractor.
 Asbestos Fibers: Asbestos fibers having an aspect ratio of 3:1 and longer than five (5)
 micrometers.
 Authorized Visitor: WVDOH personnel, Authorized Agent of the WVDOH or a
 representative of any regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the project.
 Class I Project: A Class I project as defined in OSHA as being abatement of asbestos
 containing insulating, surfacing and/or thermal surfacing materials.
 Class II Project: A Class II project as defined in OSHA as being the abatement of any
 asbestos containing material other than insulating, surfacing and/or thermal surfacing
 materials.
 
 760
 
 Clean Room: An uncontaminated area or room, which is part of the worker
 decontamination enclosure system, with provision for storage of workers street clothes and
 protective equipment.
 Curtained Doorway: A device to allow ingress or egress from one room or area to another
 while permitting minimal air movement between the rooms or areas. This curtained
 doorway is typically constructed by placing two (2) overlapping sheets of plastic over an
 existing or temporarily framed doorway and securing each along the top of the doorway.
 Secure the vertical edge of one (1) sheet along the side of the doorway and secure the
 vertical edge of the other sheet along the opposite side of the doorway.
 Decontamination Enclosure System: A series of connected rooms, with curtained
 doorways between adjacent rooms, for the decontamination of the workers, materials or
 equipment.
 Equipment Decontamination Enclosure System: A decontamination enclosure system
 for materials and equipment, typically consisting of a designated area of the work area, a
 washroom, a holding area or an uncontaminated area.
 Equipment Room: A contaminated area or room, which is part of the worker
 decontamination enclosure system, with provisions for storage of contaminated clothing
 and equipment.
 HEPA Filter: A filter capable of trapping and retaining at least 99.97% of all monodispersed particles of 0.3 micrometers in diameter.
 High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) Vacuum Equipment: HEPA filtered
 vacuuming equipment.
 Holding Area: A chamber between the washroom and an uncontaminated area in the
 equipment decontamination enclosure system.
 Negative Pressure: A local exhaust system capable of maintaining a minimum pressure
 differential of minus 0.02 inches of water column relative to adjacent unsealed areas.
 Removal: All herein specified procedures necessary to strip asbestos containing materials
 from the designated areas and to dispose of these materials at an acceptable site.
 Shower Room: A room between the clean room and the equipment room in the work
 decontamination enclosure system, with hot and cold running water and suitably arranged
 for complete showering during decontamination.
 Surfactant: A chemical wetting agent added to water to improve penetration, thus
 reducing the quantity of water required for a given operation or area.
 
 761
 
 Washroom: A room between the work area and the holding area in the equipment
 decontamination enclosure system to be used for personal decontamination.
 Worker Decontamination Enclosure System: A decontamination enclosure system for
 workers, typically consisting of a clean room, a shower room and an equipment room.
 Wet Cleaning: The process of eliminating asbestos contamination from building surfaces
 and objects by using cloths, mops or other cleaning tools which have been dampened with
 amended water and afterwards disposing of these cleaning tools as asbestos contaminated
 waste.
 681.1.3-Applicable Regulation, Standards and Guidance Regulations: The Contractor
 shall comply with the following regulations. If conflicts occur between these regulations and
 specifications, the more stringent requirements shall apply.
 A. Title 29, Code of Federal Regulations, 1910.134 (Respiratory Protection), 1910.145
 (Specifications for Accident Prevention Signs and Tags), Occupational Safety and
 Health Administration (OSHA), U.S. Department of Labor.
 B. Title 29, Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 1926.1101, Occupational Safety and
 Health Administration (OSHA), U.S. Department of Labor.
 C. Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 61, Subpart M, National Emission
 Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
 (NESHAPS) Asbestos Regulations.
 D. West Virginia Legislative Rule, 64 CSR 63 Department of Health, Asbestos Abatement
 Licensing Rule.
 E. All regulations related to environmental protection and pollution control relating to
 asbestos removal and disposition.
 681.1.3.1-Guidance Documents: The following documents will supply guidance for
 the project and shall be utilized.
 1. A Guidance for Controlling Asbestos Containing Material in Buildings: EPA
 Publication (560/5-85-004).
 2. EPA Adequately Wet Guidance Document
 681.1.4-Submittals, Notices and Documentation: Ten (10) working days prior to
 commencement of work (regardless of the presence of ACM), the Contractor shall notify in
 writing, with a copy to the Division, the following agencies:
 
 762
 
 Asbestos NESHAP Coordinator
 (3WC32)
 US EPA Region III
 1650 Arch Street
 Philadelphia, PA 19103
 
 West Virginia Department of
 Environmental Protection
 Division of Air Quality
 601 57th Street SE
 Charleston, West
 Virginia 25304-2345
 ATTN: Asbestos Coordinator
 
 West Virginia Department of
 Environmental Protection
 Division of Water & Waste
 Management, Solid Waste
 601 57th Street SE
 Charleston, West
 Virginia 25304-2345
 ATTN: Asbestos Coordinator
 
 West Virginia Department of
 Health & Human Resources
 Office of Environmental Health
 Services
 Radiation, Toxics and Indoor Air
 Division Capitol and Washington
 Streets One Davis Square, Suite 200
 Charleston, WV 25301-1798
 
 The Contractor shall maintain copies of all required notifications and of all the following
 documents at the job site:
 1. Copies of air monitoring.
 2. Copies of negative air pressure readings taken once per shift (on Class I projects).
 3. Work schedule and updated progress chart depicting all phases of the work and
 completion dates.
 4. A daily log of personnel having entered the work area.
 681.1.5-Pre-Abatement Meeting: The Contractor and/or the Asbestos Abatement
 Contractor shall meet with the Engineer prior to beginning work to discuss in detail the
 asbestos plan, including work procedures and safety precautions. The plan must be approved,
 in detail, by the Engineer, prior to the start of any abatement.
 The Contractor shall also submit to the Engineer the following information:
 1. An Abatement Plan that complies with 64 CSR 63-8 which includes the location of
 regulated areas, decontamination system and layout, sequencing of asbestos related
 work, disposal plan, air monitoring plan, description of personal protective equipment
 to be used, and detailed description of all abatement methods to be used. A WV
 Licensed Asbestos Project Designer must sign this plan.
 2. Copies of Training Certificates, a Photo I.D. and WV Licenses for each employee that
 will be involved with this project.
 681.1.6-Personnel Protection: The Asbestos Abatement Contractor shall provide for all
 workers, supervisors, inspectors and monitoring technicians, disposable paper-type protective
 overalls plus head and shoe covers as required by OSHA regulations. Respiratory equipment
 selection shall be based on OSHA requirement in 1926.1101.
 All persons entering a regulated area shall wear an approved respirator and protective
 clothing.
 Eye protection and hard hats shall be available as required.
 763
 
 The Asbestos Abatement Contractor shall provide a minimum of one set of personal
 protective equipment for use by a Division authorized visitor(s).
 681.1.7-Security: The Asbestos Abatement Contractor shall provide and post all required
 warning signs in accordance with OSHA regulations. The Contractor is responsible for
 securing the regulated area from unauthorized personnel.
 681.1.8-Air Monitoring and Testing: All exposure air monitoring shall be conducted in
 accordance with 1926.1101 of OSHA Regulations. The analysis of all air samples shall be
 conducted by a certified and licensed independent testing laboratory that is not owned or
 financially related to the Asbestos Abatement Contractor. Air sample results shall be posted
 within 24 hours of the assessment.
 For all Class I projects, the Asbestos Abatement Contractor shall be responsible for hiring
 a Testing Laboratory to conduct perimeter samples outside the regulated area. The Contractor
 shall send to the Engineer the results of all air monitoring tests conducted by the Asbestos
 Abatement Contractors testing laboratory. No Class I abatement shall be performed without
 the air-monitoring technician being notified.
 681.1.9-Asbestos Contamination Limits: If activities create a visible escape of dust from
 the work area, the Asbestos Abatement Contractor shall immediately cease abatement work
 and further seal the work area and apply additional wetting agent.
 If air test results from inside the work area or in the breathing zone of one of the employees
 exceeds the OSHA (TWA) Permissible limit, all workers inside the work area will be required
 to wear powered air purifying respirators until subsequent air tests show the asbestos levels
 have dropped below the permissible limit. At this time negative pressure half mask respirators
 may again be used.
 If testing outside the work area indicates that the levels of asbestos exceed 0.01 fibers per
 cubic centimeter or above the background levels, then abatement work shall cease. The
 enclosure will be further sealed and additional wetting agents applied. Work shall resume only
 upon approval of the Engineer.
 681.1.10-Contractor’s Certification: The Contractor shall provide written certification
 to the Engineer that the abatement as shown in the contract plans has been completed according
 to OSHA, EPA and West Virginia 64 CSR 63.
 681.2-EXECUTION:
 681.2.1-General: Work Procedures: Perform asbestos related work in accordance with
 29 CFR 1910.1001 and as specified within this provision. Use wet removal procedures.
 Personnel shall wear and utilize protective clothing and equipment as specified herein. Eating,
 smoking or drinking shall not be permitted in the asbestos work area. Personnel other than
 those engaged in the removal and demolition of asbestos shall not be exposed at any time to
 airborne concentrations of asbestos unless all the personnel protection provisions of this
 specification are complied with.
 681.2.2-Preparation of Work Area: Establish a regulated area as required by 1926.1101.
 All Class I and Class II asbestos work shall be conducted in a properly demarcated regulated
 764
 
 area. Critical barriers shall be placed over all openings into the regulated area for all Class I
 and Class II projects. These critical barriers shall consist of one or more layers of plastic
 sheeting, portable partitions, temporary wood partitions or other enclosures and shall be used
 to prevent the escape of asbestos fibers.
 Shut down and isolate heating, cooling and ventilation air systems in affected areas of the
 structure to prevent contamination and fiber dispersal to other areas. All air supply and return
 vents within the work areas shall be sealed with duct tape and two layers of plastic sheeting.
 In no case shall the structure ventilation system be used as a part of the local exhaust system
 for the asbestos work area, nor shall any fans or room ventilators be in operation during
 abatement work.
 Remove all heating, ventilation and air conditioning system filters located in the work
 areas, spray with amended water and pack impermeable clear plastic bags (6-mil thickness
 minimum) with proper labeling for disposal in the approved waste site.
 Pre-clean the regulated area prior to installing plastic sheeting over walls, floors and other
 stationary items is required if visible contamination exists. This cleaning shall be performed
 using HEPA filtered vacuum equipment or wet cleaning methods as appropriate. Methods that
 raise dust, such as dry sweeping or vacuuming with equipment not equipped with HEPA filters
 is prohibited.
 For Class I work, cover floor and wall surfaces with plastic sheeting sealed with duct tape.
 Cover floors with two (2) layers of 6-mil plastic sheeting, extending the plastic 12 inches (304
 mm) up the walls. Then cover the walls with one layer of 6 mil plastic sheeting to the floor
 level, overlapping the floor covering a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) and seal with duct
 tape.
 When tape is insufficient to support plastic sheeting or where existing finishes may be
 damaged by the application of plastic sheeting, the Asbestos Abatement Contractor shall
 construct temporary wood frame supports for the plastic sheeting. All remaining equipment
 and other items that will not be removed are to be covered with 6-mil plastic sheeting and
 sealed with duct tape.
 Emergency and fire exits from the work areas are to be maintained.
 681.2.3-Local Exhaust System (Negative Pressure): On Class I work the Asbestos
 Abatement Contractor must provide a local exhaust system in compliance with 29 CFR
 1926.1101. Each exhaust unit must be equipped with pre-filters and a HEPA filter through
 which air from the work area is drawn and exhausted. The exhaust unit(s) shall be located
 opposite to and at the farthest side from the make-up air entrance to the work area, so the makeup air enters the work area through the decontamination facility and travels across the work
 area. The structure ventilation system shall not be used as any part of the local exhaust system
 for the asbestos control area, nor shall any fans or room ventilators be in operation during the
 abatement work. All supply and return air openings are to be closed and sealed.
 Position the exhaust unit inside the work area and exhaust through the windows, door or
 other openings to the exterior of the structure through the use of flexible duct connections
 sealing around the ducts with plastic and tape. Exhaust into the construction area will be
 permitted only upon approval of the Engineer.
 Local exhaust equipment shall be supplied in a sufficient quantity to produce a minimum
 of four (4) air changes per hour in each removal area. A spare unit shall be kept on site at all
 times to ensure continuous negative air operations. The exhaust units shall be started prior to
 765
 
 beginning removal operations and shall run continuously to maintain a constant negative
 pressure. Filters are to be replaced as required to maintain the efficiency of the system.
 The Contractor shall provide a viewing window of 9 square feet (1 square meter) showing
 the enclosed work area.
 681.2.4-Decontamination Enclosure Systems: The Contractor shall provide personal
 hygiene facilities in compliance with 1926.1101.
 All Class I projects involving quantities of ACM greater than 100 square feet (30.5 square
 meters) require a decontamination system that includes a clean room, shower room and
 equipment room. (See Figure 1-Typical Decontamination Enclosure System)
 Access between any two (2) rooms within the decontaminated enclosure systems shall be
 through a curtained doorway. Both the work decontamination system and the equipment
 decontamination enclosure system shall contain lighted emergency exit signs on the doors of
 the enclosures.
 A worker decontamination enclosure system is to be constructed contiguous to the work
 area and consist of three (3) totally enclosed chambers. These chambers shall be:
 a. Clean Room: In this area a person can dress in clean disposable coveralls and store
 clean respiratory protection equipment. No asbestos contaminated items shall enter
 this room.
 b. Shower Room: This is a separate area used for showering upon leaving the work area.
 This is a contaminated area.
 c. Equipment Room: This is a change and storage area for people and equipment. This
 is a contaminated area.
 The equipment room shall have a curtained doorway to the work area.
 The shower room shall contain at least one (1) shower for every 10 workers and be
 equipped with hot and cold water with temperature controls. Careful attention shall be paid to
 the shower enclosure to insure against leakage of any kind. A supply of soap and shampoo is
 to be on hand at all times in the shower room.
 Wastewater from the shower room shall pass through a 5-micron HEPA hydraulic filter
 before being allowed to enter the structures sanitary sewer system.
 The equipment decontamination enclosure system for Class I projects shall consist of two
 (2) totally enclosed chambers as follows:
 a. A washroom used to remove contamination from bagged or wrapped ACM. Any
 wastewater from this washroom must be filtered or contained and disposed of as
 contaminated material as noted previously.
 b. A holding area with a curtained doorway to an uncontaminated area.
 For Class II projects as well as Class I projects less 100 square feet (30.5 square meter),
 the contractor shall establish an equipment room consisting of a drop cloth adjacent to the
 regulated area. The area must be of sufficient size to accommodate cleaning of equipment and
 removing personal protective equipment without spreading contamination beyond this area.
 Personal protective clothing shall be cleaned with a HEPA vacuum before it is removed.
 All barriers and plastic linings are to be effectively sealed and taped. Immediate repair of
 any damage or defects is to be completed upon discovery. A visual inspection of the enclosures
 is to be done at the beginning of each work shift.
 766
 
 681.2.5-Entry And Decontamination: All workers and visitors leaving the work area
 must follow the decontamination sequence. Contaminated respirators are to be worn into the
 shower and are not to be removed until they have been washed to remove any dust. Cartridges
 are to be removed and properly discarded. Respirators that have been thoroughly washed are
 to be stored in the clean room ready for reuse.
 Work Entry Sequence: All persons are to be logged in as they enter. Non-employees
 must sign the attached wavier before entering. The sequence for entry shall be as follows:
 For Class I projects, the worker enters the clean room and changes from street clothes into
 clean protective disposal clothing, including footwear, and don the appropriate respirator. A
 positive/negative pressure fit check is performed to insure proper fitting. When all required
 protective equipment has been donned, the worker proceeds into the work area.
 For Class II projects, employees shall don personal protective equipment prior to entering
 the regulated area.
 Work Exit Sequence: For Class I projects, the worker shall remove all gross contamination
 and debris from coveralls and footwear by wet wiping or HEPA vacuuming prior to entering
 the equipment room. The worker then proceeds to the equipment room. All clothing except
 for respiratory equipment is to be removed. Extra work clothing may be stored as contaminated
 materials in the equipment room. Disposable coveralls shall be placed in plastic bags for
 disposal with other contaminated material. The worker shall then proceed to the shower room
 and wash; removing the respirator last so as to prevent inhalation of fibers during
 decontamination.
 After showering, the worker enters the clean room and dresses in new coveralls (if
 returning to the work area) or street clothing (if leaving).
 For Class II projects, the worker shall step onto the drop cloth and HEPA vacuum the
 protective clothing prior to its removal. The respirator shall be thoroughly cleaned after
 doffing.
 Filters in the respirators shall be removed when wet and shall be treated as contaminated
 waste. A new filter shall be placed in the respirator prior to reuse.
 There shall be no smoking, eating or drinking in the regulated area or the decontamination
 area.
 681.2.6-Asbestos Removal: Asbestos removal techniques used by the Asbestos
 Abatement Contractor shall comply with OSHA, EPA and West Virginia regulations. Unless
 prior written approval is received from EPA and the Engineer, amended water shall be used to
 adequately wet all ACM removed or disturbed by the Asbestos Abatement Contractor.
 681.2.6.1-Class I Projects: The following procedures shall be used on all Class I
 project:
 a. The project shall be supervised by a competent person.
 b. Critical barriers shall be installed over all openings to the regulated area (inside
 projects only).
 c. All persons in the regulated area shall be equipped with respiratory protection.
 d. A negative pressure enclosure or glove bag shall be used
 e. ACM shall not be dropped more than 10 feet (3.5 meters).
 
 767
 
 681.2.6.2-Class II Projects: The following procedures shall be used on all Class II
 projects:
 a. All persons in the regulated area shall be equipped with respiratory protection
 and protective clothing.
 b. The project shall be supervised by a competent person
 c. Critical barriers shall be installed over all openings to the regulated area unless
 a negative exposure assessment has been produced or the project is conducted
 outside.
 d. Removal of asbestos containing flooring materials shall be conducted in
 accordance with 1926.1101
 e. Removal of asbestos containing roofing materials shall be conducted in
 accordance with 1926.1101
 f. Roofing ACM and cementitious asbestos containing siding and shingles or
 transite panels shall not be dropped to the ground. These materials shall be
 immediately lowered to the ground via covered dust-tight chute, crane or hoist,
 or placed in an impervious waste bag or wrapped in plastic sheeting and lowered
 to the ground no later than the end of the work shift.
 681.2.7-Site Inspection: While performing work, the Asbestos Abatement Contractor
 may be subject to on-site inspections by a representative of the WVDOH, USEPA, WVDEP
 and/or WVDHHR, during the abatement process.
 If the work is found to be in violation of this specification, the Engineer will be requested
 to issue a stop work order to be in effect immediately and until the violation is resolved.
 Standby time required resolving the violation shall be at the Contractors expense.
 If at any time, the Engineer determines that work practices of the Contractor are violating
 pertinent regulations, endangering workers or not complying with these specifications; The
 Engineer will immediately notify in writing the Asbestos Abatement Contractor's on-site
 representative that operations are to cease until corrective actions are taken.
 681.2.8-Cleanup: Throughout the abatement project, maintain surfaces in the work area
 free of accumulations of asbestos fibers, dust and debris. All visible accumulations of asbestos
 material and debris are to be removed by wet cleaning or HEPA vacuuming. Give special
 attention to restricting the spread of dust and debris. Prevent waste from being distributed over
 the general area.
 Wet-clean all surfaces in the work area. Remove only the plastic sheets from floors and
 walls before work area is certified as asbestos free. Windows, doors and HVAC vents shall
 remain sealed and any HEPA filtered negative air pressure systems, air filtration and
 decontamination enclosure systems shall remain in service.
 Clean all surfaces in the work area and any other contaminated areas with water and/or
 with HEPA filtered vacuum equipment. After cleaning the work area, wait 24 hours to allow
 for settlement of dust, and again wet clean or clean with a HEPA filtered vacuum all surfaces
 in the work area. After completion of the second cleaning operation, a complete visual
 inspection of the work area to ensure that the work area is free of visible debris is to be
 performed.
 Sealed drums and all equipment used in the work area shall be included in the cleanup and
 shall be removed from work areas through the equipment decontamination enclosure system
 at the appropriate time in the cleaning sequence.
 768
 
 When the final inspection determines that the area is free of accumulations of visible debris
 and a final air test shows that the concentration of asbestos fibers is less than 0.01 fibers per cc
 (or the predetermined baseline), the decontamination enclosures system shall be removed, and
 the area thoroughly cleaned with HEPA filtered vacuum equipment then windows, doors and
 vents can be unsealed and material from these areas and the equipment and shower rooms
 disposed of as contaminated waste. The Engineer is to be notified before the regulated area
 has been deemed an unrestricted entry area.
 681.2.9-Disposal: Collect asbestos waste, scrap, debris, bags, containers, equipment and
 asbestos contaminated clothing which may produce air borne concentrations of asbestos fibers
 and place them in sealed, clear impermeable bags. Each bag shall be labeled according to
 OSHA, EPA and DOT requirements. Dispose of waste asbestos material in accordance with
 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and West Virginia regulations at an approved
 landfill. For temporary storage, the sealed impermeable clear bags may be stored in asbestos
 waste drums or skids.
 681.2.10-Forms: Sample forms located on the Divisions Specifications Website and
 specified are listed as follows and shall be submitted to the Engineer as required:
 a. Air Test Samples Sampling Data Sheet
 b. Ten Day Notice Form
 c. Asbestos Disposal Form
 d. Employee Release Form
 e. Asbestos Abatement Observer's Wavier and General Release
 f. Declaration of Witness
 Specifications Website:
 http://www.transportation.wv.gov/highways/contractadmin/specifications/Pages/default.aspx
 681.3-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The quantity of work done will be on a lump sum basis.
 681.4-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The quantities, determined as provided, will be paid for at the contract unit price for the
 items listed below. The prices and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing of material
 and performing all the work prescribed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all
 tools, equipment, supplies and incidentals necessary to complete the work. All incidental work and
 materials for which no basis of payment is provided will be considered as completely covered by
 the prices bid for the items included in the Contract.
 681.5-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 681001-*
 681002-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Asbestos Abatement, Class I
 Asbestos Abatement, Class II
 
 UNIT
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 
 * Sequence number
 
 SECTION 682 THROUGH SECTION 684-BLANK
 769
 
 SECTION 685
 BRIDGE CLEANING
 685.1 DESCRIPTION:
 The cleaning work shall consist of three phases of cleaning. Phase-One will be a dry, prewash cleaning, followed by two-phase water cleaning. All dry, pre-wash cleaning shall be
 performed prior to any water cleaning, and all water cleaning shall be performed prior to surface
 preparation and painting operations. With approval of the Engineer, the Contractor may break this
 work up into sections or bays.
 685.1.1-Phase One: This phase shall consist of cleaning by dry methods all loose dirt and
 debris from all areas as noted in the plans. This phase shall be completed prior to any washing
 operations. Collection may include the use of brooms, brushes, shovels, wheelbarrows,
 buckets, vacuums, or other suitable means.
 685.1.2-Phase Two: This phase shall consist of washing completely with low pressure
 plain water the entire bridge deck, curbs, parapets, sidewalks and expansion joints, and any
 other areas as noted in the plans. All drains shall be thoroughly flushed and shall be free
 flowing. All debris and trash shall be removed from the drains. At the nozzle end, the washing
 equipment shall have a minimum pressure of 3000 PSI and a maximum pressure of 4500 PSI.
 685.1.3-Phase Three: This phase shall consist of washing with a mixture of low pressure
 water and a solution of a commercial brand soluble salt remover, any areas as noted in the
 plans. This washing shall be accomplished with a low pressure washer at a minimum pressure
 of 3000 PSI and a maximum pressure of 4500 PSI, at the nozzle end with the nozzle 4” to 8”
 from the surface. Remove all surface abnormalities such as rust scale, peeling paint, or
 blistered paint that would prevent the soluble salt remover from coming into contact with the
 salt contamination. Typically, low pressure water washing is not capable of removing intact
 coating material. The nozzle type shall be a rotary nozzle. The contractor shall follow the
 Manufacturer’s recommendations or specifications for method and rate of application of the
 soluble salt remover. Water shall be from an approved source of drinking water, and the soluble
 salt remover shall be chosen from West Virginia Division of Highways Approved Source List.
 The contractor is to place special emphasis on the top surface of all flanges, connection
 plates, bearings, and excessively rusty or pitted areas. Any areas of the structure that exhibit
 mineral deposits of black iron oxide called “black rust” after any abrasive blasting shall be
 considered contaminated with chlorides and will need an additional washing with the soluble
 salt remover solution and another abrasive blasting.
 
 770
 
 685.2-TESTING OF STRUCTURAL STEEL:
 The maximum level of chloride contamination shall be 5 micrograms/cm2. Testing
 method shall be in accordance with The Society for Protective Coatings (SSPC) Technology Guide
 15, Section 5.2.5, Latex Sleeve Methodology. In the first 150 sq. ft. of cleaning the contractor is
 to determine by sufficient testing of the most deteriorated areas (after rust has been removed), the
 rate of application, nozzle pressure, nozzle distance from surface, and dilution ratio of mixture to
 achieve the desired level of cleanliness. Thereafter, the contractor is to perform test in areas
 designated by the Engineer to insure that the entire structure has attained the specified level of
 cleanliness. The Engineer is to verify the degree of cleanliness. The Engineer’s decision shall be
 final.
 685.3-GENERAL CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY:
 The Contractor’s washing sequence and plans shall not allow the possibility of
 recontamination of the structure before blast cleaning and/or painting operations are completed.
 No cleaning shall be performed when temperatures are such that freezing could occur or that it is
 anticipated that temperatures could drop to freezing while the structure is wet. Equipment,
 methods and materials shall meet the approval of the Engineer. All applicable sections of Section
 107 of the Standard Specifications shall be followed when washing over the railroad, roadways,
 navigational waterways, parking lots etc.
 All applicable sections of Section 107 of the Standard Specifications shall be followed
 regarding dirt and debris from cleaning, paint chips, and dirt and debris containing paint chips.
 685.4-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 Payment for the above described work, including all material, equipment, labor and any
 other incidental work necessary to complete this item, will be considered completely covered by
 the contract unit price for the item below.
 685.5-PAY ITEM:
 ITEM
 685001-*
 
 DESCRIPTION
 Bridge Cleaning
 
 * Sequence number
 
 SECTION 686-BLANK
 
 771
 
 UNIT
 Lump Sum
 
 SECTION 687
 SHOP PAINTING METAL STRUCTURES
 687.1-DESCRIPTION:
 The shop painting (coating) of metal structures shall follow the provided requirements set forth
 in this specification unless otherwise noted in the Contract. This specification shall apply to surface
 preparation, coating application, contractor/fabricator responsibilities, environmental and worker
 protection, and waste handling/disposal.
 687.2-GENERAL:
 687.2.1-Surface Preparation: Shall meet the requirements of this section.
 687.2.1.2-Blasting: The compressed air used for nozzle blasting shall be free of water
 or oil. The cleanliness of each compressed air system shall be verified at least once per
 shift using the blotter test in accordance with ASTM D4285, “Standard Test Method for
 Indicating Oil or Water in Compressed Air”.
 687.2.1.2.1-Commercial: Shall meet the requirements of SSPC-SP 6 prior to painting.
 The appearance of the steel surface after blast cleaning shall correspond to the applicable
 and current SP 6 pictorial standards of SSPC Vis 1.
 687.2.1.2.2-Brush-Off Blast: Shall meet the requirements of SSPC-SP 7 prior to
 painting. The appearance of the steel surface after brush off blast cleaning shall correspond
 to the applicable and current SP 7 pictorial standards of SSPC Vis 1.
 687.2.1.2.3-Near White: Shall meet the requirements of SSPC-SP 10 prior to painting.
 The appearance of the steel surface after blast cleaning shall correspond to the applicable
 and current SP 10 pictorial standards of SSPC Vis 1.
 687.2.1.2.4-White Metal Blast: Shall meet the requirements of SSPC-SP 5 prior to
 painting. The appearance of the steel surface after blast cleaning shall correspond to the
 applicable and current SP 5 pictorial standards of SSPC Vis 1.
 687.2.1.2.5-Blast Media: The abrasives used for all blasting shall meet the guidelines
 set forth in SSPC AB1 for mineral and slag abrasives, and AB3 for ferrous metallic
 abrasives. Any additive mixed with the abrasive shall be approved by the Division prior
 to use. The abrasives used shall produce a height of profile between 1.0 and 3.0 mils (25
 μm and 75 μm). In addition, the container or bag of abrasive shall include the name of the
 abrasive, the name of the manufacturer, and the size of the abrasive. If any additive has
 been included with the abrasive, the name and the percentage of the additive shall be on
 the container or bag.
 687.2.2-Post-Surface Preparation: Surface prep operations shall be performed in such a
 manner that no damage is done to partially or entirely completed portions of the work. After
 surface prep, any areas that are repaired by welding shall be prepped again.
 
 772
 
 Areas repaired by grinding or other means shall have the anchor pattern restored by
 abrasive blasting. Visible deposits of oil, grease, or other contaminants shall be removed
 according to SSPC-SP1"Solvent Cleaning" prior to painting. Dust, loose residues, and the
 removal of abrasives from pockets and corners shall be removed from prepared surfaces by
 brushing, blowing off with clean, dry air, vacuum cleaning. The prepped surface shall be
 checked for cleanliness by wiping a clean, dark cloth across the surface. If residue is present,
 the surface shall be cleaned again and rechecked. All blast cleaned surfaces shall be painted
 prior to any rust bloom or flash rust occurring or within 24 hours, whichever comes first. After
 blast cleaning, surface imperfections that remain (e.g., sharp fins, sharp edges, weld spatter,
 burning slag, scabs, slivers, etc.) shall be removed. Any damage to the surface profile resulting
 from the removal of surface imperfections shall be re-blasted.
 687.3-PAINT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
 687.3.1-Weather Conditions: Painting shall not be done when the ambient temperature
 is below 40° F (5° C) or above 100° F (38° C), or the relative humidity above 90 percent. The
 temperature of the steel must be at least 5° F (3° C) above the dew point. Painting shall not be
 performed when the surface to be coated is sufficiently hot to cause blistering of the film or
 too rapid solvent release.
 687.3.2-Paint Storage: Paint and thinners shall be stored in a temperature-controlled
 environment between 40° F (5° C) and 100° F (38° C). At no time will paint be used beyond
 the manufacturer’s shelf life.
 687.3.3-Paint Application: The blast cleaned surface shall be painted within 24 hours. In
 the event rust bloom or flash rusting occurs, the effected members shall be re-cleaned by
 blasting. The paint shall be applied by spray methods, except those areas inaccessible to spray
 application may be brushed. Brushes, when used, shall have sufficient body and length of
 bristle to spread a uniform coat. Small touch-up areas may be brushed, if approved by the
 Engineer.
 Use of an agitated pot shall be mandatory in spray application of Zinc primer. The agitator
 or stirring rod shall reach within 1 inch (25 mm), of the bottom of the pot and shall be in motion
 at all times during paint application. Coatings shall be mixed in strict accordance with the
 coating manufacturer’s written instructions. Under certain conditions, it may be necessary to
 thin or adjust the solvent balance of the paint. The type and amount of solvent to be used shall
 be that listed on the coating manufacturer’s product data sheet for that material. Upon thinning,
 the dry film thickness requirement shall still be met. Application requirements and drying
 times between coats shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s written instructions. Dry
 film thickness requirements shall be specified in the contract documents. Exposed steel
 surfaces of expansion dams shall be painted as specified for structural steel. Spray guns must
 be equipped with the recommended size tip for the paint product being applied and shall be
 held perpendicular (90 degrees) to, and at, the proper distance from the receiving surface.
 Complete protection shall be provided by the fabricator against paint spatter, spillage,
 overspray, wind-blown paint, or similar releases. For the fully shop painted bridge, the entire
 top of the top flanges for the full length of the girders will only get primer at two mils (50 μm)
 dry.
 
 773
 
 For weathering steel bridges, the ends of the girders, to the length specified in the plans,
 are painted with the whole system, and the top of the top flange at the end of girders is primed
 only at two mils (50 μm) dry. The remaining lengths of the girders are left unpainted.
 687.3.4-Painting Sequence: Shall be in accordance with the following:
 687.3.4.1-Materials: The primer shall meet the requirements of 711.6 or 711.20. The
 fabricator responsible for the largest percentage of the painting will choose a Zinc Rich,
 Low VOC system. Primer coat shall have a maximum VOC of 3.5 lbs/gal (420 g/l).
 Intermediate and top coats shall have a maximum VOC of 2.8 lbs/gal (335g/l).
 687.3.4.2-Paint systems:
 3 COAT: Primer, Intermediate, Top Coat
 2 COAT: Primer, Top Coat
 1 COAT: Epoxy Mastic only
 INORGANIC PRIME COAT:
 All edges, corners, crevices, bolt heads and nuts, all rivet heads, edges of flanges and
 plates, welds, sharp edges, in general all edges, shall receive a dusting coat, by spray
 application, of the same primer as the Full Prime Coat. The dusting shall extend a
 minimum of one inch (2cm) from the edge. The full prime coat shall be applied
 immediately following the dusting coat. No dry film thickness is specified for this coat.
 Inorganic Zinc Primers are NOT to be tinted.
 ORGANIC PRIME COAT:
 All edges, corners, crevices, bolt heads and nuts, all rivet heads, edges of flanges and
 plates, welds, sharp edges, in general all edges, shall receive one stripe coat, by brush
 application, of the same primer as the Full Prime Coat. Striping shall extend a minimum
 of one inch (2cm) from the edge. The prime coat shall at a minimum, be set-to-touch before
 the stripe coat is applied. No dry film thickness is specified for this coat. This coat shall
 be tinted as allowed by the manufacturer to be in contrast to the full prime coat and
 intermediate coat. The tinting agent shall be the paint manufacturer’s approved tinting
 agent.
 FULL PRIME COAT:
 The structure shall receive one coat of a primer meeting the requirements of Section
 711 of the Standard Specifications. The primer used for the full prime coat shall be of the
 same type and shall be from the same manufacturer as the primer used for dusting and
 striping.
 INTERMEDIATE COAT:
 The structure shall receive one uniform coat of a paint meeting the requirements of
 Section 711 of the Standard Specifications. The color shall be in contrast to the prime and
 top coats. If tinting is required, the tinting agent shall be the paint manufacturer’s approved
 tinting agent.
 
 774
 
 CAULKING:
 Caulking shall be applied before the application of the topcoat. This includes all seams
 between diaphragm connections to stiffeners and splices; and seams between any
 connection that is riveted or bolted. Any welded connections that are not fully sealed by
 the weld shall be caulked with a paste type caulk. The caulk shall be pressed into the seams
 between the adjoining surfaces, by wetted finger or specialty tool, to insure bond and
 provide a smooth uniform surface. Caulking in a 3-coat system shall be applied after the
 intermediate coat has cured. Caulking on a 2-coat system shall be applied after prime coat
 has cured. The top coat shall not be applied until the caulking has fully cured in accordance
 with the manufacturer’s recommendations. The caulking material shall be compatible with
 the paint system being applied and shall be by written recommendation of the paint
 manufacturer. The caulking material shall be tested for compatibility with the paint system
 at the same time that the paint is tested for intercoat compatibility. Caulking operations
 shall be performed only when weather conditions are within the parameters as specified in
 section 687.3.1.
 TOP COAT:
 The structure shall receive one uniform coat of paint as designated in the plans meeting
 the requirements of Section 711 of the Standard Specifications. The color shall be as
 designated in the plans and shall be in accordance with current Federal Standard 595.
 NO TOP COAT SYSTEM:
 Prime coated structures that will not be top coated in the field shall meet all the
 requirements of section 687.3, except the dry film thickness shall be a minimum of 4 mils
 (100 μm). In addition, the Contractor shall provide the inspection access and surface
 protection required in section 688.2.4.1. The repair procedures of section 688.3.6 shall
 apply. In order to keep uniformity in the color of the structure, all paint applications will
 require the use of the same product formulation.
 Erection weight and match marks shall be stenciled or painted on structural steel after
 the last shop coat is applied. Surfaces of steel within 2 inches (50 mm) of edges to be field
 welded shall not be painted in the shop.
 687.3.4-Inspection of Applied Paint: If in the opinion of the Engineer the coating has
 flaws other than deficiencies in the prescribed dry film thickness, the material shall be repaired
 or shall be removed and replaced. Defects in the film, including but not limited to runs, sags,
 mud-cracking, lifting, overspray, dry spray, pinholes, and holidays shall be corrected until a
 continuous uniform film has been applied. Excessive film thickness shall be reduced and
 insufficient film thickness shall be increased. If the thickness of the finish coat is reduced, a
 thin coat of the finish shall be reapplied to seal the surface and to blend the area into the
 surrounding coating. Depending on the defect, total removal and replacement of the effected
 coating may be required. No unsightly runs or sags shall be visible. All "mud-cracking" and/or
 "dry overspray" in the paint film shall be removed. Excessive bubbles or pinholes shall not be
 visible in the coat after examination under a minimum of 8X magnification. Calibration of the
 thickness gage and dry film thickness measurements shall be in accordance with MP
 708.40.00.
 
 775
 
 687.3.4.1-Access for Inspection: The Fabricator shall furnish suitable safe access and
 shall provide a time mutually agreed to for inspecting the structural steel prior to and after
 coating. The Division’s inspector shall approve all repairs. When providing suitable safe
 access, rubber rollers or other protective devices shall be used. Metal rollers or clamps and
 other types of fastenings that will mar or damage freshly coated surfaces shall not be used.
 No temporary attachments, supports for access, or forms, shall damage the coating system
 (In particular, on the fascias where bracing is used, sufficient size support pads must be
 provided). Any damage that occurs from such devices shall be repaired.
 687.3.5-Handling Coated Steel: Extreme care shall be exercised when handling the steel
 in the shop, during shipping, erection, and subsequent construction of the bridge. Painted steel
 shall not be moved or handled until sufficient cure time has elapsed to insure no damage is
 done to the fresh coating. The steel shall be insulated from the binding chains by softeners.
 Hooks and slings used to hoist steel shall be padded. To prevent damage to the coating,
 diaphragms and similar pieces shall be spaced in such a way that no rubbing will occur during
 shipment. Upon arrival at the project site, if weather conditions were such that deicing
 materials from the roadway were thrown onto the steel during shipment, the contractor shall
 be responsible for washing the entire surface of the steel with low-pressure water to remove
 chloride contamination. This also includes unpainted portions of weathering steel. Water shall
 be from an approved source of drinking water. The water is to be applied at minimum pressure
 of 3000 PSI (21 Mpa) to a maximum of 4500 PSI (31 Mpa) at the nozzle end, with the nozzle
 held at a distance of 4” (100 mm) to 8” (200 mm) from the surface. After the low-pressure
 wash, a minimum of one area on each piece is to be tested for chloride contamination. The
 testing shall be by the CHLOR*TEST (chloride test kit) method. The maximum chloride
 contamination shall be 5 micrograms/cm². If the degree of contamination is above the
 maximum level, the steel is to be re-washed, using a mixture of low-pressure water and a
 solution of a commercial brand of soluble salt remover, followed by additional testing for
 chloride contamination. The Soluble Salt Remover shall be CHLOR*RID or equal. The steel
 to be washed shall not be erected until it has been washed, tested and accepted. The testing
 also includes unpainted portions of weathering steel.
 687.3.6-Shop Repair: The requirements specified herein for provisions for inspection,
 mixing, thinning, temperature and humidity, and application shall govern the coating of the
 repaired areas. All shop repairs to the coating shall be made in strict accordance with the
 coating manufacturer's recommendations except where the requirements listed in this
 specification are more stringent. The Engineer is to review and accept a repair plan before
 damaged areas are repainted. The repair primer shall be from the same manufacturer as the
 original primer. Surfaces that will be inaccessible for coating after erection shall be repaired
 and/or recoated prior to erection. In order to avoid abrupt changes in paint thickness, the area
 adjacent to repair areas shall transition from zero paint thickness to full system thickness within
 not less than 3 inches (75 mm) of the repair area by means of sanding the transition area. The
 requirements for the dry film thickness of the repair coats are the same as those specified for
 the paint system.
 
 776
 
 Blast cleaning and application of shop primer shall not be required for mechanically
 galvanized or zinc rich painted bolts, nuts and washers. All welds and surfaces from which the
 shop coat of paint has been damaged or is otherwise defective shall be blast cleaned and painted
 in accordance with sections 687.2.
 687.4-SUBMITTALS:
 Submittals shall be forwarded through the Prime Contractor and be accepted by the Engineer
 prior to commencement of the subject work. This is the responsibility of both the Fabricator and the
 Field Contractor. Electronical submittals will be accepted.
 687.4.1-Quality Control Plan for Painting: Minimum requirements and document form
 are set forth in MP 688.02.20.
 
 777
 
 SECTION 688
 FIELD PAINTING OF METAL STRUCTURES
 688.1-DESCRIPTION:
 The field painting (coating) of metal structures shall follow the provided requirements set
 forth in this specification unless otherwise noted in the Contract. This specification shall apply to
 surface preparation, coating application, contractor responsibilities, environmental and worker
 protection, and waste handling/disposal.
 688.2-GENERAL:
 688.2.1-Bridge Pre-Cleaning and Washing: All structures shall be pre-cleaned and
 washed in accordance with Section 685 of the Standard Specifications.
 688.2.2-Surface Preparation:
 688.2.2.1-Non-Blasting: When non-blast cleaning is specified in the contract
 documents, any one or any combination of the methods below shall be used. The surface
 and the surface profile after cleaning shall meet the requirements of the methods below.
 The amount of material, rust scale, and pack rust removed after non-blast cleaning, will
 meet the requirements of the SSPC methods listed:
 1. Hand Tool Cleaning SSPC-SP 2
 2. Power Tool Cleaning SSPC-SP 3
 3. Commercial Grade Power Tool Cleaning SSPC-SP 15
 688.2.2.2-Blasting: The abrasives used for all blasting shall meet the guidelines set
 forth in SSPC AB1 for mineral and slag abrasives, and AB3 for ferrous metallic abrasives.
 Any additive mixed with the abrasive shall be approved by the Division prior to use. The
 abrasives used shall produce a height of profile between 2.0 and 3.0 mils (50 μm and 75
 μm).
 In addition, the container or bag of abrasive shall include the name of the abrasive, the
 name of the manufacturer, and the size of the abrasive. If any additive has been included
 with the abrasive, the name and the percentage of the additive shall be on the container or
 bag.
 The compressed air used for nozzle blasting shall be free of water and oil. The
 cleanliness of each compressed air system shall be verified at least once per shift using the
 blotter test in accordance with ASTM D4285, “Standard Test Method for Indicating Oil or
 Water in Compressed Air”.
 688.2.2.2.1-Commercial: Shall meet the requirements of SSPC-SP 6 prior to painting.
 The appearance of the steel surface after blast cleaning shall correspond to the applicable
 and current SP 6 pictorial standards of SSPC Vis 1.
 688.2.2.2.2-Brush-Off Blast: Shall meet the requirements of SSPC-SP 7 prior to
 painting. The appearance of the steel surface after brush-off blast cleaning shall correspond
 to the applicable and current SP 7 pictorial standards of SSPC Vis 1.
 
 778
 
 688.2.2.2.3-Near White: Shall meet the requirements of SSPC-SP 10 prior to painting.
 The appearance of the steel surface after blast cleaning shall correspond to the applicable
 and current SP 10 pictorial standards of SSPC Vis 1.
 688.2.2.3-Water Jetting: Shall meet the requirements of SSPC-SP 12, section 2.1.6
 “Ultrahigh-Pressure Water Jetting” (UHP WJ), visual standard condition WJ-1, prior to
 painting.
 688.2.2.4-Post-Surface Preparation: Surface prep operations shall be performed in
 such a manner that no damage is done to partially or entirely completed portions of the
 work. After surface prep, any areas that are repaired by welding shall be prepped again.
 Areas repaired by grinding or other means shall have the anchor pattern restored. Visible
 deposits of oil, grease, or other contaminants shall be removed according to SSPC-SP 1
 "Solvent Cleaning" prior to painting. Dust, loose residues, and the removal of abrasives
 from pockets and corners shall be removed from prepared surfaces by brushing, blowing
 off with clean, dry air, vacuum cleaning. The prepped surface shall be checked for
 cleanliness by wiping a clean, dark cloth across the surface. If residue is present, the
 surface shall be cleaned again and rechecked. All blast cleaned surfaces shall be painted
 prior to any rust bloom or flash rust occurring or within 24 hours, whichever comes first.
 688.2.3-Paint Application Requirements:
 688.2.3.1-Weather Conditions: Painting shall not be done when the ambient
 temperature is below 40° F (5° C) or above 100° F (38° C), or the relative humidity above
 90 percent. The temperature of the steel must be at least 5° F (3° C) above the dew point.
 Painting shall not be performed when the surface to be coated is sufficiently hot to cause
 blistering of the film or too rapid solvent release. Painting will only be permitted between
 the dates of April 15th through October 15th. There will be no painting permitted to occur
 in a heated containment.
 688.2.3.2-Paint Storage: Paint and thinners shall be stored in a temperature-controlled
 environment between 40° F (5° C) and 100° F (38° C). At no time will paint be used
 beyond the manufacturer’s shelf life.
 688.2.3.3-Paint Application: The blast cleaned surface shall be painted within 24
 hours. In the event rust bloom or flash rusting occurs, the affected members shall be recleaned by blasting. The paint shall be applied by spray methods, except those areas
 inaccessible to spray application may be brushed or rolled. Brushes or rollers, when used,
 shall have sufficient body and length of bristle or roller nap to spread a uniform coat. Small
 touch-up areas may be brushed or rolled, if approved by the Engineer.
 Use of an agitated pot shall be mandatory in spray application of zinc-rich primer. The
 agitator or stirring rod shall reach within 1 inch (25 mm), of the bottom of the pot and shall
 be in motion at all times during paint application. Coatings shall be mixed in strict
 accordance with the coating manufacturer’s written instructions. Under certain conditions,
 it may be necessary to thin or adjust the solvent balance of the paint. The type and amount
 of solvent to be used shall be that listed on the coating manufacturer’s product data sheet
 
 779
 
 for that material. Upon thinning, the dry film thickness requirement shall still be met by
 appropriately increasing the wet film thickness.
 Application requirements and drying times between coats shall be in accordance with
 the manufacturer’s recommendations. Exposed steel surfaces of expansion dams shall be
 painted as specified for structural steel.
 Spray guns must be equipped with the recommended size tip for the paint product being
 applied and shall be held perpendicular (90 degrees) to, and at, the proper distance from
 the receiving surface. Complete protection shall be provided by the contractor against paint
 spatter, spillage, overspray, wind-blown paint, or similar releases.
 Appropriate containment shall be placed around the work area to protect public and
 private property. Staging must be adequate to provide access to all areas being painted.
 Violation of these requirements causing excessive paint waste will be justification for the
 WVDOH Engineer to order the Contractor to cease all work on the project until corrective
 action has been taken. The method of cleaning and/or replacement shall be submitted to
 the Engineer in advance for approval.
 688.2.3.3.1-Paint Systems:
 3 COAT: Primer, Intermediate, Top Coat
 2 COAT: Primer, Top Coat
 1 COAT: Epoxy Mastic only
 688.2.3.3.2-Painting over Galvanized Surfaces: Painting Galvanized surfaces shall
 be in accordance to the paint manufacturer’s recommendations.
 688.2.3.3.3-Damage to Galvanized Surfaces: The Contractor is to exercise care while
 cleaning and painting around expansion joints and galvanized surfaces. Any damage to
 the expansion joints or galvanized surfaces found by the Engineer, as a result of the
 cleaning and painting operation shall be repaired and/or replaced, to the satisfaction of the
 Engineer, at the Contractor’s expense.
 688.2.4-Inspection Requirements:
 688.2.4.1-Inspection of Applied Paint: If in the opinion of the Engineer the coating
 has flaws other than deficiencies in the prescribed dry film thickness, the material shall be
 repaired or shall be removed and replaced. Defects in the film, including but not limited
 to runs, sags, mud-cracking, lifting, overspray, dry spray, pinholes, and holidays shall be
 corrected until a continuous uniform film has been applied.
 Excessive film thickness shall be reduced and insufficient film thickness shall be
 increased. If the thickness of the finish coat is reduced, a thin coat of the finish shall be
 reapplied to seal the surface and to blend the area into the surrounding coating. Depending
 on the defect, total removal and replacement of the effected coating may be required. No
 unsightly runs or sags shall be visible. All "mud-cracking" and/or "dry overspray" in the
 paint film shall be removed. Excessive bubbles or pinholes shall not be visible in the coat
 after examination under 8X magnification. Calibration of the thickness gage and dry film
 thickness measurements shall be in accordance with MP 708.40.00.
 
 780
 
 688.2.4.2-Access for Inspection: The Contractor shall furnish suitable safe access and
 shall provide a time mutually agreed to for inspecting the structural steel prior to and after
 each coating. The Division’s inspector shall approve all repairs. When providing suitable
 safe access, rubber rollers or other protective devices shall be used. Metal rollers or clamps
 and other types of fastenings that will mar or damage freshly coated surfaces shall not be
 used. No temporary attachments, supports for access, or forms, shall damage the coating
 system. In particular, on the fascias where bracing is used, sufficient size support pads
 must be provided. Any damage that occurs from such devices shall be repaired to the
 satisfaction of the Engineer at the Contractors expense.
 688.2.4.3-Repair Procedures for Field Paint Deficiencies: All field repairs to the
 coating shall be made in strict accordance with the coating manufacturer's recommendations,
 except where the requirements listed in this specification are more stringent. Any products
 used during repairs to the coating deficiencies shall be from the same manufacturer as the
 coating being repaired. All welds from which the coating of paint has been damaged or is
 otherwise defective shall be cleaned and repaired. Surfaces that will be inaccessible for coating
 after erection shall be repaired and/or recoated prior to erection. The Engineer is to review and
 accept a repair plan before deficient areas are repaired. The requirements specified herein for
 provisions for inspection, mixing, thinning, temperature and humidity, and application shall
 govern the coating of the repaired areas. In order to avoid abrupt changes in paint thickness,
 the area adjacent to repair areas shall transition from zero paint thickness to full system
 thickness within not less than 3 inches (75 mm) of the repair area by means of sanding the
 transition area. The requirements for the dry film thickness of the repair coats are the same as
 those specified for the paint system.
 688.2.5-Submittals: Submittals shall be forwarded through the Prime Contractor and be
 accepted by the Engineer prior to commencement of the subject work. This is the responsibility of
 both the Fabricator and the Field Contractor. Electronic submittals will be accepted.
 688.2.5.1-Quality Control Plan for Painting: Minimum requirements and document
 form are set forth in MP 688.02.20.
 688.2.5.2-Containment/Disposal Control Plan for Existing Steel Structures:
 Minimum requirements and document form are set forth in MP 688.03.20.
 688.3-COMPLETE PAINTING OF EXISTING STRUCTURES:
 688.3.1-General: The field coats (total system) of paint shall meet the requirements of
 Section 711. The applicable sections of 711, the dry film thickness and the color shall be as
 specified in the contract documents. Each coat shall be a contrasting color to the one previously
 applied.
 688.3.2-Surface Preparation: All structural steel shall undergo a near-white blast
 cleaning in accordance with SSPPC SP 10. All structural steel is to include 100% of the
 girders, stringers, diaphragms, floor beams, upper and lower chord members, drains, bearing
 devices, etc. In general, all accessible steel surfaces not galvanized, aluminum, or weathering
 steel shall be blast cleaned. All laminar and stratified rust that has formed on the existing steel
 781
 
 surfaces shall be removed. Pack rust formed along the perimeter of mating surfaces of
 connected plates or shapes shall be removed to the extent feasible without mechanically
 detaching the mating surface. The Contractor is to exercise care while cleaning and painting
 around expansion joints, weathering steel, and galvanized surfaces. Any damage to these
 surfaces found by the Engineer as a result of the cleaning and painting operation shall be
 repaired and/or replaced, to the satisfaction of the Engineer, at the Contractor’s expense.
 688.3.3-Paint Application Requirements: Painting shall be in accordance with Section
 688.2.3.3.
 688.3.4-Painting Sequence:
 FULL PRIME COAT:
 The structure shall receive one coat of a primer meeting the requirements of Section
 711 of the Standard Specifications. The full prime coat shall be applied before the
 stripe prime coat. The primer used for the full prime coat and the stripe prime coat
 shall be of the same type and shall be from the same manufacturer. Dry film thickness
 requirements shall be as specified by the manufacturer’s recommendations, or as
 specified in the contract documents.
 STRIPE PRIME COAT:
 All edges, outside corners, seams, bolt heads and nuts, all rivet heads, edges of
 flanges and plates, welds, sharp edges, in general all edges, shall receive one stripe
 coat, by brush or roller application, of the same primer as the Full Prime Coat. Striping
 shall extend a minimum of one inch (2cm) from the edge. The prime coat shall at a
 minimum, be set-to-touch before the stripe coat is applied. No dry film thickness is
 specified for this coat. This coat shall be tinted as allowed by the manufacturer to be
 in contrast to the full prime coat and intermediate coat. The tinting agent shall be the
 paint manufacturer’s approved tinting agent.
 INTERMEDIATE COAT:
 The structure shall receive one uniform coat of a paint meeting the requirements of
 Section 711 of the Standard Specifications. The color shall be in contrast to the prime
 and top coats. If tinting is required, the tinting agent shall be the paint manufacturer’s
 approved tinting agent. The intermediate coat shall not be applied until the primer and
 stripe coat have fully cured according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Dry
 film thickness requirements shall be as specified by the manufacturer’s
 recommendations, or as specified in the contract documents.
 CAULKING:
 Caulking shall be applied before the application of the topcoat. This includes all
 seams between diaphragm connections to stiffeners and splices; and seams between
 any connection that is riveted or bolted. Any welded connections that are not fully
 sealed by the weld shall be caulked with a paste type caulk. The caulk shall be pressed
 into the seams between the adjoining surfaces, by wetted finger or specialty tool, to
 
 782
 
 insure bond and provide a smooth uniform surface. Bottom seams shall not be caulked
 on vertical surfaces.
 Caulking in a 3-coat system shall be applied after the intermediate coat has cured.
 Caulking on a 2-coat system shall be applied after prime coat has cured. The top coat
 shall not be applied until the caulking has fully cured in accordance with the
 manufacturer’s recommendations.
 The caulking material shall be compatible with the paint system being applied and
 shall be by written recommendation of the paint manufacturer. The caulking material
 shall be tested for compatibility with the paint system at the same time that the paint is
 tested for intercoat compatibility. Caulking operations shall be performed only when
 weather conditions are within the parameters as specified in section 688.2.3.1.
 TOP COAT:
 The structure shall receive one uniform coat of paint as designated in the plans
 meeting the requirements of Section 711 of the Standard Specifications. The color
 shall be as designated in the plans and shall be in accordance with current Federal
 Standard 595. Dry film thickness requirements shall be as specified by the
 manufacturer’s recommendations, or as specified in the contract documents.
 688.3.5-Vegetation: Vegetation may need to be trimmed or removed in order to
 accomplish the cleaning or painting of the structure. If allowed by the Contract Documents,
 the Contractor may waste vegetation within the Right-of-Way. Otherwise, any such vegetation
 cut, shall be removed from the site by the contractor. No direct payment will be made for this
 work, but shall be included in the contract price for the item in connections with which it is
 used.
 688.3.6-Utilities: Shall be in accordance with Section 107.17, Contractor Responsibility
 for Utility Property and Services or any other applicable sections of Section 107.
 688.3.7-Paint Designation Label:
 688.3.7.1-Description: The bridge paint designation label shall consist of painting on
 the fascia web of the exterior girder with the following information; the paint system,
 contractor, and the month-year the project was completed. This paint designation label will
 only be utilized during the complete removal and painting of existing or new structures.
 The acronyms and details for the paint designation label will be assigned to the Contractor
 by the Materials Control, Soils and Testing Division when the Quality Control Plan for
 Painting is approved.
 688.3.7.1-Location: The paint designation label will be located at abutment number
 one on the fascia web of the exterior girder with a southern or eastern orientation, and paint
 color shall be a semi-gloss black paint compatible with the topcoat material.
 688.3.7.2-General: All work performed regarding the paint designation label shall be
 considered incidental to the painting of the structure.
 
 783
 
 688.4-ZONE PAINTING OF EXISTING STRUCTURES:
 688.4.1-General: The field coats (total system) of paint shall meet the requirements of
 Section 711. The applicable sections of 711, the dry film thickness shall be in accordance with
 the manufacturer’s recommendations and the color shall be as specified in the contract
 documents. Each coat shall be a contrasting color to the one previously applied. The contract
 documents shall specify the areas to be prepared and zone painted.
 688.4.2-Surface Preparation: The surface shall be prepared as specified in the contract
 documents. Specific instructions will be given on the amount of surface required to be cleaned
 in accordance with the specific standards identified in 688.2.2. All laminar and stratified rust
 that has formed on the existing steel surfaces shall be removed. Pack rust formed along the
 perimeter of mating surfaces of connected plates or shapes shall be removed to the extent
 feasible without mechanically detaching the mating surface. Any rust remaining after cleaning
 shall be tight and intact when examined using a dull putty knife. The tools used to remove
 these corrosion products shall be identified in the submittals and accepted by the Engineer. If
 the surface preparation or removal of rust results in nicks or gouges, the work shall be
 suspended, and the damaged areas repaired to the satisfaction of the Engineer, at the
 Contractor’s expense. The Contractor is to exercise care while cleaning and painting around
 expansion joints and galvanized surfaces. Any damage to the expansion joints or galvanized
 surfaces found by the Engineer, as a result of the cleaning and painting operation shall be
 repaired and/or replaced, to the satisfaction of the Engineer, at the Contractor’s expense.
 688.4.3-Paint Application Requirements: Painting shall be in accordance with Section
 688.2.3.3.
 688.4.4-Painting Sequence: Painting shall be in accordance with Section 688.3.4.
 688.4.5-Vegetation: - Shall be in accordance with Section 688.3.5
 688.4.6-Utilities: Shall be in accordance with Section 107.17, Contractor Responsibility
 for Utility Property and Services or any other applicable sections of Section 107.
 688.5-FIELD PAINTING OF SHOP PRIME-COATED STEEL:
 688.5.1-General: Field painting of new shop prime coated structures: Shall include, unless
 otherwise specified in the contract, the preparation of the primed surface for painting, the
 procurement of all materials to meet the necessary specifications and the application of the
 coatings. In addition, the Contractor shall protect pedestrian, vehicular, and other traffic on or
 underneath the structure from splattering, splashing, or dripping paint. Railings, curbs and all other
 superstructure and substructure shall be protected against spatters, splashes, and the like.
 688.5.2-Sheer Studs: When shear studs are applied in the field, repair to the Prime Coat
 shall be completed to the satisfaction of the Engineer and prior to any and adjoining concrete work.
 688.5.3-Materials: The field coats (Intermediate and/or Top Coats) of paint shall meet the
 requirements of 711.22.3 and 711.22.4. Dry film thickness requirements shall be as specified
 by the manufacturer’s recommendations, or as specified in the contract documents. Each coat
 784
 
 shall be a contrasting color to the previous coat. In addition, the field intercoat adhesion shall be at
 least 3A when tested in accordance with MP 711.00.20.
 688.5.4-Surface Preparation: Prior to field coats, surface contamination such as rust, dirt,
 mud, oil, concrete, loose zinc, salts, or other foreign matter shall be removed. The shop primed
 structural steel shall be pressure washed, with a soluble salt remover from the division’s approved
 product list, at 2000 – 3000 psi (13800 – 20700 kpa). Touch up of the primer shall be in accordance
 with section 688.2.3.3.
 688.5.5-Paint Application Requirements: Painting shall be in accordance with Section
 688.2.3.
 688.5.6-Paint Sequence: Painting shall be in accordance with Section 688.3.4, with the
 exception of the Full Prime Coat and Stripe Coat. Paint containment shall be a minimum of Class
 3P as specified in the current edition of SSPC Guide 6.
 688.6-ENVIRONMENTAL, WORKER PROTECTION, AND WASTE HANDLING:
 688.6.1-General: Environmental protection shall be used when cleaning, painting,
 welding or cutting an existing bridge. The containment class, emission assessment methods
 and levels as defined by the current revision of SSPC Guide 6 shall be as stated in the contract
 documents. The specific pollution control system which is proposed for the complete capture,
 containment, collection, and disposal of the “spent material” generated by the work shall be
 included in the plan.
 688.6.2–Permits for Disposal of “Spent Material”: Shall be in accordance with Section
 107.2, Permits, Licenses, and Taxes or any other applicable sections of Section 107. The “spent
 material” shall not be disposed of until authorized by the Engineer and in no case shall “spent
 material” be allowed to accumulate longer than 90 days prior to transport.
 688.6.2.1-“Spent Material”: This shall include material generated by surface
 preparation operations and shall be sampled and tested in accordance with the current
 revision of SSPC Guide 7 The Contractor shall, at the Contractor’s expense, select a
 laboratory that will sample and analyze the “spent materials”. The laboratory must be
 certified by the WVDEP, EPA or by another state’s DEP-equivalent. Certification will be
 provided to the Engineer prior to the beginning of work. The waste transporter for both
 hazardous and non-hazardous waste will be listed on the Contractor’s
 Containment/Disposal Control Plan.
 688.6.3-Additional requirements for all classes of containment: Contractor will provide
 ground covers beneath the containment area and all equipment where spills are possible to
 capture inadvertent spills or leaks of debris. Extend the covers a minimum of 5 feet beyond
 the area to be covered. Debris shall be removed from the covers at least once per shift, or as
 directed by the Engineer. If the ground beneath the structure serves as the base of the
 containment, install and maintain air and dust impenetrable materials such as solid plywood
 panels or flexible materials such as tarpaulins. Provide explosion–proof lighting inside
 containment for all paint application. Maintain a minimum of 10 foot-candles for surface
 785
 
 preparation and painting, and a minimum of 30 foot-candles for inspection. Water booms shall
 be used to contain inadvertent releases of debris unless prohibited by navigation lanes. In these
 cases, a boat with a skimmer shall be available to collect fugitive materials. Remove all
 project-related debris from the surface of the water or from the stream sediment at the end of
 each working day at a minimum unless directed otherwise by the Engineer.
 688.6.4-Temporary Waste Storage: The Division (WVDOH) will obtain a provisional
 (temporary) EPA waste generator number for the project prior to the beginning of the work.
 The location of the temporary waste storage site at the project shall be noted in the Contractor’s
 Containment/Disposal Control Plan. This location must be approved by the Division prior to
 beginning work.
 688.6.5-Worker Protection: Shall be in accordance with Section 107.7, Public
 Convenience and Safety, or any other applicable sections of Section 107. The Contractor shall
 have a Certified Industrial Hygienist (CIH) develop, review and approve their written
 compliance plan. The CIH shall be certified by the American Board of Industrial Hygiene.
 The CIH, or a technician working under the direction of the CIH, shall be present during the
 first three days of work and at least twice a month thereafter. The CIH shall certify in writing
 during the first week of work and at the end of the work that the worker protection plan fully
 complied with all regulations and that the plans were fully implanted. Daily inspections of the
 work area shall be made by the project “competent person”. The Contractor shall have
 identified the “competent person” by name in both the CIH’s written compliance plan and the
 Contractor’s Containment/Disposal Control Plan. The compliance plan shall also include the
 “competent person’s” qualifications and the frequency of inspections to be taken. The CIH
 requirements will not apply to those zone painting projects where only SP 2 and SP 3 surface
 preparation is being done.
 688.6.6-Division Employee Worker Protection:
 The Contractor shall provide
 respiratory protection and protective clothing and other necessary equipment for up to 2
 Division employees at each site.
 688.7-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The unit of measurement for “Clean and Paint Existing Steel Bridges”, "Containment and
 Disposal of Spent Material", “Field Painting of Shop Primed Steel” shall be lump sum. The unit
 of measurement for “Zone Cleaning and Painting Steel Bridges” shall be square foot.
 688.8-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 Basis of Payment for “Clean and Paint Existing Steel Bridges”, "Containment and Disposal
 of Spent Material", “Field Painting of Shop Primed Steel” shall be lump sum price bid. “Zone
 Cleaning and Painting Steel Bridge” shall be square foot price bid. The cost for the items listed
 below, which price and payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all the materials and
 doing all the work herein prescribed in workmanlike and acceptable manner, including all labor,
 tools, equipment, supplies and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 
 786
 
 688.9-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 688001-* Clean and Paint Existing Steel Bridge
 688003-* Containment and Disposal of Spent Material
 688005-* Zone Cleaning and Painting Steel Bridge
 688007-* Field Painting of Shop Primed Steel
 * Sequence number
 
 787
 
 UNIT
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Square Foot (Meter)
 Lump Sum
 
 SECTION 689
 METALIZING STEEL
 689.1-DESCRIPTION:
 This specification covers the requirements for thermal spray metallic coatings, with or
 without sealers or top coats, as a means to prevent corrosion of steel surfaces.
 All work shall be done at the steel fabrication shop unless otherwise specified.
 The requirements outlined in the Society of Protective Coatings Guide for “Thermal Spray
 Metallic Coating Systems” (SSPC CS-Guide 23.00) shall be followed and considered as part of
 this specification.
 689.2-MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
 All metalizing work shall be performed by a company with at least three years of
 experience in coating steel. Any company which is new to metalizing and does not have three
 years experience shall, prior to starting any work, submit written documentation of successful
 structural steel metalizing projects. This shall include the name of the owner of previous projects,
 number and location of jobs completed, and number of years experience. This document will be
 reviewed, verified, and approved by the Engineer prior to beginning any work. The company shall
 possess knowledge and experience in all areas of surface preparation and metalizing work.
 Each spray operator shall be qualified to metalize in conformance with the latest edition of
 ANSI/AWS C2.18. Spray operators not having evidence of qualification shall be prohibited from
 spraying.
 689.3-MATERIAL:
 Unless otherwise specified, the metallic coating to be applied shall be pure zinc,
 conforming to the requirements of ASTM B6.
 The manufacturer shall furnish a Certificate of Analysis for each lot of material supplied.
 Each container or coil reel shall be properly labeled to identify component type, supplier, size, and
 wire lot number.
 The size of wire material shall conform to the manufacturer’s recommendations for the Arc
 Sprayed method.
 The metalizing material shall satisfy the requirements for at least a Class B slip coefficient
 and creep resistant per Appendix A of the “Specification for Structural Joints Using ASTM A 325
 or A 490 Bolts” by the Research Council on Structural Connections. The test results shall be
 provided to the Engineer by the contractor prior to the start of work.
 689.4-APPLICATION OF METALLIC COATING:
 The metalizing unit shall be an arc type gun manufactured by an established domestic
 company. The equipment shall be used in conformance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 No surface shall be sprayed which shows any signs of rust, scale or moisture. All metalizing shall
 be applied at 8 - 14 mils (200 - 350 µm) with no individual reading less than 6 mils (150 µm) nor
 more than 16 mils (400 µm). Field and/or shop bolted contact surfaces shall have the coating
 applied in the range of 2 to 5 mils (25-125 μm) dry film thickness. At least one layer of coating
 shall be applied within four hours after blasting and the final thickness within a maximum of eight
 hours of the blasting. The steel shall be cleaned with sharp, angular grit, to at least a near white
 finish meeting SSPC-SP-10. No shot will be allowed as the blasting abrasive. The profile of the
 anchor pattern shall be 2-4 mils (50-100 µm).
 788
 
 The top flange which will require shear studs shall have the metalizing applied at a
 minimum of 2 mils (50 µm) in order to prevent rusting. If applied in the shop, the studs shall be
 installed prior to metalizing. Metalizing of the studs is not required. If installed in the field, the
 shop applied metalizing on the top of the top flange shall be removed at the stud locations to bare
 metal prior to installation of the studs.
 The contractor shall provide facilities to protect the finished metalized surface from
 damage during the blasting and thermal spraying work operations on adjacent areas. All damaged
 coated areas shall be properly repaired and remetalized at no additional cost to the Division.
 Surfaces not intended to be metalized shall be suitably protected from the effects of the
 metalizing operations.
 689.5-SEALERS AND TOP COATS:
 The Division has the option of requiring a sealer and/or top coats over the metalizing.
 When this option is chosen, the requirements will be specified in the contract documents.
 689.6-SHIPPING AND HANDLING:
 All fully coated and cured assemblies shall be protected from handling and shipping
 damage with the prudent use of padded slings, dunnage, separators and tie downs. Loading
 procedures and sequences shall be designed to protect all coated surfaces. Any damaged areas
 shall be repaired in conformance with the manufacturer’s recommendations or as directed by the
 Engineer.
 689.7-FIELD TOUCH UP:
 All touch up for metalizing shall be in conformance with the coater’s recommendations.
 689.8-METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
 The unit of measurement for “Metalizing Steel” shall be lump sum.
 689.9-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 Basis of payment for “Metalizing Steel” shall be lump sum. Payment shall be full
 compensation for furnishing all the labor, tools, equipment, supplies, and incidentals necessary to
 complete the work herein prescribed.
 689.10-PAY ITEMS:
 ITEM
 DESCRIPTION
 689001-*
 Metalizing Steel
 689002-*
 Metalizing Steel With Sealer
 689003-*
 Metalizing Steel With Sealer And Top Coats
 * Sequence number
 
 789
 
 UNIT
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 Lump Sum
 
 SECTION 690
 SURFACE PREPARATION AND POWDER COATING OF
 NEW GALVANIZED STEEL FOR HIGHWAY SIGNING AND
 LIGHTING STRUCTURES
 690.1-GENERAL:
 690.1.1-Purpose and Scope: This Specification provides the material and workmanship
 requirements for the surface preparation and powder coating of new galvanized steel surfaces.
 The work consists of surface preparation and application of the powder coating system.
 690.1.2-Reference Standards: The latest edition of the following standards and
 regulations form a part of this specification.
 A. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)
 1. ASTM A123/A123M, Standard Specification for Zinc (Hot Dip Galvanized)
 Coatings on Iron and Steel Products
 2. ASTM A153/A153M, Standard Specification for Zinc Coating (Hot Dip) on Iron
 and Steel Hardware
 3. ASTM A780, Standard Practice for Repair of Hot-Dip Galvanized Coatings
 4. ASTM B201, Standard Test Method for Testing Chromate Coatings on Zinc and
 Cadmium Surfaces
 5. ASTM D4285, Standard Test Method for Indicating Oil or Water in Compressed
 Air
 6. ASTM D4414, Standard Practice for Measurement of Wet Film Thickness by Notch
 Gages
 7. ASTM E376 Standard Practice for Measuring Coating Thickness by Magnetic-Field
 or Eddy-Current (Electromagnetic) Test Methods
 B.
 1. MP 708.40.00-Procedure for the Determination of Structural Painting Film
 Thickness.
 2. MP 688.02.20-Guide for Contractor’s and Fabricator’s Quality Control Plan for
 Painting Structural Steel.
 C. The Society for Protective Coatings
 1. SSPC-SP 1, Solvent Cleaning
 2. SSPC-SP 2, Hand Tool Cleaning
 3. SSPC-SP 3, Power Tool Cleaning
 4. SSPC-SP 7, Brush-Off Blast Cleaning
 D. Equipment, and Coating Manufacturers Published Instructions.
 690.2-PRODUCTS:
 690.2.1-Hot-Dip Galvanized Materials: Material to be powder coated is required to be
 Hot-Dip galvanized as described in ASTM A123/A123 M and A153/A153 M.
 690.2.2-Hot-Dip Galvanizing Requirements: Water quenching or chromate conversion
 coating shall be avoided as these processes interfere with paint adhesion and surface
 preparation. Testing for the presence of chromate coatings in accordance with ASTM B201
 can be conducted if necessary.
 790
 
 690.3-SURFACE PREPARATION AND POWDER COATING:
 Cleaning and powder coating shall be done in accordance with WVDOH Standards and
 Specifications, Section 688. Preparation of the galvanized surface, prior to powder coating shall
 conform to written recommendations from the powder coating manufacturer, or at a minimum, in
 accordance with subsection 690.3.B. This recommendation will then become part of the Paint
 Quality Control Plan (QC Plan).
 A. Weld Spatter and Sharp Edges:
 1. The fabricator shall remove slag, flux deposits, weld spatter and grind any resulting
 burrs smooth, and shall round sharp edges such as those created by flame cutting and
 shearing.
 2. The rolled edges of angles, channels, and wide flange beams do not require further
 rounding unless specifically directed by the Engineer.
 B. Galvanized Surfaces:
 1. Remove surface contamination and oils (if any) from the finished galvanized surface
 by SSPC-SP1, Solvent Cleaning.
 2. Remove zinc oxide prior to powder coating. Any zinc or other metal oxide that
 remains on the surface of the galvanized steel can potentially retain air or moisture.
 This may cause the powder coating to blister or create voids. Likewise, the galvanized
 coat may also release gas.
 3. Remove surface oxidation with a light sweep blast, SSPC- SP 7, Brush-Off Blast
 Cleaning. This process will also promote good adhesion between galvanized surface
 of steel and powder coating.
 4. Degassing any entrapped air or water within the galvanized coating is achieved by the
 process known as pre-baking. This is done in a drying oven operated at higher
 temperatures than the curing temperature. This temperature is typically 55º F higher
 than the recommended curing temperature. In no instance the temperature should
 exceed 535º F.
 5. Chemical cleaning is not allowed.*
 6. Cleaned material shall be stored in a controlled environment and shall be coated
 immediately after the preparation.
 * Chemical cleaning leaves a film in the material surface that may create the effect of
 bond breaker between the base material and the powder coating.
 
 690.4-ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS:
 1. All powder coatings shall be done in a climate controlled self-contained shop.
 2. Do not apply materials when surface and ambient temperatures are outside the temperature
 and/or relative humidity ranges required by the powder coating manufacturer.
 3. It is recommended to have room temperature between 65 to 85 degrees F and relative
 humidity between 40 to 60%.
 4. Coordinate the shop work with field installation and other appurtenances.
 690.5-POWDER COATING:
 Except as otherwise specified, powder coating materials shall meet the following
 requirements:
 i. Gloss @60°
 ASTM D-523
 5 - 70 Low Gloss
 60 - 80 Semi-Gloss
 70- 100 High Gloss
 791
 
 ii.
 iii.
 iv.
 v.
 
 Adhesion
 Hardness
 Conical Mandrel
 Impact Resistance
 
 ASTM D-3359
 ASTM D-3363
 ASTM D-522
 ASTM D -2794
 
 100% (5B)
 H-2H Pencil
 ⅛" Mandrel
 80-160 In-lbs. Direct
 No Cracking
 vi. Salt Spray
 ASTM B-117
 1,000 Hrs.
 <⅛" Scribe Creep
 –No Blisters
 vii. Humidity
 ASTM D-1735
 1,000 Hrs.
 <1/16 " Scribe Creep
 No Blister
 viii. All powder products shall be ready mixes from the manufacturer.
 No mixing is to be done in the applicator shop.
 690.6-POWDER COATING APPLICATION:
 Prior to any powder coating application, any area that is not to be coated (threads, tight fit
 holes, friction bolted connections, etc.) will be masked.
 All powder coatings shall be applied at a minimum of three (3) mils (75 µm) dry film
 thickness.
 Prior to application of powder coating, determine the average thickness of the bare
 Galvanized layer. Subtract the average galvanized thickness from total measured dry film
 thickness in order to determine the actual powder coating film thickness.
 Verify that the coating thickness of each coat is in accordance to the coating manufacturer’s
 requirement or plan’s notes.
 690.7-REPAIR OF DAMAGED COATING:
 All shop and field repairs to the powder coating shall be made in accordance with WVDOH
 Standards and Specifications 688.3.6 and the powder coating manufacturer’s recommendations.
 In addition, the powder coating applicators shall include touch up paint with the Shipment of
 finished products to the job site.
 690.8-INSPECTION:
 A. The Engineer may inspect any or all phases of the work to verify that it is in accordance
 with the requirements of this Specification. The Contractor shall facilitate this inspection
 as required, including allowing ample time for the inspections and access to the work.
 Inspections may include, but are not limited to, surface preparation, pre-painting
 cleanliness, paint application, dry film thickness, film appearance, and adhesion.
 B. The presence or activity of Engineer inspections in no way relieves the Contractor of the
 responsibility to comply with all provisions of this Specification and to provide adequate
 inspections of its own.
 C. Furnish, until final acceptance of the powder coating system, all equipment and
 instrumentation needed to inspect all phases of the work.
 690.9-BASIS OF PAYMENT:
 The basis of payment for the “Surface Preparation and Powder Coating” shall be incidental
 to highway signing, signal, and lighting structures required to be powder coated.
 792
 
 DIVISION 700
 MATERIALS DETAILS
 
 SECTION 701
 HYDRAULIC CEMENT
 The Contractor shall provide suitable means for storing and protecting the cement against
 dampness. Cement which for any reason has become partially set or which contains lumps of
 caked cement will be rejected. Cement salvaged from discarded or used bags shall not be used.
 701.1-PORTLAND CEMENT:
 Portland cement shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C 150, Type I.
 701.2-BLANK
 701.3-BLENDED HYDRAULIC CEMENTS:
 Blended hydraulic cement shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C595 for Portland
 blast-furnace slag cement, Type IS, or Portland-pozzolan cement, Type IP, or Portland-limestone
 cement, Type IL.
 701.4-MASONRY CEMENT:
 Masonry Cement shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C 91.
 
 793
 
 SECTION 702
 FINE AGGREGATE
 702.1-FINE AGGREGATE FOR PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE:
 702.1.1-General Requirements: Fine aggregate shall consist of natural sand,
 manufactured sand, or a combination thereof, conforming to the requirements of these
 Specifications.
 702.1.2-Deleterious Substances: The Maximum percentages of deleterious substances
 shall not exceed the limits below.
 PERCENT
 BY WEIGHT
 
 MATERIAL
 Amount finer than No. 200 (75 μm) sieve for manufactured fine
 aggregate (determined by AASHTO T 11 and T 27). A
 manufactured fine aggregate is one which has been reduced in
 particle size by crushing
 Amount finer than No. 200 (75 μm) sieve for all other sands
 (determined by AASHTO T 11 and T 27)
 Coal and other lightweight deleterious material
 (determined by MP 702.01.20)
 Friable particles (determined by MP 703.01.20)
 
 5.0
 
 3.0
 2
 1
 
 Larger percentages passing the No. 200 (75 μm) sieve in the fine aggregate fraction will be
 permitted if the percent passing the No. 200 (75 μm) sieve in the coarse aggregate fraction
 (703.4) is less than the specified maximum. In no event, however, shall the percent passing
 the No. 200 (75 μm) sieve in the total concrete aggregate be greater than an amount which
 would exist if both aggregate fractions contained their specified maximum percentage passing
 the No. 200 (75 μm) sieve.
 702.1.3-Soundness (Determined by MP 703.00.22): When the fine aggregate is
 subjected to five alternations of the sodium sulphate soundness test, the weighted loss shall not
 exceed 10 percent by weight.
 702.1.4-Organic Impurities (Determined by AASHTO T21): When the fine aggregate
 is subjected to the organic impurities test, the color shall not be darker than the standard. In
 the event a color darker than the standard is produced, the acceptability of the material will be
 determined as specified in 702.1.5.
 702.1.5-Mortar Strength (Determined by AASHTO T71): Fine aggregate failing the
 organic impurities test shall be subjected to the test for mortar making properties. The fine
 aggregate shall develop a compressive strength at the age of seven days when using Type I or
 II cement, or at three days when using Type III cement, of not less than 90 percent of the
 strength developed by a mortar prepared in the same manner with the same cement and graded
 Ottawa sand having a fineness modulus of 2.4 plus or minus 0.10.
 794
 
 702.1.6-Grading: The fine aggregate used for developing a concrete mix design shall have
 an Ā of 6.1 plus or minus 0.4.
 The Ā value shall be determined by adding the cumulative percentages by weight of
 material passing each of U.S. Standard Sieve Nos. 1½ in. (37.5 mm), ¾ in. (19 mm), 3/8 in.
 (9.5 mm), 4 (, 4.75 mm), 8 (2.36 mm), 16 (1.18 mm), 30 (600 μm), 50 (300 μm), 100 (150
 μm), and 200 (75 μm) and dividing by 100.
 The graduation shall be determined in accordance with AASHTO T 27 and T 11.
 702.1.7-Uniformity of Grading: The gradation limits given in 702.1.6 represent the
 extreme limits which shall determine suitability of material from all sources of supply. The
 gradation of material from any one source, however, shall be reasonably uniform.
 702.2-MORTAR SAND:
 Sand (natural or manufactured) shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M 45, except
 delete 4.1 through 4.4 and substitute the following:
 Aggregate for use in masonry mortar shall be graded within the following limits:
 SIEVE SIZE
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 No. 8 (2.36 mm)
 No. 100 (150 μm)
 No. 200 (75 μm)
 
 PERCENT PASSING
 100
 90-100
 0-30
 0-10
 
 For joints thicker than ½ in. (13 mm), sand meeting the requirements of 702.1.1 through
 702.1.5 and 702.6 will be permitted.
 702.3-FINE AGGREGATE FOR ASPHALT MIXTURES:
 Fine aggregate for asphalt mixtures shall meet the requirements of ASTM D 1073, except
 that the gradation requirements will be waived.
 702.4-MINERAL FILLER FOR ASPHALT MIXTURES:
 Mineral filler for asphalt mixtures shall meet the requirements of ASTM D 242, modified
 as follows: Mineral filler shall be free from harmful organic impurities. Gradation requirements
 will be waived.
 702.5-LIGHTWEIGHT FINE AGGREGATE FOR STRUCTURAL CONCRETE:
 Lightweight fine aggregate for structural concrete shall meet the requirements of ASTM C
 330.
 702.6-ALTERNATE GRADING:
 Fine aggregate shall be well graded from coarse to fine and shall conform to the following
 requirements:
 SIEVE SIZE
 PERCENT PASSING BY WEIGHT
 3/8 in. (9.5 mm)
 100
 No. 4 (4.75 mm)
 95-100
 No. 16 (1.18 mm)
 45-80
 No. 50 (300 μm)
 10-30
 No. 100 (150 μm)
 2-10
 795
 
 SECTION 703
 COARSE AGGREGATE
 Coarse aggregate shall consist of crushed stone, washed gravel (crushed or uncrushed),
 crushed slag, or any combination thereof, conforming to the requirements of these Specifications.
 703.1-CRUSHED STONE:
 703.1.1-General Requirements: Crushed stone shall consist of particles of clean, hard,
 tough, durable rock free from adherent coatings.
 703.1.2-Deleterious Substances: Deleterious substances shall not exceed the limits set
 forth below:
 PERCENT
 BY WEIGHT
 
 MATERIAL
 Thin or elongated pieces
 (determined by MP 703.00.25)
 Shale
 (determined by MP 703.00.27)
 Coal and other lightweight deleterious material
 (determined by MP 702.01.20)
 Friable particles
 (determined by MP 703.01.20)
 
 5
 1
 1.5
 0.25
 
 703.1.3-Percentage of Wear (AASHTO T 96 or ASTM C 535): Crushed stone shall
 have a percentage of wear not to exceed 40.
 703.1.4-Soundness (Determined by MP 703.00.22): When subjected to five cycles of
 the sodium sulphate test, the weighted percentage of loss shall be not more than twelve.
 703.1.5-Limestone Anti-Skid Aggregates:
 703.1.5.1 Limestone: When produced for anti-skid, limestone shall be sampled from
 the stockpile by the Division. The stockpile shall meet the requirements for Section 703.1,
 with the addition of MP 703.00.29. Limestone shall contain a minimum of 10% quartz
 retained on the #200 (75µm) sieve.
 703.1.5.2-Dolomite Limestone: When produced for anti-skid, shall be sampled from
 the stockpile by the Division. The stockpile shall meet the requirements for Section 703.1,
 with the addition of ASTM C1271 and ASTM C1301. Dolomite shall contain a minimum
 of 10% elemental magnesium.
 703.2-GRAVEL:
 703.2.1-General Requirements: Gravel shall be composed of particles of hard, durable
 rock, thoroughly clean and well graded in size. Gravel shall meet the requirements of 703.1.2,
 703.1.3 and 703.1.4.
 796
 
 703.2.2-Crushed Particles: The following minimum requirements for percent of crushed
 particles (determined by MP 703.00.21) for the type of construction indicated shall govern:
 
 Type Of Construction
 Bituminous Concrete Base 1
 Bituminous Concrete Wearing, Patching and
 Leveling. Base 2, Prime, Tack, Surface
 Treatments, Winter Grade Patching
 Mixtures and aggregates No. 7 and smaller
 in penetration macadam and Road Mix
 Bituminous Pavements
 Bituminous Concrete Surfaces or Wearing
 Courses on all projects requiring specific
 skid resistant qualities
 
 Crushed Particles Minimum
 Percent by Weight of the Gravel
 or Blends Retained on No. 4
 (4.75 mm) Sieve
 Fracture
 One Face
 Two Face
 80
 0
 
 -------
 
 80
 
 -------
 
 80
 
 703.2.3-Pea Gravel: Pea gravel shall consist of clean uncrushed river gravel conforming
 to the requirements of 703.1.3, 703.1.4, total deleterious substances shall not be greater than
 five percent, and shall meet the following grading requirements for percent passing:
 ½ in. (12.5 mm)
 100
 
 No. 16 (1.18 mm)
 0-5
 
 703.3-SLAG:
 Slag shall be air cooled blast-furnace slag, reasonably uniform in density and quality, and
 free from dirt and other objectionable matter. When tested in accordance with AASHTO T 19 and
 when standard sizes are combined in the proportions used in the job mix formula, the slag shall
 not weigh less than 70 lb. per cu. ft. (1 Mg per cubic meter) when used in Portland cement concrete
 or hot-laid bituminous concrete surface courses, and not less than 60 lb. per cu. ft. (960 kg per
 cubic meter) when used in other applications. Blast furnace slag shall meet the requirements of
 703.1.2 and 703.1.4. In addition to air cooled blast furnace slag, other slags which meet the
 applicable physical requirements may be used with the approval of the Engineer. All other slag
 shall meet the requirements of 703.1.2, 703.1.3 and 703.1.4.
 703.3.1-Steel Slag: Steel slag, from the production of steel, includes open hearth, electric
 furnace, and basic oxygen furnace slag. Steel slag is differentiated from air cooled blastfurnace slag which is from the production of iron.
 For items where steel slag is used, it must be crushed to its intended item gradation,
 maintained in a constant wet condition for a period of at least 6 months, and must be rendered
 sufficiently inert to minimize potential expansion and the discharge of deleterious effluent.
 The aging period shall begin at the completion of stockpiling and shall be strictly monitored
 by the supplier. The stockpile shall be isolated with no additional material being added during
 the aging period. Should additional material be added, the aging period shall start over from
 797
 
 the date of the addition. When aging, stockpiles should be kept at a maximum height of 10
 feet to allow adequate moisture penetration throughout the pile.
 To evaluate the effectiveness of the aging process expansion tests shall be conducted at the
 end of the 6-month aging period. The selection of samples for expansion testing shall be on a
 stratified random basis vertically with at least one sample from each top one-third, middle onethird, and bottom one-third of the stockpile. Samples shall be obtained in accordance with MP
 700.00.06, Aggregate Sampling Procedures. Expansion values shall not be greater than 0.50
 percent at seven days when tested in accordance with applicable portions of ASTM D4792. If
 one or more of the samples do not meet the 0.50 percent expansion limit after the 6 month
 aging period, the stockpile shall be kept moist and aged an additional two months, after which
 expansion tests shall again be conducted in the manner described above. This process shall
 continue prior to use until the steel slag conforms to the expansion limit. When the stockpile
 has shown compliance to the expansion test requirements, it may be used in items as directed
 by the Engineer.
 When steel slag is to be used in Hot-Mix Asphalt (HMA), the expansion tests shall be
 waived. Steel slag, when used in HMA, shall not exceed 50 percent by weight of the coarse
 fraction of the mix, and in no case shall steel slag be used as a coarse aggregate fraction and a
 fine aggregate fraction within a single mix.
 When steel slag is to be used in items where thickness and quantities are limited and the
 slag is not confined, such as aggregate shoulders, road stabilization, snow and ice control, etc.,
 the expansion tests may be waived as directed by the Engineer.
 In addition to other requirements specified elsewhere in the Contract Documents, for the
 particular item, acceptance of the material shall be on the basis of the Division’s evaluation of
 the supplier’s written certification that the aforementioned aging, moisture, and expansion
 requirements (where applicable) have been accomplished, and that the level or degree of
 expansion exhibited meets the expansion criteria. The certification shall include all test data
 when applicable.
 Steel slag shall not be used in any item where expansion might be detrimental. Such items
 include, but not necessarily limited to, the following: aggregate for Portland cement concrete,
 backfill around drainage structures, piers, abutments, walls, etc.
 703.3.1.1-Wearing III (Sand Mix): When fine aggregate steel slag is used in a sand
 mix all the requirements specified in Section 703.3.1 for coarse aggregate steel slag when
 used in HMA shall apply with the following exceptions: fine aggregate steel slag shall meet
 the quality requirements of 702.1.2 and 702.1.3, and shall not exceed 25 percent by weight
 of the total fine aggregate used in the mix.
 703.3.2-Electrometallurgical Slag: Electrometallurgical slag is from the production of
 metal alloys as differentiated from the production of steel. Electrometallurgical slag may not
 be used as a Portland cement concrete aggregate.
 When electrometallurgical slag is used as an aggregate in bituminous construction and
 payment is on a tonnage (megagram) basis, proper allowance will be made for the difference
 in weight per cubic foot (meter).
 
 798
 
 703.3.3-Power Plant Slag: Power plant slag consists of Wet Bottom Boiler Slag (shiny,
 black, glassy material) formed when molten ash from the burning of coal drops into water and
 shatters at the bottom of the boiler, and Bottom Ash formed when ash particles from the
 burning of pulverized coal is allowed to air cool at the bottom of the furnace. Power plant slag
 may not be used as a Portland cement concrete aggregate.
 703.4-GRADING OF COARSE AGGREGATES:
 Coarse aggregate shall be uniformly graded to conform to the requirements of Table 703.4.
 The gradation of coarse aggregates in the production of concrete shall be controlled by the Ā value
 as specified in 501.3 and 601.3. In addition, coarse aggregates to be used in Portland cement
 concrete shall have no more than one percent by weight passing the No. 200 (75 μm) sieve, except
 that this percentage may be increased to 1.5 in the case of crushed aggregate if the material finer
 than the No. 200 (75 μm) sieve consists of the dust of fracture, essentially free from clay or shale.
 The gradation shall be determined in accordance with AASHTO T 27 and T 11.
 When the coarse aggregate is to be used in Portland cement concrete, larger percentages
 passing the No. 200 (75 μm) sieve in the coarse aggregate fraction will be permitted if the percent
 passing the No. 200 (75 μm) sieve in the fine aggregate fraction (702.1) is less than the specified
 maximum. In no event, however, shall the percent passing the No. 200 (75 μm) sieve in the total
 concrete aggregate be greater than an amount which would exist if both aggregate fractions
 contained their specified maximum percentage passing the No. 200 (75 μm) sieve.
 Table 703.4 shows the gradations for coarse aggregates required by AASHTO M 43 (Note
 that the specification current at the time of advertisement of bid shall govern).
 703.5-LIGHTWEIGHT COARSE AGGREGATE FOR STRUCTURAL CONCRETE:
 Lightweight coarse aggregate for structural concrete shall meet the requirements of
 ASTM C 330.
 
 799
 
 TABLE 703.4
 STANDARD SIZES OF COARSE AGGREGATES (AASHTO M 43)
 Amounts Finer Than Each Laboratory Sieve (Square Openings), Percent By Weight
 4 in 3½ in 3 in 2½ in 2 in. 1½ in 1 in 3/4 in 1/2 in 3/8 in No. 4 No. 8 No. 16 No. 50 No. 100
 Size Nominal Size
 ------------------------------No. Square Openings (1) 100 90
 75
 63
 50 37.5 25.0 19.0 12.5 9.5 4.75 2.36 1.18 300
 150
 mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm
 μm
 μm
 1
 2
 24
 3
 357
 4
 467
 5
 56
 57
 6
 67
 68
 7
 78
 8
 89
 9
 10
 (1)
 (2)
 
 3½ to 1½ in
 ------
 
 90 to 37.5 mm
 2½ to 1½ in
 ------
 
 63 to 37.5 mm
 2½ to ¾ in
 ------
 
 63 to 19.0 mm
 2 to 1 in
 ------
 
 50 to 25.0 mm
 2 in to No. 4
 ------
 
 50 to 4.75 mm
 1½ to 3/4 in
 ------
 
 37.5 to 19.0 mm
 1½ in to No 4
 ------
 
 37.5 to 4.75 mm
 1 to 1/2 in
 ------
 
 25.0 to 12.5 mm
 1 to 3/8 in
 ------
 
 25.0 to 9.5 mm
 1 in. to No 4
 ------
 
 25.0 to 4.75 mm
 3/4 to 3/8 in
 ------
 
 19.0 to 9.5 mm
 3/4 in to No 4
 ------
 
 19.0 to 4.75 mm
 3/4 in to No 8
 ------
 
 19.0 to 2.36 mm
 1/2 in to No 4
 
 100
 
 90 to
 100
 
 25 to
 60
 
 0 to
 15
 
 0 to 5
 
 100
 
 90 to 35 to 0 to
 100 70
 15
 
 0 to 5
 
 100
 
 90 to
 100
 
 25 to
 60
 
 100
 
 90 to 35 to 0 to
 100 70
 15
 
 0 to 5
 
 100
 
 95 to
 100
 
 35 to
 70
 
 10 to
 30
 
 100
 
 90 to 20 to 0 to
 100 55
 15
 
 0 to 5
 
 100
 
 95 to
 100
 
 10 to
 0 to 5
 30
 
 0 to
 0 to 5
 10
 
 35 to
 70
 
 0 to 5
 
 100
 
 90 to 20 to 0 to
 0 to 5
 100 55
 10
 
 100
 
 90 to 40 to 10 to 0 to
 0 to 5
 100 85
 40
 15
 
 100
 
 95 to
 100
 
 25 to
 60
 
 0 to
 0 to 5
 10
 
 100
 
 90 to 20 to 0 to
 0 to 5
 100 55
 15
 
 100
 
 90 to
 100
 
 20 to 0 to
 0 to 5
 55
 10
 
 100
 
 90 to
 100
 
 30 to 5 to
 65
 25
 
 100
 
 90 to 40 to 0 to
 0 to 5
 100 70
 15
 
 100
 
 90 to 40 to 5 to
 100 75
 25
 
 ------
 
 12.5 to 4.75 mm
 1/2 in to No 8
 ------
 
 12.5 to 2.36 mm
 3/8 in to No 8
 ------
 
 9.5 to 2.36 mm
 3/8 in to No 16
 ------
 
 9.5 to 1.18 mm
 No. 4 to No. 16
 ------
 
 4.75 to 1.18 mm
 No. 4 to 0 (2)
 ------
 
 4.75 mm to 0 (2)
 
 (1)
 
 0 to
 0 to 5
 10
 
 0 to
 0 to 5
 10
 
 100
 
 85 to 10 to 0 to
 0 to 5
 100 30
 10
 
 100
 
 90 to 20 to 5 to
 0 to 10 0 to 5
 100 55
 30
 100
 
 85 to 10 to
 0 to 10 0 to 5
 100 40
 
 100
 
 85 to
 100
 
 10 to 30
 
 In inches, except where otherwise indicated. Numbered sieves are those of the United States Standard Sieve Series
 Screenings
 Where standard size of coarse aggregate designated by two or three digit numbers are specified, obtain the specified gradation by combining the appropriate
 single digit standard size aggregates by a suitable proportioning device where has a separate compartment for each coarse aggregate combined. Performed
 the blending as directed by the Laboratory.
 (2)
 
 800
 
 SECTION 704
 STONE AND CRUSHED AGGREGATE
 704.1-STONE FOR MASONRY:
 Stone for coursed masonry shall be tough, sound and durable, resistant to weathering
 action, reasonably fine grained, uniform in color, and free from seams, cracks, pyrite inclusions or
 other structural defects. The stone shall have a compressive strength of not less than 5,000 psi
 (34.5 MPa). Stone shall be of such character that it can be truly wrought to such lines and surfaces
 as may be required.
 704.2-STONE FOR RIPRAP:
 Stone of riprap shall consist of field stone or rough unhewn quarry stone as nearly
 rectangular in section as is practicable. The material shall have a maximum weighted loss of 30
 percent when subjected to five cycles of sodium sulfate soundness test, MP 703.00.22.
 704.3-STONE FOR GABIONS:
 Material for gabions shall consist of rock, field stone, unhewn quarry stone or river bed
 stone. The dimensions of the rock or stone fillings shall be such as to prevent loss of material
 through mesh openings and accomplish a mass with a minimum amount of voids. The material
 shall have a maximum weighted loss of 30 percent when subjected to five cycles of sodium sulfate
 soundness test, MP 703.00.22.
 704.4-DUMPED ROCK GUTTER:
 The material for dumped rock gutter shall be rock containing a combined total of not more
 than 15 percent other suitable material, as determined by visual inspection.
 Visual inspection shall be used to determine that the rock will conform to the following
 weight requirements:
 70 Percent of the Weight of Material
 Thickness of Gutter
 Shall Consist of Stones Weighing
 Feet (mm)
 Between the Following Limits:
 1 (300 mm)
 50-100 lb. (20-45 kg)
 1.5 (450 mm)
 60-150 lb. (25-70 kg)
 2.0 (600 mm)
 75-200 lb. (30-90 kg)
 2.5 (750 mm)
 100-250 (45-115 kg)
 704.5-SPECIAL ROCK FILL:
 Special rock fill shall be limestone or sandstone having a maximum weighted loss of 30
 percent when subjected to five cycles of sodium sulfate soundness test, MP 703.00.22.
 Metallurgical slag or broken concrete, from a source approved by the Engineer, may be furnished.
 The rock shall have the dimensions in accordance with the Contract Documents. Thin
 Slab-like pieces shall not be used.
 704.6-AGGREGATE FOR BASE OR SUBBASE COURSE:
 704.6.1-General: The material shall consist of gravel, crushed gravel, crushed stone,
 crushed slag, or any combination of these materials uniformly blended to conform to the
 requirements of 704.6.2, with the following exception: Los Angeles abrasion is not required
 
 801
 
 for blast furnace slag. Natural or manufactured sand may be used as a component of the blend.
 Crushed slag shall meet the requirements of 703.3 with the exception of the third and fifth
 sentences. When gravel is to be used in stabilized (treated) base or subbase construction, it
 need not be crushed. When used in an unstabilized base or subbase construction, the gravel
 shall be crushed as specified.
 When the Contractor elects to blend materials, each component of the blend shall
 meet the quality requirements of 704.6.2. Blade or road mixing will not be allowed.
 When shoulders are specified, natural sand may not be used as a shoulder component.
 704.6.2-Gradation, Quality, and Crushed Particle Requirements: Material shall be
 sampled in accordance with MP 700.00.06, Aggregate Sampling Procedures.
 When gravel is used in an unstabilized condition and in combination with other types of
 aggregate, it shall produce a combined material having a minimum of 80 percent one-face
 fracture as determined by weight of particles retained on the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve. When
 gravel is used in an unstabilized condition and alone, it shall have a minimum of 80 percent
 one-face fracture as determined by weight of particles retained on the No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve.
 704.6.3-Sampling, Testing and Acceptance Procedure: Material shall be sampled in
 accordance with MP 700.00.06 Aggregate Sampling procedures. Frequency of sampling and
 testing and plotting of gradation test data will be in accordance with established Division
 procedures.
 Material failing to comply with the Specification requirements when sampled, tested, and
 evaluated in accordance with the above Division procedures shall be removed and replaced at
 the Contractor's expense, or, at the option of the Engineer, may be left in place with reduced
 payment.
 TABLE 704.6.2A–GRADATION REQUIREMENTS
 Gradation Amounts Finer Than Each
 Laboratory Sieve (Square Openings), % By Weight
 Aggr. 8” 2½” 2” 1½” 1” 3/4”
 #4
 #40
 #100
 class (200) (63) (50) (37.5) (25) (19)
 (4.75) (425 μm) (150 μm)
 1
 100
 50-90 20-50
 5-20
 2
 100
 80-100 35-75
 10-30
 3
 100
 50-90 20-50
 5-20
 4
 100
 50-95 20-60
 5-35
 5
 100
 30-90
 6
 100
 50-100 25-70
 10-45
 3-28
 with intermediate sizes between 6”
 7 90-100
 0-5
 (150 mm) and 4” (100 mm) represented
 8
 100
 80-100 35-75
 10-40
 9
 100
 80-95
 50-70 20-40
 10 *
 100 70-100 30-75
 8-40
 * Crusher Run Material Only
 
 802
 
 #200
 (75 μm)
 0-7.0
 0-10.0
 4.0-12.0
 0-25.0
 
 4.0-14.0
 0-8.0
 4.0-20.0
 
 Aggr.
 class
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 
 TABLE 704.6.2B-QUALITY REQUIREMENTS
 Los Angeles Sodium Sulfate Liquid Plasticity
 Deleterious
 Abrasion,
 Soundness,
 Limit
 Index
 Material,
 Percent Max. Percent Max.
 Max.
 Max.
 Percent Max.
 50
 12
 25
 6
 5
 50
 12
 25
 6
 5
 50
 12
 25
 6
 5
 Note 1
 25
 6
 5
 25
 6
 5
 25
 6
 5
 10 (by visual
 30
 observation)
 50
 12
 25
 6
 5
 50
 12
 25
 6
 5
 50
 12
 25
 6
 5
 
 Note 1: The Los Angeles Abrasion value of aggregate comprising the base course shall be
 treated in the manner hereinafter set forth to determine the specification requirement for the
 item:
 LA<50
 50<LA<65
 Los Angeles Abrasion Value Assigned to
 the Base Course Aggregate
 
 65<LA<80
 80<LA
 
 None
 Top 4 inches
 (100 mm)
 Top 6 inches
 (150 mm)
 Top 8 inches
 (200 mm)
 
 Stabilization shall be accomplished with bituminous material or Portland cement in
 accordance with the applicable sections of these Specifications. When the depth indicated
 above exceeds the Plan depth for the item, the depth to be stabilized shall be the Plan depth.
 In the event the Contractor elects to stabilize the material, no separate payment will be made
 for the cost of such stabilization.
 If aggregates are blended to produce the base course material, the Los Angeles Abrasion
 Value used to determine the stabilization requirements shall be the highest value obtained from
 testing the individual components of the blend.
 704.6.4-Test Methods:
 Deleterious Materials
 Gradation
 Liquid Limit
 Los Angeles Abrasion
 Plasticity Index
 Soundness (Sodium Sulphate, 5 cycles)
 
 ASTM C 295, MP 703.01.20, MP
 702.01.20, MP 703.00.27
 AASHTO T 11 and T 27
 AASHTO T 89
 AASHTO T 96, ASTM 535
 AASHTO T 90
 MP 703.00.22
 
 803
 
 704.7-FILTER MATERIAL:
 Filter material shall consist of sand, other approved inert material, or a combination thereof,
 having hard, strong, durable particles. The material shall contain no more than a total of five
 percent coal, clay lumps, shale, soft fragments, organic matter, and other local deleterious
 substances.
 The material shall conform to the following gradation:
 U.S. Standard Sieve Size
 
 Percent Passing, by Weight
 
 2 in. (50 mm)
 No. 4 (4.75 μm)
 No. 40(4.25 μm)
 No. 200 (75 μm)
 
 100
 65-100
 25-50
 0-25
 
 704.8-SHOT ROCK:
 Shot rock shall be limestone, sandstone, or other inorganic material acceptable to the
 Division, having dimensions similar to that which exists after final blasting at the quarry site and
 prior to crushing. It shall contain material that would generally be retained on a 6 inch (150 mm)
 sieve, and not larger than that which could be tailgated from a single axle 8 to 10 ton (7 to 9 Mg)
 dump truck. In addition, some 10 inch to 12 inch (250 to 300 mm) material shall be represented
 as an intermediate size. Shot rock shall have a maximum weighted loss of 30 percent when
 subjected to five cycles of the Sodium Sulfate Soundness test, MP 703.00.22.
 Acceptance for gradation shall be on the basis of a letter of certification from the Producer
 verifying that the sizes specified are represented.
 
 804
 
 SECTION 705
 ASPHALT MATERIALS
 Asphalts shall be made by refining of petroleum and shall be free from tar or tar products.
 The respective types and grades shall meet the specification requirements.
 Asphalts shall be sampled in accordance with AASHTO T40. When asphalt material is
 furnished by a supplier who is not certified under provisions of MP 401.02.25, the supplier shall
 be required to have each batch or lot of material, to be furnished to the Division, sampled by a
 Division-approved inspection agency, in accordance with MP 700.00.01 and shall have the
 samples tested for compliance with the governing Specification in a Division-approved laboratory.
 The correct application temperature for the material shall be used as directed by the
 material manufacturer. Measurement of the volume of asphalt materials however, shall be based
 on the volume of the materials at 60 F (15.5 C). Volumes measured at higher or lower
 temperatures shall be corrected to the volumes of the material at 60 F (15.5 C) using the
 coefficients of expansion given below:
 Temperature Conversion Factors
 Material
 Coefficient for F (C)
 Asphalt Emulsion
 0.00025 (0.00045)
 Performance Graded Binder
 0.00035 (0.00062)
 Cut-back Emulsified Asphalt
 0.0004 (0.0007)
 705.1-WINTER GRADE CUT-BACK ASPHALT:
 This material shall conform to Cut-back asphalts as per section 705.2, 705.3, or 705.4
 705.2-LIQUID ASPHALT (RAPID CURING TYPE):
 Rapid curing liquid asphalt shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 81.
 705.3-LIQUID ASPHALT (MEDIUM CURING TYPE):
 Medium curing liquid asphalt shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 82 and in
 addition shall meet the requirements of AASHTO T 182
 705.4-ASPHALT EMULSION:
 Anionic emulsified asphalts shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 140.
 705.5-PERFORMANCE GRADED BINDERS:
 Performance graded binders shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M-322,
 Table 1. Manufacturers are not required to perform Direct Tension Testing, AASHTO T-314. The
 naming convention for asphalt binder grades will be as followed:
 
 805
 
 Old binder Grade Designations
 PG 58 – 28
 PG 64 – 22
 PG 70 – 22
 PG 76 – 22
 Note 1:
 
 New Binder Grade Designations
 PG 58S – 28
 PG 64S – 22
 PG 64H – 22
 PG 64E – 22Note 1
 
 The indication of elastic response for binders tested in accordance with
 AASHTO T-350 shall be determined using the appendix X1INDICATIONS OF ELASTIC RESPONSE in AASHTO M 332.
 
 705.6-BLANK
 705.7-ASPHALT FOR DAMPPROOFING AND WATER-PROOFING:
 Materials shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D449. Unless otherwise specified,
 Type-II shall be used.
 705.8-PRIMER FOR USE WITH ASPHALT IN DAMPPROOFING
 WATERPROOFING:
 Materials shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D41.
 
 AND
 
 705.9 through 705.10-BLANK
 705.11-CATIONIC EMULSIFIED ASPHALT:
 Cationic emulsified asphalt shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 208.
 705.12-POLYMER-MODIFIED CATIONIC EMULSIFIED ASPHALT:
 Polymer-modified cationic emulsified asphalt shall conform to the requirements of
 AASHTO M 316.
 705.13-NONSTANDARD ASPHALT MATERIALS:
 All asphalt materials that are not standard AASHTO or ASTM grades shall meet the
 recommended requirements specified by the Division. After Division approval, materials will be
 listed on the MCS&T web page under Division Approved Source/Product Listing for bituminous
 materials.
 
 SECTION 706-BLANK
 
 806
 
 SECTION 707
 CONCRETE ADMIXTURES, CURING AND COATING MATERIALS
 707.1-AIR-ENTRAINING ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE:
 707.1.1-Acceptance Requirements for Air-Entraining Admixtures:
 707.1.1.1-In the event that the Contractor elects to use an air-entraining admixture,
 evidence based on tests made in a recognized laboratory shall be submitted to show that
 the material conforms to the requirements of AASHTO M 154 for 7-day and 28-day
 compressive and flexural strengths and resistance to freezing and thawing, except as
 provided in 707.1.1.2. Tests for bleeding, bond strength and volume change will not be
 required unless specifically called for in the Plans. A "recognized" laboratory is any
 Division, Federal Highway Administration or cement and concrete laboratory regularly
 inspected by the Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory of the National Bureau of
 Standards. Tests may be made upon samples taken from a quantity submitted by the
 Contractor for use on the project or upon samples submitted and certified by the
 manufacturer as representative of the admixture to be supplied.
 707.1.1.2-An exception to the requirements in the preceding paragraph is the case of
 air-entraining admixtures which are manufactured by neutralizing Vinsol resin with caustic
 soda (sodium hydroxide). When the Contractor proposes to use such an admixture, the
 Contractor shall submit a certificate concerning the admixture is the following form:
 "This is to certify that the product (trade name) as manufactured and sold by the
 (company) is an aqueous solution of Vinsol resin that has been neutralized with sodium
 hydroxide. The ratio of sodium hydroxide to Vinsol resin is one part of sodium hydroxide
 to (number) parts of Vinsol resin. The percentage of solids based on the residue dried at
 221 F (105 C) is (number). No other additive or chemical agent is present in this
 solution."
 707.1.1.3-When the Contractor proposes to use a air-entraining admixture which has
 been previously approved, the Contractor shall submit a certification stating that the
 admixture is the same as that previously approved. If an admixture offered for use is
 essentially the same (with only minor differences in concentration) as another previously
 approved material, a certification will be required stating that the product is essentially the
 same as the approved admixture and that no other admixture or chemical agent is present.
 707.1.2-Optional Acceptance Requirements for Air-Entraining Admixtures:
 707.1.2.1-The Division may elect to approve air-entraining admixtures as satisfactorily
 meeting acceptance requirements as outlined. If the Division chooses to exercise this
 option, then the acceptance requirements specified in 707.1.1 above shall be modified as
 noted.
 707.1.2.2-The Division may develop a spectroscopic standard for an air-entraining
 admixture if such air-entraining admixture has previously been approved by the Division
 as satisfactorily meeting all the specification requirements as set forth in 707.1.1.
 
 807
 
 707.1.2.3-When a Contractor proposes to use an air-entraining admixture for which a
 spectroscopic standard has been developed, then the air-entraining admixture may be
 approved without further certification being made if a special analysis made on a
 representative sample of the admixture proposed for use on the project compares
 satisfactorily with the standard related thereto.
 707.1.3-Additional Test Requirements for Air-Entraining Admixtures (Optional):
 707.1.3.1-Either prior to or at any time during construction, the Engineer may require
 that the admixture selected by the Contractor be further tested to determine its effect upon
 the strength of the concrete. When so tested, the seven-day compressive strength of
 concrete made with the cement and aggregates in the proportions to be used in the work
 and containing the admixture under test is an amount sufficient to produce from four to
 seven percent entrained air in the plastic concrete shall be not less than 88 percent of the
 strength of concrete made with the same materials and with the same cement content and
 consistency but without the admixture.
 707.1.3.2-The percentage reduction in strength shall be calculated from the average
 strength of at least five standard 6 by 12-in. (150 by 300 mm) cylinders of each type of
 concrete. Specimens shall be made and cured in the laboratory in accordance with the
 requirements of ASTM C 192 and shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of
 ASTM C 39. The percentage of entrained air shall be determined in accordance with the
 requirements of ASTM C 231.
 707.1.3.3-Admixtures failing to meet the above requirements will be rejected.
 707.2-WATER-REDUCING AND RETARDING ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE:
 707.2.1-Acceptance Requirements for Approval of Retarders: Water reducing and
 retarding admixtures for concrete shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 194, Type
 D or Type G.
 707.2.2-Performance Requirements for Concrete Retarders:
 707.2.2.1-The retarding effect caused by water-reducing and retarding admixtures may
 vary widely with different types of cement, cement from different mills, aggregates from
 different sources and of different gradation, and changes in water-cement ratio. Therefore,
 no retarder shall be used until the concrete of the specified class, designed in accordance
 with the Specifications and made with the ingredients proposed for use by the Contractor,
 including Type D or Type G admixtures as specified or permitted under this specification,
 is shown to meet the requirements of AASHTO M 194 for water reduction and compressive
 strength increases at ages 3, 7 and 28 days.
 When a Type G admixture is used for the sole purpose of increasing the slump of the
 subject concrete mix (no water is removed when this admixture is added), the requirements
 of AASHTO M 194 for water reduction and compressive strength increases will be waived.
 When a Type G admixture is used for the sole purpose of increasing the slump of the
 subject concrete mix (no water is removed when this admixture is added), the requirements
 of AASHTO M 194 for water reduction and compressive strength increases will be waived.
 
 808
 
 707.2.2.2-The mix shall contain the quantity of admixture recommended by the
 manufacturer at the prevailing temperature.
 707.2.3-Optional Performance Requirements for Concrete Retarders:
 707.2.3.1-The Division may elect to approve water-reducing and retarding admixtures
 as satisfactorily meeting performance requirements as outlined. If the Division chooses to
 exercise this option, then the performance tests specified in 707.2.2 will be waived.
 707.2.3.2-The Division's testing laboratory may design concrete mixes in which
 various types and gradings of aggregates and various types of cements are used and in
 which water-reducing and retarding admixtures are used, the admixtures first having met
 the acceptance requirements for approval of concrete retarders as specified in 707.2.1. The
 water-reducing and retarding admixtures used in laboratory design mixes may be subjected
 to a spectral analysis, and a spectroscopic standard or a standard spectrograph may be
 developed if the admixture in combination with the particular type and grading of aggregate
 and the particular type of cement has met the performance requirements for water-reducing
 admixtures as specified in 707.2.2.
 707.2.3.3-When a Contractor proposes to use a water-reducing and retarding admixture
 with a type of grading of aggregate and a type of cement which was previously used in a
 laboratory design mix and for which a special standard is available, the retarder may be
 approved on the basis of a spectral analysis made on a representative sample of the
 admixture proposed for use on the project if:
 i. The spectral analysis compares satisfactorily with the standard related thereto,
 and
 ii. The admixture met performance requirements in previous tests conducted in the
 Division's laboratory as outlined in 707.2.3.2.
 707.2.4-Certification of Water-Reducing and Retarding Admixtures: When a
 Contractor proposes to use an approved water-reducing and retarding admixture, the
 Contractor shall submit a certificate stating that the admixture is identical in composition with
 the sample that was used for the acceptance tests. If the admixture varies in concentration from
 the acceptance sample, a certificate will be required stating that the product is essentially the
 same for chemical ingredients as the approved admixture, and that no other admixture or
 chemical has been added.
 707.2.5-Additional Test Requirements for Water-Reducing and Retarding
 Admixtures (Optional): Either prior to or at any time during construction, the Engineer may
 require the selected admixture to be tested further to determine its effect on the strength of the
 concrete. When so tested the retarder shall meet the requirements specified in 707.2.2.
 707.3-WATER-REDUCING ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE:
 707.3.1-Acceptance Requirements for Approval of Water-Reducers: Water-reducing
 admixtures for concrete shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 194, Type A or
 Type F.
 
 809
 
 707.3.2-Performance Requirements for Concrete Water-Reducers:
 707.3.2.1-The effects of using water-reducing admixtures may vary widely with
 different types of cement, cement from different mills, aggregate proportions, aggregates
 from different sources and of different gradation, and changes in water-cement ratio.
 Therefore, no water-reducer shall be used until the concrete of the specified class, designed
 in accordance with these Specifications and made with the ingredients proposed for use by
 the Contractor, including Type A or Type F admixtures as specified or permitted under this
 Specification, is shown to meet the requirements of AASHTO M 194 for water reduction
 and compressive strength increases at ages 3, 7 and 28 days.
 When a Type F admixture is used for the sole purpose of increasing the slump of the
 subject concrete mix (no water is removed when this admixture is added), the requirements
 of AASHTO M 194 for water reduction and compressive strength increases will be waived.
 707.3.2.2-The mix shall contain the quantity of admixture recommended by the
 manufacturer at the prevailing temperature.
 707.3.3-Optional Performance Requirements for Concrete Water-Reducers:
 707.3.3.1-The Division may elect to approve water-reducing admixtures as
 satisfactorily meeting performance requirements as outlined. If the Division chooses to
 exercise this option, then the performance tests specified in 707.3.2 will be waived.
 707.3.3.2-The Division's testing laboratory may design concrete mixes in which
 various types and gradings of aggregates and various types of cement are used and in which
 water-reducing admixtures are used, the admixture first having met the acceptance
 requirements for approval of concrete water-reducers as specified in 707.3.1. The waterreducing admixture used in laboratory design mixes may be subjected to a special analysis,
 and a spectroscopic standard or a standard spectrograph may be developed if the admixture
 in combination with the particular type and grading of aggregate and the particular type of
 cement has met the performance requirements for water-reducing admixtures as specified
 in 707.3.2.
 707.3.3.3-When a Contractor proposes to use a water-reducing admixture with a type
 and grading of aggregate and a type of cement which was previously used in a laboratory
 design mix and for which a spectral standard is available, the water-reducer may be
 approved on the basis of a spectral analysis made on a representative sample of the
 admixture proposed for use on the project if:
 i. The spectral analysis compares satisfactorily with the standard related thereto,
 and
 ii. The admixture met performance requirements in previous tests conducted in the
 Division's laboratory as outlined in 707.3.3.2.
 707.3.4-Certification of Water-Reducing Admixtures: When a Contractor proposes to
 use an approved water-reducing admixture, the procedure set forth in 707.2.4 shall apply.
 707.3.5-Additional Test Requirements for Water-Reducing Admixtures (Optional):
 Either prior to or at any time during construction, the Engineer may require the selected
 
 810
 
 admixture to be tested further to determine its effect on the strength of the concrete. When so
 tested the water-reducer shall meet the requirements specified in 707.3.2.
 707.4-POZZOLANIC ADDITIVES FOR USE IN PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE:
 707.4.1-Fly ash shall conform to the following requirements of ASTM C618, Class F or C
 when sampled and tested in accordance with the applicable Section of ASTM C311
 Fineness
 Amount Retained on
 No. 325 (45 μm) Sieve
 Loss on Ignition:
 Si02+A1203+Fe203
 
 Class F
 (ASTM C618)
 
 Class C
 (ASTM C618)
 
 34% Max.
 
 34% Max.
 
 6% Max.
 70% Min.
 
 6% Max.
 50% Min
 
 707.4.2-Ground granulated blast furnace slag shall conform to the requirements of
 AASHTO M302.
 707.4.3-Microsilica Admixture: Microsilica shall be supplied in the densified powder orm
 and shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M 307.
 707.4.4-Natual pozzolans shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C618, Class N.
 707.5-LATEX ADMIXTURE:
 Formulated latex modifier shall be Dow Modifier A, Tylac 97-314 (Thermoflex 8002), BASF
 Latex 1186 or Deco-Ray 4776. The manufacturer of these products shall certify that the latex being
 supplied is of equal formulation to that supplied to the FHWA Turner-Fairbank Highway Research
 Station for initial approval. Other Styrene-Butadiene latex modifiers may be used provided they have
 been tested in accordance with and meet the acceptance criteria of the testing program outlined in
 Report No. FHWA-RD-78-35 of the Federal Highway Administration. The manufacturer shall
 certify that the latex being supplied meets the acceptance criteria used in the testing program. Only
 one brand shall be supplied. Samples taken at the job site shall contain a minimum of 46% solids in
 the latex when tested in accordance with MP 679.03.00.
 The latex admixture shall be agitated as necessary to prevent separation of the emulsion. It
 shall be maintained in storage within the temperature range of 35° F (2° C) to 85° F (29° C).
 Admixture obtaining temperatures outside the foregoing limits shall be removed and replaced at no
 additional cost to the Division.
 707.6-POLYETHYLENE COATED BURLAP FOR CURING CONCRETE:
 This material shall consist of burlap impregnated on one side with white opaque plastic
 film. The plastic film shall be securely bonded to the burlap. The film shall be clean and free of
 imperfections. Acceptance will be based on visual inspection.
 707.7-BURLAP CLOTH MADE FROM JUTE OR KENAF FOR CURING CONCRETE:
 The burlap cover shall be clean and free of defects. The cover shall provide a water
 retention blanket over the concrete. Acceptance will be based on visual inspection.
 
 811
 
 707.8-WATERPROOF PAPER FOR CURING CONCRETE:
 Waterproof paper shall consist of two sheets of kraft paper cemented together with
 bituminous material and reinforced with fiber. The top surface shall be white. Acceptance will
 be based on visual inspection.
 707.9-LIQUID MEMBRANE-FORMING COMPOUNDS FOR CURING CONCRETE:
 Curing compounds shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C309, Type 2, Class A.
 707.10-WHITE POLYETHYLENE SHEETING (FILM) FOR CURING CONCRETE:
 The sheeting shall be opaque white plastic film. The film shall be clean and free of
 imperfections. Acceptance will be based on visual inspection.
 707.11-EPOXY RESIN PROTECTIVE COATING:
 The material shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C881, Type III, Grades 1 or 2,
 Class B or C. Pigmentation shall be required in the system so the cured coating shall conform to
 Federal Color Standard 595, No. 16357.
 707.12-CONCRETE SEALER:
 707.12.1-General: The material shall be a one component, water repellant penetrating
 sealer, meeting the criteria listed in section 707.12.2. The material shall be capable of meeting the
 criteria with a single coat and shall not alter the color of the treated surfaces.
 707.12.2-Acceptance: The Contractor shall furnish certified laboratory test data showing
 the material meets the following performance requirements:
 1. Absorption-ASTM C642 (non-air entrained concrete). Concrete should be
 proportioned and mixed in accordance with ASTM C672. Sealed concrete, under total
 immersion, will not exceed 1.0% absorption after 48 hours or 2.0% absorption after 50
 days.
 2. Scaling Resistance-ASTM C672. A rating of "No Scaling" after 100 cycles on the
 sealed concrete (non-air entrained concrete) as compared to "Severe Scaling" on
 untreated concrete.
 3. NCHRP 244, Series II-Cube Test
 3.1 Weight Gain-not to exceed 25% of untreated cube.
 3.2 Absorbed Chloride-not to exceed 25% of untreated cube.
 4. NCHRP 244, Series IV-Southern Exposure
 4.1 Absorbed Chloride-not to exceed 10% of untreated concrete.
 707.13-ACCELERATING ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE:
 707.13.1-Acceptance Requirements for Approval of Accelerators: Accelerating
 admixtures for concrete shall be non-chloride and shall conform to the requirements of
 AASHTO M 194, Type C.
 707.13.2-Performance Requirements for Concrete Accelerators:
 707.13.2.1-The effects of using accelerating admixtures may vary widely with different
 types of cement, cement from different mills, aggregate proportions, aggregates from
 different sources and of different gradation, and changes in water-cement ratio. Therefore,
 812
 
 no accelerator shall be used until the concrete of the specified class, designed in accordance
 with these Specifications and made with the ingredients proposed for use by the Contractor,
 including Type C admixtures as specified or permitted under this Specification, is shown
 to meet the requirements of AASHTO M 194 for compressive strength at ages 3, 7, and 28
 days.
 707.13.2.2-The mix shall contain the quantity of admixture recommended by the
 manufacturer at the prevailing temperature.
 707.13.3-Certification of Accelerating Admixtures: When a Contractor proposes to use
 an approved accelerating admixture, the procedure set forth in 707.2.4 shall apply.
 707.13.4-Additional Test Requirements for Accelerating Admixtures (Optional):
 Either prior to or at any time during construction, the Engineer may require the selected
 admixture to be tested further to determine its effect on the strength of the concrete. When so
 tested, the accelerator shall meet the requirements specified in 707.13.2.
 707.14-WATER-REDUCING AND ACCELERATING ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE:
 707.14.1-Acceptance Requirements for Approval of Water-Reducing and
 Accelerating Admixtures: Water-reducing and accelerating admixtures for concrete shall be
 non-chloride and shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 194, Type E.
 707.14.2-Performance Requirements for Concrete Water-Reducing and Accelerating
 Admixtures:
 707.14.2.1-The effects of using water-reducing and accelerating admixtures may vary
 widely with different types of cement, cement from different mills, aggregate proportions,
 aggregates from different sources and of different gradation, and changes in water-cement
 ratio. Therefore, no water-reducing accelerator shall be used until the concrete of the
 specified class, designed in accordance with these Specifications and made with the
 ingredients proposed for use by the Contractor, including Type E admixtures as specified
 or permitted under this Specification, is shown to meet the requirements of AASHTO M
 194 for water reduction and compressive strength increases at ages 3, 7, and 28 days.
 707.14.2.2-The mix shall contain the quantity of admixture recommended by the
 manufacturer at the prevailing temperature.
 707.14.3-Certification of Water-Reducing and Accelerating Admixtures: When a
 Contractor proposes to use an approved water-reducing and accelerating admixture, the
 procedure set forth in 707.2.4 shall apply.
 707.14.4-Additional Test Requirements for Water-Reducing and Accelerating
 Admixtures (Optional): Either prior to or at any time during construction, the Engineer may
 require the selected admixture to be tested further to determine its effect on the strength of the
 concrete. When so tested, the water-reducing accelerator shall meet the requirements specified
 in 707.14.2.
 
 813
 
 707.15-HYDRATION CONTROL STABILIZING ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE:
 707.15.1-Acceptance Requirements for Approval of Hydration Control Stabilizing
 Admixtures: Hydration control stabilizing admixtures for concrete shall conform to the
 requirements of AASHTO M 194, Type B or D.
 707.15.2-Performance Requirements for Concrete Hydration Control Stabilizing
 Admixtures:
 707.15.2.1-The effects of using hydration control stabilizing admixtures may vary
 widely with different types of cement, cement from different mills, aggregate proportions,
 aggregates from different sources and of different gradation, and changes in water-cement
 ratio. Therefore, no hydration control stabilizing admixture shall be used until the concrete
 of the specified class, designed in accordance with these Specifications and made with the
 ingredients proposed for use by the Contractor, including hydration control stabilizing
 admixtures as specified or permitted under this Specification, is shown to meet the
 requirements of AASHTO M 194 for water reduction and compressive strength increases
 at ages 3, 7, and 28 days.
 Upon completion of mixing of this trial batch, air content and slump tests in accordance
 with section 601.4.1 shall be performed on the plastic concrete containing the hydration
 control stabilizing admixture. A test to establish the initial and final times of setting of the
 concrete mix shall also be performed in accordance with ASTM C403. The air content and
 slump tests shall then be repeated at 45-minute intervals until a period of 3-hours after the
 completion of mixing has elapsed.
 The value obtained by any of the air content tests during the 3-hour period shall not
 vary from the value obtained by the initial air content test by more than 2.5 percentage
 points.
 The value obtained by any of the slump tests during the 3-hour period shall not vary
 from the value obtained by the initial slump test by more than 1.75 inches (445 mm).
 707.15.2.2-The mix shall contain the quantity of admixture recommended by the
 manufacturer at the prevailing temperature.
 707.15.3-Certification of Hydration Control Stabilizing Admixtures: When a
 Contractor proposes to use an approved hydration control stabilizing admixture, the procedure
 set forth in 707.2.4 shall apply.
 707.15.4-Additional Test Requirements for Hydration Control Stabilizing
 Admixtures (Optional): Either prior to or at any time during construction, the Engineer may
 require the selected admixture to be tested further to determine its effect on the strength of the
 concrete. When so tested, the hydration control stabilizing admixture shall meet the
 requirements specified in 707.15.2.
 707.16-CONCRETE PROTECTIVE COATING MATERIALS:
 707.16.1-Acceptance: For initial approval, the manufacturer shall submit representative
 samples, colors chip(s) and certified laboratory test data along with the Material Data Sheets
 on the batch of material that is going to be used on WVDOH’s projects to the Division of
 Materials for review, approval and placing on the Department’s List of Approved Materials.
 In addition, the Materials Division may require that a representative from the manufacturer of
 
 814
 
 the product be present at the project site during the application of the concrete protective
 coating to provide guidance on the mixing (if any), application of the product, and surface
 preparation.
 If a representative from the manufacturer of the product is required, the cost will be
 incidental to Item 601020-001 Concrete Protective Coating Representative.
 If the initially accepted product has not been used on a WVDOH’s project for a period of
 two consecutive years, the product shall be removed from the Department’s List of Approved
 Materials. Any re-approval of a removed product shall comply with Subsection 707.16.1
 Subsequent approval of an initially accepted product shall be based on the manufacturer’s
 submittal of a certification to the Materials Division on each batch of the product that is going
 to be used on WVDOH’s projects. Such a certification shall be stating that the said product
 passes the laboratory test requirements listed in this subsection. Tests listed herein are the
 minimum testing requirements to be met. When requested in writing, the Engineer may accept
 materials based on conformance to the same type of test but differing on minor procedural
 points. Attach copies of test procedures which differ from those stated herein. In addition to
 the material, provide brochures or booklets containing detailed instructions and explanatory
 remarks about surface preparation, application procedures, and operations.
 A. Freeze-Thaw Test. Cast and cure three concrete specimens no less than 4 by 6 by 6
 inches (100 by 150 by 150 mm). Moist cure specimens for 14 days and then dry in
 room air at 60° to 80°F (15° to 27°C) for three hours and remove.
 1.) Immerse in water at room temperature 60° to 80°F (15° to 27C°) for three hours
 and remove.
 2.) Place in cold storage at 5°F (-15°C) for one hour and remove.
 3.) Thaw at room temperature 60° to 80°F (15° to 27C°) for one hour.
 4.) Repeat steps 1, 2, and 3 to complete a total of 50 cycles. At the end of 50 cycles
 of the Freeze/Thaw Test, ensure that the coated specimens show no visible
 defects.
 B. Accelerated Weathering. Test according to ASTM G153. Apply at an application
 rate of 50± 10 ft2/gal (1.75± 0.35 m2/L). Test for 5,000 hours in an Enclosed Carbon
 Arc Weatherometer. Perform the test in 120 minutes cycles consisting of 102 minutes
 of light and 18 minutes of light and demineralized water. At the end of the exposure
 test, ensure that there are no checking, cracking, or loss of film integrity, and no other
 firm defects. The color difference after 5,000 hours shall be no more than five ΔE units.
 C. Salt Spray Resistance. Apply the masonry coating to concrete at a rate of 50± 10
 ft2/gal (.175± 0.35 m2/L), and test the coating according to ASTM B 117. Expose the
 coating to a five percent sodium coating chloride (salt) solution for 300 hours, and
 maintain it at 95°F (35°C) during the period of exposure. Ensure that it shows no loss
 of adhesion or deterioration at the end of the 300 hours.
 D. Fungus Growth Resistance. Ensure that the protective coatings pass a fungus
 resistance test as described by the ASTM D 3273. At the end of four weeks exposure
 there shall be no growth on the coatings.
 707.17-SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE:
 707.17.1-Acceptance Requirements for Approval of Specific Performance
 Admixtures: Specific performance admixtures for concrete shall conform to the requirements
 of AASHTO M 194, Type S.
 
 815
 
 707.17.2-Performance Requirements for Concrete Accelerators:
 707.17.2.1-The effects of using specific performance admixtures may vary widely with
 different types of cement, cement from different mills, aggregate proportions, aggregates
 from different sources and of different gradation, and changes in water-cement ratio.
 Therefore, no specific performance admixture shall be used until the concrete of the
 specified class, designed in accordance with these Specifications and made with the
 ingredients proposed for use by the Contractor, including Type S admixtures as specified
 or permitted under this Specification, is shown to meet the requirements of AASHTO M
 194 for compressive strength at ages 3, 7, and 28 days.
 707.17.2.2-The mix shall contain the quantity of admixture recommended by the
 manufacturer at the prevailing temperature.
 707.17.3-Certification of Specific Performance Admixtures: When a Contractor
 proposes to use an approved specific performance admixture, the procedure set forth in 707.2.4
 shall apply.
 707.17.4-Additional Test Requirements for Accelerating Admixtures (Optional):
 Either prior to or at any time during construction, the Engineer may require the selected
 admixture to be tested further to determine its effect on the strength of the concrete. When so
 tested, the accelerator shall meet the requirements specified in 707.17.2.
 
 816
 
 SECTION 708
 JOINT MATERIALS
 708.1-PREFORMED EXPANSION JOINT FILLER FOR CONCRETE:
 708.1.1-Nonextruding and Resilient Nonbituminous Type: The material shall conform
 to the requirements of AASHTO M 153. The sampling frequency shall be on the basis of one
 sample per each day of a manufacturers production for each thickness.
 708.1.2-Nonextruding and Resilient Bituminous Type: The material shall conform to
 the requirements of AASHTO M 213. The sampling frequency shall be on the basis of one
 sample per each day of a manufacturers production for each thickness.
 708.2-PREFORMED ELASTOMERIC JOINT SEALS; LUBRICANT-ADHESIVES:
 708.2.1-Joint Seals for Concrete Pavements: This material shall meet the requirements
 of AASHTO M 220. The lubricant-adhesive shall be of the type recommended by the seal
 manufacturer.
 708.2.2-Joint Seals for Bridges: Multiple web design and strip seals shall meet the
 requirements of AASHTO M 297. The compression-deflection and recovery tests for strip
 seals are deleted. The lubricant-adhesive shall be of the type recommended by the seal
 manufacturer.
 The strip seal gland shall be delivered to the jobsite in lengths suitable for continuous one
 piece installation for each individual expansion joint. Field splicing of a strip seal gland is not
 permitted. Special conditions such as doglegs, tees, and crosses shall be shop fabricated in a
 mold under heat and pressure.
 708.3-JOINT SEALANT, HOT-POURED FOR CONCRETE AND ASPHALT
 PAVEMENTS:
 This material shall meet the requirements of ASTM D6690. Unless otherwise specified,
 Type II sealant shall be used.
 708.4-SILICONE JOINT SEALANT; JOINT BACK-UP MATERIAL:
 708.4.1-Silicone Joint Sealant:
 708.4.1.1-General Requirements: Silicone sealant shall be furnished in a one part
 formulation. The compound shall be compatible with the surface to which it is applied.
 Acid cure sealants are not acceptable for use on concrete.
 Silicone sealants shall be of the following types:
 Type I-A low modulus non-sag silicone for use in sealing horizontal and sloping
 joints in Portland cement concrete pavements. Tooling is required.
 Type II-A very low modulus self-leveling silicone used to seal horizontal joints in
 Portland cement concrete pavements.
 Type III-An ultra-low modulus self-leveling silicone used to seal horizontal joints
 in Portland cement concrete pavements. It can also be used to seal joints between
 Portland cement concrete pavement and asphalt concrete shoulders.
 
 817
 
 708.4.1.2-Test Requirements: The sealant shall meet the following requirements.
 Test Method
 
 Test
 
 ASTM D2202
 
 Flow
 
 ASTM C679
 Manufacturer
 
 Tack Free Time
 Skin Over Time
 
 Type I
 0.3 In (7.6 mm)
 Max
 1.5 Hours Max
 
 Type II
 
 Type III
 
 Self-Leveling
 
 Self-Leveling
 
 2 Hours Max
 
 2 Hours Max
 
 Note 1
 
 ASTM D412
 Die C
 Notes 2 & 3
 
 ASTM D412
 Die C
 
 Modulus @
 150%
 Elongation
 Elongation
 
 45 PSI (310 kPa)
 Max
 
 40 PSI (276
 kPa) Max
 
 15 PSI (103 kPa)
 Max
 
 500% Min
 
 500% Min
 
 500% Min
 
 Adhesion to
 Concrete
 
 No Failures @
 200%
 Elongation Min
 No Adhesive or
 Cohesive
 Failures
 No Cracking
 
 No Failures @
 200%
 Elongation Min
 No Adhesive or
 Cohesive
 Failures
 No Cracking
 
 No Failures @
 200%
 Elongation Min
 No Adhesive or
 Cohesive
 Failures
 No Cracking
 
 Notes 2 & 3
 
 ASTM D3583
 Notes 2, 3, 4, 5
 
 ASTM C719
 Note 6
 
 ASTM C793
 Notes 2 & 3
 
 Movement
 Capability 10
 Cycles @ ± 50%
 Accelerated
 Weathering
 5,000 Hours
 
 The manufacturer shall verify that the sealant will have a skin over time within the time limitations under
 field conditions.
 Note 2: Cure Temperature 77° ± 3° F (25 ± 2° C) at 50 ± 5% Relative Humidity.
 Note 1:
 
 Note 3:
 
 Cure Time 21 Days Maximum.
 
 Note 4:
 
 Specimens shall be 0.5 in. x 0.5 in. x 2.0 in (13 mm x 13 mm x 50 mm).
 
 Note 5:
 
 Type III material shall also demonstrate adhesion to asphalt blocks.
 
 Note 6:
 
 Type I material shall have movement capability 10 cycles @ +100 -50%.
 
 708.4.1.3-Acceptance: Manufacturers of silicone joint sealants shall submit certified
 test data during the first calendar quarter of each year. The testing shall be performed by
 an independent testing laboratory. The test data must demonstrate that all requirements of
 the specifications are met. Only those sealants which have been evaluated and appear on
 the Division's approved list can be used on a project. Manufacturers are responsible for
 quality control of their product and the submission of test data in a timely manner in order
 to be considered for and/or continue to have their product on the approved list.
 708.4.2-Joint Back-Up Material: Joint back-up material shall be compatible with the
 sealant. The material shall be the correct size to fit tightly in the joint to resist movement and
 to prevent the sealant from moving past the back-up material to the bottom of the joint.
 708.5-VITRIFIED CLAY PIPE JOINTS HAVING RESILIENT PROPERTIES:
 This material shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C 425.
 818
 
 708.6-HOT POUR MINERAL FILLED JOINT SEALER FOR SEWER AND CULVERT
 PIPE:
 Hot pour mineral filled sealing compound shall conform to the requirements of Federal
 Specifications SS-S-169.
 708.7-JOINTS FOR CIRCULAR CONCRETE SEWER AND CULVERT PIPE USING
 FLEXIBLE WATERTIGHT GASKETS:
 Joints for circular concrete sewer and culvert pipe shall conform to the requirements of
 AASHTO M 198.
 708.8-JOINT MORTAR:
 Joint mortar shall consist of one part cement and two parts sand, with water as necessary
 to obtain the required consistency. Sand shall conform to the requirements of 702.2. Cement shall
 conform to the requirements of 701.4 for masonry construction. For other uses cement shall
 conform to the requirements of 701.1 or 701.3.
 Mortar shall be used within 30 minutes after its preparation.
 708.9-ASPHALT PLASTIC CEMENT:
 708.9.1-General Requirement: Asphalt plastic cement is intended for use as a joint sealer
 for concrete and masonry. It shall consist of an asphalt base, volatile petroleum solvents, and
 mineral stabilizers, mixed to a smooth, uniform consistency, suitable for trowel application.
 708.9.2-Composition:
 Nonvolatile Matter, %
 Mineral Matter (Ash), %
 
 Minimum Maximum
 70
 15
 45
 
 708.9.3-Physical Requirements: Uniformity-A thoroughly stirred sample shall show no
 separation of solvent or setting that cannot be overcome by moderate stirring after standing for
 6 hours at room temperature in a closed container.
 Workability-The asphalt plastic cement shall spread readily without drawing or pulling
 when applied to a metal test panel and spread to a thickness of approximately 1/8 inch (3 mm).
 Behavior at 60 C (140 F)-A sample cured at room temperature for one hour, and heated
 in a (60  2 C) oven for five hours shall show no blistering and not more than ¼ inch (6 mm)
 sagging or slipping.
 Behavior at 0 C (32 F)-After completion of the 60 C behavior test, the sample shall be
 cooled to 0  2 C for one hour. Immediately after this exposure, the sample shall be bent
 around a 1 inch (25 mm) diameter mandrel. The sample shall show no cracking of the asphalt
 or separation of the asphalt from the panel.
 708.9.4-Test Methods: Nonvolatile matter-Test in accordance with ASTM D 2822.
 Ash-Transfer approximately 5 grams of the sample (weighed to the nearest 0.01g) to a
 crucible and heat at a low temperature (not above a dull red heat) until all carbon is consumed.
 Cool in a desiccator, weigh and calculate the percentage of ash.
 
 819
 
 708.10-WATERSTOPS (ELASTOMER MATERIAL):
 All waterstops shall be produced by a molded or extrusion process such that, as supplied
 for use, they will be dense, homogenous, and free from holes and other imperfections. The cross
 section of the waterstop shall be uniform along the length and shall be symmetrical transversely
 so that the thickness at any given distance from either edge of the waterstop will be uniform. One
 three foot (meter) sample shall be furnished for each 1,000 ft. (300 meters), or fraction thereof, of
 each size of waterstop material.
 The waterstops shall conform to the requirements in Table 708.10.1 for the
 polyvinylchloride waterstops and Table 708.10.2 for rubber waterstops.
 TABLE 708.10.1
 Polyvinylchloride Waterstops
 Property
 Tensile Strength, Die “C”, psi (Mpa)
 Ultimate Elongation, Die “C”, percent
 Cold Bend Test
 **
 
 Value
 1,400 (9.6) min.
 280 min.
 No Cracking
 
 Test Method
 ASTM D 412
 ASTM 412
 **
 
 The cold bend test shall be made by subjecting three full-width, one-inch long sample
 specimens to a temperature of 20F for two hours. The specimen shall then be bent 180
 around a ½ inch mandrel.
 
 TABLE 708.10.2
 Rubber Waterstops
 Property
 Tensile Strength, Die “C”, psi (Mpa)
 Ultimate Elongation, Die “C”, percent
 Shore Durometer Hardness, Type A
 Absorption of Water, by Weight, percent
 Weight per linear ft.
 
 820
 
 Value
 2,000 (14) min.
 360 min.
 60-85
 5 max.
 0.67 lb. (0.3 kg) min.
 
 Test Method
 ASTM D 412
 ASTM 412
 ASTM D 2240
 ASTM D 570
 --------
 
 SECTION 709
 METALS
 709.1-STEEL BARS FOR CONCRETE REINFORCEMENT:
 All bar reinforcement, whether deformed or plain, shall meet the requirements of AASHTO
 M31 or AASHTO MP18 and be NTPEP certified where applicable. All reinforcement for use in
 structures shall be labeled to correspond with marks on the plans before being shipped to the job
 site.
 When reinforcing steel material is furnished by a supplier who is not certified under
 provisions of MP 709.01.50, with either epoxy coated or plain bar, the supplier shall at their
 expense be required to have each heat or lot of material to be furnished to the Division sampled by
 a Division approved inspection agency in accordance with MP 700.00.01 and shall have the
 samples tested for compliance with the governing specification by a Division approved laboratory.
 The test and inspection information shall be furnished in the Division approved computer
 acceptable format.
 Epoxy coated reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements of ASTM A775, except that
 Section 12.1 of ASTM A775 shall be deleted and replaced with the following. The Contractor
 shall repair any damage to epoxy coating of reinforcing steel that occurs during shipment, storage
 and installation of the steel. The sum of all damage areas in each one foot (300 mm) length of bar
 shall not exceed two percent of the bar area. The total bar surface area covered by patching
 material shall not exceed five percent. All field handling and patching requirements shall conform
 to ASTM D3963.
 709.2-PRESTRESSING REINFORCEMENT:
 Prestressing reinforcement shall be high-tensile steel wire conforming to AASHTO M 204,
 high-tensile wire strand conforming to AASHTO M 203, or high-tensile-strength steel bars
 conforming to AASHTO M 275.
 709.3-HOOK EXPANSION BOLTS FOR FASTENING WIRE MESH IN SHOTCRETE
 APPLICATIONS:
 Hook fasteners for wire mesh reinforcement used in shotcrete applications shall meet the
 requirements of American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI) C1010 through C1018.
 709.4-WELDED WIRE FABRIC FOR CONCRETE REINFORCEMENT:
 Welded wire fabric for concrete reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of
 AASHTO M 55, except as modified.
 Fabric reinforcement for pavement shall be not less than 5 feet (1.5 meters) in width and
 shall be shipped in sheets and not in rolls. Fabric for slope protection, gutters and miscellaneous
 items may be shipped in rolls. Sheets shall be bent in the shop as shown on the Plans. Epoxy
 coated welded wire fabric for concrete reinforcement shall meet the requirements of ASTM A
 884/A 884M.
 709.5-EXPANDED METAL PAVEMENT REINFORCEMENT:
 Expanded metal pavement reinforcement shall be made from open-hearth mild steel plates
 by a cutting and drawing process to form a uniform diamond shape mesh. The weight per 100 sq.
 ft. (10 square) and size of the meshes shall be as specified on the Plans. The strands or members
 
 821
 
 shall be clean cut, straight and uniform in size. A bend test specimen cut from the furnished fabric
 shall withstand bending cold through 180 degrees flat upon itself without cracking on the outside
 of the bent portion. A tensile specimen cut from the furnished material shall have a minimum
 tensile strength of 55,000 psi (380 MPa). The chemical composition of the steel shall conform to
 SAE Standard No. 1010.
 709.6-FABRICATED BAR OR ROD MATS FOR CONCRETE REINFORCEMENT:
 Fabricated steel bar or rod mats shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 54.
 709.7-JOINT TIE BOLT ASSEMBLY:
 Joint tie bolt assemblies shall conform to the applicable details of the Standard Detail Book,
 Volume I. The bar used shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F432, Grade 55. The tensile
 strength of the assembly shall be not less than 15,000 lb. (65 kN) The coupling or shank of the
 hook bolt shall provide a positive stop to prevent the shank of the hook bolt from being threaded
 beyond the center of the coupling. The tie bolt assemblies shall be equipped with an approved
 fastener for installation of the assembly in the steel pavement form. The fastener shall hold the
 assembly in the designated position during the placing and finishing of the concrete and subsequent
 removal of the pavement forms without damage to the concrete or the tie bolt assembly.
 709.8-HIGH STRENGTH LOW ALLOY STRUCTURAL METAL:
 High-strength structural steel for bridges shall conform to AASHTO M270, grades 50,
 50W, or HPS 70W. High-strength steel for all other applications shall conform to AASHTO M222
 (weathering) or AASHTO M223.
 709.9-BLANK
 709.10-GRAY IRON, MALLEABLE IRON AND DUCTILE IRON CASTINGS:
 Gray iron castings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 105, Class No. 30.
 Malleable iron castings shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A 47, Grade 32510.
 Castings shall be boldly filleted at angles, and the arrises shall be sharp and perfect.
 Malleable iron castings for railings posts shall be Grade No. 32510 and shall be galvanized
 with hot-dipped zinc coating in accordance with AASHTO M 232.
 Ductile iron castings shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A-536, Grade 80-55-6,
 65-45-12 or 60-40-18.
 The dimension tolerance for gray iron castings is 1/16 inch per foot (5.2 mm per meter)
 and the weight tolerance is 5%.
 All castings shall contain a manufacturer's heat number, lot number, or cast date. This
 identification shall be cast into the material at the time of manufacturer.
 709.11-HP BEAMS, WIDE FLANGE BEAMS (WHALERS) AND SHEET PILING:
 All HP beams and wide flange beams (whalers) used for structural piling systems shall be hot
 rolled, new and unused and conform to ASTM A572 Grade 50. All steel sheet piling shall conform to
 AASHTO M202/ASTM A328 Grade 50 unless otherwise directed on project plans.
 709.12-STRUCTURAL AND EYEBAR STEEL:
 All structural steel for bridges shall conform to the applicable grade of AASHTO M270
 that is specified in the Plans. When no specific grade is called for, AASHTO M270, Grade 36 shall
 
 822
 
 be used. Non-designated structural steel in all other sections of the Specifications shall conform to
 ASTM A36.
 709.13-STEEL FORGINGS AND STEEL SHAFTING:
 709.13.1-Steel Forgings: Steel forgings shall conform to AASHTO M 102, Class E. They
 shall be bored as specified in 615.4.9.2. A record of the annealing or normalizing changes
 shall be furnished showing the forgings in such charge, the melt or melts from which they were
 secured and the treatment they received.
 709.13.2-Steel Shafting: Cold finished carbon steel shafting shall conform to AASHTO
 M169 Grades 1016 through 1030, inclusive, unless otherwise specified.
 709.14-STEEL CASTINGS:
 Steel castings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 103, except steel
 produced by the converter process shall not be used. All steel castings shall be grade 65-35 (450240). Sharp unfilleted angles or corners shall not be permitted.
 709.15-COATED DOWEL BARS & DOWEL BASKET ASSEMBLIES:
 Coated dowel bars shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M254 except that the steel
 used to make the dowel bars shall meet the requirements of Section 709.1. Additionally, the coating
 applicator shall meet the requirements of Section 709.1.2 and the saw cut ends of the coated dowel
 bars shall be touched-up with a coating material in accordance with the requirements of Section
 602.6.2.
 709.16-BLANK
 709.17-WELDED AND SEAMLESS STEEL PIPE:
 Black and galvanized steel pipe shall meet the requirements of ASTM A 53. When used
 for other than pressure pipe, the hydrostatic test will be waived. Pipe for ferrous metal railing shall
 be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with AASHTO M 111.
 709.18-COPPER ALLOY CASTINGS FOR BEARING, EXPANSION, AND NAME
 PLATES FOR BRIDGES:
 709.18.1-Copper Alloy Castings for Bearing and Expansion Plates for Bridges: The
 copper alloy castings for bearing and expansion plates for bridges shall be bronze conforming
 to the requirements of AASHTO M 107, Copper Alloy UNS Number C91100.
 709.18.2-Copper Alloy Castings for Name Plates for Bridges: The copper alloy for
 name plates shall meet the requirements of ASTM B584, alloy C83600, C83450, C83800,
 C92200, or C92210. The mechanical requirements of the specification are waived
 709.19-ROLLED COPPER-ALLOY BEARING AND EXPANSION PLATES FOR
 BRIDGES:
 The rolled plates shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 108, Alloy C51000 or
 C51100.
 
 823
 
 709.20-FLASHING FOR CONSTRUCTION AND EXPANSION JOINTS:
 709.20.1-Copper: Copper shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 138. Any
 type cold finished, suitable for the purpose intended, may be used. The sheet shall withstand
 being bent cold through 180, flat upon itself, without fracture on the outside of the bent
 portion. Unless otherwise specified, thickness of the sheet shall be 0.022 in. (approximately
 16 oz. per sq. ft.) (550 μm (approximately 4.88 kg per square meter)) with a tolerance of 0.002
 in (50 μm).
 709.20.2-Nickel-Copper Alloy: Nickel-copper alloy sheeting for flashing shall conform
 to the requirements of ASTM B 127. It shall be cold rolled, deep drawing and spinning quality.
 The thickness shall be as specified on the plans.
 709.21-PIPES FOR FLOOR DRAINS AND DOWN-SPOUTS:
 Cast iron pipe for floor drains and down-spouts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM
 A 74.
 709.22-BLANK
 709.23-STEEL BOLTS AND NUTS:
 Material shall meet the requirements of ASTM A 307.
 709.24-HIGH-STRENGTH BOLTS FOR STRUCTURAL STEEL JOINTS, INCLUDING
 SUITABLE NUTS AND HARDENED WASHERS:
 709.24.1-Bolts, Nuts and Washers: All bolts, nuts and washers shall bear the
 manufacturer's markings and all markings specified in the applicable AASHTO specifications.
 All bolts, nuts and washers supplied shall be domestic, as defined in 106.1.1.1, and the
 manufacturer and identification marks shall be registered in the Industrial Fastener Institute's
 Technical Information Report IFI-122.
 709.24.2-High-Strength Bolts: High-Strength bolts, black, galvanized or zinc rich coated,
 shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M 164 with the following exceptions. Zinc rich
 coated fasteners shall also meet the requirements of 709.24.10.
 709.24.2.1-BLANK
 709.24.2.2: Proof load tests (ASTM F606, Method #1) are required for all bolts except
 as excluded in Section 6.2 of AASHTO M 164. Minimum frequency of tests shall be as
 specified in AASHTO M 164, paragraph 9.5.1.
 709.24.2.3: Wedge tests on full size bolts (ASTM F606, paragraph 3.5) are required.
 If bolts are to be galvanized or zinc rich coated, tests shall be performed after galvanizing
 or coating. Minimum frequency of tests shall be specified in AASHTO M 164, paragraph
 9.5.1.
 709.24.2.4: If galvanized or zinc rich coated bolts are supplied, the thickness of the
 zinc coating shall be measured. Measurements shall be taken on the wrench flats or top of
 bolt head.
 
 824
 
 709.24.3-Nuts: Nuts plain, galvanized or zinc rich coated shall meet the following
 requirements.
 709.24.3.1: Nuts to be galvanized (hot-dip or mechanically galvanized), or to be zinc
 rich coated shall be grade DH or DH3 meeting AASHTO M 291 or shall be grade 2H
 meeting AASHTO M 292.
 709.24.3.2: Plain (black) nuts shall be grade C, D or C3 meeting AASHTO M 291 or
 shall be grade 2 meeting AASHTO M 292 and shall have a minimum Rockwell hardness
 of 89 HRB (or Brinell hardness 180 HB). Plain nuts may also be supplied to grades listed
 in paragraph 709.24.3.1 above.
 709.24.3.3: Nuts that are to be galvanized shall be tapped oversize the minimum
 amount required for proper assembly. The amount of overtap in the nut shall be such that
 the nut will assemble freely on the bolt in the coated condition and shall meet the
 mechanical requirements of the applicable AASHTO specification listed above and shall
 meet the requirements of the rotational-capacity test specified (the overtapping
 requirements of AASHTO M 291, paragraph 7.4 shall be considered maximum values
 instead of minimum, as currently shown).
 709.24.3.4: Galvanized and zinc rich coated nuts shall be coated with a lubricant
 containing a dye of any color that contrasts with the color of the coating.
 709.24.3.5: Proof load tests (ASTM F606, paragraph 4.2) are required for all nuts.
 Minimum frequency of tests shall be as specified in AASHTO M 291, paragraph 9.3 or
 AASHTO M 292, paragraph 7.1.2.1. If nuts are to be galvanized or zinc rich coated, tests
 shall be performed after coating, overtapping and lubricating.
 709.24.3.6: If galvanized or zinc rich coated nuts are supplied, the thickness of the
 coating shall be measured. Measurements shall be taken on the wrench flats.
 709.24.4-Hardened Washers: Hardened washers, plain, galvanized or zinc rich coated
 shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M 293 and the following:
 709.24.4.1: If galvanized or zinc rich coated washers are supplied, hardness testing
 shall be performed after coating. (Coating shall be removed prior to taking hardness
 measurements).
 709.24.4.2: If galvanized or zinc rich coated washers are supplied, the thickness of the
 coating shall be measured.
 709.24.5-Rotational Capacity Testing: Rotational-capacity tests are required and shall
 be performed on all black (plain), galvanized (after galvanizing) bolt, nut and washer
 assemblies by the manufacturer or distributor prior to shipping. Washers are required as a part
 of the test. The following shall apply:
 709.24.5.1: Except as modified, the rotational-capacity test shall be performed in
 accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M 164.
 
 825
 
 709.24.5.2: Each combination of bolt production lot, nut lot and washer lot shall be
 tested as an assembly.
 709.24.5.3: A rotational-capacity lot number shall be assigned to each combination of
 lots tested.
 709.24.5.4: The minimum frequency of testing shall be two assemblies per rotationalcapacity lot.
 709.24.5.5: The bolt, nut and washer assembly shall be assembled in a SkidmoreWilhelm Calibrator or an acceptable equivalent device. For short bolts which are too short
 to be assembled in the Skidmore-Wilhelm Calibrator see Section 709.24.5.9.
 709.24.5.6: The minimum rotation, from an initial condition (10% of the specified bolt
 proof load), shall be:
 240 (2/3 turn) for bolt lengths up to and including 4 diameters.
 360 (1 turn) for bolt lengths over 4 diameters up to an including 8 diameters.
 480 (1-1/3 turn) for bolt lengths over 8 diameters.
 709.24.5.7: The tension reached at the above rotation shall be equal to or greater than
 1.15 times the required installation tension. The installation tension and the tension for the
 turn test are shown below:
 ENGLISH
 Diameter (Inches)
 ⅝
 ¾
 ⅛
 1
 1⅛
 1¼
 1½
 Required Installation
 19
 28
 39
 51
 56
 71
 103
 Tension (kips)
 Turn Test Tension (kips)
 22
 32
 45
 59
 64
 82
 118
 Diameter (mm)
 Required Installation
 Tension (kN)
 Turn Test Tension (kN)
 
 16
 91
 
 METRIC
 20
 22
 142
 176
 
 24
 205
 
 27
 276
 
 30
 326
 
 36
 475
 
 105
 
 163
 
 236
 
 317
 
 375
 
 546
 
 202
 
 709.24.5.8: After the required installation tension listed above has been exceeded, one
 reading of tension and torque shall be taken and recorded. The torque value shall conform
 to the following:
 Torque (T) < 0.25 PD
 Where:
 Torque (T)
 P
 C
 D
 
 =
 =
 =
 =
 
 measured torque (foot-pounds) (kN•m)
 measured bolt tension (pounds) (kN)
 Contractor’s total overhead for contract period
 bolt diameter (feet) (m)
 
 709.24.5.9: Bolts that are too short to test in a Skidmore-Wilhelm Calibrator may be
 tested in a steel joint. The tension requirement of Section 709.24.5.7 need not apply. The
 826
 
 maximum torque requirement of Section 709.24.5.8 shall be computed using a value P
 equal to the turn test tension shown in the Table in Section 709.24.5.7.
 709.24.6-Reporting of Test Results:
 709.24.6.1: The results of all tests (including zinc coating thickness) required and in
 the appropriate AASHTO specifications shall be recorded on an appropriate document.
 709.24.6.2: Location where tests are performed and date of tests shall be reported on
 the appropriate document.
 709.24.7-Witnessing of Tests: The tests need not be witnessed by an independent
 inspection agency. However, the manufacturer or distributor that performs the test shall certify
 that the results recorded are accurate. Independent of the above, the Engineer reserves the right
 to witness any and all tests as the Engineer deems necessary. The manufacturer or distributor
 will notify the Engineer prior to conducting any tests.
 709.24.8-Documentation:
 709.24.8.1: Mill Test Report(s) (MTR) shall be furnished for all mill steel used in the
 manufacture of the bolts, nuts and washers. MTR shall indicate the place where the
 material was melted and manufactured.
 709.24.8.2: Manufacturer Certified Test Report(s) (MCTR): The manufacturer of the
 bolts, nuts and washers shall furnish test reports (MCTR) for the items furnished. Each
 MCTR shall show the relevant information required in accordance with Section 709.24.6.
 The manufacturer performing the rotational-capacity test shall include on the MCTR:
 a. The lot number of each of the items tested.
 b. The rotational-capacity lot number as required in Section 709.24.5.3.
 c. The results of the tests required in Section 709.24.5.
 d. The pertinent information required in Section 709.24.6.2.
 e. A statement that MCTR for the items are in conformance to this specification
 and the appropriate AASHTO specification.
 f. The location where the bolt assembly components were manufactured.
 709.24.8.3-Distributor Certified Test Report(s) (DCTR): The DCTR shall include
 MCTR above for the various bolt assembly components. The rotational-capacity test may
 be performed by a distributor (in lieu of a manufacturer) and reported on the DCTR. The
 DCTR shall show the results of tests required in Section 709.24.5; shall show the pertinent
 information required in Section 709.24.6.2 and shall show the rotational-capacity lot
 number as required in Section 709.24.5.3. The DCTR shall certify that the MCTR are in
 conformance to this specification and the appropriate AASHTO specifications.
 709.24.9-Shipping:
 709.24.9.1: Bolts, nuts and washers from each rotational-capacity lot shall be shipped
 in the same container. If there is only one production lot number for each size of nut and
 washer, the nuts and washers may be shipped in separate containers. Each container shall
 be watertight and shall be permanently marked with a shipping label on the container lid
 
 827
 
 and on the side of the container. The labels shall contain, as a minimum, the following
 information: quantity and description of contents, manufacturer's lot number for each item
 and the rotational-capacity lot number.
 709.24.9.2: The appropriate MTR, MCTR or DCTR shall be supplied to the Engineer
 or representative prior to installation of any fasteners.
 709.24.10-Zinc Rich Coated Fasteners:
 709.24.10.1: Fastener components shall be vapor degreased, blast cleaned to Steel
 Structures Painting Council (SSPC) condition SSPC-10 (near white) and spray coated with
 a high ratio water-based inorganic zinc rich primer meeting the requirements of Section
 711.20.2 of the Standard Specifications. The primer utilized shall be included on the
 Division of Highways Approved List of Zinc Primers. Copies of the Approval List are
 available from WVDOH District Materials Officers or from the Materials Division in
 Charleston, WV.
 709.24.10.2: Dry film thickness of the zinc rich primer shall be 2 mils (50 μm)
 minimum and 4 mils (100 μm) maximum.
 709.25-STEEL SHELLS OR CASINGS (DRIVEN WITHOUT MANDREL) FOR CASTIN-PLACE PILES:
 Steel shells or casings shall be composed of basic open hearth steel having a tensile strength
 of not less than 50,000 psi (345 MPa). The thickness of metal shall be as indicated on the Plans.
 The tips (small end) shall be equipped with a steel driving point securely fastened to the shell and
 the entire shell shall form one integral water-tight unit. Shells shall be tapered or step-tapered
 from top to bottom.
 Any shell proposed for use shall be approved by the Engineer before driving.
 709.26 through 709.28-BLANK
 709.29-ZINC COATED STEEL SHEETS FOR USE IN MANUFACTURING TRAFFIC
 SIGNS:
 The zinc coated steel sheets shall be 16 gage (USS) and shall conform to the requirements
 of ASTM A 525.
 The sheets shall be resquared. They shall be furnished with a galvanized coating, Class
 2.00.
 The surface of the sheets shall be clean, free of oil, soot, dirt, scale, and other foreign
 material. They shall be protected in transit and shall be suitable for painting without cleaning or
 processing in any manner upon receipt by the Division.
 709.30-CAST IRON SOIL PIPE AND FITTINGS:
 Cast iron soil pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A 74.
 709.31-ALUMINUM ALLOY EXTRUSIONS AND ALUMINUM ALLOY EXTRUDED
 TUBE:
 Aluminum alloy extrusions and extruded tube shall conform to ASTM B 221, alloy 6061,
 temper condition T6.
 
 828
 
 709.32-ALUMINUM ALLOY STANDARD STRUCTURAL SHAPES:
 Aluminum alloy standard structural shapes, rolled or extruded, shall conform to ASTM B
 308, alloy 6061, temper condition T6.
 709.33-ALUMINUM ALLOY DRAWN TUBE:
 Aluminum alloy drawn tube shall conform to ASTM B 210, alloy 6061, temper condition
 T6.
 709.34-ALUMINUM ALLOY PIPES:
 Aluminum alloy pipe shall conform to ASTM B 241, alloy 6061, temper condition T6.
 709.35-ALUMINUM ALLOY RIVETS:
 Aluminum alloy rivets shall conform to Military Specifications MIL-R-5674; grade and
 head style shall be as specified by the Engineer.
 709.36-ALUMINUM ALLOY BOLTS, NUTS AND SET SCREWS:
 Aluminum alloy bolts and set screws shall be made from rod conforming to ASTM B 211,
 alloy 2024, temper condition T4. The aluminum alloy nuts shall be made from rod conforming to
 either ASTM B 221, alloy 6061, temper condition T6 or ASTM B 211, alloy 6061, temper
 condition T6.
 Bolt head and nuts shall conform to the American Standard Regular Hexagon, ASA
 Specifications B 18.2 with the following modification: the width across the flats and the width
 across the corners may exceed the maximum given in the specification tables by an amount no
 greater than 20 percent of the difference between the maximum and minimum values given in the
 tables.
 Threads shall conform to American Standard Coarse Thread Class 2. The finished product
 shall be in the fully heat-treated and aged condition. Anchor bolts shall be given a clear anodic
 coating at least 0.0002 in (5 μm) thick. Exposed nuts and washers need not be given as anodic
 coating.
 709.37-ALUMINUM ALLOY WASHERS:
 Aluminum alloy washers shall be made from sheet conforming to ASTM B 209, Alclad
 2024, temper condition T3 or T4 depending upon the thickness supplied.
 709.38-BLANK
 709.39-ALUMINUM ALLOY SAND CASTINGS:
 Aluminum alloy sand castings shall conform to Table 658.4.3.
 709.40-ALUMINUM ALLOY SHIM MATERIAL:
 Aluminum alloy shims shall be made from sheet or plate conforming to ASTM B 209,
 alloy 1100, temper condition 0.
 709.41-ALUMINUM FILLER METAL FOR WELDING:
 Aluminum filler metal for welding shall conform to ASTM B 285, alloy ER 4043.
 
 829
 
 709.42-GALVANIZED PIPE OR TUBING FOR HORIZONTAL DRAINS:
 709.42.1-General: Horizontal drains may be of galvanized welded or seamless steel pipe,
 or galvanized tubing, conforming to the requirements prescribed.
 The outside diameter shall be a nominal diameter of 2 inches (50 mm) or greater, and the
 wall thickness shall be a minimum of 0.043 in. (1 mm). The material shall be perforated.
 Perforations shall consist of two rows of 3/16 in. 1/32 in. (5 mm 1 mm) diameter holes along
 the length of the pipe or tubing. The holes in each row shall be on 2 inches ¼ in. (50 mm 6
 mm) centers. The row shall be 110 deg apart.
 The material may be furnished in random or regular lengths.
 709.42.2-Galvanized Welded or Seamless Steel Pipe: Galvanized welded or seamless
 steel pipe shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A 53. The hydrostatic test will be
 waived.
 709.42.3-Galvanized Tubing: Galvanized tubing shall be circular in cross section with a
 welded seam. The base metal shall conform to the requirements of Table 1, AASHTO M
 218M. The outside surface of the weld shall be metalized.
 709.43 through 709.44-BLANK
 709.45-GALVANIZED STEEL GUARDRAIL POSTS:
 Steel guardrail posts shall be fabricated from steel meeting the requirements of ASTM
 A36 or fabricated in accordance with ASTM A 769, Grade 40. They shall be of a section, length
 and weight as specified on the Plans. The weight shall not be less than 97.5 percent of that
 specified.
 Galvanizing shall be in accordance with AASHTO M 111, with a minimum of 2 oz. per
 square foot (600 grams per square meter).
 709.46-STEEL POSTS, POST BRACES AND GATE FRAMES FOR RIGHT-OF-WAY
 FENCE:
 Unless otherwise specified, all right-of-way fence posts, post braces and grate frames shall
 meet the requirements of AASHTO M 181. Either Grade 1 or Grade 2 may be used unless one is
 specifically called for in the contract. Pipe members shall have the dimensions and weights called
 for on the plans.
 Studded tee posts used as line posts for farm-field fence shall conform to the requirements
 of either AASHTO M281/ASTM A702 or ASTM A499 and coated to meet the requirements of
 AASHTO M111 unless otherwise directed on project plans.
 709.47-BLANK
 709.48-CADMIUM COATED MATERIALS:
 Cadmium coated (electrodeposited) steel articles, steel hardware, nuts, bolts, etc. shall meet
 the requirements of ASTM B766.
 709.49-SHEET LEAD:
 Sheet lead shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B 29.
 
 830
 
 709.50-STEEL PILE POINTS:
 Steel pile points may be either ASTM A27 Grade 65/35 cast steel or ASTM A148 Grade
 90/60. Pile points will be approved by the Materials Control, Soil and Testing Division.
 709.51-U-CHANNEL BREAKAWAY MOUNTING DEVICES:
 709.51.1-General Description and Requirements: The device shall be NCHRP-350
 approved up to Test Level III for use with 2# per foot and 3# per foot-u-channel supports on
 installations with up to three (3) supports in a seven (7) foot lateral width. The device shall be
 designed to withstand cyclic loading (allowing for bending beyond 12%), yet break away
 safely on impact. The device shall be designed to not fail due to wind loading prior to failure
 of the sign support.
 709.51.2-General Design and Functionality: The objective of the device shall be to
 ensure a signpost with release from an anchor upon impact from a motor vehicle. The device
 shall include a driven subgrade anchor, a receiver for the channel support, and a breakaway
 coupling connecting the receiver to the anchor,
 Vehicle damage shall be minimized, as shall the risk to pedestrians after the post has been
 impacted. As a minimum, the device shall incorporate the following features:
 1. The breakaway coupler shall be designed to shear or yield at any angle of incidence
 (360) degrees), with a constant amount of force, irrespective of vehicle velocity.
 2. The breakaway coupler shall function effectively and independent of the sequence in
 which the fasteners are tightened. The sole function of the fasteners shall be to secure
 the sign post to the receiver and the coupler to the subgrade anchor. The receiver for
 the sign support shall be integral to the upper end of the coupler, eliminating the need
 for connection hardware.
 3. Upon impact, no shards of metal shall be left above the top of the subgrade anchor,
 which shall be designed to be driven to grade. The anchor shall be automatically
 plugged to prevent any foreign matter or debris from entering, and to ensure protection
 from a pedestrian trip or fall accident.
 4. No special tools such as torque wrenches or the like shall be required for effective
 installation or replacement of the receiver and breakaway coupler.
 5. The receiver and breakaway coupler design shall enable the sign installer to fully
 reattach a signpost to the anchor within a five-minute period after a knock down.
 6. When damaged by a direct wheel impact or vehicle under carriage, the design of the
 breakaway coupler shall facilitate reuse of the anchor.
 709.51.3-Individual Component Features:
 709.51.3.1-Breakaway Coupler: The breakaway coupler shall incorporate a hollow
 biconical or other similarly shaped shear section facilitating reliable true 360 degree
 functionality and enabling the post and receiver to separate cleanly from the anchor. To
 prevent trip or fall hazards, the coupler shall break cleanly and reliably at grade without
 leaving any sharp pieces of metal above grade. The coupler material shall provide for a
 minimum bending (elongation) of 12% prior to fracture. Upon impact the anchor shall
 remain undamaged with the inside of the anchor plugged by the remaining portion of the
 coupler. The bottom end of the coupler shall attach to the anchor by slidably fitting inside
 with the breakaway portion of the coupler being slightly above the anchor. The coupler
 shall incorporate a locking feature which applies equal and opposite force directly to a
 831
 
 minimum of two opposing side walls of the anchor through the tightening of one externally
 accessible fastener prior to or after installation of the sign support.
 709.51.3.2-Anchor: The breakaway coupler shall attach to a square 2½“ x 2½” (min.)
 heavy duty anchor. The length of the anchor shall be 8” min. for concrete applications and
 12” min. for asphalt applications. The anchor shall incorporate a tab completely around
 the top end such that the tab will sit flush on the road surface when completely driven, and
 will aid to seal the pre-driven hole from moisture and debris.
 The anchor may be designed to allow a square 2”x2” ¼ “ wall (min.), 80 KSI min. yield
 strength seamless extension to slide into the end in order to meet the 12” length requirement
 in asphalt. The anchor a minimum of 4”. The anchor shall use a taper lock feature which
 is designed to ensure the joining of the anchor and the extension.
 The anchor shall incorporate an inside plug or barrier, below the designed elevation of
 the bottom of the coupler after being inserted, to prevent moisture or soil from the bottom
 of the anchor to come into contact with the coupler.
 709.51.3.3-Receiver: The receiver for the sign support shall be cast, and shall facilitate
 a snug male (sign support) to female (receiver) connection. The support shall be securely
 fastened to the receiver through the use of a maximum of two fasteners.
 709.51.4-Component Materials and Coatings: The coupler and receiver components of
 the device shall be manufactured using material meeting the requirements of ASTM A536 (6545-12 min). These components shall be coating with an exterior grade (UV protected) powder
 coating.
 The subgrade anchor shall be manufactured from steel meeting the requirements of ASTM
 C1018. The entire anchor shall be covered with a rust inhibiting exterior grade epoxy coating.
 
 832
 
 SECTION 710
 WOOD MATERIALS
 710.1-STRUCTURAL MATERIALS:
 Timber, lumber, piles, posts, and blocks shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M168
 and AASHTO M133. Preservation and Treatment plants shall meet the requirements of the Book
 of Standards of the American Wood Protection Association (AWPA). All preservatives and treated
 wood products shall comply with US EPA regulations.
 710.2-SPECIES AND GRADE:
 710.2.1-Structural softwood shall meet the requirements of the Southern Pine Inspection
 Bureau (SPIB) grading rules. All wood for structural use shall be visually or mechanically
 graded for the requirements shown on the Plans or specified in the contract.
 710.2.2-Structural hardwood shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M168 or the
 Northeastern Lumber Manufacturers Association (NeLMA) structural grades. The grade and
 species required shall be as shown on the Plans or specified in the contract.
 710.2.3-Hardwood used for bridge decking shall meet the Standards of the National
 Hardwood Lumber Association (NHLA) for sound square edge, be rough sawn and sized by
 being processed through a hit or miss surfacer.
 710.2.4-All graded material may either carry the appropriate grade stamp, or be inspected
 by an independent inspection agency approved by the Division.
 710.3-PRESERVATIVE TREATMENT:
 All wood products and preservative treatments used for highway and commercial use shall
 meet the requirements of AWPA Standard U1 and AASHTO M133.
 The quantity of preservative shall be as required above, unless modified by the Plans or
 purchase order.
 710.4-TREATMENT PLANTS:
 Material treated with preservative may be purchased from certified or noncertified plants.
 Both types of plants shall adhere to the quality control procedures of AWPA M2.
 710.4.1-Certified Plants: The Division's procedure for plant certification is defined in
 MP 710.01.40.
 710.4.2-Noncertified Plants: Material purchased from noncertified plants will be tested
 on a lot by lot basis. The inspection shall be performed by a Division approved inspection
 agency. The cost of the inspection will be paid by the supplier. Shipments from noncertified
 plants shall be documented as described in MP 710.01.40.
 710.5-WOOD POSTS:
 Wood posts shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M168 and AASHTO M133 except
 round posts may be used for guardrail.
 
 833
 
 710.5.1-Round posts for guardrail shall meet the requirements of Section 5 "Material
 Requirements" of ANSI 05.1. Round posts for guardrail shall be from the major or minor
 species of Southern Pine.
 710.5.2-Rectangular posts for guardrail shall be No. 1 major or minor species of Southern
 Pine as defined in Section 400 of the SPIB grading rules.
 710.5.3-Dimensions of all guardrail posts except as noted on the Plans shall be as follows:
 Diameter:
 Length:
 Size:
 Length:
 
 Round Guardrail Posts
 7” ¼” (177 mm 6 mm) throughout the length except as noted on Plans.
 6’ ½” (1 828 mm 13 mm)
 Rectangular Guardrail Posts
 6” ¼” X 8”¼” (152 mm 6 mm by 203 mm 6 mm) throughout the
 length except as noted on Plans
 6’ ½” (1 828 mm 13 mm)
 
 710.5.4-Dimensions of wood posts for fence and signs shall be as shown on the Plans.
 710.6-PLYWOOD:
 710.6.1-Plywood shall meet the requirements of Product Standard PS-1 of U.S.
 Department of Commerce. All plywood shall be identified with the mark of a qualified
 inspection and testing agency. The identification shall include:
 710.6.1.1-Species group classification, or class number, or span rating, depending on
 grade.
 710.6.1.2-Either interior or exterior.
 710.6.1.3-Grade name or grade of face and back veneers.
 710.6.1.4-The symbol PS-1 signifying conformance with the standard.
 710.6.2-Exterior plywood shall be bonded with exterior glue and the veneers used in
 manufacture cannot be less than grade C as defined in PS-1.
 710.7-COMMON LUMBER:
 710.7.1-Common lumber is untreated and suitable for general construction and utility
 purposes. Common lumber is from 2 inches (50 mm) to, but not including, 5 inches (125 mm)
 thick and is 2 inches (50 mm) or more in width. Common lumber shall be grade 2 or better,
 unless otherwise specified in the plans, when graded by the Board of Review of the American
 Lumber Standards Committee.
 710.8-SERVICE AND LIGHTING POLES:
 710.8.1: Wood Service or lighting poles shall be ANSI Class 5, or larger, or as called for
 on the contract plans. Lighting poles shall be southern yellow pine and service poles shall be
 either southern yellow pine or Douglas fir. The poles shall be pressure-treated) to meet the
 requirements of AWPA U1 (Commodities Specification D: Poles).
 834
 
 SECTION 711
 PAINTS, COATINGS, OILS, AND INKS
 Paints shall consist of pigments and vehicles conforming to the general requirements of
 these specifications, proportioned and treated to produce materials possessing the detailed
 composition and physical properties.
 General Requirements: The finished products shall not settle excessively nor cake in the
 container, shall be readily mixed with a paddle to a smooth uniform paint of specified consistency
 and working properties. The product shall not thicken, liver, skin, or curdle. The paint shall have
 a storage life of at least 12 months. No product may have VOC’s in excess of 3.5 1bs /gal (420
 g/l).
 All ready mixed paints shall be furnished in containers holding not more than five gallons
 (20 liters), unless authorized by the Engineer. Shop paints may be furnished in larger containers
 providing approved mechanical agitation is available.
 Each container shall bear a label with the following information: Name and address of the
 manufacturer, trade name or trade mark, type of paint, reference to the Division's Standard
 Specification Number, number of gallons (liters), lot or batch number, date of manufacture, and
 flash point. The label of two component systems shall include mixing instructions.
 Sampling and testing shall be in accordance with MP 711.00.20. Quantities of 50 gallons
 (200 liters) or less may be accepted on manufacturer's certification.
 711.1-BLANK
 711.2-BOILED LINSEED OIL:
 Boiled linseed oil shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C1315.
 711.3 through 711.4-BLANK
 711.5-MINERAL SPIRITS:
 Mineral spirits shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D 235.
 711.6-ORGANIC ZINC PRIMER:
 711.6.1-General: This primer may be used in the shop on new steel or in the field on
 existing steel. When used as a shop primer, the material shall have a minimum slip coefficient
 of 0.50 (Class B) when tested in accordance with “Test Method to Determine the Slip
 Coefficient for Coatings used in Bolted Joints” as adapted by the Research Council on
 Structural Connections. Acceptance for field use shall be based on batch testing on materials
 that do not meet the minimum of 0.50 (Class B) slip coefficient. Initial approval of all material
 will be based on complete testing to assure specification compliance. The steel shall be capable
 of being blast cleaned to a near-white finish, SSPC-SP-10, for new steel, and to a commercial
 finish, SSPC-SP-6, for existing steel. The primer may be top coated with materials meeting the
 requirements of Subsections 711.22.3 and 711.22.4. The dry film thickness requirement for
 this material is three mils (75 μm) minimum unless specified otherwise.
 711.6.2–Vehicle: The organic vehicles may include phenoxies, catalyzed epoxies,
 urethanes, chlorinated rubbers, styrenes, silicones, vinyls, and other suitable resinous binders.
 
 835
 
 They may be chemically cured or may dry by solvent evaporation. Under certain conditions,
 as approved by the Engineer, heat may be used to facilitate or accelerate hardening.
 711.6.3-Physical Requirements:
 i.
 
 ii.
 iii.
 iv.
 v.
 vi.
 vii.
 viii.
 ix.
 
 Minimum Maximum ASTM
 Total Solids - % by weight of paint
 70
 D2369
 Variance shall be within ±2% of the percent solids by weight of the previously
 qualified paint.
 Pigment - % by weight of total solids
 83
 D2371
 Total zinc dust - % by weight of pigment
 93
 D521
 Total zinc dust - % by weight of total
 77
 solids
 Mudcracking - The coating when applied to a five to six mil (125-150 μm) dry
 film thickness shall show no mudcracking when viewed under 8X
 magnification.
 Adhesion - Shall be no less than 4B when evaluated in accordance with MP
 711.00.20.
 Salt Spray - Testing shall be in accordance with ASTM B117. After 1000 hours
 of continuous exposure, there shall be no evidence of checking, cracking,
 rusting, or blistering.
 Viscosity of the mixed paint shall be in accordance with ASTM D 562. Variance
 shall be within ±10 Krebs Units of the viscosity of the previously qualified paint.
 Weight per gallon of the mixed paint shall be in accordance with ASTM D
 1475. Variance shall be within ±0.5 pounds (225 g) of the weight per gallon of
 the previously qualified paint.
 
 711.7 through 711.11-BLANK
 711.12-EPOXY MASTIC MAINTENANCE COATING:
 711.12.1-General: This specification provides the requirements for a two component,
 modified epoxy coating for use as a spot primer or a one coat system for use on poorly prepared
 surfaces on most existing structures. All ingredients are not specified, however, the finished
 product shall comply with the requirements prescribed.
 The coating may be used as a primer over steel that has been cleaned to a minimum of a
 commercial finish meeting SSPC-SP-6. If it is used as a primer, it may then be coated with
 the manufacturer’s recommended intermediate and top coat from the Division’s approved list
 of Zinc Rich Low Voc Systems (711.22).
 This coating shall also be suitable for use over zinc rich primers.
 711.12.2-Composition: The pigment shall be flake metallic aluminum. The vehicle shall
 be modified epoxy resin and curing agent. The vehicle shall be formulated to permit trouble
 free application during normal humidity conditions.
 
 836
 
 711.12.3-Physical Requirements:
 i. Dry to touch @ 5 mils, (125 μm) dry, 24 Hours Maximum
 ii. Dry hard @ 5 mils, (125 μm) dry, 72 Hours Maximum
 iii. Weight per gallon, 10.5 Lbs. Minimum
 iv. Corrosion resistance: Steel panels meeting the requirements of MP 711.00.20,
 Section 5.2 shall be sandblasted to a white metal blast finish in accordance with SSPCSP-5, exposed to the atmosphere for 30 days so uniform rusting occurs, and then hand
 cleaned with a wire brush in accordance with SSPC-SP-2. The panel shall then be
 spray applied with epoxy-mastic according to manufacturers' recommendations.
 v. Fresh Water Resistance: The coated panels shall be scribed to the base metal with
 an X of at least two inch (50 mm) legs and shall be immersed in fresh tap water at 75
 ± 5° F (24° ± 3° C). Upon examination after 30 days immersion, the panels shall be
 unaffected except for discolorations of the epoxy-mastic coating. There shall be no
 blistering, softening, or visible rusting beyond 1/16 inch (2mm) from the edge of the
 scribe mark.
 vi. Salt Water Resistance: Panels shall be scribed to the base metal with an X of at least
 two inch (50 mm) legs and shall be immersed in five percent sodium chloride solution
 at 75 ± 5° F (24 °C ± 3° C). The panels shall be unaffected except for discoloration
 of the epoxy-mastic coating upon inspection after 30 days. There shall be no blistering,
 softening or visible rusting beyond 1/16 inch (2 mm) from the center of the scribe
 mark. The sodium chloride solution shall be replenished with fresh solution each
 week.
 vii. Weathering Resistance: Panels shall be tested in accordance with ASTM G 53. After
 1,000 hours exposure, the coating shall show no rusting, blistering, or loss of adhesion
 to the test panel.
 viii. Salt Fog Resistance: Panels shall be scribed to the base metal with an X of at least
 two inch (50 mm) legs. The test panels shall then be tested in accordance with ASTM
 B 117. After 1,000 hours of continuous exposure, the coating shall show no loss of
 bond, nor shall it show rusting or blistering beyond 1/16 inch (2 mm) from the center
 of the scribe mark.
 ix. Flexibility: A steel panel that is No. 20 gage (0.0375 in. or 0.952 mil), but in no case,
 no thinner than No. 24 gage (0.025 in. or 0.635 mil) shall be blasted to a white finish
 meeting SSPC-SP-5, coated and cured for 14 days at 75° ± 5° F (24° C ± 3° C). The
 epoxy mastic coating shall be applied at a minimum of 5 mils (125 µm) dry film
 thickness. The coating shall display no sign of cracking or loss of adhesion when the
 panel is uniformly bent 180° around a ¾ inch (19 mm) diameter mandrel.
 x. Application Properties: The mixed paint, when thinned in accordance with
 manufacturer's recommendations, shall be capable of being sprayed in one coat at a
 10 mils (250 μm) wet film thickness without runs or sags. The properly thinned paint
 shall be capable of brush and roller application. The manufacturer's current printed
 instructions for application of epoxy-mastic coating shall be submitted to the Division
 for review and approval prior to application.
 711.12.4-Packaging and Labeling: The epoxy-mastic coating shall be packaged in two
 containers, labeled Part A and Part B. Each container shall bear a label on which shall be clearly
 shown the manufacturer and brand name of paint, the lot number, and the date of manufacture.
 
 837
 
 The label on the containers shall also include complete instructions for the use of this paint.
 The inside of the container shall be coated, if necessary, to prevent attack by the paint
 components.
 711.12.5-Acceptance Procedure: The Division will develop an approved list of products
 meeting this specification. This list will be placed on the Division’s website.
 The list shall be based upon testing performed by the Division. Upon approval by the
 Division, further testing will not be required unless random samples tested by the Division
 show non-compliance with any of the specification requirements.
 The manufacturer shall supply the Materials Division the following for each product:
 i.
 One two gallon kit of the product
 ii.
 One gallon thinner
 iii. Instructions for mixing, thinning and application
 iv.
 Materials Safety Data Sheet for both the paint and thinner
 v.
 Product data sheet
 711.12.6-Colored epoxy-mastic shall meet the above requirements with the following
 changes:
 The metallic aluminum pigment shall be replaced by other pigments and coloring agent
 necessary to provide the specified color. The color choices permissible are from Federal
 Standard 595. The color difference, E, of the acceptance samples shall not be more than 5 E
 units from the standards listed below:
 Federal Standard Numbers - 14062, 14223, 14241, 20062, 26373
 i. Gloss @ 60° shall be 30-50 for semi-gloss and 51 or greater for gloss finishes. Flat
 finishes shall have a gloss of 29 or less.
 711.13-INKS:
 Inks for use on reflective sheeting shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the
 reflective sheeting.
 711.13.1-Transparent Ink:
 711.13.1.1-Color: The color shall meet the requirements of Table 1 and be tested in
 accordance with Section 7.1 of AASHTO M 268.
 711.13.1.2-Black Ink: Black Ink shall be opaque process ink made with synthetic
 resin.
 711.13.2-Clear Transparent Ink: Clear transparent ink for application as a final
 protective coat shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the reflective sheeting.
 711.14-OVERCOAT SYSTEMS:
 711.14.1-General: This specification provides paint systems which may be used with
 minimal surface preparation.
 
 838
 
 711.14.2-Cleaning and Painting: Surface preparation will be limited to Hand or Power
 Tool Cleaning or Power Tool Cleaning to Bare Metal meeting SSPC-SP-2, SSPC-SP-3, or
 SSPC-SP-11. Application of the paint system shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s
 recommendations.
 711.14.3-Acceptance: The Division will maintain an approved list of overcoat systems.
 711.15 through 711.19-BLANK
 711.20-INORGANIC ZINC RICH PRIMER:
 711.20.1-General: This specification provides the requirements for an inorganic zinc rich
 primer. The primer is to be shop applied over a near white blasted surface, SSPC – SP-10.
 711.20.2-Physical Requirements: This primer shall meet the requirements set forth in
 MP 711.20.59 and AASHTO M 300 with the following exceptions:
 a. Delete X-ray diffraction
 b. Delete accelerated weathering
 c. Delete bullet hole immersion test
 d. Delete humidity test
 e. Delete primer field performance requirement
 f. Delete infrared spectrum
 g. The VOC shall not exceed 3.5 lbs /gal (420 g / l).
 h. The adhesion shall be a minimum of 3B when tested in accordance with MP
 711.00.20.
 i. The primer shall have a minimum slip coefficient of 0.50 (Class B) when tested in
 accordance with "Test Method to Determine the Slip Coefficient for Coatings used
 in Bolted Joints" as adapted by the Research Council on Structural Connections.
 711.20.3- Acceptance Procedure: The Division will develop an approved list of products
 meeting this specification. This list will be placed on the Division’s web –site.
 The list shall be based upon testing performed by the Division. Upon approval by the
 Division, further testing will not be required unless random samples tested by the Division
 show non-compliance with any of the specification requirements.
 711.21-REPAIR OF DAMAGED GALVANIZED SURFACES:
 Repair of damaged galvanized surfaces will be done using a primer meeting the
 requirements Section 711.6.
 711.22- ZINC RICH LOW VOC SYSTEM:
 711.22.1-General: Initial approval of the system will be based on complete testing for
 specification compliance. Each product in the system shall be from the same paint
 manufacturer. Each coat shall be a contrasting color to the one previously applied. An
 intermediate coat meeting 711.22.3 may be needed to tie the primer and the top coat together.
 The use of the intermediate coat shall be at the option of the paint manufacturer. In either case,
 the adhesion of the system shall be at least 3A when testing in accordance with MP 711.00.20.
 Also see MP 711.22.22 for additional requirements.
 
 839
 
 The adhesion test shall be conducted approximately 14 days after application of the top
 coat.
 All products are to have a VOC of 2.8 lbs / gallon (336 g/l) - Max. except the primer, which
 can go to 3.5 lbs / gallon (420 g/l) - Max.
 The prime fabricator is responsible for choosing the paint system when shop applied.
 711.22.2-Primer: The primer shall meet the requirements of 711.6 or 711.20.
 711.22.3-Intermediate Coat: This material shall meet the manufacturer's specification and
 shall be compatible with a primer (711.6 or 711.20) and the top coat (711.22.4). See MP
 711.20.60 for additional requirements.
 711.22.4-Top Coat: This material shall meet the manufacturer’s specification and shall
 meet the requirements of 711.22.4.1. All topcoat material shall be batch tested. Tinting of
 batches shall not be allowed unless as stated below. When the quantity of material is 50 gallons
 (200 liters) or less, the Division may elect to accept the material based on certified test data
 from the manufacturer. For projects requiring less than 25 gallons of topcoat, the topcoat may
 be tinted with prior approval by the Division.
 711.22.4.1-Requirements:
 i.
 Dry Hard - 24 Hours Maximum
 ii.
 Color – The color choices permissible are from Federal Standard 595. The color
 difference, ΔE, of the acceptance samples shall not be more than five units from
 the Standards listed below:
 Federal Standard Numbers - 14062, 14223, 14241, 20062, 26373
 iii.
 
 Gloss @ 60° shall be 30-50 for semi-gloss and 51 or greater for gloss finishes.
 Flat finishes shall have a gloss of 29 or less.
 
 711.22.5-System: The system shall be composed of a primer (711.6 or 711.20) and topcoat.
 The primer shall be applied at a minimum of 3 mils (75 μm) dry.
 The intermediate coat shall be applied at a minimum of one mil (25 µm) dry.
 The top coat shall be applied at a minimum of 3 mils (75 μm) dry.
 The total coating over the primer shall be a minimum of 4 mils (100 μm) dry.
 711.22.5.1-System Requirements:
 Intercoat Adhesion-After all tests, the intercoat adhesion shall be at least 3A when
 tested in accordance with MP 711.00.20.
 Accelerated Weathering-After cycling 1000 hours there shall be no evidence of
 checking, cracking, rusting, or blistering. The degree of chalking shall not be less than
 No. 6 when tested according to the ASTM G 154. The color difference after 1000 hours
 shall be no more than five ΔE units.
 
 840
 
 Salt Spray-Testing shall be in accordance with the ASTM B117. After 1000 hours of
 continuous exposure, there shall be no evidence of checking, cracking, rusting, or
 blistering.
 Flexibility-(1/2 in. (13 mm) mandrel) – No failure
 Chemical Resistance-The top coat shall show no visual deterioration, other than minor
 discolorations, after seven days exposure to:
 a) Ten percent sulfuric acid solution
 b) Ten percent sodium hydroxide solution
 711.23 through 711.39-BLANK
 711.40-TEMPORARY WHITE OR YELLOW TRAFFIC ZONE PAINT:
 Temporary Traffic Zone Paint shall be any commercially available white or yellow paint
 designed for use on highways. The paint shall be applied with glass beads, designed by the
 manufacturer to be compatible with the paint.
 711.40.1-Color and Retroreflectivity Requirements: The Contractor may retest any
 areas or sections reported as being deficient, in the presence of a project inspector, in order to
 verify the deficiency of the areas or sections. However, the final decision in regards to
 requiring re-striping shall be at the Project Engineers discretion.
 COLOR: After the application of the glass beads or other retroreflective elements, each
 color installed shall fall within the boundaries created by the following CIE Chromaticity
 Coordinate Limits within three (3) and up to thirty (30) days after application:
 CIE CHROMATICITY COORDINATE LIMITS
 COLOR
 1
 2
 3
 4
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 White 0.480 0.410 0.430 0.380 0.405 0.405 0.455 0.435
 Yellow 0.575 0.425 0.508 0.415 0.473 0.453 0.510 0.490
 RETROREFLECTIVITY: The markings shall be visibly retroreflective, under both dry
 conditions and conditions of moderate rainfall, within three (3) and up to thirty (30) days after
 application. The markings shall be readily visible when viewed with automobile headlights at
 night. Markings not meeting the above visual criteria shall be subject to replacement by the
 Contractor at no additional charge to the Division.
 If necessary, retroreflectivity readings representing an adequate sampling, to be determined
 by the Project Engineer, may be performed by Division personnel. Readings shall be taken
 with an LTL 2000, or approved equal, hand held Retroreflectometer. The markings shall have
 a minimum retroreflective reading of 150 mc/1x/m² within three (3) and up to thirty (30) days
 after application. A 5% tolerance with the stated minimum required retroreflectivity values
 shall be allowed when tested with a hand held retroreflectometer.
 
 841
 
 711.40.2-MAP-21 Section 1504 Requirements:
 Reflective elements that are
 manufactured using glass and that are applied to temporary traffic zone paint shall meet all
 applicable state and federal requirements pertaining to materials content. Specifically, such
 elements shall meet the requirements of Section 1504 of MAP-21. Prior to application of the
 markings, the Contractor shall provide certifications of compliance with Section 1504 of MAP21 for all applicable reflective elements. These certifications shall be from each supplier of
 applicable reflective elements to be used on the project, and shall identify the reflective
 elements being used on the project by stating the identifier used by the supplier(s), such as the
 product name(s) or product code number(s). Each supplier’s certification shall be accompanied
 by a certification(s) from an independent testing laboratory. The lab certification(s) shall
 certify that a representative sample of the supplier’s product(s) has been tested, and that the
 product(s) meets the requirements of Section 1504 of MAP-21. The lab certification(s) shall
 provide clear indication that the products tested include the product(s) specified by the
 supplier(s) in their certification letter(s), and shall indicate the date(s) that the testing was
 performed. The date of testing for each product shall be one (1) year or less prior to the letting
 date of the Contract. The representative sample(s) tested are not required to be from the same
 batch or lot number assigned to the reflective elements used on the project.
 711.41-WHITE OR YELLOW FAST-DRY TRAFFIC PAINT (TYPE II):
 711.41.1-General: The pavement marking material shall be formulated as a medium-life
 pavement marking system capable of providing a minimum of one year of continuous
 performance. Solvent born paint, methyl methacrylate, chlorinated rubber, or other short
 duration products will be not approved.
 The composition of the paint shall be left to the discretion of the pavement marking
 manufacturer. The Contractor shall provide a pavement marking system to meet the
 performance requirements specified herein.
 During the pavement marking warranty period, the pavement marking materials furnished
 and installed shall show no loss greater than five (5) percent due to tracking, chipping, spalling,
 poor adhesion to the pavement, and damage from traffic and normal wear. Loss due to
 pavement failure, unless caused by the marking material, will not be considered as a material
 failure and will not be included in the loss calculations and/or retroreflectivity readings.
 There shall be no materials testing associated with the application of warranted pavement
 marking. However, the binder, bead type(s), application rate, and all other particulars shall be
 provided to the Engineer.
 The pavement marking material shall be mixed uniformly throughout and shall have a
 homogeneous dispersement of color and beads when applied to the pavement. The material
 shall have a uniformly thick cross-section through its entire length.
 An appropriate pavement marking material shall be used such that the ambient air
 temperature at the time of application is within the recommended ambient air application
 temperatures specified by the material manufacturer. Section 663 specifies that the Contractor
 shall be required to apply an appropriate Type II material at temperatures as low as thirty-five
 (35) degrees Fahrenheit (1.7 degrees Celsius).
 The warranty and performance criteria of this specification shall apply to Type II markings
 placed on or after April 15th and prior to November 1st. Markings placed prior to April 15th,
 and on or after November 1st shall be required to meet the specified warranty performance
 requirements at the time of application only.
 
 842
 
 711.41.2-Color and Retroreflectivity Requirements: The Contractor may retest any
 areas or sections reported as being deficient, in the presence of a project inspector, in order to
 verify the deficiency of the areas or sections. However, the final decision in regards to
 requiring re-striping shall be at the Project Engineers discretion.
 COLOR: After the application of the glass beads or other retroreflective elements, each
 color installed shall fall within the boundaries created by the following:
 COLOR
 White
 Yellow
 
 CIE CHROMATICITY COORDINATE LIMITS
 1
 2
 3
 4
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 0.480 0.410 0.430 0.380 0.405 0.405 0.455 0.435
 0.575 0.425 0.508 0.415 0.473 0.453 0.510 0.490
 
 The color shall show no appreciable discoloration due to aging during the warranty period
 of this pavement marking. Pavement markings shall be visually checked by the Engineer at
 any time during the warranty period of this pavement marking.
 Additionally, the Engineer may at any time during the warranty period of this marking use
 a portable colorometer to determine if the markings have faded or darkened beyond the above
 described CIE Chromaticity Coordinate Limits. The Colormeter used shall be a LTL-Y or
 other hand held colormeter device approved by the Division.
 RETROREFLECTIVITY: Markings installed on or after April 15th and prior to
 November 1st shall maintain a minimum retroreflectivity value of 200 mcd/m2/lx for white
 pavement markings and 150 mcd/m2/lx for yellow pavement markings through October 31st.
 Readings shall be taken with a LTL-X, or Traffic Engineering Division approved equal, 30
 meter geometry retroreflectometer. A 5% tolerance with the stated minimum required
 retroreflectivity values shall be allowed when tested with a hand held retroreflectometer. A
 15% tolerance with the stated minimum required retroreflectivity values shall be allowed when
 tested with a mobile retroreflectometer.
 711.41.3-Sampling and Testing Procedures for Performance Samples: The Division
 may conduct periodic pavement marking reviews throughout the warranty period of the
 markings. These reviews will occur at any time up to one (1) year after the markings have
 been placed. These reviews will evaluate the pavement marking material within the project
 limits for either day and night acceptability considering all requirements listed above. The
 following method will be used to measure the retroreflectivity and color acceptance of the
 pavement marking material:
 1. Locate and identify the starting point for measuring retroreflectivity of pavement
 markings for a roadway. Obtain five readings per line over a 1000 foot length of each
 line and calculate the average reading. Repeat this procedure at each mile point in the
 project, taking 5 readings per line over a 1000 foot section (500 feet on either side of
 the mile point), and averaging. Samples should be spaced out evenly over the entire
 1000 foot section.
 
 843
 
 2. From each failed mile point, obtain an additional five readings for each failed line at a
 point 1/2 mile in each direction from the original failure point. Obtain five readings
 per line over a 1000 foot length of each line and calculate the average reading.
 3. If the readings at either 1/2 mile point from the original failure point fail, the Contractor
 shall be required to re-stripe the entire 1/2 mile section between the original failure
 point and the failed 1/2 mile point.
 4. If the readings at either 1/2 mile point from the original failed point pass, the Contractor
 shall be required to re-stripe a distance of ¼ mile from the original failed point in the
 direction of the passing ½ mile point.
 5. No readings shall be required to be taken between successive failing mile points and
 successive passing mile points. The Contractor shall be required to re-stripe the entire
 1-mile section between successive failing mile points.
 6. If a project is less than one-mile in length, but longer than ½ mile, 20 readings shall be
 taken for each line, spaced out evenly over the length of the project, and averaged to
 determine if each line is required to be re-striped. If a project is ½ mile or less in length,
 10 readings shall be taken for each line, spaced out evenly over the length of the project,
 and averaged to determine if each line is required to be re-striped.
 711.41.4-MAP-21 Section 1504 Requirements: Reflective elements that are
 manufactured using glass and that are applied to Type II traffic paint shall meet all applicable
 state and federal requirements pertaining to materials content. Specifically, such elements shall
 meet the requirements of Section 1504 of MAP-21. Prior to application of the markings, the
 Contractor shall provide certifications of compliance with Section 1504 of MAP-21 for all
 applicable reflective elements. These certifications shall be from each supplier of applicable
 reflective elements to be used on the project, and shall identify the reflective elements being
 used on the project by stating the identifier used by the supplier(s), such as the product name(s)
 or product code number(s). Each supplier’s certification shall be accompanied by a
 certification(s) from an independent testing laboratory. The lab certification(s) shall certify that
 a representative sample of the supplier’s product(s) has been tested, and that the product(s)
 meets the requirements of Section 1504 of MAP-21. The lab certification(s) shall provide clear
 indication that the products tested include the product(s) specified by the supplier(s) in their
 certification letter(s), and shall indicate the date(s) that the testing was performed. The date of
 testing for each product shall be one (1) year or less prior to the letting date of the Contract.
 The representative sample(s) tested are not required to be from the same batch or lot number
 assigned to the reflective elements used on the project.
 
 844
 
 SECTION 712
 GUARDRAIL AND FENCE
 712.1 through 712.3-BLANK
 712.4-GALVANIZED STEEL DEEP BEAM GUARDRAIL, FASTENERS AND ANCHOR
 BOLTS:
 Galvanized steel deep beam guardrail, fasteners and anchor bolts shall conform to
 AASHTO M180, Type II, Class A.
 712.5 through 712.7-BLANK
 712.8-CHAIN-LINK FENCE:
 Chain-link fence shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 181. Fence height,
 gage and details shall be as specified on the Plans.
 712.9-ZINC-COATED (GALVANIZED) IRON OR STEEL FARM-FIELD AND
 RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY WIRE FENCING:
 This fencing shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M 279 and details shown on the
 Plans. Either of the following styles and coating classes may be used.
 1. Style 1047-6-9 with Class 1 coating
 2. Style 1047-6-11 with Class 3 coating
 Zinc coating for miscellaneous steel fittings and hardware shall conform to the
 requirements of AASHTO M 232. Zinc coating for clips used for securing fence or wire shall
 conform to AASHTO M 279, Class 1 coating.
 712.10-COATED STEEL BARBED WIRE:
 Barbed wire shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M 280, Class 1 or AASHTO M
 305, Type I.
 712.11-SAFETY FENCE:
 Safety Fence shall be orange in color, commercially manufactured from UV stabilized
 high-density polyethylene or a suitable substitute approved by the Engineer.
 
 845
 
 SECTION 713
 METAL PIPE
 713.1-BLANK
 713.2-METALLIC COATED CORRUGATED STEEL PIPE AND PIPE ARCH:
 Metallic coated corrugated steel pipe and pipe arch shall conform to the requirements of
 AASHTO M 36 for Type I and Type II pipe.
 Special sections, such as elbows, for these conduits shall be of the same gage as the conduit
 to which they are jointed, and shall conform to the applicable requirements of AASHTO M 36.
 713.3-BITUMINOUS COATED CORRUGATED STEEL PIPE AND PIPE ARCH:
 Bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe, pipe arches, coupling bands, elbows, and other
 special sections shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 190. Coating and invert paving
 shall be of the type specified.
 713.4-FULL BITUMINOUS COATED AND FULL PAVED CORRUGATED STEEL
 PIPE:
 The pipe shall conform to the applicable requirements of AASHTO M 190 and in addition
 thereto, when riveted corrugated steel pipe is used, the rivets shall be placed on the outside crests
 of corrugations. Bituminous coating shall be in accordance with the requirements for Type A; the
 paving shall be in accordance with the requirements for Type B except that the pavement shall be
 formed on the inside for the entire circumference of the pipe. Smooth lined pipe over 30 inches
 (750 mm) in diameter shall have lifting lugs attached to each section when manufactured.
 713.5-FIBER BONDED FULL BITUMINOUS COATED CORRUGATED STEEL PIPE
 AND PIPE ARCH:
 713.5.1-Type A, Fiber Bonded Full Bituminous Coated: Fiber bonded full bituminous
 coated conduits shall comply with the requirements of AASHTO M 36 for base metal, and
 fabrication where applicable. The conduit shall be formed from sheets which have been coated
 on both sides with a layer of aramid fibers, applied in a sheet form by pressing them into a
 molten metallic bonding medium. Immediately after the metallic bond has solidified, the fibers
 shall be thoroughly saturated with a bituminous saturant. The finished sheets shall be of first
 class commercial quality, free from blisters and unsaturated spots. In addition, the conduit
 shall be coated inside and out with a bituminous material complying with the requirements of
 AASHTO M 190, Type A.
 713.5.2-Type C, Fiber Bonded Full Bituminous Coated and Paved Invert: Fiber
 bonded full bituminous coated and paved conduits shall comply with all the requirements of
 713.5.1 and shall be paved to conform with the requirements in AASHTO M 190, Type C.
 713.6-FIBER BONDED FULL BITUMINOUS COATED AND FULL PAVED
 CORRUGATED STEEL SEWER PIPE:
 Fiber bonded full bituminous coated and full paved steel sewer pipe shall comply with the
 requirements of 713.5.1, where applicable, and in addition thereto, the rivets shall be placed on the
 outside crests of the corrugations and the inside of the pipe shall be paved so that a smooth surface
 
 846
 
 will be formed filling the corrugations of the pipe with a minimum thickness of 1/8 in. (3 mm)
 over the crests of the corrugations. Smooth lined pipe over 30 inches (750 mm) in diameter shall
 be provided with lifting lugs for each section when manufactured.
 713.7-CORRUGATED STAINLESS STEEL CULVERTS AND UNDERDRAINS:
 Corrugated stainless steel culverts and underdrains shall comply with the requirements of
 zinc coated (galvanized) corrugated iron or steel culverts and underdrains, AASHTO M 36, with
 the following exceptions (Numbers refer to Subsections in AASHTO M 36):
 1. SCOPE:
 1.1
 This specification covers corrugated stainless steel culverts and
 underdrains.
 3. IRON OR STEEL SHEETS:
 3.1
 The stainless steel sheets shall conform with the requirements of SAE
 Standard J-405B, Alloy Grade SAE 51409.
 6. SHEET MANUFACTURER'S GUARANTEE:
 6.1
 The manufacturer of the sheets shall submit with the certified analysis
 a guarantee providing that all metal furnished conforms with the
 Specification requirements, shall bear a suitable identification brand
 or mark, and shall be replaced without cost to the purchaser when not
 in conformity with the specified analysis and sheet thickness; and the
 guarantee shall be so worded as to remain in effect as long as the
 manufacturer continues to furnish material.
 7. RIVETS:
 7.1
 Rivets shall conform to the requirements of SAE Standard J-405B,
 Alloy Grade SAE 51430, or ASTM A 276, Type 430.
 10. CORRUGATIONS:
 Corrugations shall be annular, spiral or a combination of annular and spiral.
 12. RIVETED SEAMS:
 12.2
 For pipe with 1 in. (25 mm) deep corrugations, ½ in. (12 m) diameter
 bolts and nuts conforming to the requirements of ASTM A 276. Type
 430, may be used in lieu of rivets or spot welds on a one-for-one
 replacement ratio.
 In Table 2, substitute sheet thickness as follows:
 .048 (1.2 mm)
 .105 (2.7 mm)
 .060 (1.5 mm)
 .135 (3.4 mm)
 .075 (1.9 mm)
 .164 (4.2 mm)
 15. RESISTANCE SPOT WELDED SEAMS:
 15.1.2
 The welding shall be performed in such a manner that (1) the exterior
 surfaces of 90 percent or more of the spot welds on a length of pipe
 shall show no evidence of burning of the metal. Discoloration of the
 spot weld surfaces will not be cause for rejection.
 
 847
 
 15.3.5
 
 19.
 
 21.
 23.
 24.
 25.
 
 In Table 3, substitute sheet thickness as follows:
 Inches (mm) (Approx.)
 Pounds (Mg)
 .048 (1.2 mm)
 3,100 (1.40)
 .060 (1.5 mm)
 4,100 (1.85)
 .075 (1.9 mm)
 5,200 (2.36)
 .105 (2.7 mm)
 7,000 (3.17)
 .135 (3.4 mm)
 8,500 (3.85)
 .164 (4.2 mm)
 10,000 (4.52)
 TYPE III PIPE:
 19.1
 Culverts furnished under this type shall consist of stainless steel corrugated
 metal pipe to be used in underdrains. Unless otherwise specified the pipe shall
 be perforated.
 COUPLING BANDS:
 21.1
 Revise third sentence as follows: The coupling bands shall be made of base
 metal conforming to SAE Specification J-405B, Alloy Grade 51409.
 WORKMANSHIP:
 23.1.10
 Delete this Subsection.
 REPAIR OR DAMAGED SPELTER COATING:
 Delete this Subsection.
 Add the following notation: This Section applies only with reference to those factors
 applicable to a stainless steel sheet.
 
 713.8-STRUCTURAL PLATE FOR PIPE, PIPE ARCH, AND ARCHES:
 These conduits, and bolts and nuts for connecting plates, shall conform to the requirements
 of AASHTO M 167.
 713.9-FULL BITUMINOUS COATED STRUCTURAL PLATE PIPE, PIPE ARCH, AND
 ARCHES:
 These conduits shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 167 and shall be coated
 with bituminous material. When the coating can be applied in the shop it shall conform to the
 requirements of AASHTO M 190, Type A Coating. When the coating must be applied in the field
 the coating shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 243. The bituminous coating shall
 coat the entire inside and outside of the pipe and is not required between the metal sheets at the
 splices.
 713.10-STAINLESS STEEL STRUCTURAL PLATE PIPE:
 Stainless steel structural plate pipe shall comply with the applicable requirements of
 structural plate pipe, AASHTO M 167, with the following exceptions (Numbers refer to
 Subsections in AASHTO M 167):
 1.
 SCOPE:
 This specification covers stainless steel structural plate pipe.
 2.
 BASE METAL:
 The stainless steel sheets shall conform with the requirements of SAE Standard J-405B,
 Alloy Grade SAE 51409.
 
 848
 
 4.
 
 GAGE DETERMINATIONS AND TOLERANCE:
 In Table II substitute as follows:
 Gage
 1
 3
 5
 7
 8
 10
 12
 
 Sheet Thickness (Inches)
 .276 (7 mm)
 .245 (6.2 mm)
 .215 (5.5 mm)
 .184 (4.7 mm)
 .164 (4.2 mm)
 .135 (3.5 mm)
 .105 (2.7 mm)
 
 Tolerance Under
 .012 (300 μm)
 .012 (300 μm)
 .012 (300 μm)
 .012 (300 μm)
 .012 (300 μm)
 .012 (300 μm)
 .012 (300 μm)
 
 8.
 
 CERTIFIED ANALYSIS AND GUARANTEE:
 The manufacturer of the sheets shall submit with the certified analysis a guarantee
 providing that all metal furnished conforms with the specification requirements, shall
 bear a suitable identification brand or mark, and shall be replaced without cost to the
 purchaser when not in conformity with the specified analysis and sheet thickness; and
 the guarantee shall be so worded as to remain in effect as long as the manufacturer
 continues to furnish material.
 
 10.
 
 BOLTS AND NUTS FOR CONNECTING PLATES:
 Material for bolts and nuts shall conform to the chemical and mechanical requirements
 of ASTM A 276, Type 431, Condition T. Size and geometric configuration shall
 conform to the applicable requirements of ASTM A 325, Paragraph 5.
 
 713.11-METALLIC COATED CORRUGATED STEEL UNDERDRAIN PIPE:
 Metallic coated corrugated steel underdrain pipe shall conform with the requirements of
 AASHTO M 36 Type III.
 713.12-BITUMINOUS COATED CORRUGATED STEEL UNDERDRAIN PIPE:
 This pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 36, Type III, and shall be
 coated with bituminous material conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M 190, Type A
 coating, except that the minimum coating thickness, shall be 0.03 in. (750 μm) Coupling bands
 shall be fully coated. The specified minimum diameter of perforations shall apply after coating.
 713.13-BLANK
 713.14-CORRUGATED ALUMINUM ALLOY PIPE AND PIPE ARCHES:
 Corrugated aluminum alloy pipe and pipe arches shall conform to the requirements of
 AASHTO M 196, Type I and II. Helically corrugated aluminum alloy culvert pipe shall conform
 to the requirements of AASHTO M 211.
 Certification from the manufacturer will be the basis of acceptance for band material and
 rivets used in the fabrication.
 
 849
 
 713.15-BITUMINOUS COATED CORRUGATED ALUMINUM ALLOY PIPE AND
 PIPE ARCHES:
 Bituminous coated corrugated aluminum alloy pipe, pipe arches, coupling bands, elbows,
 and other special sections shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 190. Coating and
 invert paving shall be of the type specified.
 713.16-CORRUGATED ALUMINUM ALLOY PIPE UNDERDRAIN:
 Corrugated aluminum alloy pipe underdrain shall conform to the requirements of
 AASHTO M 196, Type III.
 713.17-BITUMINOUS COATED CORRUGATED ALUMINUM ALLOY PIPE
 UNDERDRAIN:
 This pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 196, Type III, and shall be
 coated with bituminous material conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M 190, Type A
 coating, except the minimum coating thickness shall be 0.03 in. (750 μm) Coupling bands shall
 be fully coated. The specified minimum diameter of perforations shall apply after coating.
 713.18-ALUMINUM ALLOY STRUCTURAL PLATE FOR PIPE, PIPE ARCH, AND
 ARCHES:
 These conduits and the bolts and nuts for connecting plates shall conform to the
 requirements of AASHTO M 219.
 713.19-FULL BITUMINOUS COATED ALUMINUM ALLOY STRUCTURAL PLATE
 PIPE, PIPE ARCH, AND ARCHES:
 These conduits shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 219 and shall be coated
 with bituminous material conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M 190, Type A coating.
 713.20-END SECTIONS FOR CORRUGATED STEEL PIPE AND PIPE ARCHES:
 End sections for corrugated iron or steel pipe and pipe arches shall be of the thickness
 recommended by the manufacturer, and they shall conform to the applicable requirements of
 AASHTO M 36 and the details shown on the Plans.
 713.21-END SECTIONS FOR CORRUGATED ALUMINUM ALLOY PIPE AND PIPE
 ARCHES:
 End sections for corrugated aluminum alloy pipe and pipe arches shall be of the thickness
 recommended by the manufacturer and they shall conform to the applicable requirements of
 AASHTO M 196 or M 211 and the details shown on the Plans.
 713.22-BLANK
 
 850
 
 713.23-PRECOATED, METALLIC COATED STEEL PIPE AND UNDERDRAIN:
 Precoated sheets shall have a Type B coating conforming with the requirements of
 AASHTO M 246. The minimum thickness shall be 10 mils (250 μm) on the inside and 3 mils (75
 μm) on the outside of the pipe.
 Precoated, metallic coated steel pipe and underdrain shall conform to the requirements of
 AASHTO M 245 with the following exceptions (numbers refer to subsections of AASHTO M
 245).
 19.1
 22.1.1
 
 22.1.2
 
 Coupling bands, conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M 218, will
 not require organic coating.
 Damaged areas of spelter coating shall be painted in this sequence:
 1.
 Zinc rich primer conforming to Section 711.21.
 2.
 Red oxide lacquer primer.
 3.
 Lacquer.
 Areas of damaged polymeric coating only shall be painted in this sequence
 after the areas are rubbed with commercially available acetic acid (such as
 vinegar) and dried:
 1.
 Red oxide lacquer primer.
 2.
 Lacquer.
 
 The primer and lacquer as specified above must be mutually compatible when applied and
 compatible with the polymeric coating. The red oxide primer and lacquer, which are commercially
 available, shall be allowed to completely dry between coats and before handling and backfilling.
 If the lacquer is applied from a spray can, a minimum of two coats is required. The first coat
 should provide a light covering, and the second coat should be applied heavily just to the point of
 running.
 713.24-ALUMINUM COATED CORRUGATED STEEL PIPE AND PIPE ARCH:
 These conduits shall conform to AASHTO M 36 requirements for aluminum coated or
 aluminum-zinc coated corrugated steel pipe and pipe arch.
 
 851
 
 SECTION 714
 CONCRETE, CLAY, FIBER AND PLASTIC PIPE
 714.1-NONREINFORCED CONCRETE PIPE:
 This pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 86 or ASTM C 14.
 714.2-REINFORCED CONCRETE CULVERT, STORM DRAIN AND SEWER PIPE:
 This pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 170 or ASTM C 76 and MP
 711.03.30.
 714.3-REINFORCED CONCRETE ARCH CULVERT, STORM DRAIN AND SEWER
 PIPE:
 This pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 206 or ASTM C 506.
 714.4-REINFORCED CONCRETE ELLIPTICAL CULVERT, STORM DRAIN AND
 SEWER PIPE:
 This pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 207 or ASTM C 507.
 714.5-PERFORATED CONCRETE PIPE:
 This pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 175 or ASTM C 444.
 714.6-POROUS CONCRETE PIPE:
 This pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 176.
 714.7-CONCRETE DRAIN TILE:
 This pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 178 or ASTM C 412.
 714.8-CLAY DRAIN TILE:
 Drain Tile shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 179 or ASTM C 4.
 714.9-VITRIFIED CLAY-LINED REINFORCED CONCRETE PIPE:
 Designs for fully lined or half lined pipe of the specified strength classes shall be submitted
 for approval. The applicable requirements of AASHTO M 170 and AASHTO M 65 or ASTM C
 479 shall govern. Liner or liner elements shall be clay of first quality, sound, thoroughly and
 perfectly burned, without warps, cracks, or other imperfections, and they shall be fully and
 smoothly glazed.
 714.10-CLAY PIPE:
 This pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 65 or ASTM C 700. Extra
 strength clay pipe may be substituted for standard strength.
 714.11 through 714.12-BLANK
 714.13-PERFORATED ASBESTOS CEMENT PIPE FOR UNDERDRAINAGE:
 The pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 189 or ASTM C 508.
 
 852
 
 714.14-BITUMINIZED FIBER PIPE FOR UNDERDRAINAGE:
 This pipe shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D 1861 or ASTM D 1862.
 714.15-PERFORATED BITUMINIZED FIBER PIPE FOR UNDER-DRAINAGE:
 This pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D 2311.
 714.16-FIBERGLASS-REINFORCED (FRP) PIPE:
 This pipe shall conform to ASTM D 2996 or ASTM D 2997. Fittings shall be those
 recommended by the manufacturer.
 714.17-REINFORCED PLASTIC MORTAR (RPMP) PIPE:
 This pipe shall conform to ASTM D 3262. Fittings shall be those recommended by the
 manufacturer.
 714.18-REINFORCED CONCRETE END SECTIONS:
 Precast reinforced concrete end sections shall conform to the requirements of the cited
 Specifications for the conduit to the extent to which they apply and to the details shown on the
 Plans.
 714.19-CORRUGATED POLYETHYLENE PIPE:
 For nominal pipe sizes of 3 to 6 inches (75 to 150 mm) when perforations are required the
 pipe shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M 252 with class 2 perforations.
 For nominal pipe sizes of 3 to 10 inches (75 to 250 mm) when perforations are not required
 the pipe shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M 252 type “S” only.
 For nominal pipe sizes of 12 to 60 inches (300 to 1 500 mm) the pipe shall meet the
 requirements of AASHTO M 294 type “S” or type “D” only.
 714.20-PERFORATED PLASTIC SEMICIRCULAR PIPE:
 Perforated plastic semicircular pipe shall be extruded or molded using a high density,
 flexible plastic.
 The pipe shall have a smooth or corrugated top and a smooth semicircular bottom,
 averaging 4-5/8 inches (116 mm) in diameter, with perforations uniformly distributed along the
 top of the semicircular section. The perforations shall be not less than ¼ inch (6 mm) nor more
 than 3/8 inch (10 mm) in diameter, and shall provide a minimum intake area of one square inch
 per linear foot (2100 sq. mm per m). Minimum material thickness shall be 1/8 in. (3 mm). The
 top flange shall extend a minimum of ½ in. (13 mm) beyond the top of the semi-circular section.
 A one foot (300 mm) section of pipe shall deflect no more than 1½ at an applied load of
 900 lb. (38 mm), using the Parallel Plate Load Test of ASTM D 2412. Fifteen minutes after
 removal of the load, the pipe section shall have recovered not less than 50 percent of its deflection
 at 900 lb. (4 kN).
 714.21-ACRYLONITRILE-BUTADIENE-STYRENE (ABS) PIPE:
 This pipe and fittings shall conform to AASHTO M 264, ASTM D 2680 or ASTM D 2751.
 714.22-POLYVINYL CHLORIDE (PVC) PIPE:
 The pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M278, ASTM D3034
 or ASTM F949.
 853
 
 714.23-PRECAST REINFORCED CONCRETE BOX CULVERTS:
 Precast reinforced concrete box culverts shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO
 M259 where depth of cover is 2 feet (600 mm) or more and AASHTO M273 where depth of cover
 is less than 2 feet (600 mm). Interstate live load design shall be provided for Interstate highway
 facilities: and HS20 live load design shall be provided for other locations.
 All fabricators of precast reinforced concrete box culverts shall maintain an adequate level
 of quality control. Plant certification by NPCA (National Precast Concrete Association), ACPA
 (American Concrete Pipe Association) plant certification for box culverts, or other approved equal
 certification program will be required to verify this level of quality control. Plant approval must
 be obtained prior to the start of fabrication. All Fabricators shall then submit evidence of Plant
 approval to the MCS&T Division on an annual basis.
 All box culverts shall be cured in accordance with section 601.12 except that curing may
 be discontinued once 70% of the design strength is achieved.
 714.24-NON-ASBESTOS FIBER-CEMENT STORM DRAIN PIPE:
 This pipe shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C 1450, and the water used in the
 fabrication of this pipe shall meet the requirements of section 715.7.
 
 854
 
 SECTION 715
 MISCELLANEOUS MATERIALS
 715.1-CALCIUM CHLORIDE:
 The material shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D 98.
 715.2-SODIUM CHLORIDE:
 The material shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D 632.
 715.3-BLANK
 715.4-CONCRETE REPAIR MATERIALS:
 715.4.1-Cementitious Materials for Concrete Repairs: Material to be used in concrete
 repair applications that will not be subjected to any type of loading for a minimum of 24 hours
 shall meet the minimum requirements of ASTM C 928 with the exception of the requirements
 for consistency listed in Table 1.
 715.4.2-Non-Cementitious Materials for Concrete Repairs: This includes materials
 such as methyl methacrylate, polymer concrete, and other polymer/epoxy based materials used
 for concrete repairs. These materials will be evaluated and approved on a case-by-case basis.
 Follow preparation, mixing, and application procedures as prescribed in the specific material
 supplier's instructions.
 715.5-PACKAGED DRY, HYDRAULIC-CEMENT GROUT (NON-SHRINK):
 The material shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C1107.
 715.6-HYDRATED LIME:
 715.6.1-General Use: The material shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C206.
 715.6.2-Soil Stabilization or Pavement Preservation Purposes: The material used in
 for soil stabilization purposes or pavement preservation purposes shall conform to the
 requirements of ASTM C977.
 715.7-WATER FOR USE WITH HYDRAULIC CEMENT:
 Water from sources other than treated public water systems shall conform to the
 requirements of MP 715.07.20.
 715.8-WATERPROOFING FABRIC:
 The material shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D173.
 715.9-WARNING DEVICES:
 715.9.1-General: Warning devices shall include, but shall not be limited to, signs,
 barricades, auxiliary barriers, channelizing devices, hazard warning lights, flares, and
 reflectors. Unless otherwise indicated such devices shall conform to the standard, “Manual on
 Temporary Traffic Control for Streets and Highways ", published by the Division. The
 
 855
 
 Contractor shall exhibit evidence that the warning devices furnished meet the requirements
 detailed.
 715.9.2-Signs: Sign blank material shall be either 0.080 in. flat sheet aluminum, 0.040 in.
 flat sheet aluminum (guide sign demountable shields, legend, & border only), or extruded panel
 as specified in Section 661. Retroreflection shall be required and shall be accomplished by
 using approved retroreflective sheeting as specified in Section 661 and meeting the
 requirements specified herein.
 All references herein to ASTM specification D4956 shall be interpreted as referencing
 version D4956 – 11a. Any portion of this specification which is in contradiction to ASTM
 D4956 shall supersede ASTM D4956. All references herein to AASHTO (American
 Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials) specification M268 shall be
 interpreted as referencing version M 268-10. Any portion of this specification which is in
 contradiction to AASHTO M268 shall supersede AASHTO M268. All AASHTO-NTPEP
 references herein shall be interpreted as referring to the AASHTO National Transportation
 Product Evaluation Program (NTPEP). All retroreflectivity values referenced herein shall be
 are in units of cd/fc/ft2 (cd•lx−1•m−2). All “matched component” references herein shall be
 interpreted as referencing the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer’s recommended inks and
 overlay films to be used for manufacturing purposes with the manufacturer’s sheeting. All APL
 references herein shall be interpreted as referring to the Division’s Approved Products List
 (APL) for Retroreflective Sheeting. All CSS references herein shall be interpreted as referring
 to the Division’s Central Sign Shop (CSS) internal sign manufacturing facility in Charleston,
 WV.
 715.9.2.1-Retroreflective Sheeting, Type ASTM-I: A retroreflective sheeting
 referred to as “engineering grade” that is typically an enclosed lens glass-bead sheeting.
 715.9.2.1.1- Type ASTM-I Sheeting Requirements:
 715.9.2.1.1.1-Coeffıcient of Retroreflection: New sheeting shall meet the Minimum
 Coefficient of Retroreflection requirements in ASTM specification D4956 for Type I
 material, as defined in ASTM D4956.
 For transparent ink printed or transparent film covered areas over white sheeting, the
 Minimum Coefficient of Retroreflection requirements shall be seventy (70) % of the values
 specified in ASTM D4956 for sheeting of the same color as the ink or film.
 All testing shall be conducted in accordance with ASTM D4956.
 715.9.2.1.1.2-Color: New sheeting shall meet the Daytime Color & Nighttime Color
 requirements in ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM
 specification D4956. These requirements shall also apply to transparent ink and transparent
 film covered areas over white sheeting.
 715.9.2.1.1.3-Daytime Luminance Factor: New sheeting shall meet the Daytime
 Luminance Factor requirements in ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance
 with ASTM specification D4956. These requirements shall also apply to transparent ink
 and transparent film covered areas over white sheeting.
 
 856
 
 715.9.2.1.1.4- Adhesion: New sheeting with a pressure sensitive backing shall meet
 the adhesion requirements in ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with
 ASTM specification D4956.
 715.9.2.1.1.5-Shrinkage: New sheeting shall meet the shrinkage requirements in
 ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM specification D4956.
 715.9.2.1.1.6-Flexibility: New sheeting shall meet the flexibility requirements in
 ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM specification D4956.
 715.9.2.1.1.7-Liner Removal: New sheeting shall meet the liner removability
 requirements in ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM
 specification D4956.
 715.9.2.1.1.8-Impact Resistance: New sheeting shall meet the impact resistance
 requirements in ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM
 specification D4956.
 715.9.2.1.1.9-Rotational Sensitivity: New sheeting shall meet the applicable
 requirements of AASHTO M268 in order for the sheeting to be considered rotationally
 insensitive. Testing shall be conducted at the viewing geometry of 0.5/-4 as recommended
 in AASHTO M268, and the results of retroreflectivity readings at rotation angles of 0, 45,
 90, and 120 degrees shall be compared as recommended in AASHTO M268. If the sheeting
 does not meet these requirements, it shall be noted on the APL that the material is
 rotationally sensitive.
 715.9.2.1.1.10-Shelf Life: Any Type ASTM-I material to be considered for listing on
 the Division’s APL shall have a minimum one (1) year shelf life. The same provisions shall
 apply to the manufacturer recommended matched components. Reasonable conditional
 requirements pertaining to storage, such as temperature and relative humidity, shall be
 permitted.
 715.9.2.1.1.11-Backing Class: Type ASTM-I sheeting shall have a Class 1 adhesive
 backing, as defined in ASTM D4956.
 715.9.2.1.1.12-Durability: The durability requirements of finished products
 manufactured using Type ASTM-I sheeting are specified within Section 715.9.2.7.
 715.9.2.1.2-Approval Process: The WVDOH approval process for Type ASTM-I
 sheeting products is specified within Section 715.9.2.9.
 715.9.2.2-Retroreflective Sheeting, Type ASTM-IV: A retroreflective sheeting
 referred to as “high-intensity” that is typically an unmetalized microprismatic
 retroreflective element material.
 
 857
 
 715.9.2.2.1-Type ASTM-IV Sheeting Requirements:
 715.9.2.2.1.1-Coeffıcient of Retroreflection: New material shall meet the Minimum
 Coefficient of Retroreflection requirements in ASTM D4956 for Type IV material, as
 defined in ASTM D4956.
 For transparent ink printed or transparent film covered areas over white sheeting, the
 Minimum Coefficient of Retroreflection requirements shall be seventy (70) % of the values
 specified in ASTM D4956 for sheeting of the same color as the ink or film.
 All testing shall be conducted in accordance with ASTM D4956.
 715.9.2.2.1.2-Color: New sheeting shall meet the Daytime Color & Nighttime Color
 requirements in ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM
 specification D4956. These requirements shall also apply to transparent ink and transparent
 film covered areas over white sheeting.
 715.9.2.2.1.3-Daytime Luminance Factor: New sheeting shall meet the Daytime
 Luminance Factor requirements in specification D4956 when tested in accordance with
 ASTM specification D4956. These requirements shall also apply to transparent ink and
 transparent film covered areas over white sheeting.
 715.9.2.2.1.4-Adhesion: New sheeting shall meet the adhesion requirements in
 specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM specification D4956. If the
 material is marketed as a reboundable material, the supplementary adhesion requirements
 in ASTM D4956 for reboundable materials shall apply.
 715.9.2.2.1.5-Shrinkage: New sheeting shall meet the shrinkage requirements in
 ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM specification D4956.
 715.9.2.2.1.6-Flexibility: New sheeting shall meet the flexibility requirements in
 ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM specification D4956.
 If the material is marketed as a reboundable material, the supplementary flexibility
 requirements in ASTM D4956 for reboundable materials shall apply.
 715.9.2.2.1.7-Liner Removal: New sheeting shall meet the liner removability
 requirements in ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM
 specification D4956.
 715.9.2.2.1.8-Impact Resistance: New sheeting shall meet the impact resistance
 requirements in ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM
 specification D4956. If the material is marketed as a reboundable material, the
 supplementary impact resistance requirements in ASTM D4956 for reboundable materials
 shall apply.
 715.9.2.2.1.9-Rotational Sensitivity: New sheeting materials, with exceptions noted
 herein, shall meet the applicable requirements of AASHTO M268 in order for the sheeting
 to be considered rotationally insensitive. Testing shall be conducted at the viewing
 geometry of 0.5/-4 as recommended in AASHTO M268, and the results of retroreflectivity
 
 858
 
 readings at rotation angles of 0, 45, 90, and 120 degrees shall be compared as recommended
 in AASHTO M268. If the sheeting does not meet these requirements, it shall be noted on
 the APL that the material is rotationally sensitive. With the exception of fluorescent-orange
 materials intended for application to rigid substrate signs, “work zone” materials as defined
 herein shall not be subject to rotational sensitivity testing.
 715.9.2.2.1.10-Shelf Life: A minimum shelf life shall not be required for the sheeting
 to be listed on the APL. However, in order for the sheeting to be approved for
 manufacturing purposes within the Division’s CSS, a minimum (1) year shelf life shall be
 required. The same provisions shall apply to the manufacturer recommended matched
 components. Reasonable conditional requirements pertaining to storage, such as
 temperature and relative humidity, shall be permitted.
 715.9.2.2.1.11-Backing Class: All Type ASTM-IV material supplied to the Division
 for manufacturing purposes within the CSS shall have a Class 1 adhesive backing, as
 defined in ASTM D4956. The adhesive backing on all Type ASTM-IV material supplied
 to manufacturers providing finished products to the Division or to Contractors performing
 work on Division Contracts shall have the most appropriate ASTM D4956 defined
 adhesive backing for the materials intended purpose, as determined by the manufacturer.
 715.9.2.2.1.12-Durability: Durability requirements of finished products manufactured
 using Type ASTM-IV to be warranted by the sheeting manufacturer are specified within
 Section 715.9.2.7.
 715.9.2.2.2-Approval Process: The WVDOH approval process for Type ASTM-IV
 sheeting products is specified within Section 715.9.2.9.
 715.9.2.3-Retroreflective Sheeting, Type ASTM-VI: An elastomeric retroreflective
 sheeting without adhesive. This sheeting is typically a vinyl microprismatic retroreflective
 material.
 715.9.2.3.1-Type ASTM-VI Sheeting Requirements:
 715.9.2.3.1.1-Coeffıcient of Retroreflection: New sheeting shall meet the Minimum
 Coefficient of Retroreflection requirements as specified in Table 715.9.2.3.1.1-I below.
 Table 715.9.2.3.1.1-I
 Color
 Observation Entrance
 Angle
 Angle
 White Florescent-Orange
 0.2
 -4
 300
 200
 0.2
 +30
 180
 120
 0.2
 +45
 100
 60
 0.5
 -4
 200
 120
 0.5
 +30
 75
 50
 0.5
 +45
 60
 30
 
 859
 
 For transparent ink printed areas over white sheeting, the Minimum Coefficient of
 Retroreflection requirements shall be as shown in Table 715.9.2.3.1.1-II below.
 Table 715.9.2.3.1.1-II
 Color
 Observation Entrance
 Angle
 Angle
 Green Blue Red Yellow Brown
 0.2
 -4
 21
 9.5
 29
 147
 6.1
 All testing shall be conducted in accordance with ASTM D4956.
 715.9.2.3.1.2- Color: New sheeting shall meet the Daytime Color & Nighttime Color
 requirements in ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM
 specification D4956. These same requirements shall apply to transparent ink covered areas
 over white sheeting.
 715.9.2.3.1.3-Daytime Luminance Factor: New sheeting shall meet the Daytime
 Luminance Factor requirements of ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance
 with ASTM specification D4956. These requirements shall also apply to transparent ink
 covered areas over white sheeting.
 715.9.2.3.1.4-Shrinkage: New sheeting shall meet the shrinkage requirements in
 ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM specification D4956.
 715.9.2.3.1.5-Flexibility: New sheeting shall meet the flexibility requirements in
 ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM specification D4956.
 715.9.2.3.1.6-Impact Resistance: New sheeting shall meet the impact resistance
 requirements in ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM
 specification D4956.
 715.9.2.3.1.7-BLANK
 715.9.2.3.1.8-Backing Class: All Type ASTM-VI material shall have a Class 5
 backing, as defined in ASTM D4956.
 715.9.2.3.1.9-Durability: Durability requirements of finished products manufactured
 using Type ASTM-VI material to be warranted by the sheeting manufacturer are specified
 within Section 715.9.2.7.
 715.9.2.3.2-Approval Process: The WVDOH approval process for Type ASTM-VI
 sheeting products is specified within Section 715.9.2.9.
 715.9.2.4-Retroreflective Sheeting, Type ASTM-XI: A retroreflective sheeting
 typically manufactured as an unmetalized cube corner microprismatic retroreflective
 element material.
 
 860
 
 715.9.2.4.1-Type ASTM-XI Sheeting Requirements:
 715.9.2.4.1.1- Coeffıcient of Retroreflection: New sheeting shall meet the Minimum
 Coefficient of Retroreflection requirements in ASTM specification D4956 for Type XI
 material, as defined in ASTM D4956.
 For transparent ink printed or transparent film covered areas over white sheeting, the
 Minimum Coefficient of Retroreflection requirements shall be seventy (70) % of the values
 specified in ASTM D4956 for sheeting of the same color as the ink or film.
 All testing shall be conducted in accordance with ASTM D4956.
 715.9.2.4.1.2- Color: New sheeting shall meet the Daytime Color & Nighttime Color
 requirements in ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM
 specification D4956. These same requirements shall apply to transparent ink and
 transparent film covered areas over white sheeting.
 715.9.2.4.1.3-Daytime Luminance Factor: New sheeting shall meet the Daytime
 Luminance Factor requirements in ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance
 with ASTM specification D4956. These same requirements shall apply to transparent ink
 and transparent film covered areas over white sheeting.
 715.9.2.4.1.4-Adhesion: New sheeting shall meet the adhesion requirements in ASTM
 specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM specification D4956. If the
 material is marketed as a reboundable material, the supplementary adhesion requirements
 in ASTM D4956 for reboundable materials shall apply.
 715.9.2.4.1.5-Shrinkage: New sheeting shall meet the shrinkage requirements in
 ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM specification D4956.
 715.9.2.4.1.6-Flexibility: New sheeting shall meet the flexibility requirements in
 ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM specification D4956.
 If the material is marketed as a reboundable material, the supplementary flexibility
 requirements in ASTM D4956 for reboundable materials shall apply.
 715.9.2.4.1.7-Liner Removal: New sheeting shall meet the liner removability
 requirements in ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM
 specification D4956.
 715.9.2.4.1.8-Impact Resistance: New sheeting shall meet the impact resistance
 requirements in ASTM specification D4956 when tested in accordance with ASTM
 specification D4956. If the material is marketed as a reboundable material, the
 supplementary impact resistance requirements in ASTM D4956 for reboundable materials
 shall apply.
 715.9.2.4.1.9-Rotational Sensitivity: New sheeting materials, with exceptions noted
 herein, shall meet the applicable requirements of AASHTO M268 in order for the sheeting
 to be considered rotationally insensitive. Testing shall be conducted at the viewing
 geometry of 0.5/-4 as recommended in AASHTO M268, and the results of retroreflectivity
 
 861
 
 readings at rotation angles of 0, 45, 90, and 120 degrees shall be compared as recommended
 in AASHTO M268. If the sheeting does not meet these requirements, it shall be noted on
 the APL that the material is rotationally sensitive. With the exception of fluorescent-orange
 materials intended for application to rigid substrate signs, “work zone” materials as defined
 herein shall not be subject to rotational sensitivity testing.
 715.9.2.4.1.10-Shelf Life: A minimum shelf life shall not be required for the sheeting
 to be listed on the APL. However, in order for the sheeting to be approved for
 manufacturing purposes within the Division’s CSS, a minimum (1) year shelf life shall be
 required. The same provisions shall apply to the manufacturer recommended matched
 components. Reasonable conditional requirements pertaining to storage, such as
 temperature and relative humidity, shall be permitted.
 715.9.2.4.1.11-Backing Class: All Type ASTM-XI material supplied to the Division
 for manufacturing purposes within the CSS shall have a Class 1 adhesive backing, as
 defined in ASTM D4956. The adhesive backing on all Type ASTM-XI material supplied
 to manufacturers providing finished products to the Division or to Contractors performing
 work on Division Contracts shall have the most appropriate ASTM D4956 adhesive
 backing for the materials intended purpose.
 715.9.2.4.1.12-Durability: Durability requirements of finished products manufactured
 using Type ASTM-XI material to be warranted by the sheeting manufacturer are specified
 within Section 715.9.2.7.
 715.9.2.4.2-Approval Process: The WVDOH approval process for Type ASTM-XI
 sheeting products is specified within Section 715.9.2.9.
 715.9.2.5-Transfer Film: Transfer film for premasking or applying prespaced legends
 using transparent or opaque films.
 715.9.2.5.1-Transfer Film Requirements:
 715.9.2.5.1.1-Transparency: Transfer films shall be transparent.
 715.9.2.5.2-Approval Process: The WVDOH approval process for Transfer Film is
 specified within Section 715.9.2.9.
 715.9.2.6-Matched Components:
 715.9.2.6.1-Black Opaque Overlay Film: A black, opaque, typically vinyl or acrylic
 pressure-sensitive film designed for permanent graphics that may be prespaced and
 electronically cut. These films have a synthetic liner that resists moisture absorption and
 static buildup.
 715.9.2.6.1.1-Black Opaque Overlay Film Requirements:
 715.9.2.6.1.1.1-Adhesive: This material shall utilize a pressure sensitive adhesive.
 
 862
 
 715.9.2.6.1.1.2-Chemical Resistance: This material shall resist mild alkalis, mild
 acids, and salt. The material shall exhibit excellent resistance to water, with exception to
 cases of submersion.
 715.9.2.6.1.1.3-Shrinkage: After application, this material shall not exhibit shrinkage
 in excess of 0.010 inches.
 715.9.2.6.1.1.4-Durability: Durability requirements of black opaque overlay films,
 depending on the Type sheeting the material is to be utilized with and the intended
 application, are specified in Sections 715.9.2.1 through 715.9.2.4.
 715.9.2.6.1.1.5–Shelf Life: A minimum shelf life shall not be required for the film to
 be approved for use with the manufacturer’s sheeting products. However, in order for the
 film to be approved for manufacturing purposes within the Division’s CSS, a minimum (1)
 year shelf life shall be required. Reasonable conditional requirements pertaining to storage,
 such as temperature and relative humidity, shall be permitted.
 715.9.2.6.1.1.6-CSS Requirements: In addition to, but not limited to, any other
 requirements stated herein, all black opaque overlay film to be approved for manufacturing
 purposes within the CSS shall be a vinyl material. In addition, this material shall have
 sufficient strength so that it can be handled, processed, and applied according to the
 recommendations of the manufacturer without appreciable stretching, tearing, or other
 damage. The material shall permit cutting and application at temperatures of 40 to 100°F
 (4 to 38°C).
 715.9.2.6.1.2-Approval Process: The WVDOH approval process for Black Opaque
 Overlay Film is specified within Section 715.9.2.9.
 715.9.2.6.2-Transparent Overlay Films: A colored, transparent, typically acrylic,
 transparent pressure-sensitive film designed for permanent graphics that may be prespaced
 and electronically cut. These films have a synthetic liner that resists moisture absorption
 and static buildup.
 715.9.2.6.2.1-Transparent Overlay Film Requirements:
 715.9.2.6.2.1.1-Adhesive: This material shall utilize a transparent pressure sensitive
 adhesive.
 715.9.2.6.2.1.2-Chemical Resistance: This material shall resist mild alkalis, mild
 acids, and salt. The material shall exhibit excellent resistance to water, with exception to
 cases of submersion.
 715.9.2.6.2.1.3-Color Standards: Transparent overlay films applied to the
 manufacturer’s approved white sheeting shall produce colors meeting the daytime and
 nighttime color requirements of ASTM D4956 for like colored sheeting. Testing shall be
 conducted in accordance with ASTM D4956.
 
 863
 
 715.9.2.6.2.1.4-Transparency: After application over the manufacturer’s white
 sheeting, the film’s level of transparency shall result in a minimum retroreflectivity level
 of seventy (70) % of the minimum required retroreflectivity level, as specified herein, of
 the like colored sheeting of the same grade as the white sheeting. Testing shall be conducted
 in accordance with ASTM D4956.
 715.9.2.6.2.1.5-Durability: Durability requirements of transparent overlay films,
 depending on the Type sheeting the material is to be utilized with and the intended
 application, are specified in Sections 715.9.2.1 through 715.9.2.4.
 715.9.2.6.2.1.6-Shelf Life: A minimum shelf life shall not be required for the film to
 be approved for use with the manufacturer’s sheeting products. However, in order for the
 film to be approved for manufacturing purposes within the Division’s CSS, a minimum (1)
 year shelf life shall be required. Reasonable conditional requirements pertaining to storage,
 such as temperature and relative humidity, shall be permitted.
 715.9.2.6.2.1.7-CSS Requirements: In addition to, but not limited to, any other
 requirements stated herein, all transparent overlay film to be approved for manufacturing
 purposes within the CSS shall be an acrylic material and shall be supplied on a clear liner.
 In addition, this material shall have sufficient strength so that it can be handled, processed,
 and applied according to the recommendations of the manufacturer without appreciable
 stretching, tearing, or other damage. The material shall permit cutting and application at
 temperatures of 40 to 100°F (4 to 38°C).
 715.9.2.6.2.2-Approval Process: The WVDOH approval process for Transparent
 Overlay Film is specified within Section 715.9.2.9.
 715.9.2.6.3-Opaque and Transparent Inks: Weather resistant, quick drying inks
 designed for use in traffic sign screen printing processes.
 715.9.2.6.3.1-Opaque and Transparent Ink Requirements:
 715.9.2.6.3.1.1-Chemical Resistance: This material shall resist mild alkalis, mild
 acids, and salt. The material shall exhibit excellent resistance to water, with exception to
 cases of submersion.
 715.9.2.6.3.1.2-Color Standards: Transparent inks applied to the manufacturer’s
 approved white sheeting shall produce colors meeting the daytime and nighttime color
 requirements of ASTM D4956 for like colored sheeting. Testing shall be conducted in
 accordance with ASTM D4956.
 715.9.2.6.3.1.3-Transparency: After application over the manufacturer’s white
 sheeting, the level of transparency of the transparent ink shall result in a minimum
 retroreflectivity level of seventy (70) % of the minimum required retroreflectivity level, as
 specified herein, of the like colored sheeting of the same grade as the white sheeting.
 Testing shall be conducted in accordance with ASTM D4956.
 
 864
 
 715.9.2.6.3.1.4-Durability: Durability requirements of opaque & transparent inks,
 depending on the Type sheeting the material is to be utilized with and the intended
 application, are specified in Sections 715.9.2.1 through 715.9.2.4.
 715.9.2.6.3.1.5-Shelf Life: A minimum shelf life shall not be required for the ink to be
 approved for use with the manufacturer’s sheeting products. However, in order for the ink
 to be approved for manufacturing purposes within the Division’s CSS, a minimum (1) year
 shelf life shall be required. Reasonable conditional requirements pertaining to storage, such
 as temperature and relative humidity, shall be permitted.
 715.9.2.6.3.2-Approval Process: The WVDOH approval process for Opaque and
 Transparent Ink is specified within Section 715.9.2.9.
 715.9.2.7-Durability Requirements: The durability requirements of the various type
 sheeting materials described herein and their matched components are specified in this
 Section. The sheeting manufacturer’s obligations in the event that the manufacturer’s
 material(s) fails to meet the durability requirements specified herein, as applicable, are
 specified within Section 715.9.2.8. All warranty requirements, and sheeting manufacturer
 obligations specified in Section 715.9.2.8 for materials failing to meet these requirements,
 are intended for installed devices remaining in place and becoming the property of the
 WVDOH after completion of the project, and for devices purchased or manufactured by
 the WVDOH. In all cases, the obligations of the sheeting manufacturer for failure of the
 materials to meet the established warranty requirements are to the WVDOH. The warranty
 requirements and sheeting manufacturer obligations specified herein shall not be construed
 as establishing mandatory warranty terms and obligations that the sheeting manufacturer
 is required to provide to Contractors, device manufacturers, fabricators, vendors, or other
 third parties performing work for or providing materials or finished products to the
 WVDOH.
 715.9.2.7.1-Non Work Zone Applications:
 715.9.2.7.1.1-Type ASTM-I Sheeting: Finished signs manufactured using Type
 ASTM-I sheeting shall exhibit the minimum level of performance described herein for a
 period of seven (7) years after field installation.
 The retroreflectivity levels maintained by the sheeting placed on the signs shall be a
 minimum of fifty (50) % of the required values for new sheeting of the same color, per
 715.9.2.1.1.1. For transparent ink and film covered areas over white sheeting, the
 retroreflectivity levels maintained by these areas of the signs shall be a minimum of thirtyfive (35) % [seventy (70) % of the fifty (50) % value specified above] of the required values
 for new sheeting of the same color as the ink or film, per 715.9.2.1.1.1.
 The colors and luminance factors of all areas of finished signs shall be such that the sign
 remains effective for its intended purpose when viewed from a moving vehicle under
 normal day and night driving conditions by drivers with normal vision.
 All retroreflectivity testing shall be done in accordance with ASTM D4956. All
 retroreflectivity testing shall be done at the set observation angle / entrance angle geometry
 of 0.2/-4.
 
 865
 
 715.9.2.7.1.2-Type ASTM-IV Sheeting: Finished signs manufactured using Type
 ASTM-IV sheeting shall exhibit the minimum level of performance described herein for a
 period of ten (10) years after field installation.
 The retroreflectivity levels maintained by the sheeting placed on the signs shall be a
 minimum of eighty (80) % of the required values for new sheeting of the same color, per
 715.9.2.2.1.1. For transparent ink and transparent film covered areas over white sheeting,
 the retroreflectivity levels maintained by these areas of the signs shall be a minimum of
 fifty-six (56) % [seventy (70) % of the eighty (80) % value specified above] of the required
 values for new sheeting of the same color as the ink or film, per 715.9.2.2.1.1.
 The colors and luminance factors of all areas of finished signs shall be such that the
 sign remains effective for its intended purpose when viewed from a moving vehicle under
 normal day and night driving conditions by drivers with normal vision.
 All retroreflectivity testing shall be done in accordance with ASTM D4956. All
 retroreflectivity testing shall be done at the set observation angle / entrance angle geometry
 of 0.2/-4.
 715.9.2.7.1.3-Type ASTM-XI Sheeting:
 715.9.2.7.1.3.1-Non Fluorescent Materials: Finished signs manufactured using Type
 ASTM-XI non-fluorescent sheeting shall exhibit the minimum level of performance
 described herein for a period of twelve (12) years after field installation.
 The retroreflectivity levels maintained by the sheeting placed on the signs shall be a
 minimum of eighty (80) % of the required values for new sheeting of the same color, per
 715.9.2.4.1.1. For transparent ink and film covered areas over white sheeting, the
 retroreflectivity levels maintained by these areas of the signs shall be a minimum of fiftysix (56) % [seventy (70) % of the eighty (80) % value specified above] of the required
 values for new sheeting of the same color as the ink or film, per 715.9.2.4.1.1.
 The colors and luminance factors of all areas of finished signs shall be such that the
 sign remains effective for its intended purpose when viewed from a moving vehicle under
 normal day and night driving conditions by drivers with normal vision.
 All retroreflectivity testing shall be done in accordance with ASTM D4956. All
 retroreflectivity testing shall be done at the set observation angle / entrance angle geometry
 of 0.2/-4.
 715.9.2.7.1.3.2-Fluorescent Materials: Finished signs manufactured using Type
 ASTM-XI fluorescent sheeting shall exhibit the minimum level of performance described
 herein for a period of ten (10) years after installation.
 The retroreflectivity levels maintained by the sheeting placed on the signs shall be a
 minimum of eighty (80) % of the required values for new sheeting of the same color, per
 715.9.2.4.1.1.
 The colors of all areas of finished signs shall be such that the sign remains effective for
 its intended purpose when viewed from a moving vehicle under normal day and night
 driving conditions by drivers with normal vision.
 The daytime luminance factor of all areas of finished signs shall be in conformance
 with the daytime luminance factor requirements referenced in Section 715.9.2.4.1.3.
 All testing shall be done in accordance with ASTM D4956. All retroreflectivity testing
 shall be done at the set observation angle / entrance angle geometry of 0.2/-4.
 
 866
 
 715.9.2.7.2-Work Zone Applications:
 715.9.2.7.2.1-Type ASTM-IV Sheeting:
 715.9.2.7.2.1.1-Channelization & Delineation Devices: Products in this category
 include but may not be limited to plastic posts, tubes, barricades, drums, cones, and
 channelizer cones, including “permanently” installed plastic posts and tubes. Applicable
 colors are orange, white, yellow, blue, and red. The sheeting placed on finished products
 of this type shall have its’ performance warranted for a period of three (3) years after
 application on the finished product.
 The Minimum Coefficient of Retroreflection shall be fifty (50) % of the values
 specified in Section 715.9.2.2.1.1 for sheeting of the same color.
 The colors and luminance factors of the applied sheeting shall be such that the sheeting
 remains effective for its intended purpose when viewed from a moving vehicle under
 normal day and night driving conditions by drivers with normal vision.
 All retroreflectivity testing shall be done in accordance with ASTM D4956. All
 retroreflectivity testing shall be done at the set observation angle / entrance angle geometry
 of 0.2/-4.
 715.9.2.7.2.2-Type ASTM-VI Sheeting:
 715.9.2.7.2.2.1-Roll-Up Signs: Finished roll-up signs manufactured using Type
 ASTM-VI sheeting shall have their performance warranted for a period of three (3) years
 after manufacturing.
 The retroreflectivity levels maintained by the white or fluorescent-orange areas of the
 finished signs shall be a minimum of fifty (50) % of the required values for new sheeting
 of the same color, per Table 715.9.2.3.1.1-I. For transparent ink covered areas over white
 sheeting, the retroreflectivity levels maintained by these areas of the signs shall be a
 minimum of fifty (50) % of the required values for like colored screen printed areas over
 new sheeting (50% of the values in Table 715.9.2.3.1.1-II).
 The colors and luminance factors of all areas of finished signs shall be such that the
 sign remains effective for its intended purpose when viewed from a moving vehicle under
 normal day and night driving conditions by drivers with normal vision.
 The daytime luminance factor of fluorescent-orange finished signs shall be in
 conformance with the daytime luminance factor requirements referenced in Section
 715.9.2.3.1.3.
 All testing shall be done in accordance with ASTM D4956. All retroreflectivity testing
 shall be done at the set observation angle / entrance angle geometry of 0.2/-4.
 715.9.2.7.2.3-Type ASTM-XI Sheeting:
 715.9.2.7.2.3.1-Signs: Finished work zone signs manufactured using fluorescentorange Type ASTM-XI material shall have their performance warranted for a period of
 three (3) years after manufacturing.
 The retroreflectivity levels maintained by the sheeting placed on the signs shall be a
 minimum of fifty (50) % of the required values for new fluorescent-orange sheeting, per
 715.9.2.4.1.1.
 The colors of all areas of finished signs shall be such that the sign remains effective for
 its intended purpose when viewed from a moving vehicle under normal day and night
 driving conditions by drivers with normal vision.
 
 867
 
 The daytime luminance factor of all areas of finished signs shall be in conformance
 with the daytime luminance factor requirements referenced in Section 715.9.2.4.1.3 for
 fluorescent-orange.
 All testing shall be done in accordance with ASTM D4956. All retroreflectivity testing
 shall be done at the set observation angle / entrance angle geometry of 0.2/-4.
 715.9.2.7.2.3.2-Channelization & Delineation Devices: Products in this category
 include but may not be limited to plastic posts, tubes, barricades, drums, cones, and
 channelizer cones, including “permanently” installed plastic posts and tubes. Applicable
 colors are orange, white, yellow, blue, and red. The sheeting placed on finished products
 of this type shall have its’ performance warranted for a period of three (3) years after
 application on the finished product.
 The Minimum Coefficient of Retroreflection shall be fifty (50) % of the values
 specified in Section 715.9.2.4.1.1for sheeting of the same color.
 The colors and luminance factors of the applied sheeting shall be such that the sheeting
 remains effective for its intended purpose when viewed from a moving vehicle under
 normal day and night driving conditions by drivers with normal vision.
 The daytime luminance factor of fluorescent-yellow sheeting shall be in conformance
 with the daytime luminance factor requirements referenced in Section 715.9.2.4.1.3.
 All testing shall be done in accordance with ASTM D4956. All retroreflectivity testing
 shall be done at the set observation angle / entrance angle geometry of 0.2/-4.
 715.9.2.8-Warranty Claims: The sheeting manufacturer’s obligations in the event that
 the manufacturer’s material(s) fails to meet the warranty requirements specified herein are
 specified within this Section. The retroreflective sheeting and/or matched components used
 to manufacture finished signs, channelization devices, & delineation devices shall be
 considered to be in non-compliance with these specifications where it can be shown that
 during the specified warranty period the finished product has deteriorated due to natural
 causes to the extent that is in non-compliance with the quantitative requirements contained
 herein related to retroreflectivity or luminance factor, as applicable, or is otherwise
 determined to be ineffective for its intended purpose when viewed from a moving vehicle
 under normal day and night driving conditions by drivers with normal vision. Under such
 circumstances, the sheeting manufacturer’s warranty obligations shall be as outlined as
 described herein. The retroreflectivity, color, & luminance factor durability requirements
 of the various type sheeting materials described herein and their matched components, as
 well as the required warranty periods, are specified within Section 715.9.2.7.
 Warranty claims shall be based on failures which occur as a result of design or
 manufacturing defects in the manufacturer’s sheeting and/or matched components and not
 of outside causes such as improper fabrication, handling, maintenance, or installation; use
 of non-manufacturer recommended inks, thinners, coatings, or overlay films for the
 sheeting being used; use of application equipment not recommended by the manufacturer;
 failure of sign substrate; exposure to chemicals, abrasion, or damage from fasteners used
 to mount the sign; snow burial; collisions, vandalism, or malicious mischief. It shall be the
 sheeting manufacturer’s responsibility to investigate and demonstrate that the
 recommendations contained in their product bulletins, information folders, and technical
 memos have not been followed in cases where the manufacturer chooses to contest the
 
 868
 
 warranty claim.
 Replacement sheeting shall carry the unexpired warranty of the sheeting it replaces.
 715.9.2.8.1-Non Work Zone Applications:
 715.9.2.8.1.1-Signs:
 715.9.2.8.1.1.1-Non Fluorescent Type ASTM-IV and Type ASTM-XI Sheeting: If
 the failure occurs within the first seven (7) years from the date of field installation, the
 sheeting manufacturer shall, at its expense, restore the sign surface to its original
 effectiveness. The Division will be responsible for no labor, equipment, or material costs
 in this case.
 If the failure occurs after seven (7) years from the date of field installation, but less than
 ten (10) years from the date of field installation for Type ASTM-IV material or less than
 twelve (12) years from the date of field installation for Type ASTM-XI material, the
 manufacturer shall furnish the necessary amount of sheeting to restore the sign surface to
 its original effectiveness.
 715.9.2.8.1.1.2-Fluorescent Type ASTM-XI Sheeting: If the failure occurs within the
 first seven (7) years from the date of field installation, the sheeting manufacturer shall, at
 its expense, restore the sign surface to its original effectiveness. The Division will be
 responsible for no labor, equipment, or material costs in this case.
 If the failure occurs after seven (7) years from the date of field installation, but less than
 ten (10) years from the date of field installation, the manufacturer shall furnish the
 necessary amount of sheeting to restore the sign surface to its original effectiveness.
 715.9.2.8.2-Work Zone Applications:
 715.9.2.8.2.1-Signs:
 715.9.2.8.2.1.1-Type ASTM-VI and Type ASTM-XI Sheeting: If the failure occurs
 within one (1) year from the date of manufacturing, the sheeting manufacturer will, at its
 expense, provide all required sheeting to restore the effected sign(s) to their original
 effectiveness.
 If failure occurs after one (1) year from the date of manufacturing, but less than two (2)
 years from the date of manufacturing , the sheeting manufacturer will, at its expense,
 provide two-thirds (2/3) of the required sheeting to restore the effected sign(s) to their
 original effectiveness.
 If failure occurs after two (2) years from the date of manufacturing, but less than three
 (3) years from the date of manufacturing , the sheeting manufacturer will, at its expense,
 provide one-third (1/3) of the required sheeting to restore the effected sign(s) to their
 original effectiveness.
 715.9.2.8.2.2-Channelization & Delineation Devices:
 715.9.2.8.2.2.1-Type ASTM-IV and Type ASTM-XI Sheeting: If the failure occurs
 within one (1) year from the date of manufacturing, the sheeting manufacturer will, at its
 expense, provide all required sheeting to restore the effected device(s) to their original
 effectiveness.
 If failure occurs after one (1) year from the date of manufacturing, but less than two (2)
 years from the date of manufacturing , the sheeting manufacturer will, at its expense,
 
 869
 
 provide two-thirds (2/3) of the required sheeting to restore the effected device(s) to their
 original effectiveness.
 If failure occurs after two (2) years from the date of manufacturing, but less than three
 (3) years from the date of manufacturing , the sheeting manufacturer will, at its expense,
 provide one-third (1/3) of the required sheeting to restore the effected device(s) to their
 original effectiveness.
 715.9.2.9-Approval Processes: The WVDOH processes for review and approval of
 the various material types described in Sections 715.9.2.1 through 715.9.2.6 are described
 within this Section.
 Retroreflective sheeting materials of the Types described herein, manufacturer
 recommended matched components for use with the sheeting materials, and transfer films
 to be considered for inclusion on the WVDOH APL shall be submitted to the Materials
 Division following the current procedures specified by the Materials Division. The
 manufacturer may contact the Traffic Engineering Division for verification. The
 manufacturer should include all relevant documentation and information with their
 submittal, including but not limited to Product Data Sheets, Product Flyers, Manufacturer
 Product Specifications, Product Bulletins, and any required independent test results
 described herein.
 In addition to the above described documentation and information, the manufacturer
 shall submit a letter of certification prior to approval. This letter shall include the following:
 1. Certification that the material(s) submitted for approval will meet all applicable
 requirements contained within Section 715 of the WVDOH Standard
 Specifications. The applicable material Type designation, as defined in this
 specification, should also be referenced. If the material is a Type ASTM-I, IV, or
 XI material and not intended solely for application to work zone devices as defined
 herein, or is a fluorescent-orange material intended for application to rigid substrate
 signs, and does not meet the requirements of this specification to be considered
 rotationally insensitive, the manufacturer should note this exception in the
 certification letter. Classification of the material as being rotationally sensitive will
 not prevent approval of the material.
 2. Certification that the manufacturer agrees to warranty the performance of the
 material(s) in accordance with Section 715 of the WVDOH Standard
 Specifications.
 3. Certification that the material(s) have a minimum one (1) year shelf life, when
 stored as recommended by the manufacturer, if the manufacturer is seeking
 approval of the material(s) for manufacturing purposes within the CSS.
 All submitted information will be forwarded to the WVDOH Traffic Engineering
 Division, which will in turn contact and work directly with the manufacturer during the
 evaluation process. The Traffic Engineering Division will evaluate all submitted literature
 and documentation for compliance with the specified requirements as well as satisfactory
 independent testing results, as applicable. The Traffic Engineering Division will also
 arrange for the manufacturer to furnish test samples for evaluation of the materials
 suitability for use within the CSS, as applicable. After the evaluation is complete, the
 Traffic Engineering Division will inform the Materials Division in writing of the outcome
 of its evaluation.
 870
 
 The WVDOH reserves the right to conduct testing, whether internally or through an
 independent testing agency of its choice, on any material submitted for approval in order
 to verify that the material meets any of the material specifications herein. This testing may
 be conducted prior to or any time after approval is issued. Any such testing shall be
 conducted in accordance with the testing requirements of the applicable standardization
 body, such as ASTM or AASHTO.
 715.9.2.9.1-Retroreflective Sheeting Materials & Matched Components:
 715.9.2.9.1.1-Independent Test Results: In order for the material to be evaluated and
 considered for approval, independent test results must be supplied by the manufacturer
 demonstrating the sheeting material’s conformance with the requirements specified within
 the applicable Section 715.9.2.1, 715.9.2.2, 715.9.2.3, or 715.9.2.4, with the exception of
 the requirements specified in the “Shelf Life”, “Backing Class”, and “Durability”
 subsections. The independent test results shall include accelerated outdoor weathering test
 results conducted in conformance with ASTM D4956. Artificial accelerated lab weathering
 shall not be accepted except for materials intended for work zone applications. Materials
 intended for work zone applications shall include all Type ASTM-VI materials and shall
 include, but may not be limited to, other “Type” materials intended for use on plastic posts,
 tubes, barricades, drums, cones, and channelizer cones, including “permanently” installed
 plastic posts and tubes. However, any approval granted based on the results of artificial
 accelerated lab weathering shall be provisional in nature and noted as such on the APL. As
 a condition of the acceptance of artificial accelerated lab weathering results in lieu of
 accelerated outdoor weathering results, the accelerated outdoor weathering process shall
 be ongoing at the time of issuance of the provisional approval. In addition, the material
 manufacturer shall submit the standard outdoor weathering test results to the WVDOH
 within nine (9) months after the effective date of the provisional approval for Type ASTMVI materials, and within fifteen (15) months after the effective date of the provisional
 approval for all other material “Types”. AASHTO-NTPEP results shall be considered
 acceptable for meeting the accelerated outdoor weathering test results requirement.
 Rotational sensitivity testing is not required for sheeting materials intended solely for
 application to work zone devices, as defined herein, with the exception of fluorescentorange materials intended for application to rigid substrate signs. Otherwise, if a material
 submitted for approval does not meet the rotational sensitivity requirements herein,
 rotational sensitivity testing may be omitted from the independent test results provided that
 the manufacturer notes that the material does not meet the rotational sensitivity requirement
 in their required certification letter described in Section 715.9.2.9.
 715.9.2.9.1.1.1-Accelerated Weathering Test Results: The duration of testing
 required shall be based on the sheeting material Type, as defined by this specification, and
 the intended application of the material. All Type ASTM-I sheeting materials shall be
 subjected to two (2) years of accelerated outdoor weathering. Type ASTM-IV and Type
 ASTM-XI materials intended for non-work zone applications shall be subjected to three
 (3) years of accelerated outdoor weathering. Type ASTM-IV and Type ASTM-XI
 materials intended for work zone applications shall be subjected to one (1) year of
 accelerated outdoor weathering. Type ASTM-VI materials shall be subjected to six (6)
 months of accelerated outdoor weathering.
 
 871
 
 After completion of the accelerated outdoor weathering, all materials shall be in
 conformance with the general durability requirements related to cracking, scaling, pitting,
 blistering, edge lifting, curling, shrinkage, and expansion specified in ASTM D4956.
 The retroreflectivity level of the sheeting material after completion of the accelerated
 outdoor weathering, when tested in accordance with ASTM D4956, shall be in
 conformance with the requirements of ASTM D4956. ASTM D4956 specifies the level of
 retroreflectivity to be maintained by the material as a percentage of the initial required
 retroreflectivity level specified in ASTM D4956. An exception to this shall apply to Type
 ASTM-VI materials. In this case, the percentage specified in ASTM D4956 shall be applied
 to the applicable initial required retroreflectivity levels specified in Section 715.9.2.3.1.1
 rather than the initial values specified in ASTM D4956.
 After completion of the accelerated weathering, the sheeting material shall be in
 conformance with the requirements specified in the “Color” (daytime) and “Luminance
 Factor” subsections within the applicable Section 715.9.2.1, 715.9.2.2, 715.9.2.3, or
 715.9.2.4 when tested in accordance with ASTM D4956.
 The manufacturer recommended matched components for use with the sheeting
 material must also be subjected to accelerated outdoor weathering in order for approval to
 be given for the manufacturing of signs requiring the use of these matched components.
 The duration of accelerated outdoor weathering required for the matched components shall
 be the same as the applicable duration required for the sheeting.
 The retroreflectivity level of the areas of all signs processed with transparent inks or
 transparent films after completion of the accelerated outdoor weathering, when tested in
 accordance with ASTM D4956, shall be a minimum of seventy (70) % of the
 retroreflectivity values required for like colored sheeting of the same material Type upon
 completion of the accelerated outdoor weathering.
 After completion of the accelerated outdoor weathering, the areas of all signs processed
 with transparent inks or transparent films shall be in conformance with the requirements
 specified in the “Color” (daytime) and “Luminance Factor” subsections within the
 applicable Section 715.9.2.1, 715.9.2.2, 715.9.2.3, or 715.9.2.4 when tested in accordance
 with ASTM D4956.
 If artificial accelerated lab weathering is conducted in order to obtain provisional
 approval for a material intended for work zone applications, per Section 715.9.2.9.1.1, the
 weathering process shall be done in accordance with the ASTM D4956 specifications. The
 performance requirements for the results of the testing shall be the same as described herein
 for accelerated outdoor weathering.
 715.9.2.9.1.2--CSS Evaluation: Material Types and their matched components that
 are typically used in manufacturing processes within the CSS are subject to evaluation by
 WVDOH personnel for their suitability for use within the Division’s CSS. This evaluation
 is primarily focused on the compatibility, workability, and general “user friendliness” of
 the materials when used for production purposes within the CSS using the equipment in
 place at the CSS, as well as the characteristics of the materials in these regards relative to
 other materials which have already been approved. The suitability of the materials in these
 regards shall be based solely on the judgment of the Division. The un-acceptance of the
 manufacturer’s sheeting material and/or matched components based on this evaluation
 shall not prevent the listing of these materials on the APL and the use of these materials by
 
 872
 
 private fabricators supplying finished products to the WVDOH or to Contractors
 performing Contracts for the WVDOH.
 In order for a sheeting material to be eligible for bidding on any Division raw material
 supply Contract, particular Section(s) of the Contract may require that only the sheeting
 material be determined to be suitable for use within the CSS. Other Section(s) may require
 that one or more of the matched components also be determined to be suitable for use
 within the CSS. These requirements shall be indicated in the raw material supply Contract.
 In addition to any other requirements specified herein, in order to be accepted for
 manufacturing purposes within the CSS all sheeting materials shall permit application to
 aluminum blanks and shall permit processing with compatible matched components at
 temperatures between 60 to 100°F (16 to 38°C) and relative humidity at 20% to 80 % when
 performed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. In addition, the
 sheeting and the matched component inks shall allow oven accelerated curing, providing
 that the manufacturer’s recommendations are followed.
 Any restrictions on the use of the material or any of the matched components within
 the CSS shall be noted on the APL.
 In addition to the information provided above, note the following:
 1. Type ASTM-I material is not specified for any applications on WVDOH advertised
 construction projects. The specifications and approval process described herein for
 Type ASTM-I material are in place solely for the purpose of establishing
 requirements for the placement of Type ASTM-I materials on the Division’s APL.
 A listing of approved Type ASTM-I materials is maintained in order to establish a
 list of materials approved for bidding on Division raw material supply Contracts.
 Therefore, no Type ASTM-I material that is not accepted by the Division for
 manufacturing purposes within the CSS shall be placed on the APL.
 2. Type ASTM-IV sheeting materials and their matched components intended for
 work zone (as described herein) applications only are not required to be evaluated
 for use within the CSS.
 3. Type ASTM-VI sheeting materials and their matched components are not required
 to be evaluated for use within the CSS.
 4. With the exception of fluorescent-orange material and its’ applicable matched
 components intended for use in manufacturing temporary work zone signs, Type
 ASTM-XI sheeting materials and their matched components intended for work
 zone (as described herein) applications only are not required to be evaluated for use
 within the CSS.
 715.9.2.9.2-Transfer Films: The transfer film section of the APL is solely for the
 purpose of establishing an approved list of transfer tapes for bidding on Division raw
 material supply Contracts. Private fabricators are not required to utilize transfer tapes listed
 on the APL. This shall be noted on the APL. Therefore, no transfer film that is not accepted
 by the Division for manufacturing purposes within the CSS shall be placed on the APL.
 All transfer films submitted for approval shall be transparent. No other specific
 requirements are listed herein. However, transfer films shall be thoroughly evaluated by
 personnel within the Division’s CSS. The CSS evaluation is primarily focused on the
 compatibility, workability, and general “user friendliness” of the material when used for
 production purposes within the CSS using the equipment in place at the CSS, as well as
 
 873
 
 the characteristics of the material in these regards relative to other transfer films which
 have already been approved. The suitability of the material in this regard shall be based
 solely on the judgment of the Division.
 715.9.3-Channelizing Devices and Auxiliary Barriers: Traffic cone markers shall be
 constructed of rubber or other flexible material acceptable to the Engineer, shall have a height
 of 28 to 36 in. (700 to 900 mm) and a base of approximately 14 in. by 14 in. (350 by 350 mm),
 and shall be predominantly orange in color. If the cones are required to be in place during
 periods of darkness, they shall be reflectorized.
 Barricades shall be fabricated in accordance with details shown on the plans and shall not
 be constructed with sufficient strength to stop any vehicle which collides with them, but shall
 be so constructed as to do a minimum amount of damage to a vehicle colliding with them.
 Traffic control drums shall be flexible plastic and appear basically cylindrical viewed from
 any direction. Drums shall have a minimum profile width of 18 inches (450 mm) regardless
 of orientation. The drum shall be 36 inches (900 mm) in height and orange in color.
 The markings on the drum shall be horizontal, circumferential, orange and white
 reflectorized stripes 6 inches (152.4 mm) minimum width fabricated from Type I or Type IV
 sheeting. There shall be two orange and two white stripes uniformly spaced on each drum.
 The drum shall be designed to securely attach a Type A or C warning light to the top of the
 drum. The drum shall contain a removable base not to exceed 5 inches (127 mm) in height.
 715.9.3.1-Channelizer Cones: The Channelizer Cone utilized shall be manufactured
 using a lightweight, reboundable plastic material, such as Low Density Polyethylene. The
 material used to manufacture the Channelizer Cone shall be colored bright orange
 throughout, and shall include UV stabilizers. The Channelizer Cone shall utilize a
 detachable low profile rubber base for ballast. Two different categories of bases shall be
 recognized.
 Each Channelizer Cone shall utilize retroreflective sheeting for nighttime visibility.
 The Channelizer Cone cross-section shall be round where the Retroreflective sheeting is to
 be applied. The Retroreflective sheeting utilized shall be 2 each 6-inch (150 mm) wide
 bands of orange Type ASTM-III sheeting, and 2 each 6-inch (150 mm) wide bands of white
 Type ASTM-III sheeting. The top band of sheeting shall be orange and shall be placed
 such that the top edge of the band is approximately 43 inches (1050 mm) above the bottom
 of the Channelizer Cone. The remaining white and orange bands shall be alternated down
 the Channelizer Cone, with each band separated by approximately 0.5 edge inches (12 mm)
 (+/-0.5 inch (12 mm)). The diameter of the Channelizer Cone at the top of the edge of the
 top band of sheeting shall be approximately 4 inches (100 mm). The diameter
 approximately 5½ inches (137 mm). The Channelizer Cone may be constructed such that
 the diameter of the of the Channelizer Cone transitions from the top to the bottom
 uniformly, or the Channelizer Cone may utilize a tiered construction such that the section
 of the Channelizer Cone that each band of sheeting is attached to is of a different constant
 diameter, with each tier going down the Channelizer Cone being a larger diameter than the
 one above it.
 Two different categories of bases shall be recognized, as described below.
 
 874
 
 715.9.3.1.1-55 MPH or Less Channelizer Cone Bases: Bases for use only on
 roadways with a normal (non work zone) posted speed limit of 55 MPH or less shall weight
 a minimum of 15 pounds (6.8 kg.). These bases may be a symmetrical or non-symmetrical
 shape of the manufacturer’s choosing, but shall not be round. The square or rectangular
 effective footprint defined by the outer extremes of the base shall meet the following
 guidelines:
  If the footprint is square, the overall footprint shall not exceed 20” x 20” (500 mm
 x 500 mm)
  If the footprint is rectangular, the measurement in one direction shall not exceed
 24” (600 mm) in one direction, and 18” (450 mm) in the other direction.
 715.9.3.1.2-60 MPH or Greater Channelizer Cone Bases: Bases for use on
 roadways with a normal (non-work zone) posted speed limit of 60 MPH or greater shall
 weigh a minimum of 20 pounds (9.1 kg.). These bases shall be rectangular in shape in
 order to provide maximum tipping resistance when the long side of the base is installed
 parallel to traffic. The long dimension of the base shall be a minimum of 24 inches (600
 mm) in length. The short dimension of the base shall be a minimum of 12 inches (300
 mm), and a maximum of 20 inches (500 mm) in length. All bases should be manufactured
 within the parameters described in a manner to provide stability similar to other industry
 standard Channelizer Cones, and will be subject to review and testing by WVDOH
 personnel for approval. Note, bases meeting the requirements described above may also
 be used in work zones with a normal (non-work zone) posted speed of 55 MPH or less.
 715.9.3.1.3-Approved Products: The Channelizer Cone utilized shall be a model off
 the Division’s current Approved Products Listing (APL). A list of qualified devices and
 their manufacturers may be obtained by contacting the Materials Division at the following
 address:
 West Virginia Division of Highways
 Material Controls, Soils, and Testing
 190 Dry Branch Road
 Charleston, West Virginia 25306
 715.9.4-BLANK
 715.9.5-Warning Lights: The purpose of this specification is to provide minimum
 requirements for light-emitting warning lights used for warning purposes in roadway work
 zones.
 715.9.5.1-Types of Warning Lights: Types of warning lights include any device
 which emits light, either in a flashing or steady burn mode, using any power source
 (electrical, solar, etc.). The lights include, among others, incandescent lamps, light emitting
 diodes (LED), neon, and halogen lamps. Types of warning lights are categorized as
 follows:
  Type A: low intensity flashing warning lights
  Type B: high intensity flashing warning lights
  Type C: steady burn warning lights
  Type D: 360-degree steady burn warning lights
 875
 
 715.9.5.2-General Requirements:
 715.9.5.2.1-Internal and External Illumination: The warning lights shall be
 internally illuminated by means of a light source behind a lens and, for Type A and C
 devices, shall be externally illuminated by retroreflective elements built into the lens to
 enable warning lights to be seen by retro-reflection of the light from the headlights of
 oncoming vehicles. The type B device may have a retro-reflective ring of prismatic tape or
 built in elements that meet the requirements of Section 715.9.5.10.
 715.9.5.2.2-Battery Operation and Battery Protection: When the device is to be
 operated by battery, the battery must be entirely enclosed in a weatherproof case that is
 constructed of steel or any other material such as high-impact plastics suitable for use along
 roadway work zones. The case shall be secured by a locking device. The battery may be
 replaceable or rechargeable using, for example, solar collectors or an AC power source.
 715.9.5.2.3-AC power Operation: When the device is to be operated by a 120-volt,
 60Hz power supply, the unit shall be supplied with a separate ground wire and shall be
 protected with suitable fuses. At no time shall the effective intensity of the light have a
 value greater than 500 candelas. The connections and equipment used shall be in
 accordance with the pertinent current standards of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
 Engineers, the American Society for Testing Materials, and the National Board of Fire
 Underwriters. In those areas where there are pertinent local ordinances and requirements,
 the wiring, material, and installation procedures shall comply with the local requirements.
 715.9.5.3-Flash Requirements:
 715.9.5.3.1-Flash Rate: The light from Type A and Type B devices shall have a flash
 rate of 65 (+/- 10) flashes per minute for temperatures between -29 deg C to 66 deg C (-20
 deg F to 150 deg F) regardless of the power source.
 715.9.5.3.2-ON-time:
 a) Definition: ON-time is defined as the period of the flash where instantaneous
 intensity is equal to or greater than the effective intensity as specified in Section
 715.9.5.4.1.2.
 b) Type A: The light shall have an ON-time of not less than 10 percent of the flash
 cycle.
 c) Type B: The light shall have an On-time of not less than 8 percent of the flash
 cycle.
 d) Maximum allowable ON-time for either Type A or Type B lights shall be 50
 percent.
 715.9.5.4-Optical Requirements:
 715.9.5.4.1-Photometry:
 715.9.5.4.1.1-Light Distribution: The light distribution for Types A, B and C shall
 have a minimum lateral width of 9 degrees and a minimum vertical height of 5 degrees
 from the optical axis of the system. Within these confines, minimum candela requirements,
 as specified in Sections 715.9.5.4.1.2.1 through 715.9.5.4.1.2.3, shall be met.
 
 876
 
 The light distribution for Type D shall be 360 degrees in the horizontal plane and shall
 be a minimum of 5 degrees vertical from the horizontal plane. Within these confines,
 minimum candela requirements, as specified in Section 715.9.5.4.1.2.4, shall be met.
 715.9.5.4.1.2-Minimum Candela Requirements:
 715.9.5.4.1.2.1-Type A: For Type A the effective luminous intensity shall not drop
 below 4.0 candelas within the area specified in Section 715.9.5.4.1.1, during the first 336
 hours of continuous flashing.
 715.9.5.4.1.2.2-Type B: For Type B the effective luminous intensity shall not drop
 below 35 candelas within the area specified in Section 715.9.5.4.1.1 during the first 168
 hours of continuous flashing. During the hours of darkness, the effective intensity may be
 reduced by a maximum of 50 percent.
 715.9.5.4.1.2.3-Type C: For Type C the luminous intensity shall not drop below 2.0
 candelas within the area specified in Section 715.9.5.4.1.1 during the first 168 hours of
 continuous burning.
 715.9.5.4.1.2.4-Type D: For Type D the luminous intensity on a horizontal plane shall
 not drop below 1.0 candelas. At 5 degrees vertical from the horizontal plane, the luminous
 intensity shall not drop below 0.5 candelas. This performance shall be met throughout the
 first 168 hours of continuous burning. Type D steady burn warning lights shall be visible
 on a clear night from a distance of 3,000 feet.
 715.9.5.4.2-Testing Procedures:
 715.9.5.4.2.1-Type A and Type B Effective Intensity: The effective intensity of Type
 A and Type B lights shall be calculated using the “Guide for Calculating the Effective
 Intensity of Flashing Signal Lights,” published in the November 1964 edition of
 Illuminating Engineering magazine, by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
 America, or latest revision.
 715.9.5.4.2.2-Type C and Type D Effective Intensity: The intensity of the Type C
 and Type D lights shall be tested as set forth in the current edition of SAE Standard J575
 (Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., Lighting Equipment and Photometric Tests).
 715.9.5.4.2.3-Retro-reflection: Retro-reflection shall be tested in accordance with the
 current edition of SAE Standard J594.
 715.9.5.4.2.4-ATSSA Test T-101: Warning devices furnished or approved under this
 specification shall be tested in accordance with the current edition of ATSSA Test
 Procedure T-101 (American Traffic Safety Services Association).
 715.9.5.4.2.5-Disabling of Solar Collectors: If the device uses a solar collector, the
 collector shall be disabled by either covering the collector or disconnecting it for the entire
 test period.
 
 877
 
 715.9.5.5-Lens Requirements: The following section applies to devices that use a
 lens.
 715.9.5.5.1-Lens Sizes:
 715.9.5.5.1.1-Types A, B, and C: Type A, B and C device lenses shall not be less than
 177 mm (7 in) in diameter, including a retro-reflector ring of 12 mm (1.2 in) width around
 a minimum of 300 degrees of the lens periphery.
 715.9.5.5.1.2-Type D: A Type D device lens shall be 360 degrees circular in the
 horizontal plane, with a minimum outside diameter of 75 mm (3 in) and a minimum height
 of 75 mm (3 in), including mounting flanges.
 715.9.5.5.2-Lens Directionalities:
 715.9.5.5.2.1-Types A and C: Type A and Type C device lenses shall be either bidirectional or unidirectional.
 715.9.5.5.2.2-Type B: A Type B device lens shall be unidirectional.
 715.9.5.5.2.3-Type D: A Type D device shall have a 360 degree dome lens.
 715.9.5.5.3-Lens Chromaticity: The chromaticity of the lens colors and retroreflective colors shall be tested using a light source with a color temperature ranging
 between 2600 deg K and 2856 deg K. The chromaticity of lenses and the emitted light from
 both yellow and red warning lights, and of both yellow and red retro-reflectors, shall
 conform to the chromaticity requirements of Section 8.04 and Figure 1 of the ITE Vehicle
 Traffic Control Signal Head standard. The wavelength spectra distribution of the light
 source shall be within the range of 500 nm to 650 nm.
 715.9.5.5.4-Lens Retroreflector Performance: The specific intensity of the retroreflector, when provided, shall meet the requirements as specified in Section 715.9.5.10.
 715.9.5.5.5-Lens Material: The lens shall be of one-piece construction. The lens shall
 be manufactured using materials such as plastic capable of meeting the chromaticity
 requirements of this specification. The lens material shall meet the test requirements set
 forth in the most recent edition of SAE Standard J576 (Society of Automotive Engineers,
 Inc., Lighting Equipment and Photometric Test). For the purposes of this specification, the
 exposure time and conditions of paragraph 3.4.3, SAE Standard J576, shall be for one year
 (365 calendar days).
 715.9.5.6-Head and Housing Requirements:
 715.9.5.6.1-Swivel Heads: If swivel capabilities as described in this Section are not
 incorporated in the device used to mount a Type A or Type C light to any channelizing
 device, barrier, or a sign, the head shall be mounted on the housing in a manner permitting
 it to be swiveled through a minimum 90 degree arc in a horizontal plane. If swiveling is to
 be accomplished by rotating the head, the design of the device head and its construction
 shall be such that rotating the head will not result in damaging any circuitry or wiring. If
 
 878
 
 the lens assembly rotates around the light source, the photometrics shall meet the
 requirements of Section 715.9.5.9.
 715.9.5.6.2-Housing:
 715.9.5.6.2.1-Definition: Housing is defined as the case containing the battery and may
 contain the circuitry.
 715.9.5.6.2.2-Material: The housing, when constructed of steel, shall be constructed
 of No. 18 U.S. Standard Gauge Steel. The housing may be made of any other material such
 as high-impact plastics suitable for use along roadway work zones.
 715.9.5.6.3-Painting: The housing and the lens frame, if constructed using corrodible
 metal, shall be properly cleaned, degreased and pretreated to promote adhesion. It shall be
 given one or more coats of enamel which, when dry, shall completely obscure the metal
 substrate. The enamel coating shall be of such quality that when the coated case is struck a
 light blow with a sharp tool, the paint shall not chip or crack, and if scratched with a knife
 shall not powder.
 715.9.5.6.4-Weatherproofing: The case shall be constructed and closed as to exclude
 moisture that would affect the specified operation of the light. The case shall have a weep
 hole to allow the escape of moisture.
 715.9.5.6.5-Sun Shield Visor: All Type B Warning Lights shall incorporate a sun
 shield visor for the purpose of enhancing visibility during daylight conditions. The visor
 shall encircle a minimum of 77-1/2 degrees of the face of the lens in each direction from a
 datum point at the top of the lens face. At the datum point, the lens shall extend a minimum
 of 4-3/4” out from the face of the lens. At the ends of the visor, as measured in degrees in
 each direction from the above described datum point, the visor shall extend a minimum of
 1-1/2” out from the face of the lens.
 715.9.5.7-Photoelectric Controls: Photoelectric controls, when provided, shall keep
 the device operating whenever the ambient light level falls below 215 lux.
 715.9.5.8-Testing and Certification, Quality, and Marking:
 715.9.5.8.1-Testing and Certification of New Warning Lights: Warning lights
 furnished or approved for use under this specification shall be statistically represented by
 units that have been tested and approved as to conformance to these specifications by an
 independent accredited testing organization. Certification as to conformance to these
 specifications shall be provided upon request and will be furnished by the manufacturer as
 substantiated by testing results from an independent accredited testing laboratory or
 organization. Warning lights tested and approved as described above shall be retested for
 compliance and recertification when required or when the supplier makes changes to any
 aspect of the light-emitting warning devices covered by this specification. For example,
 whenever any changes are made in the lens, light source, or circuitry.
 
 879
 
 715.9.5.8.2-Quality: All electrical components, the quality of the materials used, and
 the workmanship of all warning lights furnished for use and certified as to the conformance
 to this specification shall be the same as that of models approved under this specification.
 715.9.5.8.2-Marking: Each device shall be plainly marked as to type (A, B, C or D),
 the manufacturer’s or customer’s name, model number or name, and label or marking
 stating it meets the requirements of the Institute of Traffic Engineers “Purchase
 Specification for Flashing and Steady Burn Warning Lights”. The location of the label or
 marking may be internal or external to the housing, and may be placed on the outside of
 the circuit and/or lamp holder assembly.
 715.9.5.9-Summary Information:
 
 Lens Directional Faces
 Flash Rate Per Minute
 Minimum On-Time
 Minimum Effective
 Luminous Intensity*
 Minimum Luminous
 Intensity*
 Hours of Required
 Operation*
 
 
 
 Type A
 Low Intensity
 1 or 2
 55 to 75
 10%
 4.0 Candelas
 (yellow); 1.0
 Candelas (Red)
 
 Type C
 Steady Burn
 1 or 2
 NA
 NA
 NA
 
 Type D
 Steady Burn
 360 ⁰
 NA
 NA
 NA
 
 NA
 
 Type B
 High Intensity
 1
 55-75
 8%
 35 Candelas**
 (yellow)
 12 Candelas**
 (red)
 NA
 
 2.0 Candelas
 
 Dusk to dawn
 
 24 hours/day
 
 Dusk to
 dawn
 
 1.0 to 0.5
 Candelas
 Dusk to
 dawn
 
 These values shall be maintained within the areas as specified in Section 715.9.5.4.1
 During hours of darkness, the effective intensity may be reduced by a maximum of 50%
 
 715.9.5.10-Retroreflector Requirements:
 Observation
 Angle
 0.2
 0.2
 0.2
 0.2
 0.2
 
 Entrance Angle
 20 degrees left
 10 degrees left
 0 degrees
 10 degrees right
 20 degrees right
 
 Yellow Luminous
 Intensity
 (Candelas/lux)
 0.9
 1.31
 1.67
 1.31
 0.9
 
 880
 
 Red Luminous
 Intensity
 (Candelas/lux)
 0.23
 0.33
 0.42
 0.33
 0.23
 
 715.9.5.11-Approved Products Listing: Warning Lights utilized as part of WVDOH
 Construction projects must be included on the WVDOH Approved Products Listing (APL)
 for Warning Lights. A list of approved products and their code numbers may be obtained
 by contacting:
 West Virginia Division of Highways
 Material Controls, Soil and Testing Division
 190 Dry Branch Road
 Charleston, WV 25306
 715.10-PREFABRICATED DRAINAGE SYSTEMS:
 715.10.1-Prefabricated Pavement Edge Drain:
 715.10.1.1-General: Prefabricated pavement edge drain shall be a flexible rectangular
 hollow mat consisting of a supporting polymeric drainage core encased in an engineering
 fabric envelope and having sufficient flexibility to withstand installation bending and
 handling without damage.
 715.10.1.2-Core: The drainage core shall be constructed from a polymeric material,
 have a minimum thickness of ¾ inch (19 mm) and a minimum compressive strength of
 3,000 pounds per square foot (145 kPa) with a maximum deflection of 20 percent
 determined by ASTM D 1621, except the sample size may be increased to a maximum of
 12 in. by 12 in. (300 mm by 300 mm) The edge drain shall permit inflow on both sides of
 the drain and produce a minimum flow rate of 10 gal/minute/ft (123 liters/minute/meter)
 of width as determined by ASTM D 4716. Flow rates shall be based on a hydraulic gradient
 of 0.1 and a confining pressure of 10 psi (69 kPa) using a closed-cell foam rubber layer on
 both sides. The height of the edge drain shall be as shown on the Plans.
 715.10.1.3-Fabric: The fabric shall be suitable for subsurface drainage applications
 and shall meet the requirements of 715.11 except the minimum tensile strength shall be 90
 lbs. (400 N). The fabric shall be bonded to or stretched tightly over the core support contact
 points.
 715.10.1.4-Fittings: All fittings shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s
 published specifications.
 715.10.1.5-Outlet Pipe: The outlet pipe shall be a smooth inner wall unperforated pipe
 meeting the requirements of 714.19 (AASHTO M252, Type S only) or 714.22
 715.10.1.6-Acceptance: All components of the edge drain shall be approved before
 use. The Contractor shall furnish certified test data with the material supplied for each
 project. Tests for all required properties shall be performed in accordance with the
 procedures specified. Compliance of this data with the requirements specified will be the
 basis of acceptance.
 715.11-ENGINEERING FABRIC:
 715.11.1-General: Engineering fabric shall meet the applicable requirements of AASHTO
 M 288.
 
 881
 
 715.11.2-Acceptance: All engineering fabric shall be approved before use. When using
 a fabric not on the Division's approved list, the Contractor shall furnish certified test data with
 each shipment of fabric. Compliance of this data with the requirements of the specific
 application will be the basis of acceptance.
 The test results submitted shall be derived from testing samples representing the fabric
 contained in each shipment. Tests for all required properties shall be performed in accordance
 with the procedures specified. Each roll shipped shall be identified so as to show its
 relationship to the test data submitted.
 715.11.3-Maintenance and Repairs: Any fabric damaged or displaced shall be replaced
 or repaired at the Contractor's expense. Any fabric, other than that used for silt fence, not
 covered within 14 days after installation shall be removed and replaced at no expense to the
 Division. Minor tears or ruptures in the fabric may be repaired by sewing or by placing another
 piece of fabric over the damaged area so that the overlap is at least 2 feet (600 mm) in each
 direction or as directed by the Engineer.
 715.11.4-Engineering Fabric for Subsurface Drainage: Engineering fabric for
 subsurface drainage shall meet the applicable requirements of AASHTO M 288, Section 7,
 Class 2. Additionally, the permittivity shall be a minimum of 0.2 sec-1 and the apparent
 opening size shall be no larger than No. 60 (250m) sieve.
 715.11.5-Engineering Fabric for Sediment Control (Silt Fence): Engineering fabric for
 sediment control shall meet the applicable requirements of AASHTO M 288, Section 8.
 715.11.6-Engineering Fabric for Erosion Control: Engineering fabric for erosion
 control shall meet the applicable requirements of AASHTO M 288, Section 7, Class 1.
 715.11.7-Engineering Fabric for Paving: Engineering fabric for paving shall meet the
 applicable requirements of AASHTO M 288, Section 9.
 715.11.8-Engineering Fabric for Separation: Engineering fabric for separation shall
 meet the applicable requirements of AASHTO M 288, Section 7, Class 2.
 715.11.9-Engineering Fabric for Stabilization: Engineering fabric for stabilization shall
 meet the applicable requirements of AASHTO M 288, Section 7, Class 1.
 715.11.10-Engineering Fabric for Pumped Sediment and Erosion Control
 (Dewatering Device): Each standard Dewatering Device shall have a fill spout large enough
 to accommodate a 4 inch (100 mm) discharge hose with attached straps to secure the hose and
 prevent pumped water from escaping without being filtered. The device must be able to
 accommodate a minimum flow rate of 1000 gal per minute (4 546 liters per minute) for the
 application for which it is to be used and a minimum size of 100 square feet (9 square meters).
 The Dewatering Device shall be a nonwoven bag, which is sewn with a double needle
 stitching using a high strength thread.
 The Dewatering Device seams shall have an average wide width strength per ASTM D
 4884 of 100 LB/IN (1.15 kg/meter).
 
 882
 
 The geotextile fabric shall be nonwoven fabric with the following properties:
 PROPERTIES
 Grab Tensile
 Puncture
 
 TEST METHOD
 ASTM D-4632
 ASTM D-4833
 
 Flow Rate
 
 ASTM D-4491
 
 Permittivity
 Mullen Burst
 UV Resistant
 AOS % Retained
 
 ASTM D-4491
 ASTM D-3786
 ASTM D-4355
 ASTM D-4751
 
 ENGLISH
 250 Lbs.
 165 Lbs.
 70 Gal/ Min/Square
 Foot
 1.3 Sec.-1
 550 lbs. /Square Inch
 70 %
 100 %
 
 METRIC
 113 kg
 75 kg
 25 Liters/Min/Square
 Meter
 1.3 Sec.-1
 3.79 MPa
 70 %
 100 %
 
 * All properties are minimum average roll value.
 
 715.12-CONCRETE FOR MISCELLANEOUS USES:
 Concrete specified in this Section is intended for such uses a cast-in-place footers for rightof-way fence and footers for guardrail breakaway cable terminals and special trailing end
 terminals. The concrete may be mixed with or without air entrainment at the option of the
 Contractor. Batching and mixing may be by hand, by portable mixer, or by a commercial plant.
 At the time of placement, the concrete shall be of a workable consistency which can be
 consolidated satisfactorily by spading or vibrating. Indications of initial set in the concrete to such
 an extent as to adversely affect the workability of the concrete during placement shall be cause for
 rejection. The concrete shall be in accordance with one of the following:
 i.
 Concrete produced for other construction items under an approved mix design.
 ii.
 Concrete produced from premixed ingredients sold commercially in acceptable sacks,
 such as "Sacrete", or "Quickrete", "Handicrete” or approved equal. Premixed
 commercial preparations shall be mixed in accordance with the manufacturer's
 instructions.
 iii.
 Concrete produced from separate components proportioned by volume in the ratio of
 one part Portland cement to two parts sand to three parts coarse aggregate. Sand and
 coarse aggregate shall be visually inspected for deleterious substances, and such matter
 shall be removed prior to mixing.
 715.13-PREFORMED FABRIC PADS:
 Material shall conform to the requirements of the AASHTO Standard Specifications for
 Highway Bridges, Division II, Section 18.4.10.1.
 A certified copy of test reports showing compliance with the above requirements shall be
 furnished the Division's Shop Inspector, or to other representatives of the Division as may be
 designated, for each shipment.
 715.14-ELASTOMERIC BEARING PADS:
 Bearing pads shall meet the requirements of the AASHTO Standard Specifications for
 Highway Bridges, except for sampling frequency.
 715.14.1-Sampling Frequency for Elastomeric Bearing Pads: The sampling rate shall
 be one bearing pad per lot, per nominal dimensional size. (A change in nominal dimensional
 size is any change in the designed length, width or height of the bearing pad.)
 883
 
 715.15-ELASTOMERIC BEARING PADS FOR BRIDGE RAILING POSTS:
 Elastomeric bearing pads for bridge railing posts shall have a thickness of 1/8 inch (3 mm)
 unless modified by the project plans.
 The pads shall have a minimum tensile strength of 1,000 psi (7 MPa) when tested in
 accordance with ASTM D 412. The pads shall have a durometer hardness of 55 to 75 when tested
 in accordance with D2240.
 715.16-CLAY OR SHALE BRICK:
 Brick shall conform to the requirements of one of the following Specifications:
 Sewer Brick ............................... AASHTO M 91, Grade SM or MM
 Sewer Brick ..................................... ASTM C 32, Grade SM or MM
 Building Brick ..................................... AASHTO M 114, Grade SW
 Building Brick ............................................. ASTM C 62, Grade SW
 715.17-CONCRETE BRICK:
 Concrete brick shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C 55; the grade shall be as
 specified on the Plans.
 715.18-CONCRETE MASONRY UNITS:
 Hollow load-bearing concrete masonry units shall conform to the requirements of ASTM
 C 90. The type and grade shall be as shown on the Plans.
 Solid precast segmental concrete masonry units for construction of catch basins and
 manholes shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C 139.
 715.19-PRECAST CONCRETE UNITS FOR MANHOLES AND INLETS:
 Precast concrete units for manholes shall conform to the requirements in AASHTO M 199.
 In addition, air entrainment in the concrete shall be seven percent plus or minus two percent.
 Portland cement concrete for precast inlets shall be in accordance with the applicable
 portions of the "Materials", "Manufacture" and "Physical Requirements" sections of AASHTO M
 199, with the additional statement regarding compression tests to be included in the "Physical
 Requirements" section: "If no design strength is specified for precast concrete inlets, the minimum
 28-day compressive strength shall be considered to be the 3,200 psi (20 MPa) minimum cylinder
 strength."
 Also, for precast inlets, air entrainment in the concrete shall be seven percent plus or minus
 two percent. Surface finish for precast inlets is not required, except, if resultant exposed surfaces
 have unsightly voids, flaking or other surface defects present, those imperfections shall be repaired
 in accordance with the requirements of 601.11.1 for Class 1, Ordinary Surface Finish.
 715.20-PRECAST CONCRETE TRAFFIC DIVIDERS:
 715.20.1-Materials:
 715.20.1.1-Cement: The cement used shall conform to the requirements of 701.1 or
 701.3. It shall, in addition, be manufactured to conform to the whiteness of Atlas or
 Medusa brands of white Portland cement.
 715.20.1.2-Water: Water shall conform to the requirements of 715.7.
 
 884
 
 715.20.1.3-Aggregates: Fine aggregate shall be white silica sand conforming to the
 requirements of 702.1.1, 702.1.2, 702.1.4 and 702.1.5. Coarse aggregate shall be marble,
 3/4 in. (9.5 mm) nominal top size. Fine and coarse aggregates shall meet the soundness
 requirements in 715.20.1.4.
 715.20.1.4-Acceptance Tests: When tested in accordance with ASTM C 88 using
 sodium sulphate, the weighted average loss in five cycles shall not exceed five percent. If
 materials are blended to produce the aggregate, each component of the blend shall meet the
 soundness requirements specified above.
 A sample of concrete made with the materials proposed for use in the item, combined
 in the proportions specified in 715.20.2, shall be submitted to the Engineer for inspection
 and approval of color. The sample size shall not be less than a two-inch (50 mm) cube.
 Certified test reports from the manufacturer for all materials used in manufacturing the
 dividers shall be furnished.
 715.20.2-Proportioning: Concrete shall be proportioned to meet the following
 requirements:
 i. The sand-aggregate ratio shall be in the range of 30 to 45 percent.
 ii. The maximum allowable slump shall be 1 in. (25 mm).
 iii. The maximum water content shall be five gallons per sack (0.44 liters per kg) of
 cement.
 iv. The minimum cement factor shall be eight sacks per cubic yard (446 kg per cubic
 meter) of concrete.
 v. The amount of entrained air in the plastic concrete shall be seven plus or minus two
 percent.
 715.20.3-Placing and Curing: Concrete shall be placed in forms designed to conform to
 the lengths, shapes and other details of the traffic divider shown on the Plans. Curing shall be
 in accordance with the applicable requirements in 601.
 715.21-BLANK
 715.22-PRECAST CONCRETE MEDIAN BARRIERS (PERMANENT):
 715.22.1-Description: Precast median barriers shall conform to the shape and dimensions
 shown on the Plans and shall meet the following requirements:
 715.22.2-Materials: Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following
 Subsections of Division 700:
 
 885
 
 MATERIAL
 Air Entraining Admixture
 Cement
 Coarse Aggregate
 Expansion Joint Filler Preformed
 Fine Aggregate
 Joint Sealing Material
 Reinforcing Steel
 Water
 
 SUBSECTION
 707.1
 701.1
 703.1, 703.2, or 703.3
 708.1
 702,1
 708.3
 709.1 and 709.4
 715.7
 
 Sampling and testing of materials shall be in accordance with the minimum frequency
 stated in Table 2 of MP 711.03.30.
 715.22.3-Proportioning: Concrete shall be in proportion to meet the following
 requirements:
 i. The minimum cement factor shall be seven sacks (6.58 cwt) per cubic yard (390 kg
 per cubic meter) of concrete.
 ii. The maximum water content shall be five gallons per sack (0.94 cwt) (0.44 liters
 per kg) of cement.
 iii. The amount of entrained air in the plastic concrete shall be seven plus or minus two
 percentage points.
 iv. The consistency shall be such as to allow proper placement, consolidation, and
 finishing.
 715.22.4-Placing and Curing: Concrete shall be placed in forms designed to conform to
 the lengths, shapes and other details of the median barrier shown on the Plans. Curing shall be
 in accordance with the applicable requirements of 601.
 715.22.5-Finishing: The surface of the barrier shall be smooth and free from air bubble
 pockets, depressions, and honeycombs.
 When the barriers are removed from the forms, any surface imperfections present shall be
 repaired in accordance with the requirements of 601.11.1-Class I, Ordinary Surface Finish.
 715.23-GABIONS:
 Welded wire fabric gabions shall conform to ASTM A974 and non-welded (twisted) wire
 mesh gabions shall conform to ASTM A975. Additionally, the use of fastener rings in the
 assembly of the gabion baskets may be permitted by the Engineer, providing the rings have at least
 the same tensile strength, zinc coating, and size as the wire used in the body of the gabion.
 715.24-MATTING FOR EROSION CONTROL:
 715.24.1-General: Matting for erosion control shall be commercially designed and
 manufactured especially for the prevention of soil erosion.
 The matting used shall be recommended by the technical representative for a manufacturer
 and approved by the Engineer after an evaluation of the site conditions has been made. The
 manufacturer shall provide installation instructions and attest that the proposed matting is well
 suited to the particular site to be protected.
 
 886
 
 The matting shall be stabilized or manufactured in such a way that the physical integrity of
 the product is maintained throughout the intended life expectancy. The matting shall not effect
 the germination of seed nor inhibit plant growth. Temporary matting shall gradually
 deteriorate with no adverse environmental effects.
 715.24.2-Permanent Erosion Matting: The matting shall consist of a machine produced
 mat of 100% ultraviolet stabilized polymeric or other suitable fibers resistant to degradation
 and having uniform thickness and mass per unit area throughout. The matting shall conform
 to the following:
 Property
 
 1
 
 Minimum Mat
 Thickness
 Minimum (Wide
 Width) Tensile
 Strength
 Maximum Elongation
 Minimum Porosity
 (Calculated)
 Resiliency
 Ultraviolet Stability
 1
 
 Test Method
 
 Type A
 
 Type B
 
 Type C
 
 ASTM D1777
 
 0.35 in. (9 mm)
 
 0.50 in. (13 mm)
 
 0.50 in (13 mm)
 
 ASTM D4595
 
 145 x 110 lb/ft
 (2.16 x 1.6 kN/m)
 
 170 x 130 lb/ft
 (2.5 x 1.5 kN/m)
 
 3100 x 2000 lb/ft
 (45 x 29 kN/m)
 
 ASTM D4595
 
 50%
 
 50%
 
 50%
 
 95%
 
 95%
 
 95%
 
 80%
 80%
 
 80%
 80%
 
 80%
 80%
 
 ASTM D1777
 ASTM D4355
 
 Property values are reported as minimum average roll values (MARV)
 
 Tractive Force (Shear Stress) Performance Specification:
 Type A Matting shall have the ability to prevent soil loss where the maximum channel
 2
 2
 shear stress ranges from 0-4 lb/ft (0-20 kg/m ) in a vegetated state, @ 0.5 hours peak flow
 duration.
 Type B Matting shall have the ability to prevent soil loss where the maximum channel
 2
 2
 shear stress ranges from 0-6 lb/ft (0-29 kg/m ) in a vegetated state, @ 0.5 hours peak flow
 duration.
 Type C Matting shall have the ability to prevent soil loss where the maximum channel
 2
 2
 shear stress ranges from 0-8 lb/ft (0-39 kg/m ) in a vegetated state, @ .5 hours peak flow
 duration.
 715.24.3-Acceptance: Acceptance of temporary erosion control matting shall be based
 upon the manufacturer's written certification that the erosion control mat used is well suited to
 the particular site to be protected and upon the Division's visual inspection of the material.
 Acceptance of permanent erosion control matting shall be based upon certified test data with
 each shipment of matting. Compliance of this data with the requirements specified will be the
 basis of acceptance.
 715.25-GROUND AGRICULTURAL LIMESTONE:
 Ground agricultural limestone shall consist of high calcitic or dolomitic limestone
 containing not less than 85% of total calcium and magnesium carbonates, ground to such fineness
 887
 
 and clearly labeled in accordance with the requirements of the West Virginia Department of
 Agriculture. Ground agricultural limestone shall be furnished and used in accordance with State
 Laws. Suppliers must be registered with the West Virginia Department of Agriculture.
 715.26-FERTILIZERS:
 Commercial fertilizers shall be supplied separately or in mixtures containing the specified
 percentages of total nitrogen, available phosphoric acid, and water soluble potash. Fertilizer shall
 be furnished in standard containers with weight, name of plant nutrients and guaranteed
 percentages, clearly marked, all in accordance with governing State and Federal laws. Brands
 must be registered with the West Virginia State Department of Agriculture.
 715.26.1-Fertilizer for Seeding: Fertilizer for seeding shall consist of any type with a 12-1 ratio providing the minimum nutrient equivalent specified. Urea formaldehyde fertilizer
 shall contain a minimum of 38 percent slowly available nitrogen.
 Commercial fertilizer for seeding may be supplied in any of the following forms, subject
 to the approval of the Engineer.
 i. A dry, free flowing fertilizer that may be applied by ordinary agricultural spreaders.
 ii. A fertilizer which is water soluble or one which will permit complete suspension of
 insoluble particles in water, applicable to hydraulic methods of application.
 715.26.2-Fertilizer for Landscape Planting: The fertilizer shall be a co-granulated
 magnesium ammonium phosphate and magnesium potassium phosphate, controlled release,
 inorganic fertilizer compound (coarse grade). It shall have a guaranteed minimum analysis of:
 Percent
 Nitrogen ....................................................................................................7
 Maximum water soluble ammoniacal nitrogen.........................................2
 Minimum water insoluble ammoniacal nitrogen ......................................5
 Phosphoric acid (available P2O5) ............................................................40
 Potash(K2O) ..............................................................................................6
 715.27-MULCH MATERIAL:
 715.27.1-Mulch Material for Seeding:
 715.27.1.1-Straw Mulch: Straw mulch for seeding shall include baled wheat or oats
 straw, or baled grass hay. Alfalfa, clover and salt grass hay are not acceptable. Straw
 mulch shall be dry and reasonably free from weeds, sticks, or other foreign material.
 Acceptance shall be based on the Division's visual inspection of the material.
 715.27.1.2-Wood Cellulose Mulch: Mulch for use with the hydraulic application of
 grass seed shall consist of wood cellulose fiber. It shall contain no growth or germination
 inhibiting factors and shall be dyed green. When the material is agitated in slurry tanks
 with fertilizers, grass seed, water and other approved additives, the fibers shall become
 uniformly suspended to form a homogeneous slurry. The hydraulically sprayed slurry shall
 form a blotter-like ground cover impregnated with grass seed. The ground cover shall
 permit the absorption of water and allow rainfall or mechanically applied water to percolate
 to the underlying soil.
 
 888
 
 The wood cellulose fiber mulch shall conform to the following requirements:
 Length of fibers
 Thickness of Fibers
 Net Dry Weight Content*
 pH*
 Water Holding Capability*
 
 10 mm. maximum
 1 mm. maximum
 Minimum stated on bag
 4.0-8.5
 90% Minimum
 
 * Test Procedure-MP 715.27.20
 
 The mulch shall be delivered in packages not to exceed 100 lbs. (45 kg). The package
 shall bear the name of the manufacturer, the net weight and a supplemental statement of
 the net dry weight.
 The material must be approved prior to being used. Acceptance will be based on
 sampling and testing by the Division for conformance to specifications.
 715.27.1.3-Chemical Mulch Binder: A chemical mulch binder shall consist of a
 polymer synthetic resin, polypectate, or other material which can readily be removed and
 will give similar adhesive properties as asphalt when sprayed on straw or other fiber
 mulches.
 715.27.2-Mulch Materials for Landscape Plantings: Acceptable materials for mulching
 shall be shredded bark, buckwheat hulls, wood chips or other organic materials approved by
 the Engineer.
 Certain inorganic materials such as calcined clay, crushed rock or coarse gravel will be
 acceptable when designated on the Plans.
 715.28-SEED:
 The varieties of grass and legume seeds to be furnished to the project shall bear a tag on
 each bag of each species showing the lot number, the seedman's name, the percent of purity, the
 percent of germination and the weed seed content, in accordance with governing State and Federal
 laws.
 All seeds shall be free from noxious weed seeds as set forth in the West Virginia State seed
 law and in no event shall the total weed content of any lot of seed or seed mixture exceed one-half
 percent by weight. The minimum percent purity and germination for the various seeds shall be as
 shown in Table 715.28.
 
 Seed
 Crown Vetch
 Kentucky Bluegrass
 Kentucky 31 Fescue
 Marion Bluegrass
 Perennial Ryegrass
 Red Fescue
 White Dutch Clover
 
 Germination
 Purity
 Total
 Minimum Quick
 Minimum % Minimum (%)
 Sprouts (%)
 99
 85
 98
 90
 95
 98
 98
 
 *70
 75
 85
 75
 85
 85
 *85
 
 889
 
 35
 
 55
 
 Crown vetch seed shall be inoculated according to the supplier's recommendations.
 However, when seeding with the hydroseeder the inoculant shall be increased to five times the
 recommended rate.
 If test results indicate noncompliance with the above germination or purity requirements,
 or both, additional seed may be added to give the equivalent germination or purity, or both.
 The Division reserves the right to test, reject or approve all seed after delivery on the
 project.
 715.29-INOCULATING BACTERIA:
 This material shall be used to treat all leguminous seed and shall be a pure culture of
 nitrogen fixing bacteria selected for maximum vitality and ability to transform nitrogen from the
 air into soluble nitrates and deposit them in the soil. It shall not be more than one year old.
 715.30 through 715.32-BLANK
 715.33-VINES AND GROUND COVER PLANTS:
 This material shall have a healthy, well-formed root system, free from disease. All
 transported stock is subject to inspection by the State Agriculture Department for insect or plant
 pests, and subject to rejection if found lacking in any of the above requirements. All plants shall
 be nursery grown, two years or older, and of the quality and size designated on the Plans, subject
 to approval both at the nursery and on the planting site. All vines and ground cover plants shall
 meet the requirements of U.S.A. Standard for Nursery Stock, AAN. The 1969 edition shall govern
 unless a more recent issue is in effect at the time of advertisement of bids.
 For vines and ground cover plants, a listing by standard names in effect on any date is on
 file with the Division and is available on request.
 715.34-SEEDLING PLANTS:
 This material shall have a healthy, well-formed root system, free from disease. All
 transported stock is subject to inspection by the State Agriculture Department for insect or plant
 pests, and subject to rejection if found lacking in any of the above requirements.
 All plants shall be nursery grown, two years or older, and of the quality and size designated
 on the Plans, subject to approval both at the nursery and on the planning site. All seedling plants
 shall meet the requirements of U.S.A. Standard for Nursery Stock, AAN. The 1969 edition shall
 govern unless a more recent issue is in effect at the time of advertisement of bids.
 For seedling plants, a listing of standard names in effect on any date is on file with the
 Division and is available on request.
 715.35-TREES AND SHRUBS:
 Plants shall be healthy with well-developed root systems and top growth for the species
 and shall be free of injury from disease, insects or other causes. All plants shall be true to type
 and name in accordance with "Standardized Plant Names" where applicable. Plants shall conform
 to the requirements of U.S.A. Standard for Nursery Stock, AAN. The 1969 edition shall govern
 unless a more recent issue is in effect at the time of advertisement of bids.
 Collected plants shall be native or naturalized trees or shrubs growing in soils favorable for
 digging. The soil shall be of such character as to be readily retained on the roots of transplanted
 trees and shrubs.
 
 890
 
 The minimum root spread of bare-root collected plants shall be at least one third greater
 than that for nursery grown bare-root plants. Nursery grown stock, balled and burlapped for
 shipment, shall have ball sizes conforming to an AAN Standards. In the case of collected plants,
 ball sizes shall be at least 10 percent greater in diameter than those specified for nursery grown
 stock and shall be of sufficient depth to include the greater portion of the root system.
 For ornamental flowering trees, deciduous and evergreen trees, and deciduous and
 evergreen shrubs, a listing by standard names in effect on any date is on file with the Division and
 is available on request.
 Wherever balled and burlapped material is mentioned in these Specifications, the
 Contractor may with the approval of the Engineer, substitute container stock for balled and
 burlapped stock of small trees and shrubs. The container grown plants shall conform to the AAN
 Standards.
 Plantable type pots can be used in lieu of burlapping balled plants; however, a firm ball
 must be placed in the pot, and the hole dug with the same care and to the same size as for balled
 and burlapped plants. Plants with balls which have been manufactured on bare-root dug material
 or bare-root material that has only recently been potted will be rejected. These improperly potted
 plants will not be considered equal to balled and burlapped or container grown plants.
 715.36-ASPHALTUM BASE PAINT FOR TREE SURGERY:
 Paint for tree wounds shall be antiseptic and waterproof, black in color and with an
 asphaltic base. It shall contain no coal-tar creosote, oils, kerosene, turpentine or other material
 harmful to the living tissue of trees.
 715.37-MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS FOR LANDSCAPE PLANTINGS:
 715.37.1-Tree Stakes: Stakes used for guying or supporting newly planted trees shall be
 made from rough sawed oak, or other approved material, free from unsound or loose knots that
 impair its strength. The stakes shall be two inch (50 mm) by two inch (50 mm) square and of
 a length in proportion to the height of the tree. The following lengths for stakes shall be used
 as a guide:
 Approximate Tree Height Feet (m)
 3 to 6 (1 to 2)
 6 to 9 (2 to 3)
 9 to 14 (3 to 5)
 
 Stake Length Feet (m)
 5 (1.5)
 6 (2.0)
 7 (2.5)
 
 Larger size trees shall be guyed or supported by stakes as shown on the Plans.
 715.37.2-Wire: The wire used for guying and staking plants shall be galvanized steel wire,
 free from bends and kinks. Trees less than 3 inches (75 mm) in diameter shall be guyed with
 No. 14 gage (1.9 mm) wire, and trees 3 inches (75 mm) and larger shall be guyed with No. 12
 gage (2.7 mm) wire.
 715.37.3-Hose: The hose used for staking and guying plants shall be new 3/8 to 5/8 in.
 (10 to 16 mm) nominal I.D. rubber garden hose or equal. The walls of the hose shall be of
 sufficient thickness to prevent wire damage to the plans.
 
 891
 
 715.37.4-Twine: The material used for tying wrapped tree trunks shall be binder twine
 not less than two-ply strength.
 715.37.5-Tree Wrap: The material shall be four-inch (100 mm) wide waterproof sisal
 paper manufactured especially for wrapping trunks of tress.
 715.37.6-Anti-Desiccant: Anti-desiccant shall be an emulsion which provides a protective
 film over plant surfaces, permeable enough to permit transpiration. It shall be delivered in the
 manufacturer's containers and shall be mixed according to the manufacturer's directions.
 715.38-REINFORCED PLASTIC OR REINFORCED CORROSION-RESISTANT
 RUBBER MANHOLE STEPS:
 715.38.1-General: Steps shall be composed of a steel reinforcing bar encased in plastic or
 rubber, pressure-molded to the steel; steps shall have a minimum cross-sectional dimension of
 1 in. (25 mm). Reinforcing shall be continuous through the entire length of the legs and tread.
 Steps shall have a depressed tread or a ½ inch (12 mm) minimum height cleat at tread ends,
 and a top surface configuration such that it will prevent or minimize slippage during ascent or
 decent.
 715.38.2-Steel Reinforcing: Steel shall be a deformed reinforcing bar; either No. 3, Grade
 60, or No. 4, Grade 40 or 60 (Metric No. 10, Grade 300 or Grade 400); meeting the requirement
 of AASHTO M 31.
 715.38.3-Plastic: Plastic shall be a grade of propylene copolymer which meets the
 requirements of ASTM D4101.
 715.38.4-Corrosion-Resistant Rubber: The rubber compound shall meet the physical
 requirements of ASTM C443 except the durometer, Shore A, hardness shall be 70 plus or
 minus five.
 715.38.5-Acceptance: Steps which have been evaluated by the Division and appear on the
 Division's list of approved sources will be accepted. If the Contractor proposes to use a step
 not previously approved, a complete step and certified test data conforming to the above stated
 requirements shall be submitted for evaluation.
 715.39-ELASTOMERIC GASKET AND SEALING MATERIAL:
 These Specifications cover those elastomeric materials intended for use as, but not
 restricted to, such noncritical applications as gaskets, sealing materials, miscellaneous drainage
 items, etc. The elastomeric material shall meet the following requirements:
 
 892
 
 Tensile Strength, minimum psi (MPa), ASTM D 412 ................. 1,200 (8.3)
 Elongation at Break, minimum percent, ASTM D 412 ...........................350
 Shore Durometer Hardness, ASTM D 2440
 Minimum ........................................................................................35
 Maximum .......................................................................................65
 Compression Set, max percent, ASTM D 395,
 Method B........................................................................................25
 Accelerated Aging, ASTM D 573 (96 hr. at 70EC):
 Decreased Tensile Strength, maximum percent .............................15
 Decreased Elongation, maximum percent......................................20
 Water Absorption by Weight, maximum percent, ASTM D 471 ..............10
 715.40-PAVEMENT MARKING MATERIAL:
 This material includes all pavement marking material exclusive of White or Yellow FastDry Traffic Zone Paint (Types II or IX).
 Certification from the manufacturer that the material supplied meets the applicable
 requirements of these Specifications is required. The certification shall include the name and
 address of the manufacturer, the trademark or trade name, kind of material, reference to the
 Division's Standard Specification (Subsection Number), quantities, lot number and date of
 manufacture.
 The supplier shall have equipment and qualified personnel to conduct all of the tests that
 are required by these specifications.
 715.40.1-BLANK
 715.40.2-Preformed Intersection Traffic Markings (Type V Material): The markings
 described are preformed, retroreflective pavement markings conforming in color, size and
 shape to the WVDOH Standard Details Book, Vol. II, and to the Federal Highway
 Administration (FHWA) Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD)
 Preformed thermoplastic traffic markings shall be fabricated to a uniform thickness of not
 less than 125 mils, including retroreflective beads. Preformed pavement marking tapes, applied
 as Type V material, shall be fabricated such that no portion of the material profile is less than
 60 mils, including adhesive and retroreflective beads.
 As a minimum, preformed thermoplastic traffic markings shall be capable of being applied
 to clean road surfaces at minimum road surface and ambient air temperatures of 35 degrees
 Fahrenheit (2 degrees Celsius), with a surface primer if necessary, providing moisture has been
 sufficiently removed from the application surface.
 As a minimum, preformed pavement marking tapes applied as Type V material shall be
 capable of being applied to clean road surfaces, with a surface primer if necessary, when the
 following conditions are met:
 1. Road surface is dry
 2. Ambient air temperature 60 degrees Fahrenheit (16 degrees Celsius) and rising
 3. Road surface temperature 70 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Celsius) and rising
 4. No rainfall 24 hours prior to application
 5. Minimum air temperature overnight prior to application 40 degrees Fahrenheit (4
 degrees Celsius)
 
 893
 
 715.40.2.1-Enhanced Skid Resistant Preformed Thermoplastic Traffic Markings:
 Specific markings, as identified on the Plans or otherwise on the applicable sheets in the
 WVDOH Standard Details Book, Vol. II, shall be applied only with preformed
 thermoplastic markings with enhanced skid resistant properties. The enhanced skid
 resistance of this material shall be achieved by utilizing surface applied abrasives with a
 minimum hardness of 7 (Mohs scale). The material, after application, shall have a
 minimum skid resistant value of 60 BPN when tested in accordance with ASTM
 specification E303, and shall not fall below this value for the warranty period specified in
 715.40.2.2.
 715.40.2.2-Adherence, Retroreflectivity, Color, Road Presence, and Skid
 Resistance Warranty Requirements: Section 663 requires the Contractor to correct any
 markings not meeting the warranty requirements specified herein up to the finalization date
 of the contract, if the cause of non-conformance with the performance requirements herein
 is due to either improper application or material defect(s), and requires the Contractor to
 correct any markings not meeting the warranty requirements specified herein for the
 balance of the one (1) year period from the date of installation when the failure is
 determined by the WVDOH to be caused by improper application. Warranty of the
 performance of the material for the balance of the warranty periods specified herein shall
 be provided directly to the WVDOH by the material manufacturer, and shall apply only to
 non-conformance with the performance requirements herein determined by the WVDOH
 to be caused by material defects.
 Transverse markings shall be warranted to adhere to both asphalt and concrete,
 maintain road presence, and meet the retroreflectivity and color requirements described
 herein, for a minimum of three (3) years when applied according to the Manufacturer's
 recommendations. Transverse markings shall include stop bars, yield triangle markings,
 legend, symbols such as lane assignment arrows and lane drop arrows, railroad crossing
 markings, crosswalk markings, stripes inside lane shunts and gore areas, and other similar
 markings. When Enhanced Skid Resistant Preformed Thermoplastic material is specified,
 the marking shall meet the skid resistance requirement specified in 715.40.2.1 for the three
 year warranty period.
 Longitudinal lines shall be warranted to adhere to both asphalt and concrete, maintain
 road presence, and to meet the retroreflectivity and color requirements described herein,
 for a minimum of four (4) years when applied according to the Manufacturer's
 recommendations. Longitudinal lines shall include lane lines, channelizing lines, edge
 lines, center lines, and other similar markings. When Enhanced Skid Resistant Preformed
 Thermoplastic material is specified, the marking shall meet the skid resistance requirement
 specified in 715.40.2.1 for the four year warranty period.
 RETROREFLECTIVITY: Both white and yellow markings shall be warranted to
 maintain a minimum retroreflectivity level of 150 millicandelas, with beads applied, for
 the applicable warranty period described above.
 All retroreflectivity measurements will be taken with a LTL-X or other Traffic
 Engineering Division approved 30-meter geometry retroreflectometer. A 5% tolerance
 with the stated minimum required retroreflectivity value shall be allowed when tested with
 a hand held retroreflectometer. Average retroreflectivity values shall be determined by
 following an adequate sampling plan to be determined by the Division.
 894
 
 Generally, conformance of markings with the retroreflectivity requirement shall be
 based on a well dispersed sampling, to be determined by the Division, of the
 retroreflectivity over the whole marking. Retroreflectivity sampling may be concentrated
 on a specific area of the marking that appears to be in non-compliance with the Road
 Presence requirement for the purpose of determining non-compliance with quantitative
 data.
 COLOR: Each color installed shall be warranted to fall within the boundaries created
 by the following CIE Chromaticity Coordinate Limits, with beads applied, for the
 applicable warranty period described above:
 COLOR
 White
 Yellow
 
 CIE CHROMATICITY COORDINATE LIMITS
 1
 2
 3
 4
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 0.480 0.410 0.430 0.380 0.405 0.405 0.455 0.435
 0.575 0.425 0.508 0.415 0.473 0.453 0.510 0.490
 
 The colormeter used shall be a LTL-Y, or other hand-held colormeter device approved
 by the Division. Average color coordinate values shall be determined by following an
 adequate sampling plan to be determined by the Division.
 Generally, conformance of markings with the color requirements shall be based on a
 well dispersed sampling, to be determined by the Division, of the color values over the
 whole marking. Color sampling may be concentrated on a specific area of the marking that
 appears to be in non-compliance with the Road Presence requirement for the purpose of
 determining non-compliance with quantitative data.
 ADHERENCE AND ROAD PRESENCE: Both white and yellow markings shall be
 warranted to maintain adherence and road presence for the applicable warranty period
 described above.
 The Adherence and Road Presence requirement shall apply to materials worn
 uniformly, from the surface down, by normal traffic and snow-plowing. In addition, these
 requirements shall apply to materials at intersections subject to turning movements by
 normal traffic. However, these requirements shall not apply in cases of damage attributable
 to snow-plowing such as chiseling, cutting, chipping, or in cases of material removal from
 the roadway (other than removal from the surface down due to normal wearing as described
 above) when it can be shown that the material removal is due to snow-plowing rather than
 material adhesion failure. Loss due to pavement failure, unless caused by the marking
 material, will not be considered as a material failure.
 715.40.2.3-Approved Products Listing: Material approvals are based on results from
 AASHTO’s NTPEP testing program and/or WVDOH field evaluation tests. Approvals
 may also be granted or rescinded based on actual performance on WVDOH projects. A list
 of approved materials, code numbers, and approved Contractor personnel may be obtained
 by contacting:
 Materials Control, Soils, & Testing Division
 190 Dry Branch Drive
 Charleston, West Virginia 25306
 895
 
 715.40.3-Interim Pavement Markings (Type VIIA Interim Pavement Marking Tape)
 715.40.3.1-Interim Pavement Markings (Type VIIA): This specification describes
 an interim pavement marking tape, to be placed immediately after paving operations are
 completed, and prior to the opening of the roadway to traffic, as described in Section
 401.11. The material shall be designed to be inlaid and used in place of centerlines and lane
 lines until temporary edge lines, centerlines, and lane lines are placed as described in
 Section 636.8, within the time period specified in Section 401.11.
 715.40.3.1.1-Requirements-Any material not meeting the following requirements
 shall not be placed by the Contractor. If placed, the material shall be removed and replaced
 by the Contractor:
 i. Composition: This material shall consist of a white or yellow weather and traffic
 resistant reflective film on a conformable backing precoated with a pressure
 sensitive adhesive.
 ii. Color: The marking material shall be white or yellow color, as specified, and shall
 fall within the boundaries created by the following CIE Chromaticity Coordinate
 Limits until temporary markings are placed:
 COLOR
 White
 Yellow
 
 CIE CHROMATICITY COORDINATE LIMITS
 1
 2
 3
 4
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 0.480 0.410 0.430 0.380 0.405 0.405 0.455 0.435
 0.575 0.425 0.508 0.415 0.473 0.453 0.510 0.490
 
 The Colormeter used shall be a LTL-Y, or other hand-held colormeter device
 approved by the Division. Average color coordinate values shall be determined by
 following an adequate sampling plan to be determined by the Division.
 iii. Retroreflection: The marking material shall be visibly retroreflective, under both
 dry conditions and conditions of moderate rainfall, when inlaid on bituminous
 concrete surfaces. The markings shall be readily visible, through the interim period
 prior to the placement of temporary markings, when viewed with automobile
 headlights at night.
 iv. Adhesive: The marking material shall have a precoated pressure sensitive adhesive
 and require no activation (primer). If necessary, the adhesive shall be protected prior
 to application with a removable liner to prevent contamination during processing,
 cutting, and handling. The liner shall release from the adhesive easily, without
 splitting or tearing, and shall not shrink or prematurely release from adhesive during
 processing, storage, or handling.
 v. Storage Life: The material shall not be used after being stored beyond the
 manufacturer’s recommended storage life. The material shall have a minimum
 storage life of one (1) year.
 vi. General: The pavement marking material as supplied shall be of good appearance,
 and free from cracks. Edges shall be true, straight, and unbroken.
 vii. Approved Suppliers: The material must perform successfully in the Division’s
 field evaluation test. The Division reserves the right to remove products from the
 
 896
 
 approved list based on actual field performance. A list of approved suppliers and
 their code numbers may be obtained by contacting:
 West Virginia Division of Highways
 Material Controls, Soil and Testing Division
 190 Dry Branch Drive
 Charleston, WV 25306
 715.40.4-Temporary Pavement Marking Tape (Types VIIB and VIIC)
 715.40.4.1-BLANK
 715.40.4.2-Temporary Pavement Markings (Type VIIB): This specification
 describes a removable pavement marking consisting of a film designed to be used as
 temporary lines. The temporary pavement markings shall be white or yellow as denoted on
 the Plans or required by the MUTCD.
 715.40.4.2.1-Requirements: Any material not meeting the following requirements
 shall not be placed by the Contractor. If placed, the material shall be removed and replaced
 by the Contractor:
 i.
 Composition: The removable preformed plastic pavement marking film shall
 consist of a mixture of polymeric materials, pigments, nonmetallic reinforcing
 medium to facilitate removal, and reflective beads or elements.
 ii.
 Color: Color pigments shall be thoroughly blended to provide a plastic marking
 film that maintains uniform color under both daylight and night lighting conditions
 throughout the expected life of the film. Each color installed shall fall within the
 boundaries created by the following CIE Chromaticity Coordinate Limits, with
 beads applied, while in place for any time period from April 1st to November 1st:
 COLOR
 White
 Yellow
 
 CIE CHROMATICITY COORDINATE LIMITS
 1
 2
 3
 4
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 0.480 0.410 0.430 0.380 0.405 0.405 0.455 0.435
 0.575 0.425 0.508 0.415 0.473 0.453 0.510 0.490
 
 The Colormeter used shall be a LTL-Y, or other hand-held colormeter device
 approved by the Division. Average color coordinate values shall be determined by
 following an adequate sampling plan to be determined by the Division.
 i.
 
 Application Requirements: As a minimum, Type VIIB materials shall be capable
 of being applied to clean road surfaces, with a surface primer if necessary, when
 the following conditions are met:
 1. Road surface is dry
 2. Ambient air temperature 50 degrees Fahrenheit and rising
 3. Road surface temperature 50 degrees Fahrenheit and rising
 4. No rainfall 24 hours prior to application
 5. Minimum air temperature overnight prior to application 40 degrees
 Fahrenheit
 
 897
 
 ii.
 
 iii.
 iv.
 v.
 vi.
 
 vii.
 
 viii.
 ix.
 
 Adhesive: The removable preformed plastic pavement marking film shall be precoated with a pressure sensitive adhesive capable of being affixed to bituminous
 concrete and Portland cement concrete pavement surfaces without the use of heat.
 An additional adhesive primer or activator is allowable and may be required under
 certain weather conditions, per the manufacturer’s recommendations. The adhesive
 shall exhibit excellent shear characteristics and minimal tensile characteristics. The
 adhesive shall not require a protective liner when the preformed plastic pavement
 marking film is in rolled form for shipment.
 Storage Life: The material shall not be used after being stored beyond the
 manufacturer’s recommended storage life. The material shall have a minimum
 storage life of one (1) year.
 Thickness: The removable plastic marking film shall be manufactured such that no
 portion of the material profile is less than 30 mils, including adhesive and
 retroreflective beads.
 Skid Resistance: The surface for the retroreflective preformed plastic pavement
 marking film shall provide a minimum skid resistance value of 50 BPN when tested
 in accordance with ASTM E 303.
 Removability: While in place for any time period from April 1st to November 1st,
 the preformed plastic pavement marking film shall be removable from bituminous
 concrete and Portland cement concrete in its entirety, either manually or by a
 mechanical roll-up device, at temperatures above 40 degrees Fahrenheit (ambient
 and road surface temperature), and without the use of heat, solvents, grinding, or
 blasting.
 Retroreflectvity: The markings shall be capable of maintaining a minimum average
 retroreflective performance level of 150/ mcd/m2/lx, while in place for any time
 period from April 1st to November 1st, when installed according to the
 manufacturer’s recommendations. All retroreflectivity measurements will be taken
 with a LTL 2000, or other Traffic Engineering Division approved 30-meter
 geometry retroreflectometer. Average retroreflectance values shall be determined
 by following an adequate sampling plan to be determined by the Division.
 General: The pavement marking material as supplied shall be of good appearance,
 and free from cracks. Edges shall be true, straight, and unbroken.
 Approved Products Listing (APL): Approvals are based on results from
 AASHTO’s NTPEP testing program and/or WVDOH field evaluation tests.
 Approvals may also be granted or rescinded based on actual performance on
 WVDOH projects. A list of approved suppliers and their code numbers may be
 obtained by contacting:
 West Virginia Division of Highways
 Material Controls, Soil and Testing Division
 190 Dry Branch Drive
 Charleston, WV 25306
 
 715.40.4.3-Temporary Pavement Markings (Type VIIC): This specification
 describes a removable pavement marking consisting of a film designed to be used for
 temporary lines. The temporary marking retroreflective performance level shall not be
 
 898
 
 affected in a “wet” condition, as defined in this specification. The temporary markings shall
 be white or yellow as denoted on the plans or required by the MUTCD.
 715.40.4.3.1-Requirements: Any material not meeting the following requirements
 shall not be placed by the Contractor. If placed, the material shall be removed and replaced
 by the Contractor:
 i.
 Composition: The removable preformed plastic pavement marking film shall
 consist of a mixture of polymeric materials, pigments, nonmetallic reinforcing
 medium to facilitate removal, a thin, flexible, conformable backing, and reflective
 beads or elements.
 ii.
 Color: Each color installed shall fall within the boundaries created by the following
 CIE Chromaticity Coordinate Limits, with beads applied, while in place for any
 time period from April 1st to November 1st:
 CIE CHROMATICITY COORDINATE LIMITS
 COLOR
 1
 2
 3
 4
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 X
 Y
 White 0.480 0.410 0.430 0.380 0.405 0.405 0.455 0.435
 Yellow 0.575 0.425 0.508 0.415 0.473 0.453 0.510 0.490
 
 iii.
 
 iv.
 
 v.
 vi.
 
 The Colormeter used shall be a LTL-Y, or other hand-held colormeter device
 approved by the Division. Average color coordinate values shall be determined by
 following an adequate sampling plan to be determined by the Division.
 Application Requirements: As a minimum, Type VIIC materials shall be capable
 of being applied to clean road surfaces, with a surface primer if necessary, when
 the following conditions are met:
 1. Road surface is dry
 2. Ambient air temperature 50 degrees Fahrenheit and rising
 3. Road surface temperature 50 degrees Fahrenheit and rising
 4. No rainfall 24 hours prior to application
 5. Minimum air temperature overnight prior to application 40 degrees
 Fahrenheit
 Adhesive: The removable preformed plastic pavement marking film shall be precoated with a pressure sensitive adhesive capable of being affixed to bituminous
 concrete and Portland cement concrete pavement surfaces without the use of heat.
 An additional adhesive primer or activator is allowable and may be required under
 certain weather conditions, per the manufacturer’s recommendations. The adhesive
 shall exhibit excellent shear characteristics and minimal tensile characteristics. The
 adhesive shall not require a protective liner when the preformed plastic pavement
 marking film is in rolled form for shipment.
 Storage Life: The material shall not be used after being stored beyond the
 manufacturer’s recommended storage life. The material shall have a minimum
 storage life of one (1) year.
 Thickness: The removable plastic marking film shall be manufactured such that no
 portion of the material profile is less than 30 mils, including adhesive and
 retroreflective beads.
 899
 
 vii.
 viii.
 
 ix.
 
 x.
 
 xi.
 xii.
 
 Skid Resistance: The surface of the marking shall provide a minimum skid
 resistance value of 50 BPN when tested in accordance with ASTM E 303.
 Removability: While in place for any time period from April 1st to November 1st,
 the preformed plastic pavement marking film shall be removable from bituminous
 concrete and Portland cement concrete in its entirety, either manually or by a
 mechanical roll-up device, at temperatures above 40 degrees Fahrenheit (ambient
 and road surface temperature), and without the use of heat, solvents, grinding, or
 blasting.
 Wet Reflective Performance: The visual performance of the marking in wet and dry
 conditions shall be nearly identical. For visual evaluation purposes, the marking
 material shall be considered to be in a “wet” condition when a layer of water
 completely covers the top surface of the material. The layer of water shall measure
 a minimum of ¼ inch from the highest profile point of the material to the top surface
 of the water layer.
 Retroreflectivity: The markings shall be capable of maintaining a minimum average
 retroreflective performance level of 200/ mcd/m2/lx, while in place for any time
 period from April 1st to November 1st, in both dry and wet conditions when installed
 according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Retroreflectance shall be
 measured in accordance with ASTM specifications E 2176 and/or E 2177 to
 determine the markings retroreflectivity in wet conditions.
 Average
 retroreflectance values shall be determined by following an adequate sampling plan
 to be determined by the Division. All retroreflectivity measurements will be taken
 with a LTL 2000 (dry condition), LTL-X (wet conditions), or other Traffic
 Engineering Division approved 30-meter geometry retroreflectometer.
 General: The pavement marking material as supplied shall be of good appearance,
 and free from cracks. Edges shall be true, straight, and unbroken.
 Approved Products Listing (APL): Approvals are based on results from
 AASHTO’s NTPEP testing program and/or WVDOH field evaluation tests.
 Approvals may also be granted or rescinded based on actual performance on
 WVDOH projects. A list of approved suppliers and their code numbers may be
 obtained by contacting:
 West Virginia Division of Highways
 Material Controls, Soil and Testing Division
 190 Dry Branch Drive
 Charleston, WV 25306
 
 715.40.5-BLANK
 715.40.6-Raised Pavement Markers (RPM’s): RPM’s include Type P-2 markers, Type
 R-4 markers, and Temporary markers.
 715.40.6.1-Type P-2 Markers: This specification covers Type P-2 markers, a type of
 plowable, retroreflective, RPM for lane marking and delineation.
 All references to ASTM specification D 4383 herein shall be taken as referencing the
 D 4383 – 05 version of this specification.
 
 900
 
 715.40.6.1.1-Casting Requirements: The metal castings of Type P-2 markers shall
 meet the following requirements:
 a. When tested in accordance with the methods and procedures specified in ASTM
 D4383, the castings shall meet the Compressive Strength performance
 requirements of ASTM D4383.
 b. When tested in accordance with the methods and procedures specified in ASTM
 D4383, the “ramps” of the castings shall meet the Hardness performance
 requirements of ASTM D4383.
 c. The installed height of the casting shall not exceed 0.25 in. (6.4 mm) above the road
 surface.
 d. The casting shall be manufactured of material specified in ASTM D4383, and shall
 be hardened to the level specified in ASTM D4383. The castings shall be capable
 of demonstrating that this hardness level has been achieved when tested in
 accordance with the methods and procedures specified in ASTM D4383.
 e. The plow blade deflecting ramps of the casting shall be angled not more than six
 (6) degrees to the surface of the road.
 f. The ramps of the castings shall be designed such that there shall be no vertical
 surfaces above the road level that can be contacted by the plow blade moving in the
 normal travel direction.
 g. In new condition, the surfaces of the casting shall be free of scale, dirt, rust, oil,
 grease, or any other contaminant which may reduce its bond to the adhesive with
 which the casting is installed or with which the lens is mounted.
 h. The casting shall be designed to be partially recessed below the pavement surface
 to withstand plow impact. It shall have means for indexing the pavement surface,
 such as tabs.
 i. Castings with center rails shall not be allowed.
 j. Castings shall have fully completed testing on the American Association of State
 and Highway Transportation Officials -National Transportation Product Evaluation
 Program (AASHTO-NTPEP) test deck in a location having a similar climate to
 West Virginia. Upon review, the performance of the castings on the test deck shall
 meet or exceed the historical performance of other industry standard castings
 approved by the WVDOH. This determination shall be made solely by the
 WVDOH.
 k. Castings shall have been tested by an independent testing facility to the applicable
 ASTM D4383 specification requirements referenced herein. The castings shall
 have been sampled as specified in ASTM D4383 and shall meet the applicable
 specification requirements, as demonstrated by test results certified and made
 available by the testing facility. The applicable ASTM D4383 specification
 requirements referenced herein shall be considered to be parts a), b), and d) of this
 Section.
 
 901
 
 715.40.6.1.2-Lens Requirements: The retroreflective lenses of Type P-2 markers shall
 meet the following requirements:
 a. The coefficient of luminous intensity (RI) of the lenses in new condition shall be
 not less than the values specified in ASTM D4383 when measured in accordance
 with the procedures and methods specified in ASTM D4383. Coefficient of
 luminous intensity shall be defined as the ratio of the luminous intensity (I) of the
 retroreflector in the direction of observation to the illuminance (E) at the
 retroreflector on a plane perpendicular to the direction of the incident light,
 expressed in candelas per lux (cd/lx).
 b. After abrading the lenses in accordance with the procedures and methods specified
 in ASTM D4383, the coefficient of luminous intensity of the lenses at zero (0)
 degrees entrance angle shall be not less than the values specified in ASTM D4383
 when measured in accordance with the procedures and methods specified in ASTM
 D4383. This requirement shall not apply to red faces of lenses.
 c. When illuminated in accordance with ASTM D4383, the color of the lenses shall
 meet the color requirements of ASTM D4383 when measured in accordance with
 the procedures and methods specified in ASTM D4383.
 d. When impacted in accordance with the methods and procedures specified in ASTM
 D4383, the lenses shall meet the Lens Impact Strength performance requirements
 of ASTM D4383.
 e. When subjected to temperature cycling in accordance with the methods and
 procedures specified in ASTM D4383, the lenses shall meet the Temperature
 Cycling performance requirements of ASTM D4383.
 f. The lens shall be comprised of materials with adequate chemical, water, and UV
 resistance for the intended use.
 g. The lens width shall be approximately four (4) in. (102 mm).
 h. The angle between the face of the lens and the base shall be no greater than fortyfive (45) degrees.
 i. The base of the marker shall be flat within 0.05 in. (1.3 mm). If the bottom of the
 marker is configurated, the outermost faces of the configurations shall not deviate
 more than 0.05 in. (1.3 mm) from a flat surface.
 j. The lens shell, or body, shall be a solid polymer with no fill material. The
 retroreflective face(s) of the lens shall not be required to be integral with the shell.
 k. The retroreflective face(s) of the lens shall be subdivided into multiple “cells”
 which shall allow undamaged cells to continue to perform unaffected when one or
 more cells are damaged.
 l. The retroreflective technologies incorporated into the retroreflective face(s) of the
 lens shall be designed such that the lens will provide retroreflectivity when wet.
 m. Lenses shall have fully completed testing on the American Association of State and
 Highway Transportation Officials -National Transportation Product Evaluation
 Program (AASHTO-NTPEP) test deck in a location having s similar climate to
 West Virginia. Upon review, the performance of the lenses on the test deck shall
 meet or exceed the historical performance of other industry standard lenses
 approved by the WVDOH. This determination shall be made solely by the
 WVDOH.
 
 902
 
 n. Lenses shall have been tested by an independent testing facility to the applicable
 ASTM D4383 specification requirements referenced herein. The lenses shall have
 been sampled as specified in ASTM D4383 and shall meet the applicable
 specification requirements, as demonstrated by test results published and certified
 by the testing facility. The applicable ASTM D4383 specification requirements
 referenced herein shall be considered to be parts a), b), c), d), and e) of this Section.
 715.40.6.1.3-Adhesive Requirements: Epoxy adhesive shall be used for applying
 Type P-2 markers to the pavement surface. The specific adhesive used shall be an adhesive
 recommended by the P-2 marker manufacturer and meeting the requirements of ASTM
 D4383.
 The adhesive used for adhering the Type P-2 marker lenses in the castings shall be an
 adhesive recommended by the P-2 marker manufacturer.
 715.40.6.1.4-Product Submission and Approval: Type P-2 marker castings and/or
 lenses to be considered for inclusion on the WVDOH Approved Products List (APL) shall
 be submitted to the Materials Division following the current procedures specified by the
 Materials Division. The manufacturer may contact the Traffic Engineering Division for
 verification. The manufacturer should include all relevant documentation and information
 with this form, including but not limited to Product Data Sheets, Product Flyers,
 Manufacturer Product Specifications, Product Bulletins, Engineering Drawings,
 AASHTO-NTPEP test results, and the independent testing facility test results described
 herein.
 In addition to the above, the WVDOH may also require that the casting and/or lens
 product(s) submitted for evaluation be field tested in one or more locations in West
 Virginia in order to validate the acceptable performance of the product(s). This field testing
 shall typically be a minimum of six months to one year in duration including a full winter
 season. Specific details related to this testing, such as locations and quantities, shall be
 determined by the WVDOH.
 All submitted information will be forwarded to the WVDOH Traffic Engineering
 Division, which will in turn contact and work directly with the manufacturer during the
 evaluation process. The Traffic Engineering Division will evaluate all submitted literature
 and documentation for compliance with the specified requirements as well as satisfactory
 performance on the AASHTO-NTPEP test deck. The Traffic Engineering Division may
 also arrange for the manufacturer to furnish test samples and arrange for the product to be
 installed for field testing as previously described. After the evaluation is complete, the
 Traffic Engineering Division will inform the Materials Division in writing of the outcome
 of its evaluation.
 
 903
 
 715.40.6.2-Type R-4 Markers: This specification covers Type R-4 markers, a type of
 nonplowable, retroreflective RPM for nighttime lane marking and delineation. Note, due
 to the fact that snow plowing operations are necessary throughout the state of West
 Virginia, Type R-4 markers are not placed such that they will be subjected to direct
 plowing; rather, the RPM’s are installed in limited locations in conjunction with surface
 mounted tubular markers in order to be shielded from plowing. All references to ASTM
 specification D 4280 herein shall be taken as referencing the D 4280 – 08 version of this
 specification.
 Type R-4 markers shall meet the following requirements:
 a. When tested in accordance with the methods and procedures specified in ASTM
 D4280, the markers shall meet the Flexural Strength performance requirements of
 ASTM D4280.
 b. When tested in accordance with the methods and procedures specified in ASTM
 D4280, the markers shall meet the Compressive Strength performance
 requirements of ASTM D4280.
 c. The markers shall be comprised of materials with adequate chemical, water, and
 UV resistance for the intended use.
 d. The color of the marker shell shall match the color of the lens of the marker that is
 not red.
 e. The marker height shall not exceed 0.80 in. (20.3 mm).
 f. The marker width shall not exceed 5.1 in. (130 mm).
 g. The base of the marker shall be substantially free from gloss or substances that may
 reduce its bond to adhesive.
 h. The base of the marker shall be flat within 0.05 in. (1.3 mm). If the bottom of the
 marker is configurated, the protruding faces of the configurations shall not deviate
 more than 0.05 in. (1.3 mm) from a plane.
 i. The coefficient of luminous intensity (RI) of the marker lenses in new condition
 shall be not less than the values specified in ASTM D4280 when measured in
 accordance with the procedures and methods specified in ASTM D4280.
 Coefficient of luminous intensity shall be defined as the ratio of the luminous
 intensity (I) of the retroreflector in the direction of observation to the illuminance
 (E) at the retroreflector on a plane perpendicular to the direction of the incident
 light, expressed in candelas per lux (cd/lx).
 j. After abrading the marker lenses in accordance with the procedures and methods
 specified in ASTM D4280, the coefficient of luminous intensity of the lenses at
 zero (0) degree entrance angle shall be not less than the values specified in ASTM
 D4280 when measured in accordance with the procedures and methods specified in
 ASTM D4280. This requirement shall not apply to red faces of lenses.
 k. When illuminated in accordance with ASTM D4280, the color of the marker lenses
 shall meet the color requirements of ASTM D4280 when measured in accordance
 with the procedures and methods specified in ASTM D4280.
 l. When impacted in accordance with the methods and procedures specified in ASTM
 D4280, the marker lenses shall meet the Lens Impact Strength performance
 requirements of ASTM D4280.
 
 904
 
 m. When subjected to temperature cycling in accordance with the methods and
 procedures specified in ASTM D4280, the marker lenses shall meet the
 Temperature Cycling performance requirements of ASTM D4280.
 n. The retroreflective face(s) of the lens shall be subdivided into multiple “cells”
 which shall allow undamaged cells to continue to perform unaffected when one or
 more cells are damaged.
 o. The retroreflective technologies incorporated into the retroreflective face(s) of the
 lens shall be designed such that the lens will provide retroreflectivity when wet.
 p. The angle between the face of the marker lens and the base shall be no greater than
 forty-five (45) degrees.
 q. The markers shall have fully completed testing on the American Association of
 State and Highway Transportation Officials -National Transportation Product
 Evaluation Program (AASHTO-NTPEP) test deck. Upon review, the performance
 of the markers on the test deck shall meet or exceed the historical performance of
 other industry standard Type R-4 markers approved by the WVDOH. This
 determination shall be made solely by the WVDOH.
 r. The markers shall have been tested by an independent testing facility to the
 applicable ASTM D4280 specification requirements referenced herein. The
 markers shall have been sampled as specified in ASTM D4280 and shall meet the
 applicable specification requirements, as demonstrated by test results certified and
 made available by the testing facility. The applicable ASTM D4280 specification
 requirements referenced herein shall be considered to be parts a), b), i), j), k), l),
 and m) of this Section.
 715.40.6.2.1-Adhesive Requirements: Standard set epoxy adhesive, rapid set epoxy
 adhesive, or bituminous adhesive may be used for applying Type R-4 markers to the
 pavement surface. The specific adhesive used shall be an adhesive recommended by the R4 marker manufacturer and meeting the requirements of ASTM D4280 for one of the
 adhesive types described above.
 715.40.6.2.2-Product Submission and Approval: Type R-4 markers to be considered
 for inclusion on the WVDOH Approved Products List (APL) shall be submitted to the
 Materials Division following the current procedures specified by the Materials Division.
 The manufacturer may contact the Traffic Engineering Division for verification. The
 manufacturer should include all relevant documentation and information with this form,
 including but not limited to Product Data Sheets, Product Flyers, Manufacturer Product
 Specifications, Product Bulletins, Engineering Drawings, AASHTO-NTPEP test results,
 and the independent testing facility test results described herein.
 In addition to the above, the WVDOH may also require that the markers submitted for
 evaluation be field tested in one or more locations in West Virginia in order to validate the
 acceptable performance of the product(s). This field testing shall typically be a minimum
 of six months to one year in duration including a full winter season. Specific details related
 to this testing, such as locations and quantities, shall be determined by the WVDOH.
 All submitted information will be forwarded to the WVDOH Traffic Engineering
 Division, which will in turn contact and work directly with the manufacturer during the
 evaluation process. The Traffic Engineering Division will evaluate all submitted literature
 
 905
 
 and documentation for compliance with the specified requirements as well as satisfactory
 performance on the AASHTO-NTPEP test deck. The Traffic Engineering Division may
 also arrange for the manufacturer to furnish test samples and arrange for the product to be
 installed for field testing as previously described. After the evaluation is complete, the
 Traffic Engineering Division will inform the Materials Division in writing of the outcome
 of its evaluation.
 715.40.6.3-Temporary Markers: Temporary markers shall meet the same
 requirements as permanent Type R-4 markers, as described in Section 715.40.6.2, with the
 exception of requirements q) and r).
 The adhesive used to apply the markers shall meet the requirements of Section
 715.40.6.2.1 or, in lieu of adhesives of this type, the Contractor may utilize markers
 supplied by the manufacturer with a “peel and stick” pressure sensitive adhesive pad preapplied to the marker, provided that the surface upon which the marker is to be placed is
 within the manufacturer’s recommendations for markers incorporating a pre-applied
 adhesive pad. Markers supplied for temporary application to newly placed asphalt final
 wearing course surfaces or newly placed concrete surfaces shall be placed using a preapplied pressure sensitive adhesive pad.
 Temporary markers are not required to be submitted for review, approval, and
 placement on an Approved Products List (APL). No APL shall be maintained for
 temporary markers. When requested, the Contractor shall submit to the project Engineer a
 letter of certification from the marker manufacturer certifying that the markers supplied
 meet the current WVDOH Standard Specifications.
 715.41-TRAFFIC SAFETY DEVICES:
 Traffic Safety Devices shall meet the requirements of the AASHTO Roadside Design
 Criteria and the National Cooperative Highway Research Program Report 350, Recommended
 Procedures for the Safety Performance Evaluation of Highway Appurtenances.
 The Manufacturer of the Safety Device shall provide certified crash test data that indicates
 the product meets the requirements noted above.
 The manufacturer shall submit to Traffic Engineering Division 8 copies of their design
 (installation) drawings for the specific device. This drawing will be reviewed, if approved, it will
 be stamped and one copy returned to the manufacturer. Multiple devices of the same design for
 the same project or purchase order will require one set of drawings, not one set for each device.
 In addition, one design and one installation manual shall be shipped with each safety device.
 All safety devices shall be manufactured and fabricated using the same components as
 crash tested. Any changes in design or compound shall be requested in writing by the supplier.
 The Engineer's concurrence is required prior to any change.
 715.41.1-Sand Barrel Impact Attenuating Device (Type V):
 715.41.1.1-Description: The unit shall have cylindrical containers capable of holding
 various amounts of sand. The amount of sand capable of being held shall include at least
 2, 4, 7, 14, or 21 cubic feet (0.056, 0.112, 0.196, 0.393 or 0.588 cubic meters).
 
 906
 
 715.41.1.2-Performance: The unit shall be constructed so as to shatter upon impact
 to permit dispersion of the sand mass contained within. The center of gravity of each
 module shall be at a height which will control the attitude of the vehicle. The manufacturer
 shall certify that the units shall not crack, split, or color fade within five years of
 installation.
 715.41.2-Crash Cushion Terminal Impact Attenuating Device (Type VI):
 715.41.2.1-Description: The unit shall consist of a cable anchored system using
 slotted standard depth guardrail with breakaway wooden posts.
 715.41.2.2-Performance: The unit shall be capable of redirecting 1,800 to 4,500
 pounds (815 to 1 900 kg) vehicles at speeds up to 60 mph. (100 km/hr) which impacts the
 side of the unit at angles up to 15 degrees for the 1,800 pound (815 kg) vehicle and 25
 degrees for the 4,500 pound (1 900 kg) vehicle.
 715.41.3-Truck Mounted Impact Attenuating Device (Type VII):
 715.41.3.1-Description: The unit shall consist of a crushable cartridge, a backup and
 a backup support structure for attaching the backup to the shadow vehicle. The unit shall
 have a standard trailer lighting system, including brake lights, taillights, turn signals and
 ICC bar lights. The back of the unit shall have a device attached with alternative diagonal
 black and reflectorized yellow stripes, 6 inches (150 mm) wide, similar to an XS-15 marker
 and in accordance with Section 3C-2 of the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic
 Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
 715.41.3.2-Performance: The unit when attached to a standard truck weighing
 between 10,000 lb. and 24,000 lb. ( 4 530 kg and 10 872 kg) GVW, shall be capable of
 yielding according to the requirements of National Cooperative Highway Research
 Program Report 350. During the tests the truck shall have the brake set, transmission in
 gear, and engine off.
 715.41.4-Quad Guard Impact Attenuating Device (Type VIII):
 715.41.4.1-Description: The unit shall consist of crushable cartridges surrounded by
 a framework of steel Quad-beam guardrail which can telescope rearward during head-on
 impacts. The quad Guard System shall have a center monorail which will resist lateral
 movement during side angle impacts. The nose shall consist of a formed plastic or metal
 nose wrap.
 715.41.4.2-Performance: The unit shall be capable of redirecting 1,800 to 4,500
 pounds (815 to 1 900 kg) vehicles which impact the side of the system at speeds up to 60
 mph. (100 km/hr) at angles up to 20 degrees for both right way and wrong way impacts
 (angles measured from systems longitudinal centerline). The unit shall be constructed so
 that there is no solid debris which can create a hazard on the roadway after impact.
 715.41.5-Reusable Energy Absorbing Crash Terminal Device (Type I):
 715.41.5.1-Description: The unit shall consist of high-density polyethylene cylinders,
 which will compress and absorb energy. In addition, these cylinders under most
 
 907
 
 circumstances will recover their shape, position, and absorption capabilities sufficiently
 enough, after being impacted by a vehicle, to withstand another impact by a vehicle. Each
 cylinder shall be 24” (611 mm) to 36” (908 mm) in outside diameter and 32” (813 mm) to
 48” (1 220 mm) high. Cylinder color shall be black. Cylinder Units shall have a cover.
 The unit shall have a restraining cable system of heavy steel galvanized wire rope on each
 side of the row of cylinders.
 715.41.5.2-Performance: The unit shall be capable of attenuating head-on hits and
 redirecting 1800 lbs. (820 Kg) to 4409 lbs. (2 000 kg) vehicles which impact the unit of
 speeds up to 55 MPH (88 KPH). The device shall meet all evaluation criteria specified by
 NCHRP 350, including occupant risk, structural integrity, and post-impact trajectory.
 715.41.6-Trinity Attenuating Crash Cushion (Type II):
 715.41.6.1-Description: The unit shall consist of a pair of guidance tracks, an impact
 “sled,” intermediate steel frames, and 10 gauge W-Beam fender panels. The overall width
 should be 24 inches (610 mm). The guidance tracks are made from two C-channels formed
 into a box section by variable lengths and thicknesses of metal rip plates bolted to the
 outside flanges of the channels. The sled, or impact face, of the TRACC is positioned over
 the upstream end of the guidance tracks and contains a hardened steel blade which cuts the
 metal plates on the sides of the guidance tracks as it is forced backwards in an end hit. The
 intermediate frames support the W-beam fender panels and are free to slide backwards
 when the TRACC is hit on the end, but lock onto the guidance tracks to provide redirection
 for side impacts.
 The fender panels are bolted to the intermediate frames with a design that locks the
 inside panels in place while allowing the outer panels to slide back freely as the system
 telescopes rearward.
 715.41.6.2-Performance: The unit shall be capable of attenuating head-on hits
 redirecting 1,800 lbs. (820 kg) to 4,409 lbs. (2 000 kg) vehicles which impact the unit of
 speeds up to 62 MPH (100 KPH). The device shall meet all evaluation criteria specified
 by NCHRP 350.
 715.41.7-SCI Impact Attenuating Device (Type III):
 715.41.7.1-Description: The unit shall consist of a flat galvanized steel base plate, to
 be attached to the support surface with chemical anchor bolts, with welded galvanized steel
 reinforcing support gussets and two welded galvanized steel channel beams running the
 length of the unit.
 The internal area of the unit shall be supported laterally by a framework consisting of
 a welded up galvanized steel box shaped “sled” at the front of the unit, followed by
 successive welded galvanized steel support diaphragms to which the left and right sides of
 the unit are to be connected. The sled and diaphragms shall be locked into and held in
 position laterally by, and shall be capable of sliding longitudinally along, the channel
 beams included as part of the base.
 Each side of the unit shall provide a surface to capture and redirect impacting vehicles
 by using successive galvanized steel 10 ga. quad beam side panels, overlapped from the
 rear to the front of the unit, with the beginning of the front side panels attached to the front
 
 908
 
 sled, and the underlying panels at each overlap to be attached to an internal support
 diaphragm.
 The kinetic energy dissipating system employed by the unit for front impacts shall
 consist of a round, non-rotating, steel sheave assembly at the front of the unit with the
 ability to slide longitudinally along the unit; two round, non-rotating, steel sheave
 assemblies at the rear of the unit connected by an energy dissipating hydraulic piston; and
 a galvanized steel cable interconnecting the sheaves. During front end impacts, the entire
 device shall telescope rearward. Energy shall be dissipated variably, dependent on the
 vehicle momentum, by the hydraulic piston as it is compressed by the two rear sheave
 assemblies as tension is induced in the cable.
 For protection of the components, the unit shall be designed such that the tops of the
 sheave assemblies and piston sit below the top level of the base plate channel beams. In
 addition, the unit shall be designed such that when fully collapsed, all of the sheave
 assemblies and piston shall remain behind the front sled.
 The total outside to outside width of the unit along its’ entire length shall be
 approximately 36”. The length of the unit from the front to rear of the support base shall
 be approximately 21-1/2 feet.
 715.41.7.2-Performance: When installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s
 recommendations, the device shall be acknowledged by the Federal Highway
 Administration (FHWA) to meet the structural adequacy, occupant risk, and vehicle
 trajectory criteria set forth in National Cooperative Highway Research Program Report 350
 (NCHRP-350) for redirective, non-gating crash cushions. The device shall be
 acknowledged as meeting these criteria for all NCHRP-350 required impact tests,
 demonstrated by performance of the tests, unless specific tests are not required to be
 performed based on the results of other tests as acknowledged by the FHWA.
 In regards to impact capacity, the device shall be available in two different basic
 versions; one designed to meet the requirements of NCHRP-350 Test Level 2 and one
 designed to meet the requirements of NCHRP-350 Test Level 3, with each to be clearly
 acknowledged by the FHWA as meeting the NCHRP-350 requirements at the applicable
 Test level.
 715.41.8-TAU-II Impact Attenuating Device (Type IX):
 715.41.8.1-Description: The device shall accommodate a wide range of hazard widths
 up to 8-1/2 ft (2.6 m) in six (6) inch (150 mm) increments. The device shall be available in
 various impact speed capacities, achievable by different combinations of number of bays
 and placement of the two different types of energy absorbing cartridges described herein
 within the bays. The device shall utilize non-proprietary transition components and
 hardware for transitioning to a wide range of proprietary and non-proprietary barrier
 systems. The system shall be made up of independent collapsible bays that are guided and
 supported by high strength galvanized steel cables. The system’s energy dissipating
 capacity shall be achieved using energy absorbing cartridges. All length/width
 configurations shall be constructible using the same basic parts.
 The foundation system shall consist of two cables, a back support, and front cable
 anchors of various designs for different specific site conditions. The back support and cable
 anchors shall be manufactured using ASTM A36 steel and shall be galvanized per ASTM
 
 909
 
 A123. The fasteners for these components shall be Class 5.8 (Grade 2) or greater and shall
 be galvanized per ASTM 153. All washers shall be hardened. The cables shall be one (1)
 inch (25 mm) in diameter, minimum, and shall be galvanized per ASTM A603.
 Bays shall be separated by Front Supports, Middle Supports, and Bulkheads of various
 widths as required. The Supports, Bulkheads, and cable guides shall incorporate modular
 bolted on cable guides for the steel cables. The Supports and Bulkheads shall be
 manufactured using ASTM A36 steel and shall be galvanized per ASTM A123. The
 fasteners for these components shall be Class 5.8 (Grade 2) or greater and shall be
 galvanized per ASTM 153. All washers shall be hardened.
 Each bay shall be enclosed on each side by steel thrie-beam shaped Sliding Panels. The
 panels shall be bolted to the Supports and Bulkheads using sliding bolts. End Panels shall
 be used at the rear end of the device. The End Panels shall be attached to the back support
 and the last bay’s Sliding Panel through Pipe Panel Mounts which provide mounting points
 for transition components. The Pipe Panel Mounts shall be bolted to the Back Support.
 Sliding and End Panels shall be fabricated from steel conforming to AASHTO M180 Class
 B. Sliding Bolts shall be cast from ASTM 1045 HT steel and shall be galvanized per ASTM
 A123. Pipe Panel Mounts shall be fabricated from steel conforming to ASTM A513, Type
 5. The fasteners for these components shall be Class 5.8 (Grade 2) or greater and shall be
 galvanized per ASTM 153. All washers shall be hardened.
 The system shall incorporate a nose piece and flexible front support legs mounted to
 the front support. The front support legs shall be manufactured from either synthetic or
 natural rubber or polyurethane. The nose piece shall be fabricated from polyurethane. The
 fasteners for these components shall be Class 5.8 (Grade 2) or greater and shall be
 galvanized per ASTM 153. All washers shall be hardened.
 The system shall utilize two types of energy absorbing cartridges. The cartridges shall
 be cylindrical shaped and shall measure approximately 30-1/2 in (775 mm) in length and
 25 in (635 mm) in diameter. Each cartridge shall weight approximately 35 lb (16 kg). The
 cartridges shall be manufactured using a specially formulated High Density Cross-linked
 polyethylene.
 The device shall be attached to a foundation. Foundation and attachment specifications
 and details shall be provided by the manufacturer. The anchor design shall achieve a pull
 out strength of 25,000 lb (12,000 kg) and shear strength of 19,000 lb (8,500 kg).
 715.41.8.2-Performance: When installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s
 recommendations, the device shall be acknowledged by the Federal Highway
 Administration (FHWA) to meet the structural adequacy, occupant risk, and vehicle
 trajectory criteria set forth in National Cooperative Highway Research Program Report 350
 (NCHRP-350) for redirective, non-gating crash cushions. The device shall be
 acknowledged as meeting these criteria for all NCHRP-350 required impact tests,
 demonstrated by performance of the tests, unless specific tests are not required to be
 performed based on the results of other tests as acknowledged by the FHWA.
 In regards to impact capacity, the device shall be available in two different basic
 versions; one designed to meet the requirements of NCHRP-350 Test Level 2 and one
 designed to meet the requirements of NCHRP-350 Test Level 3, with each to be clearly
 acknowledged by the FHWA as meeting the NCHRP-350 requirements at the applicable
 Test level.
 
 910
 
 715.41.9-Acceptance: Acceptance shall be based upon review and approval of the certified
 crash test data by the Division. Materials Control, Soils, and Testing Division shall develop an
 approved list of Traffic Safety Devices.
 715.42-TRAFFIC SIGNAL MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT:
 715.42.1-Pre-timed Fixed Cycle Traffic Signal Controllers:
 715.42.1.1-Definition of Terms: Following are definitions of terms used by the
 Division for pre-timed fixed cycle traffic signal controllers:
 Cabinet: A dustproof and weatherproof enclosure for housing the controller and
 associated equipment.
 Circuit Contact Cam Shaft: A device to operate the circuit contacts to provide the
 desired interval sequence.
 Controller: A complete electrical mechanism for controlling the operation of traffic
 control signals, including the timer and all necessary auxiliary apparatus mounted in a
 cabinet.
 Local Controller: A controller for operating traffic control signals at an intersection
 which may be isolated or included in an interconnected traffic control signal system.
 Master Controller: An automatic device for supervising a system of controllers,
 maintaining definite time inter-relationship, selecting among alternate available modes of
 operation or accomplishing other supervisory functions.
 Pedestrian Actuated Controller: An automatic controller in which part of the
 intervals or groups of intervals, particularly pedestrian WALK and clearance intervals, are
 initiated by actuation of a pedestrian detector.
 Pre-timed Controller: A controller for the operation of traffic signals with
 predetermined:
 i. Fixed cycle length(s).
 ii. Fixed interval duration(s)
 iii. Interval sequence(s)
 Synchronous Controller: An automatic controller operated by a synchronous motor
 which will keep in step with the frequency of the power supply circuit.
 Emergency Feature: A mercury contact bus bar relay installed in a controller, which
 when energized from a manual switch, remote point, discontinues the normal signal
 operation and displays special signal indications for the movement of high speed fire
 apparatus, etc.
 Field Terminals: Devices mounted on a panel board for connecting all wires entering
 the controller cabinet.
 Flashing Feature: A mercury contact bus bar relay installed in a controller which,
 when energized from a manual switch, remote point or by automatic time switch,
 discontinues normal signal operation and causes the flashing of any predetermined
 combination of signal lights.
 Interval: The part or parts of the signal cycle during which signal indications do not
 change.
 
 911
 
 Interval Sequence: The order of appearance of signal indications during successive
 intervals of a cycle.
 Jack Mounted Relay: A relay which may be removed or replaced without the use of
 tools and without disturbing any wiring.
 Manual Operation: The operation of a controller assembly by means of a handoperated device(s); (i.e., push-button).
 Offset: The number of seconds or percent of the cycle length that a defined timereference point (normally the start of major street green) at a traffic signal occurs after the
 time-reference point of a master controller or of an adjacent traffic signal.
 Offset Control Switch: A device which when operated stops the timing of the cycle
 length and intervals in order to manually adjust the offset.
 Offset Dial: A calibrated dial on an automatic timer equipped with adjusting devices
 by means of which it is possible to set any desired offset of the beginning of the green
 traffic control signal indication.
 Offset Interrupter: A device which will distribute over two or more cycles the time
 required for large offset changes.
 Panel: A panel board within the controller cabinet upon which are mounted fuse
 receptacles, circuit breakers, contactors, terminals, relays, and electrically operated
 switches and other equipment, all suitable insulated.
 Pedestrian Phase (Pedestrian Movement): A traffic phase or traffic movement
 allocated exclusively to pedestrian traffic.
 Radio Interference Suppressor: A device inserted in the power line in the controller
 assembly (cabinet) than minimizes the radio interference transmitted back into the power
 supply line, which interference may be generated by the controller or other mechanisms in
 the cabinet.
 Relay Jack: A set of clips, plugs or receptacles in a controller or cabinet by means of
 which a relay may be mounted or connected to the circuit.
 Reset: An adjustment mechanism applied to an automatic controller providing for the
 setting up of the timing arrangement of the start of the green traffic control signal
 indication.
 Automatic Reset: A reset by means of which the offset or beginning of the green is
 checked automatically and adjusted, if necessary, once each time cycle.
 Double Automatic Reset: A reset by means of which it is possible to automatically
 select any one of two automatic resets.
 Triple Automatic Reset: A reset by means of which it is possible to automatically
 select any one of three automatic resets.
 Manual Reset: A reset by means of which it is possible to manually adjust the offset
 or beginning of the green.
 Reset Interrupter: A device which will automatically distribute the time lag resulting
 from a particular resetting over a period of time varying from one to several cycle lengths.
 Shutdown Feature: A mercury contact bus bar relay installed in a controller which,
 when energized from a manual switch, remote point or by an automatic time switch,
 discontinues normal traffic control signal operation and turns the signal indications off.
 Shutdown Switch: A switch in a controller which may be operated by hand to
 discontinue the operation of traffic control signals.
 
 912
 
 Signal Circuit Contact: A device arranged to energize or de-energize signal light
 circuits during a specified interval.
 Signal Indication: The illumination of a traffic signal lens, or equivalent device, or of
 a combination of several lenses or equivalent devices at the same time.
 Split: A division of the cycle length allocated to each of the various phases (normally
 expressed in percent).
 Time Cycle: The number of seconds required for one complete revolution of the timing
 dial or complete sequence of signal indications.
 Time Cycle Indicator: An indicating device applied to an automatic timer for
 indicating the time cycle in seconds.
 Timing Dial: A calibrated dial on an automatic timer equipped with adjusting devices
 by means of which it is possible to divide the time cycle into the required number of
 intervals and set up the offset and interlock.
 Timer: An automatic timing unit in a controller, including all dials, dial transfer relays,
 switching and circuit contacts, motors, gears, camshaft, etc.
 Time Switch: A device for the automatic selection of modes of operation of traffic
 signals in a manner prescribed by a predetermined time schedule.
 Traffic Phase: Those right-of-way and clearance intervals in a cycle assigned to any
 independent movement(s) of traffic.
 Yellow-Red Flash Terminals: Addition terminals installed in a traffic signal
 controller so wired that by an interchange of jumpers, flashing operation may be arranged
 to give either yellow or red on the main or cross streets.
 715.42.1.2-General Design Requirements: The following are minimum design and
 operating requirements for all pre-timed, fixed cycle traffic signal controllers and
 associated equipment described in these specifications.
 The signal time cycle shall be constant and accurate, regulated by the power line
 frequency. Neither cycle length variations nor interval timing variations shall occur if
 voltage of the power line varies between the limits of 10 percent above and 10 percent
 below 120 volts, 60 Hz AC standard service voltage. Similarly, neither cycle length
 variations nor interval timing variations shall occur if outside cabinet temperatures change
 to any value between -30 F (-34 C) and plus 122 F (50 C). Maximum inside cabinet
 temperature for above operation is plus 165 F (74 C).
 It shall be possible to accurately set or adjust the cycle lengths between the limits of 30
 and 130 seconds with accurate and definite settings within this range in five-second steps
 up to 100 seconds, and in ten-second steps above 100 seconds. This adjustment shall be
 accomplished by a change of marked gears requiring no more than the use of simple tools.
 Gear and gear shaft shall be designed to prevent slippage. Gear meshing pressure must be
 adjustable. The cycle length in operation shall automatically be indicated on a scale visible
 on the front of the dial unit.
 All pre-timed controllers shall contain three timing dials and be capable of being
 interconnected into a three-dial, three-offset system and shall include all the necessary
 keys, contacts, rider arms, etc.
 The signal color sequence period adjustments and offset adjustments shall be made on
 the same timing dial without the aid of any tools. The timing dial shall be calibrated for
 the signal color period in steps of one percent from 1 to 99 percent. The offset calibration
 
 913
 
 shall be in reverse order of the signal color sequence period. Each offset key shall be clearly
 identifiable as to its function and distinguishable from the color period keys. All keys for
 a given function shall be identical and each key having a specialized function shall be
 appropriately colored or otherwise identifiable to provide a visual indication of such
 function.
 Any changes in operation of traffic control signal lights caused by turning the signal
 lights off, or turning them on flashing operation, shall not interfere with the continued intime operation of the timer motor presently operating in each controller. A transfer from
 such special operation back to normal automatic operation shall immediately establish the
 normal time cycle and subsequently the in-time relation. The dial transfer mechanism shall
 be so designed that not more than one dial may operate at any one time. Dial No. 1 shall
 operate in absence of call for dial No. 2 or dial No. 3 or when there is a conflict on dial
 calls.
 Each controller shall be furnished with three service manuals complete with all
 necessary instructions and diagrams for the installation and maintenance of the equipment
 supplied. Each controller shall be supplied with three complete sets of wiring diagrams.
 These wiring diagrams shall identify the color code or wire tagging used in all connections.
 715.42.1.2.1-Interval Sequence: The controller shall provide consecutive divisions
 of the time cycle termed "intervals," during which time the combination of signal
 indications do not change. Each controller shall be provided with 12 or 16 interval cams.
 The cams shall be programmed so that a minimum number of dial unit keys are required
 for the plan specified phasing. If phasing is not specified, the cam lobes are not to be
 broken out.
 715.42.1.2.2-Interval Adjustment: The controller shall provide for the setting of each
 interval of the cycle by means of a positive setting on each calibrated dial. The setting shall
 at all times show a visual indication of the amount of time allocated to each interval, in
 units of percent of the cycle length. When the controller is operating within a specified
 voltage and temperature limits, the time duration of each interval shall be within plus or
 minus 500 milliseconds of the time indicated by the setting of that interval, and timing of
 successive intervals shall be without cumulative errors that would affect the accuracy of
 the cycle length.
 Each dial unit shall be provided with a scale calibrated in steps of one percent of the
 cycle length or one second, and shall provide for the accurate setting of any interval within
 the range of adjustment from 2 percent to 90 percent of the cycle length or from one second
 to 99 seconds.
 The minimum time for any interval is not required to be less than one second whenever
 that is greater than two percent of the cycle length, nor is the minimum time for any interval
 required to be less than two percent of the cycle length when that is greater than one second.
 The timing controls shall be on the front of the controller unit, easily identifiable, and
 it shall not be necessary to remove or change wires or contacts or to use any tools in making
 interval adjustments.
 The three controller dial units specified shall provide for separate programs of interval
 timing. The dial units shall be readily identifiable and a change of one dial shall not affect
 
 914
 
 or alter the other two dials. Dial transfer shall be accomplished at the beginning of mainstreet green.
 The cam-shaft dial synchronization key (commonly called the camswitch release key,
 interlock, drum release or release key) shall terminate the main-street green interval. No
 more than two cycle lengths shall be required to effect a dial transfer.
 715.42.1.2.3-Mechanism: The controller components shall be of unitized design and
 readily interchangeable.
 All mechanisms, motors, operating coils, bearings, contacts, relays, flashers and similar
 components shall be sufficiently large, rugged and accessible to insure reliability and
 minimum maintenance. All equipment shall be neatly and systematically arranged and
 mounted to allow thorough inspection while the controller is operating normally, and to
 permit easy removal of removable components without interfering with other portions of
 the controller. Components shall be securely fastened in place to prevent accidental contact
 with moving parts or electrical power and to permit the cabinet door to be opened and
 closed without interference or damage to the controller and wiring. Component
 accessibility shall permit easy access for any needed lubrication.
 A 30 ampere, mercury contact-type bus bar relay shall be provided for opening the bus
 bar circuit for signal shutdown, flashing operation or any other type of controller
 preemption.
 All relays associated with the control system shall be of the electromechanical type and
 designed for heavy, continuous operation. Except for the mercury contactors, all relays
 shall be mounted on a plug-in base with plug-in mounting. Dial transfer relays shall be
 jack or plug mounted within the timer unit chassis.
 Solid state circuitry shall not be used in the dial transfer, offset or split functions. Point
 to point wiring must be used on all circuitry. Copper or other track board circuitry is not
 permitted.
 The controller dial motors shall be designed for synchronous self-starting operation on
 120 volts, 60 Hz, single-phase alternating current. The motors shall have ample torque for
 all requirements of controller operation. Motor and reduction gearing shall be a completely
 enclosed unit containing a lifetime supply of lubricant. This unit shall not be an integral
 part of the timer but shall be arranged for easy removal. A maximum of one connector of
 the screw or bolt type shall be used to hold the timing dial firmly in position.
 The complete dial unit assembly shall be mounted in a manner which allows it to slide
 or hinge out of the timer chassis for complete access for inspection and maintenance.
 Each dial unit shall be furnished with an assembly of five gears (15 per controller).
 Gears for cycle lengths of 50, 60, 70, 80 and 90 seconds shall be provided per dial, unless
 otherwise specified.
 Only one contact (movable) shall be provided per controller circuit. Line side power
 for these circuits shall be by direct mechanical connection.
 All make and break contacts shall be of fine silver or a superior alternate material and
 shall be capable of breaking a current of 15 amperes of tungsten lamp at 120 volts, 60 Hz
 AC, one half million times without breaking physically or falling to conduct current to the
 tungsten load when operated 360 times an hour. All signal contacts shall be readily
 accessible and easily inspected. The movable contacts shall be designed to eliminate the
 possibility of accidental cross connection between adjacent contacts. The contact assembly
 
 915
 
 shall be designed so that the contacts can be arranged or rearranged to cause any signal
 light circuit to be energized or de-energized during any one of the intervals. All contacts
 shall be easily replaceable by the use of simple tools.
 The controller signal common and signal circuit bus shall have an ampacity of not less
 than 30 amperes.
 The controller shall provide terminals, wiring, cams and contacts for 18 circuits
 complete.
 Cam sequence switching shall be so designed that it shall not be possible to display a
 noticeable "dark out" interval at any time following any control function transfer, transfer
 to flash or any preempt transfer. In addition, the closing or opening of signal load contacts
 shall be positive, without objectionable dark intervals, flickering of lights or conflicting
 signal indications.
 Cam shaft advance shall be shaded pole motor or electromagnetic coil and return by
 gravity assisted spring. The cam rotor mechanism shall provide ample torque to break all
 bus contact loads, as long as the contacts remain in operational condition. Cam shaft
 advance impulse shall be actuated by the timer dial unit, or when specified in the Plans by
 manual actuation.
 All relays, coils, solenoids and motor windings shall be sufficiently large to insure
 reliability and minimum maintenance.
 715.42.1.2.4-Electrical Connectors: All electrical connections to and from the timer
 unit to the controller back panel shall be made through a 47 pin MS screw-type connector
 and wiring harness. Each wiring harness shall be at least 48 in. (1.2 meters) long or of the
 standard length specified by the manufacturer for that controller type. The harness shall
 have color-coded leads of labeled sleeves or labeled wires. The harness connections on the
 controller shall be such that the timer unit may be replaced with a similar unit, without the
 necessity of disconnecting and reconnecting individual wires therefrom.
 Seven circuits in this connector shall be capable of handling No. 12 AWG wire and a
 maximum of 30 amperes each. Connector pins for these circuits shall be rated at 41
 amperes. All other connector circuits shall be rated at 15 amperes (No. 16 AWG) with
 connector pins rated at 22 amperes.
 715.42.1.2.5-Controller Wiring Panel: A controller panel shall be installed on the
 back wall of the controller cabinet on which all relays, contactors, breaker receptacles,
 electrically operated switching devices and other auxiliary controller equipment, not an
 integral part of the timer unit assembly, shall be mounted. The panel shall be easily
 demountable in order that the entire control system can be removed, inspected and replaced
 as a unit. There shall be a minimum of 3 inches (75 mm) clearance between the bottom of
 the panel and the bottom of the cabinet.
 All terminals, except the interconnect system terminals, shall be mounted on the
 controller panel. Interconnect terminals shall be mounted on the side of the controller
 cabinet, unless otherwise specified. All panel wiring shall be neat and firm. The back
 panel shall contain at least the following:
 i. Terminals with circuit breakers for power supply.
 ii. Terminals unfused for neutral side of power supply.
 iii. One terminal for each outgoing signal circuit and one or more terminals for the
 
 916
 
 iv.
 v.
 vi.
 vii.
 viii.
 
 common conductors.
 A neutral bus with a minimum of six terminals to accommodate No. 10 wire.
 Terminals for pedestrian or any other type actuation.
 Terminals for manual control of color sequence.
 Terminals for red and yellow flash circuits.
 Controller mode switch.
 
 The controller mode switch shall provide for selection of timing dial and offset or
 system operation as a minimum. A manual sequence mode position shall be provided if
 manual operation is specified.
 All outgoing circuit terminals shall be suitably identified and shall be of the same
 polarity as the line side of the power supply. The ground side of the power supply shall be
 grounded to the controller in an approved manner.
 Power service breakers shall be provided to terminate the No. 8 AWG service
 conductor circuits on the controller back panel. Breaker No. 1 shall provide overcurrent
 protection for the controller circuits and No. 2 protection for the flasher and associated
 circuitry.
 715.42.1.2.6-Flashing Operation: Means shall be provided for the substituting of
 flashing vehicular signal indications for the normal specified interval sequence. The
 flashing operation of the controller shall be as specified on the Plans.
 Flashing of vehicular and pedestrian signal indications shall be obtained from one or
 more flashers, each of which is a self-contained device designed to plug into a socket
 mounted on the back panel of the cabinet.
 Each controller shall be equipped with additional terminals which are so wired that, by
 an interchange of jumpers, flashing operation may be arranged to display either flashing
 yellow or flashing red on each of the vehicular signals.
 Each controller shall be provided with a flash control switch for activating the flashing
 of vehicular signals. The controller shall be constructed so that the flashing operation can
 be obtained by operating the flash control switch even if the controller unit malfunctions
 or is removed from the cabinet. During flashing operation, the controller timer unit shall
 be de-energized.
 The substitution of flashing vehicular signal indications for the normal specified
 interval sequence shall be obtainable by time switch as well as by the flash control switch.
 The controller shall be so designed that an "open" in power service breaker No. 1 shall
 automatically switch the signal to flashing operation (see 715.42.1.2.5).
 715.42.1.2.7-Manual Operation: All controllers shall be designed capable of manual
 signal sequencing. When manual operation is specified on the Plans it shall be
 accomplished with the addition of standard components.
 715.42.1.2.8-Pedestrian Actuation: When called for on the Plans, non-concurrent,
 exclusive pedestrian actuated phases shall subtract the WALK interval time from the lead
 phase "green" interval and DON'T WALK time from the following phase "green" intervals.
 Manual operation of interval timing shall provide the same interval sequence as when
 the controller is operating automatically. Manual interval timing shall be obtainable by
 
 917
 
 means of weather-resisting manual push-button mounted on a flexible weather proof
 extension cord. The transfer of manual to automatic operation, or vice versa, shall be
 accomplished by an automanual switch. It shall not be necessary, when switching from
 manual to automatic operation, or vice versa, to do so at any certain time or to make any
 time adjustments.
 715.42.1.2.9-Signal Shutdown: Each controller shall be provided with a signal
 shutdown switch for turning off the signals at the intersection. This switch shall affect the
 power to the signals only and no other part of the controller.
 715.42.1.2.10-Warranties and Guarantees: The Contractor or supplier is required to
 turn over to the Division any guarantee or warranties which are given by the manufacturer
 as a normal policy. The Contractor or supplier shall furnish the Division with three copes
 of complete drawings, diagrams and manufacturer's instructions for installing and
 maintaining the equipment and any assistance as required for timing and operation of the
 equipment. Any component called for by the circuit design which has special unique
 characteristics which would limit that component to certain manufacturers or suppliers
 shall be so indicated in the manufacturer's instructions.
 The Contractor or supplier shall make available to the Division, at no cost, engineering
 data, diagrams, etc. on any later changes or improvements which would increase the
 performance of the equipment purchased.
 The Division reserves the right to withhold any payments which may be due, should it
 be discovered that the equipment does not meet the Specifications.
 715.42.1.3-Pre-Timed Fixed Cycle Traffic Signal Controller (Type FT-3): The
 purpose of this section is to set forth specific functional specifications and design
 requirements for the pre-timed fixed cycle traffic signal controller (local).
 The general design requirements in 715.42.1.2 shall apply, except when the specific
 requirements exceed those in that section.
 715.42.1.3.1-Interconnection: Type FT-3 controllers shall be furnished capable of
 interconnection with a master controller and other local controllers in signal system. A
 fused, interconnect terminal panel shall be furnished for mounting on the controller cabinet
 side wall. As a minimum, functional terminals for offset No. 1, offset No. 2, offset No. 3,
 dial No. 2, dial No. 3 and flashing operation shall be provided.
 715.42.1.3.2-Isolation: The FT-3 controller shall also be furnished capable of
 operating as an isolated controller, functionally programmed by time clocks, master
 controller or other command device.
 715.42.1.4-Pre-Timed Cycle Traffic Signal Master Controller (Type FT-3M): The
 purpose of this section is to set forth specific functional specifications and design
 requirements for a pre-timed fixed cycle master traffic signal controller (master).
 The general design requirements in 715.42.1.2 shall apply, except when the specific
 requirements herein exceed those in that section.
 
 918
 
 715.42.1.4.1-System Supervision: Type FT-3M controllers shall be furnished capable
 of providing system supervision for local controllers (FT-3) or local coordinating units
 (LCU), or both. All equipment and apparatus necessary to provide this supervision shall
 be furnished in the controller.
 The following supervisory functions shall be furnished in the controller as a minimum:
 i. Means for automatically establishing offset time relations for a system of
 interconnected FT-3 or LCU units.
 ii. An offset interrupter for decreasing the disruption to interval timing caused by
 large offset changes.
 Offset power shall be routed through an interrupter that is independent of the
 controller. The interruption interval shall be power on-line for 21 seconds,
 power off 2 seconds (23 second cycle). The interrupter shall be on breaker
 circuit No. 2 (flasher circuit).
 iii. Manual switch for transfer of all system controllers to flashing operation.
 iv. Manual switch for selecting dial No. 1, dial No. 2 or dial No. 3 at all
 interconnected FT-3 or LCU units, or both.
 v. Manual switch for selecting offset No. 1, offset No. 2 or offset No. 3 at all
 interconnected FT-3 or LCU units, or both.
 vi. Manual switch for transfer to emergency feature operation at all system
 controllers.
 Back panel mode switching shall be furnished to accomplish manual operations.
 The following supervisory functions shall also be controllable by the use of time clocks
 or other command devices:
 i. Selection of offset mode.
 ii. Selection of timing dial unit.
 iii. Selection of system flashing operation.
 iv. Selection of system emergency feature operation.
 715.42.2-Solid State Traffic Actuated Signal Controllers:
 715.42.2.1-Definition of Terms:
 Actuated: Identifies the type of signal control which responds to calling signals
 generated by action of vehicle or pedestrian.
 Actuation: The operation of any type of detector.
 Auxiliary Equipment: Separate devices used to add supplementary features to a
 controller assembly.
 Cabinet: An outdoor enclosure for housing the controller unit and associated
 equipment.
 Call: (Vehicle or Pedestrian) The result of a detector actuation indicating the presence
 of a vehicle or pedestrian requesting right-of-way.
 Chassis: The traffic signal controller and housing, complete with power supply,
 internal wiring, harness pin connector and module bays to accommodate the number and
 type of phase modules specified.
 Check: An outgoing circuit that indicates the existence of unanswered call.
 
 919
 
 Clearance Interval: A specific interval of time which follows after the termination of
 right-of-way to vehicles or pedestrians.
 Controller: A complete electrical mechanism, including timer for controlling the
 operation of traffic signals.
 Coordination: The terms applied to the interrelation between two or more intersection
 controllers.
 Cycle: The total time required to complete one sequence of signal operation around
 an intersection.
 Detector: An electrical device which when actuated signifies the passing or presence
 of a vehicle or pedestrian desiring the right-of-way.
 Digital Timing: Pertaining to a method of timing that operates by counting discrete
 units.
 Dual Max: A controller feature which provides two possible maximum time settings
 for cycle or right-of-way interval total time before termination.
 Extension Unit: The timing interval during the extensible portion which is resettable
 by each detector actuation. The green right-of-way of the phase may terminate on
 expiration of the unit extension time.
 Extension Limit: The maximum time of the extensible portion for which actuations
 on any traffic phase may retain the right-of-way after actuation on an opposing traffic
 phase.
 Fail Safe: A controller feature that prevents conflicting phase indications when power
 or equipment malfunctions occur.
 Flasher: A complete electrical mechanism for flashing a traffic signal or beacon.
 Force Off: A command that will force the termination of the right-of-way.
 Full Actuated: An intersection signal controller with detector input capability in all
 phases.
 Gap Reduction: A feature where the "unit extension" or allowed time spacing
 between successive vehicle actuations on the phase displaying the green in the extensible
 portion of the interval is reduced.
 Hold: A command that retains the existing right-of-way.
 Initial: (Green) Minimum or guaranteed green time allotted the timing phase before
 which termination can begin.
 Interface: A relay or electronic device(s) which isolates and matches one portion of a
 system to another.
 Interval: Any one of the several divisions of the time cycle during which signal
 indications do not change.
 Interval Sequence: The order of appearance of signal indications during successive
 intervals of a time cycle.
 Main Frame: A definitive single chassis unit within the controller cabinet that
 contains all signal timing and control logic. This does not include back panels, load
 switching devices, flashers, breakers, detectors and other peripheral equipment inside the
 controller cabinet.
 Manual Control: A control to permit authorized personnel in the option of terminating
 an active phase and initiating the next sequence in the signalization cycle.
 Maximum: A time limit applied to traffic actuated controls to terminate and recall the
 timing phase after a predetermined time.
 
 920
 
 Major Street: The roadway approach or approaches at an intersection normally
 carrying the major volume of vehicular traffic.
 Memory: Holds as recall a momentary vehicle actuation in the phase timer until the
 proper signal sequence can be displayed to release the vehicle.
 Minor Street: The roadway approach or approaches at an intersection normally
 carrying the minor volume of vehicular traffic.
 Modular Design: A design concept such that functions are sectioned into plug-ins
 units which can be readily exchanged with similar units.
 Monitor, Signal Conflict: A device used to continually check for the presence of
 conflicting signal indications and too provide an output in response to conflict.
 Nonlocking Memory: A mode of actuated-controller-unit operation which does not
 require detector memory.
 Overlap: A right-of-way indication that allows traffic movement when the right-ofway is being assigned to two or more traffic phases.
 Panel: A panel within the controller cabinet upon which are mounted fuse receptacles,
 terminals, relays and electrically operated switches and other equipment, all suitably
 insulated.
 Passage Period: The time allowed for a vehicle to travel at a selected speed from the
 detector to the nearest point of conflicting traffic.
 Pedestrian-Actuated Controller: An automatic controller in which part of the
 intervals or groups of intervals, particularly pedestrian WALK and clearance intervals, are
 initiated by the actuation of a pedestrian detector.
 Pedestrian Detector: A detector, usually of the push-button type installed near the
 roadway and capable of being operated by hand.
 Pedestrian Phase: (Pedestrian Movement) A traffic phase allocated exclusively to
 pedestrian traffic.
 Power Line Switch: A manual switch for discontinuing the operation of both traffic
 controller and traffic control signals.
 Power Supply: As used, a fused regulated DC power source for operation of control
 equipment where necessary. It must be an integral part of the controller chassis.
 Pre-emption: The transfer of the control of the signals from any phase or controller
 mode to a pre-emption timing unit to provide right-of-way for emergency vehicles or trains.
 Presence: Term applied to the detection pulse produced by a passing vehicle to be
 used by the control for other than count purposes. True presence indicates that the pulse
 duration is equal to the actual time the vehicle remains in the detector field of influence.
 Radio Interference Suppressor: A device inserted in the power line in the controller
 assembly (cabinet) that minimizes the radio interference transmitted back into the power
 supply line, which interference may be generated by the controller or other mechanisms in
 the cabinet.
 Recall: A manual switch which will cause the automatic return of the right-of-way to
 a street, regardless of the absence of actuation on that street.
 Rest: The interval portion of a phase when present timing requirements have been
 completed.
 Semi-Actuated: A type of traffic actuated controller in which means are provided for
 traffic actuation on one or more, but not all, approaches to the intersection.
 
 921
 
 Sequence: The order in which signal intervals are displayed around an intersection
 when there are calls on all phases of an intersection.
 Signal Indication: The illumination of a traffic signal lens or equivalent device, or of
 a combination of several lenses or equivalent devices, at the same time.
 Skip Phase: A feature of actuated intersection control which omits the right-of-way
 signal indication for a phase or movement that does not have vehicle or pedestrian calls.
 Solid State: Circuitry using semi-conductor devices exclusively in contrast to
 electronic (electron tubes) and electro/mechanical devices (relays, motors, etc.).
 Split: The division of time within the signal cycle between adjacent phases in the
 sequence.
 Stop Timing: Refers to the feature of a signal controller by which the application of
 an external signal or voltage will stop any one or all interval timers from timing further.
 Terminate: Applies most frequently to the end of a timing interval. Termination of
 right-of-way begins in an active phase when a call is received from an inactive phase in a
 full-actuated control; right-of-way termination must always include adequate clearance
 intervals.
 Time Cycle: The number of seconds required for one complete revolution of the
 timing dial or complete sequence of signal indications.
 Traffic Adjusted: Term used in master supervisory systems where vehicle actuations
 and other data are fed to the master for effecting signalization changes at several
 intersections rather than at each intersection independently.
 Uniform Manual: (MANUAL OR MUTCD) Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
 Devices for Streets and Highways, published by the Department of Transportation, Federal
 Highway Administration.
 Vehicle: A mobile inanimate object which legally must use roadways and is subject
 to traffic control by signalization.
 Volume: Numerical count of vehicle traversing a roadway and passing over a detector
 in the roadway.
 Wiring Harness: The multi-terminal (M or F) connector and associated wiring
 through which all electrical connections into and out of the controller chassis are made.
 All wiring harnesses shall be at least 48 in. (1.2 meters) long.
 Yield: A command which permits the transfer of the right-of-way.
 The above list of definitions may not be complete for all terms used. Final
 interpretation of all terms is the responsibility of the Engineer (See West Virginia Standard
 Specifications, Sections 101). Where applicable and as approved by the Engineer,
 definitions as published by the National Electrical Manufacturer's Association, Traffic
 Control Systems Standards may be applicable.
 715.42.2.2-General Design Requirements: The following are minimum design and
 operating requirements for all types of solid state traffic-actuated signal controllers and
 associated equipment described in these Specifications.
 These controllers shall be phase-modular and completely programmed for the phase
 and interval sequence specified for that chassis type. Phase, interval sequence and phase
 sequence functions and associated circuitry shall be assembled on removal plug-in
 modules. A separate, independent phase module shall be provided for each phase.
 
 922
 
 Controller timing shall be by digital timing, utilizing power line frequency as a base, and
 be constant and accurate. The length of any interval, portion, period or unit extension as
 determined by the interval timing setting or any other programmed controller function shall
 not change due to power supply voltage variations between the limits of 95 to 135 volts
 AC. The nominal voltage shall be 120 volts AC. The controller and all associated
 equipment shall be designed to operate from a 120 volt, 60 Hz, AC supply (plus or minus
 3.0 Hz).
 Specifically, the environmental and operating limits specified in the latest Traffic
 Control Systems Standards Publication by the National Electrical Manufacturer's
 Association, designated as NEMA, must be adhered to.
 A regulated fused power supply shall be an integral part of the controller chassis and it
 shall provide the DC voltages required for the operation of all equipment when necessary.
 This power supply shall provide the internal and external voltages and power requirements
 for normal operation of the signal equipment.
 A dust resistant metal enclosure, or main frame chassis, suitable protected against
 corrosion shall be provided to enclose all electrical parts of the controller. The control
 devices, indicator lights, fuse holders, switches, input/output connectors and other
 components required for the operation and adjustment of the controller shall be mounted
 on the front panel(s). All component parts and terminals shall be readily accessible when
 the controller modules are removed from the enclosure for adjustments, testing or service.
 Circuit board extender cards or cable may be employed to facilitate testing. The controller
 shall be designed for placement on a shelf. Maximum main frame sizes shall be as
 designated by NEMA for each controller chassis type.
 The front panel(s) of the controller shall be permanently marked to indicate the module
 positions, and to identify the fuses, indicator lamps, switches, controls, etc. so that the
 operation of the controller shall be readily apparent.
 The main frame chassis shall be completely equipped and wired for a full complement
 of modules as required for that chassis type. No additional hardware or wiring shall be
 required whether or not the main frame is used with the maximum possible number of
 modules.
 All modules shall be removable from the front of the controller and those of unlike
 function shall be mechanically keyed or electrically inter-locked to prevent insertion into
 the wrong opening causing controller unit malfunction. Modules of the same type shall be
 interchangeable between chassis. All modules shall be provide with controls as necessary
 to meet the functional requirements. In addition, all control logic for interval and startup
 sequence, overlap functions, coordination and all other specified controller functions must
 be an integral part of the main frame chassis.
 Each module and associated controller bay shall be identified as to phase or function.
 To facilitate interchangeability, a guide or track shall be provided for each module
 assembly in the controller chassis. All modules shall be mechanically secured in the
 controller so as to retain the assemblies in their proper position under conditions of shock
 and vibration.
 Each grouping of controller components as printed circuit assembly shall have a mean
 time to failure of three years. Printed circuits shall be of epoxy glass with an extra heavy
 (two ounces or more) copper track or a superior alternate or as otherwise specified by
 
 923
 
 NEMA standards. Circuit reference symbols for all component parts shall be clearly
 marked on the circuit boards.
 All switching functions internal to the controller shall be accomplished through the use
 of solid state circuitry. No electrical-mechanical devices, such as camshafts, rotary,
 stepping or line switches shall be used for switching functions.
 All controllers shall be equipped so that they may be coordinated with other controllers
 or supervised by a master system. This shall be possible by the simple addition of
 accessory equipment external to the controller.
 715.42.2.2.1-Phase Sequence Unit: The phase sequence unit must be an integral part
 of the controller main frame and shall establish the order and operation of the Phase Timing
 in accordance with vehicle and pedestrian detector calls.
 In the absence of recall or detector actuation, the right-of-way shall remain on the traffic
 phase upon which the last actuation occurred. The actuation of any detector during the
 extendible portion of a traffic phase having the right-of-way shall cause the retention of
 right-of-way by that traffic phase for one unit extension from the time of actuation. One
 unit extension interval of time shall be guaranteed for each vehicle actuation registered
 during the extendible period. Each actuation shall cancel the remainder of the previous
 unit extension interval in effect and initiate a complete new unit extension interval, timed
 from the instant of actuation. The actuation of a detector on another phase shall cause the
 right-of-way to transfer to that phase if during the extendible portion of the timing phase
 there have been no actuations for more than one full unit extension interval of time.
 An actuation during the clearance period for a traffic phase shall cause the right-of-way
 to return to that phase in the same manner. Also, when the right-of-way is transferred by
 operation of the extension limit, the terminated phase shall again receive the right-of-way
 in the above manner without further detector actuations.
 The controller shall be equipped with provision for skipping any phase when there is
 no call for that particular phase. Exact phase sequence when there are calls on three or
 more traffic phases shall be as specified for each controller chassis type.
 The term "Phase A" as used shall in all cases refer to the artery or mainline phase. It
 shall be the first phase in the sequence of phases. Other phases such as B, C etc. shall
 follow Phase A in alphabetical sequence with right-of-way assigned in accordance with the
 above, or specified sequence logic.
 715.42.2.2.2-Interval Sequence Unit: The interval sequence unit must be an integral
 part of the main frame and shall determine the order and control of the various intervals of
 each phase. The rotation shall be Green, Yellow, All Red and Red for vehicle movements
 and Steady Walk, Flashing Don't Walk and Steady Don't Walk for pedestrian movements.
 The transfer of the right-of-way from any traffic movement shall take place only after
 a proper clearance period.
 The clearance period for each vehicular phase shall consist of a vehicle change
 (Yellow) and an All Red Clearance interval. Each shall be timed separately and the second
 clearance interval of any phase may be omitted by a simple timing adjustment.
 The clearance period for a pedestrian movement shall be a Flashing Don't Walk.
 
 924
 
 715.42.2.2.3-Interval Settings and Adjustments: The controller shall provide a
 positive means of setting signal timing intervals. The settings for each interval shall be in
 seconds or divisions of a second and the controller shall provide a clear visual display of
 the length of each interval or period. The interval settings shall be color coded, easily
 identifiable and shall be made by means of dials or thumbwheels. Settings shall be
 provided for each phase interval and shall be mounted on the front of the associated main
 frame phase module. It shall not be necessary to use punched data cards, remove or change
 wires, pins or contacts, or to use tools of any kind in making interval adjustments. All dials
 shall be on the front of the controller and easily accessible.
 The minimum green interval shall be equal to either initial and one unit extension, walk
 plus pedestrian clearance, or walk plus pedestrian clearance plus one extension.
 The timing of the extension limit shall commence with the first actuation or other
 registration of traffic demand for the right-of-way on any traffic phase not having the rightof-way, and should begin after the initial period has expired.
 In the event the controller reverts to the start-up sequence, the signal operation shall be
 initiated in the Phase A green interval and at least one initial and one unit extension (or
 vehicle interval) period shall be timed while in that sequence. As part of the initialization
 routine, vehicle calls shall be placed on all phases.
 All phases shall be provided with at least the following intervals and minimum range
 of interval settings:
 i. Initial Interval
 0 to 99 Seconds
 ii. Vehicle Interval (Extension) 0 to 9 Seconds
 iii. Yellow Interval
 0 to 9 Seconds
 iv. Maximum Extension
 10 to 99 Seconds
 v. All Red Clearance
 0 to 9 Seconds
 Time spans and actuation limits specified are minimum and may be expanded.
 Each phase shall be provided with recall and memory control. Capability to initiate the
 maximum or single unit extension recall shall be provided for each phase. In addition,
 phase memory of vehicle actuations during any interval shall be provided. There shall also
 be a "Memory Off" control for each phase to delete the memory feature when it is not
 required.
 The controller shall be provided with a vehicle call indicator light for each phase. The
 indicator light shall respond to each vehicle call on its phase. The indicator light shall go
 off at the end of the initial portion of the green interval and indicate each actuation
 momentarily during the extendible portion of the green interval. Sufficient monitoring
 lights must be provided on the controller to visually indicate what part of the controller is
 timing and what function will follow. The monitoring lights shall be an integral part of the
 controller and must be a standard rather than an optional feature.
 The front panel of the modules shall be engraved, silk screened or otherwise
 permanently marked to indicate module type and identify indicator lamps, switches,
 controls, etc. so that the functions of the module are readily apparent.
 715.42.2.2.4-Flashing Operation: For use during periods of low traffic volume or
 emergency conditions, a flasher unit shall be provided to flash all signal indications
 displayed during any specified yellow-red or all-red sequence.
 
 925
 
 Upon resumption of controller operation of the signal indications, Flashing Red
 indications must be followed by the Steady Red or Steady Green interval of that sequence
 and Flashing Yellow must be followed by the Steady Green interval. This logic must be
 built into each controller main frame chassis.
 The controller shall be designed such that a fuse failure (open) on the controller side of
 the power supply will automatically switch the signal to flashing operation.
 715.42.2.2.5-Manual Control Feature: The controller shall be so designed that by
 wiring external to the controller, manual control of signal sequence timing may be
 assumed. The manual control function may be assumed with the application of the Stop
 Timing command. The operator may sequence the controller by applying input signals
 with a Manual Advance Switch.
 715.42.2.2.6-Uninterrupted Timing: Normal traffic-actuated operation shall be
 resumed automatically after Manual, Flashing Pre-emption or any other special operation
 has been utilized.
 715.42.2.2.7-Stop Timing: Means shall be provided so that on call, timing may be
 stopped on any one of all interval timers in the control system. This is provided for the
 purpose of adding extra intervals or auxiliary equipment, or both. Upon resumption of
 timing, the interrupted interval shall be timed in its entirety.
 715.42.2.2.8-Auxiliary Equipment: The controller shall be so designed that all
 standard auxiliary equipment may be added without internal controller modifications.
 Railroad or fire station pre-emption equipment shall be constructed and wired so as to
 transfer control of the signals from either the controller or the flasher unit to the preemption
 timing unit. Installation of the pre-emption equipment shall not alter the internal wiring of
 the controller chassis normally furnished by the manufacturer. In addition, the controller
 shall be furnished capable, by the addition of standard accessories external to the controller,
 of the following functions:
 i.
 Actuated pedestrian timing associated with each phase.
 ii. Minor movements associated with each phase.
 iii. Overlaps as required.
 715.42.2.2.9-Check Circuit: All controllers must be provided with a check circuit to
 indicate the presence or absence of an actuation on any of the phases which do not have
 the right-of-way so that a pedestrian interval timer may be added to any phase without
 additional equipment, other than the pedestrian timer.
 
 926
 
 715.42.2.2.10-Connectors and Wiring Harness: All electrical connections to and
 from the controller shall be made through MIL-C-26482 series pin connectors and wiring
 harness. Each wiring harness shall be at least 4 feet (1.2 m) long or of the standard length
 specified by the manufacturer for that controller chassis type. The harness end opposite
 the connector shall have color-coded leads or labeled sleeves. The harness connections
 shall be mounted on the front of the controller unit in accordance with the following:
 Connector A shall intermate with an MS3116( )-22-55S.
 Connector B shall intermate with an MS3116( )-22-55P.
 Connector C shall intermate with an MS3116( )-24-61P.
 The wiring harness, harness terminal functions and the MS connectors shall be identical
 for each connector type.
 Terminals shall be provided for the signal light cable. One terminal for each signal
 circuit and one or more terminals for the common conductors are required. All field wiring
 shall be color coded and the terminals labeled.
 The outgoing signal circuits shall be of the same polarity as the line side of the power
 supply and the common return shall be of the same polarity as the ground side of the power
 supply.
 A double pole, low-voltage lighting arrestor with mounting bracket shall be mounted
 on the back panel and wiring between the power supply and the fuse.
 All terminals except the interconnect system shall be mounted on the controller panel.
 The interconnect terminals shall be mounted on the side of the controller cabinet unless
 otherwise specified.
 715.42.2.2.11-Controller Terminal Functions Required: All controller functions
 shall be available at the MS connector terminals on the controller chassis. These functions
 shall be as specified in the latest NEMA standard-identification of input/output pin
 connector termination.
 In addition, the controller shall be provided with all terminal functions necessary for
 plan phasing and to meet the specification requirements. All functions shall be standard
 controller features and shall be available at the external controller terminal points.
 715.42.2.2.12-Per Phase Load Switching Devices: Solid-state, heavy-duty, jack
 mounted, per phase load switching units shall be used for opening and closing the signal
 light circuits. Each switching circuit shall have a minimum rating of 10 amperes for a
 tungsten-lamp or gas-tubing transformer load over a voltage range of 95 to 135 volts at 60
 Hz. No more than one circuit shall be energized at any one time unless the combined load
 on the energized circuits does not exceed a 10 ampere load. This, power handling
 capability shall not be derated for operation over the operating ambient temperature range
 described in the NEMA standards.
 Covers or cover plates on all switching devices shall be so designed as to be easily
 removed and replaced by means of set screws or similar replaceable securing devices.
 All load switches shall intermate with a Cinch-Jones socket S-2412-SB, or the
 equivalent. Physical and electrical characteristics of the switches and load racks must
 conform to the latest NEMA standards.
 
 927
 
 Signal load switches for use with the controller, but for mounting external to the
 controller units specified, shall be used for switching signal light circuits.
 715.42.2.2.13-Fail Safe: Insofar as possible, all phase and interval sequence logic
 internal to the controller shall be such that conflicting signal indications are not possible
 even during power failures or equipment malfunction. If "failsafe" signal monitoring
 devices are required external to the controller, it must be clearly stated in the manufacturer's
 instructions.
 In the same manner, combinations of signal indications expressly prohibited in the
 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices shall not be possible.
 715.42.2.2.14-Warranties and Guarantees: The Contractor or supplier is required to
 turn over to the Division any guarantee or warranties which are given by the manufacturer
 as a normal policy. The Contractor or supplier shall furnish the Division with two copies
 of complete drawings, diagrams and manufacturer's instructions for installing and
 maintaining the equipment and any assistance as required for timing and operation of the
 equipment. Any component called for by the circuit design which has special or unique
 characteristics which would limit that component to certain manufacturers or suppliers
 shall be so indicated in the manufacturer's instructions.
 The Contractor or supplier shall make available to the Division at no cost, engineering
 data, diagrams, etc. on any later changes or improvements which would increase the
 performance of the equipment purchased.
 The Division reserves the right to withhold any payments which may be due, should it
 be discovered that the equipment does not meet the Specifications.
 All components specified shall be amply derated with regard to heat dissipating
 capacity and rated voltage so that, with maximum ambient temperature and maximum
 applied voltage, material shortening of life or shift in values shall not occur.
 715.42.2.3 through 715.42.2.4-BLANK
 715.42.2.5-Solid State Traffic-Actuated Signal Controller (Type C) (Two through
 Eight-Phase NEMA-Microprocessor Based-Keyboard Entry): The purpose of this
 section is to set forth functional specifications for a microprocessor based, fully trafficactuated dual-ring, functional modular controller unit capable of providing up to eight
 phase signal operation. Timing and per phase functions shall be programmable by main
 frame single keyboard entry; per-phase modular entry is not acceptable. Single entry
 timing mode shall be provided.
 In addition to the above named, the Controller must provide a true MENU format for
 data entry. As a minimum, a forty (40) character by four (4) line, alpha-numeric liquid
 crystal data display screen must be provided on the front of the controller. The display
 must be easily visible in both full daylight and at night. Back lighting the display is
 required.
 The general design requirement of 715.42.2.2, as well as the NEMA standards, shall
 apply except when the specific requirements exceed those in that section of the standards.
 Phase designation and sequencing shall be as outlined in 715.42.2 of these
 Specifications.
 
 928
 
 The Controller must be capable of storing timings and other control parameters in an
 internal data memory. This data must then be accessible for display and/or alteration by
 means of front panel keyboard control and display. Coded memory access or other
 approved entry control must be provided.
 Power requirements and recovery from power interruption shall be as specified in
 current NEMA standards for solid-state signal controllers. Internal backup battery power
 to maintain the controller memory for up to one year in the absence of A/C power input
 must be provided in the controller.
 Full volume density operation per phase with walk must be an integral part of the
 controller logic, including variable initial and gap reduction. MUTCD flash operation,
 overlap programming, multiple phase configurations, partial or full entry capability, last
 car passage per phase and extended dual ring status display must also be provided in the
 controller.
 All inputs, outputs, interface voltage and interface common returns shall be through
 front panel pin connectors. These connectors shall be as specified in 715.42.2.2.10. I/O
 pin functions shall be in accordance with current NEMA standards.
 715.42.3-BLANK
 715.42.4-Local Coordinating Units:
 715.42.4.1-General Design Requirements: The following are minimum design and
 operating requirements for all types of local coordinating units. The general design
 requirements apply to master coordinating units and secondary coordinating units; both
 dial, electromechanical (LCU-EM) and digital, full solid state (LCU-DS). Local
 coordinating units provided for an interconnected signal system shall be completely
 compatible with the master controller and all local controllers in that system.
 The coordinating units described shall be used in conjunction with solid state traffic
 actuated signal controllers and traffic adjusted master controllers. The coordinators shall
 inhibit the internal extension limit in the local controllers and provide external maximum
 control. Background cycle lengths, splits, system offsets and other coordination functions
 as required shall be called in by a master controller or coordinator. These functions may
 also be called in by local or master override or time switches.
 For definition purposes, traffic phases shall be considered as running in sequence, such
 as A-B-C-D, etc. Also, any of these phases may consist of two separate auxiliary
 movements which must begin simultaneously but may end at different times, as long as the
 following phase is the auxiliary's associated thru-phase.
 All coordinating units shall be furnished capable of at least the following:
 i. Three background time cycles.
 ii. A separate split associated with each time cycle.
 iii. Three offsets associated with each time cycle.
 iv. A variable permissive period for yielding to minor phases (B,C, etc.).
 v. External maximum limits (force offs) as required for all associated phases.
 vi. System offset interruption, unless provided for in the system master controller.
 vii. Capability of generating cycle lengths of at least 60, 70, 80, 90, 100 and 120
 in association with each split and each offset.
 viii. Master-intersection control and supervision of other coordinating units as
 required.
 929
 
 ix.
 x.
 
 Free operation when called for by the system master, time switch or manual
 override.
 A minimum of eleven independent in and out functions shall be provided per
 dial with associated circuitry to provide yield, force off, free operation, system
 sync, dial transfer, etc.
 
 It shall be possible to set offset, splits and all synchronization functions from the front
 of the coordinating unit. It shall be possible to make these settings in at least one percent
 steps to any percentage of the associated cycle length and all such settings shall be clearly
 indicated.
 Each coordinating unit shall be plug-connected, and it shall be possible to remove a
 unit and replace it with a similar unit without shutting off the power to the controller or
 signals. Removal of the coordinating unit and insertion of the coordinating unit harness
 receptacle into a shorting plug, which shall be mounted on the cabinet wall, shall cause the
 local controller to go to free operation.
 In addition, each coordinating unit shall be provided with a switch on the front panel
 for selection of free or coordinated operation and at least the selection of one of three cycle
 lengths. Synchronization shall only be in effect in the coordinated position.
 Switch indicator lights shall be provided at the local coordinating units to indicate the
 synchronization period in effect.
 Absence or conflict of offset or cycle information on the interconnect shall place the
 coordinating unit in cycle number one, offset number one (average offset) or a pre-set
 standby cycle.
 When the controller is working in coordinated operation, the internal maximum of the
 controller for Phase A shall be disabled. At all other times, the internal maximum of the
 controller shall remain operable.
 Cycle change and transfer from free to coordinated operation shall take place at the first
 yield point (end of Phase A), unless otherwise specified.
 When required in the coordinating unit, system offset interruption shall be adjustable
 in the range of at least 0 to 40 seconds. When the local coordinating unit, for any reason,
 gets out of synchronization with the master system, the length of the dwell in any one cycle
 shall be limited to the time allowed by the offset interrupter. Timing shall start at the
 beginning of the dwell. A switch shall be provided to eliminate the offset interrupter from
 the interconnected system.
 Any changes in the operation of traffic control signal lights caused by turning the signal
 lights off, or transfer to flashing or preempt operation shall not interfere with the continued
 in-time operation of the coordination timer. A transfer from such special operation back
 to normal automatic operation shall immediately establish the normal time cycle and
 subsequently the in-time relation.
 Each coordinating unit shall be furnished with two service manuals complete with all
 necessary instructions and diagrams for the installation and maintenance of the equipment
 supplied and two complete wiring diagrams. These wiring diagrams shall identify the color
 code or wire tagging used in all connections.
 715.42.4.2-BLANK
 
 930
 
 715.42.4.3-Time Base Coordinating Units (Type TBC): The purpose of this section
 is to set forth functional specifications and design requirements for signal coordinating
 units that do not require communications interconnect or synchronous motors to maintain
 a signal system time base. These units will be designated as Time Base Coordinating Units
 or TBC.
 The general functional requirements in 715.42.4.1 for "hardwire" coordinating units
 shall apply to the TBC except where otherwise noted. All units shall be capable of the
 coordination of two (2) through eight (8) signal phases per controller.
 TBC units are to be used in conjunction with solid state traffic actuated signal
 controllers.
 The coordinating unit circuitry shall be of the latest solid state digital design. The units
 shall be completely self-contained and designed to be shelf mounted as auxiliary equipment
 in standard traffic signal controller cabinets. The units shall operate normally on 115 VAC,
 60 Hz line power and shall provide immediate standby battery power for the clock and
 programmable memory upon interruption of on-line power. Time base timing accuracy
 for normal (non-battery) operation shall be  1 second/month of continuous operation.
 Line voltage tolerance for specified operation shall be up to 135 VAC and down to 95
 VAC. NEMA specified transient protection shall also be provided with each unit.
 Operating temperature, humidity and all other environmental tolerances specified in
 current NEMA standards shall be met.
 Battery power for standby operation shall be of the rechargeable type and provide at
 least 100 consecutive hours of standby operation after 48 hours of normal operation with a
 minimum 3-year life. Standby clock accuracy shall be at least 0.005% in 48 hours.
 The following programmable functions shall be available to the user via front of unit
 keyboard entry.
 Minimum 100 time of day (TOD) program events per day of week
 Four (4) cycle lengths
 Three (3) offsets per cycle
 Two (2) daylight savings time changes
 Free operation selection
 Four (4) synchronization reference times (1 per cycle)
 At least eight (8) outputs associated with the above functions shall be provided. Outputs
 must be provided for synchronization, yield, force-off, phase omit (etc.); in addition, a
 minimum of three (3) auxiliary outputs shall be available to operate controller functions
 such as flash, MAX II, change of phase sequence, switching of detectors (etc.). The outputs
 shall be of the voltage required by the system configuration.
 All program entries shall be available upon demand on a front panel display that is
 easily readable when shaded from direct sunlight. Output status shall also be available on
 the unit front panel display. In addition, the unit shall give positive feedback to the
 programmer that a keyboard entry was made and recognized. This also must be displayed
 on the front panel by readily discernible means.
 Program transfer capability via data transfer port and cable must be provided on each
 unit. Standard interconnecting cable for this function must be provided with each unit.
 
 931
 
 715.42.5-Traffic Detectors:
 715.42.5.1-General Design Requirements: The following are minimum design and
 operating requirements for all types of traffic detector units. The general design
 requirements apply to both the loop detectors and the magnetic probe detectors. Detector
 units within a traffic-actuated system shall be completely compatible with the control units
 in that system.
 The detector units described shall be used in conjunction with pre-timed fixed cycle
 traffic signal controllers, solid-state traffic actuated signal controllers and traffic adjusted
 master system signal controllers.
 The detector circuitry shall be solid state and all component parts shall be of high
 quality meeting the maximum acceptable standards of good engineering practices. All
 components shall be amply derated with regard to heat dissipating capacity and rated
 voltage so that, with maximum ambient temperature and maximum applied voltage,
 material shortening of life or shift in values shall not occur. Any component called for by
 the circuit design which has special or unique characteristics which would limit that
 component to certain manufacturers or suppliers shall be so indicated in the manufacturer's
 installation, operation and service instructions.
 The detectors shall be capable of sensing both passage and presence of vehicles and
 shall not be affected by rain or other weather conditions. It shall be possible to change
 from passage to presence detection by a selector switch mounted on the outside of the
 detector unit case. The passage or presence of a vehicle over a road sensor shall activate
 an output relay.
 The pulse detection mode shall provide a short output signal for each vehicle entering
 the roadway sensor zone of detection.
 The presence detection mode shall provide a vehicle presence output signal for as long
 as a vehicle is stopped in the roadway sensor zone or as otherwise specified.
 The detectors shall be designed "fail safe." In case of power failure, the output relay
 shall remain in the closed position.
 All detector units shall be designed to operate from a 120 volt (plus or minus 10
 percent), 60 Hz, AC power line service.
 The detector units shall be completely self-contained and shall include an integral,
 fused power supply. The detector chassis shall be enclosed in a removable, sturdy
 aluminum or other non-corrosive metal case. The case shall furnish the chassis protection
 from moisture and other ambient conditions. The detector shall be of such a size as to
 readily fit into a cabinet with the signal controller when so required. All electrical
 connections to and from the detector unit shall be made through a multiterminal, quick
 disconnect, plug-type connector and wiring harness. Each wiring harness shall be at least
 36 in. (900 mm) long. The harness end opposite the connector shall have color-coded leads
 or labeled sleeves. The harness connection shall be such that the detector may be replaced
 with a similar unit, without the necessity of disconnecting and reconnecting individual
 wires leading therefrom.
 If the detector is mounted in the same cabinet with signal control equipment, all harness
 connections except power supply and vehicle call to controller shall be made on a separate
 terminal strip mounted in the controller cabinet for that purpose. Power supply connection
 and a vehicle call to controller may be connected to terminals on the controller back-panel.
 
 932
 
 A front panel light, clearly visible under full daylight conditions, shall be provided to
 indicate when a vehicle is in the detection area.
 An instruction manual and an internal wiring schematic drawing shall be provided with
 each detector to facilitate installation, operation and service of the units.
 The Contractor or equipment supplier shall turn over to the Division any guarantee or
 warranties which are given by the equipment manufacturer as a normal policy.
 NOTE: The above general design requirements do not apply to pedestrian detectors.
 Pedestrian push buttons are covered in 715.42.5.4.
 715.42.5.2-Loop Traffic Detectors (LPS):
 The purpose of this section is to set forth functional specifications and design
 requirements for a solid state digital, automatically tuned and completely self-contained,
 shelf-mounted unit for detecting the passage or presence of vehicles when connected to a
 wire loop embedded in the roadway surface.
 The general design requirements in 7l5.42.5.l and NEMA standards shall apply except
 when the specific requirements exceed those in 7l5.42.5.l and NEMA.
 The detector shall respond only to vehicles either stopped in or passing over any portion
 of the roadway loop. The unit shall be capable of driving loops of various sizes and
 configurations within a range of 30-1,000 microhenries. It shall be capable of tuning loops
 of up to 50 feet (15 m) in length with up to 1,000 feet (300 m) of lead-in wire. The detector
 shall be capable of detecting vehicles traveling at any speed between zero and 100 mph. (0
 and 160 km/hr.).
 Individual sensor-detector assemblies shall operate satisfactorily under conditions
 where adjacent sensors are located within 6 feet (1.8 m) of each other.
 The following minimum controls or equivalent shall be provided on the front panel of
 the detector.
 i. Frequency.................................................... High, median and low
 ii. Sensitivity ........................................................ As specified below
 iii. Presence ........................................................... As specified below
 Sensitivity-Three selections of minimum thresholds that will detect changes in total
 loop inductance as low as (l) 0.02%, (2) 0.08% and (3) 0.32%.
 Presence-Three selections of presence time modes (1) long-3.5 minutes (minimum),
 (2) medium-20 seconds (minimum), (3) pulse – 125  25 milliseconds pulse per vehicle.
 All electrical connections to the detector shall be made through a single front-mounted,
 11 pin, amphenol connector. The connection mounted on the detector shall be male-type
 and shall be protected and rigidly fixed.
 A mating female receptacle with appropriate cable clamps and at least 4 feet (1.2 m) of
 connecting harness cable shall be provided with each detector. The other end of the cable
 shall have color-coded leads, or labeled sleeves, each of which shall be fitted with positive
 grip, and crimp spade terminals for field connections.
 The 11 pin connector on the detector shall have the following pin assignments:
 (Adapter harnesses will not be acceptable.)
 
 933
 
 PIN NUMBER
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 11
 
 CIRCUIT
 Fused side of 120 volt AC line
 Neutral side of 120 volt AC line
 Not Used
 Earth
 Relay common contact
 Relay, normally open, contact
 Loop
 Loop
 Relay, normally closed, contact
 Not Used
 Not Used
 
 Detector loopwire and detector feeder cable shall be as specified in 715.42.13. Loop
 layout and configuration shall be specified in the plans, or as directed by the Engineer.
 Output interfacing shall be by means of relay circuitry. All components shall meet the
 latest requirements of the NEMA Standards.
 Type LPS SD detectors shall meet all the requirements of the specifications for
 715.42.5.2-Loop Traffic Detectors (LPS), but in addition, must have separate built-in
 stretch and delay timers with 0 to 15, 0 to 30, and 0 to 60 seconds timing ranges.
 715.42.6-Adjustable Face Signal Heads:
 715.42.6.1-Definition of Terms:
 Lane Control Signal Head: An assembly containing one or more signal faces
 having indications used to permit or prohibit the use of specific lanes of a street or
 highway.
 Lens: That part of the optical unit which redirects the light coming directly from
 the lamp and its reflector.
 Optically Programmed Signal Head: An assembly containing one or more signal
 faces which may be designated accordingly as one-way, two-way, etc., permitting the
 visibility zone of the indication to be determined optically.
 Optical Unit: An assembly of redirecting cover glass or lens, reflector, lamp and
 lamp socket with the necessity supporting parts to be used for providing a single signal
 indication.
 Pedestrian Control Signal: A traffic control signal, manually, electrically or
 mechanically operated which is erected for the exclusive purpose of directing
 pedestrian traffic at signalized locations.
 Signal Face: That part of a signal head provided for controlling traffic in a single
 direction. Turning indications may be included in a signal head.
 Signal Head: An assembly containing one or more signal faces which may be
 designated accordingly as one-way, two-way etc.
 Signal Indication: The illumination of a traffic signal lens or equivalent device or
 a combination of several lenses or equivalent devices at the same time.
 Traffic Control Signal: Any device, whether manually, electrically or
 mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to
 proceed.
 934
 
 NOTE: The above list of definitions may not be complete for all terms used. Final
 interpretations of all terms is the responsibility of the Engineer (see West Virginia
 Standard Specifications, Section 101).
 715.42.6.2-Traffic Control Signal Heads: Each signal shall be of the adjustable,
 colored light, vertical type with the number and type of sections described and shown on
 the Plans. Each head shall have an indication in one direction only and shall be adjustable
 through 360 degrees about a vertical axis.
 All new signal heads at any one intersection shall be of the same make and type.
 Position of Signal Indications:
 All signal indications shall be in a straight line and shall be in the following order
 although all indications shown need not be included in all cases. In vertical signals,
 Position 1 shall be at the top, the Position 8 at the bottom. In horizontal signals, Position
 1 shall be at the left (facing the signal), and position 6 at the right.
 POSITION
 Vertical
 Horizontal
 1
 1
 2
 2
 3
 4
 4
 5
 5
 3
 6
 6
 7
 8
 
 SIGNAL INDICATION
 Red
 Yellow
 Green
 Straight Thru Arrow
 Left Turn Arrow
 Right Turn Arrow
 Don't Walk Symbol
 Walk Symbol
 
 Pedestrian signal indication shall be mounted separately below the conventional post
 mounted signal to allow for separate directional facing for these indications and to obtain
 definition of the signal by spacing. At no time will a pedestrian signal indication be
 allowed to hang below an overhead-mounted signal.
 Assembly:
 Each head shall consist of an assembly of individual interchangeable sections securely
 bolted together to form a unit. There shall be no tie rods used in the assembly. The finished
 assembly shall present a clean, neat appearance. Each individual section shall house a
 complete optical unit. It shall be possible to assembly any combination of 8 in. and 12 in.
 (203 mm and 305 mm) heads without the use of special adapters.
 The top and bottom of each section shall have an opening to accommodate standard 1½
 in. (DN40) pipe brackets. The opening shall be in line vertically. The assembly shall be
 capable of being rotated between standard waterproof supporting brackets or trunnions and
 thus aimed in any direction in the horizontal plane. The portion of each section adjacent
 to the bracket openings and the portion used for connecting sections shall be properly
 reinforced to provide sufficient strength to resist shock, vibration and impact damage.
 
 935
 
 Each section shall have lugs for the mounting of at least one six-position, twelveterminal, barrier-type terminal block.
 Each section shall have lugs or pads such that backplates may be mounted without
 drilling or tapping the section.
 The housing door shall be a one-piece square casting, having two hinge locations on
 the left side and at least one latch location on the right side. The hinges shall have stainless
 steel pins at least 3/16 inch (5 mm) in diameter. The latch shall consist (1) a latch jaw on
 the door and a stainless steel latch screw, wing nut, and washer securely affixed to the
 housing, or (2) a captive wing nut, washer, and screw assembly on the door and a captive
 nut in the housing. It shall be possible to open and remove the door without the use of any
 tools.
 The door shall have a gasketed opening that shall provide a visible lens diameter of 7
 ¾ to 8 in. (197 to 203 mm) for a nominal 8 in. (203 mm) lens and 11½ to 12 in. (292 to
 305 mm) for a nominal 12 in. (305 mm) lens. All lenses shall be as described in 715.42.6.4.
 The door shall have four equally spaced visor attachment points around the lens
 opening.
 Visors shall be at least 7 inches (175 mm) long for an 8-inch (203 mm) lens and at least
 9½ inches (241 mm) long for a 12-inch lens (305 mm). Visors shall be described as
 cutaway, tunnel, or full circle. All heads shall be supplied with tunnel visors, unless
 otherwise noted on the Plans or unless prior permission from the Division has been
 received. All new replacement signal heads at any one intersection shall have the same
 type as the existing visors supplied, unless otherwise specified on the Plans.
 Visors shall be designed with a downward tilt between 3½ degrees and 5 degrees, shall
 eliminate the escape of light from one indication to another, and with the optical unit, shall
 eliminate the return of outside rays entering the unit from above the horizontal (known as
 sun phantom).
 The Signal Sections, all brackets, trunions and suspension devices shall be painted in
 accordance with ITE (Institute Transportation Engineers) Specifications. The inside of the
 signal section visors shall be flat black enamel to eliminate objectionable reflections. NonMetallic signal sections must have a color impregnated finish and be the same color as the
 enameled sections. The inside of non-metallic visors must also be painted with a
 permanent flat black enamel or use other means to prevent reflections.
 The optical unit shall consist of the lamp, lampholder, reflector, lens gasket and lens,
 and shall be so designed that all light emitted by the unit passes through the leans and so
 that any possibility of false indications is eliminated.
 The lampholder shall be of heat resisting material designed to properly position a
 medium screw base traffic signal lamp, with means to accommodate a lamp having light
 center 2-7/16 inches (60 mm) in length for the 60-watt and 100-watt series and 3 inches
 (75 mm) in length for the 150-watt series. The lampholder shall be provided with a lamp
 grip to prevent the lamp from working loose due to vibration. Provision shall be made on
 either the lampholder or the reflector holder to permit rotation of the lamp so that the leadin wires are up and the lamp shall be retained securely in that position, but no change in
 position of the socket with respect to the optical center of the reflector shall occur. The
 metal portion of the lampholder shall be compatible with brass or copper.
 Each lampholder shall be provided with two coded No. 18 or larger lead wires, type
 TEW, 600-watt, AWM fixture with 2/64 in. (0.8 mm), 221º F (105º C) rating thermoplastic
 
 936
 
 insulation, securely fastened to the socket, and with sufficient length to reach the terminal
 block with the holder or door fully open. The thermoplastic insulation shall at minus 30F
 (-34º C) be capable of being bent six times around a 1 in. (25 mm) mandrel without damage
 to its insulating properties at rated voltage. A suitable terminal block or blocks shall be
 provided in the second section from the top or in each section of one-section heads. The
 terminal block shall have at least one section for each signal head section plus at least two
 additional sections per block. Terminal blocks shall be standard commercially available
 units.
 Reflectors shall be specular aluminum in accordance with the latest ITE Specifications
 and shall be mounted in a reflector holder. The reflector holder shall provide a rigid
 reflector mounting to assure proper alignment between the lens and the reflector with the
 door closed. The reflector shall have a lampholder opening in the back. The reflector shall
 have a bead or flange on the outer edge to stiffen the reflector and insure its dimensional
 stability. The reflecting surface shall be totally free from flaws, scratches, defacements
 and mechanical distortion.
 The lens gasket shall be a slotted circular neoprene gasket specifically designed to
 exclude moisture, dust and road film. The optical unit shall be sealed to exclude moisture
 and dust. This may be accomplished in one of two ways:
 i.
 If the open door contains the complete optical unit, the reflector/door and the
 reflector/lampholder interfaces shall be equipped with specially designed
 neoprene seals to completely seal the optical unit. The section must not
 accumulate water.
 ii. If the reflector and lampholder remain in the section when the door is opened,
 the entire section shall be made watertight and dust tight by a weatherproof
 neoprene gasket contained in a gasket groove in the door. The gasket shall seal
 against a raised bead in the section to provide the proper seal.
 The lighted signal shall appear to be illuminated over the entire visible lens surface
 without shadows when viewed from any angle up to 30 degrees each side of the optical
 axis horizontally and up to 45 degrees below the optical axis vertically.
 The required appearance, light distribution and candle power intensity from the
 complete assembled section shall meet latest revision of the ITE Specification. "A
 Standard for Adjustable Face Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads."
 Trunnions, Brackets and Suspensions:
 All trunnions, brackets and suspensions used for assembling and mounting vehicle
 traffic control signal heads shall be entirely weathertight without the use of externally
 applied sealants or caulking. The trunnions, brackets and suspensions shall be the same
 manufacturer as the signal heads.
 All tubular parts shall be 1½ in. IPS (DN40) pipe. When hollow cast brackets or
 trunnions are used, they shall be of sufficient strength to support the maximum load
 imposed by the signal heads under all normal wind conditions.
 The lower support or connection between signal heads in a spanwire or mast-arm
 mounted signal may be an aluminum casting or stamping of suitable strength.
 
 937
 
 Wire raceway areas within brackets, trunnions and suspensions shall be of adequate
 size to carry all necessary wires without crowding, and raceway surfaces shall be free of
 sharp edges or protrusions which might damage insulation on wires.
 Suspensions for mast-arm or span-wire mounting shall include a device to permit
 adjustment for proper vertical alignment of the signal head.
 Non-metallic trunnions, brackets and suspension parts previously approved by the
 Division may be supplied. Such parts must be capable of mounting both metallic and nonmetallic signal heads and must have metallic reinforcement at points of anticipated wear.
 Reinforcing metal must be compatible with aluminum, steel and galvanized steel.
 Backplates:
 All signal head assemblies so indicated on the Plans shall be provided with backplates
 designed to fit the combination of sections for each signal face.
 These backplates shall be fabricated from non-ferrous metal of gage to withstand
 distortion in 60 mph. (100 km/hr) winds and shall be firmly attached to each signal face in
 such a manner as to withstand the above wind load and to permit the opening of any signal
 independent from the other doors in the signal face.
 Overhead signal heads shall have backplates with a 5 inch (125 mm) border.
 Pedestal mounted signals shall have backplates with an eight inch (200 mm) border.
 The backplates shall be finished with the best quality, oven-baked black enamel and
 shall comply with Federal Specifications TT-E-489.
 715.42.6.3-Metallic Signal Heads: Each head of this type shall be constructed
 primarily of aluminum and aluminum castings and stainless steel, and shall meet all
 requirements in 715.42.6.2, and shall accept lenses and lamps as described in 715.42.6.4.
 The section and door shall be one-piece, corrosion-resistant aluminum alloy die
 castings. Visors and reflectors shall be made from sheet aluminum or die castings.
 All cast metal parts shall have a tensile strength of not less than 17,000 psi. (117 MPa)
 All castings shall be clean, smooth and free from flaws, cracks, blowholes and other
 imperfections. The castings shall conform to ASTM B 85 alloys SC84A, SC84B, SG100A,
 SG100B, S12A or S12B.
 Sheet aluminum parts shall be manufactured from corrosion-resistant aluminum sheet
 having a tensile strength of at least 20,000 psi (138 MPa), except that reflectors shall be
 manufactured from the aluminum alloy suggested by the manufacturer.
 All hinge pins and latch parts shall be Type 304, stainless steel.
 Miscellaneous parts and hardware shall be made of non-corrosive materials.
 All parts shall have sufficient strength to show minimal damage under severe loading
 conditions. Visors shall be not less than 0.05 in. (1.31 mm) thick. Reflectors shall be spun
 or drawn from aluminum not less than 0.025 in. (0.64 mm) thick.
 715.42.6.4-Non-Metallic Signal Heads: Each head of this type shall be constructed
 primarily of a non-metallic material, aluminum and stainless steel, shall meet all
 requirements of 715.42.6.2 and shall accept lenses and lamps as described below. The nonmetallic material used shall be durable and resistant to marring, scratching, discoloration,
 weather, temperature change, shock and color change from weather or photochemical
 action. The thickness of the non-metallic material shall be sufficient to provide at least the
 strength of the cast aluminum product of the same manufacturer at any location tested.
 938
 
 In addition, the finished section shall pass the following test for strength: A completely
 wired three-section head without lamps or visors shall be securely fastened between two
 brackets. A one-pound (450 gram) weight with a spherical tip 2 inches (50 mm) in diameter
 shall be impacted into the center section on any surface including the door with an impact
 of 70 ft-lb. No part of any section, except the lens, shall be dented, cracked, crazed,
 chipped, punctured or otherwise visibly damaged.
 The test shall be conducted at 0F, 70F and 120F (at -18 C, 21 C and 49 C) ambient
 temperatures after the head has been kept at the test temperature for 12 hours. Immediately
 after the test, lamps shall be installed and the head shall be shown to function normally.
 The non-metallic material, resin and reinforcement fibers, where used, shall be die-cast
 to produce a smooth glossy surface to which water, dirt and diesel oil will not readily
 adhere. Colors shall be cast integrally in the material. The finished product shall be free
 from all visible casting defects, including color variances. All hinge pins and latch parts
 shall be Type 304 stainless steel.
 Miscellaneous parts and hardware shall be made of a non-corrosive material.
 Visors shall be at least as strong as aluminum sheet with a tensile strength of 20,000
 psi (138 MPa) and a thickness of 0.05 in. (1.3 mm)
 All parts shall have sufficient strength to show minimal damage under severe loading
 conditions.
 Lamps and Lenses:
 Lamps: The lamps supplied with the traffic signal heads shall have the filament
 adequately supported to withstand the vibration induced from truck traffic and heavy
 winds. The light center length (LCL) is the dimension, in inches (mm), from the center of
 the filament to the tip of the base. All traffic signal lamps shall have a brass, standard,
 medium screw base, a clear glass envelope and shall be in conformance with the following
 design requirements:
 i. All 8 in. or 12 in. (203 or 305 mm) traffic signal indications shall have a lamp
 rating of between 110 and 120 watts, a light center length (LCL) of 2-7/16 in.
 (60 mm), with a minimum initial lumen value of 1,260 and a rated life of at
 least 6,000 hours.
 ii. All 8 in. or 12 in. (203 or 305 mm) traffic signal indications, used exclusively
 for flashing operation shall have a lamp rating of between 60 and 70 watts, a
 light center length (LCL) of 2-7/16 in. (60 mm), with a minimum initial lumen
 value of 665 and a rated life of at least 6,000 hours.
 The glass envelope of the lamps shall be etched to show the manufacturers insignia or
 trademark, the voltage rating, the rated wattage and the rated life hours.
 Lenses: The lens shall be standard prismatic red, yellow or green and shall be durable
 on prolonged exposure to weather. Each lens shall be of clear colored glass or
 polycarbonate resin, free from bubbles and flaws and shall be annealed to relieve internal
 stresses. Flashed lenses will not be accepted.
 Lenses shall conform to the ITE Specification, "A Standard for Adjustable Face
 Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads," and any revisions to the latest edition.
 The luminous transmission for traffic signal lenses and the limits of chromaticity for
 traffic signal colors shall be as follows:
 
 939
 
 RED
 
 The minimum relative luminous transmittance shall be 0.095; the
 value of y shall not be greater than 0.308 nor less than 0.998 minus x
 
 YELLOW
 
 The minimum relative luminous transmittance shall be 0.440; the
 value of y shall not be less than 0.411 nor less than 0.995 minus x nor
 greater than 0.452
 
 GREEN
 
 The minimum relative luminous transmittance shall be 0.200; the
 value of y shall not be less than 0.506 minus 0.519x nor less than
 0.150 plus 1.068x nor greater than 0.730 minus x
 
 Each lens shall be furnished with a label which shall indicate that the lens meets the
 specifications of the Institute of Traffic Engineers, "A Standard for Adjustable Face
 Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads," January 2, 1966, and any revisions thereof.
 All lenses, except arrows, shall have pressed on its flange the word "TOP" to indicate
 the proper positioning of the lens in the door for obtaining the light distribution required,
 together with the diameter and other designations, including the name or trademark of the
 manufacturer needed for proper application and help in purchasing replacements.
 The nominal 8 in. (203 mm) lens shall have an outside diameter of from 8-5/16 in. to
 8-3/8 in. (211 to 213 mm) The nominal 12 in. (305 mm) lens shall have an outside diameter
 of from 11-15/16 in. to 12-1/32 in. (303 to 306 mm) (These dimensions do not apply to the
 visible indication area of the optically programmed head.) Each lens shall fit into a
 specifically designed slotted circular neoprene lens gasket designed to fit the housing door
 in such a manner so as to exclude moisture, dust and road film.
 Arrow Lenses:
 Arrow lenses shall meet the ITE Specification, "A Standard for Adjustable Face
 Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads," January 22, 1966, and any revisions thereof, and
 all other specifications above. The lens shall be of approved color specified above. All
 lenses shall be covered, except for the arrow with the light from a 200 watt lamp placed
 behind it. The enamel shall be baked or fired into the lens. The enamel shall be hard and
 durable and shall not peel or flake when subjected to the heat of a signal lamp when the
 lens is in use, or when the lens is washed. The arrow shall be the only illuminated portion
 of the lens.
 715.42.6.5-Pedestrian Control Signal Heads (Incandescent): These Specifications
 cover symbolic pedestrian signal assemblies to be illuminated by incandescent lamps
 mounted behind two lenses (one for each symbol), having translucent symbols.
 General Design Requirements:
 The nominal size of the lenses shall be 12 by 12 in. (305 by 305 mm).
 Housing:
 The housing shall be constructed of cast or sheet corrosion resistant, non-ferrous metal
 or plastic, or of a combination of these materials.
 
 940
 
 All cast metal parts shall have tensile strength of not less than 17,000 psi. (117 MPa)
 Sheet metal shall have a tensile strength of 27,000 psi. (186 MPa) All parts shall be clean,
 smooth and free from flaws, cracks, blowholes and other imperfections.
 If the housing and doors of the signal heads are made of aluminum alloy, they shall
 have one of the following compositions:
 i. If die castings are furnished, the alloys shall be in accordance with ASTM B 85
 60T or the latest revision thereof, and the physical characteristics and chemical
 content of the alloy used shall be within the combined limits established by allows
 S-12A, S-12B, SC-84A, SC-84B, SG-100A and SG-100B of the ASTM
 Specification.
 ii. If sand castings are furnished, the alloys shall be in accordance with ASTM B 26
 60T or the latest revision thereof, and physical characteristics and chemical content
 of the alloy used shall be within the combined limits established by alloys S-5A
 and CS-72A of the ASTM Specification.
 iii. If permanent mold castings are furnished, the alloys shall be in accordance with
 ASTM B 108 60T or the latest revision thereof, and the physical characteristics and
 chemical content of the alloy used shall be within the combined limits established
 by alloys S-5A and CS-72A of the ASTM Specification.
 iv. If sheets are furnished, the alloys shall be in accordance with ASTM 209 58T or
 the latest revision thereof, and the physical characteristics and chemical content of
 the alloy used shall be M1A of the ASTM Specification.
 When required, the successful bidder shall furnish satisfactory evidence that materials
 comply with the foregoing requirements.
 The housing shall be of unitized sectional construction and shall consist of as many
 sections as there may be optical unit levels. All sections shall be rigidly and securely
 fastened together into one weathertight signal face assembly.
 Each housing shall be arranged with round openings in the top and bottom so that it
 may be rotated between waterproof supporting brackets on trunnions and thus be capable
 of being directed at any angle to the horizontal plane. The openings shall be provided with
 a serrated ring which shall permit indexing and locking of the signal head in five-degree
 increments throughout the entire 360 degrees of rotation possible. The portion of the
 housing adjacent to the bracket shall be properly reinforced so as to have sufficient strength
 against breakage from shock.
 The housing door of each signal section shall be a one-piece, corrosion resistant
 aluminum alloy die casting. Two hinge lugs shall be cast on the one side of the door and
 latch jaws shall be cast on the opposite side of the door.
 The door shall be attached to the housing by means of two solid stainless steel hinge
 pins of not less than ¼ in. (6 mm) diameter.
 A stainless steel latch screw, wing nut and washer on the latch jaw side of the housing
 shall provide for opening and closing the signal door without the use of any special tools.
 A gasket groove on the inside of the door shall accommodate a weatherproof and
 dustproof seal.
 The outer face of the door shall have tapped holes equally spaced about the perimeter
 of the housing to accommodate screws for securing the signal head visors.
 Latch screws, hinge pins, wing nuts and washers shall be Type 304 stainless steel.
 
 941
 
 The housing door shall be finished with the best quality, oven-baked yellow enamel
 and shall comply with Federal Specifications TT-E-489.
 The housing, when properly mounted using 1½ in. (DN40) pipe brackets, shall be able
 to withstand a concentrated load of 50 lbs. (23 kg) placed 6 inches (150 mm) from the
 centerline of the mounting brackets on either side of the opening or on both sides of the
 opening simultaneously. Such loading shall not produce sufficient deformation to cause
 the material to fail or to take a permanent set that would interfere with opening the door,
 rotation about the brackets, or loss of the weathertight integrity of the unit.
 Visors:
 Each signal head shall have a visor for each signal indication. The visor shall be
 designed to fit tightly against the door and shall not permit any perceptible filtration of
 light between door and the visor. The visor shall be 8 inches (203 mm) minimum in depth
 and inclined downward approximately 32 degrees with complete enclosure at the top and
 sides. The visor shall be of sheet construction and shall be of corrosion resistant, nonferrous metal not less than 0.05 in. (No. 18 US gage) in thickness. The outside of the visor
 shall be of the same yellow enamel as the housing and door. The inside of the visors shall
 be painted a dull nonreflective black.
 Pedestrian Signal Lenses:
 Each lens shall be clear colored glass or plastic free from bubbles and flaws, and shall
 be annealed to relieve internal stresses. Flashed lenses will not be accepted.
 Lenses shall conform to the ITE Specifications, "Adjustable Face Pedestrian Signal
 Standard," and revisions thereof, where applicable.
 The luminous transmission for pedestrian lenses and the limits of chromaticity for
 signal colors shall be as follows:
 Portland Orange-Don't Walk Symbol-The luminous transmittance shall be not less than
 0.300; the value of y shall not be greater than 0.390 nor less than 0.997 minus x.
 Lunar White-Walk Symbol-The luminous transmittance shall not be less than 0.290;
 the value of x shall not be greater than 0.420 nor less than 0.329. The value of y shall not
 be greater than 0.510x plus 0.186 nor less than 0.510 plus 0.170.
 Each lens shall have pressed on its flange such designation and trademark of
 manufacturer to facilitate proper application and to help in purchase of replacements.
 The nominal 12 in. (305 mm) lens shall have minimum overall dimensions of 12 in. by
 12 in. (305 by 305 mm) with a visible area of 11 in. by 11 in. (280 by 280 mm).
 Message:
 The Walk-Don't Walk symbols shall be according to the Standard Highway Signs
 Booklet, published by the Federal Highway Administration.
 The surface of the lens, except for the symbol, shall be covered by opaque enamel of
 sufficient thickness to totally obscure the light of a 150-watt lamp when placed 12 in. (305
 mm) behind the lens. The enamel shall be baked or fired into the glass and shall not peel
 or flake during normal use.
 
 942
 
 Reflectors:
 Reflectors shall be specular Alzak finished aluminum and be designed for a 10 year
 service life.
 Reflectors shall be mounted in a cast aluminum reflector support attached to the
 housing, or shall be an integral reflector and support of formed sheet aluminum.
 The reflector assembly shall be pivoted to the housing and shall be designed so that it
 can be swung out or easily removed without the use of any tools.
 The method of mounting and fastening reflectors shall be sufficiently rigid to secure
 proper alignment between the lens and reflector when the door is closed.
 The construction of the signal head and its components shall be such that the fit between
 the reflector and the lens will eliminate all possibility of false indications.
 Reflectors shall have an opening in the back for the lamp socket.
 Pedestrian signal reflectors shall be of specular aluminum, the thickness of the anodic
 coating shall be a minimum of 0.0001 in. (2.5 μm) or its equivalent, spun or drawn from
 metal not less than 0.025 in. (0.64 mm) thick, equipped with a bead or flange on the outer
 edge to stiffen the reflector and insure its being held true to shape.
 The reflecting surface shall be totally free of flaws, scratches, defacements or
 mechanical distortion.
 Light Distribution:
 The lighted signal shall appear to be uniformly illuminated over the entire message
 surface, without shadows when viewed from usual angles encountered in service.
 Distribution of light through the letters shall be uniform and free from halation or other
 uncontrolled scattering which may reduce legibility of the message.
 The pedestrian indications should attract the attention of, and be readable to, the
 pedestrian (both day and night) at all distances from 10 ft. (3 m) to the full width of the
 area to be crossed. When not illuminated, the WALK and DON'T WALK symbols shall
 not appear to be illuminated by external light sources when viewed from the far end of the
 crosswalk they control.
 Lamps:
 Lamps supplied with the pedestrian signal heads shall have the filament adequately
 supported to withstand the vibration induced from truck traffic and heavy winds. All
 pedestrian signal lamps shall have a brass, standard, medium screw base and clear glass
 envelope. The light center length (LCL), or the dimension, in inches (mm), from the center
 of the filament to the top of the base, shall be in conformance with the following design
 requirements:
 All pedestrian signal lamps for use in 12 in. (305 mm) pedestrian signal heads shall
 have a light center length of 3 inches (75 mm).
 Pedestrian signal lamps shall conform to the following standards:
 TWELVE-INCH PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL
 Nominal
 Rated Life
 Min. Initial
 Wattage
 Hours
 Lumens
 150 watt series
 6,000
 1,950
 
 943
 
 The glass envelope of the lamps shall be etched to show the manufacturer's insignia or
 trademark, the voltage rating, the rated wattage, and the rated life hours.
 Lamp Receptacle:
 The lamp receptacle shall be heat resisting material designed to properly position a
 medium screw base pedestrian signal lamp with means to accommodate a lamp having
 light center 3 inches (75 mm) in length for the 150-watt series. The receptacle shall be
 provided with a lamp grip to prevent the lamp from working loose due to vibration.
 Provision shall be made on either the lamp receptacle or the reflector holder to permit
 rotation of the lamp so that the lead-in wires are up, and a secure fastening for the retention
 of the lamp in that position, but shall not permit any change in position of the socket with
 respect to the optical center of the reflector. The metal portion of the lamp receptacle shall
 be compatible with brass or copper.
 Wiring:
 Each lamp receptacle shall be provided with two coded No. 18 or larger lead wires,
 Type TEW, 600 volt, AWM fixture wire with 1/32 in. (0.8 mm), 221º F (105º C) rating
 thermoplastic insulation, securely fastened to the socket, and with sufficient length to reach
 the terminal block with the reflector fully open. The thermoplastic insulation shall at minus
 30 F (-35º C) be capable of being bent six times around a 1 in. (25 mm) mandrel without
 damage to its insulating properties at rated voltage. A suitable terminal block signal
 housing shall be provided.
 Trunnions, Brackets and Suspensions:
 All trunnions, brackets and suspensions used for assembling and mounting vehicle
 traffic control sign heads shall be entirely weather-tight without the use of externally
 applied sealants or caulking. The trunnions, brackets and suspensions shall be the same
 manufacturer as the signal heads.
 All tubular parts shall be 1½ in. IPS (DN40) pipe. When hollow cast brackets or
 trunnions are used, they shall be of sufficient strength to support the maximum load
 imposed by the signal heads under all normal wind conditions.
 Wire raceway areas within brackets, trunnions and suspensions shall be of adequate
 size to carry all necessary wires without crowding, and raceway surfaces shall be free of
 sharp edges or protrusions which might damage insulation on wires.
 715.42.6.6-Optically Programmed Traffic Signal Heads: The purpose of this
 section is to set forth the minimum specifications for all optically programmed traffic signal
 heads and associated equipment.
 Signal Heads:
 All signal heads shall be the nominal 12 in. (305 mm) type and shall be adjustable
 through 360 degrees about a vertical axis, with each individual section being adjustable
 plus or minus nine degrees about a horizontal axis, maintaining a vertical centerline
 through couplers and conduit. Each section shall be equipped with a sun visor.
 
 944
 
 All die cast aluminum parts shall conform to the following specifications or the latest
 revision thereof; Die casting SC-84A, SC-84B, SG-100A, SG-100B or S-12B of ASTM
 Specifications B 85. All stainless steel shall be of Type 304.
 All surfaces outside of the signal heads (except the underside of the visors) shall be
 finished with the best quality, oven-baked yellow enamel and shall comply with Federal
 Specifications TT-E-489.
 The signal head housing shall consist of an assembly of separate interchangeable
 sections, expansible type for vertical mounting without tie rods, substantially secured
 together in a watertight manner to form a unit. Each section shall house an individual
 optical unit. The top and bottom of the signal housing shall have an opening to
 accommodate standard 12 in. (DN40) pipe brackets.
 The optical system shall consist of a lamp, a circlet reflector, an optical limiter-diffuser
 combination and an objective lens. The lamp shall be nominal 150 watt, 120 volt AC, three
 prong, sealed beam having an integral reflector and an average rated life of 6,000 hours.
 A circlet reflector with a specular inter surface shall mate the lamp to the diffusing element.
 The optical limiter-diffuser combination shall provide an imaging surface, at focus on the
 optical axis for objects 900 to 1,200 ft. distance and permit an effective veiling system to
 be variously applied as determined by the desired visibility zone. The optical limiterdiffuser shall be provided with positive indexing means and composed of heat resistant
 glass. The objective lens shall be a high resolution planar incremental lens hermetically
 sealed with a flat laminate of weather-resistant acrylic. The lens shall be symmetrical in
 outline and may be rotated to any 90 degree orientation about the optical axis. Lens colors
 shall conform to the specifications of the Institute of Traffic Engineers, 1966, and any
 revisions thereof.
 Each signal head shall be equipped with a dimming mechanism that will gradually
 reduce the candlepower for nighttime operation to approximately 15 percent of that for
 daytime operation.
 The lamp fixture shall comprise a separately accessible housing and integral lamp
 support, ceramic socket and self-aligning, quick release lamp retainer. Electrical
 connection between case and lampholder shall be accomplished with an interlock assembly
 which disconnects the lampholder when open. Coded No. 16 lead wires shall be used of a
 length sufficient to permit solderless connection to line wires external to the signal.
 All signal indications shall be in a straight line and shall be in the following order,
 although all indications shown need not be included in all cases. In vertical signals,
 Position 1 shall be at the top, and Position 8 at the bottom. In horizontal signals, position
 1 shall be at the left (facing the signal), and Position 6 at the right.
 POSITION
 Vertical
 Horizontal
 1
 1
 2
 2
 3
 4
 4
 5
 5
 3
 6
 6
 7
 8
 
 SIGNAL INDICATION
 Red
 Yellow
 Green
 Straight Thru Arrow
 Left Turn Arrow
 Right Turn Arrow
 Don't Walk Symbol
 Walk Symbol
 945
 
 Each signal head shall be equipped with a suitably designed visor. The underside of
 the visor shall be flat black paint.
 Hardware:
 All trunnions, brackets and suspensions used for assembling and mounting vehicle
 traffic control signal faces shall be entirely weathertight.
 All tubular parts shall be 1½ in. IPS (DN40) pipe. When hollow cast brackets or
 trunnions are used, they shall be of sufficient strength to support the maximum load
 imposed by the signal heads under design wind conditions.
 The lower support or connection between signal heads in multi-way span wire or mast
 arm mounted signals may be an aluminum casting or stamping of suitable strength.
 Wire raceway areas within brackets, trunnions and suspensions shall be of adequate
 size to carry all necessary wires without crowding, and raceway surfaces shall be free of
 sharp edges or protrusions which might damage insulation on wires.
 Suspensions for mast arm or span wire mounting shall include a device to permit
 adjustment for proper vertical alignment of the signal head.
 715.42.6.7-Lane Control Signal Heads (Single Lamp):
 General Design Requirements:
 Each signal head shall be of the adjustable, colored-light type with the number and type
 of sections described and as shown on the Plans. Single indication heads shall be mounted
 on a vertical axis. Each head shall have an indication in one direction only and shall be
 adjustable through 360 degrees about a vertical axis for single indication heads, or about a
 horizontal axis for multi-indication heads.
 All lane control signal heads at any one intersection shall be of the same make and type.
 Position of Signal Indications:
 All signal indications shall be in a straight horizontal line and shall be in the following
 order although all indications shown need not be included in all cases. Position 1 shall be
 at the left (facing the signal), and Position 3 at the right.
 POSITION
 1
 2
 3
 
 SIGNAL INDICATION
 Red X
 Yellow X
 Green Arrow
 
 Assembly:
 Each head shall consist of an assembly of individual interchangeable sections securely
 bolted together to form a unit. Sections shall be capable of being oriented horizontally or
 vertically without the use of additional parts. There shall be no tie rods used in the
 assembly. The finished assembly shall present a clean, neat appearance. Each individual
 section shall house a complete optical unit.
 The ends of each section shall have an opening to accommodate standard 1½ in.
 (DN40) pipe brackets. The openings shall be in line. The assembly shall be capable of
 being rotated between standard waterproof supporting brackets or trunnions and thus aimed
 946
 
 in any direction in the specified plane. The portion of each section adjacent to the bracket
 openings and the portion used for connecting sections shall be properly reinforced to
 provide sufficient strength to resist shock, vibration and impact damage.
 Each section shall have lugs for the mounting of at least one six-position, twelveterminal, barrier-type terminal block.
 The housing door shall be a one-piece casting having two hinge locations and at least
 one latch location. The hinges shall have stainless steel pins at least 3/16 in. (5 mm)
 diameter. The latch shall consist of (1) a latch jaw on the door and a stainless steel latch
 screw, wing nut and washer securely affixed to the housing; or (2) a captive wing nut,
 washer and screw assembly on the door and a captive nut in the housing. It shall be possible
 to open and remove the door without the use of any tools.
 The door shall have a gasketed opening that shall provide a visible lens area of 120 sq.
 in. (0.077 sq. m) for a nominal 12 in. (305 mm) lens and 289 sq. in. (0.185 sq. m) for a
 nominal 18 in. (455 mm) lens. All lenses shall be as described in 715.42.6.7.1.
 The door shall have a gasketed opening that shall provide a visible lens area of 120 sq.
 in. (0.077 sq. m) for a nominal 12 in. (305 mm) lens and 289 sq. in. (0.185 sq. m) for a
 nominal 18 in. (455 mm) lens. All lenses shall be as described in 715.42.6.7.1.
 The door shall have four equally spaced visor attachment points around the lens
 opening.
 Visors shall be at least 10 in. (254 mm) long for a 12 in. (305 mm) lens and at least 12
 in. (305 mm) long for an 18 in. (455 mm) lens. Heads shall be supplied with standard
 visors, unless otherwise noted on the Plans. All new signal heads at any one intersection
 shall have the same type visors supplied, unless otherwise specified on the Plans.
 Visors shall be designed with a downward tilt between 3½ degrees and 5 degrees, shall
 eliminate the escape of light from one indication to another and, with the optical unit, shall
 eliminate the return of outside rays entering the unit from above the horizontal (known as
 sun phantom).
 The section and all brackets, trunnions and suspensions shall be finished with yellow
 enamel. The door and the outside of the visor shall be finished with either yellow or black
 enamel. The inside of the visor shall be finished with a flat black enamel. All enamel shall
 be best quality, oven-baked meeting Federal Specifications TT-E-489.
 The optical unit shall consist of the lamp, lampholder, reflector, lens gasket and lens,
 and shall be so designed that all light emitted by the unit passes through the lens and so
 that any possibility of false indications is eliminated.
 The lampholder shall be of heat resisting material designed to properly position a
 medium screw base traffic signal lamp, with means to accommodate a lamp having light
 center 3 inches (75 mm) in length for the 116-watt series and 6 inches (150 mm) in length
 for the 200-watt series. The lampholder shall be provided with a lamp grip to prevent the
 lamp from working loose due to vibration. Provision shall be made on either the
 lampholder or the reflector holder to permit rotation of the lamp so that the lead-in wires
 are up, and the lamp shall be retained securely in that position, but no change in position
 of the socket with respect to the optical center of the reflector shall occur. The metal
 portion of the lampholder shall be compatible with brass or copper.
 Each lampholder shall be provided with two coded No. 18 AWG or larger lead wire,
 Type TEW 600-watt fixture wire 2/64 in. (0.8 mm), 105 C rating thermoplastic insulation,
 securely fastened to the socket, and with sufficient length to reach the terminal block with
 
 947
 
 the holder or door fully open. The thermoplastic insulation shall be at minus 30 F (-34
 C) capable of being bent six times around a 1 in. (25 mm) mandrel without damage to its
 insulating properties at rated voltage. A suitable terminal block or blocks shall be provided
 in the second section from the left or in each section of one-section heads. The terminal
 block shall have at least one section for each signal head section plus at least two additional
 sections per block. Terminal blocks shall be standard commercially available units.
 Reflectors shall be specular aluminum in accordance with the latest ITE Specifications
 and shall be mounted in a reflector holder. The reflector holder shall provide a rigid
 reflector mounting to assure proper alignment between the lens and the reflector with the
 door closed. The reflector shall have a lampholder opening in the back. The reflector shall
 have a head or flange on the outer edge to stiffen the reflector and insure its dimensional
 stability. The reflecting surface shall be totally free from flaws, scratches, defacements
 and mechanical distortion.
 The lens gasket shall be a slotted neoprene gasket specifically designed to exclude
 moisture, dust and road film. The optical unit shall be sealed to exclude moisture and dust.
 This may be accomplished in one of two ways:
 i. If the door contains the complete optical unit, the reflector/door and the
 reflector/lampholder interfaces shall be equipped with specially designed neoprene
 seals to completely seal the optical unit. The section must not accumulate water.
 ii. If the reflector and lampholder remain in the section when the door is open, the
 entire section shall be made watertight and dusttight by a weatherproof neoprene
 gasket contained in a gasket groove in the door. The gasket shall seal against a
 raised bead in the section to provide the proper seal.
 The lighted signal shall appear to be illuminated over the entire visible lens surface
 without shadows when viewed from any angle up to 39 degrees each side of the optical
 axis horizontally and up to 45 degrees below the optical axis vertically.
 The required appearance, light distribution and candlepower intensity from the
 complete assembled section shall meet latest revision of the specifications of the Institute
 of Traffic Engineers, "A Standard for Adjustable Face Vehicle Traffic Control Signal
 Heads."
 Trunnions, Brackets and Suspensions:
 All trunnions, brackets and suspensions used for pedestrian signal heads shall be
 entirely weathertight without the use of externally applied sealants or caulking. The
 trunnions, brackets and suspensions shall be of the same manufacturer as the signal heads.
 All tubular parts shall be 1½ in. IPS (DN40) pipe. When hollow cast brackets or
 trunnions are used, they shall be of sufficient strength to support the maximum load
 imposed by the signal heads under all normal wind conditions.
 The lower support or connection between signal heads in a span-wire or mast-arm
 mounted signal may be an aluminum casting or stamping of suitable strength.
 Wire raceway areas within brackets, trunnions and suspensions shall be of adequate
 size to carry all necessary wires without crowding, and raceway surfaces shall be free of
 sharp edges or protrusions which might damage insulation on wires.
 Suspensions for mast-arm or span-wire mounting shall include a device to permit
 adjustment for proper vertical alignment of the signal head.
 
 948
 
 Non-metallic trunnions, brackets and suspension parts previously approved by the
 Division may be supplied. Such parts must be capable of mounting both metallic and nonmetallic signal heads and must be compatible with aluminum, steel and galvanized steel.
 Metallic Lane Control Signal Heads:
 Each head of this type shall be constructed primarily of aluminum and aluminum
 castings and stainless steel, shall meet all requirements of 715.42.6.7 and shall accept
 lenses and lamps as described in 715.41.6.7.1.
 The section and door shall be one-piece, corrosion-resistant aluminum alloy die
 castings. Visors and deflectors shall be made from sheet aluminum or die castings.
 All cast metal parts shall have a tensile strength of not less than 17,000- psi. (117 MPa).
 All castings shall be clean, smooth and free from flaws, cracks, blowholes and other
 imperfections. The castings shall conform to ASTM B 85 alloys SC-84A, SC-84B, SG100A, SG-100B, S-12A or S-12B.
 Sheet aluminum parts shall be manufactured from corrosion-resistant aluminum sheet
 having a tensile strength of at least 20,000 psi (138 MPa), except that reflectors shall be
 manufactured from the aluminum alloy suggested by the manufacturer.
 All hinge pins and latch parts shall be Type 304, stainless steel.
 Miscellaneous parts and hardware shall be made of non-corrosive materials.
 All parts shall have sufficient strength to show minimal damage under severe loading
 conditions. Visors shall be not less than 0.05 in. (1.3 mm) thick. Reflectors shall be spun
 or drawn from aluminum not less than 0.025 in. (0.064 mm) thick.
 715.42.6.7.1-Lamps and Lenses for Lane Control Signal Heads:
 Lamps:
 Lamps supplied with the lane control signal heads shall have the filament adequately
 supported to withstand the vibration induced from truck traffic and heavy winds. The light
 center length (LCL), is the dimension, in inches (mm), from the center of the filament to
 the tip of the base. All lane control signal lamps shall have a brass, standard, medium
 screw base and a clear glass envelope and shall be in conformance with the following
 design requirements:
 Head
 Size
 12
 18
 
 Wattage
 Series
 116
 200
 
 LCL
 3 in. (75 mm)
 6 in. (150 mm)
 
 Minimum
 Rated Life
 6,000 hours
 6,000 hours
 
 Minimum
 Initial Lumens
 1,260
 
 The glass envelope of the lamps shall be etched to show: the manufacturer's insignia
 or trademark, the voltage rating, the rated wattage and the rated life hours.
 Lenses:
 The lens shall be standard prismatic red, yellow or green and shall be durable on
 prolonged exposure to weather. Each lens shall be of clear colored glass or polycarbonate
 resin free from bubbles and flaws and shall be annealed to relieve internal stresses. Flashed
 lenses will be accepted.
 
 949
 
 Lenses shall conform to the specifications of the Institute of Traffic Engineers, "A
 Standard for Adjustable Face Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads," January 22, 1966,
 and any revisions thereof. The luminous transmission for traffic signal lenses and the
 limits of chromaticity for traffic signal colors shall be as follows:
 RED
 
 The minimum relative luminous transmittance shall be 0.095; the
 value of y shall not be greater than 0.308 nor less than 0.998 minus X.
 
 YELLOW
 
 The minimum relative luminous transmittance shall be 0.440; the
 value of y shall be not less than 0.411 nor less than 0.995 minus X nor
 greater than 0.452.
 
 GREEN
 
 The minimum relative luminous transmittance shall be 0.200; the
 value of y shall not be less than 0.506 minus 0.519X nor less than
 0.150 plus 1.068X nor greater than 0.730 minus X.
 
 Each lens shall be furnished with a label which shall indicate that the lens meets the
 latest revision of the specifications of the Institute of Traffic Engineers, "A Standard for
 Adjustable face Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads."
 All lenses shall have pressed on the flange the work "TOP" to indicate the proper
 positioning of the lens in the door for obtaining the light distribution required, together
 with the size and other designations, including the name or trademark of the manufacturer
 needed for proper application and help in purchasing replacements. Each lens shall fit the
 housing door in such a manner so as to exclude moisture, dust and road film. All lenses
 shall be covered except for the X or the arrow with a dull or dark gray enamel of thickness
 sufficient to totally hide the light from a 200-watt lamp placed behind it. The enamel shall
 be baked or fired into the lens. The enamel shall be hard and durable and shall not peel or
 flake when subjected to the heat of a signal lamp when the lens is in use, or when the lens
 is washed. The X or the arrow shall be the only illuminated portion of the lens.
 715.42.7-Auxiliary Traffic Signal Equipment: The purpose of this section is to set forth
 the minimum design and functional requirements for all types of optional auxiliary equipment
 which are described in this section.
 All auxiliary equipment shall operate on 120 volts, 60Hz, AC power supply. The
 equipment operation shall not be affected by supply voltage variations between the limits of
 10 percent above and 10 percent below 120 volts standard service. Similarly, the equipment
 operation shall not be affected by any change in temperature between the limits of plus 122F
 (plus 50C) and minus 30F (minus 34C) without the necessity of any heater element.
 The Contractor shall furnish manufacturer's instructions for installing, maintaining and
 placing into operation the auxiliary equipment, along with engineering data, diagrams, etc. or
 any later changes or improvements which may increase the performance of the equipment
 purchased.
 The Contractor is required to turn over to the Division any guarantees or warranties which
 are given by a manufacturer.
 The Division reserves the right to withhold any payment which may be due for equipment
 which does not meet Specifications.
 
 950
 
 Solid state flashers meeting current NEMA TS standards and capable of the above specified
 outputs and circuit ratings are an acceptable alternate to motor driven units.
 715.42.7.1-Flasher Units: The purpose of this subsection is to set forth minimum
 specifications and design requirements for flasher units to perform the flashing
 combinations as specified on the Plans.
 The signal flasher unit shall be a motor-driven switching device for flashing beacons
 or traffic signal indications at signalized intersections. It shall be designed for back-panel
 mounting in a flasher or traffic signal controller cabinet and shall be complete with jackmounting subbase. The unit shall be capable of flashing two non-simultaneous signal
 circuits at a rate of not less than 50 nor more than 60 flashes per minute per circuit, with
 approximately 50 percent on and 50 percent off periods.
 Each flashing circuit contact shall be rated at 15 amperes, 120 VAC, 60 Hz under
 continuous make and break duty. The closing and opening of the flashing circuit contacts
 shall be accomplished in such a manner as to avoid undue pitting and burning. The flasher
 contacts shall be equipped with adequate integral radio interference filters.
 The flasher motor shall be durable and provide a constant flash rate. It shall be designed
 for synchronous operation on 120 VAC, 60 Hz and shall have lifetime lubrication.
 715.42.7.2-Time Clocks: The purpose of this subsection is to describe the 24-hour
 electric programmable time clocks to be used in pretimed and traffic-actuated signal
 controllers.
 The clock motors shall be designed for synchronous operation on 120 volts, 60 Hz,
 single phase alternating current. The clocks shall be programmable for circuit on-off
 operation at 15-minute intervals of the day. In addition, the clocks must be capable of skipa-day operation. Each clock dial shall provide from one to 48 on-off operations per day
 minimum in 15-minute settings. Each clock shall be capable of operating in a "power-off"
 condition for a minimum of ten hours. Drive for the clock when electric power is off shall
 be provided by a reserve spring which is wound automatically during "power-on" periods.
 All time clocks must be easily accessible and demountable and fit within the controller
 cabinet.
 715.42.7.3-Offset Interrupter: The purpose of this subsection is to set forth functional
 specifications and design requirements for a system offset interrupter.
 The offset interrupter shall provide system offset interruption in the range of at least 0
 to 40 seconds in one-second increments. No tools or additional timing gears shall be
 required to change the interruption interval. The interval shall be set by use of a calibrated
 dial on the front of the unit. The interruption period shall be of sufficient duration to release
 all dial or coordination units in the system, or both.
 A switch shall be provided to eliminate the function of the offset interruption.
 715.42.7.4-Preemption: Preemption equipment shall be constructed and wired so as
 to transfer control of the signals from the controller to the preemption unit when actuated
 by the method specified and shall provide the color sequence specified. The preemption
 shall cause a clearance interval to be timed prior to the preemption sequence if actuated
 during a "green" or "flashing yellow" interval, unless otherwise specified.
 
 951
 
 Pedestrian WALK-DON'T WALK signals shall be placed on DON'T WALK during
 the preemption clearance interval and shall be turned off during the preemption sequence,
 unless otherwise specified.
 Installation of the preemption equipment shall not alter the internal wiring of the
 controller unit normally furnished by the manufacturer.
 After release of the preemption, normal controller operation shall be automatically
 resumed at the beginning of the "green" interval specified on the Plans and on actuated
 controllers, calls shall be placed on all phase in order for the controller to complete one
 cycle before resuming normal actuated operation.
 Two sets of complete wiring diagrams shall be provided showing the physical layout
 of all relays and other components of the preemption unit.
 715.42.7.4.1-Implementation: When included in the plans, the priority control system
 shall provide advance signal control per intersection approach. The systems consist of an
 emitter, detector, confirmation light and a card rack mounted signal interface unit.
 Priority control shall be measured as a complete unit in place per intersection or control
 location. This item shall consist of a complete electrical mechanism and all intrinsic items
 necessary for controlling preemptive functions at each intersection.
 When accepted as complete, the quantities determined and as provided below will be
 paid for at the contract unit price compensation for furnishing all materials and doing all
 work prescribed in a workmanlike manner and for furnishing all labor, equipment, tools
 and incidentals to complete the necessary work per intersection.
 The emitter shall be mounted on the priority vehicle and transmit a shaped, optical
 pattern of infrared light to a detector at the prioritized intersection approach. The interface
 unit will then input a call to the controller for a pre-programmed preemption routine. The
 transmit/receive distance for each intersection approach must be user programmable and
 will be the responsibility of the Division of Highways to determine and set. A means of
 adjustment for the transmit/receive distance per approach must be provided with the
 system. See I/S phasing and estimate of quantities.
 715.42.7.4.1.1-Optical Emitter: The Optical Emitter (OE) must be a single pulsed
 infrared light source capable of delivering sufficient optical energy to activate compatible
 O.C.S. detectors up to 2500 feet. Emissions must be precisely timed pulses of high
 intensity light. The O.E. must be available in 10HZ and 14HZ (+/- 1 HZ) modules for use
 as low and high priority vehicles.
 The range of activation of preemption at signalized intersections must be a function of
 the P.C.S. hardware.
 715.42.7.4.1.2-Detector: The Detector unit must be responsive to the optical emitter
 at a distance of up to 2500 feet. The unit must be totally compatible with all features of
 the emitter and be capable of priority distinction without the addition of special detectors.
 The Detector shall have a minimum reception angle of 35 degrees.
 715.42.7.4.1.3-Card Rack Mounted Interface Unit: Each interface card must
 provide a two (2) to four (4) channels per card for a total of (8) eight pre-empt outputs for
 use by the local traffic signal controller.
 
 952
 
 715.42.7.4.1.4-Control Equipment: Preemption control must be applicable to NEMA
 TS1 standards.
 715.42.7.4.1.5-System Requirements: Preemption control equipment must be
 compatible and completely interchangeable with existing preemption systems (as it relates
 to these special revisions and the WVDOH APL). All P.C.S. equipment for this system
 must be on the WVDOH Approved Products List (APL). Fixed card racks with integral
 power supplies and capacities to accommodate required P.C.S. features must be in the
 controller cabinet with priority control.
 715.42.7.4.1.6-Warranty: all electronic components except the optical emitter strobe
 and confirmation light, shall be warranted for a minimum of three (3) years.
 715.42.7.4.1.7-Codes and Basis of Payment: When accepted as complete, the
 quantities determined as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for
 the items listed below which the prices and payment shall be full compensation for
 furnishing all materials and doing all work prescribed in a workmanlike manner and for
 furnishing all labor, equipment, tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 Unit bid prices shall be submitted as indicated on the plans per code unit.
 (OE) – OPTICAL EMITTER
 (D1) – DETECTOR – one detector per intersection
 (D2) – DETECTOR – two detector per intersection
 (D3) – DETECTOR – three detector per intersection
 (D4) – DETECTOR – four detector per intersection
 715.42.7.5-Electronic Time Switch: The purpose of this subsection is to describe the
 seven-day programmable time switch to be used in pretimed and traffic-actuated signal
 controllers.
 The time switch shall be microprocessor-based and capable of SPDT switching of at
 least three (3) independent five-amp loads at 120 VAC. The entire unit shall be solid state
 and capable of at least 15 on or off time sets per day or week. Automatic battery backup
 providing a minimum of 48 hours of memory protection shall also be provided. The timer
 shall be entirely self-contained in a unit that can be readily mounted inside a signal
 controller cabinet.
 715.42.7.6-Electronic Time Switch (Type DST): Specification requirements for this
 time switch are the same as outlined in 715.42.7.5, with the exception that automatic
 Daylight Savings Time compensation can be programmed into this unit for an indefinite
 future period.
 715.42.8-Cabinets: The following are minimum design requirements for all types of
 weatherproof traffic control equipment cabinets:
 The terminal facilities shall be furnished in either a basemount NEMA type 5 ("P") cabinet
 or a pole mountable NEMA type 4 ("M") cabinet as called for on plans. The cabinet shall be
 UL listed and have a UL approval label installed on the inside of the main cabinet door. The
 cabinet shall also have labeling indicating date of manufacturer, part number, and drawing
 identification number. Base-mount cabinets shall be supplied with a minimum of four 1.0"
 953
 
 (25 mm) by 2.0" (50 mm) slotted holes for anchor bolt entry on the interior of the cabinet.
 Anchor bolt centers shall be 40.75" (1035 mm) wide by 18.50"(470 mm) deep. Four anchor
 bolts shall be supplied with the cabinet. The pole-mounted cabinet shall be mounted with the
 standard pole mounting brackets as shown on TES Standard Detail Sheets.
 The cabinet shall be constructed of 0.125 inch (3 mm) thick 5052-H32 aluminum with the
 following minimum exterior dimensions: (Unless otherwise shown on the Plans)
 Base Mount
 Pole Mount
 Height 54 inches (1370 mm) 49 inches (1245 mm)
 Width 44 inches (1115 mm) 30 inches (760 mm)
 17 inches ( 30 mm)
 Depth 26 inches (660 mm)
 No cabinet shall exceed any of these dimensions by a maximum of 2 inches (50 mm).
 All exterior seams of the cabinet shall be continuously welded for the entire length of the
 seam of the interior of the cabinet. Tack welding of seams and sealing with application of
 silicon or other sealers are not acceptable. Unless otherwise specified, the cabinet interior and
 exterior shall be furnished as natural (unpainted) aluminum. All surfaces shall be clean and
 free of oil, weld marks, etc. No holes for mounting rails or other main cabinet interior hardware
 shall be drilled through the cabinet walls. The conduit entry hole in the cabinet bottom must
 be field drilled to fit the location and the size of conduit required. The conduit entry hole must
 be placed as close as possible to the cabinet back wall when drilled.
 715.42.8.1-Cabinet Doors: A stainless steel main door handle shall be supplied which
 is capable of being padlocked in the closed (locked) position. The cabinet handle shall
 operate a door strike plate assembly via a minimum 0.5” (13 mm) square (or round) solid
 stainless steel rod. The handle shall be oriented in such a way that it rotates inward when
 operated to the open position. The main door lock must be a keyed tumbler lock.
 The main door shall be secured with a three-point latch assembly. The three-point latch
 assembly shall consist of a stainless steel strike plate located directly behind the handle in
 the approximate vertical center of the door that secures the center of the door. The strike
 plate shall operate two plated steel or stainless steel latch rods. The end of each rod shall
 be fitted with a minimum 0.75" (19 mm) diameter nylon roller complete with ball bearings
 to insure a smooth positive seal of the upper and lower main cabinet door. The main cabinet
 door shall be of essentially the same area as the front of the cabinet, and shall be provided
 with a #2 tumbler key lock and two keys.
 The main door handle and all of its components shall be removable for replacement in
 the field. No parts shall be welded or permanently attached to the cabinet in any way that
 would restrict or prohibit replacement in the field with the use of simple tools.
 The main door shall have a close cell neoprene gasket installed at its outer edge to form
 a watertight seal between the cabinet and main door. The gasket shall be a minimum of
 1.0" (25 mm) by 0.5" (13 mm) thick and shall be secured between the edge of the door and
 an "L" shaped bracket welded to the inside of the door. This bracket shall extend virtually
 the full length of the gasket around the door. The gasket shall mate against the main door
 opening, which shall be formed as a double flange around the entire doorframe. The flange
 shall be bent in such a manner as to apply increasing pressure against the gasket as the
 
 954
 
 main door handle is rotated to the locked position. An automatic doorstop shall be provided
 on both pole and base mount and shall be located on the bottom of the door.
 The main door for base mount shall be attached by four stainless steel butt hinges and
 for a pole mount using only three stainless steel hinges-all which have minimum 0.25" (6
 mm) diameter stainless steel pins. They shall be attached to the body of the cabinet and
 the door with 1/4-20 stainless steel carriage bolts and stainless steel nylon insert lockouts.
 The hinges shall be mounted in such a way that the pins are recessed and not removable
 with the main door closed.
 715.42.8.2-Mounting Rails: In a base mounted cabinet, four Unistrut rails shall be
 installed on each side of the cabinet and two on the back of the cabinet. For pole mounted
 cabinets, two Unistrut rails shall be installed on each side of the cabinet and two on the
 back of the cabinet. Each side rail shall extend from within 6" (150 mm) of the top of the
 cabinet to 6" (150 mm) from the bottom of the cabinet.
 715.42.8.3-Shelves: A minimum of two shelves the width of the cabinet with a
 minimum depth of 10.50" (265 mm) mounted toward the rear of the cabinet shall be
 supplied with each cabinet. Shelves shall be aluminum and shall have sufficient strength
 to support the controller unit and accessory equipment. Shelves longer than 36" (915 mm)
 shall be reinforced with an angle on the underside. Unless otherwise specified, the
 controller unit and conflict monitor shall be positioned on the top shelf. The shelves shall
 be attached with spring loaded Unistrut type nuts and stainless steel bolts.
 715.42.8.4-Ventilation: A motor-driven fan shall be mounted on a plenum in the top
 of the cabinet. It shall utilize roller (ball) bearings and be rated at 100 cubic feet per minute
 (45 liters/sec.). A finger guard shall be provided to cover the fan. The fan shall have an
 RC-network and V160LA20 MOV in parallel across the AC line to protect the controller
 unit from electrical noise generated by the fan.
 The fan shall be controlled by a variable thermostat located on the plenum in close
 proximity to the fan. The thermostat shall have a minimum adjustable turn and range of
 80 to 130 degrees F (27 to 55 degrees C).
 A filtered, weatherproof opening shall be provided on the main door near the bottom,
 a filter 12"x 16" x 1" (305 mm X 405 mm X 25 mm) shall fit smoothly and conveniently
 over this opening. The filter shall be the aluminum metal EX clean type and shall be
 reusable by blowing out dust particles. A positive filter retainer shall be supplied as a part
 of the main door assembly to firmly hold the filter against the opening. A fine mesh screen
 shall be provided between the filter and louvered opening to prohibit the entry of small
 insects. The screen shall be either aluminum or brass and fastened to the door permanently.
 The exhaust for the fan shall occur above the main door under the top of the cabinet
 and shall be located to prevent entry of water into the cabinet. A perforated aluminum
 panel or screen shall be installed over the exhaust openings to prevent entry of small
 insects.
 715.42.8.5-Police Panel: A second hinged door (police panel), shall be located near
 the top of the main door for base mounted and near the bottom section of pole mounted
 cabinets. The police panel box shall be continuously welded to the main door. A gasket
 
 955
 
 shall be provided on the inside of the police panel door for the full width of the door
 opening to insure a watertight seal. The police panel door shall be attached with a stainless
 steel high with a stainless steel hinge pin. The hinge shall be attached with tamper proof
 (one way) stainless steel screws and lockouts.
 The police door shall be provided with a conventional police lock and key.
 The police panel shall provide access to the following controls:
 Manual Control/Auto Switch-Which shall be wired to the police panel terminal, but no
 switch will be provided unless called for on plans. Manual Control Coiled Cord and Button
 (only if called for on plans). Signal Auto/Flash Switch-On and Off (Flash transfer shall be
 accomplished thru de-energization of the flash transfer relays. Upon restoration to Signal
 Auto position from Flash, a momentary external start pulse shall be generated and applied
 to the controller unit to initiate the programmed start up sequence. AC power shall not be
 removed from the controller unit during flashing operation).
 715.42.8.6-Technicians Panel: A technician switch panel shall be installed on the
 back cover of the police panel inside the controller cabinet. The following switches shall
 be supplied:
 Detector Test Switches-Detector test push-button shall be installed in the cabinet so
 that calls can be placed on each vehicle and pedestrian phase. A push-button switch shall
 be provided and wired for each vehicle and each pedestrian phase (12 switches). Each
 switch shall mount in a 0.5" (13 mm) diameter hole and shall have a minimum 0.375" (10
 mm) actuator.
 Controller Unit Power Switch-A switch shall be installed so that power to the controller
 unit and conflict monitor timer can be turned off. This switch shall not remove power from
 the detector rack.
 Signals ON-OFF Switch-The signal on-off switch, when in the off position, shall
 extinguish all signal indications for normal and flashing modes without interrupting the
 controller unit, conflict monitor and associated equipment power.
 Emergency Flash Switch-This switch shall initiate cabinet flash by de-energizing the
 flash transfer relays. Transfer into out of emergency flash via this switch shall be
 immediate and shall not restart the controller unit when returned to the normal operating
 position.
 Wiring Diagram Holder-A 9.5" x 12" (240 mm X 25 mm) or larger plastic holder shall
 be mounted to the inside of the cabinet door for convenient keeping of wiring diagrams,
 installations layout, and timing records.
 715.42.8.7-Technician Accessories: Convenience Outlet -A duplex convenience
 outlet shall be mounted on the inside right sidewall of the cabinet. The outlet shall be
 ground fault protected and shall be connected to the load side of the 20 amp circuit breaker
 that protects only the outlet, lamp, and fan.
 Cabinet Light-A minimum 18" (455 mm) 15 watt fluorescent cabinet light shall be
 mounted on the inside of the cabinet above the door opening. The cabinet light shall have
 an RC-network and V150LA20 MOV in parallel across the AC line to protect the controller
 unit from noise. The door shall activate the cabinet light switch when the door is opened.
 All hardware utilized in the cabinet assembly shall be aluminum, copper, nylon, brass,
 nickel plated brass or stainless steel.
 
 956
 
 715.42.8.8-Terminal Facilities: Various panels shall be installed in the cabinet to
 mount the necessary terminal facilities required for the controller, coordination,
 preemption, detectors, and signal circuits required for a full eight phase cabinet and
 controller unit. A Fully Wired NEMA "C" Connector Must Be Provided. All terminal
 facility panels shall be fabricated from minimum 0.125" (3 mm) thick aluminum. The
 terminals shall be provided on thermoplastic or Bakelite blocks with stainless steel or
 nickel-plated brass machine screws. Signal light field terminals shall utilize minimum 1032 screws, detector terminals shall utilize minimum 8-32 screws except other terminals
 shall utilize minimum six 6-32 screws except as otherwise noted in this specification. All
 terminals including terminal stripe, sockets, and other mounting shall be made with
 stainless steel machine screws and nuts. No "Pop" rivets or other non-removable fasteners
 shall be permitted. Every terminal shall be silk-screened with a number and, when possible,
 the terminal function mnemonic. Panels that utilize feed-thru connections shall be silk
 screened with numbers and function mnemonics on both sides. No rub-on pressure
 sensitive or adhesive labels shall be permitted in the cabinet assembly. Special name
 plates, switch or relay identifications or other labels affixed in the cabinet or on the panels
 shall be made of white over black plastic that is engraved with the appropriate legend.
 These labels shall be permanently mounted to the cabinet or panel as applicable.
 Terminal facilities shall be located on the back and sides of the cabinet and below the
 shelves wherever possible. All terminal strips and exposed electrical connections shall be
 no less than 6 inches (150 mm) from the floor of the base mount cabinet and no less than
 3 inches (75 mm) for a pole mount cabinet. The lower right cabinet sidewall shall contain
 the power panel and its related components. The lower left cabinet sidewall shall contain
 the detector panel with the detector terminals, preemption terminals, system
 communication terminals and the MS D interface panel.
 All wiring within the cabinet shall utilize stranded copper conductors. Conductors shall
 be properly sized for the operating ampacity. Insulation shall conform to MIL standards
 for Type BN conductors, clear nylon jacket over color-coded PVC insulation. Where wire
 six exceeds #18 AWG, Type TFFN or THHN insulation may be substituted for Type BN
 insulation.
 All wiring within the cabinet shall be properly terminated at all points. Harness
 connections and all other connections made on the back of the backpanel shall be
 terminated by soldering individual wires directly to the terminal strips. Slip on or fast-on
 type terminals or insulation displacement methods shall not be utilized on the back of any
 panel for any purpose. Where terminal screws are provided, a suitable spade type terminal
 lug shall be attached to the end of the wire. Any crimp connection to terminals shall be
 made only with a controlled cycle, ratchet type tool approved for use on the specific
 terminal being installed. In addition, no more than three wires may be connected under
 any terminal screw. Connections to the field terminal blocks for the conflict monitor
 conductors shall be made with the use of ring type terminals which require removal of the
 screw in order to disconnect the terminal. Right terminals shall not be used at any other
 location in the cabinet. Any stranded wire connection made to a compression type terminal
 (ground bar, neutral bar, etc.) shall require tinning of the strands with solder before
 insertion into the compression lug. Connections to circular connectors shall be made by
 soldering or machine applied crimp connections. Hand applied crimp connectors are not
 acceptable.
 
 957
 
 The following color code shall be utilized throughout the cabinet:
 120 VAC
 120 VAC Neutral
 Chassis Ground
 Logic Ground
 +24 VDC
 
 Black
 White
 Green
 Gray
 Red
 
 These colors shall not be utilized for any purpose other than that so specified anywhere
 in the cabinet.
 All harnesses shall be covered with "Expando" sleeving. Nylon cable ties, tape, etc.
 are unsuitable for use on harnesses.
 All inductive loads shall be suppressed with a series R/C network consisting of a 0.1
 uf 600 V capacitor and a 100 ohm 1/2 watt resistor connected in parallel with the load. In
 addition, a V150LA20 MOV shall be connected in parallel with the R/C network. The
 MOV and the R/C network shall also be provided on the duplex receptacle, fan, and
 fluorescent lamp. All DC inductive loads shall be suppressed with a reverse biased diode
 wired in parallel with the inductive load.
 715.42.8.9-Power Panel: Each cabinet shall be furnished with a power panel mounted
 on the lower right cabinet sidewall. This panel shall provide terminals for the incoming
 120 VAC power line capable of accepting up to a #2 AWG conductors for line, neutral,
 and ground. In addition, the power panel shall provide mounting for circuit breakers 1
 through 3, the surge arrester, line filter, mercury contactor, neutral bus bar, and ground bus
 bar. The circuit breakers shall be located on the panel closest to the main door opening.
 All wiring on the power panel shall be properly sized for its application. Main power
 wiring between circuit breakers, surge arrester, line filter and mercury contactor shall be a
 minimum of #8 AWG conductor for line, neutral and ground functions. The power panel
 shall be furnished with a clear lexan safety cover to prevent accidental contact with the
 power panel components. The safety cover shall have a cutout area for access to the circuit
 breakers and shall be secured with thumbscrews for easy removal.
 Three circuit breakers shall be provided for the incoming power distribution, Circuit
 breaker #1 shall be rated 30 amps and shall control the signal bus, detectors and control
 equipment. Circuit breaker #2 shall be rated 20 amps and shall power only the flasher and
 any related flash circuits. Circuit breaker #3 shall be rated 20 amps and shall power the
 fan, fluorescent lamp and duplex receptacle circuits.
 A line filter shall be supplied to reduce any outgoing noise into the AC power line,
 minimum rating of the line filter shall be 60 amps.
 A mercury relay-contactor shall be provided for control of power to the loadswitches
 (signal bus). This mercury shall be of a type specially designed to switch tungsten loads
 and shall incorporate a sealed type filled with nitrogen to eliminate "wicking" of the
 mercury to the electrodes under light load conditions. Minimum acceptable rating of the
 mercury relay for signal bus control shall be 50 amps.
 A main power lightning arrester shall be provided in the cabinet. The arrester shall
 consist of a primary and secondary stage. The primary stage shall be connected in parallel
 across the incoming AC line, neutral and ground. The line connections shall be made from
 
 958
 
 the load side of circuit breaker #1. The neutral connection shall be made from the neutral
 power lug. The ground connection shall be made from the ground lug. Each of these
 connections shall be short and direct. No other connections shall be made for lien, neutral
 or ground before the lightning arrester (except circuit breaker #1). The second state of the
 lightning arrester shall be high-speed silicon protector intended to protect the controller
 unit, detector rack power supply, pedestrian call isolator and emergency vehicle
 preemption cards. The main power lightning arrester shall be an EDCO Model SHP 30010. No substitutes shall be allowed without prior acceptance.
 715.42.8.10-Backpanel: Each cabinet assembly shall be furnished with a backpanel
 located on the lower center rear of the cabinet. The backpanel shall mount the loadswitches,
 flasher, flash transfer relays and controller unit input/output terminals. A base mounted
 cabinet shall have a 16 position backpanel (capable of terminating 16 loadswitches) and
 shall be provided. Further, 6 flash transfer relay bases shall be provided with terminals for
 flash color programming for loadswitches 1 through 12 (vehicle phases 1 through 8 and
 overlaps 1 through 4). The backpanel shall be mounted in such a way that it shall be
 possible to lower it for access to tall terminals on the rear with the use of simple hand tools.
 A pole-mounted cabinet shall have a 12 position backpanel (cable of terminating 12
 loadswitches) and shall be provided. Further, 4 flash transfer relay bases shall be provided
 with terminals for flash color programming. Each backpanel shall be provided complete
 with all flash transfer relays. Per phase loadswitches shall be furnished as required for each
 intersection plus two spares.
 Wiring on the back of the backpanel and all harnesses shall be color-coded for ease of
 troubleshooting. In addition, loadswitch input and output groups shall be color-coded
 orange for red, yellow for yellow and blue for green. Loadswitch outputs shall be wired
 with #16 AWG conductors. Harnesses shall be #22 AWG 19 strand and color coded* as
 follows:
 MS A Harness
 MS B Harness
 MS C Harness
 CM A Harness
 CM B Harness
 
 Blue
 Purple
 Pink
 Orange
 Yellow
 
 * If The Color Coding Is Different, It Must Be Shown On The
 Cabinet Net Wire Diagrams.
 
 715.42.8.11-Detector Panel: Each cabinet shall be furnished with a detector field
 panel mounted on the lower left cabinet sidewall. This panel shall provide field terminals
 for the detector loops, pedestrian push-buttons, emergency vehicle preemption detectors,
 system communication conductors and railroad preemption circuits. The detector panel
 shall provide the interface between the field conductors, the detector rack, the MS D
 interface panel and the backpanel. In addition to the field conductors, terminals shall be
 provided for the 8 vehicle detector inputs, 4 pedestrian detector inputs, 8 logic level phase
 green outputs, (diode isolated), per channel detector rack outputs, per channel pedestrian
 isolation outputs and per channel emergency vehicle preemption outputs. This
 arrangement shall permit full programming of detector and pedestrian call phase
 
 959
 
 assignments as well as phase green delay inhibit functions without having to provide
 additional wiring to the backpanel or soldering of additional wires on the detector rack.
 715.42.8.12-MS D Interface Panel: A panel shall be provided on the upper left
 sidewall to provide an interface for MS D harnesses for different brands of NEMA
 controller units. The panel shall mount a circular plastic connector to provide a universal
 interface for the MS D functions listed below. All functions from the MS D panel shall be
 at logic ground levels. Each controller unit furnished shall be supplied with a MS D adapter
 cable 3 feet (900 mm) in length. This adapter cable shall mate with the circular plastic
 connector on the MS D interface panel and whatever connectors are provided on the
 specific controller unit. If a particular model of controller unit provided requires a different
 logic level, coding of functions, etc., the adapter harness shall be equipped with a logic unit
 to perform the necessary conversions.
 The MS D Interface Panel shall be provided with a 120 VAC relay to provide electrical
 isolation for a railroad preemption circuit. This relay shall be wired with one side of the
 coil connected to a continuous, 1 amp fused source of 120 VAC. The other side of the coil
 shall be connected to a terminal. An adjacent terminal shall be provided with AC Neutral.
 These terminals shall be the connection point for the railroad circuit. The relay shall be
 maintained in a normally energized state with no train present. When a train is detected,
 the railroad circuit shall open and the relay shall de-energize and initiate the preempt
 sequence. A test switch shall be provided to open the coil circuit of the relay. A red LED
 shall also be provided next to the test switch to be illuminated whenever the relay is in its
 de-energized (preempt active) state. A V150LA20 MOV and R/C network shall be
 installed across the coil of the relay.
 The MS D Interface Panel shall be provided with a 120 VAC relay to provide electrical
 isolation for the flash sensing circuit. This relay shall be connected to the coil of the
 mercury contactor and shall be energized under normal signal operating conditions. This
 relay shall de-energize if the cabinet flash transfer relays de-energize of if the signal power
 is de-energized. The output of this relay shall be connected to the controller unit for
 reporting of flash conditions to a central monitor. A V150LA20 MOV and R/C network
 shall be installed across the coil of the relay.
 A door switch shall be provided and connected to the MS D Interface Panel to indicate
 cabinet door open status. This switch shall provide a logic ground input whenever the main
 cabinet door is open.
 The following pin connections shall be utilized for the MS D Interface Panel circular
 plastic connector. The connector shall be AMP part number 206438-1.
 
 960
 
 PIN
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 11
 12
 13
 14
 15
 16
 17
 18
 19
 20
 21
 22
 23
 24
 25
 26
 27
 28
 29
 
 FUNCTION
 PIN
 FUNCTION
 Offset 1 In
 30 System Detector 6 In
 Offset 2 In
 31 System Detector 7 In
 Offset 3 In
 32 System Detector 8 In
 Reserved
 33 Preempt 1 Out
 Reserved
 34 Preempt 2 Out
 Offset 1 Out
 35 Preempt 3 Out
 Offset 2 Out
 36 Preempt 4 Out
 Offset 3 Out
 37 Railroad Preempt Out
 Reserved
 38 Cabinet Flash Monitor
 Reserved
 39 Flash Command
 Transmit (Controller to Master)
 40 Flash Out
 Transmit (Controller to Master)
 41 Dial 2 In
 Receive (Controller to Master)
 42 Dial 3 In
 Receive (Controller to Master)
 43 Dial 2 Out
 Online
 44 Dial 3 Out
 System Enable
 45 Split 2 In
 Free/Coord In
 46 Split 3 In
 Free/Coord Out
 47 Split 2 Out
 Preempt 1 In
 48 Out
 Preempt 2 In
 49 Conflict Status
 Preempt 3 In
 50 Local Special Function 1 Out
 Preempt 4 In
 51 Special Function 2 Out
 Railroad Preempt In
 52 Local Special Function 3 Out
 Enable Dimming
 53 +24 VDC
 System Detector 1 In
 54 Logic Ground
 System Detector 2 In
 55 Chassis Ground
 System Detector 3 In
 56 AC Neutral
 System Detector 4 In
 57 120 VAC
 System Detector 5 In
 
 715.42.8.13-Detector Racks: A shelf detector rack shall be furnished fully wired to
 the detector panel. The detector rack shall be fully wired for all functions even though
 some functions may not be used at the present time. This includes a call output for each
 vehicle, pedestrian, a delay inhibit input for each vehicle channel, a common reset input
 for all vehicle channels and all necessary power conductors. The detector rack shall be a
 sturdy aluminum frame designed to mount card guides and edge connectors for all of the
 cards contained in the rack. All racks must be configured as shown on the following special
 sheet labeled Dual Ring/Card Rack Mounted Detectors.
 All card edge connectors shall utilize gold plated mating surfaces and shall be of the
 solder type. No crisp connections of any type will be allowed for attachment of loop leadin conductors.
 All loop lead-in wiring from the detector panel to the detector rack shall utilize tightly
 twisted conductors to eliminate coupling. Tightly twisted means a minimum of thirty-six
 
 961
 
 twists per foot. Loop lead-in twisted pairs shall utilize a white/black stripe conductor for
 color-coding.
 All cabinets must be provided with a minimum of eight (8) position NEMA racks, fully
 wired. Each position must be wired for two (2) channel detectors or P.C.S. as indicated.
 Rack Position assignments are as follows:
 POSITIONS
 Channel 1
 Channel 2
 
 1
 PH1
 PH6
 
 PH# = Phase Number
 
 2
 PH2
 PH5
 
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 PH2 PH3 PH4 PCS PCS PCS
 PH6 PH8 PH7 PH8 PCS PCS
 PCS = Priority Control System
 
 NOTE: System detectors when required are to be clearly marked and placed in unused
 position slots. In no case should system detectors (sampling stations) be assigned to a
 channel with a phase detector in the same position.
 715.42.8.14-Documentation: Each cabinet assembly shall be provided with four
 complete and accurate wiring diagrams. The wiring diagrams shall contain an identification
 number which is also attached to the cabinet on an engraved nameplate. This number shall
 identify the prints for specific cabinet assembly. In addition to the wiring diagrams, a 3.5"
 disk shall be supplied with the cabinet containing the cabinet wiring diagrams in a ".DWG"
 format suitable for use with Autocad Version 12 (Windows version). The cabinet assembly
 will not be considered complete without the required documentation.
 715.42.8.15-Cabinet Submittal for Approval: One of each type of cabinet to be
 furnished for this project must be shipped for approval the Signal And Lighting
 Maintenance Shop in Charleston, West Virginia. These must be approved prior to shipping
 any cabinets to the project site for installation. All items covered in this subsection must
 be included with the representative cabinets.
 715.42.9-Signal Supports: Signal supports shall be certified to be equal or exceed the
 requirements of "Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs,
 Luminaires and Traffic Signals", including revisions, of the American Association of State
 Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
 715.42.9.1-Mast Arm Signal Supports (Type A1, A1L, A2, A2L, B1 and B1L):
 715.42.9.1.1-General Description: Mast arm supports Types A1, A2 and B1 shall
 consist of one two traffic signal mast arms (as designated on the Plans), an upright pole
 with anchor base and any other accessories or hardware as required to make a complete
 installation. They shall be designed to suspend traffic signals from a structural assembly
 similar in appearance and construction to that shown on the standard drawing which is part
 of the contract.
 Mast arm supports Types A1L, A2L and B1L shall be identical to Types A1, A2 and
 B1 described above, except for the upright pole which shall be lengthened and provided
 with one or more street lighting luminaire arms as called for on the Plans. The upright pole
 
 962
 
 length shall be governed by the mounting height specified for the luminaire and the rise
 provided in the luminaire arm. The luminaire arm, unless otherwise noted, shall be as
 similar as possible in style to that shown on the standard drawing and shall have the spread
 noted on the Plans.
 All upright poles and all mast arms shall be made of one continuous piece, cylindrical
 in cross section, and they shall be uniformly tapered from butt to tip approximately 1 in. in
 diameter for each seven linear feet in length (0.14 in. per foot)(11.7 mm in diameter for
 each meter in length).
 The shaft length and diameter of the upright pole and mast arm shall be as described
 on the Plans.
 715.42.9.1.2-Mast Arm: All mast arms shall include a removable end cap, grommeted
 wire outlets, signal hanger assemblies of the type and quantity shown on the Plans, and a
 flange plate welded to the butt end to provide a rigid connection to the upright pole. The
 rigid connection to the upright pole shall be constructed so that it develops and transfers
 the full strength of the mast arm to the upright pole. The flange plate shall have four holes
 for the flange bolts which shall match the four tapped holes in the mounting plate on the
 upright pole. The entire assembly shall be constructed so that all wiring can be concealed
 internally. It shall be as similar, as possible in appearance and construction detail to that
 shown on the standard drawing. The use of guy rods of any type, or trussed-type arms, will
 not be permitted (except when noted for luminaire arms on the Plans).
 Mast arms shall be connected to the upright pole at a height necessary to provide 17 ft0 in. (5.2 m) clearance under the signals. The mast arm and upright pole shall be
 constructed so that the mast arm at any point along its length (measured from the flange
 plate connection), will fall within a tolerance of 0 to 5 percent of that length, above the true
 horizontal position, after loading as called for on the Plans. The fabricator must certify to
 the above and maintain results of computations or tests to document the certification for
 each type of mast-arm pole supplied. On Types B1 and B1L this requirement will only
 apply to the outboard end of the mast arm. Any deviations from this requirement due to
 sizes or loads listed on the Plans shall be brought to the Division's attention for appropriate
 corrective action prior to fabrication.
 715.42.9.1.3-Upright Pole: Each pole shall consist of an upright shaft with a steel
 anchor base, a removable pole top, a J-hook wire support welded inside near the top, a
 handhole with reinforced frame and cover, anchor bolts and nuts, one flange plate assembly
 to match that welded to the butt end of each mast arm, and any other accessories or
 hardware as required to make a complete installation. Flange plates shall have a deburred
 wiring hole and four tapped holes for flange bolts. The handhole assembly shall be welded
 into the shaff near the base. The handhole reinforcing frame shall have a tapped hole to
 accommodate a grounding lug and contain a keeper chain. The keeper chain shall be
 secured by pop rivets or stainless steel screws. The cover shall be secured to the frame by
 at least two stainless steel screws. Each pole shall have a one-piece anchor base welded to
 the butt end. This base shall be designed to secure the pole assembly to a concrete
 foundation by means of four standard anchor bolts, each fitted with removable anchor bolt
 covers.
 
 963
 
 All construction details shall be as similar as possible to that shown on the standard
 drawing.
 715.42.9.1.4-Materials Incorporated into the Support: The structures described
 above shall be fabricated from steel. The only exceptions permitted will be where the
 Contractor may prefer to use a cast aluminum pole top or aluminum anchor bolt covers, or
 both, on a galvanized steel pole.
 All steel tubes for arms and poles shall be fabricated from ASTM A595, Grade A or
 A1011, Grade 55, Class 2 or A572, Grade 55.
 Miscellaneous steel materials required for fabrication of other structural components
 shall be of a weldable quality and shall be covered physically and chemically by an
 applicable ASTM Specification. This includes welding rod, plate and bar stock (for
 flanges, signal hangers, etc.) and casting for anchor bases.
 Anchor bolts shall be fabricated from steel meeting the requirements of ASTM F 1554,
 Grade 55. Each bolt shall be provided with two regular nuts or heavy hex nuts that shall
 be hot dipped galvanized. Hex nuts shall be regular hex meeting ASTM A-563 Grade A
 for ¼” to 1½” (6.35 to 38.1 mm) sizes and shall be heavy hex for sizes 1½” to 4” (38.1 to
 101.6 mm).
 All mast-arm signal supports shall be provided with a one-piece, anchor-type base. The
 base shall be fabricated from material meeting ASTM A 27, Grade 65-35, or ASTM A 36
 of sufficient cross section to fully develop the ultimate strength of the pole. The base shall
 be fastened to the pole by means of a welded connection and shall develop the full strength
 of the pole. The base shall be provided with four holes of sufficient size to accommodate
 the proper size anchor bolts that are capable of resisting at yield strength stress, the bending
 moment of the shaft at its yield strength stress. Four removable anchor bolts covers shall
 be provided.
 All steel components shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with ASTM A
 123 or A 153. Galvanized coatings damaged for any reason shall be repaired by the
 application of a zinc-rich paint, conforming with 711.21 of the Standard Specifications.
 The places to be painted shall be thoroughly cleaned before the paint is applied.
 All nuts, bolts or screws used to connect any aluminum components shall be passivated
 stainless steel meeting the requirements of AISI 300 series, commercial grade.
 All nuts, bolts (except anchor bolts), or screws used to connect steel components shall
 meet the following requirements:
 i.
 Less than 5/8 in. (16 mm) diameter shall be ASTM A 307 and plated in
 accordance with ASTM B 633, or stainless steel. An exception to this will be
 the two screws fastening the handhole cover, which shall be stainless steel in
 accordance with the description above.
 ii. For 5/8 in. (16 mm) diameter and over, any ASTM physical and chemical
 qualification that is acceptable to the Division on the basis of structural design
 requirements and hot-dipped galvanized in accordance with ASTM A 153.
 715.42.9.1.5-Drawings for Approval Purposes: Two prints of shop drawings
 indicating the proposed dimensions and material specifications for each of the components
 involved shall be submitted by the Contractor for approval purposes within three weeks
 after the award of the Contract. These drawings will be reviewed by the Division at the
 earliest possible date and one print will be returned marked "Approved," or "Returned for
 964
 
 Revisions as Noted." Eight sets of drawings shall then be submitted for final approval.
 Appropriate action shall be taken by the Contractor after final approval to insure that the
 earliest possible erection of these items can be achieved. Resubmission of drawings to
 obtain final approval by the Division will not be considered as being just cause for delay
 in the completion of any contract.
 715.42.9.1.6-Mill Test Reports and Certification: Mill test reports or certifications
 of conformance to specifications for materials and design will be required for all materials
 incorporated into the work. The following shall be supplied by the Contractor prior to
 acceptance of the structures:
 715.42.9.1.6.1: Mill test reports (MTR) for major structural items only, as noted in the
 following chart, shall include both physical and chemical descriptions of the materials as
 supplied to the fabricator. When physical properties are altered during fabrication, the
 MTR covering chemical composition shall be supplemented by certified test reports
 indicating the physical properties of this material after fabrication.
 715.42.9.1.6.2: Certification of conformance to the specifications for all remaining
 material not covered by MTR as noted in the following chart.
 See 715.42.9.1.6.1
 
 See 715.42.9.1.6.2
 
 Component Materials
 MTR CERTIFICATIONS
 Tubes for arms and poles
 X
 Base castings
 X
 Anchor bolts
 X
 Pole tops, misc. fittings and hardware
 X
 X
 Fabricated or cast-type arm connections
 Galvanizing Welding rod
 X
 715.42.9.1.6.3: Certification of conformance to the specifications for the design of all
 components not completely dimensioned and detailed on the standard drawings.
 715.42.9.1.6.4: Certification that all welding was performed by operators qualified as
 follows: steel welders to AWS and aluminum welders to ASME.
 715.42.9.2-Strain Pole Signal Supports (Types C1, C1L, C2 and C2L):
 715.42.9.2.1-General Description: Each strain pole support Type C1 and C2 shall
 consist of an upright shaft with steel anchor base, a removable pole top, a J-hook wire
 support welded inside near the top, a 45 degree wire inlet near the top, a handhole with
 reinforced frame and cover, anchor bolts and nuts and any other accessories or hardware
 as required to make a complete installation. The pole and all its component parts shall be
 designed to support free-swinging traffic signals suspended from a span wire assembly. It
 shall be as similar as possible in appearance and construction detail to that shown on the
 standard drawing which is part of the contract.
 
 965
 
 Each strain pole support Type C1L and C2L shall be identical to the type C1 and C2
 described above, except that the upright pole shall be lengthened and provided with one or
 more street lighting luminaire arms as called for on the Plans. The shaft length of the Type
 C1L and C2L pole shall be governed by the mounting height specified for the luminaire
 and the rise provided in the luminaire arm. The luminaire arm, unless otherwise noted,
 shall be as similar as possible in style to that shown on the standard drawing and shall have
 the spread noted on the Plans.
 The upright shaft shall be made in one continuous piece, cylindrical in cross section
 and shall be uniformly tapered from butt to tip approximately 1 in. in diameter for each
 seven linear feet in length (0.14 in. per ft) (11.7 mm per m). The diameter shall be
 measured outside to outside of the cylinder. No horizontal joints of any type will be
 permitted.
 The shaft length and diameter of the Type C1, C1L, C2 and C2L poles shall be as
 described on the Plans. The signal clearance will be set for a minimum of 17 ft. in. (5.2
 m) The span wire will be fastened from 12 in. (305 mm) to 18 in. (455 mm) from the top
 of the pole, except for the Type C1L and C2L poles, where the span wire height shall be
 as specified on the Plans.
 715.42.9.2.2-Materials Incorporated into the Support: The entire strain pole
 assembly shall be made from steel. The only exceptions permitted will be where the
 Contractor may prefer to use a cast aluminum pole cover or aluminum anchor bolt covers,
 or both, on a galvanized steel pole.
 The upright shaft shall be fabricated from ASTM A595, Grade A or A1011, Grade 55,
 Class 2 or A572, Grade 55. The minimum wall thickness shall be 0.1793 in. (7 gage) (4.55
 mm).
 Miscellaneous steel material required for fabrication of other structural components
 shall be of a weldable quality and shall be covered physically and chemically by an
 applicable ASTM Specification. This includes welding rod, plate or bar stock (for span
 wire clamps, etc.) and castings for anchor bases.
 Anchor bolts shall be fabricated from steel meeting the requirement of ASTM F 1554,
 Grade 55. Each bolt shall have the threaded end galvanized for a length sufficient to extend
 down through the grout and into the concrete foundation. Each bolt shall be provided for
 two regular nuts or heavy hex nuts that shall be hot dipped galvanized. Hex nuts shall be
 regular hex meeting ASTM A-563 Grade A for ¼” to 1½” (6.35 to 38.1 mm) sizes and
 shall be heavy hex for sizes over 1½” to 4” (38.1 to 101.6 mm).
 All strain pole signal supports shall be provided with a one-piece anchor type base.
 The base shall be fabricated from material meeting ASTM A 27, Grade 65-35 or ASTM A
 36 of sufficient cross section to fully develop the ultimate strength of the pole. The base
 shall be fastened to the pole by means of a welded connection and shall develop the full
 strength of the pole. The base shall be provided with four holes of sufficient size to
 accommodate the proper size anchor bolts that are capable of resisting at yield strength
 stress, the bending movement of the shaft at its yield strength stress. Four removable
 anchor bolt covers shall be provided.
 All steel components shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with ASTM A
 123 or A 153. Galvanized coatings damaged for any reason shall be repaired by the
 
 966
 
 application of a zinc-rich paint conforming with 711.21 of the Standard Specifications.
 The places to be painted shall be thoroughly cleaned before the paint is applied.
 All nuts, bolts (except anchor bolts), or screws used to connect steel components shall
 meet the following requirements:
 i. Less than ⅝ in. (16 mm) diameter shall be ASTM A 307 and plated in accordance
 with ASTM B 633, or stainless steel. An exception to this will be the two screws
 fastening the handhold cover which shall be stainless steel.
 ii. For ⅝ in. (16 mm) diameter and over, any ASTM physical and chemical
 qualification that is acceptable to the Division on the basis of structural design
 requirements and hot-dipped galvanized in accordance with ASTM A 153.
 715.42.9.2.3-Drawings for Approval Purposes: Two prints of shop drawings
 indicating the proposed dimensions and material specifications for each of the components
 involved shall be submitted by the Contractor for approval purposes within three weeks
 after the award of contract. These drawings will be reviewed by the Division at the earliest
 possible date and one print will be returned marked "Approved," or "Returned for
 Revisions as Noted." Eight sets of drawings shall then be submitted for final approval.
 Appropriate action shall be taken by the Contractor after final approval to insure that the
 earliest possible erection of these items can be achieved. Resubmission of drawings to
 obtain final approval by the Division will not be considered as being just cause for delay
 in the completion of any contract.
 715.42.9.2.4-Mill Test Reports and Certification: Mill test reports or certifications
 of conformance to specifications for materials and design will be required for all materials
 incorporated into the work. The following shall be supplied by the Contractor prior to
 acceptance of the structures:
 715.42.9.2.4.1: Mill test reports (MTR) for major structural items only, as noted in the
 following chart, shall include both physical and chemical descriptions of the materials s
 supplied to the fabricator. When physical properties are altered during fabrication, the
 MTR covering chemical composition shall be supplemented by certified test reports
 indicating the physical properties of this material after fabrication.
 715.42.9.2.4.2: Certification of conformance to the specifications for all remaining
 material not covered by MTR as noted in the following chart.
 See 715.42.9.2.4.1
 
 See 715.42.9.2.4.2
 
 COMPONENT MATERIALS
 Tubes for upright shafts
 Base castings
 Anchor bolts
 Pole tops, misc. fittings and hardware
 Fabricated or cast-type arm
 connections
 Galvanizing Welding rod
 
 967
 
 MTR
 X
 X
 X
 
 CERTIFICATIONS
 
 X
 X
 X
 
 715.42.9.2.4.3: Certification of conformance to the specifications for the design of all
 components not completely dimensioned and detailed on the standard drawings.
 715.42.9.2.4.4: Certification that all welding was performed by operators qualified as
 follows: steel welders to AWS and aluminum welders to ASME.
 715.42.9.3-Wood Pole Signal Supports (Type D):
 715.42.9.3.1-General Description: Each Type D wood pole shall consist of an upright
 shaft fitted with necessary hardware to make the installation complete.
 The shaft length and diameter of the poles shall be as described on the Plans. The
 signal clearance will be set for minimum of 17 ft-0 in. (5.2 meters). The poles shall be of
 sufficient length to provide the luminaire mounting height when described on the Plans.
 Maximum allowable span wire sag between supports is 5 percent of the pole to pole
 span. Maximum sag is measured at the point of the greatest offset of the span wire from a
 line in the plane of the support poles drawn through the span wire suspension points.
 Spans supporting two signal heads or less shall not require tubular piping between the
 span wire mounting devices and the signal heads.
 715.42.9.3.2-Material: Poles shall not have more than 180 degree twist in grain over
 the full length and the sweep shall be no more than 4 inches (100 mm).
 715.42.9.3.3-Treatments: Poles shall be pressure treated in accordance with Section
 710 of the Specifications.
 715.42.9.4-Pedestal Pole Signal Supports (Types E1, E2, and E3):
 715.42.9.4.1-Type E1: The pole shall consist of a cast aluminum base and tapered
 shaft. The shaft shall be spun from one piece of seamless tubing. Aluminum Association
 Alloy 6063 (ASTM B 221), having a nominal 0.125 in. (3.18 mm) wall thickness and 6 in.
 (152 mm) diameter at the base tapering to 42 in. (114 mm) diameter at the top which, after
 fabrication, shall have a mechanical strength of not less than T6 temper. The shaft shall
 have no longitudinal welds and no circumferential welds, except those joining the shaft to
 the base. A handhole shall be provided near the base.
 The base shall be one-piece aluminum casting, Aluminum Association T-6 Temper
 (ASTM B 26). The base of adequate strength, shape, size and having a scalloped top
 flange, shall be secured to the lower end of the shaft by two continuous welds made by the
 metallic-arc-consumable-electrode-inert-gas-shielded process. The base shall telescope
 the shaft and one weld shall be on the inside of the base at the end of the shaft, while the
 other weld shall be on the outside at the top of the base. The two welds shall be not less
 than 2 inches (50 mm) apart and the welded connection shall develop the design strength
 of the pole assembly. The base shall be provided with four holes to receive the anchor
 bolts and eight tapped holes for attaching the ornamental covers. Four removable bolt
 covers shall be provided with each base and each cover shall attach to the upright portion
 of the body of the base by means of two hex-head cap screws.
 Anchor bolts shall be fabricated from steel meeting the requirement of ASTM F 1554,
 Grade 55. The threaded end of each anchor bolt shall be galvanized for a length sufficient
 to extend down through the grout and into the concrete foundation. Four galvanized nuts
 
 968
 
 and washers or clips as required shall be furnished with each pole. The anchor bolts shall
 be capable of resisting, at yield strength stress, the bending moment of the shaft at its yield
 strength stress. Bolts, nuts and washers or clips shall be galvanized to meet ASTM A 153.
 The shaft shall have a uniform polished finish. Each shaft shall be tire-wrapped with a
 heavy water-resistant paper for protection during shipment and installation.
 Two prints of shop drawings indicating the proposed dimensions and material
 specifications for each of the components involved shall be submitted by the Contractor
 for approval purposes within three weeks after the award of contract. These drawings will
 be reviewed by the Division at the earliest possible date and one print will be returned
 marked "Approved," or "Returned for Revisions as Noted." Eight sets of drawings shall
 then be submitted for final approval. Appropriate action shall be taken by the Contractor
 after final approval to insure that the earliest possible erection of these items can be
 achieved. Resubmission of drawings to obtain final approval by the Division will not be
 considered as being just cause for delay in the completion of any contract.
 715.42.9.4.2-Type E2: The pole shall consist of a base with anchor bolts and nuts and
 pipe shaft. The shaft shall be standard 4 in. Schedule 40 (DN100) pipe conforming to the
 requirements of ASTM A 501 and shall be welded to the steel base. A handhole shall be
 provided near the base.
 The base shall be a one-piece cast steel anchor base, ASTM A 27, Grade 65-35, of
 adequate strength, shape and size secured to the lower end of the pipe shaft by two
 continuous electric arc welds. The base shall telescope the shaft and the one weld shall be
 on the inside of the base at the end of the shaft, while the other weld shall be on the outside
 at the top of the base. The design shall be such that the welded connection and base shall
 develop the calculated yield strength of the adjacent shaft section to resist bending action.
 Anchor bolts shall be fabricated from steel meeting the requirements of ASTM F 1554,
 Grade 55. The threaded end of each anchor bolt shall be galvanized for a length sufficient
 to extend down through the grout and into the concrete foundation. Four galvanized nuts
 and washers or clips, as required, shall be furnished with each pole. The anchor bolts shall
 be capable of resisting, at yield strength stress, the bending moment of the shaft at its yield
 strength stress. Bolts, nuts and washers or clips shall be galvanized to meet ASTM A 153.
 Each anchor bolt shall be furnished with one cap nut (acorn).
 Two prints of shop drawings indicating the proposed dimensions and material
 specifications for each of the components involved shall be submitted by the Contractor
 for approval purposes with three weeks after the award of contract. These drawings will
 be reviewed by the Division at the earliest possible date and one print will be returned
 marked "Approved," or "Returned for Revisions as Noted." Eight sets of drawings shall
 then be submitted for final approval. Appropriate action shall be taken by the Contractor
 after final approval to insure that the earliest possible erection of these items can be
 achieved. Resubmission of drawings to obtain final approval by the Division will not be
 considered as being just cause for delay in the completion of any contract.
 715.42.9.4.3-Type E3: The pole shall consist of a base with anchor bolts and nuts and
 a tubing shaft. The shaft shall be fabricated from United States Standard 13 Ga. (0.095 in.)
 (2.41 mm) weldable grade commercial quality carbon steel meeting ASTM A 607 Gr. 45
 after fabrication. A handhole shall be provided near the base.
 
 969
 
 The base shall be fabricated from structural quality hot-rolled carbon steel plate with a
 guaranteed minimum yield strength of 36,000 psi. (248 MPa) The base plate shall
 telescope the shaft and be circumferentially welded top and bottom. The design shall be
 such that the welded connection and base shall develop the calculated yield strength of the
 adjacent shaft section to resist bending action.
 Anchor bolts shall be fabricated from steel meeting the requirements of ASTM F 1554,
 Grade 55. The threaded end of each anchor bolt shall be galvanized for a length sufficient
 to extend down through the grout and into the concrete foundation. Four galvanized nuts
 and washers or clips as required shall be furnished with each pole. The anchor bolts shall
 be capable of resisting, at yield strength stress, the bending moment of the shaft at its yield
 strength stress. Bolts, nuts and washers or clips shall be galvanized to meet ASTM A 153.
 Each anchor bolt shall be furnished with one cap nut (acorn).
 The finish for all exposed parts shall be hot-dipped galvanizing in accordance with
 ASTM A 123.
 Two prints of shop drawings indicating the proposed dimensions and material
 specifications for each of the components involved shall be submitted by the Contractor
 for approval purposes within three weeks after the award of the Contract. These drawings
 will be reviewed by the Division at the earliest possible date and one print will be returned
 marked "Approved," or "Returned for Revisions as Noted." Eight sets of drawings shall
 then be submitted for final approval. Appropriate action shall be taken by the Contractor
 after final approval to insure that the earliest possible erection of these items can be
 achieved. Resubmission of drawings to obtain final approval by the Division will not be
 considered as being just cause for delay in the completion of any contract.
 715.42.9.4.4-Mill Test Reports and Certification: Mill test reports or certifications
 of conformance to Specifications for materials and design shall be supplied for pedestal
 pole signal supports (Types E1, E2 and E3) as required in 715.42.9.1.6.
 715.42.10-Electrical Conduit: Following are minimum design requirements for
 underground conduit housing signal control cable and other electrical wiring.
 Unless otherwise specified on the Plans, all conduit shall be 2 inches (50 mm) in diameter.
 The Plans will call for type of conduit to be used.
 Approximate lengths of conduit are shown on the Plans. It is the responsibility of the
 Contractor to determine exact lengths of conduit runs in the field.
 715.42.10.1-Type R (Rigid Steel Conduit): The steel conduit shall conform to
 American Standard Specification for rigid steel conduit, zinc-coated ASA C80-1 and
 current amendments.
 Each length of conduit shall be furnished with one coupling.
 Running threads shall not be used on conduit for connection and coupling.
 All cut ends of conduit shall be reamed to remove rough edges.
 Bends of rigid conduit shall be so made that the conduit will not be injured and the
 internal diameter of the conduit will not be effectively reduced.
 715.42.10.2-Type F-(Flexible, Liquid-tight Conduit): Conduit shall be approved by
 Underwriters Laboratories.
 
 970
 
 Conduit shall have galvanized steel core over which is extruded a polyvinyl chloride
 cover.
 Standard liquid-tight connectors shall be used for conduit connection.
 Conduit shall protect electrical conductors from moisture, oil, grease, dirt, chemicals,
 corrosives, fumes, abrasion, etc.
 715.42.10.3-Type P (Polyvinyl Chloride Conduit): Type P (Polyvinyl Chloride
 Conduit) shall be made of polyvinyl chloride plastic using polyvinyl chloride fillers where
 fillers are used. The conduit shall meet all requirements of EPC-40-PVC as contained in
 NEMA Standards Publication TC2, shall be Underwriters' Laboratories approved, and shall
 be suitable for direct burial.
 715.42.11-Junction Boxes: Following are minimum design requirements for junction
 boxes for signal cable and other electrical wiring. The type will be noted on the Plans.
 Junction boxes are shown on the Plans shall be installed where indicated. The Contractor
 may, with the approval of the Engineer and at their own expense, install additional junction
 boxes to facilitate the work of installing conduit and pulling signal control cable.
 715.42.11.1-Type L- (Light Duty): The box shall meet the requirements of Standard
 Drawing TES-50.
 715.42.11.2-Type H-(Heavy Duty): The junction box shall consist of a concrete box
 with a cast iron frame and either a cast iron or ductile iron cover. The box shall meet the
 requirements of Standard Drawing TES-50 for the 10” x 10” (255 mm x 255 mm) size or
 TEL-43 for the 18” x 18” (460 mm x 460 mm) size.
 The walls and floor of the concrete box shall be either precast or cast in place.
 If cast in place in a paved area, the interior shall be formed and the exterior wall and
 floor may be poured directly against a smooth, well-trimmed hole in the pavement and
 ground.
 If cast in place in other than a paved area, the interior and top 3 inches (75 mm) of the
 exterior shall be formed to provide the size and shape shown on the standard drawing.
 The Type H (10x10) (255 x 255 mm) junction box cover and frame shall have a
 minimum weight of 90 pounds (40 kg). Type H (10x10) (255 x 255 mm) cover frame shall
 be cast integral with the concrete box.
 715.42.11.3-Type M (Magnetic Probe Box): The box shall have a minimum inside
 dimension of 4 in. by 4 in. by 4 in (100 x 100 x 100 mm).
 The junction box and lid shall be of copper-free aluminum meeting Federal
 Specifications W-C-583b.
 The cover shall be attached to the box by monel or stainless steel screws. The cover
 shall also contain a neoprene gasket of sufficient size to make it watertight.
 The wall thickness on the boxes shall not be less than 1/4 in. (6.35 mm).
 The lid shall have a checkered non-slip surface.
 715.42.11.4-Types A, B, and C: Junction boxes Types A, B, and C shall meet the
 dimensions and requirements as shown on the Plans. Type A and B boxes shall be
 
 971
 
 fabricated from steel conforming to ASTM A 36 with galvanizing in accordance with
 ASTM A 123. Wall thickness shall be 3 in. (6.35 mm) for Types A and B and not less than
 14 gauge for Type C.
 715.42.12-Messenger Cable: The messenger cable shall be of the diameter specified on
 the signalization plan and shall be fabricated on seven steel wires, double galvanized and
 twisted into a single concentric strand to conform to the following:
 Diameter Inches
 (mm)
 ½ (12.7)
 7/16 (11.1)
 3/8 (9.5)
 5/16 (7.9)
 ¼ (6.4)
 3/16 (4.7)
 
 Size Of Wire
 (No.)
 8
 9.5
 11
 12
 14
 16
 
 Tensile Strength
 Pounds (kg)
 12,100 (5490)
 9,350 (4240)
 6,950 (3150)
 5,350 (2425)
 3,150 (1430)
 1,900 (860)
 
 The Contractor shall, when requested by the Division, furnish in suitable form a certified
 report of the cable to show compliance with this Specification.
 715.42.13-Conductors: All conductors used for traffic signal control and external
 circuitry shall be solid or stranded copper wire as required, unless otherwise specified. Wire
 sizes shall be based on American Wire Gage (AWG). The copper wire shall conform to the
 requirements of ASTM B 3 and B 8, latest revision. IMSA specification numbers refer to the
 International Municipal Signal Associations, Inc., latest revisions on wire and cable
 specifications.
 All single conductors shall have clear, distinctive and permanent markings on the outer
 surfaces throughout the entire length, showing the manufacturer's name or trademark,
 insulation type-letter designation, conductor size and voltage rating.
 Conductors for traffic signal and supplemental flasher installations shall be rated for 600volt operation. The insulation shall be a minimum TW Grade or as specified.
 All conductors subject to flexing, such as opening and closing of the cabinet doors or on
 removal of equipment from the cabinet, shall be stranded. Conductors No. 14 AWG through
 No. 10 AWG, inclusive, shall be 19-strand and conductors No. 16 AWG shall be 26-strand.
 Conductors in traffic actuated controller cabinets between the power service terminals and
 the "AC+" terminals on the external signal load switching devices shall have an ampacity of
 20 amperes at 160 F (71º C). This ampacity shall include all switching devices and
 connections to switching devices in this circuit as well as signal light neutrals and interference
 suppressors.
 Conductors in pre-timed controller cabinets between the power service terminals and the
 controller bus to the signal light circuits shall have an ampacity of 20 amperes at 160 F (71º
 C). This ampacity shall include all switching devices and connections to switching devices in
 this circuit as well as signal light neutrals and interference suppressors.
 All other conductors in the signal light circuits (both traffic actuated and pre-timed system)
 shall be No. 14 AWG solid conductor cable meeting IMSA Specification No. 19-1 or 20-1.
 
 972
 
 Five-conductor signal light cable shall be used as a minimum per signal conductor run (see
 660.16).
 Power service conductors to the breakers (fuse) in all controller cabinets shall be No. 8
 AWG service wire.
 Conductors between the power service terminals, the "AC+" on all flasher units and the
 duplex receptacle shall have ampacity of 20 amperes at 160 F (71º C). This ampacity shall
 include all switching devices and connections to switching devices in this circuit as well as
 signal light neutrals and interference suppressors.
 Conductors for traffic loops shall be continuous No. 14 THWN stranded wire to the
 detector terminals or the feeder cable junction box or condulet.
 Detector feeder cable from the loop wire terminals to the detector terminals shall be twoconductor cable, No. l4 AWG-THW, meeting IMSA Specification 19-2, 20-2 or 50-2. The
 two conductor pair for each feeder shall be twisted together with approximately two turns per
 foot (6.5 turns per meter).
 All other multi-conductor detector writing, unless otherwise specified, shall be No. 14
 AWG cable meeting IMSA Specifications No. 19-1 or 20-1. Single conductor detector wiring
 shall be No. 14 AWG-THWN stranded, unless otherwise specified.
 Interconnect cable shall be No. 14 AWG cable meeting IMSA Specification No. l9-1 or
 20-1.
 All conductors used in the signal controller cabinets shall be No. 22 AWG, or larger.
 Conductors smaller than No. 14 AWG shall conform to Military Specification: MIL-W16878D, Type B, Vinyl-Nylon Jacket, 600-volt, 105º C. Conductors No. 14 AWG and larger
 shall be as specified.
 715.42.14-Supplemental Flashing Beacons and Mountings:
 715.42.14.1-Flashing Signal Heads: The signal head shall provide an indication in
 one direction only and shall be adjustable through 360 degrees about a vertical axis.
 Housing:
 Each head shall be constructed primarily of aluminum and aluminum castings and
 stainless steel, shall meet all requirements in 715. 42.14.1 and shall accept lenses and lamps
 as described in the paragraph on Optical Unit.
 The signal head housing shall be one piece, corrosion-resistant aluminum alloy die
 casting complete with integrally cast top, bottom, and sides. All cast metal parts shall have
 a tensile strength of not less than 17,000 psi. (117 MPa) All parts shall be clean, smooth
 and free from flaws, cracks, blowholes and other imperfections.
 The die cast aluminum housing, door and cast visor of the signal heads shall comply
 with the following specifications or latest revision thereof: Die Castings SC-84A, SC-84B,
 SG-100A, SG-100B, S-12A or S-12B of ASTM B 85.
 When required by the Engineer, the successful bidder shall furnish satisfactory
 evidence that the materials comply with the foregoing requirements.
 The top and bottom of the signal housing shall have round openings to accommodate
 standard 1½ in waterproof pipe brackets or trunnions. The portion of the housing adjacent
 to the bracket shall be properly reinforced so as to have sufficient strength to resist shock,
 vibration and impact damage.
 
 973
 
 Each signal head shall have lugs for the mounting of at least one six-position, twelveterminal barrier type terminal block.
 Each signal head shall have lugs or pads such that backplates may be mounted without
 drilling or tapping the head housing.
 The housing door shall be a one-piece square casting having two hinge locations on the
 left side and at least one latch location on the right side. The hinges shall have stainless
 steel pins at least 3/16 inch (5 mm) in diameter. The latch shall consist of (1) a latch jaw
 on the door and a stainless steel latch screw, wing nut and washer securely affixed to the
 housing or (2) a captive wing nut, washer and screw assembly on the door and a captive
 nut in the housing. It shall be possible to open and remove the door without the use of any
 tools.
 The door shall have a gasketed opening that shall provide a visible lens diameter of 7¾ in. to 8 in. (197 to 203 mm) for a nominal 8 in. (203 mm) lens. All lenses shall be as
 described in Optical Unit. The door shall have four equally spaced visor attachment points
 around the lens opening.
 The section and door shall be one-piece, corrosion-resistant aluminum alloy die
 castings. Visors and reflections shall be made from sheet aluminum or die castings.
 Sheet aluminum parts shall be manufactured from corrosion-resistant aluminum sheet
 having a tensile strength of at least 20,000 psi (138 MPa) except that reflectors shall be
 manufactured from the aluminum alloy suggested by the manufacturer.
 All hinge pins and latch parts shall be Type 304, stainless steel.
 Miscellaneous parts and hardware shall be made of non-corrosive materials.
 All parts shall have sufficient strength to show minimal damage under severe loading
 conditions.
 Visors shall be at least 7 inches (178 mm) long and shall be described as standard (cutaway), tunnel, or full circle. Heads shall be supplied with standard visors unless otherwise
 noted on the plans or unless prior permission from the Division has been received.
 Visors shall be designed with a downward tilt between 32 and 5 degrees to eliminate
 the return of outside rays entering the unit from above the horizontal (known as sun
 phantom). Visors shall be not less than 0.05 in. (1.3 mm) thick.
 All mounting brackets, trunnions, and suspensions shall be finished with yellow
 enamel. The door and the outside of the visor shall also be finished with yellow enamel.
 The inside of the visor shall be finished with flat black enamel. All enamel shall be best
 quality, over baked meeting Federal Specifications TT-E489.
 Optical Unit:
 The optical unit shall consist of the lamp, lampholder, reflector, lens gasket and lens,
 shall be so designed that all light emitted by the unit passes through the lens and so that
 any possibility of false indications is eliminated.
 The lampholder shall be of heat resisting material designed to properly position a
 medium screw base traffic signal lamp, with means to accommodate a lamp having light
 center 2-7/16 in. (60 mm) in length for the 60-watt series. The lampholder shall be
 provided with a lamp grip to prevent the lamp from working loose due to vibration.
 Provision shall be made on either the lampholder or the reflector holder to permit rotation
 of the lamp so that lead-in wires are up, and the lamp shall be retained securely in that
 position, but no change in position of the socket with respect to the optical center of the
 
 974
 
 reflector shall occur. The metal portion of the lampholder shall be compatible with brass
 or copper.
 Each lampholder shall be provided with two code No. 18 or larger lead wires, Type
 TEW, 600-watt, AWM fixture wire with 2/64 in. (0.8 mm), 105º C rating thermoplastic
 insulation, securely fastened to the socket, and with sufficient length to reach the terminal
 block with the holder door fully open. The thermoplastic insulation shall at minus 30 F (34º C) be capable of being bent six times around a 1 in. (25 mm) mandrel without damage
 to its insulating properties at rated voltage.
 Reflectors shall be specular aluminum in accordance with the latest ITE specifications
 and shall be mounted in a reflector holder. The reflector holder shall provide a rigid
 reflector mounting to assure proper alignment between the lens and the reflector with the
 door closed. The reflector shall have a lampholder opening in the back. The reflector shall
 have a hood or flange on the outer edge to stiffen the reflector and insure its dimensional
 stability.
 The reflecting surface shall be totally free from flaws, scratches, defacements and
 mechanical distortion. Reflectors shall be spun or drawn from aluminum not less than
 0.025 in. (0.64 mm) thick.
 The lens gasket shall be a slotted circular neoprene gasket specifically designed to
 exclude moisture, dust and road film. The optical unit shall be sealed to exclude moisture
 and dust. This may be accomplished in one of two ways:
 i. If the open door contains the complete optical unit, the reflector/lampholder
 interfaces shall be equipped with specially designed neoprene seals to completely
 seal the optical unit. The section must not accumulate water.
 ii. If the reflector and lampholder remain in the section when the door is opened, the
 entire section shall be made watertight and dusttight by a weatherproof neoprene
 gasket contained in a gasket groove in the door. The gasket shall seal against a
 raised bead in the section to provide the proper seal.
 The lighted signal shall appear to be illuminated over the entire visible lens surface
 without shadows when viewed from any angle up to 50 degrees each side of the optical
 axis horizontally and up to 45 degrees below the optical axis vertically.
 The required appearance, light distribution and candlepower intensity from the
 complete assembled section shall meet the latest revision of the specifications of the
 Institute of Traffic Engineers, "A Standard for Adjustable Face Vehicle Traffic Control
 Signal Heads".
 Trunnions, Brackets and Suspensions:
 All trunnions, brackets and suspensions used for assembling and mounting vehicle
 traffic control signal faces shall be entirely weathertight.
 All tubular parts shall be 1½ in. IPS (DN40) pipe.
 The lower support or connection between signal heads in a span wire or mast arm
 mounted signal may be an aluminum casting or stamping of suitable strength.
 Wire raceway areas within brackets, trunnions and suspensions shall be of adequate
 size to carry all necessary wires without crowding and raceway surfaces shall be free of
 sharp edges or protrusions which might damage insulation on wires.
 Suspensions for the mast arm or span wire mounting shall include a device to permit
 adjustment for proper vertical alignment of the signal head.
 975
 
 Non-metallic trunnions, brackets and suspension parts previously approved by the
 Division may be supplied. Such parts must be capable of mounting metallic signal heads
 and must have metallic reinforcement at points of anticipated wear.
 All reinforcing metal must be compatible with aluminum, steel and galvanized steel.
 715.42.14.2-Flashing Mechanism: The signal head shall flash at a rate of not less than
 50 not more than 60 flashes per minute with each lamp being lighted 50 percent of the time.
 The closing and opening of the flashing contacts shall be accomplished in such a manner
 as to avoid undue pitting and burning at 10 amps, 115 volts, A/C, continuous make and
 break duty. The flasher shall be equipped with adequate radio interference filter and
 protected by a fuse or circuit breaker.
 Solid state flashers meeting current NEMA TS Standards and capable of the above
 specified outputs and circuit ratings are acceptable.
 715.42.14.3-Time Clocks: The clock motors shall be designed for synchronous
 operation on 115 volts, 60 cycle, single phase alternating current.
 The clocks shall be programmable for circuit on-off operation at 15 minute intervals of
 the day. In addition, the clocks must be capable of skip-a-day operation. Each clock dial
 shall provide from one to 48 operations per day, minimum 15-minute settings.
 Each clock shall be capable of operating in a "power off" condition for a minimum of
 10 hours. Drive for the clock when electric power is off shall be provided by a reserve
 spring which is wound automatically during "power-on" periods.
 All time clocks must be easily accessible and demountable and fit within the controller
 cabinet.
 Electronic time switches as specified under Auxiliary Traffic Signal Equipment are an
 acceptable alternate to the above time clock.
 715.42.14.4-Flasher Cabinet: Flasher cabinets shall conform to the requirements of
 715.42.8.3.
 The cabinet shall be provided with the necessary opening and attachments for mounting
 and connecting in the manner specified by one of the following options as indicated on the
 plans.
 715.42.14.4.1-(Optional): Mounting to wooden poles by means of lag screws.
 715.42.14.4.2-(Optional): Mounting to steel poles using pole attachment clamps.
 715.42.14.4.3-(Optional): The flasher mechanism may be located within one of the
 signal heads when the head is of special design to permit this mounting without hindering
 the functioning of the flasher.
 715.42.14.4.4-(Optional): The timing mechanism may be located within a building
 and housed in a non-weatherproof cabinet.
 715.42.14.5-Mounting:
 following types:
 
 The mounting of the sign must conform to one of the
 
 976
 
 715.42.14.5.1-Post Mounted: The post mounted sign shall be located so that the
 nearest edge of the sign is not less than 6 feet (1.8 mm) not more than 12 feet (3.6 m) from
 the edge of the traveled way or a minimum of 2 feet (0.6 m) and a maximum of 6 feet (1.8
 mm) outside an unmountable curb.
 The bottom of the sign shall be a minimum of 8 feet (2.4 m) and not more than 15 feet
 (4.5 m) above the pavement grade at the center of the highway.
 715.42.14.5.2-Pedestal Mounted: Use the same criteria as for 715.42.14.5.1-Post
 Mounted.
 715.42.14.5.3-Span Wire: The sign shall be located over the center of the lane that it
 faces on a two-lane roadway and in the center of the lanes it faces on a multi-lane roadway.
 The span wire mounting shall be such that a minimum of 17-foot (2.4 m) and a
 maximum of 19-foot (4.5 m) clearance is maintained from the pavement to the bottom of
 the sign.
 The span wire shall have a maximum sag of five percent of the span.
 715.42.14.5.4-Mast Arm: The mast arm mounted sign shall be located so that the
 center of the sign is located over the lane or lanes to be controlled by the signs.
 The mast arm mounting shall be such that a minimum of 17-foot (2.4 m) and a
 maximum of 19-foot (4.5 m) clearance is maintained from the pavement to the bottom of
 the sign.
 715.42.14.6-Warranties and Guarantees: Any and all equipment shall be covered
 by manufacturer's written guarantee or warranty for a period of 12 months with respect to
 parts, workmanship and performance of product.
 The department reserves the right to withhold any payments which may be due, should
 it be discovered that the equipment does not meet the Specifications.
 The manufacturer shall make available, at no cost, engineering data, diagrams, etc., on
 any later changes or improvements which would increase the performance of the
 equipment purchased.
 The manufacturer shall furnish instructions for installing and maintaining the
 equipment and assistance as required for timing and operation of the equipment.
 715.42.14.7-Construction Methods: The materials furnished and used shall be new,
 except as may be specified on the Plans. All workmanship for electric work shall be in
 accordance with the details shown on the plans, the above Specifications, Special
 Provisions for 715.42 (Traffic Signals) as applicable, the Standard Drawing TES-36 and
 the requirements of the current National Electrical Code in addition to any local codes.
 715.43 through 715.44-BLANK
 715.45-BENTONITE:
 Bentonite shall meet the requirements of Section 3 of American Petroleum Institute
 Standard 13A and Supplements.
 
 977
 
 SECTION 716
 EMBANKMENT AND SUBGRADE MATERIAL
 716.1-GENERAL:
 Material for embankment shall be suitable soil, granular material, shale, rock, random
 material, or borrow material. The material shall have dimension limitations in accordance with
 the contract documents.
 Material for subgrade shall be granular material free of particles larger than 3 inches (75
 mm).
 716.1.1-Random Material: Random material shall be considered as a mixture of any or
 all of soil, granular material, or soft shale as described which are permitted by the Engineer to
 be used in embankment. These are materials that can be incorporated in a 6 inch (150 mm)
 compacted layer.
 716.1.1.1-Soil: Soil material shall be considered as layers or deposits of disintegrated
 rock, lying on or near the surface of the earth; which has resulted from natural processes,
 such as weathering, decay or chemical action or a combination of these processes. Material
 shall be considered as soil when more than 25 percent by weight of the grains or particles
 pass the No. 200 (75 μm) sieve.
 716.1.1.2-Granular Material: Granular material shall be considered as natural or
 synthetic mineral aggregate, such as broken or crushed rock, gravel, sand, or slag. Shale
 or fly ash shall not be considered granular material. Granular material shall have not more
 than 25 percent by weight of grains or particles passing the No. 200 (75 µm) sieve
 (determined by AASHTO T-27) and the plasticity index shall not be more than 6
 (determined by AASHTO T-90).
 716.1.1.3-Softshale: Soft shale shall be considered as any of the shales, weak
 sandstone, weak limestone, claystones or siltstones that break down using the following
 roller test. Rock which break down under three complete coverages with a steel drum
 roller, meeting the following requirement, shall be classified as soft shale to be placed as
 specified in 207.7.3.2.1. Smooth drum rollers shall provide a minimum 1.5 tons per linear
 foot of roller width and drum rollers with any type of feet (sheep’s foot, tamping foot, and
 etc.) shall provide the same minimum of 1.5 tons per linear foot of roller drum width. This
 criteria applies to single and multiple drum rollers as well as vibratory rollers with the
 vibration set to maximum. This criteria shall be calculated for each roller and test
 combination by dividing the operating weight of the roller in tons by the total measured
 width of the drum in feet, or the total of all drums if more than one drum. This calculation
 shall be provided to the Engineer in writing prior to the test. The contractor shall provide
 the roller or rollers and any other necessary equipment for this test without additional
 compensation.
 716.1.2-Rock: Rock is defined as sandstone, limestone, or concrete that cannot be
 incorporated in a 6 inch (150 mm) compacted lift and shall be medium hard or harder.
 
 978
 
 716.1.3-Hard Shale: Material that meets the description of shale in 716.1.1.3 except that
 is does not break down under the hardness test shall be considered as hard shale and placed as
 specified in 207.7.3.2.2 when used as embankment material.
 716.1.4-Borrow Material: Borrow shall consist of approved material required for the
 construction of embankments and other portions of the work and shall be subject to the
 applicable provisions of 211.
 716.2-TEST METHODS:
 Plastic Limit
 Grain Size Analysis
 Sieve analysis of fine and coarse
 aggregate
 Amount of material finer than 200 sieve
 (0.075 mm) in aggregate
 Specific Gravity of Soils
 Specific Gravity and Absorption of
 Coarse Aggregate
 Organic Content
 Moisture and density of soil and material
 having less than 40 percent of particles
 by weight retained on the ¾ inch (19
 mm) sieve
 Moisture and density of material having
 40 percent or more of the particles by
 weight retained on the ¾ inch (19 mm)
 sieve and that are relatively uniform in
 gradation and can be incorporated in a 12
 inch (300 mm) lift or less, and granular
 subgrade
 Liquid Limit
 
 AASHTO T 90 or ASTM D 424
 AASHTO T 88 or ASTM D 422
 AASHTO T 27
 AASHTO T 11
 AASHTO T 100 or ASTM D854
 AASHTO T 85 or ASTM C 127
 AASHTO T 267
 MP 207.07.20
 
 MP 700.00.24
 (See MP 717.04.21, Table 2.2.3.1)
 
 AASHTO T 89 or ASTM D 423
 
 716.3-MOISTURE AND DENSITY REQUIREMENTS:
 716.3.1-Embankment Moisture: Embankment soil and material having less than 40
 percent by weight of particles retained on the ¾ inch (19 mm) sieve shall be moistened or
 dried to a tolerance of plus three percentage points or minus four percentage points from
 optimum at the time compactive effort is applied. However, soils which evidence
 pronounced elasticity as the result of compactive effort shall be dried to optimum moisture
 content, if necessary to achieve stability.
 716.3.2-Embankment and Subgrade Density:
 716.3.2.1-Soil and material having less than 40 percent by weight of particles
 retained on the ¾ inch (19 mm) sieve shall be compacted within the moisture tolerance
 to a target percentage of dry density (Note 1) specified in Table 716.3.2.2. The
 maximum required dry density and the in-place dry density of the soil layers placed
 and compacted shall be determined by MP 207.07.20.
 979
 
 716.3.2.2- Soil and material having 40 percent or more by weight of particles
 retained on the ¾ inch (19 mm) sieve that are relatively uniform in gradation and can
 be incorporated in a 12 inch (300 mm) lift or less, shall be compacted to the target
 percentage of dry density (Note 1) specified in Table 716.3.2.2. The maximum
 required dry density shall be determined by Part 1 of MP 700.00.24. The in-place dry
 density of the soil layers placed and compacted shall be determined in accordance with
 Part II of MP 700.00.24.
 TABLE 716.3.2.2
 Target % of Dry Density (Note
 1) of Material Having Less
 Than 40% by Weight Retained
 on mm) the ¾ in. (19 mm)
 Sieve
 
 Target % of Dry Density (Note
 1) of Material Having 40% or
 More By Weight Retained on
 the ¾ in.(19 mm) Sieve and
 Granular Subgrade
 
 Embankment
 
 95
 
 95
 
 Subgrade
 
 95
 
 95
 
 Type of Construction
 
 Note 1-Target percentage of density shall be the percentage of density by which the decision of acceptance
 is based. The percentage of dry density for each test shall be determined by comparing the in-place dry
 density with required maximum dry density.
 
 716.3.2.3-Material, as outlined in MP 717.04.21, Table 2.2.3.1, shall be proof rolled
 with a pneumatic tire roller having an effective weight of 50 tons (45.5 Mg). Alternate
 proof rollers, acceptable to the Engineer, may be used in lieu of a 50 ton (45.5 Mg)
 pneumatic tired roller provided the weight per tire and tire pressure is maintained so
 that a minimum of 1315 pounds per inch (9.067 KN/mm) width of tire is maintained.
 The roller shall be operated at a speed of not more than five miles per hour (8 km/hr.).
 The designated areas to be proof rolled shall have two or more passes and the entire
 area shall be systematically covered with the proof rolling. During the proof rolling
 and after the proof rolling is completed, the area shall be checked for unstable areas or
 soft spots disclosed by the operation of the proof roller. These unstable areas or soft
 spots shall be corrected prior to placement of the overlying lifts of material. The
 Contractor may propose an alternate approach for small areas that are impractical to
 roll with the proof roller.
 716.4-EMBANKMENT ORGANIC CONTENT:
 The organic content of the embankment material shall not exceed 7.5 percent by weight as
 determined by AASHTO T 267.
 716.5-ACCEPTANCE OF EMBANKMENT AND SUBGRADE:
 The density of the embankment and subgrade will be accepted by the Division on a lot to
 lot basis provided the lot conforms to the specifications. A lot shall contain five approximately
 equal sublots. A sublot shall consist of not more than 2,500 cu. yd. (1900 cubic meters) for
 embankment and 400 linear ft. (120 m) per working width for subgrade. The Contractor's quality
 control testing shall include one nuclear moisture and density measurement made at a random
 980
 
 location within each of the sublots. Each lot shall be presented to the Engineer for acceptance.
 When a lot consists of more than one lift, the Contractor's quality control testing shall normally
 include testing on each lift. Testing for density shall be in accordance with 716.3.2.1, or 716.3.2.2,
 whichever is applicable. The random locations shall be determined in accordance with MP
 712.21.26. The Contractor's quality control testing will be evaluated for each lot and acceptance
 of the lot may be based either upon the Contractor's quality control testing or by independent
 testing performed by the Division. The acceptance decision will be made as soon as practicable
 after the Contractor has informed the Engineer that the lot is ready for acceptance.
 If the results of density tests on a lot indicate that at least 80 percent of the material, in
 accordance with 106.3.1 (West Virginia APA), has been compacted to the specified target
 percentage of dry density, the lot will be accepted. If less than 80 percent of the material has been
 compacted to the specified target percentage of dry density, no additional material shall be placed
 on the lot until it has been reworked to meet the specified requirements.
 Lots failing to meet the quality requirements shall be reworked by the Contractor at their
 expense and be resubmitted for acceptance. Evaluation of the reworked lots, when the testing is
 performed by the Division, shall be at the expense of the Contractor at the unit cost specified in
 109.2.2. The quality requirements of this Subsection shall apply to the reworked lots.
 
 981
 
 SECTION 717
 COMPACTION CONTROL OF BASE COURSE MATERIAL
 717.1-GENERAL:
 The Contractor shall notify the Engineer prior to construction of the test strips as set forth
 in MP 700.00.24. The Contractor shall perform quality control compaction tests and record the
 data on the forms as set forth in the Materials Procedures (MPs). The test data shall be available
 to the Engineer at the time of testing or as indicated in the Contractor's quality control plan.
 717.2-TEST METHODS:
 Maximum density, quality control density and acceptance density for crushed aggregate
 base course and aggregate subbase shall be determined in accordance with MP 700.00.24.
 717.3-DENSITY:
 The crushed aggregate base course and aggregate subbase shall be compacted to the target
 percentage of dry density of 95%. The maximum required dry density shall be determined in
 accordance with MP 700.00.24 Part I on a control test strip having a compacted thickness of 6
 inches (150 mm) or less. The in-place dry density of each base course layer shall be determined in
 accordance with MP 700.00.24 Part II. The maximum layer thickness, other than the test strip(s),
 shall not exceed 12 in. (300 mm) or as specified in the project documents. The density of layers
 with thickness that differ from the thickness of the control test strip(s) shall be subject to the density
 requirements determined by the control test strip.
 
 982
 
 SECTION 718
 SEWER AND WATERLINE MATERIAL
 718.1-IRON PIPE:
 Ductile iron pipe for waterline applications shall conform to AWWA C151.
 718.1.1: Cement lining shall conform to AWWA C104.
 718.1.2: Fittings shall conform to AWWA C110 or C153.
 718.1.3: Joints shall conform to AWWA C111. Flanged joints shall conform to C115.
 Joints shall conform to AWWA C111. Flanged joints shall conform to C115.
 718.2 through 718.4-BLANK
 718.5-PLASTIC PIPE (PVC):
 Plastic Pipe shall conform to the following requirements unless otherwise specified by the
 Utility responsible for its operation:
 Pipe Size
 
 Pressure Applications
 
 Less than 4 in (100 mm)
 4 in (100 mm) to
 12 in (300 mm)
 14 in (350 mm) to
 16 in (400 mm)
 
 ASTM D2241, SDR 21
 
 Non-Pressure
 Applications
 ASTM D3034
 
 AWWA C900, DR 14
 
 ASTM D3034
 
 AWWA C905, DR 14
 
 ASTM D3034
 
 Joint Requirements
 
 ASTM D3139
 
 ASTM D3212
 
 718.6-BLANK
 718.7-PLASTIC PIPE (POLYETHYLENE):
 Plastic pipe (polyethylene) shall conform to ASTM D2239 “PE3408”. Additionally, when
 used for potable water, polyethylene pipe shall be approved by the National Sanitation Foundation
 for use in transmitting liquids for human consumption.
 718.9-COPPER SERVICE LINE:
 Copper Service Line shall conform to ASTM B88. Fitting shall be industrial quality and
 conform to AWWA C800.
 718.10-GATE VALVES:
 Gate valves shall conform to AWWA C500 or C509.
 718.11-VALVE BOXES:
 Valve Boxes shall be as specified on the plans.
 
 983
 
 718.12-CASING-PIPE (STEEL):
 Casing Pipe (Steel) shall conform to the following:”ASTM A53, Grade B, ASTM A139,
 Grade B or ASTM A252, Graded 2 for both waterline and sewer line applications. Hydrostatic test
 requirements under ASTM A53 or ASTM A139 are waived.”
 718.13-FIRE HYDRANTS:
 Fire Hydrants shall conform to AWWA C502. See plans for specific details.
 718.14-METERS:
 Meters shall conform to AWWA C700, type as required by the plans.
 718.15-MISCELLANEOUS STEEL (CLAMPS, RODS, ETC.):
 Miscellaneous Steel (Clamps, Rods, Etc.) shall be industrial quality.
 718.16 through 718.19-BLANK
 718.20-FINE AGGREGATE:
 Fine aggregate used to level the bedding material shall consist of crushed or uncrushed
 mineral aggregate which has no particles larger than 3/8 in. (9.5 mm) as determined by visual
 inspection. The project Engineer/Supervisor may obtain samples on questionable materials for
 testing prior to use.
 718.21-BEDDING MATERIAL:
 Bedding Material shall conform to 703 and meet gradation for #67.
 
 984
 
 INDEX
 
 Index
 This index is not intended to be a complete concordance, but is intended to provide a general reference of where a Section or Subsection
 can be found. The entire book is available online and may be searched extensively and specifically for particular words and phrases.
 
 Performance Graded Binders, 805
 Polymer-Modified Cationic Emulsified Asphalt, 806
 Primer for use with Asphalt in Dampproofing and
 Waterproofing, 806
 Winter Grade Cut-Back Asphalt, 805
 
 Approach Slabs, 250
 Basis of Payment, 251
 Curbs, 251
 Description, 250
 Forms, 250
 Joints, 250
 Materials, 250
 Method of Measurement, 251
 Pay Item, 251
 Placing, 250
 
 Asphalt Skid Resistant Pavement, 181
 Description, 181
 Fine Aggregate, 182
 Materials, 181
 Mixing182
 Pay Item, 182
 
 Asbestos Abatement, 760
 
 Award and Execution of Contract, 15
 
 Basis of Payment, 769
 Execution, 764
 General, 760
 Method of Measurement, 769
 Pay Items, 769
 
 Award of Contract, 15
 Cancellation of Award, 16
 Consideration of Proposals, 15
 Execution of Contract, 18
 Failure to Execute Contract, 18
 Insurance Requirements, 17
 Preconstruction Conference, 18
 Requirement of Contract Bond, 16
 Return of Proposal Guaranty, 16
 Special Bonds and Insurance, 18
 
 Asphalt Base and Wearing Courses, Percent
 Within Limits (PWL), 194
 Acceptance Testing, 199
 Basis of Payment, 209
 Composition of Mixtures, 195
 Contractors Quality Control, 199
 Description, 194
 Equipment, 204
 General, 195
 Materials, 194
 Method of Measurement, 209
 Paving Operations, 208
 Pay Items, 212
 Protection of Pavement and Traffic Control, 208
 Testing, 198
 
 Base Course Reinforcement Geogrid, 107
 Construction, 110
 Description, 107
 Geogrid Material, 107
 Manufacturing Quality Control, 109
 Measurement/Payment, 111
 Pay Item, 111
 Reference Documents, 107
 Transportation, Handling and Storage, 110
 
 Bidding Requirements and Conditions, 10
 
 Asphalt Base, Wearing, and Patching and
 Leveling Courses, 163
 
 Combination Proposals, 13
 Contents of Proposal Forms, 10
 Delivery of Proposals, 12
 Disqualification of Bidders, 13
 Examination of Plans, Specifications, and
 Site of Work, 11
 Free competitive Bidding Affidavit, 13
 Insuance of Proposal Forms, 10
 Interpretation of Approximate Estimates, 11
 Irregular Proposals, 11
 Material Guaranty, 13
 Pre-Construction Data, 13
 Preparation of Proposal, 11
 Prequalification of Bidders, 10
 Proposal Guaranty, 12
 Public Reading of Proposals, 13
 Withdrawal of Proposals, 12
 
 Acceptance Testing, 168
 Basis of Payment, 178
 Composition of Mixtures, 164
 Contractors Quality Control, 167
 Description
 Equipment, 172
 General, 163
 Materials, 163
 Method of Measurement, 178
 Paving Operations, 176
 Pay Items, 178
 Protection of Pavement and Traffic Control, 178
 Testing, 167
 Weather Restrictions, 172
 
 Asphalt Materials, 805
 Asphalt Emulsion, 805
 Asphalt for Dampproofing and Water-Proofing, 806
 Cationic Emulsified Asphalt, 806
 Liquid Asphalt (Medium Curing Type), 805
 Liquid Asphalt (Rapid Curing Type), 805
 Nonstandard Asphalt Materials, 806
 
 985
 
 Pay Item, 98
 Selective Clearing and Thinning, 96
 
 Bituminous Underseal for Concrete
 Pavement, 254
 
 Coarse Aggregate, 796
 
 Basis of Payment, 255
 Description, 254
 General, 254
 Materials, 254
 Method of Measurement, 255
 Pay Items, 255
 
 Crushed Stone, 796
 Grading of Coarse Aggregates, 799
 Gravel, 796
 Lightweight Coarse Aggregate for Structural
 Concrete, 799
 Slag, 797
 
 Borrow Excavation, 128
 
 Compaction Control of Base Course Material, 982
 
 Basis of Payment, 132
 Description, 128
 General, 128
 Materials, 128
 Method of Measurement, 131
 Pay Items, 132
 Rock Borrow Excavation, 130
 Select Borrow Excavation, 130
 Unclassified Borrow Excavation, 130
 
 Density, 982
 General, 982
 Test Methods, 982
 
 Concrete Admixtures, Curing and Coating
 Materials, 807
 Accelerating Admixtures for Concrete, 812
 Air-Entraining Admixtures for Concrete, 807
 Burlap Cloth Made from Jute or Kenaf for Curing, 811
 Concrete Protective Coating Materials, 814
 Concrete Sealer, 812
 Epoxy Resin Protective Coating, 812
 Latex Admixture, 811
 Liquid Membrane-Forming Compound for Curing
 Concrete, 812
 Polyethylene Coated Burlap for Curing Concrete, 811
 Pozzolanic Additives for use in Portland Cement
 Concrete, 811
 Waterproof Paper for Curing Concrete, 812
 Water-Reducing Admixtures for Concrete, 809
 Water-Reducing and Accelerating Admixtures for
 Concrete, 813
 Water-Reducing and Retarding Admixtures for
 Concrete, 808
 White Polyethylene Sheeting (Film) for Curing
 Concrete, 812
 
 Bridge Cleaning, 770
 Description, 770
 Testing of Structural Steel, 771
 General Contractor Responsibility, 771
 Basis of Payment, 771
 Pay Item, 771
 
 Building Demolition, Well and Septic Tank
 Abandonment, 99
 Basis of Payment, 102
 Buildings, 99
 Description, 99
 Disposal of Materials, 99
 Method of Measurement, 102
 Pay Items, 103
 Septic Tanks, 102
 Utilities, 99
 Wells, 101
 
 Concrete Cribbing, 536
 
 Cast Bronze and Rolled Copper-Alloy Expansion
 Plates, 464
 
 Basis of Payment, 537
 Description, 536
 Filling Crib, 536
 Materials, 536
 Method of Measurement, 537
 Pay Item, 537
 Placing Crib Members, 536
 
 Basis of Payment, 465
 Cast Bronze Plates, 464
 Description, 464
 General, 464
 Materials, 464
 Method of Measurement, 464
 Pay Items, 465
 Rolled Copper-Alloy Expansion Plates, 464
 
 Concrete Gutter, Invert Pipe Gutter, or Dumped
 Rock Gutter, 533
 Basis of Payment, 535
 Concrete Gutter, 533
 Description, 533
 Dumped Rock Gutter, 534
 General, 533
 Invert Pipe Gutter, 534
 Materials, 533
 Method of Measurement, 535
 Pay Items, 535
 
 Cleaning Culverts, Inlets, and Manholes, 152
 Basis of Payment, 152
 Construction Methods, 152
 Description, 152
 Materials, 152
 Method of Measurement, 152
 Pay Items, 152
 
 Clearing and Grubbing, 95
 Basis of Payment, 98
 Clearing, 95
 Description, 95
 Disposal, 97
 General, 95
 Grubbing, 96
 Materials, 95
 Method of Measurement, 98
 
 986
 
 Materials, 561
 Method of Measurement, 564
 Pay Items, 564
 
 Concrete Pavement Cross Stitching, 278
 Basis of Payment, 281
 Construction Methods, 278
 Description, 278
 Equipment and Tools, 278
 Materials, 278
 Method of Measurement, 281
 Opening to Traffic, 280
 Pay Item, 281
 
 Control of Materials, 39
 Division-Furnished Materials, 44
 Handling Materials, 43
 Local Material Sources, 41
 Plant Inspection, 42
 Samples, Tests, Cited Specifications, 41
 Silence of Specifications, 44
 Source of Supply and Quality Requirements, 39
 Storage of Materials, 43
 Unacceptable Materials, 43
 
 Concrete Pavement Repair, 256
 Basis of Payment, 261
 Construction Methods , 257
 Description, 256
 Equipment and Tools, 257
 Materials, 256
 Method of Measurement, 261
 Pay Items, 262
 Proportioning, 256
 Ride Acceptance, 261
 Testing, 257
 
 Control of Work, 27
 Acceptance, 36
 Authority and Duties of the Inspector, 34
 Authority and Duties of the Project Engineer or Project
 Supervisor, 34
 Authority of the Engineer, 27
 Claims for Adjustment and Disputes, 36
 Construction Stakes, Lines and Grades, 33
 Cooperation Between Contractors, 33
 Cooperation by Contractor, 31
 Cooperation with Utilities, 32
 Coordination of Plans, Specifications, Supplemental
 Specifications, and Special Provisions, 31
 Failure to Maintain Roadway or Structure, 36
 Inspection of Work and Materials, 34
 Load Restrictions, 35
 Maintenance During Construction, 35
 Plans and Working Drawings, 27
 Removal of Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work, 35
 
 Concrete Slab Stabilization, 275
 Basis of Payment, 277
 Construction Methods, 276
 Description, 275
 Equipment, 275
 Materials, 275
 Method of Measurement, 277
 Opening to Traffic, 277
 Pay Items, 277
 Proportioning, 275
 
 Concrete, Clay, Fiber and Plastic Pipe, 852
 Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene (ABS) Pipe, 853
 Bituminized Fiber Pipe for Underdrainage, 853
 Clay Drain Tile, 852
 Clay Pipe, 852
 Concrete Drain Tile, 852
 Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe, 853
 Fiberglass-Reinforced (FRP) Pipe, 853
 Non-Asbestos Fiber-Cement Storm Drain Pipe, 854
 Nonreinforced Concrete Pipe, 852
 Perforated Asbestos Cement Pipe for
 Underdrainage, 852
 Perforated Bituminized Fiber Pipe for
 Underdrainage, 853
 Perforated Concrete Pipe, 852
 Perforated Plastic Semicircular Pipe, 853
 Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe, 853
 Porous Concrete Pipe, 852
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box Culverts, 854
 Reinforced Concrete Arch Culvert Storm Drain, 852
 Reinforced Concrete Culvert Storm Drain and Sewer
 Pipe, 852
 Reinforced Concrete Elliptical Culvert Storm Drain and
 Sewer Pipe, 852
 Reinforced Concrete End Sections, 853
 Reinforced Plastic Mortar (RPMP) Pipe, 853
 Vitrified Clay Lined Reinforced Concrete Pipe, 852
 
 Controlled Low-Strength Material, 146
 Construction Methods, 147
 Description, 146
 Materials, 146
 Pay Item, 148
 Properties, 146
 
 Crack and Pothole Repair, 263
 Basis of Payment, 263
 Construction Methods, 263
 Description, 263
 Materials, 263
 Method of Measurement, 263
 Pay Items, 263
 
 Crushed Aggregate Base Course, 153
 Basis of Payment, 158
 Compacting, 156
 Description, 153
 Equipment, 155
 Maintenance, 156
 Materials, 153
 Method of Measurement, 157
 Pay Items, 158
 Placing, 155
 Tolerance, 156
 
 Construction Surveying, 561
 As-Built Utility Survey, 562
 Basis of Payment, 564
 Construction Layout Stakes, 561
 Description, 561
 
 987
 
 Pay Item, 529
 
 Curbs, Combination Curbs and Gutters and
 Medians, 418
 
 Embankment and Subgrade Material, 978
 Acceptance of Embankment and Subgrade, 980
 Embankment Organic Content, 980
 General, 978
 Moisture and Density Requirements, 979
 Test Methods, 979
 
 Asphalt Curbing, 421
 Basis of Payment, 423
 Description, 418
 Materials, 418
 Medians, 422
 Method of Measurement, 423
 Pay Items, 423
 Plain Concrete Curbing, Integral Concrete Curbing, and
 Combination Concrete Curb and Gutter, 420
 Reflecting Concrete Curbing, 421
 Resetting Curb, 422
 
 Excavation and Embankment, 112
 Basis of Payment, 127
 Benches, 114
 Description, 112
 Disposal of Material, 115
 Ditches, 115
 Drainage, 124
 Finishing Earth Roads, 123
 Forming and Compacting Embankment, 118
 Materials, 112
 Method of Measurement, 125
 Pay Items, 127
 Protection of Curtain Walls, 125
 Roadway, 113
 Shoulders, 124
 Slides and Slipouts, 125
 Subgrade, 123
 Temporary Surcharge, 125
 
 Definition of Terms, 1
 Abbreviations, 1
 Definitions, 2
 Interpretations, 9
 
 Diamond Grinding, 264
 Basis of Payment, 266
 Construction, 264
 Description, 264
 Equipment, 264
 Final Surface Finish, 264
 Method of Measurement, 266
 Pay Item, 266
 Slurry Removal, 265
 Smoothness, 266
 Smoothness Requirements, 265
 
 Field Office and Storage Building, 565
 Alternate for Office Building, 567
 Basis of Payment, 568
 Description, 565
 Field Office, 565
 Liability for Property in Office/Storage Structures, 567
 Location and Time of Erection, 565
 Maintenance, 567
 Materials, 565
 Method of Measurement, 568
 Pay Items, 569
 Removal, 567
 Storage Building, 566
 
 Dismantling Structures, 104
 Basis of Payment, 105
 Construction Methods, 104
 Description, 104
 Materials, 104
 Method of Measurement, 105
 Pay Item, 105
 
 Dowel Bar Retrofit, 269
 Basis of Payment, 274
 Construction Methods, 270
 Description, 269
 Dowel Bar Alignment Assurance, 273
 Materials, 269
 Method of Measurement, 274
 Opening to Traffic, 273
 Pay Item, 274
 Test Section, 274
 
 Fine Aggregate, 794
 Alternate Grading, 795
 Fine Aggregate for Asphalt Mixtures, 795
 Fine Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete, 794
 Lightweight Fine Aggregate for Structural
 Concrete, 795
 Mineral Filler for Asphalt Mixtures, 795
 Mortar Sand, 795
 
 Drilled Caisson Foundations, 500
 
 Furnishing and Placing Topsoil, 587
 
 Basis of Payment, 510
 Construction, 504
 Description, 500
 Dimensional Requirements, 503
 Inspection of Sockets, 509
 Materials, 504
 Method of Measurement, 509
 Pay Items, 510
 Tests and Submittals, 500
 
 Basis of Payment, 588
 Description, 587
 Materials, 587
 Method of Measurement, 588
 Pay Items, 588
 Placing and Manipulating, 587
 Stripping Topsoil, 587
 Transporting, 587
 
 Electrical Work, 529
 Basis of Payment, 529
 Construction Methods, 529
 Description, 529
 Materials, 529
 Method of Measurement, 529
 
 988
 
 Notification of Abatement Demolition or
 Renovation, 57
 Opening Sections of Project to Traffic, 53
 Patented Devices, Materials, and Processes, 45
 Permits, Licenses and Taxes, 45
 Personal Liability of Public Officials, 54
 Plant Pest Regulations, 56
 Protection and Restoration of Property and
 Landscape, 52
 Public Convenience and Safety, 46
 Railway, 47
 Restoration of Surfaces Opened by Permit, 45
 Sanitary Provisions, 46
 Use of Explosives, 52
 
 Guardrail, 391
 Basis of Payment, 403
 Description, 391
 Erecting Rail Elements, 393
 Guardrail Removed and Rebuilt or Stored, 394
 Materials, 391
 Method of Measurement, 394
 Pay Items, 404
 Setting Posts and Placing Footers, 392
 
 Guardrail and Fence, 845
 Chain-Link Fence, 845
 Coated Steel Barbed Wire, 845
 Galvanized Steel Deep Beam Guardrail, Fasteners and
 Anchor Bolts, 845
 Safety Fence, 845
 Zinc-Coated (Galvanized) Iron or Steel Farm-Field and
 Railroad Right-Of-Way, 845
 
 Maintaining Traffic, 540
 Aggregates and Dust Palliatives, 542
 Basis of Payment, 555
 Channelizer Cones, 546
 Cleaning of Traffic Control Devices, 545
 Control of Traffic Through Work Areas, 540
 Description, 540
 Electric Arrow, 548
 Eradication of Pavement Markings, 542
 Flagger-Traffic Director, 545
 Materials, 540
 Method of Measurement, 550
 Pay Items, 555
 Pilot Truck and Driver or Shadow Vehicle, 542
 Portable Message Signs, 548
 Removing and Resetting Temporary Guardrail
 Barrier, 547
 Temporary Guardrail, 547
 Temporary Pavement Markings and Raised Pavement
 Markers, 543
 Temporary Pipe for Maintaining Traffic, 550
 Temporary Structures, 542
 Temporary Traffic Signal(s) or Temporary
 Lighting, 550
 Traffic Control Devices, 543
 Warning Lights, 550
 
 Horizontal Drains, 530
 Basis of Payment, 532
 Collector Pipe Installation, 531
 Description, 530
 Drilling, 530
 General, 530
 Installation of Horizontal Drain Pipe, 531
 Materials, 530
 Method of Measurement, 531
 Pay Items, 532
 Terminal Chamber Installation, 531
 
 Hydraulic Cement, 793
 Masonry Cement, 793
 Portland Cement, 793
 
 Joint Materials, 817
 Asphalt Plastic Cement, 819
 Hot Pour Mineral Filled Joint Sealer for Sewer and
 Culvert Pipe, 819
 Silicone Joint Sealant, 817
 Joint Mortar, 819
 Joint Sealant, Hot-Poured for Concrete and Asphalt
 Pavements, 817
 Joints for Circular Concrete Sewer and Culvert
 Materials, 819
 Preformed Elastomeric Joint Seals, 817
 Preformed Expansion Joint Filler for Concrete, 817
 Vitrified Clay Pipe Joints Having Resilent
 Properties, 818
 Waterstops (Elastomer Materials), 820
 
 Manholes and Inlets, 380
 Basis of Payment, 381
 Construction Methods, 380
 Description, 380
 Materials, 380
 Method of Measurement, 381
 Pay Items, 382
 
 Legal Relations and Responsibility to Public, 45
 
 Matting for Erosion Control, 604
 
 Air Pollution Control, 56
 Barricades and Warning Signs, 51
 Bridges Over Navigable Waters, 51
 Clean Water Act/Wetlands, 57
 Construction Access and Environmental Permits, 58
 Contractor’s Responsibility For Utility Property, 54
 Contractor’s Responsibility for Work, 53
 Federal-Aid Provisions, 46
 Forest Protection, 52
 Furnishing Right-Of-Way, 54
 Laws to be Observed, 45
 Lead Exposure in Construction, 57
 No Waiver of Legal Rights, 54, 55
 
 Basis of Payment, 604
 Description, 604
 Maintenance and Repairs, 604
 Materials, 604
 Method of Measurement, 604
 Pay Items, 604
 Placing, 604
 
 989
 
 Field Touch Up, 789
 Material, 788
 Method of Measurement, 789
 Minimum Requirements, 788
 Pay Items, 789
 Sealers and Top Coats, 789
 Shipping and Handling, 789
 
 Measurement and Payment, 78
 Acceptance and Final Payment, 87
 Compensation for Altered Quantities, 81
 Eliminated Item, 85
 Force Account Work, 81
 Load Limit Violations and Weigh Tickets, 91
 Measurement of Quantities, 78
 Partial Payments, 85
 Payment for Material on Hand, 86
 Price Adjustment of Asphalt Binder, 89
 Price Adjustment of Fuels, 87
 Scope of Payment, 80
 
 Metals, 821
 Aluminum Alloy Bolts, Nuts and Set Screws, 829
 Aluminum Alloy Drawn Tube, 829
 Aluminum Alloy Extrusions and Aluminum, 828
 Aluminum Alloy Pipes, 829
 Aluminum Alloy Rivets, 829
 Aluminum Alloy Shim Material, 829
 Aluminum Alloy Standard Structural Shapes, 829
 Aluminum Alloy Washers, 829
 Aluminum Alloys Sand Castings, 829
 Aluminum Filler Metal for Welding, 829
 Cadmium Coated Materials, 830
 Cast Iron Soil and Fittings, 828
 Coated Dowel Bars and Dowel Basket Assemblies, 823
 Copper Alloy Castings for Bearing, Expansion and
 Name Plates for Bridges, 823
 Expanded Metal Pavement Reinforcement, 821
 Fabricated Bar or Rod Mats for Concrete
 Reinforcement, 822
 Flashing for Construction and Expansion Joints, 824
 Galvanized Pipe or Tubing for Horizontal Drains, 830
 Galvanized Steel Guardrail Posts, 830
 Gray Iron, Malleable Iron and Ductile Iron
 Castings, 822
 High Strength Low Alloy Structural Metal, 822
 High-Strength Bolts for Structual Steel Joints Including
 Suitable Nuts and Hardened Washers, 824
 Hook Expansion Bolts for Fastening Wire Mesh in
 Shotcrete Applications, 821
 Joint Tie Bolt Assembly, 822
 Pipes for Floor Drains and Down-Spouts, 824
 Prestressing Reinforcement, 821
 Rolled Copper Alloy Bearing and Expansion Plates for
 Bridges, 823
 Sheet Lead, 830
 Steel Bars for Concrete Reinforcement, 821
 Steel Bolts and Nuts, 824
 Steel Castings, 823
 Steel Forgings and Steel Shafting, 823
 Steel Pile Points, 831
 Steel Posts, Post Braces and Gate Frames for Right-ofWay Fence, 830
 Steel Shells or Casings (Driven Without Mandrel) for
 Cast-In-Place Piles, 828
 Structural and Eyebar Steel, 822
 Welded and Seamless Steel Pipe, 823
 Welded Wire Fabric for Concrete Reinforcement, 821
 Zinc Coated Steel Sheets for use In Manufacturing
 Traffic Signs, 828
 
 Metal Cribbing, 538
 Basis of Payment, 538
 Description, 538
 Filling Crib, 538
 Materials, 538
 Method of Measurement, 538
 Pay Item, 539
 Placing Crib Members, 538
 
 Metal Pipe, 846
 Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate for Pipe, Pipe Arch,
 and Arches, 850
 Aluminum Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe and Pipe
 Arch, 851
 Bituminous Coated Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe
 and Pipe Arches, 850
 Bituminous Coated Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe
 Underdrain, 850
 Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe and Pipe
 Arch, 846
 Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel Underdrain
 Pipe, 849
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe and Pipe Arches, 849
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe Underdrain, 850
 Corrugated Stainless Steel Culverts and
 Underdrains, 847
 End Sections for Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe and
 Pipe Arches, 850
 End Sections for Corrugated Steel Pipe and Pipe
 Arches, 850
 Fiber Bonded Full Bituminous Coated Corrugated Steel
 Pipe and Pipe Arch, 846
 Fiber Bonded Full Bitumionous Coated and Full Paved
 Corrugated Steel Sewer Pipe, 846
 Full Bituminous Coated Aluminum Alloy Structural
 Plate Pipe, Pipe Arch, and Arches, 850
 Full Bituminous Coated and Full Paved Corrugated
 Steel Pipe, 846
 Full Bituminous Coated Structural Plate Pipe, Pipe
 Arch, and Arches, 848
 Metallic Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe and Pipe
 Arch, 846
 Metallic Coated Corrugated Steel Underdrain Pipe, 849
 Precoated, Metallic Coated Steel Pipe and
 Underdrain, 851
 Stainless Steel Structural Plate Pipe, 848
 Structual Plate for Pipe, Pipe Arch, and Arches, 848
 
 Milling of Asphalt Pavement Surfaces, 215
 Basis of Payment, 217
 Construction, 215
 Description, 215
 Method of Measurement, 217
 Pay Items, 217
 
 Metalizing Steel, 788
 Application of Metallic Coating, 788
 Basis of Payment, 789
 Description, 788
 
 990
 
 Maintenance, 161
 Materials, 159
 Method of Measurement, 161
 Mixing and Transporting Requirements, 160
 Pay Item, 161
 Placing, Spreading, and/or Compacting, 160
 Preparation and Batching of Materials, 160
 Testing, 159
 Tolerance, 161
 Weather and Seasonal Limitations, 160
 
 Miscellaneous Materials, 855
 Asphaltum Base Paint for Tree Surgery, 891
 Bentonite, 977
 Calcium Chloride, 855
 Clay or Shale Brick, 884
 Concrete Brick, 884
 Concrete Masonry Units, 884
 Concrete Repair Materials, 855
 Elastomeric Bearing Pads, 883
 Elastomeric Bearing Pads for Bridge Railing, 884
 Elastomeric Gasket and Sealing Material, 892
 Fertilizers, 888
 Gabions, 886
 Ground Agricultural Limestone, 887
 Hydrated Lime, 855
 Inoculating Bacteria, 890
 Matting for Erosion Control, 886
 Miscellaneous Items for Landscape Plantings, 891
 Mulch Material, 888
 Packaged Dry, Hydraulic-Cement Grout
 (Non-Shrink), 855
 Pavement Marking Material, 893
 Precast Concrete Median Barriers (Permanent), 885
 Precast Concrete Traffic Dividers, 884
 Precast Concrete Units for Manholes and Inlets, 884
 Preformed Fabric Pads, 883
 Reinforced Plastic or Reniforced Corrosion-Resistant
 Rubber Manhole Steps, 892
 Seed, 889
 Seedling Plants, 890
 Sodium Chloride, 855
 Traffic Safety Devices, 906
 Traffic Signal Materials and Equipment, 911
 Trees and Shrubs, 890
 Vines and Ground Cover Plants, 890
 Warning Devices, 855
 Water for use with Hydraulic Cement, 855
 Waterproofing Fabric, 855
 
 Overhead Sign Structures, 617
 Basis of Payment, 628
 Description, 617
 Erection, 625
 Fabrication, 619
 Materials, 617
 Method of Measurement, 628
 Pay Items, 628
 Welding of Aluminum Alloys, 620
 
 Overlaying of Portland Cement Concrete Bridge
 Decks, 737
 Basis of Payment, 759
 Construction Limitations and Requirements, 754
 Construction Methods, 747
 Description, 737
 Final Bridge Deck Finish, 758
 Materials, 737
 Method of Measurement, 758
 Pay Items, 759
 
 Paints, Coatings, Oils, and Inks, 835
 Boiled Linseed Oil, 835
 Epoxy Mastic Maintenance Coating, 836
 Inks, 838
 Inorganic Zinc Rich Primer, 839
 Mineral Spirits, 835
 Organic Primer, 835
 Overcoat Systems, 838
 Repair of Damaged Galvanized Surfaces, 839
 Temporary White or Yellow Traffic Zone Paint, 841
 White or Yellow Fast-Dry Traffic Paint (Type II), 842
 Zinc Rich Low Voc System, 839
 
 Miscellaneous Provisions, 93
 Common Carrier Rates, 93
 Minimum Wage Determinations, 93
 Nondiscrimination of Employees (Governor’s Executive
 Order), 93
 
 Pavement Markings, 696
 Description, 696
 Materials, 696
 Types of Pavement Markings, 696
 Pavement Preparation-Premarking, Coding, 698
 Application, 698
 Method of Measurement, 709
 Basis of Payment, 709
 Pay Items, 710
 
 Mitigation Devices, 570
 Basis of Payment, 570
 General, 570
 Pay Items, 570
 Placement, 570
 
 Mobilization, 106
 Basis of Payment, 106
 Construction Methods, 106
 Description, 106
 Materials, 106
 Method of Measurement, 106
 Pay Item, 106
 
 Open Graded Free Draining Base Course, 159
 Basis of Payment, 161
 Composition of Optional Stabilizing Mixtures, 159
 Curing, 161
 Description, 159
 Equipment, 160
 General, 159
 
 991
 
 Piling, 455
 
 Portland Cement Concrete Pavement, 219
 
 Accuracy of Driving, 456
 Basis of Payment, 460
 Defective Piles, 457
 Description, 455
 Determination of Bearing Values, 457
 Equipment for Driving, 455
 Extensions or “Build-Ups”, 459
 Materials, 455
 Method of Driving, 456
 Method of Measurement, 459
 Pay Items, 460
 Precast Concrete Piles, 457
 Predrilled Piling, 459
 Preparation for Driving, 455
 Prestressed Concrete Piles, 458
 Steel Piling, 458
 
 Adverse Weather Condition, 246
 Basis of Payment, 248
 Curing, 241
 Description, 219
 Equipment, 225
 Final Strike-Off, Consolidation and Finishing, 238
 Handling, Measuring, and Batching Materials, 230
 Materials, 219
 Method of Measurement, 247
 Mixing Concrete, 231
 Opening Pavement To Traffic, 244
 Pavement Widening, 246
 Pay Items, 249
 Placing Concrete, 232
 Preparation of Grade, Setting Forms, and Conditioning
 of Subgrade, 229
 Proportioning, 220
 Protection of Pavement, 244
 Removing Forms, 243
 Sealing Joints, 243
 Strike-Off of Concrete and Placement of
 Reinforcement, 233
 Surface Tests, 240
 Tolerance in Pavement Thickness, 245
 
 Piling Walls, 428
 Basis of Payment, 431
 Corrosion Protection, 429
 Description, 428
 Drilling, 428
 Installation of Piles, 429
 Lagging and Backfilling, 430
 Materials, 428
 Method of Measurement, 431
 Painting, 430
 Pay Items, 431
 
 Precast Concrete Traffic Dividers, 424
 Basis of Payment, 424
 Construction Methods, 424
 Description, 424
 Materials, 424
 Method of Measurement, 424
 Pay Item, 424
 
 Pipe Culverts, 365
 Backfilling, 371
 Basis of Payment, 376
 Bedding, 369
 Description, 365
 Elongation, 371
 Field Paving, 372
 General, 368
 Jacking Conduit, 374
 Laying and Joining, 370
 Materials, 365
 Method of Measurement, 375
 Pay Items, 377
 Relaid Conduit, 374
 Trench Excavation, 368
 
 Preformed Elastomeric Joint Sealer, 499
 Basis of Payment, 499
 Description, 499
 Installation, 499
 Materials, 499
 Method of Measurement, 499
 Pay Item, 499
 Preparation of Joint, 499
 
 Prestressed Concrete Members, 340
 Concrete, 343
 Construction of Deck, 363
 Curing, 356
 Demensional Tolerances, 360
 Description, 340
 Finishing, 358
 Handling, Storing, Transporting, and Erection, 362
 Materials, 340
 Measurement and Payment, 363
 Pay Items, 364
 Plant Requirements and Approval, 341
 Prestressing, 353
 Reinforcement, 343
 Working Drawings, 342
 Workmanship, 358
 
 Plugging Gas, Oil, and Drilled Water Wells, 714
 Basis of Payment, 715
 Description, 714
 General, 714
 Materials, 714
 Method of Measurement, 715
 Pay Items, 715
 Plugging Drilled Water Wells, 714
 Plugging Gas and Oil Wells, 714
 
 Pneumatically Applied Mortar, 496
 Basis of Payment, 498
 Cleaning, 496
 Description, 496
 Materials, 496
 Method of Measurement, 498
 Pay Items, 498
 Placing Reinforcing Mesh, 496
 Placing Shotcrete, 497
 Proportioning and Mixing, 496
 
 992
 
 Procecution and Progress, 61
 
 Retaining Wall Systems, 511
 
 Completion Dates, 72
 Default and Termination of Contract, 73
 Determination and Extension of Contract, 68
 Field Office Overhead, 76
 Home Office Overhead, 76
 Limitation of Operations, 67
 Character of Workers, 67
 Notice to Proceed, 61
 Prosecution of the Work, 61
 Subletting of Contract, 60
 Termination of Contract for Convenience of the
 State, 74
 
 Basis of Payments, 528
 Description, 511
 Design Criteria, 511
 General, 511
 Materials, 514
 Method of Measurement, 527
 Pay Items, 528
 Submittals, 512
 
 Right-Of-Way Fence, 405
 Basis of Payment, 412
 Clearing, Grubbing, and Trench Excavation, 406
 Concrete Footers, 406
 Description, 405
 Electrical Grounds, 411
 Erection of Fencing Materials, 409
 General, 406
 Junctions With Existing Fences, 411
 Materials, 405
 Method of Measurement, 412
 Paints and Painting, 411
 Pay Items, 412
 Spacing and Setting Posts, 407
 Temporary Fence, 411
 
 Project Markers, Right-Of-Way Markers,
 Survery Markers, and Outlet Markers, 558
 Concrete Survey Markers, 558
 Description, 558
 Materials, 558
 Metal (Sign-Post) Project Markers, 559
 Right-Of-Way Markers, 558
 
 Railings, 461
 Aluminum Railing, 461
 Basis of Payment, 463
 Description, 461
 Ferrous Metal Railings, 461
 Grouting of Anchor Bolts, 462
 Line and Grade, 461
 Materials, 461
 Method of Measurement, 462
 Pay Items, 463
 
 Roadside Sign Supports, 607
 Basis of Payment, 615
 Description, 607
 Erection, 610
 Fabrication, 609
 Materials, 607
 Method of Measurement, 612
 Pay Items, 616
 
 Reinforced Soil Slopes, 581
 Acceptance, 586
 Backfill Placement, 585
 Basis of Payment, 586
 Description, 581
 Erosion Control Material Placement, 586
 Foundation Preparation, 585
 Geosynthetic Installation, 585
 Materials, 581
 Method of Measurement, 586
 Pay Item, 586
 
 Roadway Lighting, 668
 Backfill, 689
 Basis of Payment, 694
 Cable-In-Duct, 690
 Cables, 689
 Concrete, 688
 Conduit, 688
 Description, 668
 Foundations, 692
 General, 688
 Grounding, 692
 Lighting Supports, 691
 Luminaires, 689
 Manholes and Junction Boxes, 689
 Materials, 668
 Method of Measurement, 694
 Pay Items, 695
 Testing, 693
 
 Reinforcing Steel, 336
 Bar Splices, 337
 Basis of Payment, 339
 Bending of Reinforcing Bars, 336
 Description, 336
 Fabric Reinforcement, 338
 Materials, 336
 Method of Measurement, 338
 Order Lists, 336
 Pay Items, 339
 Placing and Fastening, 337
 Protection of Materials, 336
 
 Re-Sealing Concrete Pavement Joints, 267
 Basis of Payment, 268
 Construction Methods, 267
 Description,
 Materials, 267
 Method of Measurement, 268
 Pay Items, 268
 
 993
 
 Pay Item, 253
 
 Roller Compacted Concrete, 282
 
 Seeding and Mulching, 589
 
 Basis of Payment, 295
 Compaction, 293
 Curing, 294
 Description, 282
 Equipment and Tools, 287
 Finishing, 294
 Handling, Measuring, and Batching Materials, 290
 Joints, 293
 Maintenance, 295
 Materials, 282
 Method of Measurement, 295
 Mixing RCC, 290
 Opening to Traffic, 295
 Pay Item, 295
 Placing RCC, 291
 Preparation of Grade and Conditioning of Subgrade or
 Base, 290
 Proportioning, 283
 Testing, 284
 
 Applying Mulch and Fertilizer, 592
 Area Preparation for Seeding and Mulching, 590
 Basis of Payment, 594
 Description, 589
 Maintenance of Seeded and Mulched Areas, 593
 Materials, 589
 Method of Measurement, 594
 Pay Items, 594
 Season of Work, 589
 Second and Third Step Seeding, Fertilizing and
 Mulching, 593
 Sowing Seed, 590
 
 Seedling Planting, 605
 Basis of Payment, 606
 Care During and After Delivery, 606
 Description, 605
 Materials, 605
 Method of Measurement, 606
 Pay Item, 606
 Planting Seedling Plants, 605
 Replacement of Seedling Plants, 605
 
 Sanitary Sewers, 728
 Abandoning Manholes, 735
 Adjusting Manholes, 735
 Backfilling, 732
 Basis of Payment, 736
 Bedding, 731
 Capping Manholes, 735
 Casing Pipe, 732
 Description, 728
 General, 728
 Jointing, 732
 Junction Boxes, 735
 Manhole, 735
 Materials, 728
 Method of Measurement, 735
 Pay Items, 736
 Pipe Laying, 731
 Reconstructed Sanitary Sewer, 735
 Testing Installations, 732
 Thrust Blocking and Anchorage, 732
 Trench Excavation, 730
 
 Sewer and Waterline Material, 983
 Bedding Material, 984
 Casing-Pipe (Steel), 984
 Copper Service Line, 983
 Fine Aggregate, 984
 Fire Hydrants, 984
 Gate Valves, 983
 Iron Pipe, 983
 Meters, 984
 Miscellaneous Steel (Clamps, Rods, Etc.), 984
 Plastic Pipe (Polyethylene), 983
 Plastic Pipe (PVC), 983
 Valve Boxes, 983
 
 Shop Painting Metal Structures, 772
 Description, 772
 General, 772
 Paint Application Requirements, 773
 Submittals, 777
 
 Scope of Work, 19
 
 Shoulders and Ditches, 150
 
 Alteration of Plans or Character of Work, 19
 Bridge Plate, 21
 Differing Site Conditions, 21
 Extra Work, 19
 Final Clean Up, 21
 Funding Source Identification Signs, 26
 Intent of Contract, 19
 Maintenance of Traffic, 20
 Significant Changes in the Character of Work, 23
 Suspension of Work Ordered by the Engineer, 23
 Temporary Structures, 19
 
 Basis of Payment, 150
 Description, 150
 Ditches, 150
 Materials, 150
 Method of Measurement, 150
 Pay Item, 151
 Shoulders, 150
 
 Sidewalks, 413
 Description, 413
 Dry Bed, 415
 Expanding Joints, 415
 Finishing, 416
 Forms, 415
 Materials, 413
 Mixing and Placing Concrete, 415
 Subgrade Preparation, 415
 
 Sealing Cracks in Concrete Pavement, 252
 Description, 252
 Materials, 252
 Preparation of Material before use, 252
 Preparation of Joints for Sealing, 252
 Equipment for Applying Sealer, 253
 Placement Requirements, 253
 Method of Measurement, 253
 Basis of Payment, 253
 
 994
 
 Forms, 311
 Handling, Measuring, and Batching of Materials, 310
 Materials, 297
 Method of Measurement, 334
 Mixing, 310
 Pay Items, 335
 Placing Concrete, 319
 Proportioning, 299
 Protective Surface Treatment, 330
 Testing, 306
 
 Sign Lighting, 629
 Basis of Payment, 638
 Description, 629
 General, 633
 Materials, 629
 Method of Measurement, 638
 Pay Item, 638
 
 Slope and Foundation Protection, 141
 Basis of Payment, 145
 Description, 141
 Foundation Protection, 143
 Method of Measurement, 144
 Pay Items, 145
 Slope Protection, 141
 Sodium Cloride, 711, 837
 
 Structure Rock, and Wet Excavation, 135
 Backfilling, 136
 Basis of Payment, 138
 Cofferdams, 135
 Description, 133
 Drainage, 136
 General, 135
 Inspection, 135
 Material, 135
 Materials, 133
 Method of Measurement, 137
 Pay Items, 139
 Preparation of Foundation, 136
 Pumping, 135
 
 Special Rock Fill, 140
 Basis of Payment, 140
 Construction Methods, 140
 Description, 140
 Materials, 140
 Method of Measurement, 140
 Pay Item, 140
 
 Steel Grid Flooring, 480
 Arrangement of Sections, 480
 Basis of Payment, 482
 Concrete Filler, 481
 Connection to Supports, 481
 Description, 480
 Field Assembly, 481
 Materials, 480
 Method of Measurement, 481
 Painting, 481
 Pay Items, 482
 Provision of Camber, 480
 Welding, 481
 
 Subgrade Preparation, 149
 Basis of Payment, 149
 Construction Methods, 149
 Description, 149
 Materials, 149
 Method of Measurement, 149
 Pay Item, 149
 
 Surface Preparation and Powder Coating of New
 Galvanized Steel for Highway Signing and
 Lighting Structures, 790
 Basis of Payment, 792
 Environmental Conditions, 791
 General, 790
 Inspection, 792
 Powder Coating, 791
 Powder Coating Application, 792
 Products, 790
 Repair of Damaged Coating, 792
 Surface Preparation and Powder Coating, 791
 
 Steel Structures, 432
 Assembly, 444
 Basis of Payment, 454
 Erection, 450
 Fabrication, 435
 General, 432
 Materials, 434
 Measurement and Payment, 452
 Pay Items, 454
 Working Drawings, 433
 
 Surface Treatments, 183
 Application of Aggregate, 186
 Application of Bituminous Material, 186
 Basis of Payment, 189
 Brooming and Rolling, 186
 Cleaning and Sweeping, 186
 Description, 183
 Equipment, 185
 Joints, 187
 Materials, 183
 Method of Measurement, 188
 Pay Items, 189
 Preparing and Repairing Existing Surface, 186
 Protection of Pavement and Traffic Control, 187
 Sequence of Operations and Quanities of Materials, 187
 Weather Restrictions, 185
 
 Stone and Crushed Aggregate, 801
 Aggregate for Base or Subbase Course, 801
 Dumped Rock Gutter, 801
 Filter Material, 804
 Shot Rock, 804
 Special Rock Fill, 801
 Stone for Gabions, 801
 Stone for Masonry, 801
 Stone for Riprap, 801
 
 Structural Concrete, 297
 Adverse Weather Conditions, 318
 Basis of Payment, 334
 Curing and Protecting Concrete, 328
 Description, 297
 Equipment and Tools, 308
 Finishing Concrete Surfaces, 323
 
 995
 
 Materials, 641
 Messenger Cable, 648
 Method of Measurement, 653
 Pay Items, 655
 Power Service, 652
 Removing and Replacing Improvements, 642
 Removing Existing Signal Equipment, 642
 Signal Heads, 645
 Support Structures, 648
 Testing, 652
 Wiring, 650
 
 Tack Coat, 190
 Application of Asphalt Material, 191
 Application of Cover Aggregate, 192
 Basis of Payment, 193
 Cleaning and Sweeping, 191
 Description, 190
 Equipment, 191
 Joints, 192
 Materials, 190
 Method of Measurement, 193
 Pay Item, 193
 Preparing and Repairing Base or Existing Surfaces, 191
 Protection of the Pavement and Traffic Control, 192
 Quantities of Materials, 192
 Weather Restriction, 190
 
 Traffic Signs and Delineators, 656
 Basis of Payment, 666
 Description, 656
 Erection, 662
 Fabrication, 659
 Materials, 656
 Method of Measurement, 665
 Pay Items, 667
 
 Temporary Pollution Control, 571
 Basis of Payment, 580
 Description, 571
 General Requirements, 572
 Materials, 571
 Method of Measurement, 578
 Pay Items, 580
 Preconstructon Conference, 572
 Seeding and Mulching, 574
 
 Tree and Shrub Planting, 598
 Basis of Payment, 603
 Care After Delivery, 599
 Care and Replacement of Plants, 602
 Clean-Up After Planting, 601
 Description, 598
 Digging Holes for Plants, 599
 Inspection and Delivery of Plant Material, 598
 Materials, 598
 Method of Measurement, 602
 Mulching, 601
 Pay Items, 603
 Plant Backfill, 599
 Planting, 600
 Pruning, 601
 Rain Basins, 601
 Staking and Guying, 601
 Wrapping and Foliage Protection, 601
 
 Three-Sided Reinforced Concrete
 Bridge/Culvert, 469
 Basis of Payment, 479
 Construction Methods, 476
 Description, 469
 Design Criteria, 469
 General, 469
 Materials, 472
 Method of Measurement, 478
 Pay Items, 479
 Submittals, 471
 
 Timber Bridge Structures, 483
 Basis of Payment, 495
 Construction Methods, 490
 General, 483
 Materials, 483
 Method of Measurement, 494
 Pay Items, 495
 Quality Control, 489
 Shop and Erection Drawings, 490
 
 Tunnel Liner Plate Pipe, 425
 Basis of Payment, 426
 Description, 425
 Field Paving, 426
 General, 426
 Grouting, 426
 Materials, 425
 Method of Measurement, 426
 Pay Items, 427
 Tunneling and Lining, 426
 
 Traffic Safety Devices, 711
 Basis of Payment, 713
 Construction Methods, 711
 Description, 711
 Method of Measurement, 713
 Pay Item, 713
 
 Underdrains, 383
 Basis of Payment, 389
 Construction Methods, 385
 Description, 383
 Materials, 383
 Method of Measurement, 388
 Pay Items, 390
 
 Traffic Signals, 641
 Basis of Payment, 654
 Cabinets, 647
 Conduit, 648
 Description, 641
 Excavating and Backfilling, 642
 Foundations, 643
 General, 642
 Junction Boxes, 649
 Loop Traffic Detectors, 644
 Maintaining Traffic, 642
 
 996
 
 Vine and Ground Cover Planting, 595
 Basis of Payment, 597
 Care During and After Delivery, 596
 Care of Vines and Ground Cover, 596
 Description, 595
 Materials, 595
 Method of Measurement, 596
 Pay Items, 597
 Planting of Vines and Ground Cover Plants, 595
 Replacement of Vines and Ground Cover, 596
 
 Water, 557
 Basis of Payment, 557
 Construction Methods, 557
 Description, 557
 Materials, 557
 Method of Measurement, 557
 Pay Item, 557
 
 Waterline Installation, 716
 Basis of Payment, 726
 Casing Pipe, 725
 Description, 716
 Fire Hydrants, 725
 Gate Valves and Valve Boxes, 725
 General, 716
 House Connection, 725
 Materials, 716
 Meters, Meter Boxes, and Special Valves and
 Appurtenances, 725
 Method of Measurement, 726
 Pay Items, 727
 Special Structures, 725
 
 Waterproofing, 466
 Basis of Payment, 468
 Dampproofing, 467
 Description, 466
 Details, 468
 Materials, 466
 Membrane Waterproofing, 467
 Method of Measurement, 468
 Pay Items, 468
 Preparation of Surface, 466
 Protection Course, 468
 
 Winter Grade Asphalt Patching Mixture, 213
 Basis of Payment, 214
 Description, 213
 Materials, 213
 Method of Measurement, 214
 Mixing Proportions, 213
 Pay Item, 214
 Preparation of Mix, 213
 
 Wood Materials, 833
 Common Lumber, 834
 Plywood, 834
 Preservative Treatment, 833
 Service and Lighting Poles, 834
 Species and Grade, 833
 Structural Materials, 833
 Wood Posts, 833
 
 997
 
 