CONTENTS
 Division 100
 General Conditions of the Contract.....................................................................4
 Division 200
 Grading and Removals.........................................................................................5
 Division 300
 Bases and Aggregate Surfaces.............................................................................6
 Division 400
 Flexible Pavements..............................................................................................7
 Division 500
 Rigid Pavements..................................................................................................8
 Division 600
 Incidental Construction........................................................................................9
 Division 700
 Structures........................................................................................................... 11
 Division 800
 Roadside Development......................................................................................12
 Division 900
 Traffic Control Facilities....................................................................................13
 Division 1000
 Materials Details................................................................................................ 14
 General Provisions and Supplemental specifications (*).................................77
 * For your convenience the Supplemental Specifications are incorporated into the
 Divisions above.
 
 3
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 DIVISIO N 100
 GENERAL CO NDITIO NS O F THE CO NTRACT
 Sec 101
 Sec 102
 Sec 103
 Sec 104
 Sec 105
 Sec 106
 Sec 107
 Sec 108
 Sec 109
 Sec 110
 
 Definition of Terms
 Bidding Requirements and Conditions
 Award and Excution of Contract
 Scope of Work
 Control of Work
 Control of Material
 Legal Relations and Responsibility to the Public
 Prosecution and Progress
 Measurement and Payment
 State and Federal Wage Rates and Other Requirements
 
 4
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 DIVISIO N 200
 GRADING AND REMO VALS
 Sec 201
 Sec 202
 Sec 202.10
 Sec 202.20
 Sec 202.30
 Sec 202.40
 Sec 202.50
 Sec 202.60
 Sec 203
 Sec 204
 Sec 204.10
 Sec 204.20
 Sec 205
 Sec 206
 Sec 207
 Sec 208
 Sec 209
 Sec 210
 Sec 211
 Sec 212
 Sec 213
 Sec 214
 Sec 215
 Sec 216
 Sec 216.10
 Sec 216.20
 Sec 216.30
 Sec 216.40
 Sec 216.50
 Sec 216.60
 Sec 216.70
 Sec 216.80
 Sec 216.90
 Sec 216.100
 
 Clearing and Grubbing
 Removal of Roadways and Buildings
 Plugging and Closure of Wells
 Septic Tank Plugging and Disposal
 Removal of Improvements for Roadway Contracts
 Demolition and Removal of Buildings
 Removal of Contaminated Material and Storage Tanks
 Individual Wastewater Lagoon Closures
 Roadway and Drainage Excavation, Embankment and Compaction
 Embankment Monitoring
 Settlement Gauges
 Pore Pressure Measurement Devices
 Modified Subgrade
 Excavation for Structures
 Linear Grading
 Interception Ditch
 Subgrade Preparation
 Subgrade Compaction
 Subgrade Scarifying
 Subgrading and Shouldering
 Blank
 Rock Fill
 Shaping Slopes
 Removals for Bridge Structures
 Removals of Bridges
 Scarification of Bridge Decks
 Seal Coat and Wearing Surface Removal
 Removal and Storage of Existing Bridge Rails
 Removal of Existing Bridge Decks
 Partial Removal of Existing Bridge Decks
 Partial Removal of Culvert and Substructure Concrete
 Curb Removal
 Removal of Existing Expansion Joints and Adjacent Concrete
 Removal of Existing Expansion Joint Seal or Sealant
 
 5
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 DIVISIO N 300
 BASES AND AGGREGATE SURFACES
 Sec 301
 Sec 302
 Sec 303
 Sec 304
 Sec 305
 Sec 306
 Sec 307
 Sec 308
 Sec 309
 Sec 310
 
 Blank
 Stabilized Permeable Base
 Rock Base
 Aggregate Base Course
 Blank
 Blank
 Blank
 Blank
 Blank
 Aggregate Surface
 
 6
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 DIVISIO N 400
 FLEXIBLE PAVEMENTS
 Sec 401
 Sec 402
 Sec 403
 Sec 404
 Sec 405
 Sec 406
 Sec 407
 Sec 408
 Sec 409
 Sec 410
 Sec 411
 Sec 412
 Sec 413
 Sec 413.10
 Sec 413.20
 Sec 413.30
 Sec 413.31
 Sec 413.40
 Sec 413.50
 Sec 413.60
 Sec 413.70
 Sec 413.80
 
 Plant Mix Bituminous Base and Pavement
 Plant Mix Bituminous Surface Leveling
 Asphaltic Concrete Pavement
 Bituminous Mixing Plants
 Blank
 Blank
 Tack Coat
 Prime Coat
 Seal Coat
 Blank
 Blank
 Blank
 Surface T reatments
 Micro-Surfacing
 Scrub Seal
 Ultrathin Bonded Asphalt Wearing Surface
 Bonded Hot Mix Asphalt Using Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane
 Bituminous Fog Sealing
 Bituminous Pavement Crack Sealing
 Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Joint/Crack Sealing
 Bituminous Pavement Crack Filling
 Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Crack Filling
 
 7
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 DIVISIO N 500
 RIGID PAVEMENTS
 Sec 501
 Sec 502
 Sec 503
 Sec 504
 Sec 505
 Sec 505.10
 Sec 505.20
 Sec 505.30
 Sec 505.40
 Sec 506
 Sec 506.10
 Sec 506.20
 Sec 506.30
 Sec 507
 
 Concrete
 Portland Cement Concrete Base and Pavement
 Bridge Approach Slab
 Concrete Approach Pavement
 Bridge Deck Concrete Wearing Surface
 Low Slump Concrete
 Latex Modified Concrete
 Silica Fume Concrete
 Latex Modified High Early Strength Concrete
 Concrete Overlays for Pavement
 Bonded Concrete Overlays of Asphalt Pavements
 Unbonded Concrete Overlays of Concrete Pavements
 Unbonded Concrete Overlays on Asphalt Pavements
 Strength of Concrete Using the Maturity Method
 
 8
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 DIVISIO N 600
 INCIDENTAL CO NSTRUCTIO N
 Sec 601
 Sec 602
 Sec 603
 Sec 604
 Sec 604.10
 Sec 604.20
 Sec 604.30
 Sec 604.40
 Sec 604.50
 Sec 604.60
 Sec 605
 Sec 605.10
 Sec 605.20
 Sec 605.30
 Sec 605.40
 Sec 605.50
 Sec 605.60
 Sec 605.70
 Sec 606
 Guard Cable
 Sec 606.10
 Sec 606.20
 Sec 606.30
 Sec 606.40
 Sec 606.50
 Sec 607
 Sec 607.10
 Sec 607.20
 Sec 608
 Sec 609
 Sec 609.10
 Sec 609.20
 Sec 609.30
 Sec 609.40
 Sec 609.50
 Sec 609.60
 Sec 609.70
 Sec 610
 Sec 611
 Sec 611.10
 Sec 611.20
 Sec 611.30
 Sec 611.40
 Sec 611.50
 Sec 611.60
 Sec 611.70
 Sec 612
 Sec 613
 Sec 613.10
 Sec 613.20
 Sec 613.30
 Sec 613.35
 Sec 613.40
 Sec 613.50
 Sec 614
 Sec 614.10
 Sec 614.20
 
 Field Laboratories
 Markers
 Water Line Installation
 Miscellaneous Drainage
 Concrete Headwalls, Drop Inlets and Manholes
 Adjusting Drainage Facilities
 Adjusting House Sewer Connections
 Pipe Collars
 Connecting Pipe to Existing Structures
 Slotted Drain
 Underdrainage
 Pipe Aggregate Pavement Edge Drain
 Geocomposite Pavement Edge Drain
 Pipe Aggregate Pavement Cross Drain
 Structural Underdrain
 French Underdrain
 Outlet Pipes and Splash Pads
 Aggregate Drains
 Guardrail, Crashworthy End Terminals, One-Strand Access Restraint Cable and T hree-Strand
 Guardrail
 Blank
 Crashworthy End Terminals
 One-Strand Access Restraint Cable
 T hree-Strand Guard Cable
 Fencing
 Chain-Link Fence
 Woven Wire Fence
 Concrete Median, Median Strip, Sidewalk, Curb Ramps, Steps and Paved Approaches
 Paved Drainage
 Concrete Curb, Gutter and Paved Ditch
 Integral Curb
 Asphalt Curb
 Drain Basin
 Blank
 Rock Ditch Liner
 Rock Lining
 Pavement Smoothness
 Embankment Protection
 Blank
 Blank
 Rock Blanket
 Blank
 Revetment
 Concrete Slope Protection
 Gabions
 Impact Attenuators
 Pavement Repair
 Full Depth Pavement Repairs
 Class A Partial Depth Pavement Repairs
 Class B Partial Depth Pavement Repairs
 Class C Partial Depth Pavement Repairs
 Dowel Bar Retrofit
 Cross Stitching
 Drainage Fittings
 Grates and Bearing Plates
 Automatic Floodgate
 
 9
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Sec 614.30
 Sec 615
 Sec 616
 Sec 617
 Sec 617.10
 Sec 617.20
 Sec 617.30
 Sec 618
 Sec 619
 Sec 620
 Sec 620.10
 Sec 620.20
 Sec 620.30
 Sec 620.40
 Sec 620.50
 Sec 621
 Sec 622
 Sec 622.10
 Sec 622.20
 Sec 622.30
 Sec 622.40
 Sec 623
 Sec 623.10
 Sec 623.20
 Sec 623.30
 Sec 623.40
 Sec 624
 Sec 625
 Sec 625.10
 Sec 625.20
 Sec 626
 Sec 627
 
 Manhole Frame and Cover and Curb Inlet
 Blank
 Temporary T raffic Control
 Concrete T raffic Barrier
 Permanent Concrete T raffic Barrier
 Temporary Concrete T raffic Barrier
 Concrete T raffic Barrier Delineators
 Mobilization
 Pavement Edge T reatment
 Pavement Marking
 Temporary Pavement Marking
 Permanent Pavement Marking
 Drop-On Glass Beads
 Quality Control and Quality Assurance
 Pavement Marking Removal
 Flowable Backfill
 Pavement and Bridge Surface Removal and Texturing
 Cold Milling Existing Pavement for Removal of Surface
 Cold Milling Pavement for a Driving Surface
 Diamond Grinding of Existing Portland Cement Concrete Pavement
 Diamond Grinding of New Portland Cement Concrete Pavement
 Concrete Bonding Compound, Epoxy Mortar and Epoxy Polymer Concrete Overlay
 Concrete Bonding Compound
 Epoxy Mortar
 Epoxy Polymer Concrete Overlay
 Polymer Concrete
 Geotextile Construction
 lab Stabilization
 Slab Undersealing
 Slab Jacking
 Rumble Strips
 Contractor Surveying and Staking
 
 10
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 DIVISIO N 700
 STRUCTURES
 Sec 701
 Sec 702
 Sec 703
 Sec 704
 Sec 705
 Sec 706
 Sec 707
 Sec 708
 Sec 709
 Sec 710
 Sec 711
 Sec 712
 Sec 713
 Sec 714
 Sec 715
 Sec 716
 Sec 716.10
 Sec 716.20
 Sec 716.30
 Sec 717
 Sec 717.10
 Sec 717.20
 Sec 717.30
 Sec 717.40
 Sec 717.50
 Sec 717.60
 Sec 718
 Sec 719
 Sec 720
 Sec 721
 Sec 722
 Sec 723
 Sec 724
 Sec 725
 Sec 726
 Sec 727
 Sec 728
 Sec 729
 Sec 730
 Sec 731
 Sec 732
 Sec 733
 Sec 734
 Sec 735
 
 Drilled Shafts
 Load-Bearing Piles
 Concrete Masonry Construction
 Concrete Masonry Repair
 Prestressed Concrete Members for Bridges
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete Structures
 Conduit System on Structure
 Blank
 Blank
 Epoxy Coated Reinforcing Steel
 Protective Coatings for Exposed Concrete Surfaces
 Structural Steel Construction
 T hrie Beam for Bridge Guardrail
 Blank
 Vertical Drain at End Bents
 Neoprene Bearings
 Plain and Laminated Neoprene Bearing Pads
 Laminated Neoprene Bearing Pad Assembly
 Type “ N” Polytetrafluoroethylene (PT FE) Bearings
 Flexible Joint Systems
 Preformed Compression Seal
 Strip Seal
 Silicone Expansion Joint Sealant
 Silicone Joint Sealant for Saw Cut and Formed Joints
 Open Cell Foam Joints
 Preformed Silicone or EPDM Expansion Joints
 Temporary Bridge
 Blank
 Mechanically Stabilized Earth Wall Systems
 Blank
 Blank
 Blank
 Pipe Culverts
 Metal Pipe and Pipe-Arch Culverts
 Rigid Pipe Culverts
 Structural Plate Pipe and Structural Plate Pipe-Arch Culverts
 Blank
 Blank
 T hermoplastic Pipe Culverts
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Manholes and Drop Inlets
 Flared End Sections
 Precast Concrete Box Culverts
 Installation of Pipe By Horizontal Boring Methods
 Culvert Pipe Liner
 
 11
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 DIVISIO N 800
 RO ADSIDE DEVELO PMENT
 Sec 801
 Sec 802
 Sec 803
 Sec 804
 Sec 805
 Sec 806
 Sec 806.10
 Sec 806.20
 Sec 806.30
 Sec 806.40
 Sec 806.50
 Sec 806.60
 Sec 806.70
 Sec 806.80
 Sec 806.90
 Sec 806.100
 Sec 806.110
 Sec 807
 Sec 808
 
 Lime and Fertilizer
 Mulching
 Sodding
 Topsoil
 Seeding
 Pollution, Erosion and Sediment Control
 Temporary Berms
 Temporary Slope Drains
 Temporary Ditch and Inlet Checks
 Sediment Basins
 Temporary Seeding and Mulching
 Sediment T rap
 Silt Fence
 Temporary Pipe
 Erosion Control Blankets and T urf Reinforcement Mats
 Temporary Stream Crossing
 Sediment Removal
 Blank
 Planting T rees, Shrubs and Other Plants
 
 12
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 DIVISIO N 900
 TRAFFIC CO NTRO L FACILITIES
 Sec 901
 Sec 902
 Sec 903
 
 Highway Lighting
 T raffic Signals
 Highway Signing
 
 13
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 DIVISIO N 1000
 MATERIALS DETAILS
 Sec 1001
 Sec 1002
 Sec 1003
 Sec 1004
 Sec 1005
 Sec 1006
 Sec 1007
 Sec 1008
 Sec 1009
 Sec 1010
 Sec 1011
 Sec 1012
 Sec 1013
 Sec 1014
 Sec 1015
 Sec 1015.10
 Sec 1015.20
 Sec 1016
 Sec 1017
 Sec 1018
 Sec 1019
 Sec 1020
 Sec 1021
 Sec 1022
 Sec 1023
 Sec 1024
 Sec 1025
 Sec 1026
 Sec 1027
 Sec 1028
 Sec 1029
 Sec 1030
 Sec 1031
 Sec 1032
 Sec 1033
 Sec 1034
 Sec 1035
 Sec 1036
 Sec 1037
 Sec 1038
 Sec 1039
 Sec 1039.10
 Sec 1039.20
 Sec 1039.30
 Sec 1039.40
 Sec 1039.50
 Sec 1039.60
 Sec 1039.70
 Sec 1040
 Cable Material
 Sec 1041
 Sec 1042
 Sec 1043
 Sec 1044
 Sec 1045
 Sec 1046
 Sec 1047
 
 General Requirements for Material
 Aggregate for Asphaltic Concrete
 Aggregate for Seal Coats
 Graded Aggregate for Bituminous Surface
 Aggregate for Concrete
 Aggregate for Surfacing
 Aggregate for Base
 Blank
 Aggregate for Drainage
 Select Granular Backfill for Structural Systems
 Geotextile
 Geocomposite Drainage Material
 Miscellaneous Drainage Material
 Blank
 Bituminous Material
 Performance Graded Asphalt Binder
 Liquid Bituminous Material
 Blank
 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag
 Fly Ash for Concrete
 Cement
 Corrugated Metallic-Coated Steel Culvert Pipe, Pipe-Arches and End Sections
 Bituminous-Coated Corrugated Metal Culvert Pipe and Pipe-Arches
 Corrugated Metallic-Coated Steel Pipe Underdrain
 Structural Plate Pipe and Pipe-Arches
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Culvert Pipe and Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe Underdrains
 Reinforced Concrete Culvert Pipe
 Polymer-Coated Corrugated Metal Culvert Pipe and Pipe-Arches
 Corrugated Polyvinyl Chloride Culvert Pipe
 Fabricating Prestressed Concrete Members for Bridges
 Vitrified Clay Sewer and Culvert Pipe
 Clay Drain T ile
 Precast Concrete Flared End Sections
 Precast Drainage Units
 Reinforced Concrete Elliptical Culvert Pipe
 Reinforced Concrete Arch Culvert
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete
 Shear Connectors
 Bearing Pads for Structures
 Epoxy Resin Material
 Type II Epoxy
 Type III Epoxy
 Epoxy or Polyester Bonding Agents For Dowels
 Epoxy Bonding Agents for Resin Anchor Systems
 Sand For Epoxy Mortar
 Epoxy Polymer Concrete Overlay
 Polymer Concrete
 Guardrail, End Terminals, One-Strand Access Restraint Cable and T hree-Strand Guard
 Polypropylene Culvert Pipe
 Highway Sign Material
 Fence Material
 Posts for Markers and Delineators
 Paint for Structural Steel
 Pipe Liner
 Corrugated Polyethylene Culvert Pipe
 
 14
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Sec 1048
 Sec 1048.10
 Sec 1048.20
 Sec 1048.30
 Sec 1049
 Sec 1050
 Sec 1051
 Sec 1052
 Sec 1052.10
 Sec 1052.20
 Sec 1052.30
 Sec 1052.40
 Sec 1053
 Sec 1053.10
 Sec 1053.20
 Sec 1054
 Sec 1055
 Sec 1056
 Sec 1056.10
 Sec 1056.20
 Sec 1057
 Sec 1058
 Sec 1059
 Sec 1059.10
 Sec 1059.20
 Sec 1059.30
 Sec 1059.40
 Sec 1059.50
 Sec 1060
 Sec 1061
 Sec 1062
 Sec 1063
 Sec 1064
 Sec 1065
 Sec 1066
 Sec 1067
 Sec 1068
 Sec 1069
 Sec 1070
 Sec 1071
 Sec 1072
 Sec 1073
 Sec 1074
 Sec 1075
 Sec 1076
 Sec 1077
 Sec 1078
 Sec 1079
 Sec 1080
 Sec 1081
 Sec 1082
 Sec 1083
 Sec 1084
 Sec 1085
 Sec 1086
 Sec 1087
 Sec 1088
 Sec 1089
 Sec 1090
 Sec 1091
 
 Pavement Marking Material
 Temporary Pavement Marking Materials
 Permanent Pavement Marking Materials
 Drop-On Glass Beads
 Precast Concrete Box Culverts
 Lumber, T imber, Piling, Posts and Poles
 Slotted Drain
 Mechanically Stabilized Earth Wall System Components
 Metallic Soil Reinforcement
 Non-Metallic Soil Reinforcement
 Large Block Wall Systems – Concrete-Facing Panels
 Small Block Wall Systems – Concrete Blocks
 Concrete Sealer and Concrete Crack Filler
 Penetrating Concrete Sealer
 Concrete Crack Filler
 Concrete Admixtures
 Concrete Curing Material
 Concrete T inting and Staining Material
 Concrete T inting Material
 Concrete Staining Material
 Material for Joints
 Polyethylene Sheeting
 Protective Coating Material
 Protective Coating – Concrete Bents and Piers (Urethane)
 Protective Coating – Concrete Bents and Piers (Epoxy)
 Concrete and Masonry Protection System
 Sacrificial Graffiti Protection System
 Temporary Coating – Concrete Bents and Piers (Weathering Steel)
 Electrical Conduit
 Electrical Conductors
 Pull and Junction Boxes
 Temporary T raffic Control Devices
 Temporary Concrete T raffic Barrier
 Delineators
 Mortars and Grout
 T runcated Domes
 T rench Drains
 Blank
 Water
 Asphalt Release Agents, Fiber Additives and Liquid Anti-Strip Additives
 Blank
 Joint Material for Structures
 Blank
 Centrifugally – Cast Fiberglass-Reinforced Polymer Mortar Pipe
 Blank
 Blank
 Blank
 Blank
 Structural Steel Fabrication
 Coating of Structural Steel
 Blank
 Blank
 Blank
 Blank
 Blank
 Blank
 Blank
 Blank
 Blank
 Lighting Equipment
 
 15
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Sec 1092
 
 Signal Equipment
 
 16
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 101
 DEFINITIO N O F TERMS
 Wherever the following abbreviations, terms or descriptive words are used in the plans, specifications or
 other contract documents, the intent and meaning shall be interpreted as follows:
 101.1 Abbre viations.
 AASHTO
 
 American Association of State Highway and T ransportation Officials
 
 AISC
 
 American Institute of Steel Construction
 
 AGC
 
 Associated General Contractors of America
 
 ANSI
 
 American National Standards Institute
 
 AREA
 
 American Railroad Engineering Association
 
 ASME
 
 American Society of Mechanical Engineers
 
 ASTM
 
 AST M International
 
 AWG
 
 American Wire Gauge
 
 AWPA
 
 American Wood-Preservers’ Association
 
 AWS
 
 American Welding Society
 
 AWWA
 
 American Water Works Association
 
 CFR
 
 Code of Federal Regulations
 
 CS
 
 Commercial Standards, U. S. Department of Commerce
 
 CSR
 
 Code of State Regulations
 
 CO E
 
 Corps of Engineers
 
 CUF
 
 Commercially Useful Function
 
 DBE
 
 Disadvantaged Business Enterprise
 
 EEI
 
 Electrical Engineer ’s Institute
 
 EEO
 
 Equal Employment Opportunity
 
 EPA
 
 Environmental Protection Agency
 
 EPG
 
 Engineer Policy Guide
 
 ESAL
 
 Equivalent 18-kip Single Axle Load
 
 FCC
 
 Federal Communications Commission
 
 FHWA
 
 Federal Highway Administration
 
 17
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 GGBFS
 
 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag
 
 GRI
 
 Geosynthetic Research Institute
 
 ICEA
 
 Insulated Cable Engineers Association
 
 IMSA
 
 International Municipal Signal Association
 
 ITE
 
 Institute of T ransportation Engineers
 
 LED
 
 Light Emitting Diode
 
 MASH
 
 AASHT O Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware
 
 MDC
 
 Missouri Department of Conservation
 
 MDNR
 
 Missouri Department of Natural Resources
 
 MGS
 
 Midwest Guardrail System
 
 MHTC
 
 Missouri Highways and T ransportation Commission
 
 MoDO T
 
 Missouri Department of T ransportation
 
 MSDS
 
 Material Safety Data Sheet
 
 MUTCD
 
 Manual on Uniform T raffic Control Devices
 
 NCHRP 350 National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) Report 350, Recommended
 Procedures for the Safety Performance Evaluation of Highway Features
 NEC
 
 National Electrical Code
 
 NEMA
 
 National Electrical Manufacturers Association
 
 NESC
 
 National Electrical Safety Code
 
 NFPA
 
 National Fire Protection Association
 
 NRCS
 
 Natural Resources Conservation
 
 NRMCA
 
 National Ready Mixed Concrete Association
 
 NTPEP
 
 National T ransportation Product Evaluation Program
 
 O SHA
 
 Occupational Safety and Health Administration
 
 PAL
 
 Pre-Acceptance List
 
 PS
 
 U.S. Product Standard, U.S. Department of Commerce
 
 PWL
 
 Percent Within Limits
 
 QA
 
 Quality Assurance
 
 QC
 
 Quality Control
 
 RETMA
 
 Radio Electronics Television Manufacturer ’s Association
 
 18
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 RSMo
 
 Revised Statutes of the State of Missouri
 
 SAE
 
 Society of Automotive Engineers
 
 SHPO
 
 State Historic Preservation Office
 
 SSPC
 
 Society of Protective Coatings
 
 SWPPP
 
 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
 
 UCP
 
 Unified Certification Program
 
 UL
 
 Underwriter ’s Laboratory
 
 USA
 
 United States of America
 
 USACE
 
 United States Army Corps of Engineers
 
 USC
 
 United States Code
 
 USCG
 
 United States Coast Guard
 
 USFW
 
 United States Fish and Wildlife
 
 VO C
 
 Volatile Organic Compound
 
 101.1.1 Unit Symbols.
 h
 
 hour
 
 ppm
 
 parts per million
 
 rpm
 
 revolutions per minute
 
 vpm
 
 vibrations per minute
 
 cf
 
 cubic feet
 
 cy
 
 cubic yards
 
 F
 
 degrees Fahrenheit
 
 ft
 
 foot/feet
 
 in
 
 inch/inches
 
 lb
 
 pound/pounds
 
 lf
 
 linear foot/feet
 
 psf
 
 pounds per square foot
 
 psi
 
 pounds per square inch
 
 sf
 
 square foot/square feet
 
 sy
 
 square yard/square yards
 
 19
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 101.2 De finitions of Te rms.
 Adve rtise me nt. T he public announcement, as required by law, inviting bids for work to be performed or
 material to be furnished.
 Appre ciable Error. Any of the following will be considered an appreciable error: an error resulting in a
 change in quantity of 10 percent from the original contract quantity of an item; an error resulting in a
 monetary change of at least $5,000 from an original contract item amount; or an error in the calculation
 of a contract item quantity based on the finite dimensions shown on the plans.
 Auxiliary Lane . T he portion of the roadway adjoining the traveled way and designated for speed change,
 or for other purposes supplementary to through traffic movement.
 Award. T he action of the Commission accepting the bid of the lowest responsible bidder for the work,
 subject to the execution and approval of a satisfactory contract therefore and bond to secure the
 performance thereof, and to such other conditions as may be specified or as required by law.
 Bid. T he written offer submitted by the bidder in the required manner on the bid to perform the work
 provided in the bidding documents at contract bid prices.
 Bid Guaranty. T he security furnished with a bid to ensure that the bidder will enter into the contract if
 the bid is accepted.
 Bid Re cords. All writings, working papers, computer printouts, charts and all other data compilation that
 contain or reflect information, data or calculations used by the bidder to determine each contract unit price
 in the bid submitted, including but not limited to material relating to the determination and application of:
 labor rates
 equipment rates
 home and field overhead rates and related time schedules
 efficiency or productivity factors
 arithmetic extensions
 subcontractors, truckers and material supplier quotations
 profit
 contingencies
 Any manuals standard to the industry that are used by the bidder in determining the bid shall be included in
 the bid records by reference and shall show the name and date of the publication and the publisher.
 Bidde r. Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint venturer or other entity submitting a bid to
 perform the contemplated work.
 Bidding Docume nts. T he documents furnished by the Commission comprising the Request for Bid, plans,
 Missouri Standard Plans for Highway Construction, addenda, Supplemental Specifications and General
 Provisions, Missouri Standard Specifications for Highway Construction and all other documents included in
 or referred to in those documents.
 Bridge . A structure having a clear span greater than 20 feet measured on a horizontal plane along the
 centerline of roadway; also a multiple span structure where the total length of spans is in excess of 20 feet.
 For both single and multiple span bridges, the clear span shall be construed to mean the total distance from
 stream face to stream face of end bents or outer walls of the structure.
 
 20
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Busine ss Day. A day that MoDOT is open for business, excluding holidays, Saturdays and Sundays.
 Cale ndar Day. Any day of the calendar year, including holidays, Saturdays and Sundays.
 Ce ntral Laboratory. T he central testing laboratory of the Commission for inspecting and determining
 the suitability of material.
 Change O rde r. A written order from the engineer to the contractor, as authorized by the contract,
 directing changes in the work as made necessary or desirable by unforeseen conditions or events discovered
 or occurring during the progress of the work.
 Change in the Work. An item of work not provided for in the contract as awarded, but found essential to
 the satisfactory completion of the contract. Contract adjustments for changes in work related to differing
 site conditions shall be determined in accordance with the contract provisions relating to differing site
 conditions.
 Claim. A written request or demand for adjustment to the compensation due or time of performance of
 the contract made within the time, in the form, and pursuant to the provisions for such contract
 adjustments specified elsewhere in the contract documents of which these specifications are a part.
 Commission. T he Missouri Highways and T ransportation Commission.
 Contract. T he written agreement between the Commission and the contractor covering the performance
 of the work for the proposed construction. T he contract will include all contract documents. T he contract
 may cover a single project or a combination of projects awarded as a single unit.
 Contract Bond. T he form of security approved by the Commission, furnished by the contractor and
 surety or sureties, guaranteeing complete performance of the contract and the payment of all legal debts
 pertaining to the construction of the project, or arising from the contract and the duties thereunder, and
 conditioned as may be required by the laws of the State of Missouri.
 Contract Docume nts. Notice to Contractors, all Bidding Documents, Contract Bond, Contract
 Agreement, Acknowledgment, Contractor Questionnaire, Notice to Proceed, and all Change Orders.
 Contract Time or Comple tion Date . T he number of working days or calendar days shown in the bidding
 document as the time allowed for the completion of the work contemplated in the contract. If a calendar
 date for completion is shown in the bidding document, the contemplated work shall be completed by that
 date.
 Contractor. T he individual, partnership, corporation or joint venture undertaking performance of the
 work under the terms of the contract, and acting directly or through the contractor or contractor ’s agents,
 employees or subcontractors.
 Controve rsy. A dispute or disagreement between a contractor and the Commission related to
 interpretation of contract documents or the engineer ’s decision under contracts entered into by the
 contractor with the Commission made in writing and in compliance with the requirements for resolutions
 of controversies under the contract, but which is not a claim under the contract, all as provided elsewhere
 in the contract documents of which these specifications are a part.
 Cost. Cost will mean the actual cost incurred, as distinguished from forecasted cost and determined in
 accordance with prevailing principles applicable to public contracts including Contract Cost Principles and
 Procedures, 48 CFR, Part 31 and Government Auditing Standards, as published by the Comptroller General
 of the United States.
 Crashworthy End Te rminal. T his term will apply to both crashworthy end terminals and crash cushions.
 Culve rt. A structure not classified as a bridge that provides an opening under any portion of a roadway.
 
 21
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Days. Days as used in the contract documents will mean calendar days, unless specified otherwise.
 De lay. Any event, action, force or factor that causes the established contract time to be exceeded for
 performance of the contract.
 (a) Compensable Delay. An excusable delay for which the contractor may be entitled to additional
 monetary compensation
 (b) Excusable Delay. A delay to the contract or milestone completion date that was beyond the
 contractor ’s control and not caused by the contractor ’s fault or negligence and for which a
 contract or milestone time extension may be granted.
 (c) Noncompensable Delay. An excusable delay for which the contractor may be entitled to an
 extension of time, but no additional monetary compensation.
 (d) Nonexcusable Delay. A delay to the contract or milestone completion date that was reasonably
 foreseeable and within control of the contractor, for which no monetary compensation or time
 extension will be granted.
 Diffe ring Site Conditions. Subsurface or latent physical conditions at the site differing materially from
 those indicated in the contract, or unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially
 from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work
 Disadvantage d Busine ss Ente rprise , or DBE. A contracting firm certified to participate in U.S.
 Department of T ransportation financial assistance programs as a DBE by MoDOT or by the Missouri
 Unified Certification Program (UCP) pursuant to T itle 49 CFR, Part 26, and pursuant to T itle 7 CSR
 Division 10, Chapter 8, governing MoDOT ’s DBE Program.
 Divide d Highway. A highway with separated traveled ways for traffic in opposite directions. T raveled
 ways separated by painted medians will not be considered divided.
 Drainage Ditch. An open depression constructed for the purpose of carrying off surface water.
 Engine e r. T he chief engineer or any other authorized representative of the Commission. Where the term
 chief engineer is used, the term shall mean the chief engineer in person. MoDOT pursues its mission
 through the functional units defined by law. Where a functional unit is stated in the contract documents, it
 will mean the engineer of the functional unit or designee.
 Equitable Adjustme nt. An adjustment to the time or price specified in the contract based upon
 contractor ’s actual and reasonable costs to perform the work for the reasons and determined by the
 methods specified elsewhere in the contract documents.
 Exte nt of the Fe de ral Share . T he percentage of federal participation in the costs of the project agreed
 to between USDOT, FHWA and MHT C before the project is awarded. It does not mean, with regard to
 contract adjustments, an amount of additional federal participation to be provided regarding the project.
 Ge nde r Re late d Te rms. No gender restrictions or limitations are intended or suggested by the use of
 terms “ he”, “ him”, “ his”, “ it” or “ its” in these specifications.
 Highway. A public way for purposes of vehicular travel, including the entire area within the right of way.
 Holidays. Missouri public legal holidays are:
 January 1 - New Year ’s Day
 T hird Monday in January - Martin Luther King Day
 February 12 - Lincoln’s Birthday
 
 22
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 T hird Monday in February - President’s Day
 May 8 - T ruman’s Birthday
 Last Monday in May - Memorial Day
 July 4 - Independence Day
 First Monday in September - Labor Day
 Second Monday in October - Columbus Day
 November 11 - Veterans Day
 Fourth T hursday in November - T hanksgiving Day
 December 25 - Christmas Day
 When any of the above holidays fall on a Sunday, the holiday will be observed on the following Monday;
 when any of the above holidays fall on a Saturday, the holiday will be observed on the immediately
 preceding Friday.
 Laboratory. T he Central Laboratory or any other testing laboratory that may be designated by the
 engineer for inspecting and determining the suitability of material.
 Le ad Worke rs. Hourly employees in direct charge of the specific operations on a project. Formerly
 referred to as the foremen.
 Local Traffic. T raffic that has either its origin or its destination at some point within the limits of the
 project. Local traffic will also include that traffic on all side roads that lead into the project where such
 traffic does not have a satisfactory outlet over a public road or street.
 Major and Minor Ite ms of Work. Any item having an original value in excess of 10 percent of the
 original contract amount will be considered as a major item or items. All other original contract items will
 be considered as minor. Where major contract items are not identified, the original contract item of
 greatest total cost, computed from the original contract price and estimated quantity, and such other
 original contract items next in sequence of lower total cost, computed in like manner, necessary to show a
 total cost at original prices and quantities of no less than 60 percent of the original contract cost will be
 considered as a major item or items.
 Me dian. T he portion of a divided highway separating the traveled ways for traffic in opposite directions.
 Notice of Bid O pe ning. T he notification provided prospective bidders, containing a description of the
 proposed work, instructions, information and the reservation of the right of the Commission to reject any
 and all bids.
 
 Notice to Contractors. T he document contained in the bidding document describing the work to be
 performed and including information and requirements for the submission of bids.
 Notice to Proce e d. T he written notice from the engineer notifying the contractor of the date on or
 before which prosecution of the work is to begin.
 O ute r Roadway O r Se rvice Road. A roadway auxiliary to and located on the side of the throughway for
 service to abutting property and adjacent areas.
 Pay Ite m. An item of work specifically described and for which a price, either unit or lump sum, is
 provided. It includes the performance of all work and the furnishing of all labor, equipment and material
 contemplated or described on the plans or in the text of the specification item included in the contract.
 
 23
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Plans. Detailed construction drawings or reproductions thereof, which show the location, character and
 details of the work. When referenced in the contract documents, plans will include both the project specific
 drawings and the standard drawings.
 Proje ct. T he specific section of the highway, including all appurtenances and construction to be performed
 thereon under the contract.
 Re que st for Bid. T he document furnished by the Commission that includes a complete set of bidding
 forms and appendices, and certain contract terms, which are made a part of the bidding document by
 reference.
 Right of Way. Land acquired by the Commission for the construction and maintenance of a highway.
 Roadbe d. T he graded portion of a highway between the outside shoulder lines, including the base course,
 surface course, shoulders and median.
 Roadway. T he portion of the highway within the limits of construction, including bridges and other
 structures.
 Road Use r Cost. Includes a combination of both road user delay costs and work zone accident costs.
 Se c. Refers to sections in the standard and supplemental specifications unless specified otherwise in the
 contract documents.
 Shoulde r. T he portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped
 vehicles, for emergency use, and for lateral support of base and surface courses.
 Shall. When used in the contract documents, states a mandatory duty on the part of the contractor.
 Significant Change in the Work. When the character of the work, as altered, (1) differs materially in
 kind or nature from that involved or included in the original proposed construction or (2) when a major
 item of work as defined elsewhere in the contract is increased in excess of 125 percent or decreased below
 75 percent of the original contract quantity.
 Spe cifications. T he compilation of provisions and requirements for the performance of prescribed work.
 (a) Standard Specifications. A book of specifications approved for general application and
 repetitive use.
 (b) Supplemental Specifications. Approved additions and revisions to the standard specifications.
 (c) Special Provisions. Revisions to the standard and supplemental specifications applicable to an
 individual project.
 State . T he State of Missouri, acting by and through the Commission.
 Subcontractor. Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture or other entity to whom the
 contractor, with the written consent of the engineer, sublets any part of the work under the contract.
 Substructure . T hat part of a bridge structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans; all
 buttresses and piers below the skewbacks of arches; all parts of rigid frames, or integral bents below tops of
 footings or tops of caissons; and also, all parts of the abutments, backwalls and wingwalls, except handrails
 and handrail posts.
 Supe rstructure . All parts of a bridge structure not defined as substructure.
 Sure ty. A corporate body duly authorized to do business in the State of Missouri, and which has executed a
 
 24
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 bid bond with the bidder or a contract bond with the contractor.
 Te mporary Structure s. Structures required for the use of traffic while construction is in progress and not
 designated to remain a part of the permanent roadway.
 Throughway. A general term denoting a highway primarily for through traffic, usually on a continuous
 route.
 Through Traffic. T raffic which has neither its origin nor its destination within the limits of the project.
 Trave le d Way. T he portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles, exclusive of shoulders and
 auxiliary lanes.
 Unbalance d Bid, Mate rially. A bid that generates a reasonable doubt that award to the bidder submitting
 a mathematically unbalanced bid will result in the lowest ultimate cost to the Commission.
 Unbalance d Bid, Mathe matically. A bid containing lump sum or unit bid items that do not reflect
 reasonable actual costs plus a reasonable proportionate share of the bidder ’s anticipated profit, overhead
 costs and other indirect costs.
 Will. When used in the contract documents, states a mandatory duty on the part of the engineer or
 department or on the part of both the engineer or department and the contractor, which is indicated by the
 context of use.
 USA. Any of the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and any other territories and possessions
 of the United States of America.
 Work. T he furnishing of all labor, material, equipment and other incidentals necessary or convenient to
 the successful completion of the project and the carrying out of all of the duties and obligations imposed by
 the contract.
 Working Drawings. Stress sheets, shop drawings, erection plans, falsework plans, framework plans,
 cofferdam plans, bending diagrams for reinforcing steel or any other supplementary plans or similar data
 which the contractor will be required to submit to the engineer for approval.
 
 25
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 102
 BIDDING REQ UIREMENTS AND CO NDITIO NS
 102.1 Notice of Bid O pe ning. After the date is fixed for the receipt of bids, the notice of bid opening
 will be posted on MoDOT ’s website and published as required by law. T he notice of bid opening will contain
 a description of the proposed work, instructions and information to the potential bidder regarding bid
 forms, plans, specifications, combination bids and the reservation of the right of the Commission to reject
 any and all bids.
 102.2 Contractor Q ue stionnaire . Each prospective bidder, including a joint venture, shall file a
 contractor questionnaire on the form furnished by the Commission, which is available on MoDOT ’s
 website. T he contractor questionnaire shall be furnished to the Commission as a separate document apart
 from any other document submitted. A bid will not be opened and read unless a fully responsive contractor
 questionnaire is on file with the Commission at least seven days prior to the time set for the opening of the
 bids. A new contractor questionnaire shall be filed annually, except the Commission reserves the right to
 request a contractor questionnaire from any contractor as of any date if the Commission has shown reason
 to believe that the contractor ’s experience data may have changed from that shown on the questionnaire
 on file. T his document shall include a record of the bidder ’s experience data. T he Commission will use this
 information as an aid to determine in each instance the lowest responsible bidder and nothing contained
 herein shall be construed as depriving the Commission of the Commission’s discretion in the matter of
 determining the lowest responsible bidder.
 102.2.1 At any time prior to award, as a condition of award and for a period of three years after the date of
 final acceptance, the Commission may request true copies of the bidder ’s financial data, including the
 bidder ’s balance sheet, profit and loss statement and similar financial data, as of the close of the bidder ’s
 most recent fiscal year prior to submission of the bid, and for each fiscal year between the contract award
 and final acceptance of the contract work. Unless specified otherwise by the Commission, financial data
 shall be prepared by an accountant and audited financial data shall be provided if it is available to the bidder
 for the fiscal period requested. A bidder who has not closed the first fiscal year prior to the date of the
 request shall supply the last periodic balance sheet, profit and loss statement and similar data.
 102.2.2 T he contractor questionnaire contains an affidavit of labor standards compliance. Each
 prospective bidder shall execute the affidavit, stating that such bidder will fully comply with all written
 requests by the Missouri Department of Labor and Industrial Relations, Division of Labor Standards, to
 provide information for the purpose of establishing a prevailing wage.
 102.2.3 T he prospective bidder, if a corporation, shall submit with the contractor questionnaire, a copy of
 the bidder ’s current annual registration report or initial registration report if a new corporation, on file
 with the Corporation Division of the Missouri Secretary of State’s Office. Each corporation that is a party
 to a joint venture shall submit the same required report with the corporation’s joint venture contractor
 questionnaire.
 102.2.4 A prospective bidder doing business in the State of Missouri under a fictitious name shall furnish to
 or have on file with the Commission a certified copy of the prospective bidder ’s registration of the
 fictitious name issued by the Missouri Secretary of State, as an enclosure with the contractor questionnaire.
 No contract will be executed by the Commission until such a certificate is furnished by the bidder.
 102.2.5 All prospective bidders who are corporations organized in states other than Missouri or countries
 other than the USA shall furnish, at the prospective bidder ’s cost, a certified copy of a current certificate
 of authority to do business in Missouri, with said certificate to remain on file with the Commission. Such a
 certified copy may be secured from the corporation supervisor in the Office of the Secretary of State,
 Jefferson City, Missouri. T he prospective bidder agrees to cause the prospective bidder ’s authority to do
 business as a foreign corporation to be continued and extended throughout the life of any contract awarded
 and until all claims thereon and thereunder shall have been finally settled. All prospective bidders shall have
 a valid certificate of authority to transact business in Missouri at the time of bid opening as a condition of
 responsiveness.
 102.3 Bidding. All bids shall be submitted electronically using the BidExpress® website. Any bid not
 submitted electronically will be considered irregular in accordance with Sec 102.8
 
 26
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 102.3.1 MoDOT uses the BidExpress® website (www.bidx.com) as the official depository for electronic bid
 submittals. MoDOT will ensure that this electronic bid depository is available for a two-hour period prior to
 the deadline for submission of bids. In the event of disruption of national communications or loss of
 services by www.bidx.com during this two-hour period, MoDOT will delay the deadline for bid submissions
 to ensure the ability of potential bidders to submit bids. Notifications and instructions of delay will be
 communicated to potential bidders.
 102.3.2 T he Commission will make the bidding documents available to the prospective bidder. T he
 documents will state the location, description and requirements of the contemplated construction and will
 show the estimate of the various quantities and types of work to be performed or material to be furnished,
 and will have a schedule of items for which unit bid prices are invited. T he bidding documents will state the
 time in which the work shall be completed, the amount of the bid guaranty and the date, time and place of
 the opening of bids.
 102.3.3 Bidders that submit bids via the internet shall have on file with the Commission an “ Electronic
 Signature Agreement”, a copy of which can be found on MoDOT ’s website. T his agreement shall be
 initiated by the prospective bidder and submitted to the Commission. A bid will not be opened and read
 unless a fully executed agreement is on file with the Commission at least seven days prior to the time set
 for the opening of the bids.
 102.3.4 T he Missouri Standard Specifications for Highway Construction, Missouri Standard Plans for
 Highway Construction, including all revisions of these documents, and other items referenced in the bidding
 documents, whether attached or not, will be considered a part of the bid. A prospective bidder will be
 expected to obtain the current edition of the Missouri Standard Specifications for Highway Construction
 and the Missouri Standard Plans for Highway Construction, including all revisions of these documents,
 which can be found on MoDOT ’s website.
 102.3.5 Bidders will be responsible for any additional fees associated with submitting bids using
 AASHT OWare Project Bids® Electronic Bidding System software and the BidExpress® website.
 102.3.6 It will be conclusively presumed that all of the bidding documents are in the bidder ’s possession and
 that these documents have been reviewed and used by the bidder in the preparation of any bid submitted.
 T he effective dates of the General Provisions & Supplemental Specifications and the Supplemental Plans
 for Highway Construction will be specified in the contract documents. A copy of the latest version of these
 documents is available on MoDOT ’s web site.
 102.4 Inte rpre tation of Q uantitie s in Bid Sche dule . T he quantities appearing in the bid schedule are
 estimated only and are prepared for the comparison of bids. Payment to the contractor will be made only
 for the actual quantities of work performed and accepted in accordance with the contract, except where
 final measurements are not made, as hereinafter provided. T he quantities of work to be done and material
 to be furnished may each be increased, decreased or omitted as hereinafter provided.
 102.5 Examination of Plans, Spe cifications, Spe cial Provisions and Site of Work. T he engineer
 will provide plans and specifications to the contractor providing direction on the work required. Conditions
 indicated on the plans and in the bidding documents represent information available from surveys and
 studies. T he bidder is expected to carefully examine the proposed work site and bidding documents before
 submitting a bid. Submission of a bid will be considered proof that the bidder has made an examination and is
 satisfied with the conditions to be encountered in performing the work.
 102.5.1 Other documentary information, consisting of boring logs and other factual subsurface information
 that does not constitute part of the contract or contract documents, will be provided with project plans
 that contain cross sections, or they will be available from the engineer upon the bidder ’s written request.
 T his information, used for project design and quantity estimation purposes, was not obtained to determine
 actual subsurface conditions, actual quantities of subsurface material or appropriate construction methods,
 nor shall this information be considered a representation of actual conditions to be encountered during
 construction. Furnishing this information does not relieve a bidder from the responsibility of making an
 investigation of conditions to be encountered, including but not limited to site visits, and basing the bid on
 information obtained from these investigations and the professional interpretation and judgment of the
 
 27
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 bidder. T he bidder shall assume the risk of error if the information is used for any purposes for which the
 information was not intended. T he Commission makes no representation as to the accuracy of the logs or
 other subsurface information, since the accuracy of this information is limited by the equipment used, the
 personal judgment of the persons making the investigation, and by the limited number of samples taken.
 Records indicate conditions encountered only at the times and the specific locations shown. Ground water
 observations are not routinely recorded in all boring logs. T he absence of such data does not mean ground
 water will not be encountered. An indication of ground water constitutes no representation or warranty as
 to where ground water will be found, nor its volume or artesian character, during the project work. Any
 assumptions a bidder may make from this data is at the bidder ’s risk; none are intended by the Commission.
 102.5.2 Certain other documents in the Commission’s possession relating to subsurface investigations are
 not included in the records made available to bidders under Sec 102.5.1. T hese documents include
 correspondence and reports containing interpretations, opinions and recommendations that may or may
 not be factual, accurate or consistent with design decisions. Any such information that does not constitute
 part of the contract or contract documents is available, at a nominal cost, from the engineer upon specific,
 written request by the prospective bidder. T he bidder is cautioned that any and all such interpretations,
 conclusions and recommendations are not represented or warranted to be accurate or reliable and the
 Commission cannot be bound by them, whether or not the Commission may appear to have “ relied” on
 them. T hese subjective findings, opinions or assumptions have not been confirmed or shown to be reliable
 and the bidder assumes the sole risk of liability or loss if the bidder does rely on these documentary
 interpretations and conclusions to its detriment, delay or loss.
 102.5.3 T he bidder assumes all risks that may be encountered in basing the order of work, equipment or
 personnel determinations, time of performance, cost of performance, working days needed, item bid prices
 or any other element of the work, on documents that the bidder obtains from the Commission, which are
 not expressly warranted.
 102.5.4 Unless stated specifically and expressly in the bidding documents, no project involving excavation,
 which may include either borrow or the disposal of excess material, is represented or warranted to be a
 “ balanced” job or project, regardless of whether the bidding documents use terms such as “ balance points”
 or other terms that could be interpreted to suggest balance. Whether or not such projects involving
 excavation contain bid items for borrow or disposal of excess material, the bidder should assume that either
 is possible and investigate those possibilities accordingly in determining a bid.
 102.5.5 Utilities are often in the process of relocation at the time a project is bid. Regardless of what
 utilities are shown in the bidding documents and utility locations listed, the bidder shall contact each area
 utility to determine the presence and location of utility lines. T he bidder shall determine and shall assume
 the risk as to whether utilities that are to be relocated by the utility companies have in fact been relocated
 and if not, when the utility company anticipates the relocation shall be completed. T he bidder shall
 independently determine the reliability of the information received from the utility companies and shall
 make the determination as to the sequence and timing of utility relocations in determining a bid.
 102.5.6 T he bidder and contractor has an affirmative duty to inquire and obtain from the National Oceanic
 and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Climatic Data Center (NCDC), from the USACE and
 any other cognizant government agency, historic weather and water stage information which the bidder
 may consider important as guides for bidding and scheduling the work. Some of that information may be
 contained among the bidding documents solely as a convenience and is not warranted nor represented to
 any degree to be complete and accurate historic data. No warranty or representation whatsoever is made or
 intended by the Commission of future weather conditions during the project. Water stages and depths of
 water at any place or at any time within the area of the project are acknowledged to be beyond control of
 the Commission and dependent upon future weather conditions and actions by other governmental bodies,
 such as the government of the USA or third parties. T he Commission makes no representation that other
 governmental bodies or third parties will not take action during the period of the contract or any extended
 time of contract performance, which will affect water stages or depths. Bidders are put on notice that the
 bidder ’s operations may be affected by water flows, siltation and other causes over which it is acknowledged
 the Commission has no control
 102.6 Sale s and Use Taxe s. T he Commission will issue a sales tax exemption certificate as described in
 Section 144.062 RSMo to contractors for the Commission. T he tax exemption will apply to the prime
 
 28
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 contractor, any subcontractors, or suppliers for materials and supplies incorporated or consumed during the
 construction of the Commission project.
 102.7 Pre paration of Bidding Docume nts
 102.7.1 Bids submitted shall be prepared using the latest version of AASHT OWare Project Bids® and be
 submitted using the BidExpress® website. Each bidder shall specify in the bid, in figures, a unit price for
 each of the separate items listed. T he bidder shall not enter zero in any “ Unit Price” field unless zero is the
 intended bid for that item. A unit price left blank will be considered a zero by the Commission. In case of
 alternate items, unit prices shall be entered for only one alternate, unless otherwise specified in the bidding
 documents.
 102.7.2 A bidder may submit a separate bid on any or all projects, except that bids shall be submitted for all
 projects in a required combination. Bidders not having the ability to simultaneously execute all contracts
 for bids submitted during a bid opening may state, in one of the bids, the maximum total value of contract
 awards the bidder is willing to accept for that bid opening. Only one statement of “ Maximum Monetary
 Value of Awards Accepted this Bid Opening” shall be completed per bid opening. In the event a bidder
 submits multiple statements of maximum award, the lowest value stated will be used. T he Commission
 reserves the right to select and award the combination of bids, not exceeding this maximum, that will be to
 the best interest of the State, provided these bids are in conformance with the requests for bids. Any
 corrected bid that exceeds the lowest specified maximum award may be declared non-responsive.
 102.7.3 Bids submitted shall have the digital ID of an individual authorized to sign bids for their respective
 company. T he individual must be identified as an officer for the company on the contractor questionnaire.
 102.7.4 T he bid by a partnership or joint venture, including individuals doing business under fictitious
 names or corporations, shall only submit one bid for the partnership or joint venture.
 102.7.5 T he bid by a corporation, whether acting alone or as a joint venturer, shall show the address and
 name of the corporation exactly as shown on the contractor questionnaire, and shall include the signature
 or digital ID and title of a person authorized by its board of directors to bind the corporation.
 102.7.6 Each bidder shall submit with each bid a sworn statement, executed by or on behalf of the bidder to
 whom a contract may be awarded, certifying that the bidder has not, either directly or indirectly, entered
 into any agreement, participated in any collusion or otherwise taken any action in restraint of free
 competitive bidding in connection with the bid or any contract that may result from its acceptance.
 102.7.7 A bid will not be accepted or considered if the bid is the product of collusion among bidders, if the
 bidder is disqualified or determined not responsible or if the bid is irregular in accordance with Sec 102.8.
 102.7.8 Subcontractor disclosure . For contracts of more than $2,000,000 each bidder shall submit with
 each bid a disclosure of the subcontracts that have a subcontract value that is equal to or greater than
 twenty percent of the total project bid or subcontracts that are greater than or equal to $2,000,000. T he
 disclosure of subcontracts must include the name of each subcontractor, the category of work that each
 subcontractor will perform (e.g. asphalt, concrete, earthwork, bridges…) and the dollar value of each
 subcontract. T he information shall be disclosed on the form provided in the bidding documents. If that
 information is not available at the time of bid the bidder shall submit the “ Subcontractor Disclosure Form”
 pages with MoDOT on or before 4:00 p.m. of the third business day after the bid opening date, directly to
 the Design Division, Missouri Department of T ransportation, 105 W. Capitol Avenue, P.O. Box 270,
 Jefferson City, Missouri 65102-0270. Telefax transmittal to MoDOT will be permitted at fax no. 573-5222281. Failure to disclose this information may result in a bid being declared non-responsive. T he complete
 signed original documents do not need to be mailed to MoDOT, but the bidder shall have it available if
 requested by the Design Division or the engineer.
 102.8 Irre gular Bids. Bids that are not completed in accordance with the bidding documents, that show
 any omissions, false statements or certifications, alterations of form, additions not called for, conditional
 or alternate bids unless called for, irregularities of any kind, or that are declared non responsive to the
 request for bids may be rejected. Bids combining or otherwise tying sections or projects not listed in the
 bidding documents as being in combination will be deemed irregular bids and will be rejected. Any comment
 
 29
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 in the bid limiting or qualifying the reserved right of the Commission to make awards that will be to the
 best interest of the State will constitute an irregular bid.
 102.8.1 A bid will be considered irregular and may be rejected if any of the unit bid prices are
 mathematically or materially unbalanced to the detriment of the Commission.
 102.9 Bid Guaranty. No bid will be considered unless accompanied by a certified check or cashier ’s check
 on any bank or trust company insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, payable to the
 Director of Revenue, Credit State Road Fund, for no less than five percent of the amount of the bid, or by a
 bid bond secured by an approved surety or sureties in accordance with Secs 103.4.2 and 103.4.3, for no less
 than five percent of the amount of the bid. Bidders may submit a bid bond for each project bid or an annual
 bid bond that would cover all projects bid for a twelve-month period beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of
 each state fiscal year. Annual bid bond forms shall be submitted by June 15 of each year. Forms delivered by
 US Mail should be mailed to: Missouri Highways and T ransportation Commission, Attention: Annual Bid
 Bond, PO Box 270, Jefferson City, MO 65102. Forms delivered by parcel delivery services, (such as UPS,
 Fed Ex, DHL etc) should be shipped to Missouri Highways and T ransportation Commission, Attention:
 Annual Bid Bond, 105 West Capitol Avenue, Jefferson City, MO 65102. T he Commission will notify the
 bidder by letter that the annual bid bond form is approved.. Bid bonds shall be submitted on forms furnished
 by the Commission, which are available on MoDOT ’s website. Bid bond forms will be furnished to the
 prospective bidder upon request. Electronically produced copies of the bid bond form may be utilized,
 however, the exact wording used on the Commission furnished form shall be included in full and without
 deviation. Bid bond forms shall be complete and correct at the time of submittal or the bid may be
 considered non-responsive. Only the version of the bid bond form provided with the request for bid shall be
 submitted, unless the Request for Bid or Notice of Bid Opening authorizes the use of alternate bid bond
 forms. T he bid bond power of attorney shall be an original document, not a facsimile. Bids accompanied by
 bid guaranties that are not in accordance with this section or accompanied by bid bonds that are not issued
 by an approved surety will be rejected.
 102.9.1 Bidders may choose to submit a paper or electronic bid guaranty in accordance with Sec 102.9.
 102.9.1.1 T he electronic bid bond shall be part of the digitally signed bid and be verified via digital
 encryption by the bonding agent.
 102.9.1.2 If utilizing an annual bid bond as a bid guaranty, it is the responsibility of the bidder to verify that
 each bid submittal does not exceed the annual bid bond limit. If a bid security maximum amount is specified
 for the annual bid bond and the bidder chooses to submit bids exceeding the maximum, it is the
 responsibility of the bidder to contact the surety for an increased annual bid bond or separate bid bond. T he
 Bidder may choose to submit a project-specific bid bond in addition to an existing annual bid bond already
 on file with MoDOT.
 102.10 Bids shall be submitted via the internet using the latest version of AASHT OWare Project Bids®,
 and be submitted using the BidExpress® website. All bids shall be filed prior to the time specified in the
 notice to contractors. BidExpress® will not accept any bids submitted after that time.
 102.11 Any request for withdrawal of a bid submitted electronically shall be completed through Bid
 Express® prior to the time set for opening bids. T he bidder may submit multiple electronic bids on the
 same project, however, the last bid received supersedes all previous submittals.
 102.12 Combination Bids. Combination bids for two or more projects may be required or permitted and
 will be designated as such in the bidding documents.
 102.12.1 On required combinations, the bidder shall complete the bid for each project included in the
 combination.
 102.12.2 On permitted combinations, the bidder will be allowed to combine all projects in the combination
 or bid each project separately. T he Commission reserves the right to determine the combination and make
 awards of the bids, that will be to the best interest of the State, provided they are in conformance with the
 request for bids and the bids submitted.
 
 30
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 102.12.2.1 T he bidder shall leave the project’s bid items blank for all projects not bid in the permitted
 combination.
 102.12.2.2 To combine all projects in a permitted combination, the bidder shall enter a complete bid for
 each project and mark the “ All or None” box in the Bid. By marking “ All or None” and combining all the
 projects, the bidder will be awarded all the projects in the combination or none of the projects.
 102.12.2.3 If the bidder does not combine all of the projects, bids for the individual projects will be
 considered separately. T he bidder shall complete the bid for each project the bidder desires to bid.
 102.12.3 Two or more projects awarded in combination will be considered to be covered by a single
 contract. If during construction an item for which a unit price has not been bid is encountered in one
 project of a combination, the unit price bid for the same item in another project of the combination will
 apply, unless there is conclusive proof that conditions are changed significantly to effect a definite increase
 or decrease in the cost of the operation.
 102.13 Bids will be opened and the bid totals made public.
 102.14 Disqualification of Bidde rs. Any one or more of the following reasons may be considered as
 being sufficient for the disqualification of a bidder and the rejection of the bid or bids:
 (a) More than one bid is received for the same work from an individual, firm or corporation under
 the same or different name, or from different firms or corporations having common ownership,
 control or “ Principals” that are affiliated, as described in Sec 108.13. However, a bidder may
 submit a bid as principal and as a subcontractor to some other principal or may submit a bid as a
 subcontractor to as many other principals as the bidder desires and by so doing will not be liable to
 disqualification in the intent of this specification.
 (b) T here is reason for believing that collusion exists among the bidders. Participants in such
 collusion will receive no recognition as bidders for any future work of the Commission until any
 such participant has been reinstated.
 (c) T he bidder or any officer, shareholder, owner or director of the bidder, has been terminated,
 debarred or suspended as an eligible contractor or bidder by any agency of the USA, the State of
 Missouri or any other state or any city, county, municipal corporation or other political
 subdivision.
 (d) T he Commission has determined or finds that the bidder is not responsible.
 (e) T he bidder is a person or firm not a resident of Missouri and has failed or refused to comply
 with the Missouri laws relating to nonresident or transient employers or is prohibited by Section
 285.230 RSMo from contracting for or performing labor on a Missouri public works project.
 102.15 Right to Re je ct Bids. T he Commission reserves the right to reject any bid and also the right to
 reject all bids. All bids may be rejected for, without limitation, the following reasons:
 (a) If in the opinion of the majority of the members of the Commission, the lowest bid or bids are
 excessive.
 (b) T he advertised bidding or contract documents are inadequate, ambiguous or otherwise deficient
 in any respect.
 (c) T he construction of all or any part of the project is no longer required.
 (d) T he bids received indicate that the quality requirements in the bidding or contract documents
 were overstated.
 (e) T he bidding and contract documents did not include all of the intended evaluation factors.
 
 31
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (f) T he bids were not independently arrived at in open competition.
 (g) T here are indications that any of the bids were collusive or were submitted in bad faith.
 (h) T he bids received did not provide sufficient competition to ensure adequate price.
 102.16 O pportunity to Partne r. T he successful bidder may enter into a cooperative partnership
 agreement with the Commission for the contract. T he objective of this agreement will be the effective
 completion of the work, on time and to the standard of quality that will be a source of pride to both the
 Commission and the contractor. T he “ Partnering” agreement will not affect the terms of the contract.
 T he agreement will only establish an environment of cooperation between the parties.
 102.16.1 Partnering objectives can be achieved on an informal basis, the preferred method, or if a formal
 partnering agreement is desired, a initial training session is recommended to initiate the formal partnership
 agreement. T he cost of this training will be borne equally between the Commission and the contractor.
 102.16.2 Participation in “ Partnering” will be voluntary and will not be required of the contract. T he costs
 associated with “ Partnering” shall not be included in the bid.
 102.17 Disadvantage d Busine ss Ente rprise Program Bidding Re quire me nts. Refer to the General
 Provisions for DBE Program Requirements.
 102.18 Ce rtifications. T he bidder makes the following certifications by signing and submitting the bid.
 102.18.1 Ce rtification Re garding Affirmative Action and Equal O pportunity. If the bidder does not
 meet all requirements set forth in sub-paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this section, then the bidder shall submit
 a statement indicating which elements the bidder has complied with and those elements that are not in fact
 true and correct. T he statement shall be on company letterhead, signed by the bidder and inserted inside the
 submitted bid. T he bidder shall provide the following elements:
 (a) T he bidder has developed and has on file at each of the bidder ’s establishments affirmative
 action programs pursuant to 41 CFR Part 60-2.
 (b) T he bidder has participated in a previous contract or subcontract subject to the equal
 opportunity clause set forth in 41 CFR 60-1.4 and Executive Order No. 11246.
 (c) T he bidder has filed with the Joint Reporting Committee, the Director of the Office of Federal
 Contract Compliance Programs or the Director ’s designate or the EEO Commission, all reports
 due under the applicable filing requirements contained in 41 CFR, Part 60-1.
 T his certification applies to and shall be executed by each bidder or proposed subcontractor if the proposed
 contract or subcontract on this project will equal or exceed $10,000.00. T his certification will also apply
 to any contractor or subcontractor that has contracts or subcontracts on federally assisted projects in any
 12-month period that have or can reasonably be expected to have an aggregate total value exceeding
 $10,000.00, 41 CFR 60-1.5(a)(1). T he prime contractor shall assure that each of the subcontractors that
 meet the criteria will also execute and submit this certification to the Commission.
 102.18.2 Ce rtification Re garding Disbarme nt, Eligibility, Indictme nts, Convictions or Civil
 Judgme nts. T he president or authorized official of the bidder, under penalty of perjury under the laws of
 the USA, shall certify that, except as noted in the exceptions, the company or any person associated
 therewith in the capacity of owner, partner, director, officer, principal investor, project director, manager,
 auditor or any position involving the administration of federal funds:
 (a) Is not currently under suspension, debarment, voluntary exclusion or determination of
 ineligibility by any federal agency.
 (b) Has not been suspended, debarred, voluntarily excluded or determined ineligible by any federal
 agency within the past three years.
 
 32
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (c) Does not have a proposed debarment or suspension pending.
 (d) Has not been indicted, convicted or had a civil judgment rendered against any of the listed
 parties by a court of competent jurisdiction in any matter involving fraud or official misconduct
 within the past three years.
 102.18.2.1 If there are any exceptions, the bidder shall submit the exceptions on company letterhead,
 signed by the bidder and inserted inside the bid submitted.
 102.18.2.2 Exceptions will not necessarily result in denial of award, but will be considered in determining
 bidder responsibility.
 102.18.2.3 For any exception noted, the bidder shall indicate to whom it applies, the initiating agency, and
 dates of action.
 102.18.2.4 Providing false information may result in criminal prosecution or administrative sanctions.
 102.18.3 Ce rtification Re garding Anti-Collusion. In accordance with 23 USC 112, the bidder shall
 certify, under penalty of perjury, that the bidder has not, either directly or indirectly, entered into any
 agreement, participated in any collusion or otherwise taken any action in restraint of free competitive
 bidding in connection with this contract.
 102.18.4 Ce rtification Re garding Lobbying Activitie s. In accordance with 31 USC 1352, the bidder
 shall certify that:
 (a) No federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the
 undersigned, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of
 any federal agency, a member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress or an employee of
 a member of Congress in connection with the awarding of any federal contract, the making of any
 federal grant, the making of any federal loan, the entering into of any cooperative agreement and
 the extension, continuation, renewal, amendment or modification of any federal contract, grant,
 loan or cooperative agreement.
 (b) If any funds other than federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person
 for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any federal agency, a member
 of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress or an employee of a member of Congress in
 connection with this federal contract, grant, loan or cooperative agreement, the bidder shall
 complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, “ Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying,” in accordance
 with the instructions.
 102.18.4.1 T his certification shall be a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed
 when this transaction was made or entered into. Submission of this certification shall be a prerequisite for
 making or entering into this transaction imposed by 31 USC 1352. Any person who fails to file the
 required certification will be subject to a civil penalty of no less than $10,000 and no more than $100,000
 for each such failure.
 102.18.4.2 T he bidder also agrees by submitting a bid that the bidder shall require that the language of this
 certification be included in all subcontracts that exceed $100,000, and that all such subrecipients shall
 certify and disclose any lobbying activities accordingly.
 102.18.5 Ce rtification Re garding Missouri Dome stic Products Procure me nt Act. T his certification
 will only apply to state-funded projects as noted on the cover of the Request for Bid. T he bidder ’s
 attention is directed to Sections 34.350 through 34.359 RSMo 2000, which requires all manufactured goods
 or commodities used or supplied in the performance of the contract or any subcontract to be manufactured,
 assembled or produced in the USA. Sections 34.350 through 34.359 RSMo will not apply if the total bid is
 less than $1,000.00.
 102.18.5.1 Section 34.355 RSMo requires the vendor or bidder to certify compliance with Section 34.353
 RSMo and, if applicable, Section 34.359 RSMo at the time of bidding and prior to payment. Failure to
 
 33
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 comply with Section 34.353 RSMo during performance of the contract and to provide certification of
 compliance prior to payment will result in nonpayment for those goods or commodities.
 102.18.5.2 T he bidder shall certify that all the specified goods or products for which this bid was solicited
 are manufactured, assembled or produced in the USA. If there are any exceptions, the bidder shall submit a
 list of the exceptions on company letterhead, signed by the bidder and attached to the inside of the bid
 submitted. T he list shall include the pay item number and the location where the item is manufactured. T he
 bidder shall identify any of the exceptions in the list that are specified goods or products that are treated as
 manufactured, assembled or produced in the USA under an existing treaty, law, agreement or regulation of
 the USA regarding export/import restrictions and international trade.
 102.18.5.3 T he bidder shall notify the contact listed in the Request for Bid of any specified goods or
 products that cannot be manufactured, assembled or produced in the USA in sufficient quantities or in time
 to meet the contract specifications.
 102.18.5.4 T he bidder shall certify that the bid complies with all provisions of Section 34.350 et seq
 RSMo.
 102.19 Pre fe re nce for Missouri Products. By virtue of statutory authority, a preference will be given,
 on projects other than federal aid projects, to material, products, supplies, provisions and all other articles
 produced, manufactured, made or grown within the State of Missouri, where same are of a suitable character
 and can be obtained at reasonable market prices in the state and are of a quality suited to the purpose
 intended and can be secured without additional cost over foreign products or products of other states.
 
 34
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 103
 AWARD AND EXECUTIO N O F CO NTRACT
 103.1 Conside ration of Bids. After bids are opened and the bid totals read, the bids will be compared on
 the basis of the summation of the products of the approximate quantities shown in the bid schedule
 multiplied by the unit bid prices. T he results of such comparisons will be immediately available to the
 public.
 103.2 Award of Contract.
 103.2.1 T he contract will be awarded by the Commission to the lowest responsible bidder as soon as
 practical after the opening of the bids. T he responsibility of the contractor will be determined by the
 Commission based on, but not limited to, previous work, financial standing and record for the payment of
 the contractor ’s obligations. No contract will be executed by the Commission unless the contractor has on
 file with the Commission a valid contractor questionnaire in accordance with Sec 102.2. T he successful
 bidder will be notified by letter mailed to the address shown on the bid that the bid has been accepted and
 the contract has been awarded.
 103.2.2 T he Commission may make a contingent award to the second lowest responsible bidder. If the low
 bidder fails to execute the contract in accordance with this section, the contract will be offered to the
 second lowest responsible bidder in accordance with the contingent award made by the Commission within
 25 days after the original award date. T he second low bidder shall then be bound by the same requirements
 as specified for the lowest responsible bidder. T he Notice to Proceed may be extended by the number of
 days between the original Commission award and the day the contract has been mailed to the second lowest
 responsible bidder. If the contract time for completion of the work is set solely by completion date, then
 the completion date may be extended by the number of days between the original Commission award and
 the day the contract was mailed to the second lowest responsible bidder. T he new contract will be adjusted
 to reflect these changes, if appropriate.
 103.2.2.1 If the second low bidder is not able to perform the work at the unit prices bid by the second low
 bidder due solely to the fact that the low bidder is unable to perform as a subcontractor in accordance with
 Sec 103.6, and the second low bidder based its bid upon an offer by the low bidder to perform subcontract
 work for the second low bidder, the second low bidder will not be required to forfeit its bid bond, providing
 the second low bidder submits to the Commission proper documentation that its bid was based on the low
 bidder ’s quote. Proper documentation shall include, but is not limited to, a letter to the Commission
 describing the work that was to be performed by the low bidder as a subcontractor, all quotes the contractor
 received and all documentation for the work in question.
 103.2.2.2 When the second low bidder is required to execute the contract and the low bidder was a DBE
 firm that was identified on the second low bidder ’s Identification of Participating DBE’s, the second low
 bidder shall attempt to replace the low bidder with another DBE firm. If the second low bidder is
 unsuccessful in attaining another DBE firm for that work, the second low bidder shall certify that a good
 faith effort was made in accordance with 49 CFR 26.53. T he DBE goal will be adjusted accordingly.
 103.2.3 When the tabulated lowest bids are equal in all respects, including price, the successful bidder will be
 determined by a formal drawing of lot limited to the tied bidders. T ied bidders will be notified of the
 location and time of the drawing and have the opportunity to attend, but attendance will not be required.
 103.2.4 Alte rnate Bids. In making the award, if alternate bids have been requested, that alternate that will
 be in the best interest of the Commission will be used.
 103.2.5 Fe de ral Concurre nce . If the USA or any agency thereof is paying all or a portion of the cost of
 construction of the project, the award made by the Commission will be tentative until proper federal
 concurrence therein has been received.
 103.3 Re turn of Bid Guaranty. T he bid guaranty, whether check or bid bond, of the low bidder will be
 retained until the contract has been executed by the successful bidder, all insurance requirements have been
 met and a satisfactory contract bond furnished. T he check of the low bidder will then be returned. T he bid
 guaranty of the second low bidder will be returned when the Commission has determined that award will not
 
 35
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 be made to that firm. If errors or irregularities appear in the bid of either of the two lowest bidders that
 creates doubt as to the status of such a bid, the bid guaranties of other bidders may be retained. When the
 two lowest bidders have been definitely established, the checks of the other bidders will be returned. Any bid
 bond furnished as a bid guaranty will be returned only upon request of the bidder furnishing the bid bond. If
 an award is not made, all checks will be returned to the bidders.
 103.4 Contract Bond Re quire d.
 103.4.1 T he successful bidder shall, at the time of the execution of the contract, furnish a contract bond in
 a sum equal to the contract price. T he bond shall be to the State of Missouri, in a form and with surety or
 sureties acceptable to the Commission, to ensure the proper and prompt completion of the work in
 accordance with the provisions of the contract, the contractor ’s compliance with all of the terms and
 conditions of the contract, all obligations on the contractor ’s part to be performed and payment of all
 obligations to the Commission by the contractor, including any indebtedness, liquidated or unliquidated, for
 any reason relating to or arising from the contract, and to ensure payment for all labor performed and
 material consumed or used in the work. T he bond, if executed by a surety that is a corporation organized in
 a state other than Missouri, shall be signed by an agent or broker licensed by the Missouri Department of
 Insurance. All bids shall be submitted on the basis of furnishing a contract bond executed by an approved
 surety or sureties, as herein set out. T he surety’s liability under the contract bond and contract shall not be
 limited to the penal sum as set forth in the contract bond. T he surety shall be liable and responsible to the
 Commission for the contractor ’s entire performance and of all obligations arising under or from the
 contract, which shall include, but is not limited to any change orders issued under the contract that increase
 the cost of the contract.
 103.4.2 Ce rtificate of Authority. Any surety company that proposes to execute a bond as required by
 the contract shall have on file with or furnish to the Commission a certified copy of the surety’s certificate
 of authority to transact business in the State of Missouri.
 103.4.3 Sure ty Acce ptability. A surety will be acceptable to the Commission if the surety is listed in the
 current United States Department of the T reasury, Fiscal Service, Department Circular 570, Companies
 Holding Certificates of Authority as Acceptable Sureties on Federal Bonds and as Acceptable Reinsuring
 Companies. Individual contract bonds may not be in excess of the underwriting limitation listed in the
 circular.
 103.5 Exe cution of Contract. T he individual, partnership, corporation or joint venturer awarded the
 contract shall return the prescribed copies of the contract and bond, properly executed, to the office of the
 Commission within 15 days after the unexecuted contract has been mailed to the bidder. No bid shall be
 considered binding upon the Commission until the contract has been awarded by the Commission, and until
 the successful bidder has executed and returned the contract and a satisfactory bond. No contract will be
 effective until the contract has been executed by all parties.
 103.6 Failure to Exe cute Contract. Failure to execute the contract or to file an acceptable contract
 bond within 15 days after the unexecuted contract has been mailed to the bidder will be just cause for the
 cancellation of the award and the forfeiture of the bid guaranty. A bidder failing to file an acceptable bid or
 contract bond from an approved surety or failing to execute the contract within the time provided resulting
 in a cancellation of the award to that bidder, disqualifies that bidder, and any other firm having common
 ownership or control with that bidder, from performing any work on the Commission project or projects
 that are the subject of that bid, as a prime contractor, a subcontractor or a supplier.
 
 36
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 104
 SCO PE O F WO RK
 104.1 Inte nt of Contract. T he contractor shall complete the work described and furnish all resources
 required to complete the work under the contract.
 104.2 Diffe ring Site Conditions. If differing site conditions are encountered during the progress of the
 work, the discovering party shall promptly notify the other party in accordance with Sec 104.4. No further
 disturbance of the site or performance of the affected work shall be done after the alleged differing site
 conditions are noted, unless otherwise directed in writing by the engineer.
 104.2.1 Upon written notification, the engineer will investigate the conditions, and if it is determined that
 the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the
 performance of any work under the contract, an adjustment, excluding anticipated profits, will be made and
 the contract modified in writing accordingly. T he engineer will notify the contractor whether or not an
 adjustment of the contract is warranted.
 104.2.2 No contract adjustment that results in a benefit to the contractor will be allowed unless the
 contractor has provided the required written notice as specified in Sec 104.4.
 104.2.3 No contract adjustment will be allowed under this section for any effects caused on unchanged
 work.
 104.2.4 Payment will be determined in accordance with Sec 109.4 and adjustments in contract time will be
 determined in accordance with Sec 108.14.
 104.3 Change s in the Work. When considered necessary to satisfactorily complete the project, the
 engineer reserves the right to provide written notice to the contractor, at any time during the contract, to
 change quantities or make other alterations for which there are no provisions included in the contract. Such
 changes in quantities and alterations in the work will not invalidate the contract, require consent of the
 surety, nor release the contract surety, and the contractor agrees to perform the work as altered.
 Alterations of plans or of the nature of the work will not involve work beyond the termini of the proposed
 construction, except as may be necessary to satisfactorily complete the project.
 104.3.1 If the alterations or changes in quantities do not cause a significant change in the work to be
 performed under the contract, payment for the altered work will be determined in accordance with Sec
 109.3 for all work for which a contract unit price exists, and Sec 109.4 for all other work. T he basis for the
 adjustment for work for which no unit price exists shall be agreed upon prior to the performance of the
 work. If a basis cannot be agreed upon, then an adjustment will be made either for or against the contractor
 in such amount as the engineer may determine to be fair and equitable. If the directed changes require
 additional time to complete the contract, adjustments in the contract time will be determined in accordance
 with Sec 108.7.
 104.3.2 If the alterations or changes in quantities cause significant change in the work under the contract
 as defined in Sec 101, an adjustment will be made to the contract. T his adjustment will occur whether such
 alterations or changes are in themselves a significant change in the work or by affecting other work,
 causing such other work to become significantly different. Payment will be determined in accordance with
 Sec 109.3 or Sec 109.4. T he basis for the adjustment shall be agreed upon prior to the performance of the
 work. If a basis cannot be agreed upon, then an adjustment will be made either for or against the contractor
 in such amount as the engineer may determine to be fair and equitable. If the directed changes require
 additional time to complete the contract, adjustments in the contract time will be determined in accordance
 with Secs 108.7 or 108.14, as appropriate.
 104.4 Notification of Diffe ring Site Conditions and Change s in the Work. T he contractor shall
 promptly notify the engineer of alleged changes to the contract due to differing site conditions, altered
 work beyond the scope of the contract, or actions taken by MoDOT that changed the contract terms and
 conditions. Within five business days of the date the alleged change or action was noted, the contractor
 shall provide the following information to the engineer in writing:
 
 37
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (a) T he date of occurrence and the nature of circumstances of the occurrence.
 (b) T he name, title and activity of MoDOT personnel having knowledge of the matter.
 (c) T he identity of any documents and the substance of any oral communications involved.
 (d) T he basis for a claim of accelerated schedule performance.
 (e) T he basis for a claim that the work is not required by the contract.
 (f) T he particular elements of contract performance for which additional compensation,
 compensable or excusable delay may be sought under this section including:
 (1) Pay items that have been or will be affected.
 (2) Labor or material, or both, that will be added, deleted or discarded and what equipment
 will be idled, extended or required on the project.
 (3) Delay and disruption in the manner and sequence of performance that has been or will
 be caused.
 (4) Estimated adjustments to contract prices, delivery schedules, staging and contract
 time.
 (5) Estimate of the time within which MoDOT must respond to the notice to minimize
 cost, delay or disruption of performance.
 104.4.1 For good cause the engineer may extend the time for the contractor to provide any part of the
 above information.
 104.4.2 T he failure of the contractor to provide notice and other information in accordance with the
 procedures of Sec 104.4 will constitute a waiver of any and all claims that may arise as a result of the
 allegations.
 104.5 Re sponse to Notification of Diffe ring Site Conditions and Change s in the Work. Following
 submission of the Sec 104.4 notification to the engineer, the contractor shall continue diligent prosecution
 of the work not affected by the notification, unless directed otherwise in writing by the engineer. Within
 ten business days after receipt of notification, the engineer will respond in writing to the contractor to:
 (a) Confirm or deny that a change occurred and specify future action to be performed by the
 contractor and the engineer, or
 (b) Advise the contractor that specific additional information is needed and the date the
 information is to be received by the engineer for further review. For good cause, the engineer may
 extend the time for the contractor to provide any of the additional information. T he engineer will
 respond within ten days of receipt of additional information from the contractor. Any adjustments
 made to the contract will not include increased cost or time extensions for delay if the contractor
 fails to provide the information required in the notice or the requested additional information by
 the date specified.
 104.6. Value Engine e ring Proposals. A Value Engineering Change Proposal (VECP) shall provide a
 product of equal or improved quality that will reduce the project cost, improve safety or decrease the time
 required to complete the project. A Practical Design Value Engineering Change Proposal (PDVECP) may
 provide a product of lesser value, use an existing item in place or underrun contract items. T he PDVECP
 shall not adversely affect safety or function of the final product. T he contractor is encouraged to submit to
 the engineer, in writing, VECP’s and PDVECP’s for modifying the plans, specifications or other
 requirements of the contract. Proposed modifications shall not impair, in any manner, essential functions
 or characteristics of the project, including but not limited to, service life, economy of operation, ease of
 maintenance, desired appearance, design or safety standards, and shall not significantly delay the
 
 38
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 completion of the project. Proposals shall be submitted to the engineer in advance of the work to be
 performed with sufficient time allowed for review. T he Commission will not be liable to the contractor for
 failure to accept or act upon the proposal nor for any delays to the work attributable to any such proposal.
 104.6.1 Submitting Proposals. Value engineering proposals shall be submitted on the proper form,
 available on MoDOT ’s web site, and shall contain the following information:
 (a) A description of both the existing contract requirements for performing the work and the
 proposed changes.
 (b) A detailed estimate of the cost of performing the work under the existing contract and under
 the proposed change.
 (c) A statement of the time within which the engineer must make a decision thereon, including the
 probable effect the proposal will have on the contract completion time.
 (d) An itemized list of the contract items of work affected by the proposed changes, including any
 quantity variation attributable thereto.
 (e) A description of any previous use or submission of the same proposal by the contractor,
 including dates, job numbers, results, and/or outcome of proposal if previously submitted.
 104.6.2 Conditions. T he engineer will only consider VECP’s that meet the following conditions.
 104.6.2.1 Contractors may submit value engineering proposals that propose changes in the basic design of
 a bridge or a pavement, except for pavement and shoulder type. Value engineering proposals will be
 considered only when the proposal will not significantly delay the completion of the project.
 104.6.2.2 T he contractor shall continue to perform the work in accordance with the requirements of the
 contract until a change order incorporating the value engineering proposal has been approved, unless
 otherwise directed by the engineer. If a change order has not been approved by the date upon which the
 contractor ’s value engineering proposal specifies that a decision thereon should be made, the proposal shall
 be deemed rejected, unless the time allowed for a decision has been extended by mutual agreement of both
 parties.
 104.6.2.3 T he Commission expressly reserves the right to adopt a value engineering proposal as standard
 practice for use on other contracts administered by the Commission. If an accepted value engineering
 proposal is adopted as design policy, only contractors submitting such a proposal will be eligible for
 compensation pursuant to this section until the proposal is incorporated into design policy, and in that
 case, only as to those contracts awarded to the contractor prior to submission of the accepted value
 engineering proposal. Value engineering proposals identical or similar to previously submitted proposals will
 be eligible for consideration and compensation under the provisions of Sec 104.6 if the identical or similar
 previously submitted proposals were not adopted as design policy by the Commission, or included in the
 present contract. Subject to the provisions contained herein, the state or any other public agency will have
 the right to use all or any part of any submitted value engineering proposal without obligation or
 compensation of any kind to the contractor, except as noted in Sec 104.6.2.4.
 104.6.2.4 T he contractor may request the return of information submitted with a value engineering
 proposal if the proposal is rejected, provided this request is in writing and submitted with the proposal. If
 the proposal is accepted, this request will be void, and the Commission may use or disclose in whole or in
 part any information necessary to utilize the proposal.
 104.6.2.5 Prior to approval, it may be necessary for the engineer to modify a proposal, with the
 concurrence of the contractor, to make the proposal acceptable. If any modification increases or decreases
 the net savings resulting from the proposal, the contractor ’s share will be determined on the basis of the
 proposal as modified.
 104.6.2.6 An electronic copy of the complete proposal shall be submitted to the engineer for review. T he
 contractor may submit a conceptual proposal for approval stating the basic proposal and approximate cost
 
 39
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 savings in order to provide the contractor with the opportunity to submit an idea without large initial
 development costs if the proposal is rejected. Approval or disapproval of proposals will be granted within
 ten days of receipt of the proposal.
 104.6.2.7 A proposal will be disqualified if additional information is not provided at the request of the
 engineer. T his will include design computations, field investigations, results, surveys, etc.
 104.6.2.8 Reimbursement for modifications to the proposal to adjust field or other conditions will be
 limited to the total amount of the contract bid prices. Rejection, limitation or reimbursement shall not be a
 basis for any claim against the Commission.
 104.6.2.9 T he contractor will have no claim to additional costs or delays, including development costs, loss
 of anticipated profits, or increased material or labor costs, if the proposal is rejected.
 104.6.2.10 T he engineer will decide whether or not to consider a proposal. T he basis for proposal
 rejections will include excessive review requirements, evaluation or investigation, or if the proposal is
 inconsistent with project design policies or criteria.
 104.6.3 Payme nt. Payment will meet the following conditions:
 104.6.3.1 T he engineer will be the sole judge of the acceptability of a value engineering proposal and of the
 estimated net difference in construction costs from the adoption of all or any part of such a proposal. T he
 engineer may adjust contract prices if, in the judgment of the engineer, such prices do not represent a fair
 measure of the value of work to be performed or to be deleted.
 104.6.3.2 If the contractor ’s cost reduction is accepted in whole or in part, such acceptance will be by a
 change order, which will specifically state that the change order is executed in accordance with Sec 104.6.
 Such change orders will incorporate the changes in the plans and specifications necessary to permit the
 value engineering proposal or any part of the proposal that has been accepted, to be put into effect, and
 will include any conditions upon which the Commission’s approval thereof is based, if the approval of the
 Commission is conditional. T he change order will also set forth the price for performing those items of
 work affected by the change order and the estimated net savings in the cost of performing the work
 attributable to the value engineering proposal in the change order, and will further provide that the
 contractor will be paid 50 percent for VECP’s or 25 percent for PDVECP’s of the actual net savings of the
 construction costs at the completion of the work affected by the change order. All reasonable documented
 engineering costs incurred by the contractor to design and develop a value engineering proposal will be
 reimbursed and subtracted from the savings of the construction costs. All costs incurred by MoDOT to
 review and implement the VECP will be at the Commission’s expense.
 104.6.3.3 T he amount and time specified in the change order will be considered full compensation to the
 contractor for the value engineering proposal and for the performance of that work.
 104.6.3.4 Only the contractor may submit proposals and be reimbursed for savings, however the contractor
 may submit proposals for any approved subcontractor.
 104.7 Mainte nance of Traffic O pe rations During Construction.
 104.7.1 T he contractor shall maintain the flow of all traffic over the project, at the contractor ’s expense,
 unless otherwise specified in the contract. Provisions for local traffic, including bicycle and pedestrian
 traffic, shall be made by the contractor, at the contractor ’s expense, at all times during construction, unless
 otherwise specified in the contract.
 104.7.2 If detours for through traffic are to be provided by the Commission at the Commission’s expense
 or designated on the plans to be constructed and maintained by the contractor around the entire project or
 any major portion of the work during construction, the engineer may open for use by traffic any
 uncompleted portions of the project, and will have the option either to maintain such portions with
 Commission forces or to require the contractor to maintain the detours. If the contractor is required to
 maintain such opened portions, the contractor will be reimbursed for the cost of such maintenance in
 accordance with Sec 109.4. However, when the time set for completion, including any authorized extension
 
 40
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 of time, has elapsed, the contractor will be responsible for all further costs of maintaining such opened
 portions, whether the open portions are maintained by the contractor ’s forces and equipment or by
 Commission forces.
 104.7.3 If the contractor is required to maintain the flow of traffic over the project, including constructed
 detours or bypasses, such maintenance shall be construed to mean the satisfactory handling of all traffic to
 maintain safe and substantially uninterrupted flow. T he contractor shall maintain the roadbed substantially
 free of ruts, holes and detrimental surface deformations. T he contractor shall control the height of
 vegetation for traffic safety, and shall provide and maintain in a safe condition approaches, crossings and
 intersections with abutting property to the highway, railroads, trails, roads and streets. Such maintenance
 shall be performed as necessary from the day the contractor starts construction operations under the
 contract. Snow removal will not be required of the contractor.
 104.7.4 When it is to the advantage of the Commission, projects involving pavement may be opened to
 traffic as soon as the surface has been sufficiently cured, even though the shoulders and other items of work
 may not be completed. Such projects or portions of projects will be inspected and a partial acceptance
 made as to the work completed, and the contractor will be required to complete any remaining construction
 items under traffic.
 104.7.5 When the
 under Secs 104.7.2
 documented actual
 other time related
 108.14.
 
 engineer opens for use by traffic any unfinished portions of the project as provided
 or 104.7.4, the contractor will be compensated in accordance with Sec 109.4 for any
 additional costs approved by the engineer. Any documented inefficiencies, delays or
 effects approved by the engineer will be an excusable delay only as provided by Sec
 
 104.8 Surfacing for Te mporary Use . Surfacing for the temporary use of traffic shall, when directed by
 the engineer, be applied to areas necessary to provide satisfactory ingress and egress to private property,
 across the project or along the roadway. Such surfacing will be authorized if traffic cannot be handled
 satisfactorily by the contractor maintaining a reasonably smooth and drainable earth surface in accordance
 with Sec 104.7. T he quantity, quality and type of surfacing will be designated by the engineer. Acceptance
 of the material will be based on visual examination.
 104.8.1 Measurement of material furnished for temporary surfacing will be made in accordance with Sec
 310.5, excluding any deductions for moisture.
 104.8.2 T he quantity of surfacing for temporary use authorized and accepted will be paid for at the
 contract unit price. Regardless of overruns or underruns, no adjustment will be made in the price for this
 material.
 104.8.3 Preparing a subgrade, spreading or laying surfacing for temporary use, maintaining the surfacing,
 future removal or scarifying, if necessary, shall be at the contractor ’s expense.
 104.9 Rights In and Use of Mate rial Found on the Work. T he contractor, with written approval from
 the engineer, may use in the construction of the project any stone, gravel or sand found in the excavation
 that conforms to the requirements of the specifications for material. T he Commission will not pay for
 damages or for anticipated profits on account of the expected use of any material shown on the plans as
 existing and later found to be nonexistent or unfit for use. Payment will be made to cover the removal of
 such material at the contract unit price for excavation of the classification under which the excavation
 properly belongs. If such material is used instead of material that was to have been furnished at the expense
 of the contractor under the terms of the contract, the contractor shall furnish sufficient suitable material,
 at no additional expense to the Commission, to complete the roadway. Unless authorized in writing by the
 engineer, the contractor shall not excavate or remove from within the right of way any material that is not
 within the excavation limits as indicated by the slope and grade lines.
 104.10 Mailboxe s, Signs and Marke rs.
 104.10.1 Mailboxe s. Mailboxes within the limits of the project that will interfere with operations shall be
 removed by the contractor before work is begun. Mailboxes shall be set temporarily where the mailbox will
 be accessible to both the carrier and the patron, and shall be properly reset by the contractor at designated
 
 41
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 locations before final acceptance of the work by the Commission. Mailboxes damaged by the contractor
 shall be replaced by the contractor at the contractor ’s expense. All mailbox supports set by the contractor
 shall be in accordance with AASHT O guidelines. Mailboxes may be reset by the contractor using only
 approved supports furnished either by the postal patron or by the engineer. No direct payment will be made
 for the removal, relocation or replacement of mailboxes or supports.
 104.10.2 Signs and Marke rs. Signs and markers within the limits of the project that will interfere with
 operations shall be removed by the contractor before work is begun. All such signs and markers required for
 safe control and guidance of traffic shall be temporarily reset, readily visible to traffic, and shall be
 maintained in a satisfactory condition. If the nature of the work makes temporary relocation impractical,
 the signs shall be placed on movable supports and maintained in accordance with Sec 616. Stop and yield
 signs at intersecting roadways shall be maintained where signs are readily visible to traffic at all times.
 Other individual signs may be moved aside only when signs interfere with actual operations. All required
 signs and markers shall be properly located to control traffic at all times. Final removal of signs and
 markers will be permitted only when permanent signs and markers have been installed. All signs and
 markers will remain the property of the Commission and shall, after final removal, be delivered without
 damage to locations within the project limits as directed by the engineer. No direct payment will be made
 for removal, relocation, temporary supports, maintenance or final removal and delivery of signs and
 markers.
 104.10.3 Right of Way Marke rs and Plaque s. All right of way marker posts or markers damaged by the
 contractor ’s operations shall be replaced at the contractors’ expense, and installed in accordance with Sec
 602 and the standard drawings. Replacements for damaged right of way marker plaques will be furnished by
 the Commission.
 104.11 Final Cle an Up.
 104.11.1 Before final acceptance, the contractor shall restore to a condition equal to or better than that
 existing prior to construction all property, both public and private, within, adjacent to and beyond the
 limits of construction that have been disturbed or damaged by prosecution of the work. Restoration work
 shall be at the contractor ’s expense.
 104.11.2 When specified in the contract, the contractor shall open and clean all existing channels and
 culverts from all excess mud or silt, drift, brush or debris of any kind. Any material excavated in cleaning
 existing channels will be paid for as roadway excavation of like classification. Any material excavated in
 cleaning out culverts that are used in place will be paid for at the contract price per each structure.
 However, only the initial excavation will be paid for, and any subsequent cleaning required prior to final
 acceptance shall be at the contractor ’s expense.
 104.12 Re quire me nts for Proje cts Involving Work O n Railroad Right of Way.
 104.12.1 All work on, over or under railroad right of way shall be performed by the contractor without
 damage to the facilities and property of the railroad or the railroad’s lessees, and in strict observance of
 requirements of the engineer and railroad for the safety of railroad property and operations. T he
 contractor shall maintain the existing or proposed depth and section of the ditches along the tracks of
 railroads through the limits of construction. Any sediment resulting from new construction shall be
 promptly removed.
 104.12.2 T he contractor shall indemnify the railroad for any loss or damage to the railroad property, right
 of way, tracks and other facilities, hereafter referred to as property, caused by acts or omissions of the
 contractor, or any of the contractor ’s subcontractors, in performing work on a project, whether on, over,
 under or in the vicinity of railroad property. In the event the contractor fails to restore railroad property
 immediately to a condition acceptable to the railroad when any such loss or damage to railroad property is
 called to the contractor ’s attention by the railroad, then the railroad may perform such corrective work at
 the contractor ’s cost.
 104.12.3 Prior to beginning any work on, over or under railroad right of way, the contractor shall furnish
 to the railroad’s engineer evidence of “ Commercial Auto Liability Insurance,” “ Commercial General
 Liability Insurance” and “ Railroad Protective Liability Insurance” in accordance with the contract
 
 42
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 documents and special provisions, which will establish the limits of each type of insurance.
 104.12.4 T he term “ loss or damage” as used in Sec 104.12 will include, but not be limited to, the erosion
 and silting of, water damage to, and the accidental or intentional placing or dropping of objects on railroad
 property.
 104.12.5 Work performed on, over or under railroad right of way will be subject to the inspection of
 railroad representatives.
 104.12.6 T he Commission will make provisions for any temporary removal of railroad or railroad lessees’
 facilities that are to be moved.
 104.12.7 T he contractor shall in no way hold the Commission liable for delay caused by securing the
 railroad company’s approval of construction features involved in placing any grade separation structure,
 the removal of any structures over the railroad’s right of way, shoring plans that could affect the railroad’s
 facilities or operation or any changes from the design plans that appear desirable during construction.
 104.12.8 Construction requirements for projects involving work upon railroad right of way will be as
 follows.
 104.12.8.1 Fiber optic, communications, control systems and other types of cable may be buried on
 railroad property. Before beginning work, the contractor shall contact the railroad to determine if cable
 systems are buried on the railroad property to be used by the contractor.
 104.12.8.2 T he contractor shall provide a minimum construction vertical clearance of 21 feet 6 inches
 above the top of rails and a minimum construction lateral clearance of 10 feet from the center line of
 track to the nearest temporary construction falsework. T he contractor shall provide the minimum final
 lateral and vertical clearances as shown on the plans.
 104.12.8.3 T he contractor shall arrange with the railroad for installation of any temporary crossings.
 104.12.8.4 T he contractor shall notify the railroad and shall arrange for adequate protection of railroad
 property and operations under the following situations and conditions:
 (a) When performing any work or operations closer to railroad tracks than the minimum
 construction clearances specified in Sec 104.12.8.2 and set forth in schedule of rates in Sec
 104.12.9.
 (b) When performing work on those portions of the structure located over or under railroad
 tracks.
 (c) When using any temporary crossing of railroad tracks and right of way.
 104.12.8.5 Arrangements for flagging shall be made in accordance with the contract documents and special
 provisions.
 104.12.8.6 When performing work near the railroad tracks, the contractor shall, at the end of each work
 day, inspect the track area and clean up any debris. When the project is completed, the contractor shall
 remove any debris or material dropped on the railroad from the railroad right of way.
 104.12.9 Requirements for projects involving rates of pay and other related costs for protective services
 required by the railroad will be as follows.
 104.12.9.1 T he services of one track foreman or other railroad employees qualified to protect railroad
 operations in accordance with railroad’s rules, will be required during any construction operations involving
 direct interference with railroad tracks or traffic, the fouling of railroad operating clearances or reasonable
 probability of accidental hazard to railroad traffic. Services of additional railroad personnel for flagging
 protection will be required whenever such protection is needed when required by the railroad’s authorized
 railroad representative.
 
 43
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 104.12.9.2 T he rate of pay per hour for each flagger shall be the prevailing hourly rate for the class of
 employee used in accordance with labor agreements and schedules in effect at the time the work is
 performed.
 104.12.9.3 One and one-half times current hourly rate shall be paid for overtime, Saturdays and Sundays.
 Two and one-half times current hourly rate shall be paid for holidays.
 104.12.9.4 Wage rates are subject to change at any time by law or by agreement between the railroad and
 railroad employees, and may be retroactive as a result of negotiations or a ruling of an authorized
 governmental agency. Additional charges, such as labor surcharges, are also subject to change. If the wage
 rates or additional charges are changed, the contractor shall pay on the basis of the new rates and new
 charges.
 104.12.10 Requirements for projects involving reimbursement for work upon railroad right of way will be
 as follows.
 104.12.10.1 T he contractor shall reimburse the railroad for all costs of installation, maintenance and
 removal of any temporary crossings.
 104.12.10.2 T he contractor shall reimburse the railroad for all costs of protective services, such as
 flaggers, required by the railroad for the protection of railroad property and operations in accordance with
 Sec 104.12.9. All such costs shall be determined on the basis of rates of pay and other related costs actually
 in existence at the time protective services are furnished. Payments will be made by deduction of funds
 from the contractor ’s periodic progress payments.
 104.12.10.2.1 Reimbursement shall cover the full eight hour day during which any flagger is furnished,
 unless the flagger can be assigned to other railroad work during a portion of such day, in which event
 reimbursement will not be required for the portion of the day during which the flagger is engaged in other
 work.
 104.12.10.2.2 Reimbursement will be required for any day not actually worked by said flagger following
 assignment to work on the project for which the railroad is required to pay the flagger and that could not
 reasonably be avoided by the railroad by assignment of such flagger to other work, even though the
 contractor may not be working during such time.
 104.12.10.3 T he contractor shall reimburse travel expenses to the railroad in addition to the rate of pay
 indicated in Sec 104.12.9.
 104.12.10.4 T he railroad shall have the right to bring an action directly against the contractor to recover
 any loss or damage sustained by the railroad by reason of the contractor ’s breach of agreements contained
 in Sec 104.12.
 104.12.10.5 In addition to such remedies of the railroad, the Commission will withhold from final payment
 due to the contractor the amount reasonably necessary to reimburse the railroad for such loss or damage, or
 for performing such work.
 104.12.11 All costs incurred by the contractor in complying with Sec 104.12 will be considered covered by
 the contract unit price for various items of work included in the contract.
 104.13 Warranty of Ele ctrical and Me chanical Equipme nt.
 104.13.1 On all contracts requiring the contractor to furnish and install electronic, electrical or mechanical
 equipment, the contractor shall obtain, assign and furnish to the Commission written manufacturer ’s
 warranties for all such equipment consistent with those provided as customary trade practice. Additionally,
 a contractor ’s warranty providing for satisfactory in-service operation shall be provided for a minimum
 period of six months from the date of project acceptance.
 104.13.2 If the equipment fails to perform satisfactorily for the specified length of time, the manufacturer
 
 44
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 or the contractor shall replace or repair the equipment as necessary to restore required performance.
 MoDOT labor costs resulting from equipment replacement will not be charged to the manufacturer or the
 contractor.
 
 45
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 105
 CO NTRO L O F WO RK
 105.1 Authority and Dutie s of Commission in Contract Administration. T he Commission is
 subject to comply with and to have the power and authority provided in, among others, the following laws
 in execution of the Commission’s authority over all state transportation programs and facilities:
 (a) 226.130 RSMo providing for Commission to have supervision of highways and bridges constructed,
 improved and maintained, in whole or part, by the aid of state monies and of highways constructed in
 whole or in part by the aid of monies appropriated by the United States government, so far as such
 supervision is consistent with the acts of Congress relating thereto, to let all contracts for the construction
 or improvement of state highways;
 (b) 226.150 RSMo to comply with acts of Congress and with any of the rules or conditions made by the
 federal agencies to secure funds allocated to this state;
 (c) 227.030 RSMo to have power to make all final decisions affecting the work provided for therein;
 (d) 227.100 RSMo, to furnish and prescribe contracts for construction of the work provided for in that
 Chapter;
 (e) 227.107 RSMo to prescribe the form of contracts and make all final decisions concerning the
 performance of work under a design-build highway project contract including claims for additional time and
 compensation;
 (f) 23 USC §112 to have supervision over construction of certain projects funded in whole or part by
 monies appropriated by the United States Government;
 (g) 23 USC §302 to have adequate powers to discharge to the satisfaction of the Secretary of
 T ransportation of the United States Government the duties required by T itle 23 of the United States Code
 and;
 (h) 23 CFR §1.3 providing that the Commission shall be authorized by the laws of the State of Missouri to
 make all final decisions for the state in all matters relating to contracts and agreements and to take such
 other actions on behalf of the state as may be necessary to comply with the federal laws and regulations in
 Part 23 of the CFR.
 105.1.1 Authority of the Engine e r. T he engineer will decide all questions that may arise as to the
 quality, quantity and acceptability of material furnished and the work performed, and as to the rate of
 progress of the work; all questions that may arise as to the interpretation of the plans and specifications;
 all questions as to the acceptable fulfillment of the contract on the part of the contractor; all questions of
 classification; the proper compensation for the performance or breach of the contract; and all claims or
 controversies of any character whatsoever in connection with or growing out of the construction, whether
 claimed under the contract, under force account, under quantum merit or otherwise. T he engineer ’s
 estimates and decisions shall be final, binding, and conclusive upon all parties to the contract.
 
 105.1.2 Suspe nsion of Work. T he engineer may suspend the work wholly or in part in accordance with
 these provisions. T he suspension may be given verbally, but will be followed in writing immediately.
 105.1.2.1 T he engineer may suspend the work wholly or in part for the contractor ’s failure to:
 (a) Correct conditions unsafe for the project personnel or general public.
 (b) Carry out provisions of the contract.
 (c) Carry out orders of the engineer.
 105.1.2.2 Suspensions in accordance with Sec 105.1.2.1 will be nonexcusable and noncompensable.
 
 46
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 105.1.2.3 Work may also be wholly or partially suspended for:
 (a) Periods necessary due to unsuitable weather.
 (b) Conditions considered unsuitable for the prosecution of the work.
 (c) Any condition or reason determined to be in the public interest.
 105.1.2.4 Suspensions in accordance with Sec 105.1.2.3 may be excusable and may be compensable as
 determined by the engineer in accordance with Sec 108.
 105.2 Plans and Working Drawings. T he plans will be supplemented by such working drawings as are
 necessary to adequately control the work. Working drawings for structures shall be furnished by the
 contractor and shall consist of such detailed plans as may be required to adequately control the work and
 which are not included in the plans furnished by the Commission. Required working drawings must be
 accepted by the engineer, and such acceptance shall not relieve the contractor of any responsibility under
 the contract for the successful completion of the work.
 105.3 Conformity with Contract Docume nts. All work performed and all material furnished shall be in
 accordance with the lines, grades, cross sections, dimensions and material requirements, including
 tolerances, shown in the contract documents.
 105.3.1 If the engineer finds the material or the finished product in which the material was used is not in
 accordance with the contract documents, but that reasonably acceptable work has been produced, a
 determination will be made if the work will be accepted and remain in place. In this event, the engineer will
 document the basis of acceptance by contract modifications that may provide for an appropriate
 adjustment in the contract price for such work or material as deemed necessary to conform to the
 determination based on engineering judgment.
 105.3.2 If the engineer finds the finished product to be unacceptable as a result of the contractor ’s method
 of operation or the use of unacceptable material, the work shall be removed and replaced or otherwise
 corrected by the contractor at the contractor ’s expense.
 105.4 Coordination of Contract Docume nts. T he contract documents are essential parts of the
 contract, and a requirement occurring in one shall be as binding as though occurring in all. Contract
 documents are intended to be complementary and to describe and provide for a complete work. In case of
 discrepancy among contract documents, the governing ranking will be:
 (a) Job Special Provisions
 (b) Project Specific Drawings
 (c) General Provisions
 (d) Supplemental Specifications
 (e) Standard Specifications
 (f) Standard Drawings
 (g) Bid Items or Quantities
 In case of discrepancies, calculated dimensions will govern over scaled dimensions.
 105.4.1 All contractors, including subcontractors, shall not take advantage of any apparent error or
 omission in the contract documents. If an error or omission is discovered, the engineer shall be notified
 promptly so corrections and interpretations necessary to fulfill the intent of the contract can be made. A
 failure to give notice shall render the effects of any error or omission noncompensable and any delay
 
 47
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 nonexcusable.
 105.5 Coope ration by Contractor. T he contractor shall maintain one set of contract documents at the
 work site at all times.
 105.5.1 T he contractor shall give the work the constant attention necessary to facilitate the progress
 thereof and shall cooperate with the engineer and other contractors in every possible way.
 105.5.2 T he contractor shall have at the work site at all times, as the contractor ’s agent, a competent
 individual capable of reading and thoroughly understanding the plans and specifications and thoroughly
 experienced in the type of work being performed, whom shall receive instructions from the engineer. T hat
 individual shall have full authority to execute orders or directions of the engineer without delay and to
 promptly supply material, equipment, tools, labor and incidentals as may be required.
 105.6 Coope ration Be twe e n Contractors. T he Commission reserves the right at any time to contract
 for and perform other or additional work on or near the project limits covered by the contract.
 105.6.1 If separate contracts are awarded within the limits of any one project, each contractor shall
 conduct work so as not to interfere with or hinder the progress or completion of the work being performed
 by other contractors. Full cooperation of the contractors involved, in careful and complete coordination of
 their respective activities in the area, will be required.
 105.6.2 Each contractor and surety involved shall assume all liability, financial or otherwise, in connection
 with the contract and shall indemnify and save harmless the State, the Commission, and the Commission’s
 agents, employees and assigns from any and all damages or claims that may arise because of inconvenience,
 delay or loss experienced, caused or contributed to by the contractor because of the presence and
 operations of other contractors working within the limits of the same project.
 105.6.3 T he contractor shall schedule and conduct work and shall place and dispose of material being used
 so as not to interfere with or cause unnecessary inconvenience or delay to the operations of other
 contractors within the limits of the same project. T he contractor shall join work with other contractors as
 required by the contracts or in a manner acceptable to the engineer and shall perform the work in proper
 sequence with the work of the other contractors. When necessary for proper prosecution of work, each
 contractor shall permit the other contractors access through overlapping construction areas and shall
 permit the use of any access or haul roads.
 105.7 Coope ration With Utilitie s. All utility facilities and appurtenances within the project limits shall
 be installed or relocated by the utility owner, unless specified otherwise. Utility installation and relocation
 shall be made in accordance with 7 CSR 10-3, Utility and Private Line Location and Relocation.
 105.7.1 T he contractor shall cooperate with utility owners and the engineer in the installation and
 relocation of utility facilities to minimize effects on the contractor ’s work, interruption to utility service
 and duplication of work by the utility owners. Facilities or appurtenances that are to remain in place during
 construction shall be accounted for and protected by the contractor ’s work procedures.
 105.7.2 T he contractor shall notify Missouri One Call (800-344-7483) with its intent to excavate, as
 described in Chapter 319 RSMo. Locations of all utility facilities and appurtenances within the project
 limits will be provided by utility owners and may not be exact, particularly with regard to underground.
 105.7.3 T he contractor shall proceed in a safe and prudent manner to prevent damage to all public and
 private utilities. Repairs to damaged utilities caused by negligent or wrongful acts or omissions on the part
 of the contractor shall be corrected at the contractor's expense. Damaged facilities shall be restored to a
 condition similar or equal to that existing before the damage occurred.
 105.7.4 In the event of any damage, dislocation or disturbance of any underground facility in connection
 with any excavation, the contractor shall immediately notify Missouri One Call and cooperate with the
 utility owners until their facilities have been restored. Work shall not begin around any fire hydrants until
 provisions for continued service have been made and approved by the local fire authority.
 
 48
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 105.7.5 T he contractor shall be solely responsible and liable for incidental and consequential damage to any
 utility facilities or interruption of the service caused by it or its subcontractor's operation. T he contractor
 shall hold and save harmless the Commission from damages to any utility facility's interruption of service
 by it or its subcontractor's operation.
 105.7.6 T he contractor agrees that any effects of the presence of the utilities, their relocation,
 contractor ’s coordination of work with the utilities and any delay in utility relocation shall not be
 compensable as a suspension of work, extra work, a change in the work, as a differing site condition or
 otherwise including but, without limitation, delay, impact, incidental or consequential damages. T he
 contractor ’s sole remedy for the effects of the presence of utilities, delay in their relocation or any other
 effects shall be an excusable delay as provided in Sec 105.7.6.1. T he contractor waives, for itself, its
 subcontractors and suppliers the compensability of the presence of utilities, delay in their relocation and
 any cost to the contractor, it’s subcontractors and suppliers in any claim or action arising out of or in
 relation to the work under the contract.
 105.7.6.1 When the failure of the owners of utility facilities to cooperate and coordinate their work with
 that of the contractor results in actual delay to the contractor in the overall completion of the
 contractor ’s work, such delay will be considered in the count of working days or date specified for
 completion as contractor ’s sole compensation from the Commission, provided the contractor notified the
 engineer in writing of the delay at the time the delay occurred.
 105.7.7 Should there be located within the right of way any public or private utility facilities that are to
 remain in place and that will interfere with the contractor ’s proposed methods of operation, the
 contractor, in cooperation with the engineer, shall make all necessary arrangements with the owner for any
 temporary or permanent removal or relocation of such facilities desired for the contractor ’s convenience.
 Any cost involved shall be at the contractor ’s expense.
 105.7.8 If utility facilities or appurtenances are found that are not noted in the contract documents and
 could not be discovered in accordance with Sec 102.5, the engineer will determine whether relocation of the
 utility is necessary to accommodate construction. If relocation is necessary, the engineer will make
 necessary arrangements with the utility owner and the contractor. Compensability and excusability will be
 determined under Secs 104 and 108.
 105.8 Construction Stake s, Line s and Grade s. Surveying, project layout and setting of construction
 stakes will be performed by the contractor in accordance with Sec 627.
 105.9 Authority and Dutie s of Re side nt Engine e r. As the immediate representative of the
 Commission, the resident engineer has direct charge of the engineering details of each construction project
 and is delegated commensurate authority for the administration of the project. T he resident engineer may
 reject defective material and suspend and reject any work that is being improperly performed. T he resident
 engineer will have no authority to modify the contract except in accordance with the contract documents
 or when expressly authorized by the Commission.
 105.10 Inspe ction of Work. All material and each part or detail of the work will be subject to inspection
 by the engineer. T he engineer shall be allowed unlimited access to all parts of the work and shall be
 furnished with such information and assistance by the contractor as is required to make a complete and
 detailed inspection.
 105.10.1 If requested by the engineer, the contractor, at any time before acceptance of the work, shall
 remove or uncover such portions of the finished work as may be directed. After examination, the
 contractor shall restore said portions of the work to the standards required by the contract documents. If
 the work thus exposed or examined proves acceptable, the uncovering, the removing, recovering or making
 good the parts removed will be paid for in accordance with Sec 109. If the work so exposed or examined
 proves unacceptable, the uncovering, removing, recovering or making good the parts removed shall be at
 the contractor ’s expense.
 105.10.2 Any work done or material used without inspection by an authorized Commission representative
 may be ordered removed and replaced at the contractor ’s expense.
 
 49
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 105.10.3 If any unit of government or political subdivision pays all or a portion of the cost of the work
 covered by the contract, the unit’s respective representatives shall have the right to inspect the work.
 105.10.4 When any work is being done on, over or under railroad right of way or adjustments are being
 made to any public or privately-owned utility facility, the respective representatives shall have the right to
 inspect the work.
 105.10.5 Inspections authorized in Secs 105.10.3 and 105.10.4 will not make any of these agencies a party
 to the contract or affect the rights of the parties to the contract.
 105.10.6 Adequate provisions for lighting, meeting the prior approval from the engineer, shall be provided
 by the contractor to permit satisfactory construction and inspection of all work done and material
 produced.
 105.10.7 Final Inspe ction. Upon presumptive completion of the entire project, the engineer will make
 an inspection. If all construction contemplated by the contract has been completed to the engineer ’s
 satisfaction, that inspection will constitute the final inspection. T he engineer will make the acceptance for
 maintenance upon completion of the final inspection. T he engineer will notify the contractor in writing of
 acceptance for maintenance as of the date of the final inspection, with the exception of items covered by
 item specific performance bonds. Final acceptance will take place within a maximum of 30 days of receipt
 of final documentation from the contractor.
 105.10.7.1 Following the final inspection, the contractor, subcontractors and suppliers will be relieved of
 any new or additional liability to third parties for personal injury, death or property damages which may be
 alleged to result from the design or construction of the work, unless additional work on the right of way will
 be required by the engineer.
 105.10.7.2 Nothing in Sec 105.10.7 shall be deemed to excuse the contractor of liability or responsibility
 for any personal injury, death or property damages which may have occurred prior to the final inspection
 of the work.
 105.11 Unauthoriz e d and De fe ctive Work.
 105.11.1 All changes in the work or departures from the plans, except those due to reclassification of
 excavation material, will be considered unauthorized and at the contractor ’s expense unless, before
 proceeding with the work, the contractor has a copy of an order record signed by the engineer, or a change
 order signed by all parties whose signatures are provided for, except the federal engineer. T hese forms will
 contain complete detailed instructions regarding the proposed changes. Any departure from the instructions
 contained in such a written order will be considered unauthorized.
 105.11.2 T he engineer may order unauthorized work removed and replaced at the contractor ’s expense.
 105.11.3 All construction and materials that have been rejected or declared unsatisfactory shall be remedied
 or removed and replaced in an acceptable manner by the contractor at the contractor ’s expense. Upon
 failure of the contractor to remedy or remove and properly dispose of rejected material or work, or to
 replace them immediately after receiving written notice from the engineer, the engineer may employ labor
 to rectify the work, and the cost of rectification will be deducted from any payment due or which may
 become due the contractor.
 105.12 Load Re strictions.
 105.12.1 T he contractor ’s movement of equipment and vehicles over bridges and pavements within the
 limits of the project will be subject to the load limit regulations for highways as prescribed by state statutes
 in effect when the movement occurs, and the contractor shall acquire special permits from the Commission
 prior to the movement of any such equipment or vehicles with a gross weight in excess of the load limits
 permitted by statute. All costs of obtaining special permits shall be at the contractor ’s expense, unless the
 special permit will be required by a restriction first imposed after the contractor has submitted the bid on
 the project. Outside of project limits, width, length, height and weight limitations as prescribed by state
 statutes shall be adhered to by the contractor during the movement of equipment and vehicles over any
 
 50
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 part of the state highway system, to include project exceptions, and the contractor shall not move or
 operate any such equipment or vehicles that exceed any statutory limitation without special permits from
 the Commission. All costs of obtaining special permits shall be at the contractor ’s expense. Material
 receipts issued by the engineer will not indicate compliance with any weight restriction regulations. All
 permits required for movement over highways other than those that are state owned or maintained shall be
 obtained by the contractor from the respective authority at the contractor ’s expense.
 105.12.1.1 Special permits will not be required for the movement of construction equipment over any part
 of a bridge or pavement that is constructed or rehabilitated in the contract.
 105.12.1.2 All movement will be subject to the same conditions and regulations established by the
 Commission for movements under special permits with the following additional requirements:
 (a) Bridge decks shall be protected by planking of uniform thickness for the full tread width of track.
 (b) All concrete in the bridge shall have achieved design strength.
 (c) No more than one unit at a time may be moved over the structure.
 (d) Equipment shall be centered on centerline of structure during movement.
 (e) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent marring of the pavement surface or the loss of surface
 texture.
 (f) Portland cement concrete pavement shall have achieved the strength required for opening to all traffic.
 (g) Adequate provisions shall be made to assure uniform load distribution at the edges of the pavement.
 (h) All movements shall be made under the supervision of the resident engineer.
 105.12.1.3 Movement of equipment over bridges or pavement not constructed under the contract, but
 located within the limits of the contract, will be subject to all requirements of this section, and a special
 permit will be required.
 105.12.2 T rack or crawler-type equipment having a gross weight of 40,000 pounds or less, evenly
 distributed over the treads, may be moved over bridges not posted for lesser loads or over rigid-type
 pavements without special permits. Such equipment having a gross weight in excess of 40,000 pounds shall
 have a special permit before moving. Crawler-type equipment having a gross weight in excess of 75,000
 pounds will not be permitted on bridges or rigid type pavements unless authorized by the engineer.
 105.12.3 T rack or crawler-type equipment that is subject to unequal distribution of weight, such as cranes
 and paving mixers and which have a gross weight in excess of 18,000 pounds but less than 40,000 pounds ,
 may be operated upon bridges not posted for lesser loads and rigid type pavements, provided special
 precautions satisfactory to the engineer are taken to distribute the weight evenly over the treads. Such
 equipment in excess of 40,000 pounds will require a special permit from the Commission.
 105.12.4 T he contractor shall not move or operate any type of equipment of such weight or so loaded that
 the equipment will cause damage to highway facilities either being constructed or in existence. Equipment
 and vehicles with steel lugs will not be permitted to operate directly on bridges or pavements at any time.
 105.12.5 When it is required that material from roadway or borrow excavation be hauled across existing
 pavement, the contractor may move the material across the pavement with equipment that results in
 overweight loading, provided the following requirements are met at the contractor ’s expense:
 (a) T he contractor and the engineer shall select the location or locations where the crossing over the
 existing pavement is to be made. T he width of the crossing shall be clearly marked on the pavement by
 painted lines and the contractor ’s equipment will be required to operate within the limits of the marked
 crossing.
 
 51
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (b) T he contractor shall obtain written permission, including the description of the location of the
 crossing, from the engineer prior to movements of overweight loads across the existing pavement.
 (c) T he existing pavement shall be kept open at all times for highway traffic except for short periods of
 time when individual pieces of equipment are crossing the pavement. T he pavement shall be kept
 reasonably free from earth or other material during hauling operations and shall be cleaned off and kept
 clean during periods when no hauling across the pavement is in progress.
 (d) T he pavement and shoulders within the crossing area shall be maintained by the contractor in a
 condition satisfactory to the engineer.
 (e) T he contractor shall provide signs and flaggers to direct traffic when hauling across the pavement.
 (f) If any hauling across the pavement is done at night, the contractor shall provide adequate lighting to
 illuminate the crossing.
 (g) If the existing pavement at the crossing is to be used in place after the contract is completed, the
 contractor shall, upon completion of the hauling operations, remove the existing shoulders, pavement and
 base between the limits of the crossing and replace the pavement with the same type, width and thickness
 of shoulders, pavement and base existing prior to the beginning of hauling operations.
 (h) T he contractor shall construct and maintain all necessary bypasses or temporary connections required
 for the proper handling of traffic during removal and replacement of the pavement in the crossing area.
 105.12.6 T he contractor shall not store or stockpile any materials on a bridge without approval from the
 engineer.
 105.12.7 Nothing contained herein or in any special permit will relieve the contractor of liability for any
 damage caused to highway facilities from the movement or operation of equipment and vehicles over the
 highway system.
 105.13 Mainte nance of the Work. T he contractor shall maintain the work during construction until the
 work is accepted. T his maintenance shall be prosecuted such that the roadway or structures are kept in
 satisfactory condition at all times.
 105.13.1 In the case of a contract for placing a course upon a course or subgrade previously constructed,
 the contractor shall maintain the previous course or subgrade during all construction operations.
 105.13.2 No direct payment will be made for maintenance of the work before the work is accepted.
 105.14 Failure to Maintain Roadway or Structure . If the contractor ’s performance at any time fails
 to comply with the provisions of Sec 105.13, the engineer will notify the contractor of such noncompliance. If notice is provided verbally, notice will be promptly confirmed in writing. If the contractor
 fails to remedy unsatisfactory maintenance within 24 hours after receipt of such notice, the engineer may
 immediately proceed to maintain the project, and the entire cost of this maintenance will be deducted from
 monies due or to become due the contractor.
 105.15 Acce ptance .
 105.15.1 Partial Acce ptance . T he contractor may request that the engineer inspect the following
 completed sections of work for acceptance at any time during the prosecution of the project:
 (a) Any section 0.5 mile or more in length.
 (b) Any section 0.5 mile or more in length in one direction of a divided highway.
 (c) A complete bridge.
 (d) An intersection traffic signal system. Partial acceptance may be made for signal equipment prior to the
 
 52
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 30 day testing period though any required performance tests and/or guarantees shall remain applicable.
 (e) Devices intended to be used for traffic safety and control. Acceptance of traffic safety devices is limited
 to guardrail, impact attenuation barriers, traffic signal items, signs, delineators, lighting, concrete barrier
 walls, concrete bridge parapet, bridge railing, guard cable, crash cushions and fence, which are permanently
 installed in their final position in accordance with the contract documents.
 
 105.15.1.1 If the contract contains seasonal items, such as sodding, painting or such items as might delay
 the final completion of the project, a partial acceptance of the completed portion may be made prior to
 completion of the entire project. If the engineer finds upon inspection that the completed work is in
 acceptable condition, the contractor will be notified in writing and after such notice has been given, the
 contractor will be relieved of the duty of maintaining and protecting that work to the extent provided in
 the notice.
 105.15.1.2 Nothing in the contract shall be construed to relieve the contractor of full responsibility for
 making good any non-latent defect in work or material found on any section of work prior to final
 acceptance of the entire project, to alter in any manner the method of payment prescribed in the contract
 or to constitute a waiver of any claim the Commission might have against the contractor on the entire
 project.
 105.15.2 Final Acce ptance . Upon receipt by the engineer of all project documentation required by the
 contract and verification by the engineer that all material incorporated into the work has been properly
 inspected, the engineer will make the final acceptance upon completion of the final inspection and
 acceptance for maintenance in accordance with Sec 105.10.7.
 105.15.2.1 When required by the contract, project documentation shall consist of the following:
 Contractor ’s Affidavit Regarding Settlement of Claims (Form C-242), Final Change Order, DBE
 Participation List and Final Verification, Affidavit – Compliance with the Prevailing Wage Law.
 105.15.2.2 Final acceptance will not excuse the contractor ’s liability or responsibility to the Commission
 for any latent defects in the work or material incorporated into the work, or for claims relating to any
 work or material incorporated into the work.
 105.16 Controve rsie s and Claims for Adjustme nt.
 105.16.1 T he contractor shall follow the requirements of Sec 104.4 for written notification of differing
 site conditions or significant changes in the character of work and Sec 108.15 for suspensions of work
 directed by the engineer. If, after receiving a written reply from the engineer the contractor considers
 additional compensation is due, the contractor shall file a written notice of claim for additional
 compensation within 60 days after completing the work in question. T he procedure for filing a claim shall
 be as described in Secs 105.16.6 through 105.16.8.2.
 105.16.2 If the contractor considers additional compensation may be due for work or material not clearly
 covered in the contract or not ordered in writing by the engineer as change in the work, the contractor
 shall notify the engineer in writing of the intention to make a claim before beginning the work in question.
 If notification is not given and the engineer is not afforded proper facilities by the contractor to provide
 necessary inspection and for keeping strict account of actual costs, the contractor agrees to waive any
 claims for additional compensation. Notice by the contractor and the fact that the engineer has kept
 account of the costs shall not be construed as substantiating the validity of the claim. T he contractor shall
 file a written notice of claim for additional compensation within 60 days after completing the work in
 question. T he procedure for filing the claim shall be as described in Secs 105.16.6 through 105.16.8.2.
 105.16.3 Claims for additional time or compensation under Sec 104 shall be filed within 60 days after
 completing the work in question. Claims for additional time or compensation in accordance with Sec 108
 shall be filed within 60 days after receipt of the engineer ’s determination. T he procedures for filing and the
 disposition of the claim or controversy shall be in accordance with Secs 105.16.3 through 105.16.9.
 
 53
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 105.16.4 If the contractor has any claim against the Commission arising out of the provisions of the
 contract or the performance or non-performance thereunder, and is not within the scope of Sec 105.16.1
 through 105.16.3, the claim shall be filed within the earlier of:
 (a) 90 days after the date of final inspection under Sec 105.10.7.
 (b) 60 days after the date of declaration of default or termination of the contract under Sec 108.
 (c) As provided in Sec 108 upon a termination of the contract for convenience of the Commission.
 105.16.5 If the Commission has a claim against the contractor that in any way arises out of the provisions
 of the contract or the performance or non-performance thereunder, the claim will be filed within 90 days
 after the date of final inspection under Sec 105.10.7, except for claims of a differing site condition or
 defects in work or material under Sec 105.15.2.2.
 105.16.6 If the claim is against the Commission, the written claim shall be personally delivered or sent by
 certified mail to the Office of the Secretary of the Commission in Jefferson City, Missouri. If the claim is
 against the contractor, the written claim will be personally delivered or sent by certified mail to the
 contractor at the address shown under the signature on the contract. If the claim is against an assignee, the
 written claim will be personally delivered or sent by certified mail to the assignee at the address shown on
 the accepted notice of assignment.
 105.16.6.1 T his provision shall not extend the claim filing time limits of the contractor or the
 Commission in the case of a differing site condition or a suspension of the work under Sec 108.
 105.16.6.2 T his provision will not limit the Commission’s claim filing time for defects in work or material
 not discovered within 90 days after the date of final inspection under Sec 105.10.7 or other claim rights
 not discovered within 60 days of filing of any claim by the contractor, or as to any work covered by a
 separate or continuing performance bond specified to survive project final acceptance.
 105.16.7 Claim submittals on the contractor ’s part shall be in sufficient detail, as specified in this section,
 to enable the engineer to determine the basis for additional time or compensation. T he following minimum
 information shall accompany each claim submitted:
 (a) A detailed factual statement of the claim, providing all necessary dates, locations and items of work
 affected by the claim.
 (b) T he date actions resulting in the claim occurred or conditions resulting in the claim became evident.
 (c) A copy of the notice of claim filed by the contractor for the specific claim.
 (d) T he name, title and activity of each MoDOT employee knowledgeable about facts that gave rise to
 such claim.
 (e) T he name, title and activity of each contractor or subcontractor employee knowledgeable about facts
 that gave rise to such claim.
 (f) T he specific provisions of the contract supporting the claim, and a statement why the provisions
 support the claim.
 (g) T he identification of any pertinent documents, and the substance and date of any material oral
 communication relating to the claim.
 (h) A statement whether the additional compensation or extension of time is based on the provisions of
 the contract, including breach of contract, or other basis in law outside the contract, with detailed support
 of the basis a claim may be made outside the terms of the contract.
 (i) If an extension of time is also sought, the specific days for which the extension is sought and the basis
 for such a claim as determined by an analysis of the construction schedule.
 
 54
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (j) T he amount of additional compensation sought with an itemized accounting of that amount.
 105.16.8 Re quire d Ce rtification of Claims. T he claim submittal shall include the contractor ’s written
 certification, under oath, attesting to the following:
 (a) T he claim is made in good faith.
 (b) Supporting data is accurate and complete to the contractor ’s best knowledge and belief.
 (c) T he amount requested includes all costs related to the specific claim and that no additional related
 claims will be submitted.
 (d) T he amount of the claim accurately reflects the contractor ’s actual cost incurred. To comply with this
 requirement, the contractor shall file a notarized statement with the claim, in which the statement includes
 at least the following:
 AFFIDAVIT FOR CLAIM
 State of (__________________________________)
 ss.
 County of (________________________________)
 (Name of the Person Making this Affidavit), the (State Your T itle or Position in the Firm) [hereinafter
 “ the Affiant”], of (State the Name of the Firm Submitting the Claim), [hereinafter “ the Claimant”], being
 first duly sworn upon his or her oath, states as follows:
 1. T his Affidavit is made upon the personal knowledge of the Affiant, and is authorized by the Claimant to
 be made in behalf of the Claimant.
 2. T he Claim being submitted by the Claimant to the Missouri Highways and T ransportation Commission
 at this time on (Route), (County), (Job No.), is made in good faith. T he Affiant has the requisite knowledge
 of the Claim, and the facts and supporting data, to be able to make this Affidavit and accurately attest to
 the facts herein.
 3. T he amount requested includes all costs related to the claim or controversy and that no additional claim
 will be submitted.
 4. All documents, records, charts, schedules, computer programs and printouts, and other data of any nature
 or description, which are submitted in support of this Claim pursuant to Sec 105.16.7 of the Missouri
 Standard Specifications for Highway Construction are accurate and complete in all respects, to the best
 knowledge and belief of the Affiant and the Claimant.
 5. Under all applicable penalties of state or federal law for perjury, submitting a false affidavit or statement,
 fraud, stealing or other falsification, the Affiant hereby certifies that this Claim for extra compensation
 and time, if any, submitted herewith by the Claimant for work performed on this contract, is a true and
 accurate statement of the Claimant’s actual costs incurred and time sought in performing the contract
 work, and is fully documented and supported under and pursuant to the contract described above between
 the Claimant and the Missouri Highways and T ransportation Commission.
 6. T his Affidavit is given in compliance with Sec 105.16 of the Missouri Standard Specifications for
 Highway Construction, which forms a part of that contract.
 __________________________________________________
 (Type or Print Name of the Claimant)
 By:_______________________________________________
 (Affiant’s Legal Signature)
 Subscribed and sworn to before me, a notary public, on this day of , (year).
 __________________________________________________
 Notary Public
 My commission expires: ______________________________________________
 105.16.8.1 T he person signing the claim and affidavit under oath shall be the owner if the contractor is a
 
 55
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 sole proprietorship, shall be a general partner if the contractor is a partnership, shall be an authorized agent
 if the contractor is a limited liability company or joint venture, or shall be an authorized officer or member
 of the board if the contractor is a corporation.
 105.16.8.2 No claim shall be deemed filed under the contract by a contractor until:
 (a) Every item of information provided for in Sec 105.16.7 has been provided or the contractor makes an
 affirmative, unequivocal statement as part of its claim that no record, document or information provided
 for by a specific provision of that section exists, and
 (b) T he sworn certification precisely as set forth in Sec 105.16.8 has been made and delivered to the
 Secretary of Commission.
 105.16.9 Duty to Supply Re cords and Information Re garding a Claim or Controve rsy. T he
 Commission is subject to a legal duty to pay no additional sum to a contractor after a contract has been
 entered into and performed in whole or part, or any claim under any agreement or contract made without
 express authority of law. T he Commission is under the further legal duty to pay only those claims that are
 supported, which have a basis in the terms of the contract and applicable state law as fairly construed and
 which are in accordance with prevailing principles of public contract law. T he Commission is obligated by
 law to set forth both the contractual basis and the cost data, supported by audit, of actual costs incurred by
 the contractor to substantiate any amount paid.
 105.16.9.1 Re cord Re te ntion. From and after the date the contractor determines a cause has occurred for
 a possible contract adjustment, and notwithstanding any policy the contractor may have regarding record
 retention, the contractor shall retain all files, records and data, in whatever form, that relate to the
 contractor ’s bid and performance of the contract relevant to the possible contract adjustment.
 105.16.9.2 Duty to Supply Information. During the review of the claim, the contractor and the
 contractor ’s subcontractors and suppliers shall cooperate with MoDOT and shall provide, if requested,
 access to the documents that contain the below information, to the extent requested by MoDOT and
 MoDOT ’s attorneys or consultants. Request for some, but not all, of the following information will not
 preclude MoDOT ’s right to request the same or additional information at another time:
 (a) Job site superintendent and foreman diaries, daily time sheets and daily reports of all types.
 (b) Any union agreements applicable to the work, including any amendments.
 (c) Insurance, welfare and benefits records.
 (d) Earnings records of salaried and hourly personnel charged as costs of the work.
 (e) Payroll tax and withholding returns.
 (f) Material invoices, purchase orders, and all material and supply acquisition contracts.
 (g) Material cost distribution worksheets.
 (h) Records for all equipment whose use was included either in the bid or which was charged to the project.
 T his should include internal equipment rates used for both purposes, as well as equipment leased from third
 parties and from affiliates and related parties. All lease or rental agreements shall be provided.
 (i) Vendor rental agreements and contracts with subcontractors and suppliers.
 (j) Payment records and invoices for subcontracted work.
 (k) Canceled checks (payroll and vendors).
 (l) Job cost reports, both periodic and final, and both the summary and supporting reports, for all costs
 charged to the contract and for any changes to the work, including any reports that compare estimated
 
 56
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 with actual costs.
 (m) General ledger, general journal (if used) and all subsidiary ledgers and journals, including all supporting
 documentation pertinent to entries made in these ledgers and journals, whether paper or computermaintained.
 (n) Financial statements with all footnotes and attachments for all years in which the contractor
 performed work on the project.
 (o) Depreciation records on all company equipment, and all documents used to develop the actual cost of
 owning and operating equipment used in the work.
 (p) All documents that reflect the contractor ’s actual profit and overhead during the time the work was
 being performed, and for each of the two years prior to the beginning of the project.
 (q ) All bid records related to the preparation of the contractor ’s bid, including the final calculations on
 which the bid was determined.
 (r) Worksheets, working papers and all other records used in or the product of preparation of the claim.
 T his includes those showing the cost components claimed and how the amounts claimed were computed.
 Without limitation, this is intended to include personnel and equipment production analysis, schedule
 analysis, all data inputs used or developed for computer analysis or generation of the claim.
 (s) Projected and actual personnel and equipment loading plans.
 (t) Any internal budget for the project.
 105.16.9.3 Confide ntiality of Re cords. T he contractor and, if applicable, the contractor ’s
 subcontractors and suppliers, shall deliver to MoDOT and MoDOT ’s attorneys or consultants, all
 information and documents requested, notwithstanding any claim of confidentiality or proprietary interest
 in the records. MoDOT and MoDOT ’s attorneys and consultants will affirmatively act to protect the
 records and information from disclosure beyond those persons having a need to know the information for
 the purpose of making a decision regarding the claim, or for law enforcement purposes. T he contractor
 shall identify and segregate any documents or information that the contractor considers particularly
 sensitive.
 105.16.10 On any claim for additional compensation for work on the project, whether claimed under the
 contract, for a differing site condition, as a change in the work, for breach of the contract, for a positive
 representation by which the contract was induced or otherwise, the following items shall never be allowable
 or claimed directly or indirectly:
 (a) Attorney fees, consultant or claims preparation costs, or costs related to litigation.
 (b) Any item that would not be eligible for federal-aid participation under the provisions of 23 CFR
 635.124, regardless of whether the project is one approved by the FHWA.
 (c) Any item that would be an expressly unallowable cost under the provisions of 48 CFR Part 31, Subparts
 31.1 and 31.2, or as it may be amended, superseded or replaced during the life of the contract.
 105.16.11 Any claim, controversy or item of any claim or controversy not included in the writings
 required to be filed in Sec 105.16, or any claim included but not clearly defined and specifically set out,
 itemized and supported, or any notice or claim not filed within the time and in the manner provided in Sec
 105.16, shall be forever waived, and shall neither constitute the basis of nor be included in any legal action,
 counterclaim, defense, set-off, arbitration or other alternative dispute resolution procedure mutually agreed
 upon between the parties.
 
 105.16.11.1 T he omission of any claim or of the detail required to be in a claim in accordance with Sec
 105.16.7 will not be subject to cure by making the claim or supplying the details in any later court or
 
 57
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 alternative dispute resolution proceeding.
 105.16.11.2 MoDOT has established a written procedure for handling contractor claims and controversies
 that provides the process for resolution of all claims and the engineer ’s final decision. T he completion of
 that process and the engineer ’s final decision will be a condition precedent to any legal action,
 counterclaim, defense, set-off or arbitration concerning the matters claimed. Any claim or controversy, or
 any portion thereof that has not been presented for handling in accordance with MoDOT ’s contractor
 claims and controversies procedure will not be subject to resolution in an alternate dispute resolution
 process.
 105.16.12 MoDOT ’s review of a claim pursuant to Sec 105.16 will be in addition to the right or duty of
 MoDOT or the Commission to conduct audits or other reviews of a claim or contractor ’s books of account
 or operations otherwise provided by federal or state laws or the rules of civil procedure.
 105.17 Ve nue . Any action concerning any matter, thing or dispute arising out of or relating to the terms,
 performance, non-performance or otherwise of the agreement, shall be filed in the Circuit Court of Cole
 County, Missouri. T he parties agree that the contract is entered into at Jefferson City, Missouri, and
 substantial elements of the contract’s performance will take place or be delivered at Jefferson City,
 Missouri, by reason of which the contractor consents to venue of any action by or against the contractor
 in Cole County, Missouri. T he contractor shall cause this provision to be incorporated in all of the
 contractor ’s agreements with, and to be binding upon, all subcontractors in the performance of this
 agreement.
 105.18 Arbitration.
 105.18.1. Purpose . By adoption of 226.096 RSMo (L. 2003, HB 668), certain controversies or claims to
 which the Missouri Department of T ransportation is a party that arises out of or relates to a contract
 awarded pursuant to subdivision (9) of subsection 1 of 226.130 (RSMo) subject to certain limits and
 preconditions are subject to, “ be settled (sic) by arbitration administered by the American Arbitration
 Association under its Construction Industry Arbitration Rules, except as provided, in 226.096”. Under the
 provisions of Chap. 435 RSMo arbitration is the subject of agreement between the parties to a contract.
 T his section provides for incorporation of the, American Arbitration Association’s, Construction Industry
 Arbitration Rules and Mediation Procedures (AAA Rules), amended and effective on the date arbitration is
 demanded and for their modification and revisions as permitted by the AAA Rules and Chap. 435 RSMo.
 105.18.2. Incorporation. T he AAA Rules are incorporated as part of the contract except as amended or
 excluded. T he AAA Rules are further expressly amended or excluded as provided herein and as provided
 directly or indirectly by 226.096 RSMo (L. 2003, HB 668) and Chap. 435 RSMo.
 105.18.3 Re gular Track Proce dure s. T he AAA Construction Industry Arbitration Rules, Regular T rack
 Procedures, October 1, 2009 are amended as follows:
 105.18.3.1 R-1. Agre e me nt of Partie s and De signation of Applicable AAA Rule s. Not revised.
 105.18.3.2 R-2. AAA and De le gation of Dutie s. Not revised.
 105.18.3.3 R-3. National Pane l of Construction Ne utrals. Shall be replaced with the following:
 In cooperation with the National Construction Dispute Resolution Committee the AAA shall establish and
 maintain a National Roster of Construction Arbitrators (“ National Roster”) and shall appoint arbitrators as
 provided first by the provisions of Missouri law, including 7 CSR 10-26, and then as provided in these rules.
 T he term “ arbitrator” in these rules refers to the arbitration panel, constituted for a particular case,
 whether composed of one or more arbitrators, or to an individual arbitrator, as the context requires.
 105.18.3.4 R-4. Filing Re quire me nts Unde r an Arbitration Agre e me nt in a Contract. Not revised.
 105.18.3.5 R-5. Filing Re quire me nts unde r a Submission Agre e me nt. Not revised.
 105.18.3.6 R-6. Change s of Claim or Counte rclaim. Shall be replaced with the following:
 
 58
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 T he contract between the parties provides for a Notice of Controversy or a Claim for adjustment to the
 contract prior to any demand for arbitration. Arbitration demands, issues, nature or amount of relief
 sought, shall not differ or be additional to that in the Notice of Controversy or Claim for contract
 adjustment provided for in the contract. T here may not be a revision of the issues, nature of relief sought
 or increase in relief during or by way of any presentation of evidence during the arbitration. No award may
 be upon different issues or basis of relief or provide relief different in nature or greater in amount than
 contained in the Notice of Controversy or Claim given under the contract and stated in the demand for
 arbitration. No new or different controversy, claim or counterclaim may be submitted to the arbitrator
 except with the consent of both parties and the arbitrator and any consent must be clearly expressed,
 written and signed by the parties. T here will be no amendments by implication.
 105.18.3.7 R-7. Consolidation or Joinde r. Shall be replaced with the following:
 If Commission expressly agrees in writing with regard to multiple disputes arising under a particular
 contract, multiple demands may be consolidated so long as the relief sought in total does not exceed
 $409,123 in the principal relief sought, as adjusted on an annual basis effective January first of each year in
 accordance with the Implicit Price Deflator for Personal Consumption Expenditures as calculated pursuant
 to subsection 5 of section 537.610, RSMo. See http://insurance.mo.gov/industry/sovimmunity.php.
 Demands to which Commission is not a party in direct privity of contract will never be joined. T he issue of
 consolidation of claims and joinder of parties will not be arbitrable. Nothing in this section shall prohibit
 more than one demand for arbitration pursuant to the same contract, provided that each demand for
 arbitration arises from a separate claim based upon facts supporting a separate right of relief, filed with the
 Department and accepted by the department under the Missouri Department of T ransportation’s
 “ Contractor Claims and Controversies Procedures”. Neither shall a prime contractor be prohibited from
 filing a demand for arbitration arising from work, which was subcontracted provided that; (a) the claim was
 initially accepted by the department under “ Contractor Claims and Controversies Procedures.” and (b)
 would provide a right to contract adjustment separate from any claimed or which could be claimed by the
 prime contractor for its sole benefit. However, subcontractors shall have no right to file a demand for
 arbitration with the Commission.
 105.18.3.8 R-8. Inte rpre tation and Application of Rule s.
 105.18.3.9 R-9. Jurisdiction. Not revised.
 105.18.3.10 R-10. Me diation. Not revised.
 105.18.3.11 R-11. Administrative Confe re nce . Not revised.
 105.18.3.12 R-12. Fixing of Locale . Not revised.
 105.18.3.13 R-13. Date , Time and Place of He aring. Not revised.
 105.18.3.14 R-14. Arbitrators Appointme nt from National Construction Pane l. Delete paragraphs
 (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) and replace with the following:
 Arbitrators will be selected and appointed in accordance with 7 CSR 10-26.
 105.18.3.15 R-15. Dire ct Appointme nt by a Party. Not revised.
 105.18.3.16 R-16. Appointme nt by a Chairpe rson by Party-Appointe d Arbitrators or Partie s. Not
 revised.
 105.18.3.17 R-17. Nationality of Arbitrator in Inte rnational Arbitration. Not revised.
 105.18.3.18 R-18. Numbe r of Arbitrators. Not revised.
 105.18.3.19 R-19. Disclosure . Not revised.
 
 59
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 105.18.3.20 R-20. Disqualification of Arbitrator. Not revised.
 105.18.3.21 R-21. Communication with Arbitrator and the AAA. Not revised.
 105.18.3.22 R-22. Vacancie s. Not revised.
 105.18.3.23 R-23. Pre liminary Manage me nt He aring. Not revised.
 105.18.3.24 R-24. Exchange of Information. Not revised.
 105.18.3.25 R-25. Atte ndance at He arings. Not revised.
 105.18.3.26 R-26. Re pre se ntation. Not revised.
 105.18.3.27 R-27. O aths. Not revised.
 105.18.3.28 R-28. Ste nographic Re cord. Not revised.
 105.18.3.29 R-29. Inte rpre te rs. Not revised.
 105.18.3.30 R-30. Postpone me nts of He arings. Not revised.
 105.18.3.31 R-31. Arbitration in the Abse nce of a Party or Re pre se ntative . Not revised.
 105.18.3.32 R-32. Conduct of Proce e dings. Not revised.
 105.18.3.33 R-33. Evide nce . Not revised.
 105.18.3.34 R-34. Evide nce by Affidavit and Posthe aring Filing of Docume nts or O the r Evide nce .
 Not revised.
 105.18.3.35 R-35. Inspe ction or Inve stigation. Not revised.
 105.18.3.36 R-36. Inte rim Me asure s. Not revised.
 105.18.3.37 R-37. Closing of He aring. Not revised.
 105.18.3.38 R-38. Re ope ning of He aring. Not revised.
 105.18.3.39 R-39. Waive r of Rule s. Not revised.
 105.18.3.40 R-40. Exte nsions of Time . Not revised.
 105.18.3.41 R-41. Se rving of Notice . Paragraphs (a) and (b) shall be replaced with the following:
 (a)Any papers, notices, or process necessary or proper for the initiation or continuation of an arbitration
 under these rules; for any court action in connection therewith, or for the entry of judgment on any award
 made under these rules, may be served on a party by mail addressed to the party or its representative at the
 last known address with return receipt or by personal service, in or outside the state where the arbitration is
 to be held, provided that reasonable opportunity to be heard with regard thereto has been granted to the
 party.
 (b)T he AAA, the arbitrator and the parties may also use overnight delivery with return receipt or
 electronic facsimile transmission (fax) to give the notices required by these rules. Facsimile transmission
 must require an acknowledgment that an entire legible transmission was received. Where all parties and the
 arbitrator agree, notices may be transmitted by electronic mail (email), or other methods of
 communication.
 
 60
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (c) Not revised
 105.18.3.42 R-42. Majority De cision. Not revised.
 105.18.3.43 R-43. Time of Award. Not revised.
 105.18.3.44 R-44. Form of Award. Paragraph (b) shall be replaced with the following:
 (a) Not revised.
 (b) T he arbitrator shall provide a concise, written breakdown of the basis of the award and a written
 explanation and justification for the awarded amount.
 (c) Not revised.
 105.18.3.45 R-45. Scope of Award. Not revised.
 105.18.3.46 R-46. Award upon Se ttle me nt. Not revised.
 105.18.3.47 R-47. De live ry of Award to Partie s. Not revised.
 105.18.3.48 R-48. Modification of Award. Not revised.
 105.18.3.49 R-49. Re le ase of Docume nts. Not revised.
 105.18.3.50 R-50. Withdrawal of Claims or Counte rclaims.
 105.18.3.51 R-51. Applications to Court and Exclusion of Liability. Paragraph (c) shall be replaced
 with the following:
 (a) Not revised.
 (b) Not revised.
 (c) Parties to these rules shall be deemed to have consented that judgment upon the arbitration award shall
 be entered as provided by 226.096, RSMo (L. 2003, HB 668).
 (d) Not revised.
 (e) Not. revised.
 105.18.3.52 R-52. Administrative Fe e s. Not revised.
 105.18.3.53 R-53. Expe nse s. Not revised.
 105.18.3.54 R-54. Ne utral Arbitrator’s Compe nsation. Not revised.
 105.18.3.55 R-55. De posits. Not revised.
 105.18.3.56 R-56. Re me die s for Nonpayme nt. Not revised.
 105.18.4 Fast Track Proce dure s. T he AAA Construction Industry Arbitration Rules, Fast T rack
 Procedures, October 1, 2009 are amended as follows:
 105.18.4.1 F-1. Fast Track Applicability. Not revised.
 105.18.4.2 F-2. Answe rs and Counte rclaims. Not revised.
 
 61
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 105.18.4.3 F-3. Limitation on Exte nsions. Not revised.
 105.18.4.4 F-4. Change s of Claim or Counte rclaim - Shall be replaced with the following:
 T he contract between the parties provides for a Notice of Controversy or a Claim for adjustment to the
 contract prior to any demand for arbitration. Arbitration demands, issues, nature or amount of relief
 sought, shall not differ or be additional to that in the Notice of Controversy or Claim for contract
 adjustment provided for in the contract. T here may not be a revision of the issues, nature of relief sought
 or increase in relief during or by way of any presentation of evidence during the arbitration. No award may
 be upon different issues or basis of relief or provide relief different in nature or greater in amount than
 contained in the Notice of Controversy or Claim given under the contract and stated in the demand for
 arbitration. No new or different controversy, claim or counterclaim may be submitted to the arbitrator
 except with the consent of both parties and the arbitrator and any consent must be clearly expressed,
 written and signed by the parties. T here will be no amendments by implication.
 105.18.4.5 F-5. Appointme nt and Q ualification of Arbitrator. Shall be replaced with the following:
 The provisions of 7 CSR 10-26 and the proce dure s for re gular track arbitrator se le ction, apply
 to fast track proce dure arbitrations.
 105.18.4.6 F-6. Se rving of Notice for He aring – Shall be replaced with the following:
 (a) Any papers, notices, or process necessary or proper for the initiation or continuation of an arbitration
 under these rules; for any court action in connection therewith, or for the entry of judgment on any award
 made under these rules, may be served on a party by mail addressed to the party or its representative at the
 last known address with return receipt or by personal service, in or outside the state where the arbitration is
 to be held, provided that reasonable opportunity to be heard with regard thereto has been granted to the
 party.
 (b) T he AAA, the arbitrator and the parties may also use overnight delivery with return receipt or
 electronic facsimile transmission (fax) to give the notices required by these rules. Facsimile transmission
 must require an acknowledgment that an entire legible transmission was received. Where all parties and the
 arbitrator agree, notices may be transmitted by electronic mail (email), or other methods of
 communication.
 105.18.4.7 F-7. Pre liminary Te le phone Manage me nt He aring. Not revised.
 105.18.4.8 F-8. Exchange of Information. Not revised.
 105.18.4.9 F-9. Discove ry. Not revised.
 105.18.4.10 F-10. Date , Time , and Place of He aring. Not revised.
 105.18.4.11 F-11. The He aring. Not revised.
 105.18.4.12 F-12. Time Standards. Not revised.
 105.18.4.13 F-13. Time of Award. Not revised.
 105.18.4.14 F-14. Ne utral Arbitrator’s Compe nsation. Not revised.
 105.18.5 Form of Award – Shall be added as follows:
 T he arbitrator shall provide a concise, written breakdown of the basis of the award and a written
 explanation and justification for the awarded amount.
 105.19 Ele ctronic Signature s. T he contractor may utilize a verifiable electronic signature to sign
 contract documents. T he electronic signature shall be verified by a recognized independent third party or
 the Construction and Materials Divisions.
 
 62
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 106
 CO NTRO L O F MATERIAL
 106.1 Source of Supply and Q uality Re quire me nts.
 106.1.1 All material needed in the work shall be furnished by the contractor, unless otherwise stated in the
 contract. T he contractor shall assume full responsibility for ordering material of the required quality and
 quantity. T he contractor shall be responsible for the delivered costs of all material ordered.
 106.1.2 T he material used in the work shall meet all quality requirements of the contract, and shall be
 obtained from supply sources that meet the approval of the engineer. If a uniform product is not being
 furnished from a supply source or if for any reason, the product from any source at any time proves to be
 unsatisfactory, the contractor may be required to furnish approved material from other sources. T he
 engineer may reject the entire output of any source where it is impractical to secure a continuous flow of
 uniformly satisfactory material.
 106.1.3 Any work incorporating material having no prior approval from the engineer shall be performed
 at the contractor ’s risk and may be considered unacceptable and unauthorized and, if so considered, will not
 be paid for. If a change in source will affect the control or appearance of the work, the use of any one kind
 or class of material for a specific project from more than one source will be prohibited, except as approved
 by the engineer. If approved, the engineer will set forth the conditions under which the change may be
 made.
 106.1.4 Material will be subject to inspection or test at any time during production or manufacture or at
 any subsequent time prior to or after incorporation into the work. T he points of inspection will be
 determined by the engineer. Material for sampling will be selected by the engineer. Material provided by the
 source solely as a sample of that material for testing verification will not be permitted. Initial inspection,
 testing and approval or rejection will be made as early as practical. T he engineer may waive any of the
 requirements regarding determination of quality and accept material on certification or visual inspection if,
 in the judgment of the engineer, the quantity involved is too small or the material use is not sufficiently
 important to warrant tests.
 106.1.5 To expedite the inspection and testing of material, the contractor shall submit a list of proposed
 sources of material to the engineer at the pre-construction conference or two weeks prior to beginning
 work, whichever is earlier. T he list shall be in a format acceptable to the engineer. At the option of the
 engineer, material may be approved at the source of supply before delivery is started.
 106.2 Local Mate rial Source s.
 106.2.1 De signate d Source s. T he Commission may acquire the right and make available to the
 contractor the right to take material from sources designated on the plans or described in the contract
 including the right to use designated property if so specified, for plant site, stockpiles and haul roads. In
 general, the quality of material contained in such sources will be considered acceptable, but the contractor
 shall determine the method of operation, equipment and work required to produce a material meeting the
 specifications from the source. Designation of a source for material will not be a representation of the
 quantity of acceptable material obtainable or the method, equipment or work required to obtain material
 from the source. It is not feasible to ascertain from samples the limits for an entire deposit, and variations
 will be considered as usual and are to be expected. T he engineer may order procurement of material from
 any portion of a deposit and may reject portions of the deposit as unacceptable.
 106.2.2 Contractor Furnishe d Source s. If sources of material are not designated on the plans or
 described in the contract, or if the contractor desires to use material from sources other than those
 designated, the contractor shall acquire the necessary rights to take material from the sources and shall pay
 all costs related thereto, including any that may result from an increase in length of haul. All costs of
 exploring, meeting environmental requirements and developing such other sources shall be at the
 contractor ’s expense. Environmental compliance documentation shall follow MoDOT requirements for
 contractor furnished borrow, as described in Sec 203.3, and shall be submitted to the engineer for review and
 approval. T he use of material from other than designated sources will not be permitted until representative
 samples taken by the contractor in the presence of the engineer have been approved and written authority
 
 63
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 is issued for the use thereof. If sources of material or material deposits are provided by the contractor, the
 engineer will test the samples and determine the suitability of the material.
 106.2.3 O pe ration of Source s. Whether sources of material are acquired and made available by the
 Commission or are furnished by the contractor, activities shall be in compliance with all federal and state
 laws and the areas shall be excavated or worked in such a manner to comply with the current MoDOT
 Pollution Prevention Plan and minimize siltation of streams, lakes, ponds and reservoirs.
 106.2.4 Final Condition of Source s. Unless otherwise permitted, pits and quarries shall be excavated
 such that water will not collect and stand therein. Sites from which material has been removed shall be left
 in such a condition to avoid or minimize siltation of streams, lakes, ponds and reservoirs, and shall be left
 in a neat and presentable condition upon completion of the work.
 106.3 Sample s, Te sts and Cite d Spe cifications. Samples for tests will be taken and shipped to the
 laboratory in accordance with MoDOT ’s Engineering Policy Guide (EPG) 106.3.1. T here shall be no
 direct charge to the Commission for material taken as samples, either for field tests or for laboratory tests.
 If a specification of a recognized national standard agency (AASHT O, AST M, AWS, AWWA, etc.) is
 designated, the material shall meet either the designated specification if a date is indicated or the latest
 revision thereof in effect at the time of bid opening. Tests of samples of material will be conducted by the
 engineer in accordance with the methods specified in the contract or in accordance with the latest methods
 in effect at the time of bid opening, as prescribed by the national standard agency. Such national standard
 specifications and methods of tests will include those designated as tentative, interim or amended and
 officially approved and published by the sponsoring agency. If appropriate methods have not been so
 prescribed, tests shall be performed in a manner determined by the engineer.
 106.4 Plant Inspe ction. T he engineer may inspect material at the source. If plant inspection is
 undertaken the following conditions shall be met.
 106.4.1 T he engineer shall have the cooperation and assistance of the contractor and the producer of the
 material.
 106.4.2 T he engineer shall be permitted unlimited access to all parts of the plant as required for adequate
 inspection of the plant equipment and for selection of samples. Facilities shall be furnished for the
 procurement of samples, performance of the tests and for the protection of testing equipment and supplies
 when tests are conducted at the source of production.
 106.4.3 If bituminous shipments are considered by the engineer to justify testing at the source, laboratory
 facilities and testing equipment meeting requirements of the prescribed methods shall be provided by the
 supplier. T he space and equipment shall be adequate for the orderly and proper testing of material without
 interference to or by the refinery personnel.
 106.4.4 When requested, a Type 1 field laboratory shall be furnished at the aggregate source in accordance
 with Sec 601.
 106.4.5 T he Commission will refuse to provide plant inspection at sources where adequate safety measures
 are not provided and maintained.
 106.4.6 T he Commission reserves the right to inspect plant equipment and to retest all material prior to or
 after incorporation into the work and to reject all material which, when retested, do not meet the
 requirements of the specifications.
 106.5 Storage of Mate rial. T he contractor shall be responsible for proper storage and handling of all
 material to ensure preservation of required quality and shall be arranged such as to facilitate inspection.
 106.6 Handling Mate rial. All material shall be handled in such a manner as to preserve the material’s
 quality and fitness for the work. Aggregate shall be transported from the storage site to the work in tight
 vehicles constructed to prevent loss or segregation of material after loading and measuring.
 106.7 Unacce ptable Mate rial. All material not in accordance with the specifications, when initially
 
 64
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 inspected and tested, will be considered defective, and all such material, whether in place or not, will be
 rejected and unless remedied, shall be removed from the site of the work. Any approved material that, in
 the judgment of the engineer, is no longer specification compliant will be rejected. Defective material,
 including any material furnished by the Commission that has been damaged by the contractor after delivery,
 shall be replaced or reconditioned by the contractor at the contractor ’s expense. Rejected material that has
 been reconditioned or corrected such that the material satisfactorily meets the specifications shall not be
 used without the engineer ’s written approval.
 106.8 Mate rial Furnishe d by the Commission. If any material is to be furnished by the Commission,
 special provisions designating such material will be included in the contract documents. T he cost of
 handling and placing such material after delivery to the contractor will be considered as part of the contract
 price for that material or work. T he contractor shall be responsible for all material upon receipt, and
 deductions will be made from any monies due to the contractor to make good any shortages and
 deficiencies, from any cause whatsoever, for any damage that may occur after such delivery and for any
 demurrage charges.
 106.9 Buy Ame rica Re quire me nt. On all federal-aid projects, the contractor ’s attention is directed to
 T itle 23, CFR, titled Buy America Requirements. Where steel or iron products are to be permanently
 incorporated into the contract work, steel and iron material shall be manufactured in the USA except for
 “ minor usage” as described herein. Furthermore, any coating process of the steel or iron shall be performed
 in the USA. T he use of pig iron and processed, pelletized and reduced iron ore manufactured outside of the
 USA will be permitted in the domestic manufacturing process for steel or iron material.
 106.9.1 Any sources other than the USA as defined will be considered foreign. T he required domestic
 manufacturing process shall include formation of ingots and any subsequent process. Coatings shall include
 any surface finish that protects or adds value to the product.
 106.9.2 “ Minor usage” of foreign steel, iron or coating processes will be permitted, provided the cost of
 such products does not exceed 1/10 of one percent of the total contract cost or $2,500.00, whichever is
 greater. If foreign steel, iron or coating processes are used, invoices to document the cost of the foreign
 portion, as delivered to the project, shall be provided and the engineer ’s written approval obtained prior to
 placing the material in any work.
 106.9.3 For each domestic permanent steel or iron item, the contractor shall furnish to the engineer for
 approval, a manufacturer ’s certification identifying the item and certifying that the manufacturing
 processes for the product occurred in the USA, including the coating process if applicable. For foreign
 items, a statement of the specific foreign manufacturing location(s) shall be provided.
 106.9.4 Upon completion of the project, the contractor shall certify to the engineer that all steel, iron and
 coating processes for steel or iron incorporated into the contract work were in accordance with this
 specification, except as noted. All exceptions and associated costs shall be listed in the same document.
 106.9.5 When permitted in the contract, alternate bids may be submitted for foreign steel and iron
 products. T he award of the contract when alternate bids are permitted will be based on the lowest total bid
 of the contract based on furnishing domestic steel or iron products or 125 percent of the lowest total bid
 based on furnishing foreign steel or iron products. If foreign steel or iron products are awarded the contract,
 domestic steel or iron products may be used; however, payment will be at the contract unit price for foreign
 steel or iron products.
 106.10 Missouri Dome stic Products Re quire me nt. For state funded projects, as noted on the cover of
 the contract, material shall be in accordance with Sec 102.18.5.
 106.11 Units.
 106.11.1 Equipme nt. Equipment such as scales, concrete and asphalt plants, and placement equipment
 shall be scaled in or measured in English units. Equipment requiring calibration will be calibrated using the
 equipment’s “ as manufactured” units.
 106.11.2 Mate rial. All material shall be furnished quantified in the specified units of measure for
 
 65
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 dimensions and other physical aspects. Any cost of re-design due to use of material with units of measure
 other than as specified by the contract shall be at the contractor ’s expense.
 106.11.3 Proje ct Docume ntation. All project tickets, paperwork for measurement, certifications or
 reporting of material shall be in English units.
 106.12 Pre -Acce ptance List of Mate rial and Source s.
 106.12.1 Pre -Acce ptance List De scription. A PAL will indicate material products or sources that have
 complied with all pre-approval requirements for a specific material and indicates a source has committed to
 continued compliance with applicable contract requirements.
 106.12.1.1 Pre -Acce ptance List Mate rial. For material acceptance based on PAL approval, Sec 106.12
 will govern over all other applicable specifications. All material shall be in full compliance with Sec 106
 and all other applicable contract documents, and shall be certified as such by the source of the material.
 Random sampling of the material will be conducted by the engineer to verify that the material is in
 compliance with the applicable specifications. Material on a PAL may be used on a project by the
 contractor prior to the engineer receiving random sample test results.
 106.12.1.2 Unavailable PAL Mate rial. If there are no PAL materials or suppliers for a specific PAL
 listing, or during the transition of a material to the PAL, the material may be accepted following sampling,
 testing and documentation review of each shipment in accordance with the specifications for that material.
 106.12.2 De finition of Te rms. T he following definitions will apply only to Sec 106.12 and subsections:
 (a) Source . T he manufacturer, supplier, fabricator, source or any other entity that is listed on a
 PAL as the provider of that specific material or product.
 (b)Inte rme diate Age nt. A supplier of a PAL material, but who is not listed as the source of that
 specific material or product on the PAL.
 106.12.3 Application for Place me nt on the PAL. A source may propose a material for PAL inclusion by
 submitting the information required in these specifications and other applicable contract documents, along
 with any required samples to Construction and Materials. Consideration of a material for PAL inclusion will
 be based on compliance with this specification or other applicable contract documents, the material’s
 history and any other applicable criteria. Submittal of a request for PAL inclusion will not guarantee
 approval. T he application shall include the following in a written document with attachments as needed:
 (a) A completed, original Product Listing/New Product Evaluation Request Form (M-PAL Form).
 (b) A completed, original PAL Program Inclusion Certification and Guarantee Statement Form (MST MNT Form).
 (c) A complete description of the material and how the material may be identified.
 (d) A list of all MoDOT specifications applicable to the material.
 (e) All documentation required by applicable MoDOT specifications or any other contract
 document.
 106.12.4 Mate rial Te rm on a PAL. Upon approval, the material will remain on a PAL for three years,
 provided the material’s name, formulation and properties have not changed, the specification requirements
 have not changed, or the material or source has not been removed from the PAL for non-compliance
 reasons.
 106.12.4.1 Mate rial Re application on a PAL. During the last 12 months of a material’s term on a PAL,
 the source shall reapply for placement on the PAL in accordance with Sec 106.12.3. No term expiration
 notification will be sent to the source, and the source shall be responsible for initiating reapplication.
 
 66
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 106.12.4.2 Mate rial Update s. Any name, source, or physical or chemical property changes to the
 material shall be submitted in writing and approved by Construction and Materials prior to use of the
 revised material. All physical or chemical changes to a material required to meet new or updated
 specifications shall be accompanied by identifiable name or identification changes, including revisions of
 any pertinent product information and certifications affected by the change. T his information shall be
 provided in addition to the documentation required under Sec 106.12.3. When an update is properly
 submitted and approved, the update will be considered the same as a PAL reapplication, and the expiration
 date will be extended for three years from the date the changes were approved.
 106.12.5 Mate rial Re moval from a PAL. Any material proposed for use after removal from a PAL,
 including use on existing contracts, will not be accepted by PAL methods. Unless stated otherwise, material
 removed from a PAL for reasons other than failure to re-apply will not be considered for reinstatement
 until one year after the date of removal. A material may be removed from a PAL for any of the following
 reasons.
 106.12.5.1 Material and sources may be removed immediately from a PAL based on the discretion of
 Construction and Materials, for reasons including, but not limited to, failure of material to meet
 specifications, falsification of documentation, not providing required documentation or notification, lack
 of response to engineers’ inquiries by the material’s approved source, unsatisfactory performance in the
 field or other reasons indicating lack of consistent material quality or suitability.
 106.12.5.2 Material that fails more than one random sample test in any 12-month period, for whatever
 reason, including improper manufacture, improper sampling, or improper supplier or contractor handling,
 will be subject to removal immediately from the PAL without recourse.
 106.12.5.3 If a reapplication in accordance with Sec 106.12.4.1, as determined by postmark, is not
 received prior to the material’s termination date, the material will automatically be removed from the PAL
 at the end of the material’s term. For reinstatement of these materials to a PAL, the source shall submit an
 application in accordance with Sec 106.12.3.
 106.12.5.4 Material that has not been documented as being used on MoDOT projects in any three
 consecutive years will be removed from a PAL. Once removed, a material will not be reinstated until
 substantial evidence of recent satisfactory use is provided and specific intended use on MoDOT work is
 established. No other time suspension will apply for considering reinstatement of these requests.
 106.12.5.5 Any material or source removed from a PAL twice for any reason in any two-year period will
 be subject to permanent removal, with a minimum suspension of three years.
 106.12.5.6 If a source has more than two materials removed from a PAL in any three-year period, all
 material from that source may be subject to removal from all PALs.
 106.12.6 Re instate me nt of a Mate rial on a PAL. Consideration for reinstatement of a material once
 removed from a PAL will be no sooner than specified under Sec 106.12.5, will require a written document
 from the source stating the reasons for removal of the material from a PAL, the action taken to correct
 those deficiencies, written concurrence from Construction and Materials that the cause has been suitably
 addressed, followed by an application in accordance with Sec 106.12.3 for PAL approval.
 106.12.7 Source Ce rtification and Guarante e . Material to be accepted by the engineer under PAL
 approval shall include a source’s certification, which may include certified test results, and a guarantee in
 accordance with the applicable material specification in the contract documents. T he written
 documentation shall also certify that the material provided is similar in all aspects to the material
 originally approved and placed on the PAL, and shall indicate the specific date of approval. An
 intermediate agent shall furnish a manufacturer and supplier ’s certification identifying the material, and
 stating that the material meets all contract document requirements for the specified intended use. Required
 documentation shall be retained by the manufacturer and each intermediate agent for a period of two years
 from the date of shipment of the material. T he documentation shall be traceable to the destination or
 destination project and shall be immediately available to the engineer when requested.
 106.12.8 Notification of PAL Mate rial De live ry. Prior to delivery to the job site, the source,
 
 67
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 intermediate agent, shipper or contractor ’s representative shall notify Construction and Materials by mail,
 fax or electronically of the impending shipment of PAL material. T he source shall ensure that any
 intermediate agent of the source’s approved PAL material carries out the required notification. T his
 notification shall include, at minimum, the following:
 (a) T he specific contract number.
 (b) Line number for which the material will be used.
 (c) Type and quantity of material.
 (d) Date of expected delivery to the job site.
 (e) Brand and manufacturer name of the material.
 106.12.8.1 All of the above information shall have been received by Construction and Materials five
 working days prior to delivery of the material to the job site. Additional material may be considered part of
 the original shipment when the ordered quantity was underestimated or material was lost or damaged.
 Construction and Materials shall be notified prior to the shipment of additional material. No material shall
 be used on a project until Construction and Materials approves such use.
 106.12.8.2 Upon approval, the entity providing the notification of material delivery will be informed that
 the material was approved and an identification number for that specific material will be provided. T his
 identification number shall be written on an orange tag or approved alternate label and shall be attached to
 the material prior to presentation for use at the job site. Requests for alternate PAL labeling shall be
 submitted to Construction and Materials for approval. Material without the identification number attached
 will not be permitted for use on a project.
 106.12.9 Sampling of Mate rial. T he source for a material shall ensure all users are adequately informed
 and monitored to ensure proper material sampling and usage. T he source shall provide instructions for
 proper sampling of the material, and sampling shall be performed under the observation of the engineer.
 T he source shall be solely responsible for proper sampling, unless stated otherwise by Construction and
 Materials.
 106.12.9.1 Additional material may be requested by the engineer at the time of shipment to allow random
 sampling of the material at the project site without creating a material shortage.
 106.12.9.2 Sample size and sampling frequency will be at the discretion of the engineer.
 106.12.10 Inte rme diate Age nt Re sponsibilitie s.
 106.12.10.1 Any intermediate agent supplying PAL material to a supplier or contractor shall be responsible
 for proper handling, storage, sampling (if required to be performed by the agent) and delivery in accordance
 with applicable specifications and the source’s recommendations, including notification of PAL material in
 accordance with Sec 106.12.8. If the intermediate agent is negligent in performing any of these specified
 tasks, the intermediate agent may be immediately denied as an intermediate agent for the PAL material
 without recourse and may be held responsible for material failure in accordance with Sec 106.12.13. If an
 intermediate agent is disapproved by Construction and Materials, that agent will not be reconsidered as an
 intermediate agent of any PAL material until one year after the date of removal as an intermediate agent
 of PAL material. Reinstatement will require a written document from the intermediate agent stating the
 reasons for removal as an intermediate agent for PAL material, the action taken to correct those
 deficiencies, and written concurrence from Construction and Materials that the problem has been suitably
 addressed and that the agent is approved as an intermediate agent of PAL material.
 106.12.10.2 An intermediate agent will be allowed to request PAL inclusion for a product manufactured by
 a separate company that does not have substantial business interest in applying for PAL or for a product
 that is only used in small quantities. If PAL inclusion is granted, the intermediate agent shall be responsible
 for any material provided that does not meet the applicable specifications. T he intermediate agent shall
 assume all penalties for non-compliant material, including removal from a PAL in accordance with Sec
 
 68
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 106.12.5.
 106.12.11 Contractor PAL Use . T he source for PAL material shall be listed on the PAL at the time the
 material is incorporated into the project. T he contractor bears the risk that material on the PAL at the
 time of bidding is no longer on the PAL at the time of incorporation. T he contractor may obtain a list of
 PAL material by contacting Construction and Materials or from MoDOT ’s website. Use of PAL material
 shall not relieve the contractor or supplier of any responsibility to provide an inspected and approved
 material meeting all requirements of the contract documents.
 106.12.12 Te sting of Mate rial. Test results from any sample will be considered representative of the
 material, and a final determination of specification compliance will be made on the basis of that sample.
 106.12.13 Re sponsibility for Mate rial Failure . When material has been incorporated into the project
 and fails any specified tests, Sec 106.7 will apply. T he use of this material on all other projects shall be
 suspended until notified otherwise by Construction and Materials.
 106.13 Q uality Control/Q uality Assurance . For material or work governed by QC/QA specifications,
 quality control performed by the contractor will determine acceptance of the material when test results are
 confirmed by the engineer ’s sampling, testing and assessment. When the engineer ’s sampling, testing or
 assessment do not support the contractor ’s results, work shall be suspended and any material in place will be
 subject to rejection following a review by the engineer. Final acceptance of the material, work or process
 will be based on the engineer ’s sampling, testing and assessment.
 106.13.1 Acce ss to Contractor Q C Te sting. T he engineer shall be allowed to witness contractor QC
 testing at any time.
 106.14 Proprie tary Ite ms. In the event a proprietary item included in a contract becomes unavailable
 during the term of the contract, the contractor shall promptly provide documentation to the engineer
 substantiating that the proprietary item is unavailable. Price or credit terms demanded of the contractor by
 the supplier will not constitute sufficient reason to substitute for the specified proprietary item. As part of
 the documentation, the contractor shall propose an alternative source or item that meets the performance
 requirements of the original proprietary item included in the contract. Any adjustment in the contract unit
 price shall be made in accordance with Sec 109.4. If an acceptable alternative item cannot be located, the
 proprietary item and any associated work may be underrun from the contract.
 
 69
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 107
 LEGAL RELATIO NS AND RESPO NSIBILITY
 TO THE PUBLIC
 107.1 Laws to be O bse rve d. T he contractor shall know, observe and comply with all federal and state
 laws, local laws, codes, ordinances, orders, decrees and regulations existing at the time of or enacted
 subsequent to the execution of the contract that in any manner affect the prosecution of the work, except
 as specified in the contract or as directed by the engineer. T he Contractor shall also ensure that any
 subcontractor know, observe and comply with all federal and state laws, local laws, codes, ordinances,
 orders, decrees and regulations as outlined above. T he contractor and surety shall indemnify and save
 harmless the State, the Commission, the Commission’s agents, employees and assigns from any claim or
 liability arising from or based on the violation of any such law, code, ordinance, regulation, order or decree,
 except any local regulations, decrees, orders, codes or ordinances that the contract or the engineer has
 specifically directed that the contractor need not obey.
 107.1.1 Contract and Le gal Inconsiste ncy. T he engineer shall be notified immediately in writing if any
 discrepancy or inconsistency is discovered between the contract and any law, ordinance, regulation, order or
 decree.
 107.1.2 Local Building and Zoning Code s or O rdinance s. T he projects of the Commission are not
 typically subject to local building or zoning codes or ordinances. T herefore, the contractor usually need not
 obtain a local building or zoning permit or variance for work done exclusively as the Commission's
 contractor on the Commission's project and the Commission's right of way. Other local codes or ordinances
 may not apply to the Commission, and thus to the contractor as well. If any questions arise concerning
 whether the contractor shall comply with a local code, ordinance, decree or order of any type, the
 contractor shall advise the engineer of the problem immediately, for resolution by the engineer. T his
 provision will not exempt the contractor from the requirement of thoroughly researching and determining,
 before submitting a bid on the contract and from complying with, all federal, state or local laws,
 regulations, codes, ordinances, decrees or orders that may apply to the contract work. T he Commission will
 not be responsible for the contractor's failure to be informed before bidding as to the federal, state and local
 laws, regulations, codes, ordinances, decrees or orders that may govern the contract work, or for the
 contractor's failure to determine before bidding which of these do not govern the contract work.
 107.1.3 Authe ntication of Ce rtain Docume nts. If plans, plats, detailed drawings or specifications for
 falsework, cofferdams or any other work are required to be submitted to the engineer, the documents shall
 be signed, sealed and stamped in accordance with the laws relating to the practice of architecture and
 professional engineering in the State of Missouri (Chapter 327, RSMo).
 107.2 Pe rmits, Lice nse s and Taxe s. Except as otherwise provided in the contract, the contractor shall
 procure all permits and licenses, shall pay all charges, fees and taxes, and shall give all notices necessary and
 incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the work. No direct payment will be made for the cost of
 complying with this requirement.
 107.3 Pate nte d or Copyrighte d De vice s, Mate rial and Proce sse s. If the contractor is required or
 desires to use any design, device, material or process covered by letters, patent, copyright, service or
 trademark, the contractor shall arrange and provide for such use by suitable agreement with the patentee or
 owner, and a copy of the agreement may be required by the Commission. T he contractor and surety shall
 indemnify and save harmless the State, the Commission, the Commission’s agents, employees and assigns
 from any suits, claims or damages arising from the infringement upon or use of any patented, copyrighted
 or registered design, device, material, process or mark.
 107.4 Safe ty and Sanitary Provisions. T he contractor shall at all times take necessary precautions to
 protect the life and health of all persons employed on the project or, who at the direction of the
 contractor are present on the right of way. T he contractor shall be familiar with the latest accepted
 accident prevention methods and shall provide necessary safety devices and safeguards accordingly. T he
 Commission will refuse to provide inspection services at plants or work sites where adequate safety
 measures are not provided and maintained.
 107.4.1 Appare l. All workers within highway right of way shall wear approved ANSI/ISEA 107
 
 70
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Performance Class 2 or 3 safety apparel and more specifically as follows:
 107.4.1.1 During daytime activities, flaggers shall wear a high visibility hard hat, safety glasses, a
 Performance Class 3 top OR a Performance Class 2 top, and safety footwear. Hard hats other than high
 visibility orange or green shall be covered with a high visibility covering.
 107.4.1.2 During daytime activities, workers shall wear a hard hat, safety glasses, a Performance Class 3
 top OR a Performance Class 2 top, and safety footwear.
 107.4.1.3 During nighttime activities, flaggers shall wear a high visibility/reflective hard hat, safety glasses,
 a Performance Class 3 top AND Class E bottoms, OR Performance Class 2 top AND Class E bottoms, and
 safety footwear. Hard hats shall be reflective or covered with a high visibility covering.
 107.4.1.4 During nighttime activities, workers shall wear a hard hat, safety glasses, a Performance Class 3
 top OR Performance Class 2 top AND Class E bottoms, and safety footwear.
 107.4.2 T he contractor shall provide and maintain in a neat and sanitary condition, such accommodations
 for the use of employees as may be necessary to comply with the requirements and regulations of any
 agency having jurisdiction over public health and sanitation. T he contractor shall permit no public or
 private nuisance.
 107.4.3 All sanitary facilities and safety devices shall be furnished free to employees and no direct payment
 will be made for such facilities or devices.
 107.5 Public Conve nie nce and Safe ty. T he contractor shall conduct the work in a manner that will
 ensure, as far as practical, the least obstruction to traffic and shall provide for the convenience and safety
 of the general public and residents along and adjacent to the highway in an adequate and satisfactory
 manner.
 107.5.1 O bstructions Prohibite d. Fire hydrants on and adjacent to the highway shall be kept accessible
 to fire fighting apparatus at all times, and no obstruction shall be placed within 15 feet of any such hydrant.
 Footways, gutters, sewers, outlets, inlets and portions of highways adjoining the work under construction
 shall not be obstructed. Pavements over which hauling is performed shall be kept clean of spilled or
 tracked-on material at all times when in use by traffic.
 107.5.2 O bje cts Pote ntially Affe cting Navigable Airspace . T he contractor shall comply with all
 federal regulations pertaining to constructing, erecting or installing any object, temporary or permanent,
 which could potentially affect navigable airspace.
 107.5.3 Mate rial and Equipme nt. During construction hours, equipment, material and vehicles utilized in
 construction of the project will only be permitted on shoulders, medians or pavements where the locations
 are closed to traffic, properly signed and occupied by ongoing construction operations, unless otherwise
 approved by the engineer. Except in cases of emergency, construction equipment, material and vehicles will
 not be permitted on pavements or shoulders being utilized by traffic. If the contract specifies time periods
 the contractor will not be permitted to perform work, construction equipment or vehicles shall not enter
 or leave the construction area via the pavements handling traffic nor be operated on the pavements
 handling traffic within the construction area during the restricted time periods. During non-construction
 hours, construction equipment, material and vehicles will not be permitted within 30 feet of the edge of the
 pavement or shoulders carrying traffic unless the equipment, material and vehicles are located in a properly
 protected area, an off-site storage area or as otherwise directed by the engineer.
 107.6 Bridge s ove r Navigable Wate rs. All work on navigable waters shall be conducted such that free
 navigation of the waterways will not be interfered with and that existing navigable depths will not be
 impaired except as allowed by permit issued by the USCG or the USACE.
 107.7 Use of Explosive s. All blasting operations shall be conducted under the direct supervision of a
 licensed blaster as required by the Missouri Blasting Safety Act. When explosives are used in the
 prosecution of the work, the contractor shall use the utmost care to prevent bodily injury and property
 damage. T he contractor shall be responsible for damage resulting from the use of explosives. T he engineer
 
 71
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 will have the authority to suspend any unsafe blasting operation. T he contractor shall be familiar and
 comply with the rules and regulations of any city, county, state or federal agency or any other agency that
 may have jurisdiction in the handling, loading, transporting, storage and use of explosives. All places used
 for explosives storage shall be marked clearly "DANGERO US EXPLO SIVES".
 107.7.1 Before beginning work, the contractor shall furnish the engineer letters of approval for the
 proposed operation from the appropriate regulating agencies. T he contractor shall notify in writing the
 appropriate fire protection jurisdiction of the intent to store, transport or use explosives and shall provide
 proof of notice to the engineer. T he contractor shall provide the engineer with copies of all permits,
 blasting logs and seismic monitoring data.
 107.7.2 T he contractor shall notify in advance each property owner, tenant and public utility company
 having structures or facilities close to the work of any intention to use explosives.
 107.7.3 Removal of any item or material of any nature by blasting shall be done in such a manner and at
 such time as to avoid damage affecting the integrity of the design and to avoid damage to any new or
 existing structure, whether on Commission right of way or private property, included in or adjacent to the
 work. Unless the contract documents or the engineer restricts such operation, the contractor shall be
 responsible for determining a method of operation to ensure the desired results and the integrity of the
 completed work.
 107.7.4 T he contractor and surety shall indemnify and save harmless the State, the Commission, the
 Commission’s agents, employees and assigns from any claim related to the possession, transportation,
 storage or use of explosives.
 107.8 Preservation of Monuments and Artifacts.
 107.8.1 Monume nts. T he contractor shall not disturb or damage any land monument or property
 landmark unless authorized by the engineer.
 107.8.2 Human and Archae ological Re mains. T he contractor shall report to the engineer the
 discovery of human remains, artifacts, fossils and other items of historical, archaeological or geological
 significance discovered within the right of way during construction. Such items will remain in the
 Commission's custody and shall not be removed from the site unless directed by the engineer. T he
 preservation and handling of such items shall be in accordance with Sec 203.4.8.
 107.9 Fore st and Park Prote ction. Environmental and sanitary laws and regulations regarding the
 performance of work within or adjacent to state or national forests or parks shall be obeyed. T he
 contractor shall keep the project site in an orderly condition, dispose of all refuse, obtain permits for the
 construction and maintenance of all construction camps, stores, warehouses, residences, latrines, cesspools,
 septic tanks and other structures in accordance with the regulations and instructions issued by the forest or
 park supervisor. T he contractor shall require employees and subcontractors, independently, and at the
 request of forest officials, to prevent and suppress forest fires, and to notify a forest official of the location
 and extent of any fire.
 107.10 Environme ntal Prote ction. T he contractor shall comply with all federal, state and local laws and
 regulations controlling pollution of the environment. Pollution of streams, lakes, ponds and reservoirs with
 fuels, oils, bitumens, chemicals or other harmful material and pollution of the atmosphere from particulate
 and gaseous matter shall be avoided.
 107.10.1 Fording of streams and fill for temporary work not specified on design plans will not be permitted
 unless the plan for such operation is authorized by the Corps of Engineers, meets the approval of the
 engineer, complies with the current MoDOT Pollution Plan and results in minimum siltation to the stream.
 Temporary stream crossings shall not be constructed unless specifically designated as a condition of the
 Corps of Engineers Section 404 permit or a permit is obtained, and the temporary stream crossing is in
 accordance with Sec 806.
 107.10.2 When work areas or pits are located in or adjacent to streams, the areas shall be separated from
 the main stream by a dike or barrier to keep sediment from entering the stream. Care shall be taken during
 
 72
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 the construction and removal of such barriers to minimize siltation of the stream.
 107.10.3 Disposal of Portland cement concrete residue and wash water, water from aggregate washing or
 other operations resulting in sediment shall be treated by filtration, settling basins or other means sufficient
 to reduce the sediment concentration to applicable limits established by MDNR.
 107.11 Re sponsibility for Claims for Damage or Injury. T he contractor and insurance company shall
 indemnify and save harmless the State, the Commission, the Commission’s agents, employees and assigns
 from all claims or suits made or brought for bodily injury, death or property damage, arising from
 performance of the work to the extent of:
 (a) T he negligent acts or omissions of the contractor, subcontractors, suppliers or their respective
 officers, agents or employees.
 (b) T he creation or maintenance of a dangerous condition of or on the Commission's property or
 right of way, which condition occurred due to the acts or omissions of the contractor,
 subcontractors, suppliers or their respective officers, agents or employees or for which the
 contractor had knowledge of or could have had knowledge of the condition in time to warn of or
 repair said condition.
 (c) T he failure of the contractor, subcontractors, suppliers or their respective officers, agents or
 employees, to perform the work in accordance with the plans and specifications.
 107.11.1 T he contractor will not be required to defend, indemnify or hold harmless any other person,
 including the State, the Commission, or the Commission’s agents, employees or assigns for any acts,
 omissions or negligence of other persons.
 107.11.2 Neither the Commission nor the contractor, by execution of a contract, shall intend to or create
 a new or enlarge an existing cause of action in any third party. T his provision shall not be interpreted to
 create any new liability that does not exist under the statutory limited waiver of sovereign immunity, or to
 waive or extinguish any defense that either party to this contract or their respective agents and employees
 may have to an action or suit by a third party.
 107.12 Contractor's Re sponsibility for Work. From the earlier of the date of commencement of the
 work or the effective date of the notice to proceed, and until any work is accepted by the engineer, the
 work shall be in the custody and under the charge and care of the contractor. Issuance of a payment
 estimate on any part of the work done will not be considered as final acceptance of any work completed up
 to that time.
 107.12.1 Damages to any portion of the work before the work is completed and accepted, caused by the
 action of the elements or from any other reason, shall be repaired or replaced at the contractor's expense.
 T he contractor, at the contractor ’s option, may insure against any such damages. T he Commission may, in
 its discretion, make such a payment, determined in accordance with Sec 109.4, for damage to the work due
 to unforeseeable causes beyond the control of, and without fault or negligence on the part of the
 contractor, unless the contractor has been reimbursed for such damages by the contractor ’s insurer. Prior to
 reimbursement, the contractor shall furnish documentary evidence of all efforts to recover such repair
 costs.
 107.12.2 T he contractor shall immediately give written notice to the engineer of any pedestrian or
 vehicular accident. T he contractor may be directed by the engineer to repair permanent Commission
 facilities that have been damaged by events that are beyond the control of the contractor. Reimbursement
 will be provided by the Commission, determined in accordance with Sec 109.4, for the actual direct cost of
 labor, equipment and material, exclusive of overhead, indirect or consequential costs of profit. T he
 Commission may elect to make such repairs in lieu of the contractor.
 107.13 Insurance Re quire me nts. T he contractor shall procure and maintain at the contractor ’s
 expense until acceptance of the project by the engineer, insurance for all damages and losses imposed by
 law and assumed under the contract, of the kinds and in the amounts specified in Secs 107.13.1 through
 107.13.4. Before the contractor begins the work, the contractor shall require the insurance company or
 
 73
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 companies to furnish to the engineer evidence of such insurance showing compliance with these
 specifications. All insurance required in Sec 107.13 shall be occurrence policies in a form acceptable to the
 engineer, and shall remain in force until all work required to be performed under the terms of the contract is
 satisfactorily completed as evidenced by formal acceptance by the engineer. Each policy or policy’s
 declaration pages shall provide that the policy shall not be materially changed or canceled until the
 engineer has been given at least 30 days advance notice in writing. If any policy is canceled before the
 contract work is complete, a satisfactory replacement policy shall be in force, with notice and evidence of
 insurance submitted to the engineer, prior to the effective date of cancellation of the former policy. All
 evidence of insurance and notices shall be submitted to: Construction and Materials, MoDOT, 105 W.
 Capitol Avenue, P.O. Box 270, Jefferson City, Missouri 65102-0270. Upon request, the contractor shall
 promptly furnish the engineer with a complete copy of the policy. Failure to furnish evidence of proper
 insurance, or complete insurance policies when requested, will result in the temporary suspension of work as
 provided in Sec 108, and may result in other claims or actions for breach of contract or otherwise, as may
 be recognized at law or in equity.
 107.13.1 Worke rs' Compe nsation Insurance . T he contractor shall furnish evidence to the engineer
 that, with respect to the operations the contractor performs, the contractor carries workers' compensation
 insurance, or is qualified by the Missouri Division of Workers’ Compensation as self-insured, and carries
 insurance for employer ’s liability sufficient to comply with all obligations under state laws relating to
 workers' compensation and employer ’s liability. T he contractor shall require each subcontractor on the
 project to furnish the same evidence to the engineer. T his evidence shall be furnished to and approved by
 the engineer prior to the time the contractor or subcontractor commences work on the site of the project.
 107.13.2 Contractor's Liability Insurance with Additional Insure d Partie s.
 107.13.2.1 Comme rcial Liability Insurance . T he contractor shall carry commercial general liability
 insurance and commercial automobile liability insurance from a company authorized to issue insurance in
 Missouri. Each such policy shall name the Commission, and the Missouri Department of T ransportation
 and its employees, as additional named insureds, in amounts sufficient to cover the sovereign immunity
 limits for Missouri public entities as calculated by the Missouri Department of Insurance, Financial
 Institutions and Professional Registration, and published annually in the Missouri Register pursuant to
 Section 537.610, RSMo. Each policy shall be endorsed to cover liability arising from blasting if applicable,
 other inherently dangerous activities, and underground property damage. Each policy shall be endorsed to
 include broad form general liability, contractual liability and completed operations coverage.
 107.13.2.2 Annual Update s. T he contractor shall cause the insurer to update the contractor's liability
 insurance coverage minimums annually to correspond to the statutory limits as adjusted on an annual basis
 effective January 1st, and published in the Missouri Register as provided for in section 537.610 RSMo. If a
 statutory limit of liability for a type of liability specified in this section is repealed or does not exist, the
 Commission shall set reasonable limits for that insurance coverage which shall be subject to adjustment
 periodically, in a written notice from the Commission to the Contractor.
 107.13.2.3 Subcontractor's Cove rage . If any part of the contract is subcontracted, each subcontractor,
 or the contractor on behalf of that subcontractor, shall obtain the same commercial general liability
 insurance and commercial automobile liability insurance coverage. T he commercial general liability
 insurance shall name the same entities specified in Sec 107.13.2.3 as additional insureds, and shall have the
 same separation of insureds conditions.
 107.13.3 Navigable Wate rs Insurance Prote ction.
 107.13.3.1 De scription. Any contractor performing contract work on or adjacent to the Missouri and
 Mississippi rivers, and any other waters classified as "navigable waters of the United States" by the USACE,
 shall obtain insurance coverage in accordance with these specifications. T he contractor may also obtain
 this insurance coverage for any subcontractor who will perform contract work under that contract.
 Employees of contractors or subcontractors that perform marine construction work on or near a waterway
 that is a navigable water of the United States may be subject to maritime law liability for injuries to
 employees working from vessels in waterways or working from nearby facilities in relation to construction
 on or over such waterways. Contractors and subcontractors for such work on these navigable waters of the
 United States shall purchase coverages as required in
 
 74
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Secs 107.13.3.2.1 and 107.13.3.2.2.
 107.13.3.2 Insurance Re quire me nts. Jones Act Insurance, Longshore and Harbor Workers'
 Compensation Act Insurance, and Maritime Law Liability Insurance will apply as provided in Secs
 107.13.3.2.1 and 107.13.3.2.2.
 107.13.3.2.1 Jone s Act Insurance . Insurance shall be purchased by any contractor or subcontractor
 performing work on or near the Missouri or Mississippi Rivers, or any other navigable waters of the United
 States, for exposures under the Jones Act, 46 USC, with a minimum limit of $2,000,000 per occurrence and
 in the aggregate, or as may be specified by law, whichever amount is higher. T he contractor or
 subcontractor may obtain insurance covering employees under the Jones Act for any other project for
 which the contractor ’s insurer deems there is exposure. Insurance under this section covers any employee
 deemed by the courts as masters or members of crews of vessels who are entitled to seek recovery as
 “ seamen” for injury or death under the Jones Act, or general maritime law. Such coverage may be provided
 through appropriate endorsements to the contractor ’s or subcontractor ’s workers’ compensation policy.
 107.13.3.2.2 US Longshore and Harbor Worke rs’ Compe nsation Act Insurance . Insurance shall be
 purchased by any contractor or subcontractor performing work on or near the Missouri or Mississippi
 Rivers, or any other navigable waters of the United States, for exposures under the US Longshore and
 Harbor Workers’ Compensation Act, USC, T itle 33, with a minimum limit of $2,000,000 per occurrence,
 and in the aggregate, or as may be specified by law, whichever amount is higher. T he contractor or
 subcontractor may obtain insurance covering employees under the US Longshore and Harbor Worker ’s Act
 as defined in this section for any other project for which the contractor ’s insurer deems there is exposure.
 Insurance under this section covers any employees who do not qualify as masters or members of a crew of a
 vessel, but perform work in loading or unloading vessels or work from docks, barges or other platforms, and
 who may be deemed by the courts as entitled to seek compensation for injury or death under the US
 Longshore and Harbor Workers’ Compensation Act. Such coverage may be provided through appropriate
 endorsements to the contractor ’s or subcontractor ’s workers’ compensation policy.
 107.13.4 Railroad Prote ctive Liability Insurance . In addition to other forms of required insurance, the
 contractor shall carry railroad protective liability insurance when any of the contractor ’s work is to be
 performed within any railroad right of way. T he policy shall be written using one of the following
 combinations of Insurance Services Office (“ ISO”) Form Numbers: CG 00 35 01 96 and CG 28 31 10 93, or
 CG 00 35 07 98 and CG 28 31 07 98. T he name or names of the railroad companies to be insured will be
 specified in each contract. T he minimum limits of the insurance will be established in the contract
 documents and provided to the contractors prior to the opening of bids. T he contractor shall submit the
 original policy in its entirety and one duplicate to the Commission for review and transmittal to the
 railroad. No work will be permitted within any railroad’s right of way until the railroad involved has
 reviewed and approved the insurance policy. Any day upon which the contractor cannot perform work due
 to such a policy not being approved by the railroad will not be counted as a working day under Sec 108.7.
 Subcontractors for any part of the work that is sublet will not be required to obtain railroad protective
 liability insurance or provide evidence thereof, if the contractor ’s insurance for that purpose covers
 subcontractors.
 107.13.5 Insurance with O the r Than Missouri Companie s. Any insurance policy required as specified
 above, if written by an insurance company organized in a state other than Missouri, shall be signed by an
 agent or broker licensed by the State of Missouri. In the case of policies written by companies organized in
 a state other than Missouri, the evidence of insurance submitted as authorized in the contract shall be
 signed by an agent or broker licensed by the State of Missouri. Nothing in this provision limits or waives
 the requirement that each insurance policy shall be issued by a company authorized to issue such insurance
 in Missouri.
 107.13.6 Combinations. Employer ’s liability insurance, commercial general liability insurance and
 commercial auto liability insurance and insurance under the Jones Act or Longshore and Harbor Workers
 Compensation Act or Maritime Law Liability requirements, as required by this section, may be arranged
 under a single policy for the full limits required or by a combination of underlying policies and an excess
 liability policy, or “ umbrella” coverage, which follows the form of the underlying policy.
 107.14 Third Party Liability. Neither the State of Missouri, including the Commission, nor the
 
 75
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 contractor, by execution of the contract including these specifications, intend to create a right of action in
 a third party beneficiary, except as specifically set out in these specifications and the contract. It is not
 intended by any required contractual liability in the contract or in these specifications that any third party
 beneficiary has a cause of action arising out of the condition of the project when completed in accordance
 with the plans and accepted by the Commission.
 107.15 Pe rsonal Liability of Public O fficials. T here shall be no personal liability upon the Chief
 Engineer, or any member, employee or agent of the Commission in carrying out any of the provisions of
 the contract or in exercising any power or authority granted to the individual, it being understood that in
 such matters the individual acts as an agent and representative of the State, with official and public duty
 doctrine immunity. If any provision of the contract appears to impose a duty on such an individual, the
 duty will remain exclusively that of the Commission and will not be a personal duty or obligation of the
 individual.
 107.16 Contractors That Are Not Re side nt In Missouri. Any contractor that is not a permanent
 resident of or domiciled in Missouri shall provide to the Commission proof of compliance with the
 Missouri "nonresident employers" financial assurance laws at
 Sections 285.230 to 285.234, RSMo, before the contractor performs any work on a project.
 107.16.1 A nonresident contractor that is a "transient employer" as that term is defined in Section
 285.230.1, RSMo, and 12 CSR 10-2.017(1)(A), shall file with the Commission a photocopy of the
 contractor ’s current transient employer's certificate of registration issued by the Missouri Department of
 Revenue before performing any work on a project. A nonresident contractor that is not classified by the
 Missouri Department of Revenue as a "transient employer" because the nonresident contractor has
 properly registered with the Missouri Department of Revenue and the Missouri Division of Employment
 Security, and has filed and paid Missouri state income taxes for more than 24 consecutive months, shall file
 with the Commission a photocopy of the contractor ’s certificate of registration, issued by the Missouri
 Department of Revenue, that it is not a "transient employer" before performing any work on a project.
 107.16.2 T he contractor shall require a nonresident subcontractor to file with the Commission a
 photocopy of the subcontractor ’s current transient employer's or alternate certificate of registration, as
 issued by the Missouri Department of Revenue, before that subcontractor performs any work on a project.
 107.16.3 Any nonresident contractor or subcontractor that fails to file the financial assurance forms with
 the Missouri Department of Revenue as required by Missouri law will be prohibited from contracting for or
 performing labor on any project for a period of one year.
 107.17 Basis of Payme nt. No direct payment will be made for compliance with Sec 107, except as
 provided by Sec 618.
 
 76
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 108
 PRO SECUTIO N AND PRO GRESS
 108.1 Suble tting of Contract.
 108.1.1 T he contractor shall not sublet, sell, transfer, assign or otherwise dispose of the contract or
 contracts or any portion thereof, or of any right, title, or interest therein, without written consent of the
 engineer. Requests for permission to sublet, assign or otherwise dispose of any portion of the contract shall
 be in writing and accompanied by evidence that the organization that will perform the work is particularly
 experienced and equipped for such work. In case such consent is given, the contractor will be permitted to
 sublet a portion thereof, but the contractor's organization shall perform work amounting to no less than 40
 percent of the total contract cost. Certification or classification of a contractor by type of work
 performed or consent to a subcontract shall not constitute the Commission's endorsement of the
 qualifications of the subcontractor or that the particular subcontractor ’s work will constitute compliance
 with any other provisions of the contract.
 108.1.2 T he value of the work sublet will be the amount designated in the contractual agreement between
 the contractor and the subcontractor. T he subcontractor shall perform the work described in the
 subcontract agreement. No subcontracts, or transfer of contract, will in any case release the contractor's
 liability under the contract and bonds. Consent to a subcontract will not create a direct contractual
 relationship between the subcontractor and the Commission.
 108.1.3 T he contractor shall furnish to the Commission a complete copy of the signed subcontract, and all
 revisions upon request.
 108.1.4 A contractor, at the discretion of the engineer, may make a substitution for a subcontract that was
 disclosed with the bid in accordance with Sec 102.7 or may add a subcontract that would have required
 disclosure in accordance with Sec 102.7. T he contractor shall submit the name of the new subcontractor,
 the category of work, the dollar value of each subcontract and the reason for the substitution or addition in
 writing to the engineer for consideration.
 108.2 Notice to Proce e d. T he notice to proceed will stipulate the date the contractor is expected to begin
 work. T he Commission will issue the notice to proceed by stipulating the date on the notice of award sent
 to all successful bidders, or on a separate form for this purpose. Prior to the stipulated date, the contractor
 shall execute and file the prescribed number of copies of the contract and bond and shall furnish to the
 Commission satisfactory evidence of having complied with insurance requirements.
 108.3 Prose cution of Work. T he contractor will be expected to start work on the date stipulated by the
 notice to proceed. If all contract requirements have been met in accordance with Sec 108.2 the contractor
 may start work before the date stipulated by the notice to proceed, provided the engineer is notified in
 writing at least three days prior to the date on which the contractor expects to begin.
 108.3.1 T he contractor shall continuously and diligently prosecute the work in such order and manner as
 will ensure the completion of the work within the specified time, and the contractor shall be fully
 responsible for the prosecution and coordination of all work being performed under the contract.
 108.3.2 T he work in progress shall receive the personal attention either of the contractor or of a
 competent and reliable representative of the contractor who shall have full and final authority to act for
 the contractor. If authority is delegated to a representative of the contractor, the contractor shall notify
 the engineer in writing, stating the name of the person authorized to act as the contractor ’s representative,
 and stating the name or names of persons authorized to sign the various documents such as weekly reports,
 change orders, force account statements, labor payrolls and any other documents that may be required
 during the progress of the work. If progress at any time is not adequate to meet the contractor's schedule
 and the contract completion time, the contractor shall take all steps necessary to complete the work in the
 time and manner specified in the contract.
 108.3.3 Prior to beginning any work on contracts involving a joint venture, the joint venturers shall
 appoint and maintain a single representative having full and final authority to act for the joint venture.
 T he engineer shall be notified in writing of the name of this representative and of any replacements.
 
 77
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 108.4 Progre ss Sche dule s. T he contractor shall submit a progress schedule to the engineer for review
 prior to or at the pre-construction conference. T he progress schedule shall be used to establish construction
 operations and to monitor the progress of the work, although the engineer's determination of the then
 major operation or controlling item of work will always prevail. T he progress schedule shall be in the form
 specified in Sec 108.4.1, unless the contract contains different requirements. T he progress schedule shall be
 based on the number of working days, calendar days or other increments as set forth in the contract that
 the contractor expects to require in completing the project, recognizing the capabilities of labor,
 equipment, arrangements for material, mobilization, shop drawing preparation and approvals, and other
 relevant items. If an electronic computer software program is used to generate the schedule, the initial and
 any revised schedules shall be accompanied by a disk containing the schedule files in the native format of
 the software program used to create the schedule. T he disk shall be labeled with the contract ID, route,
 county, date of revision, and the name of the software program used. T he contractor will not be required to
 provide any copies of the software program.
 108.4.1 Form and Conte nts of Progre ss Sche dule . T he progress schedule shall contain an activities
 schedule bar chart and may, at the contractor's option, include a written narrative that breaks down into
 detail the time in working days, calendar days or completion date involved in performing all construction
 activities for the duration of the project, and which is in a suitable scale as to indicate the percentage of
 work scheduled for completion at any time. T he schedule shall indicate all interdependencies between
 activities. T he progress schedule shall also clearly outline the intended maintenance of traffic, work
 phasing provided by the contract and such other information, as required by the contract.
 108.4.2 Pre paration of Initial Sche dule . T he contractor shall complete development of a progress
 schedule and present a copy to the engineer prior to or at the pre-construction conference.
 108.4.2.1 T he construction time, as indicated by the progress schedule, for the entire project or any
 milestone, shall not exceed the specified contract time. If any milestone date or contract completion date
 is exceeded in the schedule, time estimates on the progress schedule shall be revised. T he controlling
 activity shall be clearly shown for each day of the schedule. A controlling activity will be defined as that
 part of a progress-controlling item or items that must be performed before the next progress-controlling
 item of work can be started. Following a review of the progress schedule by the engineer, the engineer and
 contractor will meet for a joint review, correction and adjustment of the schedule, if necessary.
 108.4.2.2 If necessary this process will be repeated. However, the schedule shall be finalized by the
 contractor within seven days after request for correction and adjustment to the schedule.
 108.4.3 Cost and Inte nt of Progre ss Sche dule s. T he review by the engineer of any progress schedule
 will not constitute a determination that the schedule is reasonable, that following the schedule will result in
 timely completion, or that deviation will result in a delayed completion. T he progress schedule, and any
 updates provided, is not a part of the contract. If the schedule reflects a completion date different than
 that specified in the contract, that does not void the completion date or working days specified in the
 contract. If any schedule reflects a completion time earlier than that specified in the contract, the
 contractor specifically understands that no claim for additional contract time or compensation will lie
 against the Commission if the work is not completed by the earlier time shown on the schedule. It will be
 the contractor's responsibility to determine the most feasible order of work consistent with the
 requirements of the contract.
 108.4.3.1 No direct payment will be made for furnishing progress schedules or revisions.
 108.4.3.2 If the contractor fails to comply with the requirement to supply an initial or any revised
 progress schedule, the engineer may withhold progress payments until a schedule has been submitted and
 reviewed.
 108.4.4 Re vise d Progre ss Sche dule s. T he contractor shall provide a revised progress schedule, which
 will then become the current progress schedule:
 (a) When departure from the existing progress schedule makes it apparent to the engineer or the
 contractor that the project will not be completed in the time provided in the contract.
 
 78
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (b) When the engineer or the contractor determines that the progress schedule requires revisions
 for any reason.
 108.5 Labor, Me thods and Equipme nt. T he contractor shall at all times employ sufficient labor,
 methods and equipment for prosecuting the work to full completion in the time and manner required by the
 contract.
 108.5.1 All workers shall have sufficient skill and experience to properly perform work assigned. T he
 engineer may demand the dismissal of any person employed by the contractor in, about or upon the work,
 who engages in misconduct, is incompetent or negligent in the due and proper performance of assigned
 duties, or who neglects or refuses to comply with any proper directions given. Such a person shall not again
 be employed thereon without the written consent of the engineer. Should the contractor continue to
 employ or re-employ any such person, the engineer may suspend the work until the contractor complies
 with such orders.
 108.5.2 All equipment used on the work shall be of sufficient size and in such mechanical condition to meet
 requirements of the work and to produce satisfactory work. T he condition or use of equipment on any
 portion of the project shall not cause damage to the roadway, adjacent property or other highways, or
 injury to any person.
 108.5.3 T he intent of the contract is to provide performance-type specifications to the extent consistent
 with producing finished work meeting the intent of the contract documents. T herefore, the methods and
 equipment to be used by the contractor in accomplishing the work will not be prescribed in the contract,
 and the contractor is free to use any method or equipment that will accomplish the contract work in
 conformity with the requirements of the contract. T he failure of the engineer to object to contractor's
 equipment or methods will never constitute agreement that the equipment or methods used are appropriate.
 108.5.4 If the contract specifies that the construction be performed by the use of certain methods and
 equipment, such methods and equipment shall be used unless otherwise authorized by the engineer. If the
 contractor desires to use a method or type of equipment other than those specified in the contract,
 authority shall be requested from the engineer. T he request shall be in writing, including a full description of
 the proposed methods and equipment to be used and an explanation of the reasons for making the change.
 If approval is given, the contractor shall be fully responsible for producing work in conformity with the
 contract. If the engineer determines that the work produced does not meet contract requirements after use
 of the substitute method or equipment, the contractor shall discontinue the use of the substitute method or
 equipment and shall complete the remaining construction with the methods and equipment specified in the
 contract. T he contractor shall remove deficient work and replace the work as specified in the contract, or
 take such other corrective action as directed by the engineer. Except as provided in Sec 104, no change will
 be made in the basis of payment for the construction items involved or in contract time as a result of
 approving any method or equipment change.
 108.6 Te mporary Suspe nsion of Work. T he engineer has authority to suspend any or all of the work in
 accordance with Sec 105 for such time as necessary. If it becomes necessary to stop work for an indefinite
 period, the contractor shall store all material in a manner that will protect the material from theft or
 damage, shall not unnecessarily obstruct traffic, shall take every precaution to prevent damage to or
 deterioration of work performed, shall provide suitable drainage of the roadway by opening ditches,
 shoulder drains, etc. and shall erect temporary structures where necessary. T he contractor may suspend
 work for reasonable cause upon written approval from the engineer. During such a period in which work is
 suspended, liquidated damages will not accrue unless such suspension is due to the contractor's failure to
 comply with the contract. If work has been suspended, the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing at
 least 48 hours before resuming operations.
 108.7 Contract Time for Comple tion of the Work. T he time for the completion of the work is
 specified by calendar days, calendar date or working days in the contract. T ime is an essential element of
 the contract, and it is therefore important that the work be pursued vigorously to completion.
 108.7.1 Comple tion by Cale ndar Days or Cale ndar Date . Any computation of time by calendar days
 or calendar date will be based on the seasonal importance of days on the basis of weighted time tables on
 
 79
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 file in the Office of the Secretary of the Commission and available on the MoDOT website. If a change in
 the work is directed by the engineer, the contractor will be allowed an extension of contract time based on
 the weighted time tables and the ratio of the cost of such additional work to the contract price, unless it
 can be established that the additional work required more time than is indicated. In such cases, the actual
 time required, as determined by the engineer, may be allowed.
 108.7.1.1 If the notice to proceed is not issued and effective within 35 days after the award or the later
 date specified in the contract due to any failure of the Commission, the contractor will be given an
 extension of contract time equal to the number of calendar days after the 35th day or the later date
 specified in the contract, until the notice to proceed is effective. Such a delay in the effective date of the
 notice to proceed will be an excusable, noncompensable delay.
 108.7.1.2 T he contractor will not be entitled to any extension of contract time because of unsuitable
 weather conditions or the effects of weather conditions unless authorized in writing by the engineer as an
 excusable, noncompensable delay under Sec 108.14.1.
 108.7.2 Comple tion by Working Days. If the time for the completion of the work is based on working
 days, this time will be specified in the contract. A working day will be defined as any day when, in the
 judgment of the engineer, soil and weather conditions would permit the major operation of the project for
 six hours or more, unless other unavoidable conditions prevent the contractor's operations. If conditions
 require the contractor to stop work in less than six hours, the day will not be counted as a working day.
 108.7.2.1 December 15 to March 15, both dates inclusive and Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays established
 by law will not be counted as working days.
 108.7.2.2 T he count of working days will start on the date the contractor starts construction operations,
 or the effective date of the notice to proceed, whichever is earlier. T he engineer will determine when a
 working day is to be charged. T he engineer may make allowance for working days lost due to causes
 justifying their elimination from the count of working days. No allowance will be made for delay or
 suspension of the prosecution of the work due to fault of the contractor. On each contractor pay estimate
 the engineer will give the contractor written notice of the number of working days charged since the
 preceding pay estimate. Any objection by the contractor to the number of working days so charged shall be
 made in writing within five days, setting forth the contractor's objections and specifying the reasons
 therefore, or those objections shall be forever waived and will not constitute the basis for an excusable or
 compensable delay.
 108.7.2.2.1 Where projects specify signal or lighting equipment as the major work items, working days will
 not begin until 104 calendar days after the date of the Notice to Proceed or until such time as the signal or
 lighting equipment is available to the contractor, or until the contractor begins work, whichever date is the
 earliest, to allow time for the fabrication and delivery of signal posts and lighting poles.
 108.7.2.3 In case the final value of all work performed exceeds the original contract amount, an extension
 in the working days will be granted the contractor. T he extension will be made by increasing the contract
 time by the ratio of the total final cost of all work performed under the contract to the total amount of
 the original contract. Incentive/disincentive, bonus or deduction adjustments will not be used in this
 computation. For a combination of projects awarded as a single contract, the extension will be made in a
 similar manner. If it can be established that the extra work required more time than indicated, the actual
 number of working days required, as determined by the engineer, may be allowed.
 108.8 Liquidate d Damage s for Failure or De lay in Comple ting Work on Time .
 108.8.1 If the contractor or, in case of default, the surety fails to complete the work within the time
 specified in the contract, or within such extra time as may be allowed in the preceding sections, a deduction
 of an amount specified in the contract will be made for each day that the contract remains incomplete
 after the time allowed for completion. T he amount specified in the contract is agreed upon, not as a
 penalty, but as liquidated damages for loss to the Commission and the public. T his amount will be deducted
 from any money due the contractor. T he contractor and surety will be liable for all liquidated damages.
 Permitting the contractor to continue the work after the expiration of the specified time or any extension
 of time will not constitute a waiver by the Commission of any contractual rights.
 
 80
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 108.8.1.1 T he liquidated damages shown in the contract will be listed separately as contract administrative
 costs and project road user costs. A combination of projects awarded as a single contract will be considered
 as one unit for the determination and assessment of the administrative liquidated damages. T he road user
 costs will be specified independently for each project in the contract and will be assessed independently for
 each project not completed within the time specified in the contract.
 108.8.1.2 T he Commission may waive the road user cost as may accrue if the work is deemed to be
 significantly complete. A project will be considered significantly complete when all necessary signing,
 pavement markings in accordance with Sec 620, guardrail, signals, all permanent traffic control devices and
 other safety appurtenances have been installed and are operational. At a minimum, traffic must have
 complete use of the roadways and shoulders, with no delays due to construction activity. T he suspension of
 the road user cost by the engineer will not constitute a waiver by the Commission of any contractual rights,
 and its application will be contingent upon the discretion of the engineer in completing the remaining
 items of work.
 108.8.1.3 Regardless of the method used to specify contract time for completion of the work, liquidated
 damages will not be charged as follows:
 (a) From December 15 through March 15, both dates inclusive.
 (b) For Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays established by law.
 (c) During any period of sod maintenance, as specified in Sec 803, if such maintenance is the only
 work remaining and the contractor can perform the maintenance without inconveniencing the
 traveling public.
 (d) During the final 15 consecutive day test period for a signal system, as specified in Sec 902,
 provided all other work has been completed.
 108.8.2 T he Commission will not be required to file a claim or counterclaim under Sec 105.16.5 or any
 other provision, to assess or retain liquidated damages.
 108.8.3 T he contractor and surety shall be liable for liquidated damages chargeable under the contract when
 the work is completed after default of the contract, unless the delay is caused by the Commission. A delay
 in the work or the final completion of the project caused by the Commission shall not void the provisions
 of the contract as to liquidated damages and will be considered an excusable, noncompensable delay.
 108.9 Signal and Lighting Malfunctions. If the engineer invokes the option under Secs 901, 902 or
 903 to have MoDOT personnel or a third party correct a lighting, signal or sign lighting malfunction, the
 contractor will be charged for the service. If MoDOT personnel make the correction, the charge will be
 computed as five times the cost for all replacement parts, equipment rental, salaries and fringe benefits. If a
 third party makes the correction, the contractor will be charged 1.2 times the charges billed the
 Commission by the third party. However, in no case will the charge be less than $100.
 108.10 De fault of Contract. After notice and an opportunity to remedy, the engineer may declare the
 contractor in default, if the contractor:
 (a) Fails to begin the work under the contract within the time specified to begin work.
 (b) Fails to perform the work with sufficient resources to assure the timely completion of the
 work.
 (c) Fails to perform the work in accordance with the contract requirements, or neglects or refuses
 to remove and replace rejected material or unacceptable work.
 (d) Discontinues the prosecution of the work.
 (e) Fails to resume work that has been discontinued within a reasonable time after notice to do so.
 
 81
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (f) Becomes insolvent, is declared bankrupt or commits any act of bankruptcy or insolvency,
 allows any final judgment to remain unsatisfied or makes an assignment for the benefit of
 creditors.
 (g) Fails to comply with contract requirements regarding prevailing wage payments, DBE or EEO
 requirements.
 (h) Is a party to fraud.
 108.10.1 T he engineer will give notice in writing to the contractor and surety of the condition described in
 Sec 108.10, and advise the contractor and surety of the actions required for remedy. If the contractor does
 not proceed to remedy the condition within ten days of receipt of this notice, the engineer may declare the
 contractor in default. T he declaration of default will be made in writing to the contractor and the surety.
 108.10.2 If within ten days after receipt of the declaration of default, the surety does not proceed to
 assume the contract for completion under the direction of the engineer, the Commission has full power and
 authority, without impairing the obligation of the contract or the bond:
 (a) To take over the completion of the work.
 (b) To appropriate or use any or all project material and equipment that is suitable and acceptable.
 (c) To enter into agreements with others.
 (d) To use such other methods as in its judgment may be required for the completion of the
 contract in an acceptable manner.
 108.10.3 Liability for Costs. T he contractor and surety shall be liable for all costs and expenses incurred
 in completing the work, and for all liquidated damages in conformity with the contract. T he contractor and
 surety are obligated to comply with all change orders and directives of the engineer to the same extent, and
 for the same compensation, if any, as the contractor would have been in the absence of default. In case the
 sum of such liquidated damages and the expense so incurred is less than the sum that would have been
 payable under the contract if the work had been completed by the contractor, the contractor or surety will
 be entitled to receive the difference. If the sum of such expense and such liquidated damages exceeds the
 sum that would have been payable under the contract, the contractor and surety will be liable and shall pay
 the amount of such excess. T his provision will apply regardless of whether the surety or the Commission
 completes the contract work. T he contractor and surety will solely be liable for the costs and expenses of a
 completing contractor, laborers and suppliers with which either has contracted.
 108.10.4 If it is determined after termination of the contractor's right to proceed that the contractor was
 not in default, the rights and obligations of the parties will be the same as if the termination had been issued
 for the convenience of the Commission under Sec 108.11. Sums to which a contractor may be entitled as a
 result of the contract termination will be limited to amounts determined under Sec 108.11.
 108.10.5 Sure tie s' Continue d Acce ptability. A surety failing to proceed within ten days after the
 written declaration of default by the engineer under Sec 108.10 may be required to show cause to the
 Commission why the surety should continue to be accepted for future bonds.
 108.11 Te rmination of Contract for Conve nie nce of the Commission. T he Commission may
 terminate the entire contract, or any portion thereof, if the engineer determines that a termination is in
 the Commission's best interest. T he engineer will deliver to the contractor and surety a notice of
 termination specifying the extent of termination and the effective date. A termination of the contract for
 convenience may be directed at any time after the Commission has made a determination to award a
 contract. T he bidding documents may provide for a termination of the contract for convenience under this
 section upon the occurrence or nonoccurrence of a specified event after bid opening.
 108.11.1 Submittals and Proce dure s. After receipt of a notice of termination, the contractor shall
 immediately proceed with the following obligations:
 
 82
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (a) Stop work as specified in the notice.
 (b) Place no further subcontracts or orders for material, supplies, services or facilities, except as
 necessary to complete the portion of the contract that has not been terminated.
 (c) Terminate all subcontracts to the extent they relate to the work terminated.
 (d) Settle with subcontractors and suppliers all outstanding liabilities arising from the termination.
 (e) T ransfer title and deliver to the Commission, work in progress, completed work, supplies and
 other material produced or acquired for the work terminated, and completed or partially completed
 plans, drawings, information and other property that, if the contract had been completed, would be
 required to be furnished to the Commission.
 (f) Complete performance of the work not terminated.
 (g) Take any action that the engineer directs to protect and preserve contract-related property
 that is in the possession of the contractor in which the Commission has or may acquire an
 interest.
 108.11.2 Se ttle me nt Provisions. When the Commission orders termination of all or a part of the
 contract effective on a certain date, completed items of work as of that date will be paid for at the contract
 unit price. Payment for partially completed work will be made either at agreed prices or under the
 provisions below. When items are eliminated in their entirety by such termination, the contractor will be
 paid for actual work done and actual costs incurred before notification, including mobilization of equipment
 or material.
 108.11.2.1 Additional Costs. Within 60 days of the effective termination date, the contractor shall
 submit any request for additional damages or costs not covered in Sec 108.11 or elsewhere in the contract.
 Such a request may include only such cost items as: mobilization, overhead expenses proven to be
 attributable to the project or the part terminated and not paid for under work not terminated,
 subcontractor costs not otherwise paid for, actual idle equipment and idle labor cost only for any time the
 work is stopped in advance of the termination date, guaranteed payments for private land usage as part of
 the original contract, and any other actual cost for which the contractor feels reimbursement should be
 made.
 108.11.2.1.1 Anticipated profits, including anticipated earnings on usage of owned equipment, and impact,
 delay or other direct or indirect costs resulting from this termination that are not expressly authorized, will
 not be compensable as part of any settlement.
 108.11.2.1.2 T he contractor and the engineer may agree upon the whole or any part of the amount to be
 paid because of the termination. T he amount may include a reasonable allowance for profit on work done.
 T he agreed amount may not exceed the total contract price as reduced by the amount of payments
 previously made and the contract price of work not terminated. T he contract will be amended and the
 contractor paid the agreed amount.
 108.11.2.2 Additional Cost Re vie w. If the contractor and the engineer fail to agree on the whole amount
 to be paid the contractor because of the termination of work, the Commission will pay the amounts
 determined as follows, but without duplication of any amounts agreed upon in Sec 108.11.2.1:
 (a) For contract work performed before the effective date of termination, the total, without
 duplication of any items of:
 (1) T he actual cost of work performed.
 (2) T he cost of settling and paying termination settlements under terminated subcontracts
 that are properly chargeable to the terminated portion of the contract if not included in
 Sec 108.11.2.1.
 
 83
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (3) A sum for profit on the actual cost of work performed as determined by the engineer
 to be fair and reasonable. T he engineer will allow no profit under this section if the
 contractor's costs incurred on work performed exceed the contract prices paid.
 (b) T he reasonable costs to settle the work terminated, including:
 (1) Internal accounting and clerical expenses reasonably necessary for the preparation of
 termination settlement proposals and support data, including expenses for termination
 and settlement of subcontracts.
 (2) Storage, transportation and other costs incurred, reasonably necessary for the
 preservation, protection or disposition of the termination inventory.
 (c) For normal spoilage and to the extent that the engineer expressly accepts the risk of loss. T he
 engineer will exclude the fair value of property that is destroyed, lost, stolen or damaged so as to
 become undeliverable to the Commission or to the buyer.
 108.11.2.2.1 In arriving at the amount due the contractor under this clause, there will be deducted:
 (a) All advanced payments for mobilization, services or facilities, or other payments to the
 contractor under the terminated portion of the contract.
 (b) Any claim that the Commission has against the contractor under the contract.
 (c) T he agreed price for or the proceeds from the sale of material, supplies or other items acquired
 and sold by the contractor, and not recovered by or credited to the Commission.
 (d) Any costs saved as a result of the termination.
 108.11.2.2.2 If the termination is partial, the contractor may file a proposal with the engineer for an
 equitable adjustment of the price or prices of the continued portion of the contract. T he engineer will
 make any equitable adjustment agreed upon. Any proposal for an equitable adjustment under this clause
 shall be requested within 60 days from the effective date of termination unless extended in writing by the
 engineer.
 108.11.2.2.3 T he contractor shall maintain and make available all project cost records to the engineer for
 audit to the extent necessary to determine the validity and amount for each item requested. T his will
 include, but is not limited to, all items described in Sec 105.16. T hese records and documents shall be made
 available to the engineer at the contractor's office at all reasonable times, without any direct charge. If
 approved by the engineer, photographs, microphotographs or other authentic reproductions may be
 maintained instead of original records and documents.
 108.11.3 Effe ct of Te rmination. Termination of the contract or portion thereof will not relieve the
 contractor of contractual responsibilities for the work completed, nor will termination relieve the surety of
 the surety’s obligation for and concerning that part of the contract not terminated or any just claim arising
 out of the work performed.
 108.12 Notice to Contractor and Sure ty. Notice to the contractor, in case of default or termination of
 the contract, shall be deemed to be served when delivered to the person in charge of any office used by the
 contractor, the contractor's representative at or near the work or by certified mail addressed to the
 contractor's last known place of business. Notice to the surety shall be deemed served when mailed to the
 surety's address as shown in the contract by certified mail.
 108.13 Te rmination of Contract for Misconduct. For the purposes of the following provision, "state"
 will include the State of Missouri and any other state, commonwealth or territory of the United States. T he
 Commission may declare the contract to be terminated at any time after the contract is awarded and prior
 to final acceptance of the project, for any one or more of the acts set forth below, if the act occurred after
 the bid opening or within two years immediately preceding the date of the bid opening, unless the act is a
 
 84
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 basis for an adverse action under 49 CFR, Part 29 in which case the time limit will not apply, on any
 Commission or other federal, state or local government or privately awarded contract:
 (a) Receiving or giving any currency or item of value in order to influence the competitive bidding
 process or the award of a competitively bid contract; bid-rigging, collusion or any similar act or
 communication with any person or firm in restraint of competitive bidding on a contract; or to
 obtain or grant an advantage in obtaining the award of such a contract.
 (b) Fraud, dishonesty or a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in any request for
 proposal or bid submitted to a private firm or governmental agency, or in any contract documents
 submitted to such a firm or agency.
 (c) Making or receiving kickbacks or payments of currency or any item of value in order to obtain
 or retain any contract or payment thereunder, or in return for an agreement to make or for the
 making of any false statements or material misrepresentations or omissions of fact to any federal,
 state or local governmental agency or private firm relevant to contract compliance.
 (d) Suspension, debarment or other disqualification of the contractor, or determination that the
 contractor is not a responsible bidder for public contracting purposes, by any federal, state or local
 governmental agency, regardless of whether the sanction is still in effect at the time of the bid or
 contract award by the Commission.
 (e) Conviction or adjudication of guilt in any criminal proceeding in a federal or state court,
 regardless of whether sentence was suspended or executed, for any act an element of which is fraud,
 dishonesty or moral turpitude, which conduct is relevant to a determination of the responsibility
 of the contractor.
 (f) Commission of any act or failure to act, such that the contractor is subject to the
 determination that the contractor is not a responsible bidder under the contract or under applicable
 Missouri or federal law.
 108.13.1 T he acts, omissions and liabilities of persons or firms affiliated with the contractor or of persons
 that are principals of the contractor, are those of the contractor, unless the circumstances clearly negate
 that conclusion. Persons or firms are "affiliates" of each other if, directly or indirectly, either one controls
 or has the power to control the other or a third person controls or has the power to control both.
 Examples of control include, but are not limited to: interlocking management or ownership, identity of
 interests among family members, shared facilities and equipment, common use of employees on projects or
 a new business entity organized following the determination of ineligibility or non-responsibility of a
 person or firm which has the same or similar management, ownership or principal employees as the
 ineligible person. A "principal" will be defined as an officer, director, owner, partner or other natural person
 within a firm with primary management, supervisory or contracting responsibilities.
 108.13.2 T he Commission will not declare the contract terminated pursuant to this section if the
 contractor made a full and complete disclosure of the acts and circumstances described in Sec 108.13 to the
 Commission in the bid or in writings submitted with the bid and the Commission did not determine the
 contractor to be non-responsible prior to making the award of the contract. T he Commission will not be
 precluded from terminating the contract under this section if the information provided by the contractor
 did not constitute a full and complete disclosure of all facts and circumstances pertinent to the issue of the
 responsibility and integrity of the contractor.
 108.13.3 T he procedures for notice of the proposed termination of the contract and the contractor ’s right
 to be heard regarding that proposed action will be those in accordance with a proposed disqualification or
 suspension under the provisions of 7 CSR 10-18. After notice and an opportunity to be heard, upon a
 finding of the existence of a basis to terminate a contract under this section, the Commission may
 terminate the contract immediately or at the occurrence of some specific date or event in the future, prior
 to project completion, upon delivery of a written notice to the contractor by actual service or by certified
 mail, return receipt requested, sent to the address of record of the contractor. Effective with the contract
 termination date, the contractor shall discontinue further work on the project and shall instruct
 subcontractors and suppliers to do the same, other than to remove promptly the contractor ’s personnel,
 equipment and supplies from the project site. T he contractor will be paid for all completed work to that
 
 85
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 date at the contract price. At the option of the engineer, the Commission may assume the possession and
 cost of any specially fabricated material or supplies for the project that have been ordered prior to notice
 of termination, but have not been installed on the date of termination. T he contractor and surety will be
 liable to the Commission for all costs and expenses incurred by the Commission in completing the project,
 including, but not limited to, the Commission's costs to redraft and rebid the project, which costs and
 expenses exceed the total of the contractor's bid price plus additional expenses allowed by the engineer
 during the contractor's work on the project, less the amount paid to the contractor by the Commission.
 T he Commission will not be liable for damages for breach of contract or in any other action or respect for
 declaring a default if one exists under this section and for terminating the contract prior to completion by
 the contractor.
 108.13.4 T he satisfactory performance of a contract, prior to the notice to the contractor of the intent to
 terminate the contract for misconduct, will not be a basis to determine whether the contract may be
 terminated for misconduct under this section.
 108.13.5 T he contractor shall file any claim the contractor has against the Commission within 60 days
 after the effective date of termination, pursuant to the procedures of Sec 105. T he Commission will file
 any claim the Commission has against the contractor or surety within
 60 days of the date of final acceptance of the project, whether or not it is renumbered or redesigned, and
 whether completed by the surety, by a successor contractor retained by the Commission, or by the
 Commission itself. Any Commission claim will be filed pursuant to the procedures of Sec 105.
 108.14 De te rmination of Compe nsation and Contract Time Exte nsion for Excusable ,
 Noncompe nsable and Compe nsable De lays. An extension of the contract time may be granted under
 the following conditions provided documentation has been given to the engineer in accordance with Secs
 108.14.3 through 108.14.5. Strict adherence to the provisions of this section will be a condition precedent
 to the contractor's entitlement to an extension of contract time or compensation because of project
 delays.
 108.14.1 Excusable or Noncompe nsable De lay. Contract time allowed for the performance of the work
 may be extended for delays caused by acts of God, acts of the public enemy, fires, floods, earthquakes,
 epidemics, quarantine restrictions, strikes, freight embargoes, unusually severe weather or other delays not
 caused by the contractor's fault or negligence.
 108.14.2 Compe nsable De lay. Contract time allowed for performance of the work may be extended for
 delays caused by the Commission. T he contractor may be granted an extension of time and additional
 compensation only as provided by Sec 109.
 108.14.3 Notification of De lay. Within seven days of the occurrence of a delay to the prosecution of any
 phase of the work, the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing of such a delay and indicate that a
 request for delay consideration will be filed. Delay costs incurred prior to notifying the engineer that
 operations have been delayed will be noncompensable.
 108.14.4 Proce dure s Following a De lay. T he contractor shall keep daily records of all non-salaried
 labor, material costs and equipment expenses for all operations affected by the delay.
 108.14.4.1 T he contractor shall maintain a daily record of each operation affected by the delay and the
 station location of the operations affected. Daily records of the operations and stations will also be
 maintained by the engineer. Each Monday, the contractor shall compare the previous week's daily records
 with the records kept by the engineer. T he contractor shall also prepare and submit written reports to the
 engineer each Monday containing the following information:
 (a) Number of days behind schedule due to the delay.
 (b) A summary of all operations that have been delayed or will be delayed.
 (c) In the case of a claimed compensable delay, the contractor shall explain how the Commission's
 act or omission delayed each operation and estimate the amount of time required to complete the
 project.
 
 86
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (d) An itemized list of all extra costs incurred, including:
 (1) How the extra costs relate to the delay and how the costs are being calculated and
 measured.
 (2) T he identification of all non-salaried project employees for whom costs are being
 compiled.
 (3) A summary of time charges for equipment, identified by manufacturer's year and
 model and the contractor's number, for which costs are being compiled.
 108.14.4.2 T he contractor shall provide written notice to the engineer within seven days of the results of
 the comparison of the detailed reports performed each Monday and shall define any disagreements between
 specific records.
 108.14.4.3 Failure to meet to review the engineer's records or to report disagreements between the records
 will be considered conclusive evidence that the engineer's records are accurate.
 108.14.5 Proce dure s Following Comple tion of Work Alle ge dly De laye d. Within the earlier of 15
 days of completion of any phase of work allegedly delayed, or of project completion, the contractor shall
 submit a report to the engineer containing the following information:
 (a) A description of the operations that were delayed and the documentation and explanation of
 the reason for the delay, including all reports prepared by or for the contractor.
 (b) An as-built chart or other graphic depiction of how the operations were delayed based on the
 contractor's most recent progress schedule prior to the delay event.
 (c) An item by item measurement and explanation of extra costs requested for reimbursement due
 to the delay.
 108.14.5.1 All costs shown in the report submitted to the engineer must be directly caused by the delay
 event and shall reflect the actual costs incurred as shown on the contractor's project cost records kept in
 the ordinary course of business.
 108.14.5.2 T he engineer will review the contractor's submission and any reports prepared for the engineer.
 A written decision will be provided to the contractor within 60 days of the receipt of the complete
 contractor's submission. T his time may be extended if the engineer requires additional information. T he
 contractor shall state affirmatively in writing when the contractor has made a complete submission of
 information regarding a delay event.
 108.14.5.3 In the case of compensable delays, if the engineer determines that the Commission is
 responsible for delays to the contractor's operations, the engineer's written decision will reflect the nature
 and extent of any resulting equitable adjustment to the contract in accordance with Sec 109.
 108.15 Suspe nsion of Work Dire cte d by the Engine e r.
 108.15.1 If the performance of all or any portion of the work is suspended or delayed by the engineer for
 an unreasonable period of time not originally anticipated, customary or inherent to the construction
 industry, and the contractor believes that additional compensation or contract time is due as a result of such
 suspension or delay, the contractor shall submit to the engineer in writing a request for adjustment within
 seven days of receipt of the notice to resume work. T he request shall set forth the reasons and support for
 such an adjustment. T he procedures of Secs 108.14.4 and 108.14.5 will apply to requests for additional
 compensation or time claimed by the contractor as a result of a suspension of work directed by the
 engineer under this section.
 108.15.2 Upon receipt, the engineer will evaluate the contractor's request. If the engineer agrees that the
 cost or time required for the performance of the contract has increased as a result of such a suspension and
 the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the contractor, suppliers
 
 87
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 or subcontractors, and not caused by weather, the engineer will make an adjustment, excluding profit, and
 modify the contract in writing accordingly. T he engineer will notify the contractor of the engineer's
 determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted.
 108.15.3 No contract adjustment will be made unless the contractor has submitted the request for
 adjustment within the time prescribed.
 108.15.4 No contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause to the extent that performance would
 have been suspended or delayed by any other cause, or an adjustment is provided for or excluded under any
 other term or condition of the contract.
 
 88
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 109
 MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
 109.1 Me asure me nt of Q uantitie s. All work completed under the contract will be measured by the
 engineer according to United States standard measure or will be paid for on a contract quantity basis as set
 out elsewhere in these specifications. T he method of measurement and basis of payment will be made to
 the nearest whole number unless specified otherwise. When the contract quantity of any item is found to
 include appreciable errors, or when an authorized revision of the plans is made, the quantity will be
 corrected before making final payment. T he method of measurement and computations to be used in
 determination of quantities of material furnished and of work performed under the contract will be those
 methods generally recognized as conforming to good engineering practice.
 109.2 Scope of Payme nt.
 109.2.1 Compe nsation. T he contractor shall receive and accept compensation provided for in the
 contract as full payment for performing all work under the contract in a complete and acceptable manner,
 and for all risk, loss, damage or expense arising from the work or the prosecution thereof subject to Sec
 109.8.
 109.2.2 Comple te d Improve me nts. T he payment of any current or final estimate, or the acceptance of
 any portion of the work as provided in the specifications, will not affect the obligation of the contractor
 to submit for final acceptance a completed improvement in accordance with the contract.
 109.3 Compe nsation for Alte re d Q uantitie s. When the accepted quantities of work vary from the
 quantities in the contract, the contractor shall accept payment at the original contract unit prices for the
 accepted quantities of work done. No allowance will be made for any increased cost, except as provided in
 Sec 104 and Sec 108.
 109.4 Diffe ring Site Conditions and Change s in the Work. Contract adjustments to compensate for
 changes in the work or extra work caused by differing site conditions or changes in the work performed in
 accordance with Sec 104 will be determined by use of one of the following methods, in order of precedence
 109.4.1 Contract Unit Price s. Where contract unit prices exist, the contract unit price will always be
 applied without deviation, unless the effect of a differing site condition or a significant change in the
 character of the work requires an equitable adjustment to a contract unit price under the terms of this
 contract. Equitable adjustments will exclude any anticipated profits.
 109.4.2 Unit Price s or Lump Sum Amount Agre e d Upon in the Change O rde r Authoriz ing the
 Work. Where contract unit prices do not exist for the work to be done, the parties may agree to such unit
 prices or a lump sum price for that work. Where an equitable adjustment to a unit price is required, the
 parties may agree to the adjustment to be made to the contract unit price, excluding any anticipated
 profits. Prior to agreeing upon such unit or lump sum prices, the engineer may require from the contractor
 any information to which the engineer is authorized under Sec 104.
 109.4.3 Equitable Adjustme nt. In all other cases, except work ordered to be performed under force
 account, the engineer will make an equitable adjustment to or determination of the affected contract prices
 for the work, based on the contractor's actual costs to perform the work. T his determination will be
 consistent with the contractor's other proven costs to perform the contract work, as shown in the
 contractor's bid computations and project cost records, produced and kept in the ordinary course of
 business. Prior to making an equitable adjustment, the engineer may require from the contractor any
 information relevant to that determination, including the information authorized under Sec 104. T he
 condition precedent to determination of contractor entitlement and amount of any contract adjustment
 and Commission liability will be that the adjustment:
 (a) Is supported by demonstrated actual excess costs incurred, including by an audit of the actual
 costs, unless expressly waived by FHWA on federal aid projects.;
 (b) Has a basis in the terms of the contract;
 
 89
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (c) Has a basis in terms of applicable Missouri law and;
 (d) Is in accordance with prevailing principles of public contract law.
 109.4.4 Application of Force Account. Force account, as computed under Sec 109.5, will apply to
 determine the amount of compensation for a contract adjustment under Sec 109.4 only when expressly
 directed to be used in writing by the engineer and in no other instance whatsoever for any determination of
 contract adjustments for any work performed on the project, whether claimed under the contract, for
 breach of the contract, arising from a claimed representation by which the contract was induced or any
 other basis.
 109.5 Force Account Computation.
 109.5.1 Labor. For all lead workers and laborers, the contractor will receive the rate of wage paid for each
 hour that said lead workers and laborers are engaged in the force account work.
 109.5.1.1 T he contractor will receive the actual costs paid to, or on behalf of, employees for subsistence
 and travel allowances, health and welfare benefits, pension fund benefits or other benefits, if such amounts
 are required by the collective bargaining agreement or employment contract applicable to the classes of
 labor employed on the work.
 109.5.1.2 An amount equal to 20 percent (5 percent profit and 15 percent overhead) of the sum of the
 above items will also be paid the contractor.
 109.5.2 Insurance and Taxe s. For property damage, liability and worker's compensation insurance
 premiums, unemployment insurance contributions and social security taxes on the force account work, the
 contractor will receive the actual cost paid, to which 20 percent (5 percent profit and 15 percent
 overhead) will be added.
 109.5.3 Mate rial. For material accepted by the engineer and used, the contractor will receive the actual
 cost of such material delivered on the work, including transportation charges paid (exclusive of equipment
 rentals as hereinafter set forth), to which cost 20 percent (5 percent profit and 15 percent overhead) will
 be added. For all material used in connection with, but not entering permanently into the work, reasonable
 depreciation will be allowed.
 109.5.4 Equipme nt. T he Contractor will be reimbursed for its costs for providing equipment at the rates
 listed in “ Cost Recovery” as posted by EquipmentWatch™ , hereafter referred to as the Rental Rate Blue
 Book, for contractor-owned equipment necessary to accomplish the force account work, including all fuel
 and lubricants, tires and repairs. T he contractor will be allowed an hourly rate equal to the monthly rental
 rate divided by 176 hours as set out in the Rental Rate Blue Book http://equipmentwatch.com/blue-bookcost-recovery/ at the time the force account is ordered. T he allowed rates will be the rate adjustment factor
 multiplied by the bare hourly rates multiplied by the regional adjustment factor, plus the estimated
 operating cost per hour. T he allowed time will be the actual operating time on the work. For the time
 required to move the equipment to and from the site of the work and any authorized standby time, the rate
 will be 50 percent of the hourly rate after the actual operating costs have been deducted. All allowed time
 shall fall within the authorized working hours for such extra work. No payment will be allowed for time
 elapsed while equipment is broken down or being replaced. T he hourly rental rates will apply only to
 equipment that is already on the job. If the actual unit of equipment to be used is not listed in the schedule,
 the rate listed for similar equipment with the approximate same initial cost shall be used. Equipment to be
 used and all prices shall be agreed upon in writing before such equipment is used. An amount equal to 20
 percent (5 percent profit and 15 percent overhead) of the sum of these items will also be paid to the
 contractor. Whenever it is necessary for the contractor to rent equipment, the rental and transportation
 costs of the equipment plus five percent for overhead will be paid. In no case shall the rental rates exceed
 those of established distributors or equipment rental agencies. All prices shall be agreed upon in writing
 before such equipment is used.
 109.5.5 Misce llane ous. No additional allowance will be made for general superintendence, the use of
 small tools or other costs for which no specific allowance is herein provided. Jobsite and home office
 overhead expenses shall be considered fully compensated by the payments provided in Sec 109.5.
 
 90
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 109.5.6 Subcontracte d Work. For administration and all overhead costs in connection with approved
 subcontract work, the Prime contractor will receive an amount equal to five percent of the actual cost of
 the subcontracted work. T he engineer has the authority to require alterations in the equipment and labor
 force assigned to force account work, to limit authorization of overtime work to that normally used on a
 project for work of similar nature or to require overtime work when an emergency exists, and to require the
 cessation of force account work when adverse conditions seriously limit productivity.
 109.5.7 State me nts. No payment will be made for work performed on a force account basis until the
 contractor has furnished the engineer with duplicate itemized statements of the cost of such force account
 work detailed as follows:
 (a) Name, classification, date, daily hours, total hours, rate and extension for each laborer and
 foreman.
 (b) Designation, dates, daily hours, total hours, rental rate and extension for each unit of
 machinery and equipment.
 (c) Quantities of material, prices and extensions.
 (d) T ransportation of material.
 (e) Cost of property damage, liability and worker's compensation insurance premiums,
 unemployment insurance contributions and social security.
 109.5.7.1 Statements shall be accompanied and supported by receipted invoices for all rental equipment,
 material used and transportation charges.
 109.5.7.2 If material used on the force account work is not specifically purchased for such work but is
 taken from the contractor's stock, then in lieu of the invoices, the contractor shall furnish an affidavit
 certifying that such material was taken from contractor's stock, that the quantity claimed was actually used,
 and that the price and transportation claimed represent the actual cost to the contractor.
 109.5.8 Compe nsation. Each day the contractor's representative and the engineer shall compare records
 of the cost of work done as ordered on a force account basis. Two copies of these records will be made by
 the engineer on forms provided by the Commission, and the copies shall be signed at the end of each day by
 both the engineer and the contractor, one copy to be retained by the engineer, and one copy to be retained
 by the contractor. T he total payment made, as provided in Sec 109.5, shall constitute full compensation
 for such work.
 109.6 Me thod of Payme nt. Payment to the contractor for furnishing all material and performing all
 work under the contract will be deposited electronically in an account number and financial institution
 designated by the contractor on form MO 300-1278.
 109.7 Partial Payme nts.
 109.7.1 Payme nt Estimate s. T he engineer will make semi-monthly payment estimates in writing for the
 material in place and the work performed during the semi-monthly interval and the value thereof at the
 contract unit bid prices. For partially complete items, the proper percentage with relation to completion
 will be allowed.
 109.7.2 Mate rial Allowance . T he engineer may, in any payment estimate, include the value of any nonperishable material that will be finally incorporated in the completed work. T he material shall be in
 conformity with the plans and specifications in the contract, and shall not have been used at the time of
 such estimate. T he value of such material in a single submission from one supplier shall be no less than
 $10,000.00. T he material shall be delivered to the project or other location that is approved by the
 engineer. Any storage area not within the right of way shall be leased at the contractor's expense with
 provisions for right of entry by the engineer during the period of storage. Invoices for material payment
 shall be submitted to the engineer at least four days prior to the estimate date. Receipted invoices for all
 
 91
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 material payments previously allowed on the estimate shall be submitted to the engineer within 42 days of
 the date of the estimate on which material allowance was made or such material allowance will be deducted
 from future payments. T he amounts paid for such material shall reduce the amount of other partial or final
 payments due the contractor for the work performed as the materials are fabricated or incorporated in the
 completed work.
 109.7.2.1 No partial payment will be made for living or perishable plant material until planted.
 109.7.2.2 T he engineer may also, on contracts containing 100 tons or more of structural steel, include in
 the estimate prepared for partial payment, the value of structural carbon steel or structural low alloy steel,
 or both, which is to form a part of the completed work and which has been produced and delivered by the
 steel mill to the fabricator.
 109.7.2.2.1 T he required receipted mill invoice, billing, title or assignment documents or other documents
 furnished by the contractor shall include certified mill test reports as described in Sec 1080, containing
 complete material description, identification, weights, dimensions, heat and unit numbers, and cost data.
 109.7.2.2.2 T he structural steel shall be stored separately and used only for the fabricated structural steel in
 the contract.
 109.7.2.2.3 T he weight of the structural steel considered for partial payment shall not exceed the contract
 quantity.
 109.7.2.3 T he engineer may also include in any payment estimate an amount not to exceed 90 percent of
 the invoice value of any inspected and accepted fabricated structural steel items, fabricated structural
 aluminum sign trusses, structural precast items and permanent highway signs providing the total invoice
 value of these items is no less than $25,000 for each storage location for each project.
 109.7.2.4 All material furnished for the work as noted in these specifications will be subject to shop
 inspection by the engineer.
 109.8 Final Acce ptance and Payme nt. When the project has been accepted as provided in Sec 105, the
 engineer will prepare the final tabulation of the quantities of work performed. All prior partial estimates
 and payments will be subject to correction in the final tabulation and payment. T he contractor will be paid
 the entire sum found to be due after deducting all previous payments and all amounts to be retained or
 deducted under the provisions of the contract. T he contractor shall submit the following for file with the
 Commission:
 (a) An affidavit, on the form prescribed by the Commission, to the effect that all payments have
 been made and all claims have been released for all material, labor and other items covered by the
 contract bond.
 (b) T he written consent of the surety to such payment is required if retainage was held.
 (c) Any other documents that may be required by the contract.
 109.8.1 Final Payme nt and Claims. If said affidavit regarding subcontractor and third party debts and
 claims cannot be given because of a dispute as to the amount or legality of a claim, the engineer, with the
 consent of the surety, may consent to and make payment of all of the final amounts due the contractor if:
 (a) T he engineer is of the opinion that the claim has not been paid solely because the contractor
 is, in good faith, questioning the legality of said claim or its amount.
 (b) T he engineer is further satisfied that there is good and sufficient bond to fully protect said
 claimant.
 (c) T he contractor's affidavit clearly sets out the facts as to the name and address of the unpaid
 claimant or claimants, the amount of the disputed claim, and a brief statement of the cause of the
 dispute.
 
 92
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 109.8.2 Corre ctions. Final acceptance will not prevent the Commission from correcting any
 measurement, estimate or certificate made before or after completion of the contract. T he Commission
 will not be prevented from recovering, from the contractor or surety, or both, overpayments made or costs
 sustained by the Commission for failure of the contractor to fulfill the obligations under the contract. A
 waiver on the part of the Commission of any breach of any part of the contract shall not be held to be a
 waiver of any other or subsequent breach.
 109.8.3 De fe cts. T he contractor and surety shall be liable to the Commission for latent defects, fraud or
 such gross mistakes as may amount to fraud, or as regards the Commission's rights under any warranty or
 guaranty without prejudice to the terms of the contract.
 109.9 Re taine d Pe rce ntage .
 109.9.1 Withholding of Re taine d Pe rce ntage .
 109.9.1.1 Retainage may be initiated during contract performance if the engineer determines that certain
 events have occurred, including:
 (a) Events where federal or state law applicable to the contract require payments be withheld to
 enforce a contract obligation.
 (b) Events where the contract otherwise specifically provides for withholding payments to secure
 performance.
 (c) T he occurrence of a cause for withholding payment specified in the Missouri Prompt Pay Act,
 34.057 RSMo. Retainage withheld under these circumstances will be as allowed by that statute.
 (d) When projects are being charged liquidated damages or when it is determined by the engineer
 that assessment of liquidated damages is probable and imminent.
 109.9.1.2 If retainage is initiated during contract performance, then the greater of the amount allowed
 under 34.057 RSMo or five percent will be deducted from the total amount of remaining work items of
 each estimate. T he retained percentage will be released as provided in these specifications. T he net amount
 due on the estimate will be certified to the Commission for payment. T his method of retained percentage
 will not apply to Sec 808.6.
 109.9.2 Re le ase of Re taine d Pe rce ntage . As soon as practical after final acceptance of the work, and
 after final quantities have been computed or computations have reached a point where final quantities may
 be closely estimated, the retained percentage will be paid to the contractor. A portion of any retained
 percentage may be released after the project is open to all through traffic, or the work has been essentially
 completed. Prior to release of any retained percentage the contractor shall file with the Commission:
 (a) An affidavit, on the form prescribed by the Commission, to the effect that all payments have
 been made and all claims have been released for all material, labor and other items covered by the
 contract bond.
 (b) T he written consent of the surety to such payment.
 (c) Any other documents which may be required by the contract.
 109.9.3 Re le ase with Pe nding Claims. If said affidavit cannot be given because of a dispute as to the
 amount or legality of a claim, the engineer, with the consent of the surety, may consent to and make
 payment of all of final amounts and percentage due the contractor if:
 (a) T he engineer is of the opinion that the claim has not been paid solely because the contractor
 is, in good faith, questioning the legality of said claim or its amount.
 (b) T he engineer is further satisfied that there is good and sufficient bond to fully protect said
 
 93
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 claimant.
 (c) T he contractor's affidavit clearly sets out the facts as to the name and address of the unpaid
 claimant or claimants, the amount of the disputed claim, and a brief statement of the cause of the
 dispute.
 109.10 Assignme nts. Neither the contract, nor any duties or obligations or rights of the contractor or
 the contractor ’s surety arising under, from or relating to the contract, or to be performed as required by the
 contract, and whether present or prospective, including, without limitation, money due at any time or any
 claim of any character arising from or relating to performance or nonperformance of the contract,
 whether for breach or otherwise, shall be assigned or transferred to any other person so as to bind or affect
 the Commission absent the express written consent of the surety and the Commission and upon a written
 request and compliance with such requirements as the engineer or Commission may provide.
 109.11 Compe nsation for Proje ct De lays. T his provision will apply to and will control all contract
 adjustments, change orders and claims for additional compensation that are time related, resulting from
 compensable project delays, inefficiency, standby, extended performance or described in any other term.
 109.11.1 Only the actual and documented additional costs associated with the following items will be
 recoverable by the contractor as an equitable adjustment for delay.
 (a) Non-salaried labor expenses.
 (b) Material costs.
 (c) Equipment costs.
 (d) Costs of extended job-site overhead.
 (e) An additional ten percent of the total of items (a), (b), (c) and (d) for home office overhead
 and every other cost for which no specific allowance is provided.
 109.11.2 All costs claimed shall be adequately documented when measuring additional equipment expenses
 (i.e. ownership expenses) arising as a direct result of a delay caused by MoDOT. Actual records kept in the
 usual course of business, measuring actual increased ownership expenses pursuant to generally accepted
 accounting principles, may be required at the discretion of the engineer for determining equipment costs.
 For delays that the engineer determines to be short-term, or when the engineer determines this method
 acceptable, equipment costs shall be calculated using the provisions for authorized standby time in Sec
 109.5.4, except that no increase for overhead or profit will be allowed in excess of what is established in
 Sec 109.11.1.
 109.11.3 T he parties agree that, in any adjustment for delay costs, MoDOT will have no liability for the
 following items of damages or expense.
 (a) Profit in excess of that provided herein.
 (b) Loss of profit.
 (c) Labor inefficiencies.
 (d) Equipment inefficiencies or reduced production.
 (e) Home office overhead in excess of that provided in the percentage allowance in Sec 109.11.1
 or herein if none of those percentages applies.
 (f) Consequential damages, including but not limited to loss of bonding capacity, loss of bidding
 opportunities and insolvency.
 (g) Indirect costs or expenses of any nature.
 
 94
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (h) Attorney's fees, claims preparation expenses or costs of litigation.
 109.12 Change O rde rs. Except as otherwise provided for in the change order, an adjustment of the
 contract price or time of contract performance in a change order constitutes compensation in full to the
 contractor, subcontractors and suppliers for all costs and time effects directly or indirectly attributable to
 the matter described in the change order, for all delays related thereto, for all impact, cumulative impacts
 and for performance of the change within the time stated. T he surety's liability under the contract bond
 and contract shall not be limited to the penal sum as set forth in the contract bond. T he surety shall be
 liable and responsible to the Commission for the contractor's entire performance and of all obligations
 arising under or from the contract, which shall include, but not be limited to, any change orders issued under
 the contract that increase the cost of the contract.
 109.13 Prompt Payme nt to Subcontractors and Supplie rs. T he requirements set forth in this section
 will apply to all contracts where the federal government is participating in the cost of construction.
 109.13.1 When the contractor receives any payment from the Commission, the contractor shall, within
 the earlier of fifteen days of receipt of that payment, or the date provided by the subcontract or purchase
 order, pay each subcontractor or supplier a sum, less only any retention provided by the subcontractor or
 purchase order or sum withheld as allowed by Sec 109.13.3, equal to one of the following:
 (a) T he value of that subcontractor's work, services or material included on the contractor
 payment estimate applicable to that payment.
 (b) T he amount of any material allowance under Sec 109.7.
 (c) Such greater sum as provided by the subcontract or purchase order for work included on the
 contractor payment estimate.
 109.13.2 Notwithstanding any conflicting provision in a subcontract or purchase order and subject only to
 the requirements of Sec 109.13.3, the contractor shall make final payment of the balance of all sums under
 a subcontract or purchase order, including any retention, within 30 days of the satisfactory completion of
 the subcontractor's work or services, or a supplier's final delivery of materials to be provided.
 109.13.3 T he contractor may withhold periodic payment or final payment to a subcontractor or supplier
 only for the following causes and only if that subcontractor or supplier is directly involved:
 (a) T he engineer has rejected specific areas or items of work or materials as not conforming to the
 contract or such areas or items of work or materials are deemed not suitable for payment.
 (b) Unsatisfactory job progress.
 (c) Defective construction work or materials not remedied.
 (d) Disputed work, but only the disputed amount.
 (e) Failure to comply with other material provisions of the contract.
 (f) T hird party claims filed, or reasonable evidence that a claim will be filed, but not claims
 covered by a subcontractor or supplier's insurance required by Sec 107.
 (g) Substantial evidence of the subcontractor or supplier's failure to make timely payments for
 labor, equipment or materials; damage to the contractor or another subcontractor or material
 supplier, but not such damage as is covered by a subcontractor or supplier's insurance required by
 Sec 107.13.2.3.
 (h) Substantial evidence that the subcontractor or supplier's work cannot be completed for the
 unpaid balance of the subcontract or purchase order sum, or a reasonable amount for retention.
 
 95
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 109.14 Price Adjustme nt for Fue l. If the contractor accepts the option for fuel adjustment in the bid
 proposal, the method of price adjustment for the fuel used on the items of work specified herein will be
 based on "Fuel Usage Factors" T he following table specifies the fuel usage factors for Production and OnRoad Hauling. T he On-Road Hauling Factor is based on an average 30-mile round trip and will be used
 regardless of the actual haul distance.
 
 Item of Work
 
 Unit
 
 Fuel Usage
 Fuel Usage
 Total Fuel
 Factor f or
 Factor f or
 Usage
 On-Road
 Production
 Factor
 Hauling
 
 Class A Excavation
 
 gal/yd 3
 
 0.20
 
 n/a
 
 0.20
 
 Unclassified
 Excavation
 Class C Excavation
 (Includes Sandstone
 and Igneous Rock
 Excavation)
 
 gal/yd 3
 
 0.30
 
 n/a
 
 0.30
 
 gal/yd 3
 
 0.40
 
 n/a
 
 0.40
 
 0.35
 
 n/a
 
 0.35
 
 2.65
 
 0.67
 
 3.32
 
 0.27
 0.29
 0.31
 0.33
 0.35
 0.36
 0.39
 0.41
 0.42
 
 0.22
 0.26
 0.29
 0.33
 0.37
 0.41
 0.44
 0.48
 0.52
 
 0.49
 0.55
 0.60
 0.66
 0.72
 0.77
 0.83
 0.89
 0.94
 
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 
 0.11
 0.15
 0.19
 0.23
 0.26
 0.30
 0.34
 0.67
 1.35
 
 0.11
 0.15
 0.19
 0.23
 0.26
 0.30
 0.34
 0.67
 1.35
 
 gal/yd 3
 Bituminous Construction
 on Roadways, Shoulders
 and Entrances. Includes
 both full depth asphalt
 and overlays. Includes
 all asphalt mixes under
 gal/ton of
 Secs 401, 402 and 403,
 total asphalt
 as well as Ultrathin
 mix
 Bonded Asphalt Wearing
 Surface (UBAWS).
 Asphalt mixes paid by
 SY will be converted to
 equivalent tons using a
 factor of 1.98 tons/yd 3.
 Concrete P avement
 Construction on
 Roadways, Shoulders
 and Entrances.
 gal/yd 2
 Includes both full depth
 6 in.
 concrete and overlays.
 7 in.
 Includes roller
 8 in.
 compacted concrete.
 9 in.
 Round to nearest 1 in.
 10 in.
 increment. (e.g. if 7.5”
 11 in.
 pavement use 8 in.
 12 in.
 factor). If less than
 13 in.
 6 in., use 6 in. factor.
 14 in.
 Concrete paid by CY
 will be converted to
 equivalent thickness.
 Embankment in P lace
 
 Aggregate Base
 Construction a on
 Roadways, Shoulders
 and Entrances.
 
 gal/yd 2
 3in.
 4 in.
 5 in.
 6 in.
 7 in.
 8 in.
 9 in.
 gal/ton
 gal/yd 3
 
 a Includes all base in Secs 302 and 304, when hauled to the project, but
 does not include material in Secs 303 or 310. Does not include any base
 produced within project limits or adjacent to the project. Includes base
 shown in pay limits for optional shoulder designs (e.g. A3 shoulder), but not
 the portion identified as incidental base.
 
 109.14.1 T he first day of each month (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) in which the project is
 bid will be used to establish the "Starting Fuel Index" for the duration of the project. T he "Starting Fuel
 Index" will be the average of the values given for No. 2 fuel as reported by Platt's Oilgram - PAD 2 - St.
 Louis Area.
 
 96
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 109.14.2 T he pay items and unit prices in the contract will not change. T he Commission will, on the first
 day of each month (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays), determine the "Monthly Fuel Index" of
 No. 2 fuel from the price index as reported by Platt's Oilgram - PAD 2 - St. Louis Area, which will apply to
 all payment estimates during that month regardless of the type fuel used.
 109.14.3 T he quantities of completed work for the payment period will be determined by the engineer and
 included in the payment estimate. T hese same quantities will be used to determine the fuel usage for any
 price adjustment.
 109.14.4 T he difference (±) between the "Monthly Fuel Index" and the "Starting Fuel Index" will be the
 "Monthly Fuel Index Adjustment Factor". T his "Monthly Fuel Index Adjustment Factor", along with the
 "Fuel Usage Factor" and quantities of completed work for which payment is made will determine the fuel
 adjustment payment or deduction.
 
 109.14.5 If adjustments are made in the contract quantities, the contractor shall accept the fuel adjustment
 as full compensation for increases or decreases in the price of fuel regardless of the amounts of overrun or
 underrun.
 109.14.6 T he fuel adjustment will be computed each pay period work is performed, for the usage of fuel by
 the following procedure:
 Fuel Adjustment = (Fuel Usage Factor) x (Monthly Fuel Index Adjustment Factor) x (Units of Work
 included in the payment estimate)
 109.14.7 Payments or deductions for the fuel adjustments on the various items of work will be made on the
 estimate as one "Fuel Adjustment". No change order will be required.
 109.14.8 If the bidder wishes to be bound by these specifications, the bidder shall execute the acceptance
 form in the proposal. Failure by the bidder to execute the acceptance form will be interpreted to mean
 election to not participate in the price adjustment for fuel.
 109.15 Fixe d Cost Ite ms. T he following fixed prices shall be used when referenced in the specifications:
 Sec
 201.4.3
 203.9.4
 
 206.6.2
 206.6.3.1
 206.6.3.2
 206.6.3.3
 206.6.3.4
 214.5.1.2
 303.5.1.2
 401.14
 403.23.2
 611.30.5.1
 701.7.7
 703.5.1
 703.5.1
 
 Item No.
 Item of Work
 201-30.00 Clearing and Grubbing
 ≤500 cy
 203-20.00 Class C Excavation
 > 500 cy but < 2000 cy
 203-20.00 Class C Excavation
 ≥ 2000 cy
 203-20.00 Class C Excavation
 Supplemental Foundation Test
 206-36.00
 Holes
 206-10.03 Class 1 Excavation in Rock
 206-20.03 Class 2 Excavation in Rock
 206-31.00 Class 3 Excavation in Rock
 206-34.00 Class 4 Excavation in Rock
 214-20.00 Furnishing Rock Fill
 303-06.00 Furnishing Rock Base Material
 Sample of Compacted P lant Mix
 401-05.00
 Bituminous P avement
 Sample of Compacted Asphaltic
 403-05.00
 Concrete P avement
 611-30.10 Furnishing Type 1 Rock Blanket
 611-30.20 Furnishing Type 2 Rock Blanket
 701-15.00 Concrete Coring
 Concrete Fill > 2 cy
 703-20.02 Class B Concrete (Misc)
 Concrete Fill < 2 cy
 703-20.02 Class B Concrete (Misc)
 
 Unit Fixed Price
 Acre $3,500.00
 cy
 
 $25.00
 
 cy
 
 $20.00
 
 cy
 
 $8.00
 
 ft
 
 $6.00
 
 cy
 cy
 cy
 cy
 cy
 sy
 
 $120.00
 $170.00
 $85.00
 $85.00
 $15.00
 $10.00
 
 Each
 
 $75.00
 
 Each
 
 $75.00
 
 cy
 cy
 lf
 
 $24.00
 $25.00
 $100.00
 
 cy
 
 $500.00
 
 cy
 
 $750.00
 
 97
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 704.6
 
 706-10.00 Reinforcing Steel
 
 lb
 
 $2.00
 
 98
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 110
 STATE AND FEDERAL WAGE RATES AND O THER REQ UIREMENTS
 110.1 Wage Rate s. T he contractor will be required to pay either the state or federal prevailing hourly
 wage rate for any craft or type of worker required to perform the work, except when expressly provided by
 the contract documents. State wage rates, information on the required federal aid provisions, and the
 current federal wage rates are available on MoDOT ’s web site. Applicable federal wage rates will be posted
 on MoDOT ’s web site ten days before the bid opening. T hese supplemental bidding documents have
 important legal consequences. It shall be conclusively presumed that the documents applicable to the
 contract are in the bidder's possession and have been reviewed and used by the bidder in the preparation of
 any bid submitted on a project.
 110.2 Fe de ral-Aid Proje cts. If the federal government is participating in the cost of construction of the
 project, all applicable federal laws, and the regulations made pursuant to such laws, will be applicable to and
 become part of the contract, shall be observed by the contractor, and the work will be subject to the
 inspection of the appropriate federal agency in accordance with Sec 105.10. Contracts with federal-aid will
 require payment of the prevailing hourly wage rate for each craft or type of work required to execute the
 contract as determined by the Missouri Department of Labor and Industrial Relations, and will require
 adherence to a schedule of minimum wages as determined by the U.S. Department of Labor. For work
 performed anywhere on the project, the contractor and the subcontractors shall pay the higher of these
 two applicable wage rates.
 110.3 Pre vailing Wage s and Re cords. T he prevailing state wage rate, overtime and fringe benefits for
 the locality of the work as determined by the Missouri Department of Labor and Industrial Relations, or by
 a court decision on appeal, will be contained in the contract. T he effective date for the current wage rate,
 overtime and fringe benefits, for bidding purposes, will be in the bid documents by special provision. T he
 contractor and all subcontractors shall pay no less than the prevailing wage rate, overtime and fringe
 benefits as specified or as same may be changed by a court decision on appeal, for all work performed under
 the contract. Per 290.250 RSMo., the contractor shall forfeit a penalty up to $100 per day per worker for
 each worker that is paid less than the prevailing rate for any work done under the contract by the
 contractor or any subcontractor as determined by the Missouri Department of Labor.
 110.3.1 T he contractor is advised that the prevailing wage rate, overtime and fringe benefits are subject to
 change during the life of the contract by court decision. No such change shall be the basis for adjustment in
 the contract price.
 110.3.2 T he contractor and each subcontractor shall keep an accurate record showing the names and
 occupation of all workers employed by the contractor, including the actual wages, overtime and fringe
 benefits paid to each worker. T he record shall be open to inspection at all reasonable hours by the
 representatives of the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations of Missouri or the Commission. T he
 contractor shall submit certified copies of payrolls to the engineer each week.
 110.3.3 Subsiste nce De ductions. T he contractor shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws
 for employee payroll deductions for subsistence and as specified herein:
 (a) T he contractor shall provide to the engineer a copy of the employee-signed agreement for
 each employee that agrees to a subsistence deduction prior to that employee beginning work on
 the project. If the employee does not speak English, such agreement shall be written in his/her
 native language.
 (b) T he contractor shall document each purpose (food, lodging, travel etc.) and amount of all
 subsistence deductions and provide documentation in support of each deduction to the engineer.
 (c) T he subsistence deductions shall serve the convenience and interest of the employee. No profit
 or other benefit shall otherwise be obtained, directly or indirectly, by the contractor or
 subcontractor or any affiliated person in the form of commission, dividend or otherwise.
 110.4 Work Pe rforme d in Adjoining State s. When a project requires work to be performed in both the
 State of Missouri and a bordering state, the contractor will be required to pay the applicable prevailing
 
 99
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 hourly rate of wage for the site of the work. T he contractor shall determine which rates are applicable, and
 shall pay the greater of any conflicting wage rates. Additional information on obtaining wage rates and
 federal wage rates for the bordering state will be contained in the contract.
 
 100
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 201
 CLEARING AND GRUBBING
 201.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of clearing, grubbing, removing and disposing of items, debris
 and other objectionable matter from within the limits of right of way and easement areas, except
 vegetation designated to remain or to be selectively treated.
 201.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 201.2.1 Ge ne ral. T he engineer will designate all trees, shrubs, plants and other objects that are to remain.
 All designated items shall be preserved. Any damage to natural terrain, vegetation or objects designated to
 remain shall be repaired or replaced, as determined by the engineer, at the contractor ’s expense.
 201.2.2 Cle aring and Grubbing. Unless otherwise specified in the contract documents, the entire length
 of the project shall be cleared and grubbed to the limits and requirements specified. Clearing and grubbing
 shall include removal of all trees, stumps, roots and any objectionable matter resting on or protruding
 through the surface of the original ground, except for those items designated to remain.
 201.2.2.1 Cle aring. T he area for clearing shall be within the following limits:
 (a) Highway construction areas on the right of way or right of way easements, including structures,
 frontage roads, streets, ramps, approaches, ditches, channels and all other access roads,
 connections and incidental items that are to be constructed. T hese areas shall extend 10 feet
 outside of construction lines, or to the right of way limits if less than 10 feet.
 (b) Material sites within the right of way or right of way easements.
 (c) Areas enclosed by interchange loops and ramps.
 (d) Site distance areas for intersecting routes.
 201.2.2.2 Limits of Grubbing. Within the limits of the cut areas, grubbing shall be performed to a
 minimum depth of 18 inches below the finished earth grade of roadways, ditches, channels, borrows and
 structures. T he areas below the natural ground surface shall be grubbed to a depth necessary to remove all
 stumps, roots, buried logs and other objectionable material. In embankment areas, undisturbed stumps and
 roots extending no more than
 6 inches above the ground line may remain, provided the stumps and roots are a minimum of 4 feet below
 the finished earth grade. Except in areas to be excavated, holes created by removals shall be backfilled with
 suitable material and compacted to the approximate density of the adjacent area.
 201.2.2.3 Se le ctive Cle aring and Grubbing. All areas outside the limits designated for clearing and
 grubbing, but on the right of way, shall be free of unsightly vegetation, debris and other objectionable
 matter. In lieu of grubbing, undisturbed stumps outside the slope stake limits and in mowable areas may be
 cut to a maximum height of 3 inches above the ground. Low hanging, unsound or unsightly branches on
 trees or shrubs designated to remain shall be removed as directed by the engineer.
 201.2.3 Scalping. T he contractor shall scalp all areas where excavation or embankment is to be
 performed, except mowed or burned over sod may remain where the embankment to be constructed is at
 least 4 feet above natural ground. Scalping shall include the removal of surface material such as sod, grass,
 residue of agricultural crops, sawdust and any other vegetative matter without removing more earth than is
 necessary.
 201.2.4 National Fore st Land. Before beginning work on a highway to be constructed over national
 forest land, the contractor shall obtain information from the forest ranger in charge to determine rules and
 regulations covering construction procedures and shall follow those requirements. Before any fires are set,
 the contractor shall notify the forest ranger in charge, and shall secure a burning permit.
 201.2.5 Re moval and Disposal of Mate rial. T he contractor shall dispose of all trees, stumps, brush,
 roots and all other objectionable matter removed in the clearing and grubbing process.
 
 101
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 201.2.5.1 O pe n Burning. T he contractor shall not be allowed to conduct open burning except for small
 quantities as approved by the engineer or as described in the contract. In lieu of open burning the
 contractor shall make efforts to harvest marketable timber, utilize mulched timber for erosion control and
 utilized excess mulch for composting. Open burning in incorporated areas will be permitted only under a
 permit or waiver from MDNR. T he contractor shall obtain all necessary permits and approvals before open
 burning is initiated, and shall comply with permit conditions, MDNR regulations, and all laws in accordance
 with Sec 107. A contractor representative shall be present during all burning. Measures shall be taken to
 ensure that structures or vegetation on adjacent property, or items designated to remain on the right of
 way, shall not be jeopardized. Fires set for the purpose of training fire fighters and industrial employees in
 fire fighting methods may be permitted after coordination with MDNR or local fire departments, and shall
 be in strict accordance with NFPA standards.
 201.2.5.2 Disposal of Wood. Burial of stumps and debris will not be permitted on the right of way.
 Products of clearing and grubbing may be removed from the right of way and disposed of out of sight from
 the roadway, provided there is no conflict with governing regulations for the wasted material. A signed,
 written agreement with the property owner shall be submitted by the contractor to the engineer prior to
 the disposal of material on that property.
 201.2.5.3 Disposal of Scalping. T he products of scalping shall be deposited at the toe of embankments
 where such areas are available within the limits of the roadway balance affected. If such areas are not
 available, the products shall be neatly and uniformly deposited on the right of way in such a manner that no
 drainage will be blocked.
 201.2.5.4 Disposal of Timbe r. Except in national forest areas, all timber that has not been removed from
 the right of way prior to construction and is not designated to remain in place shall become the property of
 the contractor.
 201.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. T he work provided herein will not be measured for payment, but will be
 considered a plan quantity. T he following exceptions will be made on a measured quantity basis:
 
 (a) An authorized change in the line or grade, or appreciable deviations in the original ground
 elevations in accordance with Sec 203.8.1, significantly alters the original construction limits of
 the contract.
 (b) Authorized alterations or corrections to the plans provide additional work outside the original
 construction limits of the contract and will materially affect the final payment quantity.
 (c) Appreciable errors within the original limits of construction, if the contractor provides written
 notification, and measurements of the proposed change to the engineer prior to commencing
 clearing operations. T he engineer will accept or reject the changes by the close of the next
 business day.
 201.3.1 If payment for additional work is required, a combined measurement of clearing and grubbing will
 be made on an area basis to the nearest 1/10 acre . An acre will consist of 87.12 units, each unit being a
 rectangular area 50 feet long and 10 feet wide.
 201.3.2 T he total area of the right of way, except that part secured for channel changes, inlet or outlet
 easements, and borrow areas will be laid out in units beginning at the centerline of the highway with corners
 at whole or half stations and extending outward until all of the right of way has been included. T he total
 area of the right of way secured for channel changes, inlet or outlet easements, and borrow areas will be laid
 out in units in the same manner from longitudinal base lines run or designated for these areas.
 201.3.3 Clearing and grubbing will be considered as one item. If additional clearing or grubbing is required,
 the entire unit will be counted for measurement. Areas of mowing or scalping, removal of small trees or
 brush 5 feet high or less, and all weeds, cornstalks and similar vegetation regardless of height, and the
 trimming of branches on trees and shrubs designated to remain, will not be measured and will be considered
 incidental to other required work. Only stumps 3 inches or more in diameter and 6 inches or more above
 
 102
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 the ground surface in areas where grubbing is required will be considered in the measurement of clearing and
 grubbing.
 201.3.4 If any clearing or grubbing is performed within any unit, the entire area of that unit, except in the
 case of overlaps, will be included in the measurement. If individual trees or stumps, cause the overlapping of
 units as laid out, only one unit of clearing and grubbing, as applicable, will be allowed. If a fractional unit
 occurs as a result of measurement or of overlap, the fractional unit will be counted as one unit. If the
 boundary line of any unit intersects a single tree or stump, counting of another applicable unit will not be
 made if there is any clearing and grubbing to be paid for in the adjacent unit.
 201.4 Basis of Payme nt.
 201.4.1 Clearing and grubbing will be paid for at the contract unit price based on plan quantity.
 201.4.2 If a bid item for clearing and grubbing is not included in the contract, any necessary clearing and
 grubbing, including scalping, selective clearing and the removal and disposal of all the resulting material
 required within the contract items specified, will be considered incidental to the contract and additional
 compensation will not be made.
 201.4.3 If additional clearing and grubbing in accordance with Sec 201.3 is required outside the initial
 contract work, payment for that clearing and grubbing will be made per acre at the contract unit price, or if
 separate payment for clearing and grubbing is not included in the contract, payment will be made in
 accordance with Sec 109.
 
 103
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 202
 REMO VAL O F RO ADWAYS AND BUILDINGS
 202.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of the removal and disposal of all existing improvements from
 the right of way and within the limits of any construction area outside the right of way, except
 improvements designated or permitted to remain in place or to be removed under other items of work.
 T hese specifications will apply to all removal work performed by the contractor.
 202.2 Ge ne ral Re quire me nts.
 202.2.1 Disposal of Mate rial. All improvements not designated to remain shall be removed or disposed
 of by the contractor as required. T he work may involve the generation of excess material, which may be
 solid waste under the definitions of the MDNR Solid Waste Management Program. T he contractor shall
 dispose of solid waste in accordance with the Missouri Solid Waste Management Law and implementing
 regulations, 10 CSR 80.
 202.2.1.1 Regulated solid waste, including waste tires, shall be handled, transported and disposed of in
 accordance with applicable regulations. Documentary proof of proper transport and disposal of this waste,
 including transport forms, disposal forms, scale tickets, cancelled checks and receipts, shall be provided to
 MDNR and to the engineer prior to acceptance of the work.
 202.2.1.2 Material designated for use elsewhere shall not be removed from the project. Open burning of
 material shall be conducted in accordance with Sec 201.2.5.1. Uncontaminated underground storage
 facilities not requiring removal shall be dewatered, filled with sand or grout to within one foot of the top of
 the facility, and crushed.
 202.2.2 Damage d Ite ms. Any item damaged by the contractor's operations that is designated to remain in
 place, to be used elsewhere, or to be used by the public or an adjoining property owner, shall be repaired or
 replaced at the contractor ’s expense, in a manner satisfactory to the engineer in accordance with Sec
 107.12.
 202.2.3 Dust and Emissions Control. All operations during demolition and removal shall be adequately
 controlled to prevent dust and visible emissions, unless otherwise approved by the engineer. All measures
 taken shall be provided by the contractor at the contractor ’s expense unless specified otherwise.
 202.2.4 Salvage . All material designated in the contract to be salvaged for Commission use from existing
 structures or improvements shall be removed without damage, in sections that may be readily handled,
 transported and stored as approved by the engineer. Unless otherwise designated in the contract, all
 coldmilled material, existing guardrail, and guard cable material designated for removal shall become the
 property of the contractor. All buildings, material and equipment of any description not designated for
 salvage by the Commission shall become the property of the contractor, unless owned and claimed by a
 political subdivision or utility company. Salvaged material becoming the property of the contractor shall
 not be stored on the right of way, nor shall any portion of the right of way or land owned by the
 Commission be used by the contractor as a place of sale for salvaged material.
 202.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 202.3.1 Disposal of Mate rial.
 202.3.1.1 Clean fill, including uncontaminated soil, rock, sand, gravel, concrete, minimal amounts of wood,
 metal and inert solids, as approved by rule or policy by MDNR's Solid Waste Management Program, will
 not be regulated. T hese materials will not be considered solid waste, and may be disposed of without prior
 approval from MDNR's Solid Waste Management Program.
 202.3.1.2 Material that is not clean fill by definition shall be disposed of in accordance with MDNR's or
 local regulations, and the contractor shall provide appropriate documentation, i.e. landfill receipts or a
 private owner waiver letter or statement from MDNR, that the disposal complies with applicable laws or
 regulations.
 
 104
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 202.3.2 Re moval Re quire me nts. Removal of pavement, curb, gutter, sidewalk and other similar
 improvements, and where a portion of such improvements are to be left in place, shall be to an existing
 joint or to a joint sawed full depth. Sufficient removal shall be made to provide for proper grades and
 connections in the new work regardless of removal limits shown on the plans.
 202.3.2.1 Removal of concrete or bituminous material shall consist of breaking up and disposing of the
 material in areas furnished at the contractor ’s expense, within a basement excavation where approved
 backfill material over 24 inches deep is to be placed over such broken material, or within embankments
 where new embankment over 24 inches is to be placed over the broken material. If concrete or bituminous
 slabs are to be left within an embankment or basement, the slabs shall be broken into pieces not
 exceeding 4 square feet . At locations shown on the plans where piling is to be driven, existing pavement,
 sidewalks, footings, foundations, walls and all other types of removal items shall be completely removed
 for a sufficient distance to permit piles to be driven. Existing improvements not removed in their entirety
 shall be removed to a minimum depth of 12 inches below the finished grade section or natural ground. All
 reinforcing steel extending from concrete shall be removed to the exposed face prior to placement within
 water or on exposed ground surfaces.
 202.3.2.2 T he contractor shall remove slabs on grade more than 6 inches higher than existing street or
 alley grades or surrounding low grades. All other aboveground concrete and masonry improvements, fences,
 posts and other structures on the parcel shall be removed to adjacent surface grades. For any location on
 the plans designated as a bridge site, the contractor shall remove all basement and foundation walls,
 footings, floors, and any other incidental masonry construction prior to backfilling. All material from such
 removals meeting the requirements of clean fill shall be disposed of as directed by the engineer. All other
 material shall be disposed of off site at the contractor ’s expense.
 202.3.2.3 All sidewalk slabs over basements, areaways, and all beams, fixtures and supports shall be
 removed except slabs that are part of the public sidewalks adjacent to structures being demolished. T he
 contractor shall not remove coal hole covers, trap doors, sidewalk doors, gratings and similar
 appurtenances that occur in the public sidewalk adjacent to buildings being demolished.
 202.3.2.4 T he contractor shall leave in place any walls or structures that retain adjacent property to ensure
 lateral support to that property. Any wall perpendicular to and connected to the said wall or structure shall
 remain in place and connected to the wall for a distance at least one-half the height of the wall. T he slope
 of the top of the perpendicular wall shall be 1:2 or flatter, sloping downward from the top of the wall or
 structure.
 202.3.3 Se we rs and Drains. All sewers, drainage pipes and floor drains that have been or are to be
 abandoned shall be permanently sealed at the ends with a minimum 8-inch thick bulkhead constructed of
 Class B concrete, a commercial mix concrete in accordance with Sec 501.15 or brick masonry. T he use of
 salvaged brick will be permitted for constructing bulkheads, provided the brick is clean and sound.
 202.3.4 Backfill. All trenches, holes and pits resulting from the removal of improvements, contaminated
 material, soil, tanks and piping shall be backfilled and graded to shape and finish disturbed areas. Backfilling
 shall be performed in accordance with applicable portions of Sec 203 and compacted in accordance with Sec
 203.5 unless otherwise designated by the engineer. Material shall be placed in the same manner and
 compacted to the same density required in adjoining areas and shall be done in such a manner as to ensure
 proper drainage.
 202.3.4.1 Backfill material may consist of previously stockpiled uncontaminated soil or may be obtained
 from the right of way if approved by the engineer. Only approved material free of trees, stumps, rubbish
 and any other deleterious material shall be used in the construction of backfills. Rock, broken concrete or
 other solid material shall not be placed in bridge fill areas. No slope shall be steeper than 2:1 . Broken
 masonry resulting from demolition of buildings or other improvements on the parcel may be used for
 backfill provided the masonry meets the requirements of clean fill. In no case shall broken masonry extend
 closer than 12 inches to the finished surface. In the event there is insufficient material in the immediate
 vicinity, the contractor shall provide material, at the contractor ’s expense, from a source obtained by the
 contractor and approved by the engineer in accordance with Sec 106.
 202.3.4.2 All trees, shrubs or other vegetation within the limits of the contractor ’s backfilling operations
 
 105
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with Sec 201.
 202.3.5 Haz ardous Mate rial.
 202.3.5.1 T he contractor may encounter small quantities of hazardous material as defined by MDNR. T his
 material shall be recycled or disposed of in a manner that maintains the material’s qualifications as “ small
 quantities” in accordance with MDNR regulations.
 202.3.5.2 In the event the contractor encounters what is reasonably suspected to be large quantities of
 hazardous material, the contractor shall immediately cease work and notify the engineer in accordance with
 the contract requirements. If the engineer determines the suspect material is not hazardous or does not
 constitute a large quantity of hazardous material, the contractor will be notified to continue the work. If
 the engineer determines the suspect material is hazardous or constitutes a large quantity of hazardous
 material, the engineer may require the contractor to perform work necessary to abate the hazardous
 material.
 202.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted removal of improvements will be paid for at the contract lump
 sum price. If no lump sum unit for the removal of improvements is included in the contract, the removal
 of improvements required to complete the contract, or as directed by the engineer, will be considered
 incidental to the work and no direct payment for the removal will be made. If additional removals are
 encountered as described in Sec 202.30, payment will be accordance with Sec 104.3.
 202.4.1 No direct payment will be made for the following work:
 (a) Removal and disposal of abandoned fences and mailboxes.
 (b) Sealing abandoned sewers, drainage pipes or floor drains.
 (c) Removal and disposal of small quantities of hazardous material.
 202.4.2 Payment for any additional work required for hazardous material abatement will be handled in
 accordance with Sec 104.3.
 SECTIO N 202.10 PLUGGING AND CLO SURE O F WELLS.
 202.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of plugging and closing wells as shown on the plans or as
 directed by the engineer.
 202.10.2 Conformance Re quire me nts. T he contractor shall notify the engineer at least 24 hours in
 advance of the contractor's intent to plug the well. T he contractor shall be in possession of a valid MDNR
 permit for well or pump installation. T he abandonment procedure for wells shall be in accordance with
 requirements in specific MDNR regulations for monitoring wells, heat pump wells, test holes or all other
 wells, as applicable. A copy of the completed closed well registration shall be furnished to the engineer.
 202.10.3 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of plugged and closed wells will be paid for at the
 contract unit price per each. Payment will be considered full compensation for all labor, equipment and
 material for plugging and closing, and the costs and fees associated with closed well registration.
 SECTIO N 202.20 SEPTIC TANK PLUGGING AND DISPO SAL.
 202.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of plugging and disposing of septic tanks shown on the
 plans or as directed by the engineer.
 202.20.2 Conformance Re quire me nts. T he contractor shall notify the engineer at least 24 hours in
 advance of the contractor's intent to plug and dispose of the septic tank. Septic tanks shall be abandoned by
 pumping the septic tank, collapsing the top of the tank, plugging incoming and outgoing laterals, and
 breaking the bottom to permit drainage. T he tank trench shall be backfilled with coarse gravel or rock,
 agricultural lime, or sand to a depth of 2 feet below the existing ground surface. T he top 2 feet shall be
 backfilled with soil from the parcel and compacted in 6-inch lifts to the approximate density of the
 
 106
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 adjacent soil. In the event there is insufficient material in the immediate vicinity, the contractor shall
 provide material meeting the approval of the engineer, at the contractor's expense. All material pumped
 from septic tanks shall be properly disposed of at a permitted sewage treatment facility or other location
 approved by the engineer.
 202.20.3 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of septic tanks, plugged and disposed of, will be paid
 for at the contract unit price per each. Payment will be considered full compensation for disposal of tank
 contents, permits, labor, equipment and material to complete the described work.
 SECTIO N 202.30 REMO VAL O F IMPRO VEMENTS FO R RO ADWAY CO NTRACTS.
 
 202.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of removing and disposing of all existing improvements for
 roadway contracts from the right of way and within the limits of any construction easement outside the
 right of way, except improvements designated to remain in place or to be removed under other items of
 work.
 202.30.1.1 Removal of improvements shall include removing all drainage structures, pavement, surfacing
 and base courses, curb, gutter, sidewalks, house walks, steps, retaining walls, foundation walls, columns,
 footings, concrete floors, cisterns, catch basins, uncontaminated storage tanks, manholes, drainage and
 sewer pipes, water and gas main pipes, signs, fences, scattered or piled bricks, stones, broken masonry,
 rubbish, debris, outdoor advertising signs, etc., from existing improvements.
 202.30.1.2 T he plans may not show a complete list of all items to be removed. T here may be an
 undetermined number of abandoned utilities, basement or foundation walls, columns, footings or other
 improvements encountered. T he contractor shall determine the extent of the work to be performed under
 this item.
 202.30.2 Me thod of Me asure me nt. T his work will not be measured for payment, but will be considered a
 lump sum unit. T he work will include the removal of all items, regardless of whether the items are shown
 on the plans or encountered during construction, unless the presence of the improvement encountered
 could not have been determined by a visual inspection prior to bidding. No deductions will be made from the
 quantities measured for payment of excavation where existing improvements are removed from within the
 limits of the sections measured for determining pay quantities of excavation.
 202.30.3 Basis of Payme nt. Accepted removal of improvements will be paid for at the contract lump
 sum price. If no lump sum unit for the removal of improvements is included in the contract, the removal
 of improvements required to complete the contract, or as directed by the engineer, will be considered
 incidental to the work and no direct payment for the removal will be made. If additional removals are
 encountered as described in Sec 202.30.2, payment will be made in accordance with Sec 104.3.
 SECTIO N 202.40 DEMO LITIO N AND REMO VAL O F BUILDINGS.
 202.40.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of demolishing, removing and disposing of all existing
 buildings from the right of way or within the limits of any construction easement outside the right of way
 as shown on the plans. Removal of buildings shall include all attached structures, existing rubbish, trash and
 contents in and adjacent to the building on each parcel.
 202.40.1.1 Notification of De molition. T he contractor shall provide proper notification to all
 appropriate federal, state and local agencies prior to demolition. Notification is necessary for the
 demolition of a building, bridge or bridge deck regardless of whether asbestos is present. T he notification
 procedures and forms are available from MDNR. T he contractor shall provide copies of all completed and
 approved forms to the engineer prior to any demolition work.
 202.40.2 Sche dule . T he contractor shall submit a plan and schedule for demolition and removal of any
 designated improvements, asbestos containing material (ACM), buildings, contaminated material, and
 storage tanks on the parcel. Prior to the start of removals, the contractor shall obtain approval from the
 engineer for all schedules and plans. T he work shall be performed in accordance with the approved plan and
 schedule unless otherwise approved by the engineer. T he contractor shall complete all demolition, removal
 
 107
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 and disposal of buildings, other than ACM removal, within seven days after starting work on the building,
 unless otherwise approved by the engineer.
 202.40.3 De molition and Re moval Ge ne ral Re quire me nts.
 202.40.3.1 Backfilling. Backfilling operations for residential basements shall be completed within four
 days after residential buildings are removed. Backfilling operations for commercial basements shall be
 completed within 14 days after commercial buildings are
 removed in accordance with the demolition and removal work schedule required in Sec 202.40.2.
 202.40.3.2 Site Mainte nance . All parcels included with each notice to remove shall be maintained by the
 contractor and kept in a safe and clean condition until acceptance of the work by the engineer. All access
 to the interior of buildings located on a parcel for which a notice to remove has been issued shall be closed
 up and secured or otherwise covered such that the public cannot enter the buildings.
 202.40.3.3 Utilitie s. Before beginning demolition, the contractor shall arrange for the disconnection of
 utilities to buildings to be demolished in accordance with the regulations of the utility concerned. T he
 contractor shall take measures to prevent any material from entering storm and sanitary sewers. In the
 event that utility service lines are disrupted and utility service is needed, the contractor shall provide
 adequate substitute utility service, at the contractor's expense.
 202.40.3.4 Site Se curity. Before starting demolition for each parcel, the contractor shall provide
 adequate security around buildings to be demolished to protect the public and workers from operating
 equipment and falling debris, and to block access to any situation that constitutes a hazard to the public
 202.40.4 Re moval of Asbe stos Containing Mate rial. Unless designated otherwise, the Commission will
 test all buildings or structures to be removed for ACM. Testing of buildings will be limited to ACM.
 Buildings will not be tested for other substances. T he Commission disclaims any representation that the
 buildings are hazard-free. If ACM is present in a building or structure, the ACM shall be removed and
 disposed of by the contractor accordance with the contract documents. All regulated asbestos containing
 material (RACM), as defined in Sec 202.40.4.5, and Category I nonfriable ACM on concrete shall be
 removed from the buildings prior to demolition or salvage. Category II nonfriable ACM that does not have
 a high probability of becoming crumbled, pulverized or reduced to powder in the course of demolition, and
 Category I nonfriable ACM, except floor tile or sheeting on concrete, may remain in the building during
 demolition. All building demolition material, including the Category II nonfriable ACM and Category I
 nonfriable ACM, shall be disposed of in a licensed landfill. T he contractor shall not crumble, pulverize or
 reduce to powder Category II nonfriable ACM and shall not cut, grind, sand, abrade or render the Category I
 nonfriable ACM friable during demolition and transportation to the licensed landfill. If the contractor
 elects to remove and dispose of Category II nonfriable ACM and Category I nonfriable ACM prior to
 demolition, disposal shall be performed properly and at the contractor ’s expense.
 202.40.4.1 Asbe stos Ide ntification and Te sting. Suspect ACM will be sampled and tested. T he results of
 the testing for friable and nonfriable ACM requiring removal will be made available to the contractor or
 included within the contract documents. For those buildings with unknown quantities at the time of award,
 results of testing for friable and nonfriable ACM requiring removal will be provided with the notice to
 remove.
 202.40.4.2 Lice nsing and Pe rmits. T he contractor performing friable asbestos abatement in accordance
 with the regulations shall be registered with MDNR and certified as an asbestos contractor with the agency.
 Before beginning work on any parcel, the contractor shall provide the engineer with copies of all permits,
 licenses and certifications in accordance with local, state, or federal agencies.
 202.40.4.3 Notification and Re porting. T he contractor shall provide all information regarding asbestos
 abatement to the EPA, OSHA, MDNR and local agencies in accordance with applicable regulations
 concerning asbestos removal work. Notification shall be provided by the contractor to all applicable
 regulating agencies for all asbestos removal before removal and demolition begins. T he contractor shall
 obtain any necessary authorization for the work from all applicable federal, state and local agencies. T he
 contractor shall provide copies of all reports and authorization information to the engineer prior to
 beginning work on the project.
 
 108
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 202.40.4.4 O n-Site Supe rvisor. T he contractor shall provide a trained supervisor to remain on site
 during all ACM removal work in accordance with EPA regulations. T he contractor shall provide evidence
 of the supervisor's training to the engineer before any work begins.
 202.40.4.5 Re gulate d Asbe stos Containing Mate rial and Cate gory I Nonfriable Asbe stos
 Containing Mate rial on Concre te . T he contractor shall remove, transfer and dispose of RACM and
 Category I nonfriable ACM (floor tile and sheeting on concrete) specified in the contract. T he following
 material will be considered RACM:
 (a) Friable asbestos material.
 (b) Category I nonfriable ACM that has become friable.
 (c) Category I nonfriable ACM that will be or has been subjected to sanding, grinding, cutting or
 abrading.
 (d) Category II nonfriable ACM that has a high probability of becoming or has become crumbled,
 pulverized or reduced to powder by the forces expected to act on the material in the course of
 demolition.
 202.40.4.6 Unide ntifie d Asbe stos. If the contractor encounters suspect ACM not previously identified
 in the contract, the contractor shall immediately notify the engineer in accordance with the contract
 requirements. T he engineer will have the suspect material sampled and tested, and the contractor shall not
 remove the additional suspect ACM until directed by the engineer.
 202.40.4.7 No Salvage Pe rmitte d. No salvage of items containing asbestos material will be permitted.
 202.40.4.8 Airborne Asbe stos Particle Te sting. T he contractor shall monitor and test for airborne
 asbestos particles during working hours within the area of the property or fence line. T he contractor shall
 conduct operations to keep airborne particles beyond this area within the established regulation limits. T he
 contractor shall furnish the engineer copies of correspondence, test results, recommendations and other
 information to document contractor's compliance with the following requirements:
 (a) When asbestos removal is completed, all work shall be inspected by the contractor for the
 presence of asbestos debris. Removal and cleaning shall continue until air monitoring clearance
 testing indicates the level of airborne fibers meets required levels. T he engineer shall be notified
 when sampling is started. T he contractor shall provide documentation to the engineer within 24
 hours after the sampling has been completed that the level of airborne fibers meets required levels.
 (b) For asbestos abatement projects requiring third party air monitoring as determined by the
 engineer, the contractor shall cooperate and coordinate with the engineer and the third party air
 sampler designated by the engineer to perform the third party air sampling. T he contractor shall
 provide to the engineer a minimum of 48 hours notice of the time when the services of the third
 party air sampler will be required as a result of the contractor's work. T he contractor shall arrange
 work so as not to interfere with the third party air sampler's ability to conduct the necessary air
 sampling. T he contractor and the third party air sampler shall work cooperatively with the
 engineer in a sequence such that air sampling shall be conducted in a proper and timely manner by
 the third party air sampler with minimal interruption to any other party.
 202.40.4. 9 Disposal. All RACM and Category I nonfriable ACM shall be disposed of within seven days of
 removal from the building or structure. All RACM and ACM shall be disposed in accordance with applicable
 EPA, OSHA, MDNR and local agencies’ regulations.
 202.40.4.9.1 T he contractor shall identify or mark hauling vehicles used to transport asbestos waste during
 loading, transporting and unloading in accordance with applicable regulations for transporting asbestos
 waste. T he waste shall be transported in enclosed roll-offs or dumpsters, vehicles that have completely
 enclosed cargo areas, or a four-sided cargo area that shall be completely covered with two layers of 6-mil
 thick plastic sheeting or equivalent covering while the waste is being transported.
 
 109
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 202.40.4.9.2 T he contractor shall provide a Waste Shipment Record to the waste site owner or operator at
 the time the waste is delivered to the waste disposal site. A copy of the Waste Shipment Record shall be
 provided to the engineer.
 202.40.5 Re moval of Buildings. Removal of buildings shall include all attached structures. Under no
 circumstances shall the contractor burn, grind, pulverize or otherwise reduce any portion of the building
 into fine particles without prior approval from the engineer. Any buildings or portion thereof located on
 the parcel may be removed intact or substantially intact subject to the contractor's adherence to the
 following conditions:
 (a) T he contractor shall declare, in writing, the intention to move any building or substantial
 portion thereof to any other location. Such declarations shall be made within 30 days of the
 issuance of the notice to remove for the building. T he contractor shall submit a separate
 declaration for each building.
 (b) T he name of the house mover or house moving company shall be included in the declaration.
 T he engineer reserves the right to disapprove a house mover or house moving company with no
 prior performance record or based on unsatisfactory performance on previous moving jobs.
 Conditional approval may be given at the discretion of the engineer for previously disapproved
 house movers or house moving companies for one building at a time.
 (c) No building or portion thereof shall be removed from the parcel until the contractor has
 received written approval from the engineer and other authority having jurisdiction over the area
 involved in the total move by issuance of the proper permits.
 (d) T he contractor shall commence the removal of buildings promptly. Buildings removed shall
 not be placed on other portions of state right of way for storage or for any other purpose, except
 as specifically allowed by issuance of an overdimension permit from the Commission
 (e) Interim storage of buildings for resale or any other purpose will be limited to areas where
 zoning allows for such storage. No public lands or right of way shall be used unless a permit is
 granted by the responsible agency.
 (f) T he contractor shall remove all components of the building to the foundation level, including
 those components suspended from the main level subfloor structure. T he primary components of
 the building shall be removed intact as a whole structure. T he contractor will not be paid for ACM
 removal from these structures unless required from the disturbance of the foundation or on the
 remaining foundation components after building removal, as determined by the engineer.
 202.40.5.1 De molition of Walls. All exterior walls shall be removed to the level of existing adjacent
 ground, streets, alleys or sidewalks. Interior walls shall be removed to the level of existing basement floors.
 202.40.5.1.1 Where joint or party walls exist between two buildings that are not being demolished at the
 same time, the part of wall or walls serving both buildings shall be removed with the demolition of the last
 structure. No demolition work shall damage or weaken walls or portions of walls serving adjacent buildings.
 202.40.5.1.2 Remaining portions of party walls shall be left in sound condition with demolition
 terminating in neat vertical and horizontal lines. Care shall be taken to ensure demolition without damage
 to roofs or other parts of adjoining buildings.
 202.40.5.2 Re moval of Flooring. Floor construction over basements, sub-basements or cellars, and all
 other floors regardless of elevation, shall be removed. All existing wood and other material attached to
 concrete and masonry construction shall be removed.
 202.40.5.3 Disposal of De bris. T he contractor shall remove any debris resulting from demolition as work
 progresses and dispose of the material in a licensed landfill.
 202.40.5.4 Cooling Syste ms. Buildings to be demolished may have various cooling systems that contain
 
 110
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 freon or other refrigerants. T he contractor shall identify the type of refrigerant present in each system and
 properly recover the refrigerant prior to salvage or demolition of the cooling systems.
 202.40.6 Re moval of Appurte nance s. Removal and disposal shall include all existing building
 appurtenances on each parcel in the demolition and removal contracts from the right of way and within
 the limits of any construction easement outside the right of way, except those items designated to remain
 in place or to be removed under other items of work.
 202.40.6.1 All elevated sidewalks, steps, retaining walls, basement and foundation walls, columns, footings,
 concrete floors, cisterns, catch basins, uncontaminated storage tanks, manholes, signs, fences, bricks,
 stones, broken masonry, rubbish, debris and any other items not covered elsewhere in Sec 202 will be
 considered building appurtenances.
 202.40.6.2 T he plans may not show a complete list of all items to be removed. T here may be an
 undetermined number of basement or foundation walls, columns, footings or other improvements
 encountered. T he contractor shall determine the extent of the work to be performed under this item.
 202.40.7 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 202.40.7.1 Final measurement of removal for ACM will be made to the nearest square foot or linear foot
 based on the asbestos survey test report.
 
 202.40.7.2 Measurement for demolition and removal of buildings and appurtenances will be considered a
 lump sum unit per parcel.
 202.40.8 Basis of Payme nt.
 202.40.8.1 Payment for removal of ACM will be made for field-measured quantities as approved by the
 engineer at the contract unit price. If additional suspect material tests positive for the presence of asbestos,
 payment will be made per the contract unit price. No direct payment will be made for recovering
 refrigerant.
 202.40.8.2 Payment for demolition and removal of buildings and appurtenances will be made at the
 contract lump sum unit price per parcel.
 SECTIO N 202.50 REMO VAL O F CO NTAMINATED MATERIAL AND STO RAGE TANKS.
 202.50.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of removing and disposing of designated residual material,
 pavement, pump islands, all storage tanks and piping; excavation and disposal of uncontaminated and
 contaminated soil as required; obtaining the necessary regulatory permits; backfilling the excavated areas
 with uncontaminated soil after clean up levels have been achieved; and any incidental work or material
 required to complete the job.
 202.50.2 Sche dule . T he contractor shall submit a plan and schedule for demolition and removal of any
 designated storage tanks on the parcel and shall obtain the engineer ’s approval prior to starting work. T he
 work shall be performed in accordance with the approved plan and schedule unless otherwise approved by
 the engineer.
 202.50.3 Re moval Re quire me nts.
 202.50.3.1 Site Inspe ction. T he contractor shall inspect and become familiar with the proposed work
 site, conditions and circumstances.
 202.50.3.2 Conformance Re quire me nts. Work shall be performed in accordance with industry
 recommended practices, including the American Petroleum Institute (API) Recommended Practices, and
 MDNR Underground Storage Tanks (UST ) Closure Guidance (Closure Guidance).
 202.50.3.3 Groundwate r Monitoring We lls. T he contractor shall protect all existing groundwater
 
 111
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 monitoring wells located within the area of underground storage tanks from damage and contamination,
 except for wells in an area of contaminated soil removal.
 202.50.3.4 Tank Vapor Le ve ls. Vapor levels in each tank shall be checked for explosive potential prior to
 removing the tank or piping. Non-sparking tools shall be used for gaining access to the tank atmosphere in
 order to measure the vapor level. If the explosive level is above 20 percent of the lower explosive limit,
 flammable vapors shall be removed in accordance with methods outlined by API Recommended Practices
 until the 20 percent level is reached. T he contractor shall purge vapors from a vent pipe. Gasoline tanks
 shall not be purged during adverse weather conditions where vapors could accumulate at ground level and
 cause a public health or fire hazard.
 202.50.3.5 Tank De wate ring and Re moval. T he contractor shall notify the engineer prior dewatering
 and removing storage tanks.
 202.50.3.6 Re sidual Mate rial. T he contractor shall remove and dispose of all residual material in the
 tanks or drums on the site identified as being a regulated quantity of hazardous waste material. All product,
 sludge, and water in contact with the interior of a petroleum UST will be presumed to be hazardous waste,
 unless sample test results reporting the requirements of the Toxicity Characteristic Final Rule prove
 otherwise. Hazardous waste material shall be transported by a hazardous waste transporter licensed in the
 State of Missouri and manifested as hazardous waste to a Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)
 treatment, storage or disposal facility. T he generator's copy of the manifest shall be submitted to the
 engineer. T he material in tanks or drums identified as being non-hazardous shall be managed properly.
 202.50.3.7 Tank Pit Surface Wate r. Tank pits on the site may contain contaminated surface water or
 groundwater. T he contractor shall remove, transport and dispose of all contaminated water from the tank
 pit at an appropriate treatment, storage or disposal facility.
 202.50.3.8 Soil Excavation. Soil excavation shall be performed by the contractor to segregate
 contaminated soil from uncontaminated soil. Contaminated soil shall be excavated to the limits directed by
 the engineer. T he contractor shall use calibrated field instrumentation approved by the engineer to evaluate
 approximate levels of contamination remaining in the unexcavated soil.
 202.50.3.9 Hauling and Disposal of Contaminate d Soil. Contaminated soil shall be hauled from the
 site and disposed of in a licensed landfill, or as directed by the engineer. Disposal of contaminated soil shall
 be in accordance with the Closure Guidance. T he contractor shall provide the engineer with a copy of a
 completed MDNR form entitled Disposal of Soil Contaminated With Virgin Gasoline or Virgin Fuel Oil.
 202.50.3.10 Use of Uncontaminate d Soil. Uncontaminated soil may be reused as backfill at locations
 approved by the engineer.
 202.50.3.11 Water Accumulated in Excavation. If stormwater accumulates in the excavated area and
 requires removal prior to backfilling, the contractor shall obtain an MDNR storm water discharge permit or
 approval to discharge accumulated water into a sewer system. Disposal of water removed from the
 excavated area will be at the contractor ’s expense.
 202.50.3.12 Sample Analysis. T he contractor ’s work will be regulated as follows:
 (a) T he contractor shall sample and analyze residual material, tank pit surface water or
 groundwater, and any stormwater that accumulates in the excavated area as necessary for proper
 disposal.
 (b) T he contractor shall provide the engineer with the name, location and testing requirements of
 the disposal facility for the contaminated material.
 (c) T he engineer will sample and analyze all soil prior to disposal; prior to beneficial reuse if
 beneficial reuse is designated in the contract; and prior to backfilling. Sampling and analysis will be
 done in accordance with the Closure Guidance and requirements of the Missouri Petroleum Storage
 Tank Insurance Fund.
 
 112
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (d) T he engineer will obtain samples beneath the tank, down-gradient and around pumps and lines
 in accordance with the Closure Guidance.
 (e) T he engineer will determine if remaining soil requires excavation and when clean up levels have
 been achieved.
 202.50.3.13 Backfill. T he contractor shall not begin backfilling operations until directed by the engineer.
 202.50.3.14 Closure Re port. T he contractor shall provide copies of all necessary documentation for
 tank cleaning and disposal, and soil, sludge and wastewater disposal to the engineer. Documentation shall be
 in accordance with the Closure Guidance and the Missouri Petroleum Storage Tank Insurance Fund. T he
 engineer will prepare the underground storage tank closure report in accordance with the Closure Guidance.
 202.50.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of tank removal and disposal will be made per each;
 residual hazardous material removal and disposal will be measured per gallon; tank pit surface water removal
 and disposal will be measured per 10 gallons; and hauling and disposing of contaminated soil will be
 measured per ton based on landfill weight tickets. Measurement of excavation and backfill will be made to
 the nearest cubic yard, measured from the actual excavation limits to the existing surrounding ground line.
 A deduction equal to the volume of the tanks removed will be made from the volume measured for payment
 of contaminated soil excavation when existing tanks are removed from within the limits of the sections
 measured for determining pay volumes of excavation.
 202.50.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 202.50.5.1 T he accepted quantities for removal and disposal of storage tanks will be paid for at the
 contract unit price per each.
 202.50.5.2 T he accepted quantity of hazardous residual material will be paid for at the contract unit price.
 Payment will be considered full compensation for sampling and analysis, removal of the material,
 appropriate containerization and labeling, transportation and treatment or disposal. Payment will not be
 made until the engineer receives a Certification of T reatment or Disposal for all material from the RCRA
 treatment, storage or disposal facility.
 202.50.5.3 T he accepted quantity of tank pit surface water and groundwater removal and disposal will be
 paid for at the contract unit price. Payment will be considered full compensation for all sampling and
 analysis, transportation, disposal fees, and processing of approvals.
 202.50.5.4 T he accepted quantity for excavation of contaminated soil will be paid for at the contract unit
 price.
 202.50.5.5 T he accepted quantity for hauling contaminated soil will be paid for at the contract unit price,
 based on landfill weight tickets. Payment will be considered full compensation for removal from the site
 and transportation for treatment or disposal.
 202.50.5.6 T he accepted quantity for disposal of contaminated soil will be paid for at the contract unit
 price, based on landfill weight tickets. Payment will be considered full compensation for all landfill fees and
 processing of landfill approvals.
 202.50.5.7 T he accepted quantity for backfill will be paid for at the contract unit price and will be
 considered full compensation for material, transportation and compaction.
 SECTIO N 202.60 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER LAGO O N CLO SURES.
 202.60.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of dewatering, sludge removal or treatment, and grading of
 individual residential wastewater lagoons as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 
 202.60.2 Construction Re quire me nts. T he contractor shall notify the engineer at least 24 hours in
 advance of the contractor ’s intent to dewater by pumping and apply to a vegetated area approved by the
 
 113
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 engineer at a rate that will not cause runoff. Residual sludge remaining in the lagoon shall be mixed with soil
 on at least a one to one ratio. Lagoon berms shall be demolished and compacted over the lagoon bottom to
 the approximate density of the adjacent soil. T he contractor shall provide material meeting the approval
 of the engineer to backfill the lagoon to the surrounding ground surface. Material required to backfill the
 lagoon will be considered incidental to the work. If material is available in the immediate vicinity of the
 lagoon, the engineer may authorize using on-site material. Disturbed areas shall be fertilized, seeded and
 mulched. All material pumped from the lagoon shall be properly disposed of at a sewage treatment facility
 unless otherwise directed by the engineer.
 202.60.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of individual residential wastewater lagoon closures will
 be made per each.
 202.60.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of residential wastewater lagoon closures will be paid
 for at the contract unit price. Payment will be considered full compensation for removal, disposal of
 lagoon contents, required backfill material, seeding, fertilizing and mulching, permits, labor, equipment and
 material to complete the described work.
 
 114
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 203
 RO ADWAY AND DRAINAGE EXCAVATIO N,
 EMBANKMENT AND CO MPACTIO N
 203.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of excavating, disposing of or compacting all material
 encountered within the limits of the work not being removed under some other item. T his work shall be
 performed in accordance with the specifications and as shown on the plans, or directed by the engineer. All
 excavation will be classified as hereafter described.
 203.2 Classification of Excavation.
 203.2.1 Class A Excavation will consist of all roadway and drainage excavation not classified as Class C or
 Unclassified. Shale, fire clay, chert broken by intermittent clayey partings or clay seams (joint flint rock),
 stratified chert cemented with clay seams (hardpan), and plain or bituminous-bound bases or surface courses
 of macadam, gravel, broken stone or similar material will be considered as Class A Excavation, not Class C
 Excavation.
 203.2.2 Class C Excavation will consist of the removal of stone, including sandstone or igneous
 formations, in ledges 6 inches thick or more. Laboratory analysis will be made, if necessary, to aid in the
 determination. A ledge will be considered to be a continuous deposit of rock that may or may not include
 thin, interbedded seams of soft material or shale. T he vertical limits of each ledge will be determined by
 beds of soft material or shale greater than 24 inches thick. T he beds of soft material or shale will be
 included in the measurement of Class A Excavation, unless the material falls within the vertical limits
 identified by Sec 203.8.2.3. Boulders or other detached stones, each having a volume of 2 1/2 cubic yards or
 more, will be considered Class C Excavation.
 203.2.3 Unclassified Excavation will consist of the excavation of all material not classified within the
 contract.
 203.3 Borrow.
 203.3.1 Borrow will consist of approved material required for the construction of embankment or for other
 portions of the work, and shall be obtained either from borrow areas shown on the plans or from areas
 designated or approved by the engineer. T he contractor shall notify the engineer sufficiently in advance of
 opening any borrow areas so the necessary cross sections or measurements may be taken. Borrow will be
 classified in the same manner as roadway excavation.
 203.3.2 Borrow areas proposed by the contractor, other than those shown on the plans or designated by
 the engineer, may be approved, provided:
 (a) T he material and area are equally satisfactory.
 (b) T he final cost to the Commission, including the cost of easements, is not greater than the cost
 as originally designated.
 (c) T he substitution is in the best interest of the Commission.
 (d) Proper environmental clearances have been obtained for use of any alternate borrow sites, with
 the exception of permitted quarries and other locations that have already obtained environmental
 clearances in accordance with Sec 203.3.2.5.
 (e) T he contractor has obtained appropriate land disturbance permits from MDNR in advance of
 excavation, unless the site is already under permit by MDNR.
 203.3.2.1 Proposed sites for contractor furnished material will be sampled and tested only after award of
 the contract, and after a copy of the written agreement between the property owner and the contractor
 authorizing use of any borrow site and access has been provided to the engineer. T he agreement shall
 include provisions for the final condition of the borrow site and access.
 203.3.2.2 T he preliminary subsurface investigations to determine depth to rock, general soil
 
 115
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 characteristics, etc., shall be the sole responsibility of the bidder or contractor.
 203.3.2.3 T he engineer shall be notified in writing sufficiently in advance of the proposed use of a borrow
 site to allow six weeks for sampling under the direction of the engineer for testing.
 203.3.2.4 T he contractor shall furnish equipment suitable for the purpose of soil sampling, and shall make
 all necessary arrangements for performing the work at a time mutually agreeable to the contractor and the
 engineer.
 203.3.2.5 Environmental clearances under applicable federal and state laws and regulations will include, but
 are not limited to the following: Clean Water Act (COE and MDNR), the Endangered Species Act (USFW
 and MDC), the National Historic Preservation Act (SHPO), the Farmland Protection Act (NRCS),
 Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (MDNR), Comprehensive Environmental Response (MDNR),
 Compensation, and Liability Act (MDNR) and RSMo Chapter 194, Section 194.400 Unmarked Human
 Burial Sites (SHPO). Certification shall be obtained in advance of the proposed use of a borrow site and
 furnished to the engineer. Certification shall include clearance letters and other evidence of coordination
 from the appropriate regulatory agencies as attachments. Guidelines for obtaining environmental
 clearances for contractor furnished borrow sites may be obtained from the project contact as designated in
 the contract proposal.
 203.3.2.6 After borrow material has been removed, the borrow site and access shall be finished in
 accordance with the agreement of the property owner.
 203.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 203.4.1 Ge ne ral. Prior to beginning excavation and embankment operations in any area, all necessary
 clearing, grubbing and stripping in that area shall have been performed. T he excavation and embankment
 for roadway, intersections and entrances shall be made to the designated alignment, grade and cross section.
 Sideslopes, cuts and fills shall be finished to a reasonably smooth and uniform surface that will merge with
 the adjacent terrain without variations readily discernible from the road. Finishing by hand methods will not
 be required, except that all brush, weeds, excess mud and silt, or other debris shall be removed from culverts
 and channels within the scope of the work in accordance with Sec 104.11.2, even if such structures are used
 in place. Areas disturbed by the contractor outside the limits of construction shall be restored at the
 contractor's expense to a condition similar to that prior to construction operations.
 203.4.1.1 Fie ld Stone . Before final project acceptance, all loose field stone greater than 4 inches in size
 within the limits of the right of way shall be disposed of as directed by the engineer.
 203.4.1.2 Shoulde rs. Earth shoulders shall be constructed of suitable material to the grade and cross
 section shown on the plans and shall be compacted in accordance with Sec 203.5. T he construction of
 shoulders shall start when sufficient surfacing has been completed and the surfacing has attained satisfactory
 strength to permit continuous shouldering operations. Equipment that will damage the surfacing will be
 prohibited from operating on the surfacing during shouldering operations. Surfacing and curbs shall be
 protected where equipment is crossing or turning.
 203.4.1.3 Grading for Aggre gate Type Surface Roadway. If a roadway to receive an aggregate-type
 surface is specified in the contract, reasonable tolerance in alignment, grade and cross section will be
 permitted. A reasonable tolerance in alignment will be defined as a maximum gradual deviation of 2 feet ,
 free from sharp breaks, made in the interest of economy and to take advantage of favorable topography. A
 reasonable tolerance in grade will be defined as a final grade that is uniform in appearance, free from sharp
 breaks or humps, and within 6 inches of plan grade if such tolerance results in economy to the Commission.
 Economy to the Commission will not refer to each individual cut, but to the entire project after due
 consideration has been given to the need of the material removed from cuts that are below grade and to the
 compensating feature of cuts that are left above grade. Loose rock on the finished subgrade over 2 inches in
 size shall be removed, picked up and disposed of as directed by the engineer.
 203.4.2 Mainte nance . During construction, the roadway shall be maintained by the contractor in such a
 condition that the roadway will be passable and well-drained at all times. Roadway ditches, channel changes,
 inlet and outlet ditches, and any other ditches in connection with the roadway shall be cut and maintained
 
 116
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 to the required cross section. All drainage work shall be performed in proper sequence with other
 operations. All ditches and channels shall be kept free of debris or obstructions. All material resulting from
 slides shall be removed and disposed of as directed by the engineer.
 203.4.3 Re moval of O ve rsiz e Mate rial in Subgrade . T he engineer may order the contractor to
 remove oversize material if the upper 4 inches of the subgrade, as tentatively completed, contains loose
 rock over 2 inches in size to make the subgrade unacceptable as a roadbed for the proposed type of
 surfacing in the judgment of the engineer.
 203.4.4 Excavating in Rock. Excavating and undergrading in rock, that is material in accordance with the
 description of Class C, whether the contract calls for classified or unclassified excavation, shall be
 performed in a manner to produce material of such size as to permit placement in embankments in
 accordance with the requirements. Rock shall be removed to the limits of undergrading insofar as practical
 and in such manner as to leave no undrained depressions in the cut. Care shall be taken to avoid
 overshooting when blasting. Any loose or shattered rock, overhanging ledges and boulders above the
 roadbed that might dislodge shall be removed. If the contract provides a specific use for rock from roadway
 excavation, the work shall be performed in such order and manner as may be necessary to ensure that the
 desired quantity of such material may be placed as required.
 203.4.4.1 Blasting Re quire me nts. Reporting for all blasting shall be made in accordance with Sec 107.7.
 203.4.4.1.1 T he contractor shall submit a rock excavation blasting plan to the engineer at least 14 days
 before drilling operations begin. T he blasting plan shall address all trenching, presplitting and production
 shots, and shall include, but is not limited to the following information: powder factor per cubic yard , hole
 size, subdrill, stemming depth, drill pattern, type of explosives and detonators, and safety precautions. A
 preblast survey will be required on all uncontrolled structures within 500 feet of planned blasting operations.
 A separate blasting plan will be required on all locations requiring blasting within 50 feet of any roadway
 structure. Any changes to blasting plans shall be provided to the engineer for review prior to performing
 the work.
 203.4.4.1.2 T he contractor shall not exceed blasting holes larger than 4 inches in diameter. T he powder
 factor shall be between 0.60 to 1.35 pounds per cubic yard except for presplitting or trenching. If
 stemming ejection becomes a problem, crushed stone stemmings shall be used. Subdrill shall be no more
 than 30 percent of burden. T he contractor shall not drill within a radius equal to the depth of the cut of a
 loaded borehole. Seismic monitoring will be required when the scaled distance is less than 65 , where the
 scaled distance equals the distance, in feet , divided by the square root of explosive weight, in pounds, per 8millisecond delay.
 203.4.4.1.3 T he contractor shall perform the excavation of rock cuts by the technique of presplitting,
 cushion blasting or air decking to produce a neat line of the proposed excavation, with the results subject to
 the approval of the engineer. Holes for presplitting shall be drilled to the full depth of the cut or to a preselected bench elevation as shown on the plans or as determined by the engineer. Presplitting shall be done
 according to accepted practice to produce a clean face on the excavated cut. Presplit shots shall be made
 prior to production shots. Production holes shall not be drilled any closer to the presplit line than 12 times
 the diameter of the production blast hole.
 203.4.4.2 Unde rgrading. Regardless of whether the contract includes paving, the final surface for the
 backfilled undergraded areas shall be of a uniform texture and grade suitable to the engineer for paving.
 203.4.4.2.1 Unless specified otherwise, the final surface shall be substantially free of exposed rock
 exceeding the 2 inch size that would interfere with the final preparation of the base for paving. Areas of
 required undergrading, except where an aggregate-type surface is specified, shall be backfilled with one of
 the following material, with preference in the order given, depending on availability:
 (a) T he top approximately 2 inches of the rock backfill shall consist of either rock fragments or
 spalls or a 2-inch granular-type material having a plasticity index not exceeding 10, and a
 gradation such that at least 50 percent of the material will be retained on the No. 4 sieve.
 (b) A 2-inch maximum size granular-type material having a plasticity index not exceeding 10, and
 
 117
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 a gradation such that at least 50 percent of the material will be retained on the No. 4 sieve.
 (c) A material having a low plasticity index and designated by the engineer as suitable. No material
 shall exceed 2 inches in size.
 203.4.4.2.2 If a roadway to receive an aggregate type surface is specified in the contract, undergraded areas
 shall be backfilled with material obtained from roadway excavation, and the upper 6 inches shall be free of
 granular material larger than 4 inches.
 203.4.4.3 O ve rbre ak. Overbreak resulting from blasting rock below the limits of undergrading shall be
 removed and backfilled with spalls or rock fragments at the contractor's expense. If spalls are not available
 and if the contractor does not elect to use rock fragments, the use of either of the following will be
 satisfactory.
 (a) Material in accordance with Sec 1007.
 (b) A granular-type material with a plasticity index not exceeding 10, and a gradation such that at
 least 50 percent of the material will be retained on the No. 4 sieve.
 203.4.5 Unsuitable Mate rial. Where excavation to the finished graded section results in a subgrade or
 slopes of unsuitable material, the engineer may require the contractor to remove the unsuitable material,
 and backfill to the finished graded section with approved material. T he contractor shall conduct the
 operations in such a manner that the engineer may make the necessary measurements before the backfill is
 placed.
 203.4.6 Borrow. Borrow material shall not be placed until after material from roadway excavation has
 been placed in the embankment, except as otherwise approved by the engineer. T he contractor shall not
 excavate beyond the dimensions and elevations established, and no material shall be removed prior to
 staking and cross sectioning the site. If the contractor places more borrow than required, thereby causing a
 waste of excavation, such waste will be deducted from the borrow volume as measured in the borrow area.
 All borrow areas shall be bladed and left in such a shape as to permit taking the necessary cross sections
 after excavating has been completed. T he finished borrow areas shall be approximately true to line and
 grade if so specified in the contract, and shall be finished, where practical, such that no water will collect or
 stand therein. If it is necessary to remove fencing in order to obtain borrow material, the fencing shall be
 replaced in as good condition as the fencing was at the time of removal. T he contractor shall be responsible
 for confining livestock when a portion of the fence is removed. Removing and replacing such a fence or
 the confining of livestock shall be at the contractor ’s expense.
 203.4.7 Roadway O blite ration. If obliteration of existing roadways or temporary construction is
 designated in the contract to be performed on a roadway excavation basis, such obliteration shall include all
 operations necessary to fill the ditches and blend the old road with the natural ground to provide a pleasing
 appearance. Removal of concrete pavement and concrete base course will be paid for in accordance with
 Sec 202.30. T he earthwork for obliteration, including bituminous surfacing, will be included as roadway
 excavation.
 203.4.8 Human, Criminal, Historical, Archae ological or Ge ological Re mains. If any human
 remains, or archaeological artifacts that may be of historical, archaeological or geological significance such
 as arrowheads, pottery, stone tools, animal bones, or fossils, are encountered during construction, the
 contractor shall stop all work within a 50-foot buffer around the human remains and/or artifacts, and then
 shall notify the MoDOT resident engineer or construction inspector. T he contractor shall maintain the 50foot minimum buffer until otherwise directed by the Engineer.
 203.4.8.1 In the case of human remains, MoDOT HP staff will notify the local law enforcement and the
 State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) as per state law. If the contractor is unable to contact
 appropriate MoDOT staff, the contractor shall initiate this involvement by local law enforcement and the
 SHPO. In this instance, a description of the contractor ’s actions shall be promptly made to MoDOT.
 203.4.8.2 In the case of archaeological artifacts, MoDOT HP will contact the appropriate staff at the
 Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) and the SHPO to report the discovery after a preliminary
 
 118
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 evaluation of the artifacts is made and reasonable efforts to see if the findings represent an archaeological
 site which can be avoided. If MoDOT determines that the site/artifact is significant and will be adversely
 affected by the contract work, MoDOT HP will immediately notify the FHWA and SHPO of this finding
 and provide recommendations to minimize and/or mitigate the adverse effect.
 203.4.8.3 If a temporary suspension of work under this section lasts for an unreasonable period of time, as
 defined in Sec 108.15.1, and the suspension results in an actual increase in the time or cost of performance
 of the contract, then this condition will be deemed a suspension of the work directed by the engineer under
 Sec 108.15 and will be handled in accordance with that section.
 203.4.9 Excavate d Mate rial Stockpile . During the process of excavating cuts, the engineer may order
 specific excavated material placed in stockpiles in order to have suitable material available to complete the
 upper portion of embankments and to backfill portions of undergraded cuts.
 203.4.10 Embankme nt Construction. Embankment construction shall consist of constructing roadway
 embankments, including preparation of the area upon which the embankment is to be placed, constructing
 dikes and berms, placing and compacting approved material within roadway areas where unsuitable material
 has been removed, and placing and compacting embankment material in holes, pits and other depressions
 within the roadway area. Only approved material free of trees, stumps, rubbish and any other deleterious
 material shall be used in the construction of embankments and backfills. Rocks, broken concrete or other
 solid material shall not be placed in embankment areas where piling is to be placed or driven.
 203.4.10.1 Embankments requiring surcharges, restricted loading rates, embankment control stakes or pore
 pressure measurement devices shall be constructed to the design template progressively for the full height.
 Failure of embankments or embankment foundations, or damage to structures that occurs when the
 contractor fails to observe restricted loading rates, or fails to construct slopes initially to the design
 template shall be repaired as directed by the engineer at the contractor's expense.
 203.4.10.2 Construction of embankments shall not be started on foundation soil or partially completed
 embankments having more than 0.2 foot of frozen soil, nor shall embankment be built of frozen material.
 Frozen soil layers in partially completed embankments shall be at least 18 inches apart. No material shall
 be placed on frozen soil layers encountered within 12 inches of the top of the proposed grading section.
 Frozen material on foundation soil or partially completed embankment not meeting the above
 requirements shall be removed before placing material for the embankment. T he removal of frozen
 material from the foundation of an embankment or from any layer of the embankment and the
 replacement with satisfactory material shall be at the contractor ’s expense.
 203.4.11 Embankme nt on Hillside s or Against Existing Embankme nt. Where embankment is to be
 placed on hillsides or where new embankment is to be constructed against existing embankments, existing
 slopes steeper than six horizontal to one vertical measured at a right angle to the roadway shall be
 continuously benched in no less than 12-inch rises over those areas as required, as the work is brought up in
 layers. Benching shall be of sufficient width to permit placing and compacting operations. Each horizontal
 cut shall begin at the intersection of the ground line and the vertical side of the previous bench. Existing
 slopes shall also be stepped to prevent any wedging action of the embankment against structures. T he
 material thus cut out or compacted along with the new embankment material will be at the contractor ’s
 expense.
 203.4.12 Scalping. Scalping shall be performed in accordance with Sec 201.2.3. Where an embankment
 less than 4 feet high is to be constructed, all sod and vegetative material shall be removed from the surface
 upon which the embankment is to be placed, and the cleared surface completely broken up by plowing,
 scarifying or stepping to a minimum depth of 6 inches . T his area shall be compacted in the same manner
 as that required for the embankment placed on the area. Sod not requiring removal shall be thoroughly
 disked before construction of embankment. Where an embankment less than 3 feet high is to be
 constructed over a compacted road surface containing bituminous or granular material, the old road surface
 shall be scarified to a depth of at least 6 inches . T his scarified material shall be recompacted.
 203.4.13 Embankme nt Against Existing Structure s. If embankment is deposited on one side only of
 abutments, wingwalls, piers or culvert headwalls, care shall be taken that the area immediately adjacent to
 the structure is not compacted to the extent that the compaction will cause overturning of or excessive
 
 119
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 pressure against the structure. Equipment of such weight as may cause damage to culverts or other
 structures will not be permitted to work over or immediately adjacent to such structures. T he embankment
 adjacent to the end bent of a bridge shall not be placed higher behind than in front of end bents until the
 superstructure is in place. If embankment is to be placed on both sides of a concrete wall or box-type
 structure, operations shall be conducted such that the embankment is kept at approximately the same
 elevation on each side.
 203.4.14 Surcharge d Embankme nts. Surcharged embankments shall be built in accordance with the
 plans and shall remain in place for such time as in accordance with the contract. T he requirements for
 placing and compacting will be waived on the surcharge material above the specified compacted area.
 203.4.15 Exce ss or Unsuitable Mate rial. All excess or unsuitable excavated material, including rock and
 boulders that cannot be used in embankments, may be placed on the sideslopes of the nearest embankment
 in a satisfactory manner or shall be disposed of off the right of way in areas secured by the contractor. T he
 contractor shall be responsible for compliance with all federal, state and local laws in the disposal of excess
 or unsuitable material. Rock or boulders greater than 24 inches shall not be used routinely in constructing
 sideslope embankments. A distinct shoulder line shall be maintained by keeping all such waste material at
 least 24 inches below the finished shoulder elevation, and specific density control will not be required.
 203.4.16 Place me nt of Embankme nt. Roadway embankment shall be placed in layers not exceeding 8
 inches , an uncompacted measurement, and shall be compacted as specified before the next layer is placed.
 T he layers shall be placed approximately parallel to both the proposed profile grade and to the finished
 roadbed. Effective spreading equipment shall be used on each lift to obtain uniform thickness prior to
 compacting. Continuous leveling and manipulating will be required during compacting operations.
 Construction equipment shall be routed uniformly over the entire surface of each layer. Occasional rocks
 and boulders greater than 24 inches shall be dispersed to allow for uniform compaction between them.
 203.4.16.1 Occasional stones or rock fragments exceeding the thickness of the 8-inch layer shall be
 disposed of by being incorporated into the embankment outside the limits of the proposed surfaced traffic
 lanes. T he thickness of the layer in these areas may be increased if necessary to accommodate the stones,
 but shall not exceed 12 inches, an uncompacted measurement. T he stones or rock fragments shall be placed
 such that there is no nesting.
 203.4.16.2 Lifts may be increased to a maximum of 12 inches , an uncompacted measurement, for berms,
 filling of old channels, waste or similar areas, and any roadway or approach for which a granular-type
 surface is proposed. T hese areas shall be compacted by uniformly distributing all equipment movements
 over the entire area, and specific density control will not be required. Compaction performed in these areas
 will be at the contractor ’s expense.
 203.4.17 Rock Embankme nt. If the excavated material consists predominantly of rock fragments of
 such a size that the material cannot be placed in layers of the prescribed thickness, such material shall be
 placed in the embankment in layers having a thickness of the approximate average size of the larger rocks
 but not exceeding 24 inches . Rocks or boulders too large to permit placing in a 24-inch layer shall be
 reduced in size as necessary to permit this placement. Rock shall not be dumped in place, but shall be
 distributed by blading or dozing in a manner to ensure proper placement in final position in the
 embankment. Construction equipment shall be routed uniformly over the entire surface of each layer. T he
 spalls and smaller stone fragments shall be left on the surface of each layer as formed.
 
 203.4.18 Rigid or Fle xible Pave me nts. If the specified or proposed surfacing consists of a rigid or
 flexible-type pavement, the top consolidated rock layer for the full width between roadbed slopes shall be
 finished to the same limits as shown on the plans for undergrading in rock cuts. If rigid pavement is to be
 constructed without an aggregate base, the material requirements of Sec 203.4.4.2.1 (a) or (b) shall govern
 the construction of the area between the bottom of the pavement and the top of the top consolidated rock
 layer. Any embankment necessary outside the limits of the pavement shall be constructed of suitable earth
 or as otherwise specified in the contract.
 203.5 Compaction of Embankme nt and Tre atme nt of Cut Are as with Moisture and De nsity
 Control. AASHT O T 99, Method C, replacing any material retained on a 3/4-inch sieve, as provided
 
 120
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 therein, or MoDOT Test Method T M 40 will be used as the Standard Compaction Test for determining the
 moisture density relations of soils. T he optimum moisture as determined by the Standard Compaction Test
 may be used as a guide in determining the proper moisture content at which each soil type should be
 compacted. Water shall be added or removed as necessary to permit obtaining the required density and
 moisture control. T he field density of the embankment after compaction will be determined in accordance
 with AASHT O T 191 or T 205, using the total material or T 310, for wet density. T he volume of the test
 hole may be reduced as necessary to accommodate available testing equipment. If nuclear density methods
 are used, moisture content will be determined in accordance with AASHT O T 239, except that a moisture
 correction factor will be determined for each soil in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 35. T he
 calculated density obtained in a field density test will be compared with the maximum density as directed by
 the Standard Compaction Test to determine the percent of compaction attained.
 203.5.1 Maximum De nsity Compaction Re quire me nts. If payment of Compacting Embankment or
 Embankment in Place is specified as a contract pay item, compaction to at least 90 percent of maximum
 density, as determined by the Standard Compaction Test, will be required in the following areas:
 (a) All roadway embankments except as otherwise provided in the following sections: Secs
 203.4.14, 203.4.15, 203.4.16.2, 203.5.3, 203.5.4, 203.5.5 and 203.5.7
 (b) All backfilled undergraded cuts, except as modified by Sec 203.5.3.
 (c) Certain portions of the roadbed in cuts specified in Sec 203.5.8, except as modified in Sec
 203.5.3.
 203.5.2 Moisture Control. T he moisture content of the soil at the time of compaction shall be as
 specified herein.
 203.5.2.1 When necessary to eliminate a rubbery condition of the embankment, it may be required that
 some soils have a moisture content below the optimum during compacting work, except that Class A
 material having a liquid limit of 40 or more, where placed in embankments within 5 feet of the top of the
 finished subgrade or where encountered in areas of cut compaction, shall be compacted at no less than the
 optimum moisture content. T he liquid limit determination will be in accordance with AASHT O T 89. Some
 Class A material, including heavy clays and material commonly known as shales and fireclays, shall require
 breaking down such that the moisture can be uniformly distributed.
 203.5.2.2 Loessial soils shall have moisture controlled so as not to exceed optimum plus 3 percentage
 points when placed in embankments less than 30 feet high. When placed in embankments 30 feet high or
 more, such soils shall have moisture controlled such that the optimum moisture is not exceeded. If wet
 foundation conditions contribute to the embankment moisture while compacting, the engineer may waive
 this specified moisture content for a height not to exceed 3 feet above the embankment foundation. In the
 event of conflict of provisions of this section with provisions in Sec 203.5.2.1, Sec 203.5.2.1 shall govern.
 203.5.3 Top Lift Thickne sse s. T he upper 18 inches of the earth subgrade extending the full width between
 roadbed slopes shall be compacted to at least 95 percent of maximum density.
 203.5.4 Structure Approach. Roadway embankment within 100 feet of each end of a structure on which
 the top slab or deck is to be used as the riding surface and the spill fill under such a structure shall be
 compacted to no less than 95 percent of maximum density.
 203.5.5 Rocky Fill. Density requirements will not apply to portions of embankments constructed of
 material so rocky that the embankment cannot be satisfactorily tested in accordance with AASHT O T 191
 or T 205. Material of a gradation having more than approximately 20 percent retained on a 3/4-inch sieve
 will generally be considered too rocky for satisfactory density testing. In lieu thereof, the compactive
 effort on rocky material shall consist of making four complete passes on each layer with a tamping-type
 roller or two complete passes on each layer with a vibratory roller. T he tamping-type roller shall have
 tampers or feet protruding no less than 6 inches from the surface of the drum and shall have a minimum
 load on each tamper of 250 psi of tamping area. T he vibratory roller shall have a manufacturer's rating of
 16 to 20 tons compacting power. During compaction, each layer shall have the moisture content
 controlled such that, in the judgment of the engineer, any silt and clay fraction is in a plastic state. Simple
 
 121
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 diagnostic tests to establish such a plastic state will include ability to indent with a thumb or heel or to roll a
 short thread of soil between the hands. Material that crumbles under pressure will be considered too dry.
 203.5.6 Lift Consiste ncy. Each layer shall be wetted or dried as necessary, and shall be compacted to the
 required density. Regardless of the type of equipment used, the roadway shall be compacted uniformly and
 the surface kept reasonably smooth at all times. If large pieces of heavy clay are encountered, the material
 shall be broken down by suitable manipulation to permit satisfactory embankment construction. If shale is
 encountered, the shale shall be broken down as much as practical and compacted at or above optimum
 moisture.
 203.5.7 De e p Fills. Compaction to at least 95 percent of maximum density will be required for that
 portion of any embankment below an elevation 50 feet below the top of the finished subgrade. If, because
 of embankment foundation conditions, the 95 percent maximum density cannot be obtained after
 reasonable compactive effort has been expended, the engineer may waive the 95 percent requirement for a
 height not exceeding 3 feet above the embankment foundation.
 203.5.8 Compacting in Cut. Cut compaction shall be performed in all Class A material areas and in all
 unclassified material areas that meet the requirements of Sec 203.2.2 after removal of the roadway
 excavation material to the required section. A surface parallel to the pavement slope, 12 inches below the
 bottom of the pavement or lowest base course, shall be temporarily exposed for the full width between
 roadway inslopes. T he exposed material shall be manipulated and compacted to no less than the required
 density to a depth of 6 inches . T he material above this compacted plane shall be spread in layers not
 exceeding 8-inch loose thickness, each layer being wetted or dried as necessary and compacted to the
 specified density. T he entire volume of material so handled and compacted, including the 6-inch layer
 compacted in place, will be considered as Compacting in Cut. All Class A material having a liquid limit of 40
 or more, including the 6-inch layer compacted in place, shall be compacted at no less than the optimum
 moisture content.
 203.5.8.1 Cut compaction shall be performed to an additional depth of 12 inches for 50 feet on each side
 of the intersection of the natural ground and the top of the subgrade, then uniformly graded for 30 feet to
 meet the depth requirements of Sec 203.5.8 and, if necessary, Sec 203.5.8.2.
 
 203.5.8.2 T he existing ground for the full width between roadway slopes under embankments less than 18
 inches high shall be treated in accordance with Sec 203.5.8 to only such depth as to ensure having 18
 inches of material of the required density and moisture below the top of the finished subgrade.
 203.5.9 Fie ld Laboratory. When authorized by the engineer, the contractor shall provide a Type 2 field
 laboratory in accordance with Sec 601.
 203.6 Compaction of Embankme nt not Constructe d with De nsity or Moisture and De nsity
 Control. If compaction of embankment is a requirement of the contract but has not been specified as a
 pay item, the compactive effort on each layer shall consist of distributing all equipment movements over
 the entire embankment area and of at least three complete passes with a tamping-type roller over the
 entire area to be compacted. T he tamping-type roller shall have tampers or feet projecting no less than 6
 inches from the surface of the drum and shall have a minimum load on each tamper of 250 psi of tamping
 area. Compactive efforts shall be continued, if necessary, until the tamping feet penetrate no more than 2
 inches into the layer of material being compacted. Continuous leveling and manipulating will be required
 during compacting operations and the moisture content shall be adjusted as necessary, in the judgment of
 the engineer, to permit proper consolidation.
 203.6.1 Dumping and rolling areas shall be kept separate, and no lift shall be covered by another until
 compaction complying with these requirements has been attained. Unstable areas in the embankment shall
 be removed and replaced with suitable material at the contractor's expense.
 203.6.2 Each layer of embankment constructed of rock or rocky material shall also be compacted by three
 complete passes of the tamping-type roller. A vibratory roller may be used if approved by the engineer.
 203.7 Compaction of Embankme nt Without Spe cifie d Compaction Re sults or Spe cifie d
 
 122
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Compaction Equipme nt. If compaction of embankment is not designated by the contract, compaction
 will not be required other than that attained by distributing equipment movements over the entire
 embankment area.
 203.8 Me thod O f Me asure me nt.
 203.8.1 Contract Q uantity Payme nt. T he quantities of excavation , compacting embankment, and
 embankment in place for which payment will be made will be those shown in the contract for the various
 items, provided the project is constructed essentially to the lines and grades shown on the plans. A partial
 check of existing ground elevations will be made at the time slope stakes are set, and of the finished work
 for deviations in the grade, width or slope from the authorized grade or typical section.
 203.8.1.1 Final measurement will not be made of Class A Excavation, Unclassified Excavation ,
 Compacting Embankment, and Embankment in Place except when:
 (a) Appreciable errors are found in the original computations.
 (b) An original cross section is found to have an average deviation from the true elevation in
 excess of one foot.
 (c) An authorized change in grade, slope or typical section is made.
 (d) Unauthorized deviations decrease the quantities on the plans.
 (e) Class C excavation is encountered, unless the contract calls for unclassified excavation. If this
 condition is encountered, corrections or revisions will be computed and added to or deducted from
 the contract quantity.
 
 (f) Quantities are determined by measurement as specified in Sec 203.8.2.
 203.8.1.2 If the plans have been altered or when disagreement exists between the contractor and the
 engineer as to the accuracy of the plan quantities of any balance, or the entire project, either party has the
 right to request a recomputation of contract quantities of excavation within any area by written notice to
 the other party. T he written notice will contain evidence that an error exists in the original groundline
 elevation or in the original computations that will materially affect the final payment quantity. If such
 final measurement will be required, measurement will be made from the latest available ground surface and
 the design section.
 203.8.2 Me asure d Q uantitie s. If payment of excavation is to be made on a measured quantity basis,
 volumes of authorized excavation will be computed from cross section measurements by the average end
 area method. When not attributable to carelessness of the contractor, slides in Class A Excavation and in
 Unclassified Excavation will be included in such measurements. Authorized excavation of rock, shale, muck
 or other unsuitable material will also be included.
 203.8.2.1 Authorized excavation of rock, shale, muck or other unsuitable material below grade shall consist
 of that excavation necessary to provide the designated depth of undergrading. No measurement or payment
 will be made of any material removed and replaced below the design limits of undergrading. No
 measurement will be made for overbreak or for the disposal of the same if such material is obtained from
 outside the neat lines of the proposed backslopes in rock excavation, except that such overbreak will be
 measured as Class A Excavation or Unclassified Excavation, as applicable, when all suitable authorized
 excavation has been used and the overbreak material will be required for completion of the embankment. A
 maximum tolerance of one foot will be permitted for rock protruding or extending within the neat lines of
 the proposed backslopes.
 203.8.2.2 While work involving classified excavation is in progress, the engineer will fix points of
 elevation and stationing as required to establish the lines of demarcation between material of different
 classification. T hese top points will be determined before any Class C, sandstone or igneous rock
 excavation is removed, and the contractor shall notify the engineer before removing any such material.
 
 123
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Any excavation removed before the engineer has been notified and given 24 hours to establish lines of
 demarcation will be included in the measurement of Class A Excavation only.
 203.8.2.3 Excavation may be encountered in which lines of demarcation between material of different
 classifications are impractical to establish. T he quantity of material classified as other than Class A
 Excavation may be determined by the engineer on a percentage basis as the work progresses after the limits
 of determinate classification material have been established. Where vertical or near vertical excavation
 limits are indicated by the plans, all Class A Excavation material encountered within the actual Class C
 vertical excavation limits will be included with Class C Excavation quantities.
 203.8.2.4 Measured quantities of excavation will be used where the ground elevations shown on the plans
 are found to be erroneous. No revision of contract quantities will be made if the actual ground elevations
 are considered to agree generally with the ground line shown on the plans. Where the engineer authorizes a
 change in grade, slope or typical section affecting the volume of excavation allowed for payment in that
 particular balance or area, the revised volume will be determined by the average end area method on the
 basis of the revised grade, slope or typical section. Where unauthorized deviations result in a decrease in the
 contract quantities, the deviations will be measured and deducted from the contract quantity.
 203.8.2.5 T he quantity of Class C Excavation will be computed on a measured quantity basis. T he volume
 of Class A Excavation allowed for payment in roadway balances involving rock excavation will be
 determined by one of the following methods, whichever in the judgment of the engineer is more applicable:
 (a) Measuring and computing both the Class A Excavation and the Class C Excavation within the
 limits affected or as defined by Sec 203.8.2.3.
 (b) Deducting the volume of Class C, sandstone or igneous rock excavation from the total adjusted
 volume of roadway excavation, regardless of classification, within the limits affected or as defined
 by Sec 203.8.2.3.
 203.8.2.6 Measurement will be made for unsuitable material actually excavated and removed to permit
 proper compaction in cut sections and in foundations for embankment sections. No measurement will be
 made of the suitable material temporarily removed and replaced to facilitate compaction in cuts or under
 shallow embankments.
 203.8.2.7 Borrow quantities will be determined by measuring the borrow area before and after excavating.
 203.8.2.8 Excavated material stockpiled in accordance with Sec 203.4.9 will be measured in the stockpile
 by the average end area method.
 203.8.2.9 Only that material placed in accordance with Sec 203.5 will be included in the measurement of
 Compacting Embankment and Embankment in Place. If an error has been found in the original
 computations or ground elevations, or if there has been an authorized change in grade, slope or typical
 section, the plan quantity for Compacting Embankment and Embankment in Place for those areas or
 balances affected will be adjusted for final payment. All required compaction above the original ground line
 and all compacting of material placed in undergraded cut sections will be considered as Compacting
 Embankment and Embankment in Place.
 203.8.2.10 Compacting in cuts will be measured to the nearest 1/10 station along the centerline of each
 roadbed regardless of width, and will include any required compaction of the original ground under shallow
 embankments. For the purpose of measurement, a divided highway will be considered as having two
 roadbeds. Measurement of ramps will be made from or to the ramp’s gore point. Final measurement will not
 be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the
 contract quantity. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract
 quantity.
 203.8.2.11 Measurement of roadway and drainage excavation, compacting embankments and embankments
 in place will be made to the nearest cubic yard .
 203.9 Basis of Payme nt. Roadway and drainage excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price per
 
 124
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 cubic yard and will be considered full compensation for the following:
 (a) Excavating.
 (b) Hauling any distance.
 (c) Placing and forming embankments.
 (d) Preparation of subgrade.
 (e) Shouldering, rounding slopes, obliterating existing roadbeds or temporary construction,
 finishing of graded earth roadway, picking up and disposing of field stone and other rock.
 (f) Disposal of excess excavation.
 (g) Any work noted on the plans to be included in the contract unit price for excavation.
 203.9.1 No payment will be made for any material used for purposes other than those designated, except as
 approved by the engineer.
 203.9.2 Payment will be made at the contract unit price per cubic yard for the applicable item of Class A
 Excavation or Unclassified Excavation for each handling of stockpiled excavation approved by the
 engineer.
 203.9.3 No payment will be made for rock overbreak or for backfilling overbreak areas below the
 undergrading limits. Payment for the material for backfilling required undergraded areas will be made under
 an applicable excavation item. No direct payment will be made for backfilling around structures, the
 excavation for which has been paid for as roadway excavation.
 203.9.4 If the contract does not contain a contract unit price for Class C Excavation and such material is
 encountered during construction, unless the project is let on an unclassified excavation basis, payment will
 be made per cubic yard at the fixed contract unit price specified in Sec 109.
 203.9.5 No direct payment will be made for water required in compaction work. Any costs involved in
 reducing the moisture content in soils will be at the contractor's expense.
 203.9.6 Payment for finishing a graded earth roadway will be considered completely covered by the
 contract unit price for the various classes of excavation except as otherwise specifically noted under Sec
 104.11.2 in regard to material excavated in cleaning channels and culverts used in place.
 203.9.7 When removal of unsuitable material is directed by the engineer, the contractor will be reimbursed
 for excavation of the unsuitable material and the excavation of the suitable replacement material. Payment
 will be made for each operation at the contract unit price of Class A Excavation or Unclassified
 Excavation. Payment for placement of the suitable material will be paid for at the contract unit price of
 Compacting Embankment.
 203.9.8 Embankment in Place will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard , and will be
 considered full compensation for:
 (a) Furnishing and transporting material from stockpile sites or from a contractor-provided source.
 (b) Placing and forming embankments.
 (c) Compacting embankment or for adding or reducing the water content of the embankment.
 (d) Any excavation required to provide the embankment material included under the item of
 embankment in place, including mulching and seeding a borrow site.
 (e) Any work noted on the plans to be included in the contract unit price for embankment in
 
 125
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 place.
 203.9.9 Payment will be made at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 
 126
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 204
 EMBANKMENT MO NITO RING
 SECTIO N 204.10 SETTLEMENT GAUGES.
 204.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of installing settlement gauges for the purpose of obtaining
 foundation settlement data during and following placement of embankment and surcharge construction. An
 estimated number of settlement gauges will be indicated in the contract. T he exact number and locations
 will be determined by the engineer.
 204.10.2 Mate rial. A settlement gauge shall consist of the following:
 (a) A plate with a galvanized riser pipe attached perpendicular to the center of the plate.
 (b) Lengths, to be approved by the engineer, of 3/4-inch threaded galvanized riser pipe and
 couplings.
 (c) Lengths, to be approved by the engineer, of galvanized 1 1/2-inch threaded pipe and couplings
 to act as a cover or guard for the riser pipe.
 204.10.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 204.10.3.1 T he first section of the 3/4-inch pipe shall be firmly attached to the plate. T he distance from
 the top of plate to the top of pipe will be accurately measured and recorded by the engineer.
 204.10.3.2 An excavation, slightly larger than the plate, shall be made to a depth approximately 18 inches
 below the natural ground surface. Care shall be exercised during excavation to ensure that the bottom of the
 pit is level and that the material at this location is undisturbed. T he pit bottom shall be covered with a layer
 of Portland cement mortar, approximately 3 inches thick, and the plate bedded therein in such position
 that the riser pipe is vertical. After the mortar has set, the cover pipe, cut approximately 6 inches shorter,
 shall be slipped over and centered around the riser pipe. T he backfill shall then be placed in 6-inch layers
 and thoroughly compacted. T he contractor shall notify the engineer when the installation is complete. No
 embankment shall be placed around the gauge until the elevation of the top of the riser has been
 determined by the engineer.
 204.10.3.3 Embankment material in the immediate vicinity of the settlement gauge pipe shall be placed
 and compacted in accordance with Sec 726.3.4. When the elevation of the embankment reaches a level
 approximately one foot below the top of the cover pipe, the engineer shall be notified and the next section
 of riser pipe and cover pipe shall be installed in the engineer's presence. As the height of the embankment
 increases, this procedure shall be repeated until the embankment and surcharge is completed, and the pipe
 sections, both riser and cover, extend approximately 2 feet above the surface of the completed
 embankment and surcharge.
 204.10.3.4 All necessary precautions shall be taken to keep the alignment of the riser pipe and cover pipe
 maintained in a vertical position at all times. T he contractor shall operate equipment such that the
 settlement gauges are not damaged or displaced. Protective barriers shall be erected when directed by the
 engineer. Settlement gauges shall be maintained in a satisfactory operating condition until after placement
 of the embankment and surcharge and until, in the judgment of the engineer, the settlement readings are no
 longer necessary. Any damaged gauges shall be repaired or replaced by and at the contractor's expense.
 204.10.3.5 T he engineer will obtain and record all measurements and elevations necessary for accurate
 determination of settlement data during and after completion of embankment and surcharge.
 204.10.4 Basis of Payme nt. Accepted settlement gauges, complete in place, will be paid for at the
 contract unit price. No direct payment will be made for any devices required to protect the gauges.
 SECTIO N 204. 20 PO RE PRESSURE MEASUREMENT DEVICES.
 204.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of placing and maintaining pore pressure measurement
 
 127
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 devices as shown on the plans for obtaining foundation pore pressure measurements during the placement
 of embankment. Pore pressure measurement devices, locations, elevations and limits of embankment
 subject to control by each device will be shown on the plans.
 204.20.2 Equipme nt. Pore pressure measuring devices shall consist of the following types:
 (a) Type A. T his device shall consist of a pneumatic transducer sealed within a sand chamber which
 is set into the foundation to the specified elevations.
 (b) Type B. T his device shall consist of a 1/2-inch PVC standpipe extending to the surface of the
 embankment from a sand chamber set into the foundation to the specified elevations.
 204.20.2.1 T he pneumatic transducer, jacketed tubing, and necessary pressurizing and gauging equipment
 for Type A installations will be furnished by the Commission without cost to the contractor upon two
 weeks written notice preceding the date of installation. T he balance of the material for the Type A
 installation shall be furnished by the contractor. All material for the Type B installation shall be furnished
 by the contractor, except for the electrical sounding device.
 204.20.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 204.20.3.1 T he contractor shall be responsible for the installation, furnishing all incidental material,
 providing all necessary protection of the installation, and replacement in the event of damage, including
 cost of any replacement equipment furnished by the Commission. In the event of damage to the
 installation, the engineer may require suspension of embankment construction in the controlled area until
 the contractor has restored the installation to satisfactory working order. No embankment may be placed
 until the installation is complete and tested to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 204.20.3.2 A hole of no less than 5 inches or no more than 8 inches in diameter shall be drilled to
 Elevation “ B” as shown on the plans. If necessary, casing shall be used to prevent sloughing of material
 from the walls of the hole and contamination of the walls or bottom of the hole by sloughed material. T he
 outer diameter of the casing shall be no smaller than the diameter of the hole. T he casing shall have no
 externally coupled joints in the bottom 10 feet.
 204.20.3.3 If casing is required, the hole shall be washed to the bottom with clean water circulated through
 the bit until the discharge is clear. Clean sand shall then be poured into the hole to the approximate depth
 shown on the plans. T he assembled pore pressure measurement device shall then be lowered to the device’s
 indicated position with care to avoid contamination with soil from the side of the hole, and additional sand
 shall be placed around the device to Elevation “ A” as shown on the plans. During these steps, any casing
 shall be pulled ahead of the backfill in increments of 6 to 24 inches as necessary to prevent collapse or
 sloughing of the hole. T he hole shall be maintained full of clean water during these steps to at least the
 elevation of the top of the sand chamber. T he creation of pockets of soil, air or voids in the sand backfill
 shall be avoided.
 204.20.3.4 After sand is placed to the specified elevation, the hole shall be backfilled with wetted, plastic
 bentonite clay as the casing is withdrawn, for no less than 4 feet above the top of the sand filled chamber.
 If necessary, the clay shall be worked by hand into plastic balls to be dropped into the hole and tamped into
 a coherent mass. An acceptable alternate is the use of preformed dry bentonite pellets. In dry installation,
 dry granular bentonite may be tamped in place. T he remainder of the hole shall be filled with a thick slurry
 of bentonite.
 204.20.3.5 At natural ground level, or as otherwise directed by the engineer, four layers of 3/4-inch
 exterior grade plywood, 4 x 4 feet , nailed and clinched together with rustproof nails, and with a 3-inch
 diameter hole cut at the center shall be centered over the installation after the ground is smoothed and
 leveled with sand. A closet flange or other suitable receptacle shall be securely fastened to the plywood over
 the 3-inch diameter hole to securely receive a 5-foot length of 3-inch iron or steel casing. Earth or sand
 shall be compacted about the casing in 6-inch lifts with care to avoid misalignment after the engineer has
 established the elevation of the plywood slab and the top of the casing.
 204.20.3.6 Upon completion, each installation shall be tested. Type A installations shall be tested in
 
 128
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 accordance with recommendations of the transducer manufacturer. Type B installations shall be tested by
 dropping a weighted line through the standpipe to check for possible obstructions. T he standpipe shall then
 be filled with water and periodic readings made of the water level in the standpipe until the level of natural
 groundwater is reached. If less than a 70 percent drop in head is experienced in the first 24 hours, the
 standpipe shall be flushed and retested. Records of rate of head loss shall be kept for subsequent evaluation
 of possible time lags in the response of water levels to embankment placement.
 204.20.3.7 T he engineer may require the installation of additional pore pressure measurement devices, at
 the contract unit price, within any area subject to control by such devices, at any time during construction
 of the embankment. T he engineer will determine the type of device, location and elevation of additional
 installations. Any such additional pore pressure measurement devices shall govern the rate of construction
 in the same manner as the original devices. T he reference pressure levels for additional devices shall be
 either that of the original devices or as determined from boreholes located outside the loaded area, as
 directed by the engineer.
 204.20.4 Pore Pre ssure Me asure me nts and Re cords.
 204.20.4.1 T he engineer will make and record all observations and measurements required to determine
 natural ground water pressures and pore water pressures induced by embankment construction. T he pressure
 of the natural ground water existing at the time of installation and prior to placement of any embankment
 will be used as a reference to determine pore pressures induced by subsequent embankment placement. T he
 engineer may subsequently require borings outside the loaded area to facilitate observations to determine if
 the natural groundwater table has lowered due to seasonal or climatic variations. Such observations may be
 used to lower, but not raise, the initial reference groundwater pressure.
 204.20.4.2 T he engineer will make all records of groundwater and pore water pressures readily available to
 the contractor for guidance in the planning of the contractor's work.
 204.20.4.3 If foundation pore pressure, in excess of pressure from the natural water table, equals or exceeds
 35 percent of the unit pressure of the embankment in place over the installation at any time, placement of
 embankment shall be immediately suspended. Construction shall not resume until such excess pressure
 declines to 25 percent of embankment pressure, unless otherwise authorized by the engineer.
 204.20.4.4 After the embankment reaches an elevation equal to 60 percent of the maximum height, the
 contractor shall control the rate of construction in such a manner that foundation pore pressure, in excess
 of pressure from the natural water table, will not exceed 35 percent of the unit pressure of the embankment
 in place over the installation at any time. An example of pressure relationships follows: Soil embankment
 with an average wet density of 125 pounds per cubic foot is equal to twice the unit weight of water. A foot
 of such embankment thus has a potential to create, at most, 2 feet of water rise in a standpipe, or a 0.87
 psi increase in a Type A installation. T he contractor shall anticipate the maximum possible effect of any
 load to be added. Type B installations may exhibit some time lag in rate of response to a pressure
 increment. Records of pore pressure response during placement of the first 60 percent of embankment
 height shall be examined for evidence of such lag. T he time required for dissipation of head during testing
 will also be indicative of the rate of response.
 204.20.4.5 When embankment has advanced to within approximately one foot of the top of the casing,
 the casing and the 1/2-inch PVC pipe for the Type B installations, shall be advanced in 5-foot increments.
 No extension shall be made without the engineer's approval. PVC pipe extensions shall be made using
 solvent welded couplings exercising care to make smooth, squared cuts with all burrs removed, in
 accordance with recommendations of the pipe and solvent cement manufacturers. Pneumatic tubing leads
 used with Type A installations shall be long enough to permit extension, without connections, to the top of
 the embankment or surcharge. Excess tubing shall be stored in a steel container attached to the last casing
 extension as shown on the plans.
 204.20.5 Se ttle me nt Re cords. T he engineer will make and record all measurements and elevations
 necessary, including elevations of the plywood plate and all casing extensions, for use in establishing a
 settlement record at the site of the pore pressure measurement device. T he 3-inch outer steel casing will be
 used for this purpose. Care shall be taken to ensure the tightest possible coupling connections, using pipe
 wrenches, without rotating the bottom pipe. Settlement records obtained in this manner may be used to
 
 129
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 satisfy such settlement rate requirements as may be outlined in the contract.
 204.20.6 Basis of Payme nt.
 204.20.6.1 T he contract unit price shall include all effects, impacts and cumulative impacts of possible
 restraints inherent in the use of these devices upon the rate of construction. No additional compensation
 will be made for any impact, cumulative impacts, inefficiency or any costs incurred as a result of
 compliance with this requirement.
 204.20.6.2 Accepted pore pressure measurement devices, complete in place, will be paid for at the contract
 unit price per each.
 
 130
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 205
 MO DIFIED SUBGRADE
 205.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of modifying a subgrade to improve stability. T his work shall
 be performed as specified in the contract, at the contractor ’s option with concurrence from the engineer or
 at the direction of the engineer.
 205.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows.
 205.2.1 T he modifying material shall be hydrated lime or other chemical material, a geogrid, a geotextile,
 or other material approved by the engineer.
 205.2.1.1 If hydrated lime is used, the contractor shall furnish or require the supplier to furnish with each
 load certification that the product is in accordance with AASHT O M 216.
 205.2.1.2 If chemical modifying material other than hydrated lime is used, the material and application
 plan shall be approved by the engineer prior to use.
 205.2.2 If a geogrid or geotextile is used the product type and layout plan shall be approved by the engineer
 prior to use.
 205.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 205.3.1 Application.
 205.3.1.1 If not directed by the engineer or specified in the contract, the contractor may determine the
 locations, amount of modifying material and depth of application, within the limits of this specification
 and subject to concurrence from the engineer.
 205.3.1.2 Where performed, subgrade modification shall be done to all areas uniformly and laterally
 between outside shoulder points plus 18 inches on each side. When the chemically modified areas are
 stopped and started, there shall be a longitudinal transition zone at the rate of 30 feet per 6 inches of
 modified depth. T he transition may be made by reducing modifying material or by mixing depth.
 205.3.1.3 Chemical modifying material shall be spread in uniform and regular patterns. No material shall be
 applied if the material is being blown from the work area.
 205.3.1.4 T he application rate of the chemical modifying material shall be approved by the engineer.
 205.3.2 Compaction. When chemically modified, the subgrade shall be uniformly mixed with the
 modifying material. Mixing and compaction shall continue until the subgrade is shown to have suitable
 compaction as demonstrated by the roller equipment. Density and moisture testing will ordinarily be waived
 for subgrade chemically modified under this specification, except that should compaction not be
 demonstrated to the engineer's satisfaction, the engineer reserves the right to run such tests as necessary to
 ensure density. When stabilized with a geogrid or geotextile, the subgrade will require recompaction to the
 specified density and moisture content only of it is disturbed by the goegrid or geotextile placement.
 205.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of modified subgrade will be made to the nearest square
 yard, including transition areas. Subgrade meeting all other requirements, suitable for the placing of base
 material and having modifying material incorporated as specified herein, will be paid for at the contract
 unit price per square yard except as noted herein.
 205.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 205.5.1 If included in the contract, payment for modified subgrade will be made per square yard of modified
 subgrade at the contract unit price. No direct payment will be made for the required modifying material.
 205.5.2 If performed at the option of the contractor, payment for modified subgrade will be made at the
 
 131
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 invoiced material cost from the supplier, and no reimbursement will be made for incorporation or for
 processing.
 205.5.3 If modified subgrade is not included in the contract and is directed by the engineer, payment will be
 made in accordance with Sec 104.3.
 205.5.4 Reimbursement for transition areas will be made at the contract unit price per square yard for 1/2
 the area of the transition.
 205.5.5 Reimbursement will be limited to modified areas, the width of the pavement and shoulders, plus 18
 inches on each side.
 205.5.6 Only one payment for modified subgrade will be made for any area, regardless of the depth of
 stabilized material, number of applications or other circumstances.
 
 132
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 206
 EXCAVATIO N FO R STRUCTURES
 206.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of the necessary excavation for the foundations of all
 structures, removal and disposal of all excavated material, backfilling around the completed structures, and
 all related work.
 206.1.1 All removal work that might endanger the new structure shall be completed before any work on
 the new structure is started. Partial removals of any structure or adjustments to any utility shall be made
 with care to preserve the value of the retained portions. Work around any live utility shall be done in such
 a manner that uninterrupted service is maintained.
 206.1.2 Excavated material that is unsuitable for backfill and embankments, and excess material not
 required for either, shall be disposed of. Excavated material shall not be dumped into the channel of a
 stream.
 206.2 De pth of Excavation. T he elevation of the bottoms of footings as shown on the plans shall be
 considered an approximate elevation, and the engineer by written order may make changes in plan
 elevations and dimensions of footings as necessary to secure a satisfactory foundation.
 206.3 Foundation Stabiliz ation and Te sts.
 206.3.1 T he contractor shall furnish and place sand, rock, gravel or other suitable granular backfill material
 to replace unsuitable material encountered below box culvert slabs or below the foundation elevation of the
 structures.
 206.3.2 T he contractor shall stabilize suitable foundation material or form the bottom of pile footings, if
 necessary to obtain a stable foundation. T he contractor shall assist in driving sounding rods or shall drill
 test holes to permit an adequate inspection of the foundation subgrade. T he depth of the excavation, the
 character of the material and the condition of the foundation shall be approved by the engineer before any
 concrete is placed in the footing.
 206.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 206.4.1 Foundation Excavation Prote ction. Methods shall be used in excavating for foundations of
 structures that will ensure maintaining the stability of the material adjacent to the excavation. Sheeting,
 cribbing, timbering or bracing shall be placed by the contractor where indicated on the plans and wherever
 considered necessary. T he contractor shall ensure the adequacy of all sheeting, cribbing, timbering or
 bracing used.
 206.4.2 Foundation Ke y. Foundations for structures and retaining walls shall be free of loose material, and
 the footing shall be placed on undisturbed material. Footings shall be keyed no less than 6 inches into rock
 (limestone, dolomite or other suitable material with qu ≥ 100 ksf), and no less than 18 inches into weak
 rock (shale or other suitable material with 5 ksf ≤ qu ≤ 100 ksf)other suitable material specified for spread
 footings. Excavation in rock or weak rock for the key shall be made as near as practical to the size of the
 footing, or of the key, as shown on the plans. When placing the footing, the key portion shall be cast
 against the vertical, undisturbed face of the rock or weak rock. If side forms are necessary for footings, the
 forms shall be removed approximately 24 hours after placing the concrete, and the excavation
 immediately backfilled to the top of the footing. All cavities or crevices shall be cleaned out and filled with
 concrete in accordance with Sec 703.3.3.9, or spanned with a reinforced concrete beam, as directed by the
 engineer.
 206.4.3 Foundation Subgrade . Care shall be taken to avoid disturbing the material below the bottom of
 the footings where the structure is founded on material other than rock, and final removal to grade shall
 not be made until just prior to placing concrete. Where foundation piles are required, the excavation of
 each pit shall be completed before the piles are driven, and after the driving is completed, all loose and
 displaced material shall be removed.
 206.4.4 Culve rts on Rock. If rock is encountered under a portion of the bottom slab of a concrete box-
 
 133
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 type structure, the rock shall be removed to at least 6 inches below the bottom of the slab and curtain walls,
 and backfilled with material similar to that under the remainder of the structure.
 206.4.5 Footing Construction. Concrete footings for structures shall be placed on foundation material
 that is reasonably dry in the judgment of the engineer. T he contractor shall perform all draining, bailing or
 pumping operations, drive any sheeting, and construct any cofferdams or cribs necessary to obtain this
 condition. Pumping from the interior of any foundation enclosure shall be done in a manner to preclude
 the possibility of the movement of water, or other fluids or semi-fluids, through any fresh concrete. If
 necessary, the footing form shall be made watertight and shall be sealed around the bottom, and all pumping
 done between the footing form and the wall of the enclosure.
 206.4.6 Footing Drainage . All holes, pits or sumps resulting from excavating operations shall be kept
 drained or pumped out until the completion of the work. No ponding of water around footings on other
 than rock will be permitted.
 206.4.7 Coffe rdams. In accordance with the contract, the contractor shall provide cofferdams, consisting
 of sheet piling, or the contractor may propose alternate methods for the construction of the bridge
 foundations. Alternate designs or methods may consist of, but are not limited to: the construction of
 cofferdams, seal courses, over excavation, well point systems, dewatering and drainage diversion. T he
 method proposed by the contractor shall stay within the right of way limits provided in the contract. T he
 interior dimensions of cofferdams shall provide sufficient clearance for the construction of forms, and
 ample room for a sump and for pumping outside the footing forms. Cofferdams that have been tilted or
 moved laterally during the process of sinking shall be corrected to provide the necessary clearance.
 Cofferdams shall be constructed to protect the work against damage from sudden rising waters and to
 prevent damage to the foundation by erosion. Cofferdams shall be removed after the completion of the
 substructure unit, unless specific authority is given for the cofferdam to remain in place. T he contractor
 shall submit the proposed method of cofferdam construction to the engineer prior to beginning work.
 206.4.8 Te mporary Shoring. When temporary shoring is required by the contract documents, the
 contractor shall provide temporary shoring as needed, consisting of sheet piling or alternate methods for
 the construction of roadway fills, mechanically stabilized earth walls or structures. T he contractor shall
 submit the proposed method of temporary shoring construction to the engineer prior to beginning work.
 206.4.9 Se al Course s. Seal courses will be required if indicated on the plans or if conditions are
 encountered that, in the judgment of the engineer, render it impractical to dewater the foundation area.
 T he dimensions of the seal course shall be adequate to seal the foundation area. Pumping will not be
 permitted while excavating, pile driving or placing the seal course, and not until, by determination of the
 engineer, the seal course has attained sufficient strength to withstand the hydrostatic pressure. If seal
 courses are shown on the plans, and the engineer determines that the footings may be satisfactorily placed
 without sealing, the contractor shall dewater any completed excavation for investigation purposes. T he
 seal course designs shown on the plans are based on the use of sheet piling in construction of the
 cofferdams at the indicated water elevations. If the contractor ’s proposed alternate method includes
 cofferdams that are to be constructed with seal courses, the contractor shall prepare construction plans that
 are properly designed for the site conditions and water elevations that may be encountered during footing
 construction. T hese plans shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of
 Missouri and shall be provided to the engineer for review a minimum of two weeks prior to the beginning of
 actual footing construction. T he contractor is responsible for the safety and performance of the
 contractor ’s proposed system.
 206.4.10 Backfill. Backfill material shall be free from large or frozen lumps, wood or other extraneous
 material. All spaces excavated and not occupied by the new structure or by porous backfill shall be refilled
 with earth to the original ground surface or to the finished ground lines shown on the plans. T he backfill at
 end bents, walls or other units that fall within the limits of the roadbed shall be placed in successive 6-inch
 layers and compacted to the same density required for the adjacent roadbed. Dry footings at interior bents
 shall be backfilled and compacted to no less than the density of the adjacent undisturbed material.
 Precautions shall be taken to prevent any wedging action against the masonry. T he slope bounding the
 excavation, if steeper than 6:1 shall be stepped or serrated. Backfill placed around culverts and piers shall
 be kept at approximately the same elevation on opposing sides. Drains consisting of 5 cubic feet of coarse
 aggregate shall be placed at weep holes, except where porous backfill is required. Backfill material shall not
 
 134
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 be placed against end bents of bridges, on sides of box culverts or behind retaining walls until the concrete
 has attained the strength specified in Sec 703.3.2.13. Backfill material shall not be placed higher behind
 than in front of end bents until the superstructure, including the bridge deck, is in place. Until the grade is in
 place, drainage shall be maintained away from the end bent backwall by constructing a 6:1 or steeper slope
 away from the backwall for a minimum distance of 3 feet and by providing a lateral path for all water to
 flow off the roadbed section.
 206.4.11 Porous Backfill. Porous backfill, in accordance with Sec 1009, shall be placed behind abutments,
 wings and retaining walls where specified and shown on the plans. Porous backfill shall be placed and
 consolidated in successive 12-inch layers such that the porous backfill will not become mixed with other
 backfill material.
 206.4.12 Flowable Backfill. Flowable backfill will be required when indicated on the plans. T he
 contractor may, with approval from the engineer, use flowable backfill as an alternate to compacted
 backfill for structures, pipes or utility cuts. Flowable backfill intended for any other use by the contractor
 shall also be approved by the engineer. Flowable backfill shall not be used to surround drainage systems such
 as vertical drains or edge drains. Flowable backfill shall be in accordance with Sec 621.
 206.4.13 Excavation Classification. Unless otherwise shown on the plans, excavation for structures will
 be classified as Class 1 Excavation, Class 1 Excavation in Rock, Class 2 Excavation, Class 2 Excavation in
 Rock, Class 3 Excavation, Class 3 Excavation in Rock, Class 4 Excavation and Class 4 Excavation in
 Rock. In general, Class 1 Excavation and Class 2 Excavation will apply to excavation for bridges and large
 retaining walls. Class 3 Excavation will apply to excavation for pipe culvert installations, utilities, retrofit
 pipe culverts, drop inlets, and manholes. Class 4 Excavation will apply to excavation for box culverts,
 small retaining walls and other miscellaneous structures. Class 1 Excavation will include all excavation
 above a specified elevation indicated on the plans while Class 2 Excavation will include all excavation
 below this specified elevation. T he classification of excavation for all structures will be shown on the plans.
 
 206.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 
 206.5.1 Measurement of Class 1 and Class 2 Excavation will be made to the nearest 1/2 cubic yard for each
 structure of that volume of material actually removed from within the limits established in this section.
 T he volume measured will be limited by vertical planes 18 inches outside of and parallel with the neat lines
 of footings, tie beams or overhangs of structures classed as bridges or retaining walls. T he upper limits of
 the volume measured will be the existing ground line or the lower limits of the roadway, drainage or channel
 excavation, including any allowable overbreak, whichever is lower. Where roadway spill fills are required to
 be placed and compacted before driving piles or before constructing bridge substructure units, any required
 additional excavation for the substructure units will be measured from the spill slope. For stream crossings,
 the measured volume will not include water, but will include mud, muck and other semi-solids. T he lower
 limits of the volume measured will be the bottom of the footings, bottom of seal courses, or 18 inches
 below the bottom of tie beams and overhangs. Excavation for columns above drilled shafts will be Class 1
 Excavation, with measurement made of the volume of material actually removed above the top of the
 drilled shaft. T he volume measured will not exceed that of a cylinder having a diameter 36 inches greater
 than that of the column above the drilled shaft. No measurement will be made of the material excavated
 for the drilled shaft below the bottom of the column.
 206.5.2 Final measurement of Class 3 Excavation for pipe culverts, utilities, retrofit pipe culverts, drop
 inlets or manholes will not be made unless there is an authorized change from plan location resulting in a
 different quantity or there is an authorized change averaging more than 6 inches in the foundation
 elevation. If a revision is made or an appreciable error is found in the contract quantity, the revision or
 correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity. Measurement of Class 3
 Excavation will be made to the nearest cubic yard for each structure of that volume of material actually
 removed from within the area bounded by vertical planes 18 inches outside of the outer walls of the
 structure. T he upper limits of the volume measured, will be the existing ground line, or the lower limits of
 the roadway excavation, whichever is lower. T he lower limits of the volume measured will include
 excavation necessary for pipe bedding.
 
 135
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 206.5.3 Measurement of Class 4 Excavation for box culverts classified as bridges will be made to the
 nearest cubic yard for each structure of that volume of material actually removed from within the area
 bounded by vertical planes 18 inches outside of the outer walls of box culverts with bottom slabs. T he upper
 limits of the volume measured will be the existing ground line, or the lower limits of the roadway
 excavation, whichever is lower. Class 4 Excavation under embankments and in channel changes will be
 measured from the original ground surface unless otherwise designated on the plans. For box culverts
 without bottom slabs, measurement will be made as above except no material below plan flow line will be
 included that is outside of the area bounded by vertical planes 18 inches each side of and parallel with the
 neat lines of the walls or footings. Final measurement of Class 4 Excavation for box culverts not classified
 as bridges, small retaining walls and miscellaneous structures will not be made unless there is an authorized
 change from plan location resulting in a different quantity or there is an authorized change averaging more
 than 6 inches in the foundation elevation. If a revision is made or an appreciable error is found in the
 contract quantity, the revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract
 quantity. Excavation classification will not change if a substitution of a drainage structure type is approved.
 206.5.4 Where concrete in footings or walls is cast against the vertical faces of the excavation, the neat
 lines of the concrete footings will be considered the limits of excavation for that depth in which the
 concrete is in contact with the excavation, and no measurement will be made of any excavation or
 overbreak beyond the neat footing lines.
 206.5.5 Final measurement of the porous backfill will not be made except for authorized changes during
 construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, the volume of
 porous backfill will be computed to the nearest cubic yard at each structure from dimensions on the plans.
 Any porous backfill material placed outside the neat lines shown on the plans shall be placed at the
 contractor's expense. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the
 contract quantity.
 206.6 Basis of Payme nt.
 206.6.1 Payment for additional Class 1 and Class 2 Excavation required to carry footings a maximum of 8
 feet below elevations shown on the plans will be made at 125 percent of the contract unit price for that
 additional excavation within the limits of Class 1, and at 150 percent of the contract unit price for that
 additional excavation within the limits of Class 2 Excavation. Additional excavation required to carry
 footings a depth of more than 8 feet
 below plan elevations will be considered changes in the work, and will be paid for in accordance with Sec
 104.3.
 206.6.2 Payment for drilling test holes for foundation tests will be made per foot of hole drilled at the
 fixed contract unit price specified in Sec 109.
 206.6.3 Payment will not be made for removal or replacement of foundation material that became
 unsuitable because of improper methods of construction by the contractor. Payment for removal of
 inherently unsound material for foundation stabilization will be made at the contract unit price for
 excavation for structures. No payment will be made for any costs involved in replacing the volume below
 the foundations, except that the contractor will be reimbursed for the delivered cost of the granular backfill
 when directed by the engineer.
 206.6.3.1 If Class C Excavation material, as defined in Sec 203, is encountered in Class 1 Excavation, and
 no pay item for Class 1 Excavation in Rock is included in the contract, payment for that material will be
 made per cubic yard at the fixed contract unit price specified in Sec 109.
 206.6.3.2 If Class C Excavation material, as defined in Sec 203, is encountered in Class 2 Excavation and
 no pay item for Class 2 Excavation in Rock is included in the contract, payment for that material will be
 made per cubic yard at the fixed contract unit price specified in Sec 109.
 206.6.3.3 If Class C Excavation material, as defined in Sec 203, is encountered in Class 3 Excavation and
 no pay item for Class 3 Excavation in Rock is included in the contract, payment for that material will be
 made per cubic yard at the fixed contract unit price specified in Sec 109.
 
 136
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 206.6.3.4 If Class C Excavation material, as defined in Sec 203, is encountered in Class 4 Excavation and
 no pay item for Class 4 Excavation in Rock is included in the contract, payment for that material will be
 made per cubic yard at the fixed unit price specified in Sec 109.
 206.6.4 No direct payment will be made for placing porous backfill at weepholes in accordance with Sec
 206.4.11, or for backfilling the structure.
 206.6.5 T he accepted quantities of excavation for structures and porous backfill will be paid for at the
 contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 206.6.6 All costs for furnishing material, labor or equipment, construction, dewatering, drainage, and any
 other incidental work necessary to complete cofferdam construction; and subsequent removal of any
 cofferdams, berms, diversions, and any other features constructed for cofferdams as identified by the
 engineer will be considered completely covered in the contract unit price per lump sum per bent, regardless
 of construction method. Payment for Class 1 Excavation and/or Class 2 Excavation will be limited to the
 volume defined in Sec 206.5. No additional payment for excavation will be made for a contractor proposed
 method of cofferdam construction.
 206.6.7 All costs for furnishing material, labor, equipment, construction, drainage and other incidental
 work necessary to complete temporary shoring construction; and subsequent removal of any temporary
 shoring, berms, diversions, and any other features as identified by the engineer will be considered
 completely covered in the contract unit price per lump sum regardless of construction method.
 206.6.8 No direct payment will be made for removing existing structures within the limits of excavation
 for structures. Existing headwalls or culvert concrete to be removed will be paid for as removal of
 improvements for roadway culverts or partial removal of culvert concrete for bridge culverts.
 206.6.9 Payment for seal courses other than those on the plans will be made only with written
 authorization from the engineer.
 206.6.10 Any material excavated in cleaning out culverts to be used in place will be paid for at the contract
 unit price per each structure. However, only the initial excavation will be paid for, and any subsequent
 cleaning required prior to final acceptance shall be done at the contractor's expense.
 
 137
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 207
 LINEAR GRADING
 207.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of grading work necessary to bring the roadway to the required
 grade and cross section within reasonable tolerances. T he work shall also include the following:
 (a) Construction of all inlet and outlet ditches and ditch blocks within the linear grading limits
 unless otherwise provided for in the contract.
 (b) Construction of entrances and approaches.
 (c) Breaking up and satisfactory removal or incorporation into the roadway of all gravel, macadam
 or bituminous surfaces.
 (d) Compaction of the roadway subgrade within linear grading limits.
 207.1.1 Linear Grading, Class 1, shall consist of grading where the topography is such that the excavation
 necessary to bring the roadway to the designated cross section will approximately complete the nearby
 embankments with a minimum of drifting, and where it is not necessary to control the finished grade line
 for purposes other than to obtain minimum cover over culverts.
 207.1.2 Linear Grading, Class 2, shall consist of grading where it is necessary to excavate and haul material
 approximately 200 feet to bring the roadway to the desired grade and may involve work on high banks and
 side hills.
 207.1.3 T he class of linear grading designated on the plans will apply only to those sections that have been
 specifically indicated as such on the plans and will not be subject to change unless approved by the engineer.
 207.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 207.2.1 T he roadway shall be brought to the required grade and cross section within reasonable tolerances
 by backsloping, ditching, removing stone and boulders from the roadbed surface, or any other work
 necessary, including drifting and hauling of any excavated material. A reasonable tolerance in alignment will
 be defined as a maximum gradual deviation of 2 feet, free of sharp breaks, to take advantage of favorable
 topography. Gradual deviation in alignment will be permitted, if necessary to center an existing drainage
 structure that is to be used in place. A reasonable tolerance in grade will be defined as a final grade that is
 uniform in appearance, free of sharp breaks or humps, and within 6 inches of plan grade.
 
 207.2.2 Stumps, roots, rubbish or any other deleterious material shall not be placed in embankments.
 Where an embankment less than 2 feet high is to be constructed, all vegetative matter shall be cut and
 removed from the surface upon which the embankment is to be placed. T he cut-over surface shall be
 thoroughly broken. All ditches, including inlet and outlet ditches, shall be cut to grades that will properly
 drain. T he required cross section for inlet and outlet ditches leading to or from structures shall be of a width
 no less than the width of the floor or the diameter of the structure being served. Finishing operations shall
 continue until the roadbed is free from sharp breaks in alignment and grade, and until the roadbed has been
 shaped to the required cross section. Material considered unsuitable for the subgrade shall be disposed of on
 nearby slopes or as otherwise directed by the engineer.
 207.2.3 If obliteration of existing roadways or temporary construction is designated in the contract to be
 performed on a linear grading basis, such obliteration shall include all operations necessary to fill the
 ditches and blend the old roadbed with the natural ground to provide a pleasing appearance.
 207.2.4 Any subgrade upon which a paved surface is to be placed shall be compacted in accordance with Sec
 203.5.
 207.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of Linear Grading, Class 1 and Class 2, will be made to the
 nearest 1/10 station.
 
 138
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 207.3.1 Unless otherwise in accordance with the contract, measurement and payment for entrances and
 approaches will be made as Linear Grading, Class 1. Entrances and approaches will be measured along the
 centerline of each facility, regardless of the width to be constructed, beginning at the shoulder line of the
 road that is being entered and extending to the point of zero cut or embankment of the entrance or
 approach. Measurement will be made to the nearest 10 feet for each facility and totaled to the nearest 100
 feet.
 207.3.2 If material is encountered that may be classified as other than Class A Excavation as described in
 Sec 203.2.1, the limits of linear grading will not be underrun. Material classified as other than Class A
 Excavation will be measured and paid for per cubic yard in accordance with Sec 203.8. Where undergrading
 is necessary, backfilling of the undergraded area will be considered as a part of the linear grading operation.
 207.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of linear grading will be paid for at the contract unit
 price for each of the pay items included in the contract, and will be considered as full compensation for all
 labor, equipment, material or other construction involved to complete the described work. Removal of
 concrete pavement and concrete base course will be paid for in accordance with Sec 202.30.3. T he
 earthwork for obliteration, including bituminous surfacing, will be included as linear grading.
 
 139
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 208
 INTERCEPTIO N DITCH
 208.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of all work necessary to construct an interception ditch or
 levee, or both, as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 208.2 Construction Re quire me nts. Interception ditches shall be constructed in a manner to provide a
 profile free from sharp breaks or irregularities. T he work shall be finished to a reasonably smooth and
 uniform surface. Loose rock shall be removed from the finished surfaces.
 208.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement will be made to the nearest 10 feet along the flow line of
 the ditch for each segment and totaled to the nearest 100 feet for the sum of all segments.
 208.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of interception ditch will be paid for at the contract unit
 price.
 
 140
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 209
 SUBGRADE PREPARATIO N
 209.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of preparing the subgrade upon which a base course is to be
 constructed or a surfacing placed as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. After a base course
 has been constructed, the top of the completed base course will be considered the subgrade for the next
 operation. In surfacing contracts involving only incidental grading, the contractor shall complete subgrade
 compaction in accordance with Sec 210 before proceeding with this work.
 209.2 Construction Re quire me nts. T he subgrade shall be substantially uniform in density throughout
 the entire width of the subgrade. T he subgrade shall be constructed to drain surface water to the side ditches
 and all ditches shall be kept open by the contractor. Where hauling results in ruts or other objectionable
 irregularities, the contractor shall reshape and reroll the subgrade before the base or surfacing is placed. If
 an old roadway comprises any part of the roadbed, the contractor shall loosen the compacted portions to a
 depth of at least
 6 inches and shall reshape the roadbed.
 209.2.1 All subgrade shall be rolled. T he subgrades shall be checked after rolling and, if not at the proper
 elevation at all points, sufficient material shall be removed or added and compacted to bring all portions of
 the subgrade to the required elevation and density. T he moisture content of the top 6 inches of the finished
 subgrade at the time the base is placed, or at the time pavement is placed if no base is provided under the
 pavement, shall be no less than the minimum specified for compacting in Sec 203.5.3. If the moisture
 content has not been maintained, the subgrade shall be scarified, wet to the required moisture content and
 compacted. A maximum deviation of 1/2 inch, plus or minus, from the required elevation will be permitted
 on the surface of the finished subgrade.
 209.2.2 Soft spots shall be removed to a maximum depth of 24 inches and backfilled with approved stable
 material. Unsuitable material shall be removed and backfilled in accordance with Sec 203.4.5.
 209.2.3 T he subgrade shall be compacted and brought to true shape. Any material added shall be
 satisfactorily incorporated and compacted. Care shall be taken in forming the crown and shaping the
 subgrade to ensure that the specified thickness of pavement will be attained. T he finished concrete
 pavement subgrade at the time of paving shall be moist, but sufficiently firm to resist rutting or deforming
 under construction traffic.
 209.3 Basis of Payme nt. No direct payment will be made for subgrade preparation.
 
 141
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 210
 SUBGRADE CO MPACTIO N
 210.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of compacting the earth subgrade on the roadbed of a
 previously graded roadway. T his work shall be performed prior to any work under Sec 209. T he contractor
 shall perform this work on the subgrade at all locations specified by the engineer. Tentative locations of
 subgrade compaction will be shown in the plans, but the engineer will specify all locations and depths of this
 work by written order. No contract adjustment will be made for the direct or indirect costs, incidental or
 consequential costs, or effects of any overrun, or partial or complete underrun.
 210.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 210.2.1 T he subgrade for the full width of the roadbed shall be scarified to a depth of at least 6 inches, and
 the scarified material shall be brought to a uniform moisture content either by drying or by adding water
 and manipulating. At the contractor's option, the upper 6 inches of soil may be removed and replaced with
 satisfactory material, or removed and manipulated before replacing. T he material shall be compacted to the
 required density and within the moisture contents specified under Sec 203.5.
 210.2.2 If it is determined that the required subgrade density cannot be obtained by moisture control and
 compaction of the upper 6 inches, the unsuitable material shall be excavated to a maximum depth of 18
 inches, and replaced with satisfactory material compacted in layers not to exceed 6 inches, except as
 otherwise permitted by the engineer. Each 6-inch layer shall be processed, wetted or dried as necessary, and
 compacted to the required density.
 210.2.3 If the contractor ’s operations cause an unsatisfactory subgrade, the contractor shall restore the
 subgrade to a satisfactory condition at the contractor's expense.
 210.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement will be made to the nearest 1/10 station along the
 centerline of each roadbed, regardless of width, for each depth of compaction authorized and totaled to the
 nearest 100 feet for the sum of all segments. For the purpose of measurement, a divided highway will be
 considered as having two roadbeds. Measurement of ramps will be made from the ramp’s gore point.
 210.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of subgrade compaction, 6-inch depth, will be paid for at
 the contract unit price. Subgrade compaction to a depth of 12 inches will be paid for at the rate of two
 times the contract unit price for subgrade compaction, 6-inch depth. Subgrade compaction to a depth of 18
 inches will be paid for at the rate of three times the contract unit price for subgrade compaction, 6-inch
 depth.
 
 142
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 211
 SUBGRADE SCARIFYING
 211.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of loosening the surface of the roadbed and removing all rocks
 larger than 4 inches. Tentative locations of subgrade scarifying will be shown on the plans, but the engineer
 will specify all locations of this work by written order.
 211.2 Construction Re quire me nts. T he engineer will specify areas where subgrade scarifying is to be
 performed. T he contractor shall perform all specified work necessary to loosen the surface of the roadbed
 over the full width to a depth of 6 inches below the finished grading section, and to remove all rocks larger
 than 4 inches. Oversized material shall be disposed of as directed by the engineer. After all oversized
 material has been removed; the roadbed shall be brought back to a satisfactory grade and cross section by
 the addition of extra material, if needed, without rocks exceeding 4 inches .
 211.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement will be along the centerline of the roadbed, regardless of
 the width, to the nearest 1/10 station for each segment and totaled to the nearest 100 feet for the sum of
 all segments.
 211.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of subgrade scarifying will be paid for at the contract unit
 price.
 
 143
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 212
 SUBGRADING AND SHO ULDERING
 212.1 De scription.
 212.1.1 Subgrading and Shouldering, Class 1, shall consist of preparing the earth subgrade for surfacing and
 shoulders by fine-grading, and shaping the existing roadbed of a previously graded roadway and shaping
 fillslopes, inslopes and ditches as required to complete a finished roadway in accordance with the typical
 section shown on the plans.
 212.1.2 Subgrading and Shouldering, Class 2, in addition to the above, shall include the construction and
 final shaping of earth shoulders.
 212.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 212.2.1 Subgrading and shouldering will normally be restricted to the roadway from ditch to ditch or to the
 roadbed and upper portions of fill slopes. All ditches shall be graded to drain. T he median, if any, shall be
 shaped to conform to the typical section. If oversize rock in the subgrade cannot be removed by scarifying,
 compensation for additional work will be made in accordance with Sec 104.3. No work will be required on
 backslopes, except that necessary to blend the lower portion of the existing backslope with the regraded
 ditch. T he work on fillslopes shall be confined to the upper 10 feet of the slope, measured along the slope
 line.
 212.2.2 If the subgrade has less density than that required under Sec 203.5, the engineer may order the item
 of Subgrade Compaction to be performed. When lack of satisfactory density results from improper
 maintenance by the contractor, the subgrade density shall be restored at the contractor's expense. Earth
 shoulders shall be constructed in accordance with Sec 203.4.1.2.
 212.2.3 Finishing of ditches, side slopes, cuts and fills shall be to a reasonably smooth and uniform surface
 that will merge with the adjacent slopes. Finishing by hand methods will not be required, except that all
 brush, weeds, excess mud and silt or other debris shall be removed from all channels and culverts within the
 scope of the work in accordance with Sec 104.11, even though such structures are used in place.
 212.2.4 Any additional material required to complete the subgrade or shoulders to proper grade and section
 shall be obtained from within the right of way limits as directed by the engineer. Excess excavation shall be
 used for widening shoulders on fill sections or shall be wasted within the limits of the right of way as
 directed by the engineer.
 212.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of Subgrading and Shouldering, Class 1 and Class 2, will be
 made to the nearest 100 feet along the centerline of each roadbed, regardless of width. For the purpose of
 measurement, a divided highway will be considered as having two roadbeds. Measurement of ramps will be
 made from the ramp’s gore point.
 212.3.1 Subgrading and Shouldering, Class 1 and Class 2, will apply only to those sections that have been
 specifically designated as such on the plans and the class will not be subject to change during construction.
 212.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of subgrading and shouldering will be paid for at the
 contract unit price.
 212.4.1 No direct payment will be made for minor drifting of excavated material or for any additional
 material required. If additional material is required to be hauled approximately 1000 feet or more to
 complete the work, compensation will be made in accordance with Sec 104.3.
 212.4.2 T he repair of major erosion beyond the limits as described in Sec 212.2.1 will be paid for in
 accordance with Sec 104.3.
 
 144
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 214
 RO CK FILL
 214.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing fill of rock or broken concrete for protection
 of embankment.
 214.2 Mate rial. T he material for rock fill shall be durable stone or broken concrete containing a combined
 total of no more than 10 percent of earth, sand, shale and non-durable rock. T he material shall be similar
 to quarry-run stone graded from coarse to fine with a minimum of voids. T he coarse stone shall be as large
 as can be conveniently handled, but at least 25 percent of the material shall be of pieces having a volume
 of one cubic foot or more. Acceptance of quality and size of material may be made by visual inspection at
 the job site.
 214.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Successive horizontal layers of stone or broken concrete not
 exceeding 24 inches thick shall be spread over the area of the rock fill. T he larger pieces shall be well
 distributed and the voids filled with smaller pieces. Each layer shall be spread in accordance with Sec
 203.4.16. Where rock fill is placed as a portion of embankment with controlled density, the material shall
 be compacted in accordance with Sec 203.5.5. T he fill shall conform to the elevations and dimensions
 shown on the plans, and the slopes shall present a dense, finished appearance free from segregation with a
 proportionate quantity of the large pieces exposed.
 214.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement will be made to the nearest cubic yard of material in place
 in the completed fill.
 214.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 214.5.1 Commission Furnishe d Rock Fill. If shown on the plans that the material for rock fill is to be
 obtained from the right of way or other source furnished by the Commission, the excavating, including all
 breaking, loading and hauling, regardless of haul distance, will be paid for and considered completely covered
 under the contract items of Class A Excavation, Class C Excavation, Unclassified Excavation, Excavation
 for Structures or other applicable items. If payment is made under these conditions, separate payment for
 furnishing rock fill will not be made.
 214.5.1.1 If the rock fill from the right of way or other sources furnished by the Commission is made
 unsuitable or unattainable by the contractor's operations, the contractor shall provide suitable material and
 dispose of any surplus material at the contractor ’s expense.
 214.5.1.2 If all or part of the required quantity of acceptable material is not actually available and was not
 made unacceptable by the contractor ’s operations, payment will be made per cubic yard at the fixed unit
 price specified in Sec 109 for such additional rock fill material that the contractor is required to furnish and
 haul.
 214.5.2 Contractor Furnishe d Rock Fill. If the plans do not provide for a source of material, the
 contractor shall provide the material and all costs of securing the source, quarrying, excavating, breaking
 and hauling the material to the site will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for furnishing
 rock fill.
 214.5.3 Placing Rock Fill. Payment for placing rock fill will be made at the contract unit price per cubic
 yard.
 
 145
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 215
 SHAPING SLO PES
 215.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of grading and shaping existing slopes to eliminate shoulder
 drop off conditions as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 215.1.1 Shaping Slopes, Class I, shall consist of shaping slopes where, in general, the material required to
 bring the roadway to the designated cross section can be obtained or disposed of within 1000 feet on the
 right of way as directed by the engineer.
 215.1.2 Shaping Slopes, Class II, shall consist of shaping slopes where it may be necessary to haul in excess
 of 1000 feet or go outside the limits of the right of way for additional material to construct the slopes to
 the designated cross section or where it may be necessary to dispose of waste material outside the limits of
 the right of way. T he contractor shall provide the engineer with an acceptable written agreement with any
 property owner from whose property additional material is to be obtained or on which excess excavation is
 to be disposed.
 215.1.3 Shaping Slopes, Class III, shall consist of providing fill material and shaping slopes to construct
 additional shoulder width for the installation of guardrail and Type A crashworthy end terminals in
 accordance with Missouri Standard Plans for Highway Construction. Material used shall be Type 1, 5, or 7
 Aggregate Base, or other granular material approved by the engineer. Any excess material shall be disposed
 of outside the limits of the right of way.
 215.1.3.1 In lieu of aggregate base, earth material may be used for Shaping Slopes, Class III. When earth
 material is used, an approved seed mixture shall be applied in accordance with Sec 805, mulch shall be
 applied in accordance with Sec 802 and erosion and sediment control shall be utilized in accordance with
 Sec 806. All cost for seeding, mulching, and erosion control shall be incidental to the cost of Shaping
 Slopes, Class III.
 215.2 Construction Re quire me nts. Slope areas to be shaped by the addition of material shall be
 scarified to allow bonding with the added material. Density shall be obtained from reasonable compactive
 efforts consisting of no less than three passes with a roller or other methods approved by the engineer. T he
 contractor will not be required to excavate any classified rock excavation under this item.
 215.2.1 Benching of the existing slope may be necessary to provide stability to the additional shoulder
 width constructed by Shaping Slopes, Class III. All costs for benching shall be included in the cost of
 Shaping Slopes, Class III.
 215.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except where appreciable errors are
 found in the contract quantity.
 215.3.1 Where required, measurement will be made to the nearest 1/10 station separately for each length
 of slope measured along the centerline of the traveled way and totaled to the nearest 100 feet for the sum
 of all segments.
 215.3.2 Shaping Slopes, Class I, Class II, or Class III will apply only to those sections that have been
 specifically designated as such on the plans.
 215.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of shaping slopes will be paid for at the contract unit
 price for each of the pay items included in the contract. If Shaping Slopes, Class I, Class II, or Class III is
 not provided but is required, payment will be in accordance with Sec 104.3. No direct payment will be made
 for any additional material required for shaping slopes.
 
 146
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 216
 REMO VALS FO R BRIDGE STRUCTURES
 SECTIO N 216.10 REMO VAL O F BRIDGES
 216.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of removing and disposing of existing bridge structures as
 shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 216.10.2 Re moval Re quire me nts. T he entire structure, including all substructure units, shall be removed
 to an elevation 2 feet below the finished ground line or streambed. Any portion of an existing structure
 below the ground line that interferes with the construction of the new structure shall be removed. Existing
 structures used for handling temporary traffic shall not be removed until the replacement structure is open
 to traffic. Notification of demolition shall be made in accordance with Sec 202.40.1.1.
 216.10.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. No measurement will be made for removal of bridges.
 216.10.4 Basis of Payme nt. Removal of bridges will be paid for at the contract lump sum price.
 SECTIO N 216.20 SCARIFICATIO N O F BRIDGE DECKS .
 216.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of scarifying the bridge deck to the depth shown on the
 plans or as directed by the engineer.
 216.20.2 Re moval Re quire me nts. T he bridge deck shall be uniformly scarified to the depth as shown on
 the plans. Excessive tearing of the deck surface shall require immediate correction. Over areas of half-sole
 repair and full depth repair, the scarified removal depth may be coincidental with the repair removal
 operation. T he scarification shall produce a very rough texture that is acceptable to the engineer as a
 bondable surface for the new concrete wearing surface or as a starting profile for total surface hydro
 demolition. T he scarifying process shall not produce a polished or slick surface. Any epoxy patches
 encountered shall be completely removed to sound, natural concrete.
 216.20.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of scarification of bridge decks will not be made
 except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract
 quantity. Where required, scarification of the bridge decks will be measured to the nearest square yard based
 on measurement longitudinally from end of slab to end of slab and transversely from roadway face of curb
 to roadway face of curb. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the
 contract quantity.
 216.20.4 Basis of Payme nt. Scarification of bridge decks will be paid for at the contract unit price.
 SECTIO N 216.30 SEAL CO AT AND WEARING SURFACE REMO VAL.
 216.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of the complete removal and disposal of the unbonded seal
 coat, bonded seal coat, asphalt wearing surface or concrete wearing surface from the bridge deck as shown
 on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 
 216.30.2 Re moval Re quire me nts.
 216.30.2.1 All material and residue shall be removed. Staining will be permitted. T he equipment and
 procedures used for removal shall be such that no damage will be done to the existing concrete deck. Any
 epoxy patches encountered shall be completely removed to sound, natural concrete. Excessive tearing of
 the deck surface shall require immediate correction.
 216.30.2.2 When a concrete wearing surface is to be installed, the removal of the wearing surface plus the
 amount of deck as shown on the plans shall produce a very rough texture that is acceptable to the engineer
 as a bondable surface for the new concrete wearing surface or as a starting profile for total surface hydro
 demolition. T he removal process shall not produce a polished or slick surface.
 
 147
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 216.30.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the seal coat and wearing surface removal will
 not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the
 contract quantity. Where required, removal of bonded seal coat, asphalt wearing surface and concrete
 wearing surface will be measured to the nearest square foot based on measurement longitudinally from end
 of slab to end of slab and transversely from roadway face of curb to roadway face of curb. T he revision or
 correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity. No measurement will be
 made for removal of unbonded seal coat.
 216.30.4 Basis of Payme nt. Seal coat and wearing surface removal will be paid for at the contract unit
 price, except that all costs incurred by the contractor while removing the unbonded seal coat will be
 considered completely covered in the contract unit price for other items.
 SECTIO N 216.40 REMO VAL AND STO RAGE O F EXISTING BRIDGE RAILS.
 216.40.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of disassembling, removing, transporting and storing
 existing bridge rails at the location specified in the contract documents or as directed by the engineer.
 216.40.2 Storage Re quire me nts. Storage shall be by stacking in a neat and orderly manner on
 contractor furnished timbers. T he contractor shall notify and make arrangements with the engineer a
 minimum of 24 hours prior to commencing the storage of these materials. T he contractor shall be
 responsible for damage to or loss of any part, including necessary repair or replacement, until storage has
 been acceptably completed.
 216.40.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the removal and storage of existing bridge rails
 will not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in
 the contract quantity. Where required, removal and storage of existing bridge rails will be measured to the
 nearest linear foot from end of rail to end of rail. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to
 or deducted from the contract quantity.
 216.40.4 Basis of Payme nt. Removal and storage of existing bridge rails will be paid for at the contract
 unit price.
 SECTIO N 216.50 REMO VAL O F EXISTING BRIDGE DECKS.
 216.50.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of removing and disposing of existing bridge rails, curbs,
 slab, expansion devices and any other items necessary to reconstruct the bridge deck as shown on the plans
 or as directed by the engineer.
 216.50.2 Re moval Re quire me nts.
 216.50.2.1 T he existing bridge deck shall be removed by methods such that the girders, stringers or floor
 beams that are to remain in place are not damaged. Any damage to the girders, stringers and floor beams
 resulting from the contractor ’s operations shall be repaired or replaced as directed by the engineer, at the
 contractor ’s expense. Notification of demolition shall be made in accordance with Sec 202.40.1.1.
 216.50.2.2 T he contact surfaces of all existing structural steel, including any shear connectors, exposed by
 removal of the bridge deck shall be cleaned, including the removal of stratified rust, with a minimum of
 SSPC-SP-3 surface preparation. Any tightly adhered concrete remaining after the surface preparation may
 be left in place. T he area, including the welded connection between the shear connector and the top flange,
 shall be coated with one coat of gray epoxy-mastic primer (non-aluminum) in accordance with Sec 1081 to
 produce a dry film thickness of no less than 3 mils. Overspray on other areas of the shear connector will be
 considered acceptable. T he gray epoxy-mastic primer (non-aluminum) shall be compatible with concrete.
 216.50.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of removal of the existing bridge decks will not
 be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the
 contract quantity. Where required, removal of the existing bridge decks will be measured to the nearest
 square foot based on measurement longitudinally from end of slab to end of slab and transversely from out
 to out of the bridge deck. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the
 contract quantity.
 
 148
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 216.50.4 Basis of Payme nt. Removal of the existing bridge deck will be paid for at the contract unit
 price.
 SECTIO N 216.60 PARTIAL REMO VAL O F EXISTING BRIDGE DECKS.
 216.60.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of removing and disposing of the existing curbs, rails, slab
 and any other items necessary to reconstruct the bridge deck as shown on the plans or as directed by the
 engineer.
 216.60.2 Re moval Re quire me nts.
 216.60.2.1 Concrete shall be removed by conventional hand/mechanical equipment in accordance with Sec
 704. A removal line shall be established with the joint sawed to a depth of one inch with a vertical face. In
 no case shall existing reinforcement be cut or damaged by the sawing operation.
 216.60.2.2 T he existing reinforcing steel shall be stripped, cleaned, straightened and extended into or
 utilized in the new concrete as shown on the plans. Care shall be taken to prevent damage to the
 reinforcement or the reinforcement bond to the concrete. If any reinforcement is damaged or deteriorated,
 the engineer shall be notified. Cut or broken bars or bars having 10 percent or more cross sectional area
 lost shall be spliced 24 diameters on each side of the damage.
 216.60.2.3 T he existing bridge deck shall be removed by methods such that the girders, stringers and floor
 beams that are to remain in place are not damaged. Any damage to the girders, stringers and floor beams
 resulting from the contractor ’s operations shall be repaired or replaced as directed by the engineer at the
 contractor ’s expense.
 216.60.2.4 T he contact surfaces of all existing structural steel, including any shear connectors, exposed by
 partial removal of the bridge deck shall be cleaned and coated in accordance with Sec 216.50.2.2.
 216.60.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the partial removal of existing bridge decks
 will not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in
 the contact quantity. Where required, partial removal of existing bridge decks will be measured to the
 nearest square foot based on measurement longitudinally from end of slab to end of slab and transversely
 from outside edge of the existing slab to the line shown on bridge plans. T he revision or correction will be
 computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 216.60.4 Basis of Payme nt. Partial removal of existing bridge decks will be paid for at the contract unit
 price.
 SECTIO N 216.70 PARTIAL REMO VAL O F CULVERT AND SUBSTRUCTURE CO NCRETE.
 216.70.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of removing and disposing of existing culvert wings and slab
 or substructure concrete as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 216.70.2 Mate rial. T he qualified special mortar shall be in accordance with Sec 704.2.
 216.70.3 Re moval Re quire me nts.
 216.70.3.1 Any excavation required during the removal of concrete shall be backfilled after the new
 concrete is poured and cured. Any part of the roadway that is removed or damaged and any part of the
 remaining structure damaged during the removal of the existing concrete shall be repaired or the material
 replaced, at the contractor ’s expense, as directed by the engineer.
 216.70.3.2 Concrete removal shall be in accordance with Sec 216.60.2.1. T he concrete to be removed will
 not be included in the excavation volume. Areas exposed by removal of concrete and not covered by new
 concrete shall be coated with a qualified special mortar.
 216.70.3.3 Existing reinforcing steel utilized in the new concrete shall be prepared in accordance with Sec
 
 149
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 216.60.2.2. Existing reinforcing steel not utilized in the new concrete shall be cut off one inch into the
 concrete. Any holes outside the limits of new concrete shall be filled with a qualified special mortar.
 216.70.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. No measurement will be made for partial removal of culvert and
 substructure concrete.
 216.70.5 Basis of Payme nt. Partial removal of culvert and substructure concrete will be paid for at the
 contract lump sum price.
 SECTIO N 216.80 CURB REMO VAL.
 216.80.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of removing and disposing of existing curbs, rails and end
 posts as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 216.80.2 Mate rial. Qualified special mortar shall be in accordance with Sec 704.2.
 216.80.3 Re moval Re quire me nts.
 216.80.3.1 Concrete removal shall be in accordance with Sec 216.60.2.1. Areas exposed by removal of
 concrete and not covered by new concrete shall be coated with a qualified special mortar.
 216.80.3.2 Existing reinforcing steel utilized in the new concrete shall be prepared in accordance with Sec
 216.60.2.2. Existing reinforcing steel not utilized in the new concrete and existing rail post bolts shall be
 cut off one inch into the concrete. Any holes outside the limits of new concrete shall be filled with a
 qualified special mortar.
 216.80.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of curb removal will not be made except for
 authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity.
 Where required, curb removal will be measured to the nearest linear foot based on measurement from end of
 curb to end of curb. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract
 quantity.
 216.80.5 Basis of Payme nt. Curb removal will be paid for at the contract unit price.
 SECTIO N 216.90 REMO VAL O F EXISTING EXPANSIO N JO INTS AND ADJACENT CO NCRETE
 216.90.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of any excavation, backfill, removal and disposal of the
 existing expansion joint system, curb plates and adjacent concrete as shown on the plans or as directed by
 the engineer.
 216.90.2 Mate rial. Qualified special mortar shall be in accordance with Sec 704.2.
 216.90.3 Re moval Re quire me nts.
 216.90.3.1 Any excavation required during the removal of concrete shall be backfilled after the new
 concrete is poured and cured. Any part of the roadway that is removed or damaged and any part of the
 remaining structure that is damaged during the removal of the existing concrete shall be repaired or the
 material replaced as directed by the engineer at the contractor ’s expense.
 216.90.3.2 Concrete removal shall be in accordance with Sec 216.60.2.1. T he concrete to be removed will
 not be included in the excavation volume. Areas exposed by removal of concrete and not covered by new
 concrete shall be coated with a qualified special mortar.
 216.90.3.3 Existing reinforcing steel utilized in the new concrete shall be prepared in accordance with Sec
 216.60.2.2. Existing reinforcing steel not utilized in the new concrete shall be cut off one inch into the
 concrete. Any holes outside the limits of new concrete shall be filled with a qualified special mortar. Any
 reinforcement that interferes with the installation of the new expansion joint system shall be called to the
 attention of the engineer and may be shifted, cut or removed as directed by the engineer. Any reinforcing
 steel removed that was to remain in place shall be replaced with bars of like size and shape, Grade 60, in
 
 150
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 accordance with Sec 706 or Sec 710 and spliced 24 bar diameters as directed by the engineer.
 216.90.3.4 T he contact surfaces of all existing structural steel exposed by removal of the existing
 expansion joints and adjacent concrete shall be cleaned and coated in accordance with Sec 216.50.2.2.
 216.90.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the removal of existing expansion joints and
 adjacent concrete will not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable
 errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, removal of the existing expansion joint system
 and adjacent concrete will be measured to the nearest linear foot based on measurement from roadway face
 of curb to roadway face of curb along centerline of the existing joint. T he revision or correction will be
 computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity. Portions of the joint extending past the
 roadway face of curbs will not be measured for payment.
 216.90.5 Basis of Payme nt. Removal of existing expansion joints and adjacent concrete will be paid for
 at the contract unit price for each of the items included in the contract.
 SECTIO N 216.100 REMO VAL O F EXISTING EXPANSIO N JO INT SEAL O R SEALANT.
 216.100.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of removing and disposing of existing expansion joint
 seals or sealant, curb plates and any partial removal of concrete as shown on the plans or as directed by the
 engineer.
 216.100.2 Mate rial. Qualified special mortar shall be in accordance with Sec 704.2.
 216.100.3 Re moval Re quire me nts.
 216.100.3.1 Concrete removal shall be in accordance with Sec 216.60.2.1. Areas exposed by removal of
 concrete and not covered by new concrete shall be coated with a qualified special mortar. Any damage to
 the remaining structure resulting from the contractor ’s operations shall be repaired or replaced, at the
 contractor ’s expense, as directed by the engineer.
 216.100.3.2 Existing reinforcing steel utilized in the new concrete shall be in accordance with Sec
 216.60.2.2. Existing reinforcing steel not utilized in the new concrete shall be cut off one inch into the
 concrete. Any holes outside the limits of new concrete shall be filled with a qualified special mortar. Any
 reinforcement that interferes with the installation of the new expansion joint seal or sealant shall be called
 to the attention of the engineer and may be shifted, cut or removed as directed by the engineer. Any
 reinforcing steel removed that is to remain in place shall be replaced with bars of like size and shape being
 Grade 60.
 216.100.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of removal of existing expansion joint seal or
 sealant will not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are
 found in the contract quantity. Where required, removal of the existing expansion joint seal and sealant will
 be measured to the nearest linear foot based on measurement from roadway face of curb to roadway face of
 curb along centerline of the existing joint. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or
 deducted from the contract quantity. Portions of the joint extending past the roadway face of curbs will not
 be measured for payment.
 216.100.5 Basis of Payme nt. Removal of existing expansion joint seal or sealant will be paid for at the
 contract unit price.
 
 151
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 302
 STABILIZED PERMEABLE BASE
 302.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing a stabilized permeable base material.
 T he mixture shall be placed, spread and compacted as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 302.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Aggregate for Drainage
 Asphalt Binder (P G 64-22, P G 70-22, P G 76-22)
 P ortland Cement
 Water
 
 Section
 1009
 1015
 1019
 1070
 
 302.2.1 Ge ne ral. Stabilized permeable base shall be either asphalt binder stabilized or Portland cement
 stabilized at the option of the contractor. All stabilized permeable base shall use Grade 4 drainage aggregate
 in accordance with Sec 1009.
 302.2.2 Asphalt Stabiliz e d Pe rme able Base . Mixtures shall be composed of the base aggregate and 2.5
 percent asphalt binder by weight of the total mixture. PG 64-22, PG 70-22 or PG 76-22 asphalt binder
 shall be used. All proportioning, mixing and transporting shall be in accordance with Sec 401.
 302.2.3 Ce me nt Stabiliz e d Pe rme able Base . Cement stabilized base mixtures shall be composed of the
 base aggregate with a cement factor of 2.5 sacks per cubic yard. All proportioning, mixing and transporting
 shall be in accordance with Sec 501. Fly ash and ground granulated blast furnace slag shall not be used.
 302.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 302.3.1 Contamination. Contamination of the finished base material that affects the drainage capability
 of the product will not be permitted. Any areas determined to be contaminated shall be completely
 removed without disturbing the adjacent or underlying material and replaced at contractor ’s expense.
 302.3.2 Displace me nt. Rutting or other displacement of the permeable base or the underlying base will
 not be permitted. If displacement occurs, which could result in ponding or a non-uniform, non-draining
 thickness of permeable base, the material shall be completely removed without disturbing the adjacent or
 underlying material and shall be replaced at the contractor ’s expense.
 302.3.3 Asphalt Stabiliz e d Pe rme able Base . Applicable portions of Sec 401 will apply, except as noted
 herein. T he final mixture, when discharged from the pugmill or drum, shall be 250-300 F. A minimum of
 three passes of a 5 to 10 ton steel wheel roller shall be made, compacting the material until no further
 displacement is noted. Compaction shall begin as soon after spreading the mixture as the mixture is able to
 bear the weight of the roller without undue displacement and shall be completed before the temperature of
 the mixture drops below 100 F. T he approximate compacted thickness of a single lift shall be a maximum
 of 4 inches .
 302.3.4 Ce me nt Stabiliz e d Pe rme able Base . Applicable portions of Sec 502 will apply, except as
 noted herein. Segregation of the mixture shall be minimized. Normal concrete pavement consolidation
 equipment such as vibrators or vibrating pans will be considered adequate, provided the mixture can be
 satisfactorily compacted. T he mixture shall be cured for a minimum of 48 hours in accordance with Sec
 502.6, except that white-pigmented membrane or straw shall not be used. A fine water mist may be applied
 several times each day for the 48-hour period as needed to maintain moisture. T he water application shall
 not be heavy enough to wash away the cementitious material or mortar.
 302.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the completed permeable base will not be made
 except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract
 quantity. Where required, measurement of permeable base, complete in place, will be made to the nearest
 square yard . T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract
 
 152
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 quantity.
 302.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of permeable base of the thickness specified will be paid
 for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. Payment will be considered
 full compensation for all labor, equipment and material, including the stabilizing agent, to complete the
 described work.
 
 153
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 303
 RO CK BASE
 303.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing select rock material in the top 12 or
 18 inches of the subgrade for use as a base to provide pavement support and drainage as shown on the plans
 or as directed by the engineer.
 303.2 Mate rial. T he material source for rock base shall be in accordance with approval from the engineer.
 Geologic conditions may vary from available subsurface information. Approval from the engineer of a
 source for the inherent stone will not constitute approval of the final rock base product.
 303.2.1 Material for rock base shall be durable stone or broken concrete containing a combined total of no
 more than 10 percent, by weight, of earth, sand, shale and non-durable rock. Material from geologic-filled
 sink deposits or stone indicating evidence of solution activity shall not be used.
 303.2.2 T he material shall be as large as can be conveniently handled within the limits of this specification.
 No particle dimension shall exceed approximately 12 inches, for 18 inch rock base or 9 inches for 12 inch
 rock base. T here shall be some material with particle dimensions exceeding approximately 9 inches for 18
 inch rock base or 6 inches for 12 inch rock base. T he material shall be uniformly graded from coarse to
 fine.
 303.2.3 Broken, sound concrete pavement and composite pavements may be used provided the ratio of the
 longest dimension measurement to thickness does not exceed 2:1 and provided there is no excessive
 exterior steel mesh that would affect compaction. Milled, crushed or chunked forms of bituminous
 pavement shall not be used. Small, thin amounts adhering to broken concrete pavement will be permitted.
 303.2.4 Acceptance of quality and size of material will be made by visual inspection at the job site.
 303.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 303.3.1 Except as noted herein, all applicable provisions in Sec 203 for the handling and placement of
 roadway excavation material shall apply.
 303.3.2 T he material shall not be dumped in place, but shall be distributed by blading or dozing in a manner
 to ensure proper placement in final position in the subgrade.
 303.3.3 Material for either 12 inch or 18 inch rock base may be placed in one lift. Rock base material may
 be placed thicker, with approval from the engineer, in maximum 24-inch lifts, provided a uniform drainage
 plane under the rock base is provided. No particle dimension shall exceed approximately 6 inches less than
 the placed lift thickness. T here shall be some material with particle dimensions exceeding approximately
 50 percent of the lift thickness. No additional payment will be made for the thicker rock base material.
 Class C Excavation in rock cuts shall be performed to allow placement of the specified lift thickness.
 303.3.4 Material shall be compacted in accordance with Sec 203.5.5.
 303.3.5 T he final surface shall be of a uniform texture and grade suitable for paving. T he top 2 inches of
 rock base shall consist of either 2 inch maximum rock fragments, spalls, reclaimed asphalt, or concrete.
 T he 2 inch maximum size granular material shall have a plasticity index not to exceed 10 and a gradation
 such that at least 50 percent of the material will be retained on the No. 4 sieve or have a gradation meeting
 Type 5 or 7 aggregate as specified in Sec. 1007. T here shall be no exposed rock exceeding the inch size in
 the final surface that would interfere with final preparation of the base for paving.
 303.3.6 A roughly compensating maximum deviation of ± 1/2 inch from the required elevation will be
 permitted on the surface of the finished rock base.
 303.3.7 When the contract includes paving over existing rock base, the paving contractor shall adjust the
 rock base grade as needed to that required using approved backfill material as specified herein. No additional
 payment will be made for this adjustment.
 
 154
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 303.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the completed rock base will not be made except
 for authorized changes during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity.
 Where required, measurement of rock base, complete in place, will be made to the nearest square yard. T he
 revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 303.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 303.5.1 If the contract documents provide that the material for rock base shall be obtained from the right
 of way or other source furnished by the Commission, the excavating, breaking, processing, loading and
 hauling, regardless of distance to the site, of the rock base will be paid for and considered completely
 covered under Class A Excavation, Class C Excavation, Unclassified Excavation, Excavation for Structures,
 or other applicable items. Separate payment for furnishing rock base will not be made.
 303.5.1.1 If the contract documents provide that the material for rock base shall be obtained from the
 right of way or other source furnished by the Commission, and the material is made unsuitable or
 unattainable by the contractor's operations, the contractor shall provide suitable material and dispose of
 any surplus material at the contractor's expense.
 303.5.1.2 If the contract documents provide for obtaining material from the right of way or other source
 furnished by the Commission, but all or part of the required quantity of acceptable material is not available,
 unless the shortage is due to the contractor ’s operations, payment for such additional rock base material
 that the contractor will be required to furnish and haul will be made per square yard at the fixed contract
 unit price in Sec 109 and will be measured in accordance with Sec 109.1.
 303.5.2 If the contract documents do not provide for a source of material, the contractor shall provide the
 material. All costs of securing the source, quarrying, excavating, breaking, processing and hauling the
 material to the site will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for furnishing rock base.
 303.5.3 Payment for placing rock base will be made at the contract unit price per square yard complete in
 place, based entirely on the surface area of the design thickness. No additional payment will be made for
 material needed to maintain the required edge slopes.
 
 155
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 304
 AGGREGATE BASE CO URSE
 
 304.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing one or more courses of aggregate on
 a prepared subgrade in accordance with these specifications, and as shown on the plans or as directed by the
 engineer. T he type of aggregate to be used will be specified in the contract.
 304.2 Mate rial. Material for Type 1, 5 and 7 aggregate bases shall be crushed stone or reclaimed asphalt or
 concrete which meet the requirements of Sec 1007.
 304.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 304.3.1 Fie ld Laboratory. When authorized by the engineer, the contractor shall provide a Type 2 field
 laboratory in accordance with Sec 601. Payment for the laboratory will be made in accordance with Sec
 601.
 304.3.2 Subgrade . All work on that portion of subgrade on which the base is to be constructed shall be
 completed in accordance with Sec 209.2.1 prior to placing any base material on that portion. Aggregate
 base shall not be placed on frozen subgrade.
 304.3.3 Placing.
 304.3.3.1 T he contractor shall place base material on the roadbed as shown in the contract documents.
 T he maximum compacted thickness of any one layer shall not exceed 6 inches. If the specified compacted
 depth of the base course exceeds 6 inches, the base shall be constructed in two or more layers of
 approximately equal thickness. T he compacted depth of a single layer of the base course may be increased
 to 8 inches for shoulders.
 304.3.3.2 Types 1 and 5 aggregate base used for shoulders adjacent to rigid or flexible type pavement,
 including pavement resurfacing, shall be simultaneously deposited and spread on the subgrade. Aggregate
 shall not be deposited on the pavement and bladed or dozed into place.
 304.3.4 Shaping and Compacting. Each layer shall be compacted to the specified density or dynamic
 cone penetration index value before another layer is placed.
 304.3.4.1 Segregated surface areas constructed of Type 1 aggregate base may be corrected by adding and
 compacting limestone screenings of such gradation and quantity as required to fill the surface voids, and
 firmly bind the loose material in place. Screenings used in correcting segregated surface areas will be
 measured and paid for as base material. Type 5 and Type 7 aggregate bases are intended to provide some
 drainage and shall not be segregated. T rimmed Type 5 and 7 aggregate base may not be reused until the
 material is verified as meeting the required specifications. Base material contaminated to the extent that
 the material no longer complies with the specifications shall be removed and replaced with satisfactory
 material at the contractor ’s expense.
 304.3.4.2 Type 1 aggregate base used for shoulders shall be compacted to a minimum 95 percent of
 standard maximum density. Type 1 aggregate base used on other than shoulders shall be compacted to no
 less than standard maximum density. Type 5 aggregate base under both roadway and shoulders shall be
 compacted to a minimum 95 percent of standard maximum density. T he Standard Compaction Test will be
 conducted in accordance with AASHT O T 99, Method C, replacing any material retained on the 3/4-inch
 sieve, as provided therein. Field density will be determined in accordance with AASHT O T 191 or
 AASHT O T 310, Direct T ransmission, for wet density. T he volume of the test hole may be reduced as
 necessary to accommodate available testing equipment. If nuclear density test methods are used, moisture
 content will be determined in accordance with AASHT O T 310, except a moisture correction factor will be
 determined for each aggregate in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 35. In lieu of the density
 requirements for Type 1 aggregate base used for shoulders with thicknesses less than 4 inches, the aggregate
 shall be compacted by a minimum of three complete coverages with a 5 ton roller. Rolling shall be
 continued until there is no visible evidence of further consolidation.
 
 156
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 304.3.4.3 Type 7 aggregate base under both roadway and shoulders shall be compacted to achieve an
 average dynamic cone penetration index value through the base lift thickness less than or equal to 0.4
 inches per blow, as determined by a standard dynamic cone penetrometer (DCP) device with a 17.6 lb
 hammer meeting the requirements of AST M D6951.
 304.3.4.3.1 Water shall be applied to the Type 7 base material during the mixing and spreading operations
 so that at the time of compaction the moisture content is not less than 5 percent of the dry weight.
 304.3.4.3.2 Type 7 base shall be tested with the DCP within 24 hours of placement and final compaction.
 304.3.4.4 If at any time the compacted aggregate base or subgrade becomes unstable, the contractor, at the
 contractor's expense, shall restore the earth subgrade and the aggregate base to the required grade, cross
 section and density.
 304.3.5 Substitutions for Aggre gate Base . If available, the contractor may substitute bituminous
 pavement cold millings or crushed recycled concrete in lieu of aggregate base for any temporary surface,
 regardless of the type or thickness of aggregate shown on the plans. If this option is exercised, the
 contractor shall notify the engineer at least two weeks prior to using the millings or recycled concrete, and
 shall identify the location from where the millings or concrete will be removed. T he millings or recycled
 concrete shall be installed to the same dimensions shown on the plans for the aggregate base. Millings or
 recycled concrete shall be placed in maximum 4-inch lifts, and each lift shall be compacted by a minimum
 of three passes with a 10-ton roller.
 304.3.6 Mainte nance . T he contractor shall maintain, at the contractor ’s expense, the required density
 and surface condition of any portion of the completed aggregate base until either the prime coat or a
 succeeding course or pavement is placed. If a prime coat is specified in the contract, the contractor will be
 required to apply the prime coat on any completed portion of the aggregate base as soon as practical, or as
 otherwise specified. T he contractor will not be permitted to apply prime if the moisture in the top 2 inches
 of the Type 1 or 5 aggregate base exceeds the higher of either (1) the average of the optimum moisture as
 determined by the Standard Compaction Test and the absorption of the plus No. 4 fraction, or (2) twothirds of the optimum moisture as determined by the Standard Compaction Test.
 304.4 Q uality Control/Q uality Assurance (Q C/Q A).
 304.4.1 Q uality Control. T he contractor shall control operations to ensure the aggregate base, in place,
 meets the specified requirements for density, thickness, gradation, deleterious, and plasticity index. Tests
 shall be taken at random locations designated by the engineer at the following frequency:
 Tested Property
 Density
 Dynamic Cone
 P enetrometer
 Index Value (for
 Type 7 base)
 
 Test Method
 AASHTO T 191
 or
 AASHTO T 310
 ASTM D6951
 
 Applicable
 method meeting
 engineer’s
 approval
 AASHTO T 11,
 Gradation and
 AASHTO T 27
 Deleterious Material a and MoDOT Test Method TM 71
 Thickness
 
 P lasticity Indexa
 
 Contractor Frequency Engineer Frequency
 1 per 4,000 tons,
 minimum of 1 per
 project
 
 1 per 1000 tons,
 minimum of 1 per day
 1 per 1000 tons,
 minimum of 1 per day
 
 1 per 4,000 tons,
 minimum of 1 per
 project
 
 1 per 1000 tons,
 minimum of 1 per day
 
 1 per 4,000 tons,
 minimum of 1 per
 project
 
 1 per 8,000 tons,
 minimum of 1 per
 project
 1 per 40,000 tons,
 1 per 10,000 tons,
 AASHTO T 89 and AASHTO T 90
 minimum of 1 per
 minimum of 1 per project
 project
 1 per 2000 tons,
 minimum of 1 per day b
 
 a Sampled
 bWhen
 
 at point of delivery, prior to rolling.
 production for a week is anticipated to be 1,000 tons or less, the contractor may test the material
 
 at
 a frequency of 1 per 250 tons or 1 per week, whichever occurs first.
 304.4.1.1 T he contractor shall provide copies of the test results, including all raw data, to the engineer the
 
 157
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 next business day following testing or sampling.
 304.4.1.2 T he contractor or the contractor ’s representative shall also determine the standard maximum
 dry density and the optimum moisture content for Type 1 and 5 base material and the dry weight for Type
 7 base material and supply all test data to the engineer.
 304.4.1.3 When density or DCP index value tests are less than specified or when thickness measurements
 indicate the thickness is deficient by more than 1/2 inch from the plan thickness, additional measurements
 will be taken at 100-foot intervals parallel to centerline ahead and behind the tested location until the
 extent of the deficiency has been determined. Each measurement will be assumed as representative of the
 base thickness for a distance extending one-half the distance to the next measurement, measured along
 centerline, or in the case of a beginning or ending measurement, the distance will extend to the end of the
 base section. Any deficient areas shall be corrected by reworking or adding material within the limits of the
 deficiency.
 304.4.1.4 When two consecutive tests for gradation, deleterious material, or plasticity index do not meet
 the specification limits, the material shall be removed beginning at the point where the first test was
 conducted.
 304.4.1.5 T he contractor shall retain the untested portion of the plasticity index, gradation and deleterious
 sample for the engineer ’s use.
 304.4.2 Q uality Assurance . T he contractor ’s QC test results and the engineer ’s QA test results shall
 meet the specifications and the following. For Type 1 and 5 base the contractor ’s compaction standard
 tests shall compare within 3.0 pounds of the maximum density of the MoDOT determined compaction
 standard. For Type 7 base the contractor ’s average DCP penetration index shall compare within 0.1 inches
 per blow of the MoDOT determined average penetration index. For retained samples, the contractor ’s test
 results and the engineer ’s test results shall compare within the following limits:
 (a) T he total deleterious material shall be within 2.0 percentage points.
 (b) T he plasticity index shall be within 2.
 (c) T he gradation test results shall compare within the following limits:
 Sieve
 1 1/2-inch
 1-inch
 3/4-inch
 1/2-inch
 No. 4
 No. 8
 No. 10
 No. 30
 No. 40
 No. 100
 No. 200
 
 Tolerance (% )
 ± 5.0
 ± 5.0
 ± 5.0
 ± 5.0
 ± 4.0
 ± 4.0
 ± 3.0
 ± 3.0
 ± 2.0
 ± 2.0
 ± 1.0
 
 304.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the completed aggregate base course will not be
 made except for authorized changes during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the
 contract quantity. Measurement will include aggregate course placed under curb and gutter. Where required,
 measurement of aggregate base course, complete in place, will be made to the nearest square yard . Where
 the aggregate base course extends to the inslope of the shoulder, the pay limit of the aggregate base course
 will be measured from the mid-point of the sloped portion. T he revision or correction will be computed and
 added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 304.6 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of aggregate base course of the thickness and type
 specified will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 Payment will be considered full compensation for water used in performing this work. When bituminous
 
 158
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 pavement cold millings or recycled crushed concrete are substituted for aggregate base, payment will be
 made for the aggregate base quantity provided in the plans, regardless of whether millings, recycled crushed
 concrete or the aggregate base is used. Payment will be considered full compensation for hauling of millings,
 cold milling operations, and all other material or labor necessary to substitute bituminous pavement
 millings for aggregate base.
 
 159
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 310
 AGGREGATE SURFACE
 310.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing chat, gravel or crushed stone
 surfacing in the quantity shown in the contract document or as directed by the engineer.
 310.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 Sec 1006. T he type and gradation of the surfacing material to be used will be specified in the contract.
 310.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 310.3.1 Ge ne ral. T he contractor shall furnish, haul and spread surfacing material on the subgrade at the
 designated rate. T he rate of application may be varied at the discretion of the engineer, depending on the
 nature of the soil encountered in the subgrade. T he contractor shall uniformly unload and distribute the
 required quantity of material throughout each station. T he subgrade shall be prepared as specified in Sec
 209, and any work done in reshaping the subgrade before placing surfacing material shall be at the
 contractor's expense. When it is determined by the engineer to be to the Commission's advantage, hauling
 may be done over surfacing material previously spread, otherwise, all hauling shall be over the subgrade.
 310.3.2 Surface Re quire me nts. Material shall be spread to a uniform thickness over the subgrade and
 shaped as shown on the plans until the surface is free from ruts and waves. T he surface shall be compacted
 under traffic. Maintenance of the surface shall continue until final project acceptance is made.
 310.3.3 Stockpile s. Material shall be stockpiled at locations approved by the engineer, and in the
 approximate quantity shown on the contract.
 310.3.4 Salvage . Designated areas shall be scarified to the full depth of the existing surfacing and such
 material pulverized to a maximum size of approximately 2 inches. Uncontaminated material shall be
 removed from the roadbed and placed in stockpiles or spread at locations approved by the engineer.
 Salvaged surfacing material shall be maintained as free as practical of dirt, vegetation or other objectionable
 material. Salvaging shall not be performed unless approved by the engineer.
 310.4. Ve hicle Scale s. Vehicle scales shall be approved by the engineer and shall be in accordance with the
 requirements specified herein.
 310.4.1 Basis of Acce ptance . Scale acceptance will be based on one of the following:
 (a) A valid certification or seal of approval by the Missouri Department of Agriculture, Division of
 Weights and Measures.
 (b) A valid certification or seal of approval by a State of Missouri duly appointed Sealer of Weights
 and Measures in cities or counties of 75,000 population or more.
 (c) Certification of calibration from a commercial scale service company showing that the scale
 meets the requirements of these specifications. T he contractor shall furnish the certification of
 calibration to the engineer.
 (d) Calibration from zero weight through the maximum load to be applied by the application of
 standard weights in the presence of the engineer by the contractor's personnel. In lieu of starting
 the calibration at zero weight, standard weights may be applied to an unloaded truck, the weight of
 which has been determined on a certified scale and the calibration continued through the maximum
 load to be applied. Regardless of the form of acceptance, the calibration shall be within the
 accuracy requirements specified in Sec 310.4.2, and the scales shall meet all requirements of these
 specifications.
 310.4.2 Scale Calibration. Scales shall have been calibrated within the 12-month period immediately
 prior to any material being delivered or any time the engineer has cause to question the accuracy of the
 scale. Scales shall be accurate to within 0.4 percent of the net load applied, regardless of the location of the
 load on the platform. T he value of the smallest unit of graduation on a scale shall be no greater than 20
 
 160
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 pounds. Sensitivity requirements of scales not equipped with balance indicators shall be twice the value of
 the minimum graduated interval on the weigh beam or 0.2 percent of the nominal capacity of the scale,
 whichever is less. For scales equipped with balance indicators, the sensitivity requirement shall be the value
 of the minimum graduated interval on the weigh beam.
 310.4.3 Ve rification. Verification of a vehicle scale may be required by weighing a hauling unit on another
 recently calibrated and certified scale.
 310.4.4 Long Ve hicle s. If equipment to be weighed is of such length that all axles cannot be weighed
 simultaneously, a level area of concrete or bituminous pavement shall be provided permitting those axles
 not on the scale platform to be on the pavement during the weighing operation. T he approach shall be at
 least as wide as the platform and of sufficient length to ensure the level positioning of vehicles during
 weight determinations. T he weighing shall be performed with all brakes released. If equipment to be weighed
 is equipped with an air bag suspension unit on any axle, the equipment, including semi-trailers or pup
 trailers, shall be determined on vehicle scales of sufficient size to weigh all axles of the combination
 simultaneously.
 310.4.5 Ce rtification. All costs incurred in obtaining certification of calibration or verification shall be at
 the contractor ’s expense.
 310.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 310.5.1 Me asure me nt by Volume . Stockpiles of salvaged surfacing material may be measured by the
 average end area method.
 310.5.2 Me asure me nt of Aggre gate Surfacing by Are a. Final measurement of the completed
 aggregate surface will not be made except for authorized changes during construction, or where appreciable
 errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, measurement of aggregate surface, complete in
 place, will be made to the nearest square yard . T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or
 deducted from the contract quantity.
 310.5.3 Me asure me nt by We ight. Measurement will be made by weighing each truck load on scales in
 accordance with Sec 310.4. Deductions will be made for any moisture in excess of 2.0 percent of the dry
 weight of the material. After deduction for excess moisture has been made, measurement will be made to
 the nearest ton for the total tonnage of material accepted.
 310.6 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of aggregate surface will be paid for at the contract unit
 price.
 
 161
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 401
 PLANT MIX BITUMINO US BASE AND PAVEMENT
 401.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of a bituminous mixture placed, spread and compacted as
 shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 401.2 Mate rial.
 401.2.1 T he grade of asphalt binder will be specified in the contract. When the plasticity index on
 individual aggregate fractions with 10 percent or more passing the No. 30 sieve exceeds 3, a moisture
 susceptibility test shall be required in accordance with Sec 401.4.5 during the mix design process. If the
 plasticity index exceeds that of the material approved for the mix design, additional testing may be
 required. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as
 follows:
 Item
 Coarse Aggregate
 Fine Aggregate
 Mineral Filler
 Hydrated Lime
 Asphalt Binder, P erformance Graded (P G)
 
 Section
 1004.2
 1002.3
 1002.4
 1002.5
 1015
 
 401.2.2 Re claime d Asphalt. Reclaimed Asphalt may be obtained from Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement
 (RAP) and Reclaimed Asphalt Shingles (RAS). T he asphalt binder content of recycled asphalt materials
 shall be determined in accordance with AASHT O T 164, AST M D 2172 or other approved method of
 solvent extraction. A correction factor for use during production may be determined for binder ignition by
 burning a sample in accordance with AASHT O T 308 and subtracting from the binder content determined
 by extraction.
 T he use of reclaimed asphalt shall be limited to one of the following options with the exception of
 bituminous base. For bituminous base the limits specified may be increased according to the recycled
 materials used as follows; 10% for RAP only, 5% for RAS only and 10% for the appropriate RAP and RAS
 combination.
 
 B inder
 
 Percent Ef f ective Virgin B inder Replacement
 RAP and RAS
 RAP RAS
 combination
 
 Contract Grade Virgin Binder
 0 - 20 0 -10
 shall be used
 Virgin Binder shall be
 21 - 40 11 - 20
 Softened One Gradea
 Blend Chart b
 Extraction and Grading of
 Binder from final Mixturec
 
 0 - 100
 
 RAP + (2*RAS) ≤ 20
 20 < RAP + (2*RAS) ≤ 40
 
 N/A
 
 N/A
 0 - 100
 
 a T he
 
 virgin binder shall have a low temperature grade 6 degrees lower than the
 binder grade specified in the contract. Lowering the high temperature of the
 virgin binder is not required; however, if lowered, the virgin binder shall have a
 high temperature grade no lower than 6 degrees below the binder grade specified
 in the contract. (Ex. Contract grade PG 64-22; virgin binder could be either
 PG 58-28 or PG 64-28). T he Pressure Aging Vessel (PAV) test temperature
 (AASHT O M320) shall be tested at 19° C, regardless of the high temperature
 grade of the selected virgin binder
 bTesting in accordance with AASHT O M323 including raw data shall be included
 with the mix design which demonstrates that the grade of the combine mixture
 meets the contract requirements.
 c Testing in accordance with either AASHT O T 319, or AASHT O T 164 and R59
 along with grading in accordance with AASHT O M320 including raw data shall
 be included with the mixt design which demonstrates that the grade of the
 combine mixture and rejuvenator, if applicable, meets the contract requirements.
 
 162
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 401.2.2.1 Re claime d Asphalt Pave me nt. Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement (RAP) may be used in any Sec
 401, Plant Mix Bituminous Base and Pavement. All RAP material, except as noted below, shall be tested in
 accordance with AASHT O T 327, Method of Resistance of Coarse Aggregate Degradation by Abrasion in
 the Micro-Deval Apparatus. Aggregate shall have the asphalt coating removed either by extraction or
 binder ignition during production. T he material shall be tested in the Micro-Deval apparatus at a frequency
 of once per 1500 tons. T he percent loss shall not exceed the Micro-Deval loss of the combined virgin
 material by more than five percent. Micro-Deval testing will be waived for RAP material obtained from
 MoDOT roadways. All RAP material shall be in accordance with Sec 1002 for deleterious and other foreign
 material. T he aggregate specific gravity shall be determined by performing AASHT O T 209 in accordance
 with Sec 403.19.3.1.2 and calculating the Gse to which a 0.98 correction factor will be applied in order to
 determine Gsb as follows:
 
 100 − P b
 Gse = 100 _ P b
 Gmm Gb
 RAP Gsb = RAP Gse X 0.98
 See Sec 401.4.4.1 for mixes containing more than 40% effective binder replacement from reclaimed
 asphalt.
 401.2.2.2 Re claime d Asphalt Shingle s. Reclaimed Asphalt Shingles (RAS) may be used in any mixture
 specified to use PG 64-22 in accordance with AASHT O PP 53. In addition, shingles shall be ground to 3/8inch minus. Waste, manufacturer or new, shingles shall be essential free of deleterious materials. Postconsumer RAS shall not contain more than 1.5 percent wood by weight or more than 3.0 percent total
 deleterious by weight. Post-consumer RAS shall be certified to contain less than the maximum allowable
 amount of asbestos as defined by national or local standards. T he bulk specific gravity of RAS used in the
 job mix formula shall be 2.600.
 RAS Gsb = 2.600
 See Sec 401.4.4.1 for mixes containing more than 40% effective binder replacement from reclaimed
 asphalt.
 T he gradation of the aggregate may be determined by solvent extraction of the binder or using the
 following as a standard gradation:
 Shingle Aggregate G radation
 Sieve Size Percent Passing by Weight
 3/8 in.
 100
 No. 4
 95
 No. 8
 85
 No. 16
 70
 No. 30
 50
 No. 50
 45
 No. 100
 35
 No. 200
 25
 
 401.2.2.3 Re juve nators. Rejuvenators may be used in any asphalt mixture containing recycled material.
 When a rejuvenator is used for the purpose of softening the binder grade, the requirements for the
 Extraction and Grading of Binder from Final Mixture option in Sec 401.2.2 must be satisfied.
 401.3 Composition of Mixture s. Aggregate sources shall be from the specific ledge or combination of
 ledges within a quarry, or processed aggregate from a particular product, as submitted in the mix design. T he
 total aggregate prior to mixing with asphalt binder shall be in accordance with the following gradation
 requirements:
 Sieve Size
 
 Percent Passing by Weight
 
 163
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 B ase B P-1 B P-2 B P-3
 1 inch
 100
 100
 100
 100
 3/4 inch 85-100 100
 100
 100
 1/2 inch 60-90 85-100 95-100 100
 3/8 inch
 ------100
 No. 4
 35-65 50-70 60-90 90-100
 No. 8
 25-50 30-55 40-70
 --No. 16
 ------30-60
 No. 30
 10-35 10-30 15-35
 --No. 200
 4-12
 5-12 5-12
 7-12
 
 401.4 Job Mix Formula. At least 30 days prior to placing any mixture on the project, the contractor
 shall submit a mix design for verification and approval by Construction and Materials. T he mixture shall be
 designed in accordance with Asphalt Institute Publication MS-2, Mix Design Methods for Asphalt Concrete
 and Other Hot-Mix Types. T he mixture shall be compacted and tested at a minimum of three asphalt
 contents separated by a maximum of 0.5 percent in accordance with AASHT O T 245, except as herein
 noted. T he test method shall be modified by short-term aging the specimens in accordance with AASHT O
 R 30. A detailed description of the mix design process shall be included with the job mix formula.
 Representative samples of each ingredient for the mixture shall be submitted with the mix design.
 Aggregate fractions shall be in accordance with the same proportions as the proposed job mix formula. A
 minimum of 150 pounds will be required for any individual fraction. T he amount of each ingredient
 submitted shall be as follows for each mix design to be verified:
 Ingredient
 Aggregate
 Hydrated Lime, Mineral Filler
 and/or Baghouse Fines
 Asphalt Binder
 
 Minimum Amount
 300 lbs
 20 lbs
 10 gal.
 
 401.4.1 Mixture De sign. Laboratories that participate and achieve a score of 3 or greater in the
 AASHT O proficiency sample program for T 11, T 27, T 84, T 85, T 166, T 209, T 308 and T 245 or T
 312 will have the mixture verification process waived. T he mix design shall be submitted to Construction
 and Materials for approval at least seven days prior to mixture production.
 401.4.2 Re quire d Information. T he mix design shall include raw data from the design process and shall
 contain the following information:
 (a) All possible sources intended for use, and grade and specific gravity of asphalt binder.
 (b) Source, type (formation, etc.), ledge number(s) if applicable, gradation, and percent chert of
 each aggregate fraction.
 (c) Plasticity index of each aggregate fraction which has 10 percent or more passing the No. 30
 sieve.
 (d) Bulk and apparent specific gravities and absorption of each aggregate fraction in accordance
 with AASHT O T 85 for coarse aggregate and AASHT O T 84 for fine aggregate, including all raw
 data, or in accordance with T M 81.
 (e) Specific gravity of hydrated lime, mineral filler or baghouse fines, if used, in accordance with
 AASHT O T 100.
 (f) Percentage of each aggregate component.
 (g) Combined gradation of the job mix.
 (h) Percent of asphalt binder, by weight, based on the total mixture.
 (i) Bulk specific gravity (Gmb) by AASHT O T 166, Method A of a laboratory compacted mixture.
 
 164
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (j) Percent air voids (Va ) of the laboratory compacted specimen.
 (k) Voids in the mineral aggregate (VMA) and voids in the mineral aggregate filled with asphalt
 binder (VFA).
 (l) T heoretical maximum specific gravity (Gmm ) as determined by AASHT O T 209 in accordance
 with Sec 403.19.3 after the sample has been short-term aged in accordance with AASHT O R 30.
 (m) Mixing temperature and molding temperature.
 (n) Bulk specific gravity (Gmb) of the combined aggregate.
 (o) Percent deleterious content of the combine aggregate.
 (p) Baghouse fines added for design. Provide the combine gradation with and without the baghouse
 percentage.
 401.4.3 Mixture Approval. No mixture will be accepted for use until the job mix formula for the project
 is approved by Construction and Materials. T he job mix formula approved for each mixture shall be in
 effect until modified in writing by the engineer. When unsatisfactory results or other conditions occur, or
 should a source of material be changed, a new job mix formula may be required. In lieu of a new laboratory
 design, mixtures requiring adjustment beyond the limits allowed in Sec 401.8.2 may be designed in the field
 based on characteristics of plant-produced mixture in accordance with Sec 401 and verified by Construction
 and Materials, which may require new aggregate characteristics.
 401.4.4 Mixture Characte ristics.
 401.4.4.1 Base, BP-1, BP-2 and BP-3 mixtures shall have the following properties, when tested in
 accordance with AASHT O T 245 or AASHT O T 312. T he number of blows with the compaction hammer
 shall be 35 or the number of gyrations shall be 35 with the gyratory compactor. BP-1 and BP-2 mixtures
 shall have between 60 and 80 percent of the VMA filled with asphalt binder and dust to effective binder
 ratio of 0.8 to 1.6. BP-3 mixtures shall be compacted with the gyratory compactor to 35 gyrations and
 shall have a minimum 75 percent of the VMA filled with asphalt binder and dust to effective binder ratio of
 0.9 to 2.0.
 AASHTO T 245 Voids in Mineral
 Aggregate
 Stability
 lb
 (VMA)b
 
 Mix Type
 
 Percent
 Air Voids
 
 BB
 
 3.5
 
 750
 
 BP -1
 BP -2
 BP -3
 
 3.5
 3.5
 3.5
 
 750
 750
 750
 
 13.0 a
 13.5
 14.0
 15.0
 
 a Bituminous
 
 base mixtures that would require 12.0 percent
 VMA following Asphalt Institute MS-2 will have a minimum
 12.0 percent requirement.
 bIf the effective virgin binder replacement from any
 combination of RAP and RAS is greater than 40 percent;
 then the minimum VMA required shall be increased by 0.5.
 401.4.4.2 When specified in the contract as BP-3NC, BP-3 mixtures containing limestone aggregate shall
 contain a minimum amount of non-carbonate aggregate as shown in the table below, or the aggregate blend
 shall have an acid-insoluble residue (A.I.R.), MoDOT Test Method T M 76, meeting the criteria of crushed
 non-carbonate material. T he A.I.R. shall be determined on the minus No. 4 sieve. Non-carbonate aggregate
 shall have an A.I.R. of at least 85 percent insoluble residue.
 Aggregate Minimum Non-Carbonate by Volume
 Limestone
 20% Minus No. 4
 Dolomite
 No Requirement
 
 165
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 401.4.5 Moisture Susce ptibility. When required moisture susceptibility shall be tested in accordance with
 AASHT O T 283. T he mixture shall have a tensile strength ratio (T SR) of 70 percent or greater when
 compacted to 3.7 inches with 7 ± 0.5 percent air voids. An approved anti-strip additive may be added to
 increase retained strength to a passing level. When testing is required by Sec 401.2.1 or Sec 401.9, the
 mixture shall be tested during production in accordance with Sec 403.19.
 401.4.6 Time Limit. A mix design may be transferred to other projects for a period of three years from
 the original approval date provided satisfactory results are obtained during production and placement.
 401.5 Gradation and De le te rious Conte nt Control. T he engineer shall be notified as soon as possible,
 but no later than 24 hours if a change is made to the cold feed settings, hot bin settings or the binder
 content. T he contractor shall determine the mixture gradation at the frequency stated in Sec 401.8.1. T he
 mixture gradation may be determined directly by using residual aggregate from the binder ignition process
 or by mathematical combination of the cold feed and recycled materials gradations. When the
 mathematical combination method is used, the RAS gradation shall be from the JMF and RAP gradation
 from the ignition or extraction residual aggregate. Mixtures as produced shall be subject to the following
 tolerances and controls:
 (a) T he maximum variations from the approved job-mix formula shall be within the tolerances as
 shown in the table below:
 Sieve Size
 No. 8 a
 No. 200
 a
 
 Percent Passing by Weight
 Tolerance Action Limit
 ± 5.0
 
 ± 10.0
 
 ± 2.0
 
 ± 4.0
 
 Use No. 16 sieve for BP-3
 
 (b) T he deleterious content of the material retained on the No. 4 sieve shall not exceed the limits
 specified in Sec 1004.2.
 (c) T he quantity of asphalt binder introduced into the mixer shall be the quantity specified in the
 job-mix formula. No changes shall be made to the quantity of asphalt binder without written
 approval from the engineer. T he quantity of asphalt binder determined by tests on the final
 mixture shall not vary by more than - 0.3 to + 0.5 percent from the job-mix formula.
 401.5.1 Sample Location. T he gradations of the total aggregate will be determined from samples taken
 from the hot bins on batch-type plants or continuous mixing plants or from the composite cold feed belt
 on drum mix plants. T he deleterious content of the total aggregate shall be determined from samples taken
 from the composite cold feed belt. When required, samples for plasticity index shall be taken from the
 stockpile. T he RAP shall be sampled from the RAP feeding system on the asphalt plant. Samples for
 asphalt content determination may be taken at the plant.
 401.5.2 Substitutions. At the option of the contractor and at no cost to the Commission, the contractor
 may use a Sec 401 mixture with a smaller nominal maximum size aggregate or an approved Sec
 403 mixture, design level C, E, or F with the same or smaller nominal maximum size aggregate in lieu of
 any Sec 401 mixture. When a Sec 403 mixture is substituted, the layer thickness requirements of Sec
 403 will apply. T he gradation, asphalt content, deleterious, and density acceptance of the substituted
 mixture during production will be in accordance with Sec 401.
 401.5.3 Comme rcial Mixture . If specified in the contract that an approved commercial mixture may be
 used, the contractor shall, at least seven days prior to the desired time of use, furnish a statement setting
 out the source and characteristics of the mixture proposed to be furnished. T he statement shall include:
 (a) T he types and sources of aggregate, percentage range of each, and range of combined
 gradation.
 (b) T he percent and grade of asphalt binder.
 (c) T he mixing time and range of mixture temperature.
 
 166
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 T he plant shall be designed and operated to produce a uniform, thoroughly mixed material free from
 segregation. It will not be necessary for the plant to meet the requirements of Sec 404. A field laboratory
 will not be required. If the proposed mixture and plant are approved by the engineer, the component
 material and the mixture delivered will be accepted or rejected by visual inspection. T he supplier shall
 furnish with the first truckload of each day's production, a certification that the material and mixture
 delivered are in conformance with the approved mixture. Upon completion of the work, a plant
 certification shall be furnished by the supplier for the total quantity delivered. T he mixture shall be
 transported, placed and compacted in accordance with Sec 401.7. Without specific contract designation, an
 approved commercial mixture may be used in lieu of plant mix bituminous pavement or base course
 mixtures for work that is considered temporary construction and is to be maintained at the contractor's
 expense. Temporary construction will be defined as work that is to be removed prior to completion of the
 contract.
 401.5.4 Moisture Conte nt. T he bituminous mixture, when sampled and tested in accordance with
 AASHT O T 329, shall contain no more than 0.5 percent moisture by weight of the mixture.
 401.5.5 Contamination. T he bituminous mixture shall not be contaminated with deleterious agents such
 as unburned fuel, objectionable fuel residue or any other material not inherent in the job mix formula.
 401.6 Fie ld Laboratory. T he contractor shall provide a Type 3 field laboratory in accordance with Sec
 601. T he contractor may use the equipment provided in the Type 3 laboratory as long as adequate space is
 provided for the engineer ’s work.
 401.7 Construction Re quire me nts.
 401.7.1 Weather Limitations. Bituminous mixtures shall not be placed on any wet surface or frozen
 pavement. Temperatures shall be obtained in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 20.
 401.7.2 Bituminous Mixing Plants. Bituminous mixing plants and preparation of material and mixtures
 shall be in accordance with Sec 404.
 401.7.3 Subgrade or Surface Pre paration. T he subgrade upon which the bituminous mixture is to be
 placed shall be prepared in accordance with Sec 209 and primed as specified in the contract in accordance
 with Sec 408, as applicable. All material requirements of a tacked surface shall be in accordance with Sec
 407.
 401.7.3.1 Base Wide ning. For base widening work, the bottom of the trench shall be compacted until
 further consolidation is not visually evident, by use of a trench roller having a weight of no less than 300
 psi of width of rear roller, or by mechanical tampers or other methods approved by the engineer. Suitable
 excavated material may be used in shouldering operations. On the outside of curves, the design depth of
 trench at the beginning of the superelevation transition shall be varied gradually to the minimum depth at
 the end of the superelevation transition. Slight transitioning of the width of the base widening will be
 necessary to permit the indicated angle of repose or shear angle outside of the ultimate edge of surface. T he
 bottom of the trench shall in no case be less than 3 inches below the surface of the existing pavement. All
 surplus excavated material shall be disposed of by the contractor in areas to be secured by the contractor
 beyond the right of way limits. An acceptable written agreement with the property owner on whose
 property the material is placed shall be submitted to the engineer.
 401.7.3.2 Application of Prime or Tack. Application of prime or tack shall be in accordance with Sec
 403.12.
 401.7.4 Hauling Equipme nt. T rucks used for hauling bituminous mixtures shall be in accordance with Sec
 404.
 401.7.5 Spre ading. T he base course, tacked or primed surface, or preceding course or layer shall be
 cleaned of all dirt, packed soil or any other foreign matter prior to spreading the bituminous mixture. T he
 mixture shall be spread in the number of layers and in the quantity required to obtain the compacted
 thickness and cross section shown on the plans. When placing multiple layers with varying thicknesses, the
 
 167
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 thicker layer shall be placed first.
 401.7.5.1 Irre gularitie s. T he mixture shall be spread without tearing the surface and struck off such that
 the surface is smooth and true to cross section, free from all irregularities, and of uniform density
 throughout. Care shall be used in handling the mixture to avoid segregation. Areas of segregated mixture
 shall be removed and replaced with a suitable mixture at the contractor ’s expense. T he outside edge
 alignment shall be uniform. Irregularities shall be corrected by adding or removing mixture before
 compacting. In situations where there is a dispute in the existence of segregation, the area in question will
 be tested in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 75. Mixture production shall immediately cease if
 either criteria of MoDOT Test Method T M 75 fail. Segregated mixtures shall be removed and replaced to
 the limits determined by the engineer.
 401.7.5.2 Le ve ling Course . If required by the contract, a leveling course consisting of a layer of variable
 thickness shall be spread to the desired grade and cross section to eliminate irregularities in the existing
 surface. Spot-leveling operations over small areas, with feather-edging at high points and ends of spot
 areas, may be required prior to placing the leveling course. Rigid control of the placement thickness of the
 leveling course will be required. T he mixture shall be practically free from segregation.
 401.7.5.3 Base Wide ning. T he specified total thickness of base widening shall be completed to the
 adjacent traveled way elevation as shown on the plans. Additional thickness of base widening may be placed
 as required prior to coldmilling, at the contractor's expense, and shall subsequently be coldmilled to the
 same elevation as the traveled way, if conducive to expedite operations. On base-widening work, a
 succeeding layer of bituminous mixture may be placed the same day as the previous layer, if it can be shown
 that the desired results are being obtained. On small areas, and on areas that are inaccessible to mechanical
 spreading and finishing equipment, the mixture may be spread and finished by hand methods if permitted by
 the engineer. At least one lane of the existing pavement and the adjacent shoulder shall be kept open to
 traffic at all times during construction, except for short intervals when the movement of the contractor's
 equipment will seriously hinder the flow of traffic. Intervals during which the contractor will be allowed to
 halt traffic shall be as designated by the engineer. T he contractor shall not open more trenches ahead of
 the first layer of the base widening than is necessary for placing that layer in one half a day's operations.
 T he first layer of the base widening shall not be placed for a greater distance ahead of the second layer than
 is necessary for placing the second layer in one half a day's operations. T he second layer shall not be placed
 for a greater distance ahead of the final layer than is necessary for placing the final layer in one day's
 operation. Any changes in these lengths shall be made only with written permission from the engineer.
 401.7.5.4 Edge Diffe re ntial. For roadways constructed under traffic, no pavement edge differential shall
 be left in place for more than seven days, unless approved by the engineer.
 401.7.6 Joints. T he minimum density of all traveled way pavement within 8 inches of a longitudinal joint,
 shall be no less than 2.0 percent below the specified density. T he cores taken to evaluate this area shall be
 centered 6 inches from the longitudinal joint. If no deficient cores are found in the first 25 percent of
 production, the established rolling procedure may be used, at the direction of the engineer, in lieu of density
 tests provided no changes in the material, typical location or temperatures are made. Pay adjustments due
 to longitudinal joint density shall apply to the full width of the lane paved. Adjustments due to joint density
 shall apply to the day’s production from which the cores are obtained. T ransverse joints shall be formed by
 cutting back on the previous run to expose the full depth of the layer. When a transverse vertical edge is to
 be left in place and opened to traffic, a temporary depth transition shall be constructed as approved by the
 engineer. T he longitudinal joints in one layer shall offset those in the layer immediately below by
 approximately 6 inches. T he joints in the final surface layer shall be at the lane lines of the traveled way,
 except that the placement width shall be adjusted such that pavement marking shall not fall on a
 longitudinal joint. Each side of the joint shall be flush and along true lines.
 401.7.7 Surface d Approache s. At locations designated in the contract or as specified by the engineer,
 approaches shall be primed in accordance with Sec 408 and surfaced with a plant mix bituminous mixture.
 T he bituminous surface shall be placed as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. Approaches
 shall not be surfaced before the surface course adjacent to the entrance is completed. No direct payment
 will be made for any work required to condition and prepare the subgrade on the approaches.
 401.7.8 Compaction. T he compacted mixture shall have a minimum density of 92 percent of the
 
 168
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 theoretical maximum specific gravity. Density will be determined by the direct transmission nuclear method
 in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 41 or by a specific gravity method. When the contractor
 elects to place a lift of mixture greater than six times the nominal maximum aggregate size, cores shall be
 cut in half and the density of each half determined separately. In lieu of density requirements, mixtures used
 for wedging, transitions, existing shoulder overlays, new shoulders constructed on a sub-grade or base that
 does not specify density control, temporary bypasses to be maintained at the expense of the contractor,
 and areas where a commercial mixture is used shall be thoroughly compacted by at least three complete
 coverage's over the entire area with either a pneumatic tire roller weighing no less than 10 tons, a tandemtype steel wheel roller weighing no less than 10 tons or an approved vibratory roller. Rolling shall be
 performed at proper time intervals on each layer and shall be continued until there is no visible evidence of
 further consolidation.
 401.8 Q uality Control. T he contractor shall maintain equipment and qualified personnel to perform QC
 field inspection, sampling and testing in accordance with applicable portions of Sec 403. A QC Plan will not
 be required. A proposed third party for dispute resolution shall be included with the mix design submittal.
 401.8.1 Mixture Te sting. T he contractor shall randomly test the mixture within the following
 frequencies. T he gradation and the asphalt content shall be determined at least once every 1,000 tons of
 production or a minimum of once per day. Deleterious content shall be determined once per 5,000 tons
 unless quality concerns dictate more frequent testing as directed by the engineer. Gradation and asphalt
 content of RAP shall be determined once every 10,000 tons of production. If RAP is used and AASHT O T
 308 is used to determine the asphalt content, the binder ignition oven shall be calibrated in accordance with
 MoDOT Test Method T M 77. At the engineer ’s discretion, testing may be waived when production does
 not exceed 200 tons per day. T he contractor shall certify the proper proportions of a previously proven
 mixture were used.
 401.8.2 Failing Te st. If a, deleterious content, or asphalt content test result falls outside of the
 specification tolerances, a review or adjustment of the plant settings and production shall be made and
 another sample shall be immediately taken. If the second test falls outside of the specification tolerances,
 production shall be immediately ceased until the mixture can be brought back into specification. If a
 gradation test falls between the Tolerance and Action Limits, adjustments to plant shall be made and
 another gradation shall be taken immediately. Plant production for the following day shall not resume until
 the mixture is brought back into specification when the final gradation for the day is not within tolerance.
 If a gradation test falls outside the Action Limit, production shall cease until the mixture is brought back
 into specification.
 401.8.3 Re taine d Sample s. One half of the contractor ’s sample for gradation, deleterious content, and
 asphalt content and all cores shall be retained for the engineer. T he contractor shall retain the samples for
 7 days after testing has been completed and the results accepted by the engineer.
 401.8.4 Pave me nt Te sting.During construction, the engineer will designate as many tests as necessary to
 ensure that the course is being constructed of proper thickness, composition and density. Density of the
 roadway shall be determined by one core obtained by the contractor at a random location selected by the
 engineer for every 500 tons of production. T he cores from each day’s production will be averaged to
 determine acceptance. A joint density core shall be taken from the same transverse cross section as the mat
 core and alternate sides. T he maximum theoretical density shown on the job mix formula shall be used for
 this determination. Minimum 4-inch diameter cores, shall be taken the full depth of the layer to be tested.
 Cores tested by AASHT O T 166 shall be in accordance with Sec 403.19.3.1.3. T he contractor shall restore
 the surface from which samples have been taken immediately with the mixture under production or with a
 cold patch mixture acceptable to the engineer.
 401.8.5 De nsity Adjustme nt. Payment for mixture placed at or below the required minimum density will
 be adjusted as follows:
 Field Density Percent of Maximum Percent of Contract
 Theoretical Density
 Unit Pricea
 91.5 or above
 100%
 91.0 to 91.4, inclusive
 97%
 90.5 to 90.9, inclusive
 94%
 
 169
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 90.0 to 90.4, inclusive
 89.5 to 89.9, inclusive
 Below 89.5
 
 90%
 80%
 Remove and Replace
 
 a When
 
 adjustments are necessary, the lower percent of the
 contract unit price of either the pavement or joint density
 adjustment will apply.
 401.9 Q uality Assurance .Acceptance tests for gradation, deleterious content and asphalt content will be
 performed by the engineer at a minimum rate of one independent sample per 4 QC samples. A favorable
 comparison will be considered when a QA test is within the specification tolerances. An acceptance test for
 plasticity index will be performed at a minimum rate of one per project by the engineer on an independent
 sample taken during production. Initial testing will be performed the first week of production. When the
 plasticity index on an individual aggregate fraction is more than two percentage points above the value
 shown on the approved mix design, moisture susceptibility testing shall be required in accordance with Sec
 401.4.5. At least once for every five days of production, a split of the contractor ’s sample will be tested. If
 the results of the split sample are not within five percent on all sieves above the No. 200, two percent on
 the No. 200, within the specification ranges on the deleterious content, and within 0.5 percent on the
 asphalt content from the contractor ’s results, another split sample will be taken jointly with the contractor
 and tested. If the second test results do not compare within the specification tolerances, production shall
 cease until the discrepancy is resolved. If the second test results compare within the above tolerances,
 production may continue. T he engineer will retain one half of the plasticity index test and moisture
 susceptibility test for 7 days after testing is complete. Results of QA testing will be furnished to the
 contractor within 24 hours of obtaining the sample, with the exception of moisture susceptibility testing.
 401.10 Surface Smoothne ss. T he finish of the pavement surface shall be substantially free from waves
 or irregularities and shall be true to the established crown and grade. T he pavement shall be thoroughly
 tested for smoothness by profiling or straightedging in accordance with Sec 610.
 401.11 De fe ctive Mixture . Any mixture showing an excess of bituminous material or that becomes loose
 and broken, mixed with dirt, or is in any way defective, shall be removed and replaced with a satisfactory
 mixture, which shall be immediately compacted to conform to the surrounding area.
 401.12 Pave me nt Marking. If the contractor's work has obliterated existing pavement marking on
 resurfacing projects open to through traffic, the pavement marking shall be replaced at the contractor ’s
 expense in accordance with Sec 620.
 401.13 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement will be in accordance with Sec 403.
 401.14 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of plant mix bituminous pavement and base course will
 be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. Payment for
 obtaining and delivering samples of compacted mixture from the base and replacement of the surface will
 be made per sample at the fixed contract unit price specified in Sec 109. No direct payment will be made
 for QC cores, excavating the trench for base widening, or for hauling and disposing of excess excavation
 material.
 
 170
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 402
 PLANT MIX BITUMINO US SURFACE LEVELING
 402.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of placing, spreading and compacting a bituminous mixture as
 shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. Spot wedging will not be required.
 402.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Coarse Aggregate
 Fine Aggregate
 Mineral Filler
 Asphalt Binder, P erformance Graded (P G)
 
 Section
 1004.2
 1002.3
 1002.4
 1015.3
 
 402.2.1 Asphalt Binde r. T he grade of asphalt binder will be specified in the contract.
 402.2.2 We t Bottom Boile r Slag. T he contractor may furnish wet bottom boiler slag of approved quality
 in lieu of coarse aggregate specified in Sec 402.2. If wet bottom boiler slag is used, the slag shall meet the
 requirements for coarse aggregate, except that the percentage of wear specified in Sec 1004.2.1 will not
 apply.
 402.2.3 Re claime d Asphalt. T he asphalt binder content of recycled asphalt materials shall be determined
 in accordance with AASHT O T 164, AST M D 2172 or other approved method of solvent extraction. A
 correction factor for use during production may be determined for binder ignition by burning a sample in
 accordance with AASHT O T 308 and subtracting from the binder content determined by extraction.
 402.2.3.1 Re claime d Asphalt Pave me nt.Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement (RAP) may be used in any
 mixture, except SMA mixtures. Mixtures may be used with more than 30 percent virgin effective binder
 replacement provided testing according to AASHT O M 323 is included with the job mix formula that
 ensures the combined binder meets the grade specified in the contract. All RAP material, except as noted
 below, shall be tested in accordance with AASHT O T 327, Method of Resistance of Coarse Aggregate
 Degradation by Abrasion in the Micro-Deval Apparatus. Aggregate shall have the asphalt coating removed
 either by extraction or binder ignition during production. T he material shall be tested in the Micro-Deval
 apparatus at a frequency of once per 1500 tons. T he percent loss shall not exceed the Micro-Deval loss of
 the combined virgin material by more than five percent. Micro-Deval testing will be waived for RAP
 material obtained from MoDOT roadways. All RAP material shall be in accordance with Sec 1002 for
 deleterious and other foreign material. T he aggregate specific gravity shall be determined by performing
 AASHT O T 209 in accordance with Sec 403.19.3.1.2 and calculating the Gse to which a 0.98 correction
 factor will be applied in order to determine Gsb as follows:
 
 100 − P b
 Gse = 100 _ P b
 Gmm Gb
 RAP Gsb = RAP Gse X 0.98
 402.2.3.2 Re claime d Asphalt Shingle s. Reclaimed Asphalt Shingles (RAS) may be used in any mixture
 specified to use PG 64-22 in accordance with AASHT O PP 53 except as follows:
 For mixtures containing RAS or a combination of RAS and RAP, the RAS contribution shall not exceed 20
 percent effective virgin binder replacement. Mixtures containing a combination of RAS and RAP may have
 a maximum 30 percent effective virgin binder replacement with no virgin binder grade change. Mixtures
 containing a combination of RAS and RAP may have a 30 to 40 percent effective virgin binder
 replacement under the following conditions: (1) with a virgin binder grade change from a PG64-22 to a PG
 58-28 or (2) with a combination of a PG64-22 binder and a rejuvenator provided testing demonstrates that
 a PG58-28, meeting the requirements of AASHT O M320, is achieved. Shingles shall be ground to 100
 percent passing the 3/8-inch sieve. Waste, manufacturer or new, shingles shall be essential free of
 
 171
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 deleterious materials. Post-consumer RAS shall not contain more than 1.5 percent wood by weight or more
 than 3.0 percent total deleterious by weight. Post-consumer RAS shall be certified to contain less than the
 maximum allowable amount of asbestos as defined by national or local standards. T he bulk specific gravity
 of RAS used in the job mix formula shall be 2.600.
 RAS Gsb = 2.600
 T he gradation of the aggregate may be determined by solvent extraction of the binder or using the
 following as a standard gradation:
 Shingle Aggregate G radation
 Sieve Size Percent Passing by Weight
 3/8 inch
 100
 No. 4
 95
 No. 8
 85
 No. 16
 70
 No. 30
 50
 No. 50
 45
 No. 100
 35
 No. 200
 25
 
 402.3 Composition of Mixture . Aggregate sources shall be from the specific ledge combination of ledges
 within a quarry, or processed aggregate from a particular product, as submitted in the mix design. T he total
 aggregate prior to mixing with asphalt binder shall be in accordance with the following gradation
 requirements:
 Plant Mix B ituminous Surf ace Leveling
 Sieve Size Percent Passing by Weight
 3/4 inch
 100
 1/2 inch
 99-100
 3/8 inch
 90-100
 No. 4
 60-90
 No. 8
 40-70
 No. 30
 15-35
 No. 200
 5-12
 
 BP-3 in accordance with Sec 401.3 is an allowable substitution.
 402.3.1 Mixture Characte ristics. Bituminous surface leveling mixture shall have the following
 properties, when tested in accordance with AASHT O T 245 or AASHT O T 312. T he number of blows with
 the compaction hammer shall be 35 or the number of gyrations shall be 35 with the gyratory compactor.
 T he mixture shall have a minimum voids filled with asphalt (VFA) of 75 percent. T he dust to effective
 binder ratio shall be 0.8 to 1.6.
 Voids in
 Percent Air AASHTO T 245 Mineral
 Voids
 Stability lb Aggregate
 (VMA)
 3.5
 750
 14.5
 
 402.4 Job Mix Formula. T he mixture shall be in accordance with Sec 401.4.
 402.5 Gradation and De le te rious Conte nt Control. In producing mixture for the project, the plant
 shall be operated such that no deviations from the job mix formula are made. T he contractor shall
 determine on a daily basis, at a minimum, the gradation on the aggregate reclaimed from the RAP by either
 extraction or binder ignition. T he gradation results shall be used to determine the daily specification
 compliance for the combined gradation. Mixture as produced will be subject to the following tolerances and
 control:
 (a) T he total aggregate gradations shall be within the master range specified in Sec 402.3.
 
 172
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (b) Material passing the No. 200 sieve shall not vary from the job mix formula by more than ± 2.0
 percentage points.
 (c) T he deleterious content of the material retained on the No. 4 sieve shall not exceed the limits
 specified in Sec 1004.2.
 (d) If the plasticity index of any fraction exceeds that of the material approved for the mix
 design, additional testing may be required.
 (e) T he quantity of asphalt binder introduced into the mixer shall be that quantity specified in the
 job mix formula. No changes may be made to the quantity of asphalt binder specified in the job
 mix formula without written approval from the engineer. T he quantity of asphalt binder
 determined by calculation or tests on the final mixture shall not vary more than ± 0.3 percent
 from the job-mix formula.
 402.6 Sample Location. T he gradations of the total aggregate will be determined from samples taken
 from the hot bins on the batch-type plants, or from hot bins or combined hot aggregate flow on continuous
 mixing plants, or from the combined cold feed on dryer-drum plants. T he deleterious content of the total
 aggregate will be determined from the samples taken from the combined cold feed belt. Samples for
 plasticity index will be taken from the stockpile. T he RAP shall be sampled from the RAP feeding system
 on the asphalt plant.
 402.7 Moisture Conte nt. T he bituminous mixture, when sampled and tested in accordance with AASHT O
 T 329, shall contain no more than 0.5 percent moisture by weight of the mixture.
 402.8 Contamination. T he bituminous mixture shall not be contaminated with deleterious agents such as
 unburned fuel, objectionable fuel residue or any other material not inherent in the job mix formula.
 402.9 Fie ld Laboratory. T he contractor shall provide a Type 3 field laboratory in accordance with Sec
 601.
 402.10 Construction Re quire me nts.
 402.10.1 We athe r Limitations. Bituminous mixtures shall not be placed (1) when either the air
 temperature or the temperature of the surface on which the mixture is to be placed is below 50 F or (2) on
 any wet surface or frozen pavement. Temperatures shall be obtained in accordance with MoDOT Test
 Method T M 20.
 402.10.2 Bituminous Mixing Plants. Bituminous mixing plants and preparation of material and
 mixtures shall be in accordance with Sec 404.
 402.10.3 Application of Prime or Tack. Application of prime or tack coat shall be in accordance with
 Sec 403.12.
 402.10.4 Hauling Equipme nt. T rucks used for hauling bituminous mixtures shall be in accordance with
 Sec 404.
 402.10.5 Spre ading. T he existing surface shall be cleaned of all dirt, packed soil or any other foreign
 material prior to spreading the bituminous mixture. T he mixture shall be spread in the quantity required to
 obtain the compacted thickness and cross section shown on the plans. T he paver shall be operated at a
 speed that will give the best results. T he rate of delivery of the mixture to the paver shall be coordinated to
 provide, where practical, a uniform rate of placement without intermittent operation of the paver. On
 small areas and on areas that are inaccessible to mechanical spreading and finishing equipment, the mixture
 may be spread and finished by hand methods when permitted by the engineer.
 402.10.5.1 Irre gularitie s. T he mixture shall be spread without tearing the surface and struck off such that
 the surface is smooth and true to cross section, free from all irregularities and of uniform density
 throughout. Care shall be used in handling the mixture to avoid segregation. Areas of segregated mixture
 shall be removed and replaced with suitable mixture. T he outside edge alignment shall be uniform and any
 
 173
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 irregularities shall be corrected by adding or removing mixture before compacting.
 402.10.5.2 Pave me nt Edge Diffe re ntial. No pavement edge differential shall be left in place for more
 than seven days, without written approval from the engineer.
 402.10.6 Joints. T ransverse joints shall be formed by cutting back on the previous run to expose the full
 depth of the layer. When a transverse vertical edge is to be left and opened to traffic, a temporary depth
 transition shall be built as approved by the engineer. T he longitudinal joint shall be at the lane lines of the
 traveled way except that the placement width of bituminous surface may be adjusted such that temporary
 raised pavement markers will not fall on a longitudinal joint. Each side of the joint shall be flush and along
 true lines.
 402.10.7 Compaction. T he mixture shall be thoroughly compacted by at least three complete coverages
 over the entire area with either a pneumatic tire roller or a tandem-type steel wheel roller each weighing no
 less than 10 tons. All rollers used shall be in satisfactory condition, capable of reversing without backlash,
 and steel wheel rollers shall be equipped with scrapers. Rollers shall have a system for moistening each roll
 or wheel. Rolling shall begin as soon after spreading the mixture as the new surface will bear the weight of
 the roller without undue displacement. Final rolling shall be done by the steel wheel roller. Rolling shall be
 performed at proper time intervals and shall be continued until there is no visible evidence of further
 consolidation and until all roller marks are eliminated.
 402.10.8 Surface Condition. T he surface of the mixture after compaction shall be smooth and uniform.
 Any mixture showing an excess of asphalt binder or that becomes loose and broken, mixed with dirt or is in
 any way defective shall be removed and replaced at the contractor ’s expense with a satisfactory mixture,
 which shall be immediately compacted to conform to the surrounding area.
 402.10.9 Hauling O ve r Comple te d Surface . Hauling of plant mix bituminous mixture over any
 completed portion of the project will not be permitted unless allowed by special provision.
 402.11 Me thod of Me asure me nt. T he weight of the mixture will be determined from the batch weights if
 a batch-type plant is used. If other types of plants are used, the weight of the mixture will be determined by
 weighing each truck load on scales in accordance with Sec 310. Measurement will be made to the nearest
 0.1 ton for the total tonnage of material accepted.
 402.12 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of plant mix bituminous surface leveling will be paid
 for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 
 174
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 403
 ASPHALTIC CO NCRETE PAVEMENT
 403.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of providing a bituminous mixture to be placed in one or more
 courses on a prepared base or underlying course as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. T he
 contractor shall be responsible for QC of the bituminous mixture, including the design, and control of the
 quality of the material incorporated into the project. T he engineer will be responsible for QA, including
 testing, to assure the quality of the material incorporated into the project.
 403.1.1 Naming Conve ntion. T he nomenclature of Superpave bituminous mixture names, such as
 SP125CLP, will be as follows. When only the aggregate size is shown, such as SP125, the specifications
 shall apply to all variations of that size, such as SP125B, SP125C, SP125CLP, etc. When "x" is indicated,
 such as SP125xLP, specifications shall apply to all variations of mixture designs. Stone Matrix Asphalt will
 be generally referred to as SMA and designated by SM or SMR.
 Superpave Nomenclature
 Superpave
 4.75mm (No. 4) nominal aggregate size
 9.5 mm (3/8 inch) nominal aggregate size
 12.5 mm (1/2 inch) nominal aggregate size
 19.0 mm (3/4 inch) nominal aggregate size
 25.0 mm (1 inch) nominal aggregate size
 Mixture design: B, C, E or F (as described below)
 Limestone porphyry (when designated)
 Stone Matrix Asphalt (when designated)
 Stone Matrix Asphalt limestone/non-carbonate
 SMR
 (when designated)
 SP
 048
 095
 125
 190
 250
 x
 LP
 SM
 
 403.1.2 De sign Le ve ls. T he following cumulative equivalent single axle loads (ESALs) shall be used for
 the specified mix design. T he same size aggregate mix design at a higher design traffic may be substituted at
 the contractor ’s expense for the contract specified mixture design with the approval from the engineer.
 Substitutions shall be done uniformly and project mixing of various designs for the same work will not be
 permitted. For example, an SP125B mixture may be substituted for an SP125C mixture, or SP190C for
 SP190E, etc. Mixture design substitution will be limited to one design level higher than that specified in the
 contract.
 Design Traf f ic (ESALs) Design
 < 300,000
 F
 300,000 to < 3,000,000
 E
 3,000,000 to < 30,000,000
 C
 ≥ 30,000,000
 B
 
 403.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follow:
 Item
 Aggregate
 
 Section
 1002
 
 Asphalt Binder, P erformance Graded (P G)a 1015
 Fiber Additive
 1071
 Anti-Strip Additive
 1071
 a T he
 
 grade of asphalt binder will be specified in the
 contract.
 403.2.1 Fine Aggre gate Angularity. Fine aggregate angularity (FAA) shall be measured on the fine
 portion of the blended aggregate. When tested in accordance with AASHT O T 304 Method A, aggregate
 particles passing the No. 8 sieve shall meet the following criteria for the minimum percent air voids in
 loosely compacted fine aggregate:
 Design FAA
 
 175
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 F
 E
 C
 B
 a For
 
 --a
 40
 45
 45
 
 SP048 Mixtures the FAA shall be a minimum of 40.
 
 403.2.2 Coarse Aggre gate Angularity. Coarse aggregate angularity (CAA) shall be measured on the
 coarse portion of the blended aggregate. When tested in accordance with AST M D 5821, the coarse
 aggregate shall meet the following criteria. Crushed limestone, dolomite, steel slag and porphyry will be
 considered as having 100 percent two fractured faces unless visual observations indicate an undesirable
 particle shape is being produced.
 Design CAA a
 F
 55/None
 E
 75/None
 C
 95/90
 B
 100/100
 a T he
 
 criteria denotes the
 minimum allowable
 percentage of the coarse
 aggregate with "one/two"
 fractured faces, such as
 a "95/90" requirement,
 means that the coarse
 aggregate shall have a
 minimum of 95 percent
 particles by weight with
 one fractured face and a
 minimum of 90 percent
 particles by weight with
 two fractured faces.
 403.2.3 Clay Conte nt. When tested in accordance with AASHT O T 176, blended aggregate particles
 passing the No. 4 sieve shall meet the following minimum sand equivalent criteria:
 Design Sand Equivalent
 F
 40
 E
 40
 C
 45
 B
 50
 
 403.2.4 Thin, Elongate d Particle s. For all mixtures except SMA, the blended aggregate particles retained
 on the No. 4 sieve shall not exceed 10 percent, based on a ratio of 5:1 when tested for flat and elongated
 particles in accordance with AST M D 4791.
 403.2.5 Stone Matrix Asphalt. In addition to other requirements, material for SMA mixtures shall meet
 the following. Coarse aggregate shall consist of crushed limestone and either porphyry or steel slag in
 accordance with the quality requirements of Sec 1002, except as follows. T he Los Angeles (LA) abrasion,
 when tested in accordance with AASHT O T 96, shall not exceed 40 percent based on initial ledge approval
 and source approval. T he percent absorption, when tested in accordance with AASHT O T 85, shall not
 exceed 3.5 percent based on the individual fractions. T he amount of flat and elongated particles, measured
 on material retained on a No. 4 sieve, of the blended aggregate shall not exceed 20 percent based on a 3:1
 ratio or 5 percent based on a 5:1 ratio.
 403.2.5.1 Fille r Re striction. Rigden void content determined in accordance with MoDOT Test Method
 T M-73 shall be no greater than 50 percent.
 403.2.5.2 Fibe rs. A fiber additive shall be used as a stabilizer when required to prevent draindown during
 production. Fibers shall be uniformly distributed by the end of the plant mixing process. T he dosage rate for
 
 176
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 fibers shall be no less than 0.3 percent by weight of the total mixture for cellulose and no less than 0.4
 percent by weight for mineral fibers.
 403.2.6 Re claime d Asphalt. A maximum of 30 percent virgin effective binder replacement may be used
 in mixtures without changing the grade of binder. T he asphalt binder content of recycled asphalt materials
 shall be determined in accordance with AASHT O T 164, AST M D 2172 or other approved method of
 solvent extraction. A correction factor for use during production may be determined for binder ignition by
 burning a sample in accordance with AASHT O T 308 and subtracting from the binder content determined
 by extraction. T he aggregate specific gravity shall be determined by performing AASHT O T 209 in
 accordance with Sec 403.19.3.1.2 and calculating the Gse to use in lieu of Gsb as follows:
 
 100 − P b
 Gse = 100 _ P b
 Gmm Gb
 403.2.6.1 Re claime d Asphalt Pave me nt. Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement (RAP) may be used in any
 mixture, except SMA mixtures. Mixtures may be used with more than 30 percent virgin effective binder
 replacement provided testing according to AASHT O M 323 is included with the job mix formula that
 ensures the combined binder meets the grade specified in the contract. All RAP material, except as noted
 below, shall be tested in accordance with AASHT O T 327, Method of Resistance of Coarse Aggregate
 Degradation by Abrasion in the Micro-Deval Apparatus. Aggregate shall have the asphalt coating removed
 either by extraction or binder ignition during production. T he material shall be tested in the Micro-Deval
 apparatus at a frequency of once per 1500 tons . T he percent loss shall not exceed the Micro-Deval loss of
 the combined virgin material by more than five percent. Micro-Deval testing will be waived for RAP
 material obtained from MoDOT roadways. All RAP material shall be in accordance with Sec 1002 for
 deleterious and other foreign material.
 403.2.6.2 Re claime d Asphalt Shingle s. Reclaimed Asphalt Shingles (RAS) may be used in any mixture
 specified to use PG 64-22 in accordance with AASHT O PP 53 except as follows: When the ratio of virgin
 effective binder to total binder in the mixture is between 60 and 70 percent, the grade of the virgin binder
 shall be PG 52-28 or PG 58-28. Shingles shall be ground to 3/8-inch minus. Waste, manufacturer or new,
 shingles shall be essential free of deleterious materials. Post-consumer RAS shall not contain more than 1.5
 percent wood by weight or more than 3.0 percent total deleterious by weight. Post-consumer RAS shall be
 certified to contain less than the maximum allowable amount of asbestos as defined by national or local
 standards. T he gradation of the aggregate may be determined by solvent extraction of the binder or using
 the following as a standard gradation:
 Shingle Aggregate G radation
 Sieve Size Percent Passing by Weight
 3/8 inch
 100
 No. 4
 95
 No. 8
 85
 No. 16
 70
 No. 30
 50
 No. 50
 45
 No. 100
 35
 No. 200
 25
 
 403.3 Composition of Mixture s.
 403.3.1 Gradation. Prior to mixing with asphalt binder, the combined aggregate gradation, including filler
 if needed, shall meet the following gradation for the type of mixture specified in the contract. A job mix
 formula may be approved which permits the combined aggregate gradation during mixture production to be
 outside the limits of the master range when the full tolerances specified in Sec 403.5 are applied.
 
 Sieve Size SP250
 
 SP190
 
 Percent Passing by Weight
 SP125 SP095 SP048 SP125xSM(R) SP095xSM(R)
 
 177
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 1 1/2 inch 100
 --------1 inch
 90 - 100 100
 ------3/4 inch 90 max. 90 - 100 100
 -----1/2 inch
 --90 max. 90 - 100 100
 --3/8 inch
 ----90 max. 90-100 100
 No. 4
 ------90 max. 90-100
 No. 8
 19 - 45 23 - 49 28 - 58 32-67
 --No. 16
 --------30-60
 No. 30
 ----------No. 50
 -----------
 
 ----100
 90-100
 50-80
 20 - 35
 16 - 24
 -------
 
 ------100
 70-95
 30-50
 20-30
 21 max.
 18 max.
 15 max.
 
 No. 100
 
 ---
 
 ---
 
 ---
 
 ---
 
 ---
 
 ---
 
 ---
 
 No. 200
 
 1-7
 
 2-8
 
 2 - 10
 
 2-10
 
 7-12
 
 8.0-11.0
 
 8.0-12.0
 
 403.3.2 Anti-Strip Age nt. An anti-strip will be allowed by the engineer to improve resistance to
 stripping. Anti-strip agents and application rates shall be from a list approved in accordance with Sec 1071.
 403.3.3 Porphyry Mixture s. For LP and SMA mixtures, at least 50 percent by volume of the aggregate
 shall be crushed porphyry retained on the following sieves: No. 30 for SP048, No. 16 for SP095 and No. 8
 for SP125. Depending on the actual gradation of porphyry aggregate furnished, the amount of crushed
 porphyry required may vary, however at least 40 percent by weight of crushed porphyry will be required.
 Steel slag may be substituted for porphyry in LP and SM mixtures, except at least 45 percent by weight of
 crushed porphyry and/or slag will be required. T he engineer may approve the use of other hard, durable
 aggregate in addition to porphyry and steel slag. . When an SMR mixture is designated, the mixture shall
 contain aggregate blends with at least 30 percent non-carbonate material in accordance with Sec 403.3.5.
 403.3.4 Minimum Stone Matrix Asphalt Binde r. T he percent asphalt binder for SMA mixtures shall
 not be less than 6.0 percent unless otherwise allowed by the engineer.
 403.3.5 Surface Mixture s. Design level B surface mixtures and SP048NC, except as described in Sec
 403.15.3, containing limestone coarse aggregate shall contain a minimum amount of non-carbonate
 aggregate. T he LA abrasion values, AASHT O T 96, of the limestone will determine the type and amount of
 non-carbonate aggregate required as shown in the table below. T he LA abrasion value will be determined
 from the most recent source approval sample. In lieu of the above requirements, the aggregate blend shall
 have an acid insoluble residue (AIR), MoDOT Test Method T M 76, meeting the plus No. 4 criteria of
 crushed non-carbonate material. Non-carbonate aggregate shall have an AIR of at least 85 percent insoluble
 residue.
 Coarse Aggregate (+ No. 4) Minimum Non-Carbonate by Volume
 Limestone, LA ≤ 30
 30% P lus No. 4
 Limestone, LA > 30
 Dolomite
 a
 
 20% Minus No. 4 a
 No Requirement
 
 Use for all SP095 and SP048NC containing limestone.
 
 403.4 Job Mix Formula. At least 30 days prior to placing any mixture on the project, the contractor
 shall submit a mix design for approval to Construction and Materials. T he mixture shall be designed in
 accordance with AASHT O R 35 or R 46 and shall be tested in accordance with AASHT O T 312 except as
 noted herein. A detailed description of the mix design process shall be included with the job mix formula
 (JMF). Representative samples of each ingredient for the mixture shall be submitted with the mix design.
 Aggregate fractions shall be provided in the same proportions as the proposed job mix formula. A minimum
 of 150 pounds will be required for any individual fraction. T he amount of each ingredient submitted shall be
 as follows for each mix design to be verified:
 Ingredient
 Minimum Amount
 Aggregate
 750 P ounds
 Hydrated Lime, Mineral Filler and/or Baghouse Fines
 20 P ounds
 Asphalt Binder
 10 Gallons
 
 403.4.1 Proficie ncy Sample Program. Laboratories that participate in and achieve a score of three or
 
 178
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 greater in the AASHT O proficiency sample program for T 11, T 27, T 84, T 85, T 166, T 176, T 209, T
 304 (AST M C 1252), T 308 and T 312 will have the mixture verification process waived. T he mix design
 shall be submitted to Construction and Materials for approval at least seven days prior to mixture
 production.
 403.4.2 Re quire d Information. T he mix design shall include raw data from the design process and
 contain the following information:
 (a) All possible sources intended for use, and grade and specific gravity of asphalt binder.
 (b) Source, type (formation, etc.), ledge number if applicable, gradation, and deleterious content of
 each aggregate fraction.
 (c) Bulk and apparent specific gravities and absorption of each aggregate fraction in accordance
 with AASHT O T 85 for coarse aggregate and AASHT O T 84 for fine aggregate including all raw
 data.
 (d) Specific gravity of hydrated lime, mineral filler or baghouse fines, if used, in accordance with
 AASHT O T 100.
 (e) Percentage of each aggregate component.
 (f) Combined gradation of the job mix.
 (g) Percent asphalt binder, by weight, based on the total mixture and percent asphalt binder
 contributed by reclaimed asphalt materials.
 (h) Bulk specific gravity (Gmb) by AASHT O T 166 Method A of a laboratory compacted mixture
 compacted at Ndesign gyrations.
 (i) Percent air voids (Va ) of the laboratory compacted specimen compacted to Ndesign gyrations.
 (j) Voids in the mineral aggregate (VMA) and voids in the mineral aggregate filled with asphalt
 binder (VFA) at Ndesign gyrations.
 (k) T heoretical maximum specific gravity (Gmm ) as determined by AASHT O T 209, in accordance
 with Sec 403.19.3, after the sample has been short term aged in accordance with AASHT O R 30.
 (l) T he tensile strength ratio as determined by AASHT O T 283 including all raw data.
 (m) T he gyratory sample weight to produce a 115 mm minimum height specimen.
 (n) Mixing temperature and gyratory molding temperature.
 (o) Number of gyrations at Ninitial, Ndesign, and Nmaximum .
 (p) Dust proportion ratio (-200/P be ).
 (q) Bulk specific gravity (Gsb) of the combined aggregate.
 (r) Percent chert contained in each aggregate fraction.
 (s) Percent of Gmm at Ninitial and Nmaximum .
 (t) Blended aggregate properties for clay content, angularity, and thin and elongated particles.
 (u) Voids in coarse aggregate (VCA) for both the mixture and dry-rodded condition for SMA
 mixtures.
 
 179
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (v) Draindown for SMA mixtures.
 (w) Baghouse fines added for design.
 (i) Batch and continuous mix plants – Indicate which aggregate fraction to add baghouse
 percentage during production.
 (ii) Drum mix plants – Provide cold feed settings with and without baghouse percentage.
 
 403.4.3 Approval. No mixture will be accepted for use until the JMF for the project is approved by
 Construction and Materials.
 403.4.4 Job Mix Formula Modification. T he JMF approved for each mixture shall be in effect until
 modified in writing by the engineer. When unsatisfactory results occur or should a source of material be
 changed, a new JMF may be required.
 403.4.5 De sign Gyrations. T he number (N) of gyrations required for gyratory compaction shall be as
 follows:
 
 Design b,N initial a,N design a,b N maximum
 F
 E
 C
 B
 
 -7
 8
 9
 
 50
 75
 80 or 100
 125
 
 -115
 160
 205
 
 a SMA mixtures
 
 shall have Ndesign equal to
 100 and no Nmaximum requirement.
 bDesign
 
 Level C mixtures designed at 80
 gyrations shall have no Ninitial or Nmaximum
 requirements.
 In addition, the compaction level, as a percent of theoretical maximum specific gravity, shall be less than
 or equal to 91.5 percent for Design F, 90.5 percent for Design E and 89.0 percent for Designs C and B at
 Ninitial, equal to 96.0 percent at Ndesign and less than or equal to 98.0 percent at Nmaximum .
 403.4.6 Mixture Characte ristics. When compacted in accordance with AASHT O T 312, the mixture
 shall meet the following criteria.
 403.4.6.1 Air Voids (Va ). Design air voids for all mixtures at all traffic levels shall be 4.0.
 403.4.6.2 Voids in the Mineral Aggregate (VMA).
 Mixture
 VMA Minimum (percent)
 SP 250
 12.0
 SP 190
 13.0
 SP 125 (except for SMA)
 14.0
 SP 095 (except for SMA)
 15.0
 SP 048
 16.0
 SMA
 17.0
 
 403.4.6.3 Voids Fille d With Asphalt (VFA).
 Design VFA (percent)a
 F
 70 - 80
 
 180
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 E
 
 65 – 78
 
 C
 
 65 – 75 b
 
 B
 
 65 – 75 b
 
 a SMA and
 
 SP048 mixtures shall
 have a minimum VFA of 75 percent.
 bMaximum
 
 76 percent for SP095 and
 78 percent for SP048.
 403.4.7 Dust to Binde r Ratio. For all mixtures except SMA and SP048, the ratio of minus No. 200
 material to effective asphalt binder (Pbe) shall be between 0.8 and 1.6. For SP048, the ratio of minus No.
 200 material to effective asphalt binder (Pbe) shall be between 0.9 and 2.0.
 403.4.8 Moisture Susce ptibility. For all mixtures except SMA, the mixture shall have a tensile strength
 ratio (T SR) greater than 80 percent when compacted to 3.7 inches with 7 ±0.5 percent air voids and tested
 in accordance with AASHT O T 283. SMA mixtures shall have a T SR greater than 80 percent when
 compacted to 3.7 inches with 6 ±0.5 percent air voids and tested in accordance with AASHT O T 283.
 403.4.9 Draindown. AASHT O T 305, Draindown Test, shall be performed on all SMA mixtures prior to
 job mix approval. T he mixture shall be stabilized in such a way that the draindown of the asphalt binder
 shall not exceed 0.3 percent by weight of mixture.
 403.4.10 Voids in Coarse Aggre gate . T he percent VCAMIX of SMA mixtures shall be less than or equal
 to the VCADRC as determined using AASHT O T 19. T his may be calculated using the following equations:
 VCADRC = 100 x (GCAγw - γs) / GCAγw
 VCAMIX = 100 - (P bp x Gmb / GCA)
 P bp = P s x PAbp
 Where:
 
 GCA
 
 =
 bulk specific gravity of the combined coarse aggregate (AASHT O T 85),
 γs
 =
 unit weight of coarse aggregate in the dry-rodded condition (DRC) (lb/ft3)
 (AASHT O T 19),
 γw
 =
 unit weight of water (62.34 lb/ft3) ,
 P bp
 =
 percent aggregate by total mixture weight retained on No. 4 sieve and
 PAbp =
 percent aggregate by total aggregate weight retained on No. 4 sieve*.
 
 *Use No. 8 sieve for SP095xSM
 403.5 Mixture Production Spe cification Limits.
 403.5.1 Gradation and De le te rious Conte nt Control. T he gradation of the aggregate shall be
 determined from samples taken from the hot bins on batch-type or continuous mixing plants or from the
 composite cold feed belt on drum mix plants. T he gradation may also be obtained by sampling the mixture
 and testing the residual aggregate. T he deleterious content of the aggregate shall be determined from
 samples taken from the composite cold feed belt. T he RAP shall be sampled from the RAP feeding system
 on the asphalt plant. T he contractor shall determine on a daily basis at minimum, the gradation on the
 aggregate reclaimed from the RAP by either extraction or binder ignition. T he results shall be used to
 determine the daily specification compliance for the combined gradation.
 403.5.1.1 Stone Matrix Asphalt Tole rance s. In producing mixtures for the project, the plant shall be
 operated such that no intentional deviations from the job mix formula are made. T he maximum deviation
 from the approved job mix formula shall be as follows for SMA mixtures:
 Sieve
 
 Max. Tolerance
 SP 095 SP 125
 3/4 inch -----
 
 181
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 1/2 inch
 3/8 inch
 No. 4
 No. 8
 No. 200
 
 --±4
 ±3
 ±3
 ±2
 
 ±4
 ±4
 ±3
 ±3
 ±2
 
 403.5.1.2 Mixture Tole rance . For all other SP mixtures, the percent passing the first sieve size smaller
 than the nominal maximum size shall not exceed 92.0 percent, a tolerance not to exceed 2.0 percent on
 the No. 8 sieve from the table in Sec 403.3.1, and within the range listed in Sec 403.3.1 for the No. 200
 sieve T he deleterious content of the material retained on the No. 4 sieve shall not exceed the limits
 specified in Sec 1002.2.
 403.5.2 De nsity. T he final, in-place density of the mixture shall be 94.5 ± 2.5 percent of the theoretical
 maximum specific gravity for all mixtures except SMA. SMA mixtures shall have a minimum density of
 94.0 percent of the theoretical maximum specific gravity. T he theoretical maximum specific gravity shall
 be determined from a sample representing the material being tested. Tests shall be taken not later than the
 day following placement of the mixture. T he engineer will randomly determine test locations.
 403.5.2.1 Shoulde r De nsity. Density on non-integral shoulders shall be in accordance with Sec 403.15.3.
 403.5.2.2 Inte gral Shoulde r. When shoulders are placed integrally with the traveled way, tests shall be
 taken on the traveled way.
 403.5.2.3 Longitudinal Joint De nsity. Density along longitudinal joints shall be in accordance with Sec
 403.16.1.
 403.5.3 Asphalt Conte nt. T he asphalt content (AC) shall be within ±0.3 percent of the approved mix
 design.
 403.5.4 Voids in the Mine ral Aggre gate . T he VMA shall be within – 0.5 and + 2.0 percent of the
 minimum required for each type of mixture at Ndes gyrations.
 403.5.5 Air Voids. Air voids shall be within ±1.0 percent of the approved mix design at Ndes gyrations.
 403.5.6 Te nsile Stre ngth Ratio. T he T SR shall be greater than or equal to 75 percent as determined
 from loose mixture taken from the roadway and tested in accordance with AASHT O T 283.
 403.5.7 Aggre gate Prope rtie s. Aggregate properties from Sec 403.2 on the combined aggregate during
 production shall be no less than 2 percent below the minimum for FAA, no less than 5 percent below the
 minimum for CAA, no less than 5 percent below the minimum for clay content and no more than 2
 percent above the maximum for thin, elongated particles.
 403.5.8 Fibe rs. T he fiber proportioning and delivery system for SMA mixtures shall have an accuracy of
 10 percent by weight of the material actually being measured in any given period of time.
 403.5.9 Moisture Conte nt. T he asphaltic concrete mixture, when sampled and tested in accordance with
 AASHT O T 329, shall not contain more than 0.5 percent moisture by weight of the mixture.
 403.5.10 Contamination. T he asphaltic concrete mixture shall not be contaminated with deleterious
 agents such as unburned fuel, objectionable fuel residue or any other material not inherent to the job mix
 formula.
 403.6 Fie ld Laboratory. T he contractor shall provide a Type 3 field laboratory in accordance with Sec
 601. T he contractor shall furnish the bituminous mixture equipment to perform all required test methods
 for QC and QA work. T he gyratory compactor shall be evaluated in accordance with AASHT O PP 35. An
 approved list will be maintained by Construction and Materials. All other equipment shall be capable of
 performing tests in accordance with the approved test methods.
 
 182
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 403.7 Bituminous Mixing Plants. Bituminous mixing plants and preparation of material and mixtures
 shall be in accordance with Sec 404.
 403.8 Hauling Equipme nt. T rucks used for hauling bituminous mixtures shall be in accordance with Sec
 404.
 403.9 Pave rs. Bituminous pavers shall be self-contained units, provided with an activated screed or strikeoff assembly, heated if necessary, and capable of spreading and finishing asphaltic concrete in lane widths
 applicable to the specified typical sections and thicknesses shown on the plans.
 403.10 Construction Re quire me nts.
 403.10.1 We athe r Limitations. No mixture shall be placed on any wet or frozen surface. Temperatures
 shall be obtained in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 20.
 403.10.2 Substitutions. With approval from the engineer, the contractor may substitute a smaller
 nominal maximum size mixture for a larger sized mixture. Specifications governing the substitute mixture
 shall apply. Except for a single surface layer, the total pavement thickness shall be maintained when the
 substitute mixture layer is reduced as allowed in Sec 403.13 by increasing the thickness of other layers or
 courses. T he contract unit price for the original mixture shall be used.
 403.11 Fie ld Adjustme nts of Job Mix Formulas. When test results indicate the mixture produced does
 not meet the specification requirements, the contractor may field adjust the job mix formula as noted
 herein. Field adjustments may consist of changing the percent binder as listed on the original approved job
 mix by no more than 0.3 percent. Additional fractions of material or new material will not be permitted as
 field adjustments. T he engineer shall be notified immediately when any change is made in the cold feed
 settings, the hot bin settings or the binder content. A new Gsb shall be calculated using the new aggregate
 percentages. T he gradation of the adjusted mixture shall meet the requirements of the mixture type
 specified in the contract. When the binder content is adjusted more than 0.3 percent, the mixture will be
 considered out of specification, and a new mix design shall be established.
 
 403.11.1 Fie ld Mix Re de sign. When a new mix design will be required, the contractor will be permitted to
 establish the new mix design in the field. T he mixture shall be designed in accordance with AASHT O R 35
 or AASHT O R 46 and shall meet the mix design requirements, including T SR. A representative sample of
 the mixture shall be submitted with the new mix design to the Central Laboratory for mixture verification.
 T he amount of mixture submitted for verification shall weigh at least 50 pounds.
 403.11.1.1 Approval. New mix designs established in the field shall be submitted for approval to
 Construction and Materials. Upon approval, Construction and Materials will assign a new mix number to
 the mixture.
 403.11.1.2 Re sume Production. No mixture shall be placed on the project until the new field mix design
 is approved.
 403.12 Application of Prime or Tack. T he prime coat, if specified, shall be applied in accordance
 with Sec 408. A tack coat is required on all existing pavement and shoulder surfaces that will be overlaid
 with a bituminous mixture. A tack coat is also required between all lifts of bituminous pavements placed
 within the driving and turn lanes, unless otherwise specified in the contract. All construction requirements
 of a tacked surface shall be in accordance with Sec 407, and specified herein. T he tack coat shall be applied
 uniformly and shall completely cover the surface upon which the bituminous mixture is to be placed.
 Placement of a bituminous mixture shall not be placed upon a tacked surface that is not uniformly covered
 or surfaces that have experienced excessive loss of tack due to tracking. Re-application of tack due to
 excess tracking or non-uniform coverage shall be at the contractor ’s expense.
 403.13 Spre ading and Finishing. T he base course, primed or tacked surface, or preceding course or layer
 shall be cleaned of all dirt, packed soil or any other foreign material prior to spreading the asphaltic
 mixture. If lumps are present or a crust of mixture has formed, the entire load will be rejected. T he
 thickness and width of each course shall conform to the typical section in the contract. T he contractor
 
 183
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 may elect to construct each course in multiple layers. T he minimum compacted thickness shall be 0.75
 inches for SP048, 1.25 inches for SP095, 1.75 inches for SP125, 2 inches for SP190, and 3 inches for
 SP250.
 403.13.1 Paving Widths. T he following shall apply for roadways constructed under traffic. For
 pavements having a width of 16 to 24 feet, inclusive, the asphaltic concrete pavement shall be laid in lanes
 approximately one half the full width of the completed pavement, and the full width shall be completed as
 soon as practical. Unless otherwise permitted, a single lane of any course shall not be constructed to a
 length that cannot be completed to full width of the pavement the succeeding operating day. For
 pavements greater than 24 feet wide, single lane width construction shall be limited to one day's production
 and completion to full width shall be accomplished as soon as practical. Uneven pavement shall be left in
 place for no more than seven days, unless approved by the engineer. Removal of pavement to be in
 accordance with this specification shall be at the contractor ’s expense.
 403.13.2 Se gre gation. No segregation will be permitted in handling the mixture at the plant, from the
 truck or during spreading operations on the roadbed. All layers shall be feathered out, by hand raking if
 necessary, in transitioning the depth of the surface to meet present grades at bridges or ends of projects, to
 provide a uniform, smooth riding surface free of irregularities. Where only the top layer of the surfacing
 continues across a bridge, the bottom layers shall be feathered out. In situations where there is a dispute in
 the existence of segregation, the area in question will be tested in accordance with MoDOT Test Method
 T M 75. Mixture production shall immediately cease if either criteria of MoDOT Test Method T M 75 fail.
 Segregated mixture shall be removed and replaced to the limits determined by the engineer.
 403.13.3 Re le ase to Traffic. If the asphaltic concrete construction consists of more than a single layer,
 each layer shall be compacted as specified and allowed to cool to the ambient temperature before the next
 layer is placed. T he contractor shall keep traffic off the asphaltic concrete until the surface of the
 asphaltic concrete is 140 F or below and the asphaltic concrete has cooled sufficiently to prevent flushing
 of the asphalt binder to the surface, marking or distorting the surface or breaking down the edges.
 403.13.4 Draindown. Evidence of asphalt binder separation or draindown at delivery will be cause for
 rejection.
 403.13.5 Shoulde r Substitution. When a Sec 403 mixture is specified for traffic lanes, the same mixture
 may be used for the adjacent shoulder, subject to the density requirements in Sec 403.5.2.
 403.14 Spot We dging and Le ve ling Course . T he engineer will specify the locations and thickness of
 spot wedging and the thickness of leveling course to obtain the smoothest possible riding surface. T his
 procedure may result in spot wedging operations over small areas with feather-edging at high points and
 ends of wedge areas. Rigid control of the placement thickness of the leveling course shall be required.
 Leveling course, consisting of a layer of asphaltic concrete of variable thickness used to superelevate curves
 and eliminate irregularities in the existing base, shall be spread uniformly to the specified profile grade and
 cross section. T he mixture shall be uniformly spread and compacted, with only minor segregation as
 accepted by the engineer. Type SP125 or finer mixtures, as applicable, shall be used for the spot wedging
 and for the leveling course.
 403.15 Compaction. After the asphaltic mixture has been spread, struck off and surface irregularities
 adjusted, the asphaltic mixture shall be compacted thoroughly and uniformly by rolling to obtain the
 required compaction while the mixture is in a workable condition. Excessive rolling, to the extent of
 aggregate degradation, will not be permitted. A pneumatic tire roller shall be used as the initial or
 intermediate roller on any course placed as a single lift, as a wedge or leveling course. Rollers shall not be
 used in the vibratory mode when the mixture temperature is below 225 F. When warm mix technology is
 used, as approved by the engineer, rollers shall not be used in the vibratory mode when the mixture
 temperature is below 200 F .
 403.15.1 Rolling. Any displacement occurring as a result of starting, stopping or changing direction of a
 roller, or from other causes, shall be avoided. Excess liquid, to prevent adhesion of the mixture to the
 rollers, will not be permitted. Diesel fuel, fuel oil or other detrimental products shall not be used as wetting
 agents. Along forms, curbs, headers, walls and other places not accessible to the roller, the mixture shall be
 thoroughly compacted with hot hand tampers, smoothing irons or with mechanical tampers.
 
 184
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 403.15.2 De fe ctive Mixture . Any mixture that becomes loose and broken, mixed with dirt or is in any
 way defective shall be removed and replaced with fresh, hot mixture, which shall be compacted to conform
 with the surrounding area. Any area showing an excess or deficiency of asphalt binder shall be removed and
 replaced.
 403.15.3 Non-Traffic Are as. Sec 403 mixtures used for surfacing medians and similar areas, shoulders
 adjacent to rigid or flexible pavement and shoulders adjacent to resurfaced pavement shall be compacted to
 the specified densities for the mixture. Once an established rolling pattern has been demonstrated to
 provide the required density for shoulders, at the engineer's discretion, the pattern may be used in lieu of
 density tests provided no changes in the material, typical location or temperatures are made. Regardless of
 the method, density will still be required and subject to testing as deemed necessary by the engineer. In lieu
 of roller and density requirements, temporary bypasses to be maintained at the expense of the contractor
 shall be thoroughly compacted. T he rolling shall be performed at proper time intervals and shall be
 continued until there is no visible evidence of further consolidation.
 403.15.4 De nsity Me asure me nt. Measurements for determining the in-place density of the mixture shall
 be taken no later than the day following placement. Measurements not obtained within the prescribed time
 limits shall be subject to the requirements of Sec 403.22. If a core is taken, material from underlying layers
 that remain adhered to the core shall be removed in a manner that does not harm the integrity of the
 specimen. If the contractor elects to place a lift of mixture greater than six times the nominal maximum
 aggregate size, cores shall be cut in half and the density of each half determined separately.
 403.16 Joints. T ransverse joints shall be formed by any method that will produce a dense, vertical section
 for use when laying is resumed. When a transverse vertical edge is to be left and opened to traffic, a
 temporary depth transition shall be built as approved by the engineer. T he joint formed when the fresh
 mixture is placed shall be dense, well sealed, and the grade, line and surface texture of the succeeding surface
 shall conform to that of the joined surface. If directed by the engineer, the transverse joint shall be painted
 with a light coating of liquid asphalt. Hand manipulation of the mixture shall be minimized to avoid
 unsightly surface texture.
 403.16.1 Joint Composition. Longitudinal joints shall be formed by the use of an edging plate fixed on
 both sides of the finishing machine. Care shall be taken to obtain a well bonded and sealed longitudinal joint
 by placing the hot mixture in a manner ensuring maximum compaction at this point. If directed by the
 engineer for properly sealing the longitudinal joint, a light coating of bituminous material shall be applied
 to the exposed edge before the joint is made. T he minimum density of all traveled way pavement within 6
 inches of a longitudinal joint, including the pavement on the traveled way side of the shoulder joint, shall
 not be less than 2.0 percent below the specified density when unconfined. T he density of the longitudinal
 joint when confined will be included in the evaluation of the remainder of the mat. Each side of the joint
 shall be flush and along true lines.
 403.16.2 Joint O ffse t. T he longitudinal joint in any layer shall offset that in the layer immediately below
 by a minimum of 6 inches; except, the joints in the completed surfacing shall be at the lane lines of the
 traveled way or other required placement width outside the travel lane. T he placement width shall be
 adjusted such that pavement marking shall not fall on a longitudinal joint.
 403.17 Q uality Control.
 403.17.1 Q uality Control O pe rations. T he contractor shall maintain equipment and qualified personnel
 to perform all QC field inspection, sampling and testing as required by this specification. All contractor
 personnel included in the QC operation shall be qualified by the MoDOT Technician Certification Program.
 Under no circumstances will unqualified personnel be allowed to perform QC sampling or testing. Personnel
 will be disqualified if acceptable methods and procedures are not followed.
 
 403.17.1.1 Asphalt Te st Re sults. T he contractor shall record all test results and furnish a copy, including
 all raw data, to the engineer no later than the beginning of the day following the test. T he contractor shall
 maintain all test results in an organized format and shall be available to the QA inspector at all times. Scale
 readings and other measurements not directly recorded by electronic media shall be recorded in an organized
 
 185
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 format. Printouts from gyratory compactors and asphalt content devices shall be retained as part of the
 testing records.
 403.17.2 Bituminous Q uality Control Plan. Prior to approval of the trial mix design by the engineer,
 the contractor shall submit a QC Plan to Construction and Materials for approval. T he QC Plan shall
 include:
 (a) T he contractor representative in charge of QC and the project level representative if different
 from the contractor representative. Contact information should be recorded for these individuals.
 (b) Lot and sublot sizes and how they will be designated.
 
 (c) T he test method for determining asphalt content and number of cores to be cut for density
 determination.
 (d) A proposed independent third party name, contact, address, and phone number for dispute
 resolution.
 403.17.2.1 Third Party. T he third party shall be independent of the contractor, MoDOT consultants and
 all project subcontractors or suppliers on each specific project. All testing of material for dispute resolution
 shall be performed by an approved laboratory. Approved laboratories shall be AASHT O Accreditation
 Program certified in the areas of the material being tested.
 403.17.2.2 Plant Calibration. Plant calibration shall be performed by the contractor in accordance with
 Sec 404, and records shall be made available to the engineer.
 403.17.2.3 Re taine d Sample s. All samples taken by the contractor, including but not limited to tested
 aggregate, volumetric and density samples, shall be retained for the engineer for a minimum of seven days
 after the contractor ’s tests are complete and accepted unless otherwise instructed. T hese samples shall be
 maintained in clean covered containers, without contamination, readily accessible to the engineer. T he
 retained sample's identification shall consist of, but is not limited to:
 (a) T ime and date sampled.
 (b) Product specification number.
 (c) Type of sample, i.e. belt, bin, stockpile.
 (d) Lot and sublot designation.
 (e) Sampler/Tester.
 (f) Project Job Number.
 403.17.2.3.1 Gradation and De le te rious Conte nt Sample s. For each gradation and deleterious sample
 taken, the contractor shall retain for the engineer, the portion of the sample not tested after reducing the
 original sample to testing size.
 403.17.2.3.2 Loose Mix Sample . All loose mix samples for determination of volumetrics, asphalt binder
 content and T SR shall be taken from the roadway at random locations designated by the engineer. A
 companion loose mix sample shall be taken, identified and retained for the engineer.
 403.17.3 Q uality Control Laboratory. All QC mixture testing shall be performed in an approved
 laboratory.
 403.17.3.1 Calibration Sche dule . T he contractor shall calibrate or verify all significant test equipment
 associated with tests covered in this specification. Intervals as set by the contractor shall not exceed the
 following limits:
 
 186
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Equipment - Test Method
 (AASHTO)
 
 Requirement
 
 Interval (Month)
 
 Calibrate – 1.16 ± .02° internal angle 12 a
 Gyratory Compactor - T 312
 Verify
 Daily
 Gyratory Molds - T 312
 Check Critical Dimensions
 12
 Thermometers - T 209, T 166, T 312 Calibrate
 6
 Vacuum System - T 209
 Check P ressure
 12
 P ycnometer (Flask) - T 209
 Calibrate
 Daily
 Gyratory Compactor - T 312
 
 12 b
 
 Binder Ignition Oven - T 308
 
 Verify
 
 Nuclear Content Gauge – T 287
 or MoDOT TM 54
 Mechanical Shakers - T 27
 Sieves
 Weighted Foot Assembly - T 176
 Mechanical Shaker - T 176
 Liquid Limit Device - T 89
 Grooving Tool - T 89
 Ovens
 
 Drift & Stability – Manuf.
 Recommendation
 Check Sieving Thoroughness
 Check P hysical Condition
 Check Weight
 Check Rate & Length of Throw
 Check Wear & Critical Dimensions
 Check Critical Dimensions
 Verify Temp. Settings
 
 Balances
 
 Verify
 
 Timers
 
 Check Accuracy
 
 1
 12
 6
 12
 12
 12
 12
 4
 12 b
 6
 
 a Calibrate
 bVerify
 
 and/or verify after each move.
 after each move.
 
 403.17.3.1.1 Inve ntory. An inventory of all major sampling, testing, calibration and verification
 equipment, including the serial number or other identifying number shall be maintained.
 403.17.3.1.2 Calibration Re cords. Calibration and verification records shall include but are not limited
 to:
 
 (a) Detailed results of the work performed (dimensions, mass, force, temperature, etc.)
 (b) Description of the equipment calibrated including identifying number.
 (c) Date the work was performed.
 (d) Identification of the individual performing the work.
 (e) Identification of the calibration or verification procedure used.
 (f) T he previous calibration or verification date and next due date.
 (g) Identification of any in-house calibration or verification device used (including identification to
 establish traceability of items such as standard masses, proving rings, standard thermometers,
 balances, etc.).
 403.17.3.2 Re cord Re te ntion. Test records shall be maintained to permit verification of any test report.
 Records pertaining to testing, equipment calibration and verification, test reports, internal quality systems
 review, proficiency sample testing, test technician training and evaluation and personnel shall be retained in
 a secure location for a minimum of three years.
 403.17.3.3 Te st Me thod Availability. A current copy of all test methods and procedures shall be
 maintained in the QC laboratory at all times for reference by the technicians. Examples of report formats
 and procedures may be found in AASHT O R 18.
 403.18 Q uality Assurance . All QA field inspection, sampling and testing will be performed by a qualified
 MoDOT technician. T he QA inspector shall have free access to any and all testing equipment used by the
 mixture producer and any workbooks, records or control charts maintained by the mixture producer for the
 
 187
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 QC process. T he QA inspector shall also have sufficient access to the plant grounds to assure compliance
 with the approved QC Plan.
 403.18.1 Assurance Te sting. T he engineer will independently sample and test the mixture from the
 roadway at the frequency listed in Sec 403.19.3. T he independent sample will be of sufficient size to retain
 half for possible disputes. Further testing of this sample will be under the direction of the engineer. T he
 retained portion of the QC samples for mixture properties, gradation, and deleterious content will be tested
 at a frequency no less than once per week. T he engineer's test results, including all raw data, will be made
 available to the contractor when completed and no later than the next working day.
 403.18.2 Core Chain of Custody. QA density cores that are not in possession of the engineer for the
 entire time from extraction till testing shall be sealed in tamper proof bags after extraction.
 403.18.3 Aggre gate Comparison. Comparison for aggregate will be considered favorable when the
 contractor ’s QC results and the engineer ’s QA test results of a retained sample compare within the
 following limits.
 403.18.3.1 Gradation.
 Sieve Size
 Percentage Points
 3/4 inch and larger
 5.0
 1/2 inch
 5.0
 3/8 inch
 4.0
 No. 4
 4.0
 No. 8
 3.0
 No. 10
 3.0
 No. 16
 3.0
 No. 20
 3.0
 No. 30
 3.0
 No. 40
 2.0
 No. 50
 2.0
 No. 100
 2.0
 No. 200
 1.0
 
 403.18.3.2 Coarse Aggre gate Angularity. Angular particles shall be within 5 percentage points.
 403.18.3.3 Fine Aggre gate Angularity. Void content shall be within 2 percentage points.
 403.18.3.4 Sand Equivale nt. Sand equivalency shall be within 8 percentage points.
 403.18.3.5 Thin, Elongate d Particle s. Flat, elongated particle content shall be within one percentage
 point.
 403.18.3.6 De le te rious. T he total and individual deleterious content shall not exceed the specification
 limits.
 403.18.4 Fe de ral Highway Administration Re quire me nts. Performance and acceptance of QC/QA
 testing under these specifications shall not eliminate any FHWA requirements for acceptance of the
 material.
 403.19 Acce ptance of Mate rial. Acceptance of bituminous mixture will be based on lots. Material will be
 sampled from the roadway behind the paver in lots or sublots on a random basis through the use of a
 random number system and evaluated using a Quality Level Analysis (QLA). A QLA will determine
 payment based on a combination of the total PWL (PWLt) determined for each pay factor item for each
 lot of material produced.
 403.19.1 Random Numbe rs. T he engineer will generate random numbers.
 403.19.2 Lots. T he lot size shall be designated in the contractor ’s QC Plan. Each lot shall contain no less
 
 188
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 than four sublots with a maximum sublot size of 1,000 tons. Sublots from incomplete lots shall be combined
 with the previous complete lot for determination of pay factors. When no previous lot exists, the mixture
 shall be treated in accordance with Sec 403.23.7.4.1. A new lot shall begin when the asphalt content of a
 mixture is adjusted in accordance with Sec 403.11.
 403.19.3 Te st and Pay Factor Ite ms. As a minimum, the contractor and engineer shall test in accordance
 with the following table. Where multiple test methods are allowed, the contractor shall designate the test
 method to be used in the QC Plan. Final payment will be based on the indicated pay factor items.
 Tested
 Property
 Mixture
 temperature
 Temperature of
 base and air
 Mat Density (%
 of theoretical
 maximum
 density) by
 contractor
 
 Pay
 Factor
 
 Test
 Method
 
 Contractor
 Frequency
 
 Engineer
 Frequency
 
 No
 
 ----
 
 1/Sublot
 
 1/day
 
 No
 
 ----
 
 As needed
 
 As needed
 
 Yes
 
 MoDOT Test
 1 Sampleb/Sublot
 Method TM-41 or As needed for joints 1 Sample/4 Sublots
 e
 AASHTO T 166
 & shoulders.
 
 Unconfined Joint
 Density
 
 No
 
 MoDOT Test
 Method TM-41 or 1 Sampleb/Sublot
 AASHTO T 166 e
 
 1 Sample/4 Sublots
 
 Cold feed or hot
 bin gradation and
 deleterious
 content
 
 No
 
 AASHTO T 27 and
 1/2 Sublots
 AASHTO T 11
 
 1/4 Sublots
 
 Ground shingles
 
 No
 
 AASHTO T 27
 
 FAA, CAA, Clay
 Content and Thin,
 Elongated
 P articles from
 material sampled
 from the cold
 feed or hot bin
 
 No
 
 AASHTO T 304,
 1/10,000 tons with a
 ASTM D 5821,
 minimum of
 1/project
 AASHTO T 176
 1/project/mix type
 and ASTM D 4791
 
 Yes
 
 AASHTO T 164,
 or MoDOT Test
 Method TM-54, or 1/Sublot
 AASHTO T 287,
 or AASHTO T 308
 
 Asphalt content
 
 Asphalt content of RAP No
 VMA @ N des gyrations Yes a
 
 AASHTO T 164 d
 AASHTO T 312
 and R 35 e
 AASHTO T 312
 and R 35 e
 
 1/10,000 tons with a
 minimum of
 1/project
 1/project
 
 1/4 Sublots
 
 1/4 Sublots
 
 1/project
 
 1/Sublot
 
 1/4 Sublots
 
 1/Sublot
 
 1/4 Sublots
 
 Va @ N des
 gyrations
 
 Yes a
 
 VFA @ N des gyrations
 
 No a
 
 AASHTO T 312
 and R 35 e
 
 1/Sublot
 
 1/4 Sublots
 
 Theo. max SG of
 the mixture
 
 No
 
 AASHTO T 209
 
 1/Sublot
 
 1/4 Sublots
 
 TSR of the in
 place mixture
 
 No c
 
 AASHTO T 283
 
 1/10,000 Tons or
 fraction thereof
 
 1/50,000 Tons or
 1/project
 combination
 
 a Based
 
 on the average of a minimum of two compacted specimens.
 samples shall consist of one core. Up to two additional cores, as stated in the QC Plan,
 may be obtained at the same offset within one foot of the randomly selected location. If more
 than one core is obtained, all cores shall be combined into one sample.
 c Payment will be based on the table in Sec 403.23.5.
 d
 Other methods may be approved by establishing correction factors for RAP from the same
 source.
 e
 AASHT O T 331 may be substituted for AASHT O T 166.
 bCore
 
 403.19.3.1 Te st Me thod Modification.
 
 189
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 403.19.3.1.1 Binde r Ignition Modification. Asphalt content determination in accordance with
 AASHT O T 308, Section 6.9.1 shall be modified by adding the following: If the calibration factor exceeds
 1.0 percent, lower the test temperature to 800 ± 8 F and repeat test. Use the calibration factor obtained at
 800 F even if it exceeds 1.0 percent. If RAP is used, the binder ignition oven shall be calibrated in
 accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 77. At the engineer ’s discretion, testing may be waived when
 production does not exceed 200 tons per day. T he contractor shall certify the proper proportions of a
 previously proven mixture were used.
 403.19.3.1.2 Rice Te st. When the water absorption of any aggregate fraction is greater than 2.0 percent,
 the test method for determining theoretical maximum specific gravity, AASHT O T 209, shall be modified
 as follows: After completing the procedure in accordance with Section 9.5.1 or 9.5.2, drain water from the
 sample. To prevent loss of fine particles, decant the water through a paper towel held over the top of the
 container. Spread the sample before an electric fan to remove surface moisture. Weigh at 15-minute
 intervals, and when the loss in mass is less than 0.05 percent for this interval, the sample may be
 considered to be surface dry. T his procedure requires about 2 hours and shall be accompanied by
 intermittent stirring of the sample. Break conglomerations of mixture by hand. Take care to prevent loss
 of particles of mixture. Calculate the specific gravity of the sample by substituting the final surface-dry
 mass for A in denominator of Equations 2 or 3.
 403.19.3.1.3 Mixture Bulk Spe cific Gravity. Determining bulk specific gravity using paraffin-coated
 specimens, AASHT O T 275, shall not be used when required by AASHT O T 166. Alternate methods are
 AASHT O T 331 and AST M D1188. T he surface of specimens prepared for testing by these methods may
 have the surface texture removed by sawing a minimal amount. Specimens shall be securely held in a jig or
 other clamping device to eliminate distortion and retain a face parallel to the original surface.
 Measurements for lift thickness shall be made prior to sawing.
 403.19.3.2 Misce llane ous Applications.
 403.19.3.2.1 Small Q uantitie s. Small quantities are less than 4000 tons for each separate mixture. T his
 applies to individual projects, individual projects in combination contracts or projects with short
 discontinuous sections. T he contractor has the option to use all testing frequencies in accordance with Sec
 403.19.3 or the following shall apply:
 (a) A field laboratory will not be required for monitoring mixtures. All required QC and QA testing
 shall be performed in an approved laboratory.
 (b) QC tests required in Sec 403.19.3 shall be performed at a frequency of no less than one per day
 if production does not exceed 750 tons and at a frequency of no less than two per day if
 production exceeds 750 tons. Independent or retained sample QA tests shall be performed at least
 once per 1500 tons, as indicated.
 403.19.3.2.2 Base Wide ning and Entrance s. For base widening mixture and entrance work, the
 following will apply:
 (a) All base widening shall be constructed in accordance with Sec 401.7 and subsections.
 
 (b) T he minimum density of these mixtures shall be attained as specified herein, except,
 compaction may be performed in accordance with Sec 403.15.3.
 403.19.4 Dispute Re solution. When there are significant discrepancies between the engineer's and the
 contractor's test results, dispute resolution procedures will be used.
 403.19.4.1 Ce ase Work. T he contractor's operations may be required to cease until the dispute is resolved
 if the test results indicate the mixture is subject to failure.
 403.19.4.2 Third Party Re solution. T he first step in dispute resolution will be to identify differences in
 procedures and correcting inappropriate procedures before moving to third party resolution. If that does
 not resolve the dispute, either the contractor or the engineer may request the approved QC Plan third
 
 190
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 party involvement. T he recommendations of the approved third party shall be binding on both the
 engineer and contractor.
 403.19.4.3 Third Party Payme nt. T he contractor shall be responsible for the cost associated with the
 third party testing and resolution if the final result indicates the engineer's test results were correct.
 Likewise the Commission will be responsible for the cost associated with the third party testing and
 resolution when the final result indicates the contractor's results were correct.
 403.19.4.4 O the r Adjustme nts. T he contractor shall not be entitled to any additional payment for costs
 incurred due to use of the dispute resolution procedures such as, but not limited to, those for delay, cessation
 of operations, costs to subcontractors, etc. T he engineer may give consideration to adjustment of working
 days if warranted.
 403.20 Surface Smoothne ss. T he finish of the pavement surface shall be substantially free from waves
 or irregularities and shall be true to the established crown and grade. T he pavement surface shall be
 thoroughly tested for smoothness by profiling or straighedging in accordance with Sec 610.
 403.21 Ge ne ral Re quire me nts.
 403.21.1 Se que nce of O pe rations. To reduce inconvenience to the traveling public during widening or
 surfacing, the contractor will not be permitted to place any final surface course until the base widening, the
 leveling course and the binder course have been completed throughout the entire combination of sections,
 unless otherwise authorized by the engineer. T he proper condition of the base widening, the leveling course
 and the binder course, at the time of placing the surface course, shall be the contractor's responsibility.
 403.21.2 Pave me nt Marking. If the contractor's work has obliterated the existing pavement marking on
 resurfacing projects open to through traffic, the pavement marking shall be replaced in accordance with Sec
 620.
 403.21.3 Surface d Approache s. At locations designated in the contract or as specified by the engineer,
 approaches shall be primed in accordance with Sec 408 and surfaced with Type SP125 asphaltic concrete.
 T he asphaltic concrete surface shall be placed in accordance with the details shown on the plans or as
 specified by the engineer. Approaches shall not be surfaced until after the surface course adjacent to the
 entrance is completed. Any work required to condition and prepare the subgrade on the approaches will be
 at the contractor ’s expense.
 403.21.4 Filling Drain Basins. If shown on the plans, existing drain basins shall be filled to the top of
 the lip with plant mix bituminous base course or asphaltic concrete from the pavement edge to the edge of
 the shoulder. Any difficulty or delay created by this requirement will be at the contractor ’s expense.
 403.21.5 Pave me nt Re pairs (Blow-Ups). A blow-up will be considered that area where excessive
 expansion has resulted in distress to the existing pavement. Blow-ups occurring prior to the application of
 the tack coat on the existing surface will normally be repaired by the Commission. Blow-ups occurring after
 the application of the tack coat shall be repaired by the contractor by removing the distressed concrete and
 replacing the pavement in accordance with Sec 613.
 403.22 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 403.22.1 We ight De te rmination. T he weight of the mixture will be determined from the batch weights if
 a batch-type plant is used, and will be determined by weighing each truck load on scales in accordance with
 Sec 310 if other types of plants are used. Measurement will be made to the nearest 0.1 ton for the total
 tonnage of material accepted.
 403.22.2 Full De pth.
 403.22.2.1 T he final driving surface area, for the full depth of the pavement, will be used as the area for all
 underlying bituminous lifts and will not include the additional quantity needed to construct the 1:1 slope.
 403.22.2.2 Final measurement of the completed pavement will not be made except for authorized changes
 
 191
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required,
 measurement of the pavement complete in place will be made to the nearest 0.1 square yard. T he revision
 or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 403.22.3 Alte rnate O ve rlay.
 403.22.3.1 Fie ld Establishe d Q uantity. When bid as an alternate to a Portland cement concrete overlay,
 the contractor shall establish the existing roadway profile and set the final overlay profile. T he engineer
 may adjust the final profile as needed. T he tons of hot mix asphalt required will be determined by the
 engineer from the set or adjusted profile. T his quantity will be the field established plan quantity.
 403.22.3.2 O ve rlay Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the completed pavement will be based on the
 field established plan quantity except for authorized changes during construction. T he revision or
 correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity. Measurement of the
 pavement complete in place will be made to the nearest 0.1 ton.
 403.22.4 Pave me nt Te sting. T he finished courses shall have the nominal thickness shown on the plans.
 Tests will be conducted to ensure that each course is being constructed to proper thickness, composition
 and density. T he contractor shall cut samples from any layer of the compacted mixture at locations
 designated by the engineer. QA samples shall be cut and delivered to the engineer no later than the end of
 the next day following the laydown operation. If the samples are not cut and delivered as stated, the
 asphaltic laydown operation may be suspended and a deduction of 5 percent per day of the contract unit
 price of the representative material may be applied, until samples are cut and delivered to the engineer.
 Samples may be obtained by either sawing or drilling 4-inch minimum diameter cores. Each sawed sample
 shall consist of a single piece of the pavement of the size designated by the engineer, but no larger than 12
 inches square.
 403.22.4.1 Pave me nt Thickne ss. Lift thickness may be determined by the average thickness of cores
 taken for density measurements for each lot. Total thickness samples for new full depth asphalt pavements
 shall be obtained after all bituminous construction is completed on the project and shall be taken at
 locations specified by the engineer. For the purpose of determining the constructed thickness of full depth
 pavement, cores shall be taken at random intervals in each traffic lane at the rate of one core per 1000
 feet or increment thereof, or at any other locations as may be determined by the engineer and measured in
 accordance with AASHT O T 148. Sections of any asphaltic concrete determined to be 0.5 inches or more,
 less than the thickness shown on the plans, shall be corrected by the contractor. No payment will be made
 for any costs incurred by the contractor in correcting pavement deficient in thickness. Each core is
 representative of the pavement thickness for a distance extending one-half the distance to the next core,
 measured along centerline, or in the case of a beginning or ending core, the distance will extend to the end
 of the pavement.
 403.22.4.2 Surface Re storation. T he surface from which samples have been taken, including those for
 density measurements, shall be restored by the contractor with the mixture then being produced no later
 than the next day of plant operation, if construction is still active. If bituminous construction has been
 completed, the surface from which samples have been taken shall be restored within 48 hours with an
 approved commercial mixture or with cold patch mixtures acceptable to the engineer.
 403.23 Basis of Payme nt.
 403.23.1 Aggre gate Variation. Due to possible variations in the specific gravity of the aggregates, the
 tonnage of mixture used may vary from the proposal quantities. No adjustment in contract unit price will
 be made because of such variation.
 403.23.2 Compacte d Sample s. Payment for obtaining and delivering samples of compacted mixture
 from the pavement and replacing the surface will be made per sample at the fixed price specified in Sec
 109. No direct payment will be made for samples taken for QC testing.
 403.23.3 Payme nt for Pave me nt Re pairs (Blow-ups). Payment for repairing blow-ups will be made in
 accordance with Sec 104.
 
 192
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 403.23.4 Smoothne ss Adjustme nt. T he contract unit price for all mixes, except wedge or level course,
 will be adjusted in accordance with Sec 610.5. T he contract unit prices for asphaltic concrete pavement
 will be considered full compensation for all materials entering into the construction of the pavement and
 for the cost of the smoothness testing and correction.
 403.23.5 Te nsile Stre ngth Re taine d Adjustme nt. T he contract unit price of each 10,000 tons or
 fraction thereof for all mixtures shall be adjusted based on T SR according to the following:
 TSR
 Percent of Contract Price
 90% and above
 103
 75-89%
 100
 70-74%
 98
 65-69%
 97
 <65%
 Remove
 
 403.23.6 De nsity Adjustme nt. Pay adjustments due to longitudinal joint density will apply to the full
 width of the lane paved. T he average of joint cores from each lot will determine specification compliance.
 Adjustments will be in accordance with Sec 403.23.7.4.1(b). If payment reductions are necessary, the lower
 adjusted contract unit price of the PWL or unconfined joint density adjustment will apply. Adjustments due
 to joint density will apply to the lot from which the cores are obtained.
 403.23.7 Pe rce nt Within Limits. PWL will be based on the mean, standard deviation and quality index
 of each lot's test results. T he upper PWL (PWLu) and lower PWL (PWL1) is determined from the table in
 Sec 502.15.8. Total percent within limits, PWLt, is: PWLt = (PWLu + PWL1) - 100.
 T he mean is:
 x a = (∑x i)/n
 Where:
 x a = Average of the individual values being considered
 ∑ x i = T he summation of all the individual values being considered
 n = T he number of individual values under consideration
 T he Standard Deviation is: s = (∑(x i - x a )2/(n - 1))1/2
 T he Upper Quality Index is: Qu = (USL - x a )/s
 T he Lower Quality Index is: Q1 = (x a - LSL)/s
 Where:
 
 Qu = Upper Quality Index
 Q1 = Lower Quality Index
 USL = Pay Factor Item Upper Spec Limit
 LSL = Pay Factor Item Lower Spec Limit
 
 403.23.7.1 Q uality Le ve l Analysis. T he engineer will make the QLA no more than 24 hours after
 receipt of the contractor's test results, by determining the PWLt for each designated pay factor item.
 403.23.7.1.1 Acce ptance . T he contractor's test results will be used when applicable to determine the
 PWL, provided the contractor's QC tests and the engineer's QA tests compare favorably, and provided the
 engineer's inspection and monitoring activities indicate the contractor is following the approved QC Plan.
 403.23.7.1.2 Comparison. Favorable comparison will be obtained when the engineer's QA test results on a
 production sample are within two standard deviations, or one-half the specification tolerance, whichever is
 greater, from the mean of the contractor's test results for that particular lot.
 403.23.7.1.3 O utlie rs. No test result shall be discarded, except individual test results on a lot basis may be
 checked for an outlier in accordance with the statistic T in AST M E 178, at a significance level of 5
 percent. If an outlier is found, material from the retained QA sample may be tested, in the presence of the
 engineer, to determine a replacement test value. T he replacement test value shall be used in the PWL
 determination.
 403.23.7.1.4 Roadway/Shoulde r Lots. For the purpose of QLA, mixture placed on the traveled way and
 
 193
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 placed on the traveled way and shoulders integrally, shall be accounted for in a regular lot/sublot routine.
 Mixture placed on shoulders only shall be accounted for in a shoulder lot/sublot routine.
 
 403.23.7.1.5 Random Sampling. For the purpose of QLA, all mixture placed on the roadway shall be
 subject to random testing, except mixture placed within 6 inches of an unconfined longitudinal joint shall
 not be subject to evaluation. Random samples taken in the same day may be separated by 200 tons.
 403.23.7.2 Pay Factors. T he total pay factor (PFT) for each lot will be equal to the weighted sum of the
 pay factors (PF) for each pay factor item for each lot, and is determined as follows:
 
 PFT = + (0.25) PFdensity + (0.25) PFAC + (0.25) PFVMA + (0.25) PFVa
 T he PFT for each lot, on the shoulder or otherwise when the density pay factor is not directly included, will
 be equal to the weighted sum of the PF for each pay factor item for each lot, and will be determined as
 follows:
 PFT = + (0.3333) PFAC + (0.3333) PFVMA + (0.3333) PFVa
 T he PF for each pay factor item for each lot will be based on the PWLt of each pay factor item of each lot
 and will be determined as follows:
 When PWLt is greater than or equal to 70: PF = 0.5 PWLt + 55
 When PWLt is less than 70: PF = 2 PWLt - 50
 403.23.7.2.1 De nsity Pay Factor. T he theoretical maximum specific gravity of the mixture, as
 determined for each sublot and the bulk specific gravity of no less than one core from each sublot, will be
 used to perform the QLA for the percent of theoretical maximum density. T hick cores required to be cut in
 half in accordance with Sec 403.15.4 shall effectively double the number of sublots for cores. When density
 is not used as a pay factor, additional adjustment of the contract unit price will be based on the table in Sec
 403.23.7.4.1(b).
 403.23.7.2.2 Asphalt Conte nt Pay Factor. T he QLA will be performed using the asphalt content test
 results from each lot.
 403.23.7.2.3 Voids in the Mine ral Aggre gate and Air Voids Pay Factor. Two gyratory specimens
 shall be compacted for each sublot and the average of the two specimens will be used to calculate the
 volumetrics of the sublot. T he VMA, VFA, and air voids shall be determined from the gyratory compacted
 specimens. T he VMA and air voids for the QLA shall be those calculated using the combined bulk specific
 gravity of the aggregate as listed on the approved job mix formula, the average bulk specific gravity of the
 gyratory compacted specimens and the theoretical maximum specific gravity of the mixture determined
 for the sublot of material. T he aggregate content used for the calculation shall be that determined from
 field asphalt content testing for that sublot.
 403.23.7.3 Re moval of Mate rial. All lots of material with a PFT less than 50.0 shall be removed and
 replaced with acceptable material by the contractor. Any sublot of material with a percent of theoretical
 maximum density of less than 90.0 percent or greater than 98.0 percent shall be removed and replaced
 with acceptable material by the contractor. For SMA mixtures, any sublot of material with a percent of
 theoretical maximum density of less than 92.0 percent shall be removed and replaced with acceptable
 material by the contractor. Any sublot of material with air voids in the compacted specimens less than 2.5
 percent shall be removed and replaced with acceptable material by the contractor. No additional payment
 will be made for such removal and replacement. T he replaced material will be tested at the frequencies listed
 in Sec 403.19. Pay for the material will be determined in accordance with the applicable portions of Sec
 403.23 based on the replacement material.
 403.23.7.4 Misce llane ous Applications.
 
 194
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 403.23.7.4.1 Small Q uantitie s. Small quantities are defined in Sec 403.19.3.2.1. Unless the contractor
 has elected to use the normal evaluation in the Bituminous QC Plan for small quantities, the following shall
 apply for each separate mixture qualifying as a small quantity:
 (a) QLA and PWL will not be required.
 (b) Mixtures shall be within the specified limits for VMA, Va, AC and density. In addition to any
 adjustments in pay due to profile, the contract unit price for the mixture represented by each set
 of cores will be adjusted based on actual field density above or below the specified density using the
 following schedule:
 Field Density
 Pay Factor
 (Percent of Laboratory Max. Theoretical Density) (Percent of Contract Unit Price)
 For all SP mixtures other than SMA:
 92.0 to 97.0 inclusive
 100
 97.1 to 97.5
 or 91.5 to 91.9 inclusive
 90
 or 91.0 to 91.4 inclusive
 85
 97.6 to 98.0
 or 90.5 to 90.9 inclusive
 80
 or 90.0 to 90.4 inclusive
 75
 Above 98.0
 or Below 90.0
 Remove and Replace
 For SMA mixtures:
 >94.0
 100
 93.5 to 93.9 inclusive
 90
 93.0 to 93.4 inclusive
 85
 92.5 to 92.9 inclusive
 80
 92.0 to 92.4 inclusive
 75
 Below 92.0
 Remove and Replace
 
 403.23.7.4.2 Base Wide ning and Entrance s. For base widening mixtures and entrance work, QLA and
 PWL will not be required. Payment for these mixtures will be made at 100 percent of contract unit price
 for material that otherwise meets the specifications.
 403.23.7.4.3 Single Lift or Le ve ling Course Work. For resurfacing projects specifying a single lift,
 surface mixture of 3,000 tons or more, or for leveling course work, the following shall apply to the
 traveled way mixture. All bituminous mixture QC/QA requirements shall apply, except the density pay
 factor designated in Sec 403.23.7.2 will not be directly included in the total pay factor. In lieu of that, one
 density sample shall be taken per sublot and the pay adjustment for density will be made using the table in
 Sec 403.23.7.4.1(b).
 
 195
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 404
 BITUMINO US MIXING PLANTS
 404.1 De scription. T his specification covers the requirements for mixing plants and equipment used in
 the production of bituminous mixtures.
 404.2 Re quire me nts for All Plants.
 404.2.1 Aggre gate . Sufficient storage space shall be provided for each size of aggregate. T he different
 aggregate sizes shall be kept separated until delivery to the combined cold feed belt. T he storage yard shall
 be maintained in a neat and orderly condition and the separate stockpiles shall be readily accessible for
 sampling.
 404.2.2 Asphalt Binde r. An asphalt binder storage tank shall be provided at the proportioning and mixing
 plant. If more than one storage tank is used to deliver asphalt binder to the proportioning unit, piping and
 valve arrangements shall permit material to be used from any one of the tanks without using from another
 at the same time.
 404.2.2.1 Storage . Each tank used for storage from which asphalt binder is delivered to the proportioning
 unit shall be equipped for heating the material under effective and positive control at all times to the
 temperature requirements set forth in Sec 1015. Heating shall not allow contact of flame with the heating
 tank. T he contractor shall furnish a tank capacity chart calculated in increments suitable for verifying
 quantities used during a normal production period.
 404.2.2.2 Circulation. A circulating system of adequate capacity shall provide proper and continuous
 circulation of the asphalt binder between the storage tank and proportioning units during the entire
 operating period. T he discharge end of the circulating pipe shall be maintained below the surface of the
 asphalt binder in the storage tank to prevent discharging into the open air. All pipe lines and fittings shall
 be properly insulated to prevent heat loss.
 404.2.2.3 Binde r Sampling. T he contractor shall provide a sampling outlet in the asphalt binder feed
 lines connecting the plant storage tanks to the proportioning or injection system. T he sampling outlet
 shall be installed in a readily accessible location such that representative samples may be withdrawn safely
 and slowly at any time during plant operation. A drainage receptacle shall be provided for flushing the
 outlet prior to sampling. When all of the chemical admixtures are added to the plant storage tank prior to
 use, the engineer may allow the contractor to sample the asphalt binder from the storage tanks located at
 the mixing facilities. Sampling procedures shall be approved by the engineer prior to samples being taken.
 404.2.3 Cold Aggre gate Fe e de r. T he plant shall be provided with an accurate mechanical means for
 uniformly feeding the aggregate into the drier to provide uniform production and temperature. A
 synchronized method of proportioning the aggregate at the cold feeder shall be provided.
 404.2.3.1 Cold Fe e d Calibration. For all plants producing bituminous mixtures composed of more than
 one fraction of aggregate, the aggregate cold feeds shall be calibrated as required by the engineer. On the
 basis of the calibration, aggregate cold feeds shall be adjusted to ensure the proper percentage of the various
 aggregate fractions of the mix, as required by the job mix formula.
 404.2.3.2 Aggre gate Sampling. Safe, adequate and convenient facilities shall be provided for obtaining
 representative aggregate samples from the full width and length of the discharge flow of the combined cold
 feed, or from each hot bin on batch-type plants.
 404.2.4 Drie r. A drier of any satisfactory design for drying and heating the aggregate shall be provided.
 T he drier shall be capable of drying and heating the aggregate to a temperature within the limits of the
 range specified in Sec 1015 for the grade of asphalt binder used, without leaving any visible unburned oil or
 carbon residue on the aggregate. T he mixture may be tested for contamination. Absorbed moisture in the
 aggregate shall be reduced to such a quantity that there is no visible segregation of asphalt binder resulting
 from escaping water vapor in the prepared mixture.
 404.2.5 Dust Colle ctor. An efficient dust collecting system shall be provided to prevent the loss of fine
 
 196
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 material into the surrounding environment. T he material collected may be returned to the mixture at a
 uniform rate through a metering device or the dust may be wasted.
 404.2.6 Fille r Storage . If mineral filler or hydrated lime, or both, are required, adequate dry storage shall
 be provided and provisions shall be made for accurate proportioning.
 404.2.7 Asphalt Control Unit. Satisfactory means, either by weighing or metering, shall be provided to
 obtain the proper quantity of asphalt binder. Metering pumps for asphalt shall deliver accurately to within
 plus or minus 2.0 percent of the required quantity when tested for accuracy. Asphalt scales shall be in
 accordance with Sec 404.3.4. If the quantity of asphalt binder is controlled by metering, provisions shall be
 made whereby the delivery meter may be readily checked by actual weight.
 404.2.8 The rmome tric Equipme nt. A thermometer of suitable range shall be fixed in the asphalt feed
 line at a suitable location near the discharge at the mixer unit. T he thermometer included in the asphalt
 metering unit shall be displayed in a location readily accessible to the engineer. An approved recording
 thermometer, pyrometer or other recording thermometric instrument shall be installed in plants in such
 manner that the temperature of the heated mixture or aggregate is automatically registered and recorded.
 T he terminal shall be maintained free of accumulated mixture or aggregate to ensure accuracy. T he
 thermometric instrument shall be installed in the discharge chute of drum mix plants and in at least one hot
 aggregate bin of batch plants. T he terminals shall be located where the hot material will flow around the
 terminals during the proportioning operation and shall not be located near the corners of the bins or at
 points where the material will collect or pack around the terminals. T his instrument shall be located in
 clear view of the plant operator. A chart shall continuously record both time and temperature. T he smallest
 interval of time shall be a maximum of 15 minutes and the temperature graduations shall be no more than
 10 F. T he chart shall be furnished to the engineer at the end of each day's operation.
 404.2.9 Plant Calibration. Personnel, scales and equipment necessary for calibrating the plant and for
 verifying the accuracy of proportions shall be furnished by the contractor and shall be available at all times.
 All scales used in the final measurement of the mixture shall be in accordance with Sec 310. Records of all
 calibration shall be provided to the engineer.
 404.2.10 Safe ty Re quire me nts. A conveniently located, easily opened gate or door shall be provided in
 the mixer cover for observation of pugmill mixing operations. Adequate and safe stairways to the pugmill
 mixer platform and sampling points shall be provided. Guarded ladders to other plant units shall be placed at
 all points where accessibility to plant operations is required. Accessibility to the top of truck bodies shall be
 provided by a platform or other suitable device to enable the engineer to obtain samples and mixture
 temperature data. All gears, pulleys, chains, sprockets and other dangerous moving parts shall be
 thoroughly guarded and protected. Ample and unobstructed space shall be provided on the pugmill mixing
 platform. A clear and unobstructed passage shall be maintained at all times in and around the truck loading
 area. T his area shall be kept free from drippings from the mixing platform.
 404.2.11 Surge Bins. Surge bins used in the production of bituminous mixtures shall maintain the
 temperature of the mixture within 25 F of the contractor ’s designated temperature. Mixture shall not be
 stored more than 8 hours.
 404.2.12 Automatic Ticke t Printe r. T he asphalt plant shall be equipped with an automatic ticket printer
 connected to the weighing system in such a manner that the printer automatically detects and prints the
 weight determined by the system. T he printer shall store and recall the tare weight when the operator
 enters the vehicle identification. T he weight shall be shown to at least the nearest 20 pounds or nearest one
 one-hundredth of a ton.
 404.2.13 Ticke t Information. T he printer shall be capable of keeping and printing cumulative totals for
 each project for each type of bituminous mixture. T he printer shall produce a ticket in triplicate to
 accompany each load delivered to the project and shall be furnished to the engineer. T he ticket shall show
 the following: (as a minimum)
 (a) Gross and tare and/or net weights.
 (b) Current date and time.
 
 197
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (c) MoDOT mix number assigned to the mix being placed.
 (d) Unique ticket number (may be preprinted on the ticket).
 (e) Job number, route and county.
 (f) License plate number of the delivery vehicle (Must be displayed legibly on the ticket).
 404.2.13.1 Ne t We ight. T he gross and tare weights will not be required when the net weight of bituminous
 mixture is determined by batch weights.
 404.2.13.2 Gross We ight. When the net weight of bituminous mixture is determined from the gross
 weight of the loaded delivery vehicle, the empty delivery vehicle weight shall be determined daily or from
 time to time during the day as directed by the engineer.
 404.2.13.3 Daily Total. At the end of each day's operation, the contractor shall furnish to the engineer a
 total tonnage of mixture produced by the asphalt plant in sufficient detail to determine the amount of
 asphalt binder used in that day's operation.
 404.2.13.4 Printe r Failure . In the event of automatic ticket printer failure, the contractor may be
 permitted, without approval from the engineer, to furnish manually written tickets to complete that day's
 operation.
 404.3 Re quire me nts for Batch-Type Plants.
 404.3.1 Automatic Batching. For all contracts containing no more than 10,000 tons of bituminous
 mixture, standard manual batching methods approved by the engineer will be permitted. For contracts
 containing more than 10,000 tons of bituminous mixture, in accordance with Sec 401 or Sec 403, batching
 plants shall be equipped to operate automatically to the extent that the only manual operation required for
 the proportioning of all ingredients for one batch shall be a single actuation of a switch or starter. T he
 equipment shall include devices capable of automatically proportioning each ingredient of the mixture in
 the selected sequence and quantity. Interlocks shall be provided which will hold or delay the automatic batch
 cycling whenever the batched quantity of any ingredient is not within the specified tolerance. T he weight
 setting and timing controls shall be suitably equipped so the controls may be locked when specified by the
 engineer. Manual operation will not be permitted beyond 24 hours after breakdown in the automatic
 equipment, except with written approval from the engineer.
 404.3.2 Aggre gate Scale s. Scales for weighing aggregate and mineral filler or hydrated lime, or both, may
 be beam, springless dial or electronic digital weigh meter type, and shall be of standard make and design
 having tolerances on overregistration and underregistration not exceeding 0.4 percent of the indicated
 weight when tested for accuracy. Each aggregate fraction shall be measured within one percent of the total
 batch weight of the mixture. Mineral filler or hydrated lime, or both, shall be measured within 0.5 percent
 of the total batch weight of the mixture. T he total weight of the batch shall be within 2.0 percent of the
 desired batch weight. T he change in load required to change the position of the rest of the indicating
 element or elements of a non-automatic indicating scale an observable amount shall be no greater than 0.1
 percent of the nominal scale capacity. If manual batching methods are used, beam-type scales shall be
 equipped with a device to indicate to the operator that the required load is being approached. T his device
 shall indicate at least the last 5 percent of the load weighed on any beam, except that this increment will
 not be required to be greater than 200 pounds. Multiple beam-type scales shall be equipped with a tare beam
 and a separate beam for each size of aggregate. Dial scales shall be equipped with adjustable pointers for
 marking the weight of each material to be weighed (incorporated) into the batch. Graduation intervals for
 either beam or dial scales shall be no greater than 0.1 percent of the nominal scale capacity. Quantity
 indicators necessary for batching shall be in full view of the operator.
 404.3.3 Asphalt Bucke t. If a bucket is used for weighing the asphalt binder, the filling system and bucket
 shall be of such design, size and shape that asphalt will not overflow, splash or spill outside the confines of
 the bucket during filling and weighing.
 
 198
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 404.3.4 Asphalt Scale s. Scales for weighing asphalt binder shall be in accordance with Sec 404.3.2, except
 a device to indicate at least the last 20 pounds of the approaching total load shall be provided. Asphalt
 binder shall be measured within 0.1 percent of the total batch weight of the mixture. Beam-type scales shall
 be equipped with a tare beam or adequate counter-balance for balancing the bucket and compensating
 periodically for the accumulation of asphalt on the bucket. Springless dial scales used for weighing asphalt
 binder shall have a tare beam and a dial graduated in increments not to exceed 0.1 percent of the nominal
 scale capacity and the maximum dial capacity shall be no more than 15 percent of the nominal capacity of
 the mixer.
 404.3.5 Mixe r Unit. T he plant shall be capable of producing a uniform mixture. T he mixer shall be heated
 and shall have a minimum capacity of 2000 pounds per batch. T he mixer shall be constructed to prevent
 leakage of the contents and the mixer box shall be equipped with a hood to prevent loss of dust.
 404.3.5.1 Time Lock. T he mixer shall have an accurate time lock to control the operation of a complete
 mixing cycle by locking the weigh box gate after the charging of the mixer until the closing of the mixer
 gates at the completion of the cycle. T he time lock shall lock the asphalt bucket throughout the dry
 mixing period and shall lock the mixer gate throughout the dry and wet mixing periods.
 404.3.5.2 Mixe r Rating Plate . A rating plate designating the manufacturer's rated capacity shall be
 attached to the mixer. T he quantity of mixture produced per batch shall not exceed the manufacturer's
 rated capacity.
 404.3.5.3 Mixing Time s. T he mineral aggregate for mixtures specified in Secs 401 and 402 shall be mixed
 dry for at least 10 seconds and for mixtures specified in Sec 403 shall be mixed dry for at least 15 seconds.
 T he dry mixing period shall start when all of the mineral aggregate has been charged into the mixer, and
 end when the introduction of the asphalt binder begins. After dry mixing, the asphalt binder shall be
 charged into the mixer in a manner that will uniformly distribute the asphalt over at least 3/4 of the full
 length of the mixer. T he time required to add the asphalt binder shall not exceed 15 seconds. Wet mixing
 shall begin at the introduction of the asphalt binder and shall continue for at least 30 seconds, or longer if
 necessary, to produce a complete and uniform coating of the particles and a thorough distribution of the
 asphalt binder throughout the aggregate. T he wet mixing period shall end when the discharge gate is
 opened.
 404.4 Re quire me nts for Drum Mix Plants.
 404.4.1 Drum Plant. T he plant shall be specifically designed for drum mixing and shall be capable of
 satisfactorily heating, drying and mixing bituminous mixtures. Heating shall be controlled to prevent
 damage to the aggregate or the asphalt binder. T he temperature of the mixture when discharged from the
 mixer shall be within the range specified in Sec 1015 for the grade of asphalt binder being used. T he rate of
 flow through the drum shall be controlled such that the bituminous material and aggregate shall be mixed
 until a homogeneous mixture with all particles uniformly coated is obtained, and in no case shall the
 quantity of mixture produced exceed the manufacturer's rated capacity.
 404.4.2 Fe e d Indicators. Each feeding orifice shall have an adjustable gate with an indicator provided to
 reference the opening setting. A device shall be installed on each aggregate feeder to indicate when the flow
 of material from the bin is below the point where accurate proportioning through the feeder gates can be
 accomplished. T hese indicators shall be positive in action and shall actuate a clearly visible or audible signal
 to the plant operator, or stop the flow of material to the drum when the level of material in the bin is too
 low for accurate proportioning. A scalping screen mounted independent of other proportioning or weighing
 equipment shall be provided if directed by the engineer. T he total daily asphalt binder quantity numbers for
 the project shall be provided ot the engineer.
 404.4.3 Asphalt Me te r. Asphalt binder shall be introduced through a continuously registering cumulative
 indicating meter by a pump specifically designed for drum mix plants. T he meter shall be located in the
 asphalt line so that the meter will continuously register the asphalt discharge to the mixer and such that the
 discharge through the meter can be readily diverted into a container for measurement. T he meter shall be
 equipped with a nonsetback register and shall have an accuracy within 2 percent by weight of the material
 actually being measured in any given period of time. T he nonsetback register shall register only the asphalt
 discharged to the mixer and shall not record asphalt circulated back to the storage tank. A device shall be
 
 199
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 provided in the asphalt storage tank to indicate when the supply of asphalt to the pump and metering
 device is such that accurate proportioning is not accomplished. T he accuracy of the pump and meter shall
 be verified at periodic intervals as designated by the engineer. T he total daily asphalt binder quantity
 number for the project shall be provided to the engineer.
 404.4.4 Mine ral Fille r. If mineral filler or hydrated lime, or both, are used, a separate bin and feeder for
 each material shall be furnished and each material shall be dispensed by weight by continuous batching
 device. T he batching device shall have a continuous weight display in clear view of the plant operator. T he
 delivery system shall be variable speed and interlocked with the aggregate weigh belt so the total dry
 aggregate weight, including mineral filler or hydrated lime, or both, is indicated to the asphalt
 proportioning system. A continuously registering, cumulative, nonsetback register shall record the quantity
 of mineral filler or hydrated lime, or both, discharged into the mixer. Mineral filler and hydrated lime shall
 be introduced and uniformly dispersed into the drum mixer at the point of introduction of the asphalt
 binder without loss to the dust collection system. T he mineral filler and hydrated lime proportioning and
 delivery system shall have an accuracy of 10 percent by weight of the material actually being measured in
 any given period of time. T he total daily mineral filler and hydrated lime quantity numbers for the project
 shall be project shall be provided to the engineer.
 404.4.5 Be lt Scale s. Positive weight measurement of the combined cold feed aggregate shall be by use of
 belt scales. T he combined cold feed aggregate shall be continuously recorded on a nonsetback register. T he
 belt scale shall have an accuracy within 2 percent by weight of the material actually being measured in any
 given period of time. T he accuracy of the belt scales shall be verified at periodic intervals as directed by the
 engineer. T he total daily aggregate quantity numbers for the project shall be provided to the engineer.
 404.4.6 Re claime d Asphalt Pave me nt We ighing. Positive weight measurement of reclaimed asphaltic
 pavement shall be by use of belt scales in accordance with Sec 404.4.5.
 404.4.7 Syste m Inte rlocks. T he aggregate feed system, reclaimed asphaltic pavement feed system if
 recycling is permitted, mineral filler or hydrated lime, or both if specified, and the asphalt flow shall be
 interlocked by a blending system which will automatically regulate the asphalt binder, mineral filler,
 hydrated lime and reclaimed asphaltic pavement flow, and shall cause synchronized corrections for
 variations in aggregate flow. T he blending system shall include a moisture-compensating device to correct
 for moisture in the aggregate passing over the belt scales. Moisture determinations shall be made
 periodically during each day's operation. T he blending system shall include a device to correct for changes
 in the specific gravity of the asphalt binder.
 404.4.8 Sampling. Safe, adequate and convenient facilities shall be provided for obtaining representative
 samples of asphalt binder, cold aggregate and bituminous mixture. T he plant shall be equipped with sampling
 devices capable of providing a sample of sufficient size from the full width of the combined aggregate flow
 and from the full width of the mixer discharge flow. Sampling devices shall be designed such that samples
 may be taken while the plant is operating at normal production rates.
 404.4.9 Calibration. Safe, adequate and convenient facilities shall be provided for calibrating or verifying
 the asphalt binder, mineral filler, hydrated lime, reclaimed asphaltic pavement and the aggregate nonsetback
 registers. T he manufacturer's recommendations shall be followed for calibration unless specified otherwise.
 T he quantities of aggregate and asphalt binder measured in any given period of time shall vary no more
 than 2.0 percent by weight from the required quantity of each.
 404.5 Stone Matrix Asphalt Mixture s. A homogeneous mixture shall be produced.
 404.5.1 Fibe rs in Batch Plants. For batch plants, fibers shall be added to the mineral aggregate either in
 the weigh hopper or in the pugmill. T he fibers shall be accurately added by weight, either manually by bag
 or other measure, or by an approved weight metering device. If fibers are added in the weigh hopper, no
 fiber shall be added until mineral aggregate from at least one hot bin has been placed in the weigh hopper. If
 fibers are added in the pugmill, the fiber shall be added immediately after the mineral aggregate and before
 the asphalt binder is added.
 404.5.1.1 Dry Mixing. T he mineral aggregate and the fibers shall be dry mixed for at least 20 seconds.
 
 200
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 404.5.1.2 We t Mixing. T he wet mixing time shall be no less than 35 seconds to allow the cellulose fibers
 to expand and to ensure adequate distribution of the fibers and asphalt binder.
 404.5.1.3 Uniformity. Dry and wet mixing times and batch mixing temperatures shall be adjusted as
 necessary to achieve a uniform mixture.
 404.5.2 Fibe rs in Drum Plants. For drum plants, fibers shall be introduced into the plant in either loose
 or pelletized form.
 404.5.2.1 Me te ring. Equipment for metering fibers into the plant shall ensure a consistent, uniform
 blending of the fibers into the mixture. T he metering system shall be variable speed, shall proportion the
 fibers by weight, shall be accomplished as specified by the equipment manufacturer and be to the
 satisfaction of the engineer.
 404.5.2.2 Pe lle tiz e d Fibe rs. If used in a drum mix plant, pelletized fiber shall be added directly into the
 drum mixer through the recycle asphalt inlet.
 404.6 Liquid Anti-Strip Additive Syste ms. Type I liquid anti-strip additives shall be blended into the
 asphalt binder. Type II additives shall be sprayed on the combined cold feed aggregate. Both shall be
 incorporated in a consistent and uniform manner.
 404.6.1 Calibration. T he method of adding an additive into the mix shall be accurate to within ± 10
 percent of the amount to be added. Calibration of the blending system shall be provided to the engineer.
 404.6.2 Flow Inte rruption. T he feed system shall be equipped with a flow meter that signals if the
 additive is or is not being added. It shall be interlocked so that the operation will cease if the additive flow is
 interrupted or not within the allowable limits.
 404.6.3 Inte rlock. T he rate of application shall be interlocked with the plant to coincide with plant
 production rates when the additive is incorporated during mixture production.
 404.6.4 Type I Addition. For Type I liquid anti-strip additive used in drum mix plants, the blending system
 shall add the material into a static in-line mixer between the asphalt binder storage tank and the asphalt
 binder flow meter. For batch plants, the blending system shall add the material into a static in-liner mixer
 between the asphalt binder storage tank and the mixing plant injection point. Controls shall be in place so
 that blended material is not permitted to recirculate back to the asphalt binder storage tank.
 404.6.5 Type II Addition. For Type II liquid anti-strip blending systems, the blending system shall
 uniformly apply the material to the cold feed prior to the drum for continuous, batch and drum plants.
 404.7 Hauling Equipme nt. T rucks used for hauling bituminous mixtures shall have tight, clean, smooth,
 metal beds that have been thinly coated with a minimum quantity of lime solution or an approved
 bituminous mixture release agent in accordance with Sec 1071 to prevent the mixture from adhering to the
 beds. T he release agent shall not be diluted less than the minimum rate specified by the manufacturer and
 shall be applied with equipment recommended by the manufacturer. Use of diesel fuel, fuel oil or other
 detrimental products as a bed coating or dilution agent will not be permitted. Each truck shall have a cover
 of canvas or other suitable material of such size to protect the mixture from the weather. T he cover shall
 be securely fastened over all sides of the truck bed. T ruck beds shall be insulated, when necessary, such that
 the mixture will be delivered on the road at the specified temperature.
 
 201
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 407
 TACK CO AT
 407.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of preparing and treating an existing bituminous or concrete
 surface with bituminous material, in accordance with these specifications.
 
 407.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 
 Item
 Section
 Emulsified Asphalt or P erformance
 1015
 Graded Asphalt Binder
 
 407.3 Equipme nt. T he contractor shall provide a system for heating and applying the bituminous
 material. T he system shall be designed, equipped, maintained and operated such that emulsified asphalt or
 liquid asphalt, at even heat, may be applied uniformly on variable widths of surface up to 15 feet with
 uniform pressure and an allowable variation from any specified rate of ±0.01 gallon per square yard. T he
 system shall include a calibrated tank and a thermometer for measuring temperature of tank contents. T he
 system shall be equipped with instrumentation that continuously verifies application rates. T he calibration
 of the system shall be approved by the engineer prior to use, and the contractor shall furnish all equipment,
 material and assistance if calibration is required.
 407.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 407.4.1 Pre paration of Surface . T he existing surface shall be free of all dust, loose material, grease or
 other foreign material at the time the tack is applied. Any excess bituminous surface mixture or bituminous
 joint material will be removed by MoDOT without cost to the contractor before the tack is applied.
 407.4.1.1 Coldmille d Surface . All coldmilled surfaces shall be in accordance with Sec 622.10, except
 modified herein. Coldmilled surfaces shall be swept or vacuumed prior to tack coat application. T he
 sweeping or vacuuming requirement may be waived, if traffic is allowed onto the coldmilled surface and is
 considered clean by the engineer.
 407.4.1.2 Pre -we tting. Existing surfaces may be pre-wetted just prior to the tack coat application. Prewetting shall consist of misting the surface with controlled spraying equipment to achieve a damp condition
 with no standing water or shiny appearance.
 407.4.2 Asphalt Emulsion Application. Asphalt emulsion shall be applied uniformly with a pressure
 distributor or spray paver at the target rates indicated in the following table. Upon approval by the
 engineer, the target application rate may be varied by +/- 0.02 gal/sy in the field, based upon the existing
 pavement condition. T he tack coat material shall be heated at the time of application to a temperature in
 accordance with Sec 1015. When an asphalt emulsion is applied through a pressure distributor, the tack coat
 shall be properly set and the tacked surface shall be clean of all dirt before the next course is placed.
 Tack Coat Application Rates
 Target Application Rate; Target Application Rate;
 Surf ace Type
 Undiluted (gal/yd2)
 20% Diluted (gal/yd2)
 New Asphalt Surfaces
 0.05
 0.06
 Existing Asphalt or Concrete Surfaces
 0.08
 0.10
 Coldmilled Asphalt or Concrete Surfaces
 0.10
 0.13
 
 407.4.2.1 Dilution of Asphalt Emulsions. Water may be added only by the tack coat manufacturer and
 shipped to the jobsite. No dilution shall be allowed in the field. When water is added to the asphalt
 emulsion, the resulting mixture shall contain no more than 20 percent of added water. T he contractor shall
 notify the engineer of the use of a diluted emulsion. T he exact quantity of added water shall be indicated on
 the manufacturer ’s bill of lading, manifest or truck ticket. T he target application rate shall be adjusted to
 the diluted target application rate as specified in the table under Sec 407.4.2.
 
 202
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 407.4.2.2 Pe rformance Grade d (PG) Asphalt Binde r. Hot applied PG graded asphalt binders may be
 used as tack coat in lieu of emulsified asphalt. T he PG graded binders shall be applied uniformly with a
 pressure distributor to provide complete coverage of the preceding course or layer. Safety procedures of hot
 applied asphalt shall be addressed in the contractor ’s safety plan. A pre-construction meeting shall be held
 to address all safety procedures and protocols of hot applied asphalt prior to tack coat application.
 407.4.3 Tack. T he tack coat shall be applied in such a manner as to cause the least inconvenience to traffic
 and to permit one-way traffic without tracking of asphalt emulsion. A bituminous mixture shall not be
 placed upon a tacked surface that is not uniformly covered or surfaces that have experienced excessive loss
 of tack due to tracking. Re-application of tack due to excess tracking or non-uniform coverage shall be at
 the contractor ’s expense. All exposed tack coat shall be covered with bituminous mixture prior to opening
 to traffic.
 407.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of asphalt emulsion to the nearest gallon will be made in
 accordance with Sec 1015. If water is added to asphalt emulsion, the quantity to be paid for will be
 determined prior to the addition of water.
 407.6 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of tack coat will be paid for at the contract unit price.
 No direct payment shall be made for water added to the asphalt emulsion.
 
 203
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 408
 PRIME CO AT
 408.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of preparing and treating an existing surface with bituminous
 material in accordance with these specifications, as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 408.2 Mate rial. T he type and grade of bituminous material will be specified in the contract. Liquid asphalt
 may be changed one grade by the engineer during construction at no change in the contract unit price. All
 material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Type RC and MC Liquid Asphalts 1015
 Emulsified Asphalt
 1015
 
 408.3 Equipme nt. Equipment shall be in accordance with Sec 407.
 408.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 408.4.1 Pre paration of Surface . T he surface to be primed shall be shaped to the required grade and cross
 section, shall be free from all ruts, corrugations, segregated material or other irregularities, and shall be
 uniformly compacted by rolling. T he surface shall be firm and slightly damp when primer is applied. Delays
 in priming may necessitate reprocessing or reshaping to provide a smooth compacted surface.
 408.4.2 Application. Bituminous material shall be applied to the width of the section to be primed by
 means of a pressure distributor in a uniform, continuous spread. T he application rate shall be as specified in
 the contract, or as revised by the engineer between 0.2 and 0.5 gallon per square yard. T he primer shall be
 heated at the time of application in accordance with the limits provided in Sec 1015.
 408.4.2.1 T here shall be no overlapping of bituminous material. Pools of primer material remaining on the
 surface after the application shall be removed. As soon as the bituminous material has been absorbed by the
 surface and will not track, traffic may be routed onto the treated traveled way. Any damage caused to the
 prime coat due to the contractor ’s equipment or decision to allow traffic on the roadway too soon shall be
 primed again at the contractor ’s expense.
 408.4.2.2 T he primer shall be properly cured and the primed surface shall be cleaned of all dirt and surplus
 sand before the next course is placed.
 408.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Bituminous material will be measured to the nearest gallon in
 accordance with Sec 1015.
 408.6 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of prime coat will be paid for at the contract unit price
 for each of the pay items included in the contract. No direct payment will be made for furnishing or
 applying any water required for dampening the surface to be primed.
 
 204
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 409
 SEAL CO AT
 409.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of placing bituminous material followed by placing cover
 aggregate material.
 409.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 
 Item
 
 Section
 
 Aggregate for Seal Coats a 1003
 a T he
 
 grade of aggregate will be
 specified in the contract
 409.2.1 All limestone and dolomite shall be either pre-coated as specified herein or fog sealed in
 accordance with Sec 413.
 409.2.2 Emulsified asphalt or polymer modified emulsions shall be in accordance with Sec 1015, with the
 following exceptions:
 Asphalt Emulsion Requirements
 Test Method Minimum Maximum
 Tests on Asphalt B indera
 P enetration @ 77°F
 ASTM D 5
 60
 150
 Elastic Recovery @ 50°F, % AASHTO T 301 65
 --a T hese
 
 tests shall be done on the asphalt residue for emulsions and cutbacks.
 
 409.2.3 Pre-coating binder shall be in accordance with Sec 1015 for PG binder or emulsions.
 409.3 Job Mix Formula. T he contractor shall submit the mix design to the laboratory for approval no
 less than two weeks prior to placing the seal coat.
 409.3.1 T he mix design shall contain the following information:
 (a) All possible sources intended for use, grade and certified test results for the asphalt binder.
 (b) Source, type (formation, etc.), ledge number if applicable, and gradation of the aggregate.
 (c) T he grade and certified test results for the aggregate.
 (d) T he application rate used to pre-coat the aggregate as allowed in Sec 1003.
 (e) T he percent binder application rate, gallons per square yard. T he adjustment factor shall be
 included if specified in the contract plans.
 (f) T he aggregate application rate, pounds per square yard.
 409.3.1.1 T he target binder application rates for each aggregate grade, as found in Sec 1003, shall be:
 G rade
 
 A1 A2
 
 B1
 
 B2
 
 C
 
 Target B inder Application Rate, gal/sya 0.38 0.28 0.38 0.28 0.38
 a Corrections
 
 to the rate listed may be included in the plans
 
 409.3.2 A surface condition, aggregate properties and traffic volume correction may be provided in the
 plans. T his assessment will contain an allowable variance from the binder application rate. T he aggregate
 application rates shall not vary from the mix design by more than ± 5 pounds per square yard.
 
 205
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 409.4 Equipme nt. Equipment shall be capable to perform the following:
 (a) Heating and applying bituminous material, measuring temperature of tank contents and
 continuously verify application rates. T he calibration of the system shall be accomplished by the
 contractor and approved by the engineer prior to use. T he contractor shall furnish all equipment,
 material, labor and supervision necessary to perform this calibration. Equipment shall be calibrated
 subsequent to any repair that may affect calibration.
 (b) Removal of loose aggregate from applied surface.
 (c) Seating of aggregate without causing aggregate fracture.
 (d) Accurately measuring and uniformly spreading of the aggregate over the full width of the
 bituminous material and have ability to vary the application width depending upon road width. It
 shall also be able to have verifiable application rates. T he calibration of the system shall be
 accomplished by the contractor and approved by the engineer prior to use. T he contractor shall
 furnish all equipment, material, labor and supervision necessary to perform this calibration.
 Equipment shall be calibrated subsequent to any repair that may affect calibration.
 409.5 Construction Re quire me nts.
 409.5.1 We athe r Limitations. Bituminous material shall not be placed on any wet surface. Seal coat shall
 only be placed when the ambient temperature and the temperature of the pavement on which it is to be
 placed is above 60 F. Temperatures shall be obtained in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 20.
 409.5.1.1 Fore caste d We athe r. No seal coat shall be placed when the forecast from the National
 Weather Service predicts ambient temperatures falling below 40 F within 24 hours of construction.
 409.5.2 Surface Pre paration. T he surface shall be thoroughly cleaned or swept to remove all dirt, packed
 soil, or any other foreign material prior to spraying the bituminous material.
 409.5.3 Application of Bituminous Mate rial.
 409.5.3.1 Bituminous material shall be uniformly applied within the temperature range recommended by
 the manufacturer. Any bituminous material applied on adjacent Portland cement or asphaltic concrete
 pavements, curbs, bridges or any areas not specified to be sealed shall be removed by the contractor, at the
 contractor ’s expense.
 409.5.3.2 When pre-coating is required, the cover aggregate shall be pre-coated at a minimum rate of 0.5
 percent residual asphalt by weight of aggregate.
 409.5.4 Compaction. All aggregate shall be uniformly seated over the entire area being sealed in a
 manner which minimizes aggregate loss and prevents crushing of aggregate.
 409.5.5 Dust Control. T he contractor may be required to control dust should airborne dust become a
 concern, or as directed by the engineer.
 409.5.6 Loose Aggre gate . Loose aggregate shall be removed from curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways,
 and other areas designated by the engineer.
 409.6 Traffic Control.
 409.6.1 During application of the seal coat, the contractor shall control traffic through the work zone by
 means of pilot vehicles traveling at a maximum speed of 35 miles per hour. T he contractor shall designate
 a responsible person for receiving and resolving damage claims made by the public. T his person shall be
 available by telephone during the contractor's normal business hours Monday through Friday.
 409.6.2 T he contractor shall provide contact information signs with their company name and phone
 number on a variable width by 24 inch tall sign with black lettering on an orange background. T he first line
 
 206
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 shall state “ CONT RACT OR” in uppercase 4 inch C highway font, the second line shall contain the
 contractor name in upper/lower case 4 inch B highway font and the third line shall contain the contractor ’s
 phone number in 4 inch C highway font. Signs shall be posted near the beginning and end of the project
 limits as approved by the engineer.
 409.7 Basis of Acce ptance . Acceptance shall be made no less than 14 days from completion of the route.
 Seal coat will be evaluated for acceptance by the engineer based on the following criteria:
 (a) No location having bleeding of binder in excess of two square feet or a combined area of
 bleeding greater than 10 square feet on any 50 foot length of two lane roadway.
 (b) No continued or ongoing tracking from seal coat onto other roadways or adjacent driveways.
 (c) No transverse and longitudinal construction joints from the seal coat application that are not
 straight, create a bump, or produce a poor riding surface.
 (d) Longitudinal construction joints that are straight and contain no gaps.
 (e) No asymmetric appearance stemming from longitudinal grooves or ridges in the surface.
 (f) A pavement treatment having complete aggregate coverage with full adherence to the roadway.
 T he contractor is responsible for any damage claims that are associated with the seal coat until the route is
 accepted by the engineer.
 409.8 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 409.8.1 Final measurement for aggregate in the completed seal coat will not be made except for authorized
 changes during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity.
 409.8.2 Where required, measurement of seal coat, complete in place, will be made to the nearest square
 yard for aggregate.
 409.8.3 Final measurement for binder will be made to the nearest gallon in accordance with Sec 1015. Any
 revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 409.9 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of seal coat aggregate and binder, in place, will be paid
 for at the contract unit price. No separate payment will be made for pre-coating aggregate, fog sealing, dust
 control, or for providing and installing contract information signs. If the binder application rate includes a
 correction factor, it is included in the plan quantities.
 
 207
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 413
 SURFACE TREATMENTS
 SECTIO N 413.10 MICRO -SURFACING.
 413.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of producing and placing a mixture of cationic polymermodified asphalt emulsions, mineral aggregate, mineral filler, water, and other additives as needed at
 locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 413.10.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Emulsified Asphalt 1015
 Aggregate
 1002
 
 413.10.2.1 Aggre gate .
 413.10.2.1.1 T he mineral aggregate shall be flint chat from the Joplin area, an approved crushed porphyry
 or an approved crushed steel slag. Blast furnace slag may be used from sources with a documented history of
 satisfactory use and that have been previously approved by MoDOT for use in micro-surfacing. For nontraffic areas such as shoulders, the mineral aggregate may be crushed limestone or crushed gravel in
 accordance with Sec 1002.1. T he aggregate shall be free of cemented or conglomerated material and shall
 not have any coating or detrimental material.
 413.10.2.1.2 Blends of approved aggregate may be supplied provided:
 (a) T he individual aggregates are reasonably uniform in gradation and other qualities.
 (b) T he aggregates are uniformly blended with designated proportions into a separate stockpile
 prior to use. Aggregate may be blended directly into the supply truck provided the blending device
 has been calibrated, gate settings are unchanged, and belt samples indicate material gradation
 compliance.
 (c) T he proportion is not changed from the job mix formula during the course of placement.
 413.10.2.1.3 T he final aggregate, or blend of aggregates, shall be in accordance with one of the following
 gradations. In addition, the aggregate shall be ± 5 percent of the designated job mix gradation for all plus
 No. 200 material and within ± 2 percent for the minus No. 200 material.
 
 Aggregate G radation Requirements
 Type II
 Type III/Type IIIR
 Sieve Percent Passing Sieve Percent Passing
 3/8 inch 100
 3/8 inch 100
 No. 4
 90 - 100
 No. 4
 70 - 90
 No. 8
 65 - 90
 No. 8
 45 - 70
 No. 16 45 - 70
 No. 16 28 - 50
 No. 30 30 - 50
 No. 30 19 - 34
 No. 50 18 - 30
 No. 50 12 - 25
 No. 100 10 - 21
 No. 100 7 - 18
 No. 200 5 - 15
 No. 200 5 - 15
 
 413.10.2.1.4 T he final aggregate mixture shall have no oversize material when deposited at the stockpile
 site. If the stockpile area contains any particles exceeding the specified maximum sieve, all aggregate shall
 be screened again as the aggregate is loaded into the final placement machine.
 413.10.2.2 Mine ral Fille r. Mineral filler shall be Type 1 Portland cement or hydrated lime, and shall be
 
 208
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 free of lumps or any other deleterious material.
 413.10.2.3 Wate r. Water shall be potable and free of harmful soluble salts.
 413.10.2.4 Additive s. Any other material added to the mixture or to any of the component materials to
 provide the required properties shall be supplied by the emulsion manufacturer.
 413.10.2.5. Mate rial Acce ptance . All aggregate shall be sampled, tested and approved by the engineer
 prior to use. Portland cement and hydrated lime may be accepted for use based on visual examination.
 413.10.3 Job Mix Formula. T he manufacturer of the emulsion shall develop the job mix formula and
 shall present certified test results for the engineer's approval. T he job mix formula shall be designed in
 accordance with the International Slurry Surfacing Association (ISSA) recommended standards by an ISSA
 recognized laboratory. Mix acceptance will be subject to satisfactory field performance. T he job mix
 formula, all possible emulsion sources intended for use, all material, the methods and the proportions shall
 be submitted for approval prior to use. Proportions to be used shall be within the limits provided in the
 table below. If more than one aggregate is used, the aggregates shall be blended in designated proportions as
 indicated in the job mix formula, and those proportions shall be maintained throughout the placement
 process. If aggregate proportions are changed, a new job mix formula shall be submitted for approval.
 Material
 
 Requirement
 
 Type II Mineral aggregate, lbs/yd 2 dry mass, min. 10 - 20
 Type III Mineral aggregate, lbs/ yd 2 dry mass, min.
 Type IIIR
 P olymer Modified Emulsion (residual), percent
 Mineral Filler, percent by mass of dry aggregate
 Additive
 
 15 - 30
 As necessary
 5.5 to 10.5 by dry weight of aggregate
 0.0 to 3.0 by dry weight of aggregate
 As required
 
 413.10.3.1 All Type s. T he minimum dry mass per unit area will be based on a bulk specific gravity (BSG)
 of 2.65. In the event that crushed steel slag aggregate is used as a part of the blended aggregate or as the
 entire aggregate, the BSG of the final aggregate blend shall be determined and shown as part of the job mix
 formula criteria. If the BSG is different from 2.65 by more than 0.05, the above minimum masses shall be
 adjusted by dividing the specified unit mass by 2.65 and multiplying by the new BSG. (For example, for a
 new BSG = 3.15, the new minimum would be 3.15(10.8/2.65) = 23.8 lbs./sy). T hese adjusted values shall be
 designated on the job mix formula and will apply in the field.
 413.10.3.2 Type II. For Type II, if a specified thickness will be required, the amount of mineral aggregate
 per square yard shall be increased as necessary to obtain the thickness.
 413.10.3.3 Type III. When specified, Type III shall be applied in two passes of approximately equal
 quantities, the first of which shall be to fill depressions and level the surface for the final pass.
 413.10.3.4 Type IIIR. For Type IIIR mixes, there will be no minimum or maximum unit quantities. T he
 contractor shall make the determination as to the amount necessary, except all depressed areas shall be
 filled level as specified. Type IIIR may be applied in more than one pass at the contractor ’s expense. Type
 IIIR shall not be added to Type II or Type III applications in the field, but shall be a separate application.
 413.10.4 Equipme nt.
 413.10.4.1 Mixing Equipme nt. T he micro-surfacing mixture shall be mixed and laid by a self-propelled
 mixing machine. T he mixing machine shall be able to accurately deliver and proportion the aggregate,
 mineral filler, water, additive and emulsion to a revolving
 multi-blade dual mixer and to discharge the thoroughly mixed product. T he machine shall have sufficient
 storage capacity for all components to maintain an adequate supply to the proportioning controls.
 413.10.4.1.1 Individual volume or weight controls for proportioning each item to be added to the mix shall
 be provided. Each material control device shall be calibrated and properly marked. T he calibration shall be
 approved by the engineer prior to proportion. Each device shall be accessible for ready calibration and
 placed such that the engineer may determine the amount of each material used at the time.
 
 209
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 413.10.4.1.2 T he mixing machine shall be equipped with a water pressure system and nozzle-type spray bar
 to provide a water spray to dampen the surface when required immediately ahead of and outside the
 spreader box as required. No free flowing water shall be present.
 413.10.4.2 Spre ading Equipme nt. T he micro-surfacing mixture shall be spread uniformly by means of a
 mechanical-type spreader box attached to the mixer. T he spreader box shall be equipped with paddles or
 augers to agitate and spread the material uniformly throughout the box. T he paddles or augers shall be
 designed and operated so all the fresh mix will be agitated to prevent the mixture from setting up in the
 box, causing side buildup and lumps.
 413.10.4.2.1 T he spreader box used for surface course construction shall be equipped with flexible seals in
 contact with the road to prevent loss of mixture from the box. T he box shall be equipped with devices to
 adjust the thickness or grade of the surface and shall have a squeegee strike-off rear plate.
 413.10.4.2.2 A secondary strike-off shall be provided to improve surface texture. T he secondary strike-off
 shall have the same adjustments as the spreader box.
 413.10.4.2.3 T he spreader box used for rut-filling shall have two metal strike-offs, angled from each side
 toward the center at approximately 45 degrees. Interrupted flight augers shall be used ahead of the first
 strike-off plate to spread the mix and maintain laminar flow. T he second strike-off plate shall be adjusted
 to produce the desired grade and depth. T he first strike-off and augers shall be adjustable up and down in
 order to maintain a fairly uniform flow or roll of material in front of the second strike-off. A rubber
 squeegee shall be attached to the adjustable metal plate at the rear of the spreader box, behind the second
 strike-off, to texture the surface. T he adjustable metal plate shall have sufficient clearance not to affect
 the grade established by the second strike-off.
 413.10.5 Construction Re quire me nts.
 413.10.5.1 Te st Strip. A test strip 500 feet long and the width of one lane shall be provided. T he test strip
 will be evaluated for 24 hours after placement and will be subject to approval from the engineer before any
 further production. If unsatisfactory, the test strip shall be removed and another strip placed for evaluation
 at the contractor ’s expense.
 413.10.5.2 Surface Pre paration. T he surface shall be thoroughly cleaned of all vegetation, loose
 material, dirt, mud, and other objectionable material and shall be pre-wetted as required immediately prior
 to application of the micro-surfacing. All pavement marking shall be removed, maintained, and
 compensated for in accordance to Sec 620.
 413.10.5.3 Application. T he micro-surfacing mixture shall be spread to fill cracks and minor surface
 irregularities, and shall leave a uniform surface. No lumping, balling or unmixed aggregate will be permitted.
 Longitudinal joints shall be placed on lane lines. Excessive overlap will not be permitted. T he finished
 micro-surfacing shall have a uniform texture free of scratches, tears and other surface irregularities. T he
 contractor shall repair the surface if any of the following conditions exist:
 (a) More than one surface irregularity that is 1/4 inch or wider and 10 feet or longer in any 100foot section of the micro-surfacing.
 (b) More than three surface irregularities that are 1/2 inch or wider and more than 6 inches long in
 any 100-foot section of the micro-surfacing.
 (c) Any surface irregularity that is one inch or wider and more than 4 inches long. T he finished
 longitudinal and transverse joints in the micro-surfacing shall be complete and uniform.
 413.10.5.3.1 T he contractor shall repair joints if any of these conditions exist:
 (a) Build-up of micro-surfacing material at the joints.
 (b) Uncovered areas at the joints.
 
 210
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (c) Longitudinal joints with more than 1/2 inch vertical space between the surface and a 4-foot
 straightedge placed perpendicular to the joint.
 (d) T ransverse joints with more than 1/4 inch vertical space between the surface and a 4-foot
 straightedge placed perpendicular to the joint.
 413.10.5.3.2 T he edges of the micro-surfacing shall follow the centerline, lane lines, shoulder lines and curb
 lines. T he edges shall be repaired if the edges vary more than 3 inches from a 100-foot straight line or
 from a 100-foot arc on a curved section. T he repaired surface shall be dense with a uniform texture.
 413.10.5.3.3 Any successive passes shall be separated such that each layer placed undergoes approximately
 12 hours of traffic for compaction and curing.
 413.10.5.3.4 Type IIIR applications to raise shoulders or fill ruts shall be applied with the rut spreader box,
 and the contractor shall place a strip as designated in the contract documents to raise an area to match the
 surroundings. Rutting or traffic-bearing applications, excluding shoulders, shall be crowned 1/8 to 1/4 inch
 per inch of depth, to allow for compaction. Shoulder applications shall drain and slope uniformly downward
 to the shoulder point. A Type II or Type III application may follow as a surface course if specified in the
 contract documents.
 413.10.5.3.5 Micro-surfacing shall not be placed over steel expansion plates.
 413.10.5.3.6 When micro-surfacing is placed on concrete, a tack coat shall be applied first in accordance
 with Sec 407 and shall be given adequate time to break.
 413.10.5.3.7 T he micro-surfacing shall permit traffic operations on a 1/2 inch thick surface within one
 hour after placement at 75 F and 50 percent humidity.
 413.10.5.4 We athe r Limitations. Micro-surfacing shall not be placed when either the air temperature or
 the temperature of the surface on which the mixture is to be placed is below 50 F, when it is raining, or
 when there is a chance of temperatures below 32 F within 24 hours after placement. Temperatures shall be
 obtained in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 20.
 413.10.5.5 Re pair of Damage d Are as. Any traffic-damaged, marred areas or deficiencies as defined in
 Sec 413.10.5.3 shall be repaired by the contractor at the contractor ’s expense.
 413.10.5.6 Incide ntal Construction. Areas that cannot be reached with the mixing machine shall be
 surfaced using hand squeegees to provide complete and uniform coverage. Utilities shall be protected from
 coverage by a suitable method. Work at intersections shall be done in stages, or blotter material shall be
 used to allow crossing or turning movements. Regardless of the method, no marred sections will be
 permitted.
 413.10.6 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of completed Type II and Type III surface will
 not be made except for authorized changes during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the
 contract quantity. Where required, measurement of Type II, Type III and Type IIIR micro-surfacing,
 complete in place, will be made to the nearest square yard. Final measurement of Type IIIR surface may be
 made as necessary to determine the actual areas placed. Field measurement will be based on the estimated
 width and length dimensions necessary to bring a designated area to a level plane, and not necessarily for
 the full rutted area. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract
 quantity.
 413.10.7 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of micro-surfacing will be paid for at the contract
 unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. No additional payment will be made for
 removing and replacing test strips.
 SECTIO N 413.20 SCRUB SEAL.
 413.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of producing and placing a polymer modified asphalt (scrub
 
 211
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 seal) emulsion intended for use as a surface rejuvenation treatment and to fill and seal cracks.
 413.20.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 
 Section
 
 Aggregatea 1005.3
 Emulsion
 1015
 a Aggregate
 
 substitutions may
 be allowed as approved by
 the engineer.
 413.20.3 Equipme nt.
 413.20.3.1 Aggre gate Spre ade r. T he aggregate spreader shall be self-propelled and capable of evenly
 spreading aggregate.
 413.20.3.2 Pne umatic Tire Rolle r. T he pneumatic tire roller shall be in accordance with Sec 401.
 413.20.3.3 Brooms. Brooms shall be capable of adequately scrubbing the mixture into the cracks and
 surface.
 413.20.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 413.20.4.1 Surface Pre paration. T he surface shall be thoroughly cleaned of all vegetation, loose
 material, dirt, mud and other objectionable material immediately prior to application of the scrub seal
 emulsion.
 413.20.4.2 Application. T he scrub seal emulsion shall be uniformly applied with a pressure distributor at
 the rate specified in the contract or as designated by the engineer. T he mixture shall be spread to fill cracks
 and minor surface irregularities and shall leave a uniform surface.
 413.20.4.3 Physical Characte ristics for Scrub Se al Emulsion.
 
 Properties
 Application rate of emulsion, gallons/sq. yard a
 Emulsion Temperature, F
 Application rate of aggregate, lb./sy a
 Time of set prior to opening, hours b
 
 Minimum Maximum
 0.18
 
 0.22
 
 110
 
 160
 
 16
 
 22
 2
 
 a Application
 
 rate may change, final decision will be made by the engineer.
 bT he final decision for opening will be made by the engineer.
 413.20.4.4 Me thod of Place me nt. After proper surface preparation, a distributor truck shall place the
 scrub seal emulsion at the prescribed rate. T he distributor truck shall pull the broom assembly to sweep and
 spread the emulsion uniformly on the surface and into the cracks of the pavement.
 413.20.4.4.1 Fine aggregate shall be placed immediately after the application of the emulsion and prior to
 the emulsion breaking. Immediately following the aggregate spreader, a second broom assembly shall be
 pulled to combine the aggregate with the emulsion.
 413.20.4.4.2 T he pneumatic tire roller shall immediately follow the second broom and shall make a
 minimum of two passes.
 413.20.4.4.3 All excess sand shall be removed from the roadway, paved shoulders and paved side roads
 within 24 hours of application or as directed by the engineer.
 
 212
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 413.20.4.5 We athe r Limitations. T he scrub seal emulsion shall not be placed on any wet surface or when
 the ambient temperature or the temperature of the pavement on which the mixture is to be placed is below
 60 F. Temperatures shall be obtained in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 20.
 413.20.4.6 Damage d or Marre d Are as. Any traffic damaged or marred areas shall be repaired by the
 contractor at the contractor ’s expense.
 413.20.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the completed surface will not be made except
 for authorized changes during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity.
 Where required, measurement of scrub seal emulsion and mineral aggregate, complete in place, including
 multiple passes or courses, will be made to the nearest square yard. Measurement of individual passes or
 courses will not be made. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the
 contract quantity.
 413.20.6 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of scrub seal, in place, will be paid for at the contract
 unit price.
 SECTIO N 413.30 ULTRATHIN BO NDED ASPHALT WEARING SURFACE.
 413.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of producing and placing an ultrathin bonded asphalt
 wearing surface.
 413.30.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows, except as modified herein:
 Item
 Coarse Aggregate
 Fine Aggregate
 Mineral Filler
 
 Section
 1002.2
 1002.3
 1002.4
 
 413.30.2.1 Coarse Aggre gate . Coarse aggregate may consist of crushed gravel, limestone, dolomite,
 porphyry, steel slag, flint chat, or blends of two or more of these aggregates will be acceptable. When
 coarse aggregate for these mixes are from more than one source or of more than one type of material, the
 coarse aggregate shall be proportioned and blended to provide a uniform mixture. Coarse aggregate shall be
 material predominantly retained above the No. 4 sieve and shall be in accordance with the following
 requirements:
 Coarse Aggregate Modif ied Requirements
 Test
 Method
 Min Max
 Los Angeles Abrasion Value, % Loss a AASHTO T 96
 
 35
 
 Soundness, % Loss, Sodium Sulfatea
 
 AASHTO T 104
 
 12
 
 Flat & Elongated Ratio, % @ 3:1 b
 
 ASTM D 4791
 
 25
 
 % Crushed, single faceb
 
 ASTM D 5821
 
 95
 
 % Crushed, two faces b
 
 ASTM D 5821
 
 85
 
 Micro-Deval, % loss a
 
 AASHTO T 327
 
 18
 
 a Tests
 
 shall be determined on each individual ledge basis.
 bTested on the coarse portion of the blended aggregate
 413.30.2.2 Fine Aggre gate . Fine aggregate shall be material predominantly passing the No. 4 sieve and
 shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
 Fine Aggregate Modif ied Requirements
 Tests
 Method
 Min Max
 Sand Equivalent a
 
 AASHTO T 176 45
 
 Methylene Bluea
 
 AASHTO T 330
 
 10
 
 Uncompacted Void Content a AASHTO T 304 40
 a Tested
 
 on the fine portion of the blended aggregate
 
 213
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 413.30.2.3 Re claime d Asphalt Pave me nt. T he RAP shall be in accordance with Sec 403.2.6 and shall
 have 100 percent passing the 3/8 inch and no less than 70 percent passing the No. 4 sieve. T he mixture
 shall contain no less than 80 percent effective virgin binder.
 413.30.2.4 Asphalt Binde r. T he asphalt binder shall be in accordance with Sec 1015, including all
 subsections pertaining to PG76-22.
 413.30.2.5 Polyme r Modifie d Emulsion Me mbrane . T he emulsion shall be polymer modified and shall
 be in accordance with Sec. 1015.
 413.30.3 Job Mix Formula. At least 30 days prior to placing any mixture on the project, the contractor
 shall submit a mix design to Construction and Materials for approval. Representative samples from each
 ingredient for the mix shall be submitted with the mix design.
 413.30.3.1 Proficie ncy Sample Program. Laboratories that participate in and achieve a score of three
 or greater in the AASHT O proficiency sample program for T 11, T 27, T 84, T 85, T 166, T 176, T 209,
 T 304 (AST M C 1252), T 308 and T 312 will have the mixture verification process waived. T he mix
 design shall be submitted to Construction and Materials for approval at least seven days prior to mixture
 production.
 413.30.3.2 Re quire d Information. T he mix design shall include raw data from the design process and
 contain the following information:
 (a) All possible sources intended for use, and grade and specific gravity of asphalt binder.
 (b) Source, type (formation, etc.), ledge number if applicable, and gradation of the aggregate.
 (c) Bulk and apparent specific gravities and absorption of each aggregate fraction in accordance
 with AASHT O T 85 for coarse aggregate and AASHT O T 84 for fine aggregate including all raw
 data.
 (d) Specific gravity of hydrated lime, mineral filler or baghouse fines, if used, in accordance with
 AASHT O T 100.
 (e) Percentage of each aggregate component.
 (f) Combined gradation of the job mix.
 (g) Percent asphalt binder, by weight, based on the total mixture.
 (h) T heoretical maximum specific gravity (Gmm ) as determined by AASHT O T 209, in accordance
 with Sec 403.19.3.1, after the sample has been short term aged in accordance with AASHT O R 30.
 (i) T he tensile strength ratio as determined by AASHT O T 283 including all raw data.
 (j) Mixing temperature and gyratory molding temperature.
 (k) Bulk specific gravity (Gsb) of the combined aggregate.
 (l) Percent chert contained in each aggregate fraction.
 (m) Percent deleterious contained in each aggregate fraction.
 (n) Blended aggregate properties for clay content, angularity, and thin and elongated particles.
 (o) Draindown for mixture.
 (p) Film thickness for mixture
 
 214
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 413.30.4 Composition of Mixture .
 413.30.4.1 Asphalt Amount. T he amount of asphalt binder in the mixture shall meet the following limits
 for the type of mixture specified in the contract.
 Mix Design Criteria
 Type A Type B Type C
 Asphalt Content, % 5.3 – 5.8 5.1 – 5.6 4.9 – 5.6
 
 413.30.4.2 Gradation. Prior to mixing with asphalt binder, the combined aggregate gradation, including
 filler if needed, shall meet the following gradation for the type of mixture specified in the contract.
 
 Mix Design Criteria
 Composition by Weight Percentages
 Type A
 Type B
 Type C
 Sieves % Passing % Passing % Passing
 3/4 in.
 100
 100
 1/2 in.
 97 – 100 85 – 100
 3/8 in. 100
 75 – 100 50 – 80
 No. 4 40 – 55
 25 – 41
 25 – 41
 No. 8 22 – 32
 17 – 27
 17 – 27
 No. 16 15 – 25
 23 max.
 23 max.
 No. 30 18 max.
 18 max.
 18 max.
 No. 50 13 max.
 13 max.
 13 max.
 No. 100 10 max.
 10 max.
 10 max.
 No. 200 4.0 – 6.0
 4.0 – 6.0
 4.0 – 6.0
 
 413.30.4.3 Film Thickne ss. T he film thickness shall be a minimum 10.0 microns when calculated using
 the effective asphalt content in conjunction with the surface area for the aggregate in the Job Mix
 Formula. T he surface area factors can be found in Table 6.1 of the Asphalt Institute MS-2, Mix Design
 Methods for Asphalt Concrete and Other Hot Mix Types, Sixth Edition.
 413.30.4.4 Non-Carbonate Aggre gate Re quire me nt. Mixtures containing limestone coarse aggregate
 shall contain a minimum amount of non-carbonate aggregate as shown in the table below, or the aggregate
 blend shall have an acid-insoluble residue (A.I.R.), MoDOT Test Method T M 76, meeting the plus No. 4
 sieve criteria of crushed non-carbonate material. Non-carbonate aggregate shall have an A.I.R. of at least
 85 percent insoluble residue.
 Coarse Aggregate (+ No. 4) Minimum Non-Carbonate by Volume
 Limestone
 30% P lus No. 4
 Dolomite
 No Requirement
 
 413.30.4.5 Drain Down. Drain down from the loose mixture shall not exceed 0.10 percent when tested in
 accordance with AASHT O T 305.
 413.30.4.6 Moisture Susce ptibility. T he mixture shall have a tensile strength ratio (T SR) of 80 percent
 or greater when compacted to 3.7 inches with 7 ± 0.5 percent air voids and tested in accordance with
 AASHT O T 283.
 413.30.5 Construction Re quire me nts.
 413.30.5.1 We athe r Limitations. A damp pavement surface may be acceptable for placement if free of
 standing water and favorable weather conditions are expected to follow. Mix shall not be placed if the air
 temperature or the temperature of the surface on which the mixture is to be placed is below 50 F, the
 surface is wet or frozen, or weather conditions prevent the proper handling or finishing of the mixture.
 Temperatures shall be obtained in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 20.
 
 215
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 413.30.5.2 Pave r. T he paver shall be capable of spraying the polymer modified asphalt emulsion
 membrane, applying the hot mix asphalt overlay and leveling the surface of the mat in one pass. Wheels or
 other parts of the paving machine shall not come in contact with the polymer modified emulsion
 membrane before the hot mix asphalt concrete wearing course is applied. T he screed shall have the ability
 to crown the pavement at the center and shall have vertically adjusted extensions to accommodate the
 desired pavement profile.
 413.30.5.3 Surface Pre paration. Immediately prior to placing the ultrathin bonded asphalt wearing
 surface, the roadway surface shall be thoroughly cleaned of all vegetation, loose material, dirt, mud and
 other objectionable material. All non-working surface cracks with an opening size exceeding 1/4 inch and
 any size working crack shall be sealed prior to placement of the ultrathin bonded asphalt wearing surface.
 Immediately prior to spraying the polymer modified emulsion membrane, the surface shall be free of fresh
 bituminous mix. T he ultrathin bonded asphalt wearing surface shall not be placed until the sealant has cured.
 Curing time of sealant shall be in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 413.30.5.4 Application of Me mbrane . T he polymer modified emulsion membrane application shall be
 applied in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations. T he sprayer shall accurately and
 continuously monitor the rate of spray and shall provide a uniform application across the entire width to
 be overlaid.
 413.30.5.4.1 Adjusting Me mbrane Rate . T he engineer may make adjustments to the spray rate based
 on the existing pavement surface conditions and the recommendations of the polymer modified emulsion
 membrane manufacturer.
 413.30.5.4.2 Application Rate of Me mbrane . Unless otherwise shown on the plans, the target field
 application rate of the asphalt emulsion shall be as follows for the type of mixture specified in the
 contract.
 Membrane Application Rate
 Field Application Rate
 Mixture Type
 (gal/sy)
 Type A
 0.15
 Type B and C
 0.19
 
 413.30.5.4.2.1 Tole rance for Me mbrane Application Rate . At any given time during placement, the
 application rate of the asphalt emulsion shall be within 0.02 gal/sy of the target field application rate in the
 table or as indicated in the plans. T he yield of the application rate over the entire project area shall be
 within 0.01 gal/sy of the target field application rate given in the table or as indicated in the plans.
 413.30.5.5 Application of Mixture . T he hot mix asphalt concrete shall be applied at a temperature of
 290 to 330 F and shall be spread over the polymer modified emulsion membrane immediately after
 application of the polymer modified emulsion. T he hot asphalt concrete wearing course shall be placed
 over the full width of the polymer modified emulsion membrane with a heated vibratory-tamping bar
 screed.
 413.30.5.5.1 Handwork. For handwork, the hot mix asphalt shall be applied within five minutes after the
 application of the polymer modified emulsion.
 413.30.5.5.2 Application Rate of Mixture . T he target application rate of the ultrathin bonded asphalt
 wearing course shall be as shown on the plans. T he application rate shall be adjusted to minimize fracturing
 of the top size aggregate by the screed. T he engineer will determine the acceptable extent of fracturing at
 the edges for tapering purposes.
 413.30.5.6 Rolling. Rolling of the wearing course shall consist of no more than three passes immediately
 following placement of the ultrathin bonded asphalt wearing course with a steel, double-drum, asphalt roller
 with a minimum weight of 10 tons. All rolling shall be completed before the material temperature has
 fallen below 195 F. Rollers shall be equipped with a functioning water system and scrapers to prevent
 adhesion of the fresh mix onto the roller drums. An acceptable release agent approved by the engineer may
 be added to the water system to prevent adhesion of the fresh mix to the roller drum and wheels. Rolling
 
 216
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 shall be done in the static mode. Excessive rolling to the extent of aggregate degradation will not be
 permitted. T he engineer will determine the acceptable extent of fracturing at the edge of the pavement
 from the rolling operation. New pavement shall not be opened to traffic nor shall any roller sit idle on the
 pavement until the rolling operation is complete and the material has been cooled below 140 F.
 413.30.5.7 Bituminous Mixing Plants. Bituminous mixing plants and preparation of materials and
 mixtures shall be in accordance with Sec 404.
 413.30.5.8 Hauling Equipme nt. T rucks used for hauling bituminous mixtures shall be in accordance with
 Sec 404.
 413.30.5.9 We aring Course . T he finished wearing course shall have a minimum thickness of 1/2 inch for
 Type A, 3/4 inch for Type B, and 3/4 inch for Type C.
 413.30.5.10 Pave me nt Marking. Pavement marking shall be replaced in accordance with Sec 620.
 413.30.5.11 Acce ptance . Acceptance will be based on test results indicating that the ultrathin bonded
 asphalt wearing surface meets the specification requirements, the contractor following the approved QC
 Plan, and favorable comparison of the contractor ’s QC test and the engineer ’s QA test.
 413.30.6 Q uality Control.
 413.30.6.1 Q uality Control O pe rations. Quality control shall be conducted in accordance with Sec
 403.17, except as follows.
 413.30.6.1.1 Aggre gate Gradation. Sieve analysis shall be performed for every 600 tons of mixture
 produced Test shall be performed in accordance with AASHT O T 27 from randomly sampled material
 taken from the composite cold feed belt or the hot bins.
 413.30.6.1.2 Asphalt Conte nt. T he asphalt binder content shall be determined for each 600 tons of
 mixture produced. Test shall be performed in accordance with AASHT O T 287 or AASHT O T 308.
 Samples for determination of the asphalt binder content shall be retrieved from the hot elevator at the
 asphalt plant or from the transport truck at the plant by random sampling.
 413.30.6.1.3 De le te rious Conte nt. Deleterious content shall be determined for every 600 tons of
 mixture produced. Test shall be performed in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 71 from
 randomly sampled material taken from the composite cold feed belt.
 413.30.6.2 Gradation and Asphalt Binde r Tole rance s. T he total aggregate gradation and asphalt
 content shall be within the range specified in Sec 413.4.1, Sec 413.30.4.2 and the maximum variations
 from the approved job mix formula shall be within the following tolerances:
 
 G radation and Asphalt B inder Tolerances
 Percent Passing
 Sieves
 Type A Type B Type C
 3/4 in.
 1/2 in.
 ± 5.0
 3/8 in.
 ± 5.0
 No. 4
 ± 5.0 ± 4.0 ± 4.0
 No. 8
 ± 4.0 ± 4.0 ± 4.0
 No. 16
 ± 4.0
 No. 200
 ± 1.0 ± 1.0 ± 1.0
 Asphalt Content, % ± 0.3 ± 0.3 ± 0.3
 
 413.30.6.3 De le te rious Conte nt Tole rance . T he deleterious content of the material retained on the No.
 4 sieve shall not exceed the limits specified in Sec 1002.2.
 
 217
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 413.30.6.4. Ve rifying Me mbrane Rate . T he application rate of the polymer emulsion membrane shall
 be verified by dividing the volume of polymer modified emulsion membrane used by the area of paving for
 that day.
 413.30.6.5 Mix Adjustme nts. T he contractor may make field adjustments to the job mix formula as
 noted herein. T he adjusted job mix formula shall be in accordance with the mix design requirements of Sec
 413.30.4. T he engineer shall be notified prior to making any change in the cold feed settings, the hot bin
 settings or the binder content. No additional fractions of material or new material will be permitted for
 field adjustments.
 413.30.6.6 De fe ctive Are as. T he contractor shall remove and replace defective areas at the contractor ’s
 expense with material meeting specification requirements as directed by the engineer.
 413.30.7 Q uality Assurance . Quality assurance will be conducted in accordance with Sec 403 except as
 follows.
 413.30.7.1 Sampling Fre que ncy. Corrective action shall be taken by the contractor if any QA tests are
 outside the QC tolerances shown in Sec 413.30.6.2. T he engineer will, at a minimum, independently sample
 and test at the following frequency:
 
 Sample
 Aggregate Gradation
 Asphalt Binder Content
 Deleterious Content
 
 Frequency
 1 per day
 1 per day
 1 per day
 
 413.30.7.2 Te sting Re tain Sample s. T he engineer will test, at a minimum, one retained QC gradation
 sample and one retained QC asphalt binder content sample per calendar week. T he engineer ’s test results,
 including all raw data, will be made available to the contractor by the next working day.
 413.30.7.2.1 Aggre gate Comparison. A favorable aggregate comparison will be achieved when test
 results are within the specified tolerances shown in Sec 403.18.2.
 413.30.7.2.2 Asphalt Conte nt Comparison. A favorable asphalt content will be achieved when test
 results are within 0.3 percent.
 413.30.8 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the completed surface will not be made except
 for authorized changes during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity.
 Where required, measurement of ultrathin bonded asphalt wearing surface, complete in place, will be made
 to the nearest square yard. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the
 contract quantity.
 413.30.9 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of ultrathin bonded asphalt wearing surface will be
 paid for at the contract unit price.
 SECTIO N 413.31 BO NDED HO T MIX ASPHALT USING PO LYMER MO DIFIED EMULSIO N
 MEMBRANE.
 413.31.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of the placement of a Polymer Modified Emulsion
 Membrane prior to a bituminous overlay of hot asphaltic concrete pavement. T he Polymer Modified
 Emulsion Membrane shall be spray applied immediately prior to the application of the hot asphaltic
 concrete pavement so as to produce a homogeneous surface in accordance with Secs 401, 402, or 403.
 413.31.2 Mate rials. T he Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane shall be in accordance with Sec
 1015.20.6.2.
 413.31.3 Construction Re quire me nts. T he asphaltic concrete pavement shall be placed in accordance
 with Secs 401, 402, or 403, except as modified herein.
 
 218
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 413.31.4 Equipme nt. No wheel, track or other part of the paving machine or any hauling equipment shall
 come in contact with the Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane before the asphaltic concrete pavement
 mixture is applied.
 413.31.5 Application of Polyme r Modifie d Emulsion Me mbrane .
 413.31.5.1 T he Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane shall be sprayed at a temperature of 120 - 180°.
 T he sprayer shall accurately and continuously monitor the application rate and provide a uniform coverage
 across the entire width to be overlaid. T he target application rate of the asphalt emulsion membrane shall
 be 0.20 gallons per square yard. T he Engineer may make adjustments to the application rate based upon the
 existing pavement surface conditions and the recommendations of the Polymer Modified Emulsion
 Membrane supplier; however, the application rate shall be within +/- 0.05 gallon per square yard of the
 target application rate.
 413.31.5.2 T he application rate of the Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane shall be verified by dividing
 the volume (of Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane used) by the area of paving for that day.
 413.31.5.3 No water shall be added to the Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane.
 413.31.6 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of the Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane shall be
 based on the volume in gallons in accordance with Sec 1015.
 413.31.7 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of the Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane will be
 paid for at the contract unit price.
 SECTIO N 413.40 BITUMINO US FO G SEALING.
 413.40.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing diluted asphalt emulsion and preparing and
 sealing surfaces by means of a bituminous distributor.
 413.40.2 Mate rial. Asphalt emulsion grades SS-1, SS-1H, CSS-1, or CSS-1H shall be in accordance with Sec
 1015 and shall be used unless otherwise directed by the engineer.
 413.40.3 Equipme nt. T he distributor shall be designed, equipped, maintained and operated such that liquid
 asphalt at even heat may be applied uniformly on variable widths of surface up to 15 feet at readily
 determined and controlled rates from 0.02 to 1.00 gallon per square yard, with uniform pressure, and with
 an allowable variation from any specified rate not to exceed 0.02 gallon per square yard. T he distributor
 equipment shall include a tachometer, pressure gauges, a calibrated tank and a thermometer for measuring
 temperatures of tank contents. Distributors shall be equipped with a power unit for the pump, and with full
 circulation spray bars adjustable both laterally and vertically. T he calibration of all distributors shall be
 approved by the engineer prior to use, and the contractor shall furnish all equipment, material and
 assistance necessary if calibration will be required.
 413.40.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 413.40.4.1 Asphalt emulsion shall be applied only during weather conditions under which satisfactory
 application and curing can be obtained. Asphalt emulsion shall not be placed on a damp or wet surface
 except as approved by the engineer. T he surface shall be free of objectionable material prior to sealing.
 413.40.4.2 T he asphalt emulsion shall be diluted with water prior to application. T he dilution rate shall be
 as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. T he contractor shall provide documentation to the
 engineer that the specified coating system has been properly diluted.
 413.40.4.3 T he diluted asphalt emulsion shall be uniformly applied at the rate of 0.20 gallon per square
 yard surface. T he application rate may be adjusted as directed by the engineer. Application widths shall be
 such that the entire surface is covered in one application.
 413.40.4.4 Care shall be taken such that asphalt emulsion is applied only to designated areas. Sand dams or
 other approved means may be necessary to prevent emulsion from being applied outside of designated
 
 219
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 areas. Pavement marking obliterated by this operation shall be replaced by the contractor at the
 contractor ’s expense in accordance with Sec 620, unless otherwise provided for in the contract.
 413.40.4.5 After application of the sealant, the surface shall be tack-free and capable of being open to
 traffic within four hours without tracking.
 413.40.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of the undiluted asphalt emulsion, complete in place
 and accepted by the engineer, will be made to the nearest gallon in accordance with Sec 1015.
 413.40.6 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of bituminous fog seal will be paid for at the contract
 unit price for undiluted asphalt emulsion for seal that is mixed and used on the project. Diluted asphalt
 emulsion that is delivered to the job site, but not applied to the surface, will not be considered for payment.
 No direct payment will be made for sand.
 SECTIO N 413.50 BITUMINO US PAVEMENT CRACK SEALING.
 413.50.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of preparing and sealing all working transverse and
 longitudinal cracks in bituminous pavement as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 413.50.2 Mate rial. T he sealant shall be a single-component material in accordance with AASHT O M 324,
 except as herein modified.
 413.50.2.1 T he sealant shall be capable of being reheated to pouring temperatures at least once after the
 initial heating, while retaining the sealant’s physical characteristics.
 413.50.2.2 Penetration at 77 F, 50 grams, 5 seconds, shall be no less than 50 or greater than 90.
 413.50.2.3 When tested at 77 F, the resilience recovery shall be a minimum of 50 percent.
 413.50.2.4 T he sealant shall meet all physical requirements after prolonged heating for six hours with
 constant mixing in a laboratory melter at the recommended field pouring temperature, complete cool
 down, and reheating to the recommended pouring temperature.
 413.50.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 413.50.3.1 T he engineer will mark the cracks to be sealed. Sealant shall not be placed when the pavement
 is wet, or when the ambient or pavement temperature falls below 40 F. T he contractor shall furnish to the
 engineer the manufacturer ’s recommendations for mixing and application, including temperature
 restrictions, and shall prepare and apply the crack sealant in accordance with the manufacturer ’s
 recommendations.
 413.50.3.2 Cracks shall be routed or sawed to provide a reservoir centered over the existing crack. T he
 reservoir shall be slightly larger than the existing crack, with a minimum size of 1/2-inch wide x 1/2-inch
 deep. T he crack shall be clean, free from all loose and foreign material, and dry, prior to application of the
 sealant. Loose material on the surface within
 2 inches of the crack shall be removed to permit proper adhesion.
 413.50.3.3 T he sealant shall be applied to the reservoir from the bottom up. T he reservoir shall be slightly
 overfilled and excess material squeegeed with a V or U-shaped squeegee, level to the adjoining surface
 pavement forming a wipe zone 3 to 4 inches wide.
 413.50.3.4 T he contractor shall apply a light coating of sand or other blotting material to the surface of
 the newly placed sealant if traffic results in tracking of the crack sealing material.
 413.50.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of crack sealing will be made to the nearest linear foot
 of cracks sealed, complete in place, and accepted by the engineer.
 413.50.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of pavement crack sealing will be paid for at the
 contract unit price.
 
 220
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 413.60 PO RTLAND CEMENT CO NCRETE PAVEMENT JO INT/CRACK SEALING.
 413.60.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of preparing and resealing all existing transverse and
 longitudinal joints, and working transverse and longitudinal cracks in Portland cement concrete pavement
 (PCCP) as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 413.60.2 Mate rial. Sealant material shall be in accordance with Sec 1057.
 413.60.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 413.60.3.1 T he engineer will mark the existing joints and cracks to be sealed. T he sealant shall not be
 placed when the pavement is wet, or when the ambient or pavement temperature falls below 40 F. T he
 contractor shall furnish to the engineer the manufacturer ’s recommendations for mixing and application,
 including temperature restrictions, and shall prepare and apply the crack sealant in accordance with the
 manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 413.60.3.2 Cracks shall be routed or sawed to provide a reservoir centered over the existing crack. T he
 reservoir shall be slightly larger than the existing crack, with a minimum size of 3/8-inch wide x d/4 deep,
 where d is the thickness of the pavement. T he joint/crack shall be clean, free from all loose and foreign
 material, including existing sealant, and dry prior to application of the sealant.
 413.60.3.3 Sealant shall be applied to the joint or reservoir uniformly from the bottom to 1/2 inch from
 the top. Any excess material shall be removed from the pavement surface.
 
 413.60.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of crack sealing will be made to the nearest linear foot
 of cracks sealed, complete in place, and accepted by the engineer.
 413.60.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of pavement crack sealing will be paid for at the
 contract unit price.
 SECTIO N 413.70 BITUMINO US PAVEMENT CRACK FILLING.
 413.70.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of preparing and filling all cracks in bituminous pavement
 as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 413.70.2 Mate rial. Filler material shall be in accordance with one of the following:
 Item
 Section
 Asphalt Binder
 1015.3
 P olymer Modified Emulsion 1015.20.5
 Crack Sealing Material
 413.50.2
 
 413.70.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 413.70.3.1 T he engineer will mark the cracks to be filled. Filler material shall not be placed when the
 pavement is wet, or when the ambient or pavement temperature falls below 40 F. T he contractor shall
 furnish to the engineer the manufacturer ’s recommendations for mixing and application, including
 temperature restrictions, and shall prepare and apply the crack filler material in accordance with the
 manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 413.70.3.2 T he crack shall be clean, free from all loose and foreign material, and dry prior to application
 of the filler material. Loose material on the surface within 2 inches of the crack shall be removed to permit
 proper adhesion.
 413.70.3.3 Filler material shall be applied to the crack from the bottom up. T he crack shall be slightly
 overfilled and excess material squeegeed with a V or U-shaped squeegee, level to the adjoining surface
 pavement forming a wipe zone 3 to 4 inches wide.
 
 221
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 413.70.3.4 T he contractor shall apply a light coating of sand or other blotting material to the surface of
 the newly placed filler if traffic results in tracking of the crack sealing material.
 413.70.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of crack filling will be made to the nearest linear foot
 of cracks filled, complete in place, and accepted by the engineer.
 413.70.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of pavement crack filler will be paid for at the
 contract unit price.
 SECTIO N 413.80 PO RTLAND CEMENT CO NCRETE PAVEMENT CRACK FILLING.
 413.80.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of preparing and filling all cracks in PCCP, as shown on the
 plans or as directed by the engineer.
 413.80.2 Mate rial. Filler material shall be in accordance with Sec 413.50.2 or Sec 1057.
 413.80.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 413.80.3.1 T he engineer will mark the existing cracks to be filled. Filler material shall not be placed when
 the pavement is wet, or when the ambient or pavement temperature falls below 40 F. T he contractor shall
 furnish to the engineer the manufacturer ’s recommendations for mixing and application, including
 temperature restrictions, and shall prepare and apply the crack filler material in accordance with the
 manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 413.80.3.2 T he crack shall be clean, free from any loose and foreign material, and dry prior to application
 of the filler material.
 413.80.3.3 Filler material shall be applied to the crack uniformly from the bottom to 1/2 inch from the
 top. Any excess material shall be removed from the pavement surface.
 413.80.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of crack filling material will be made to the nearest
 linear foot of cracks sealed, complete in place, and accepted by the engineer.
 413.80.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of pavement crack filler will be paid for at the
 contract unit price.
 
 222
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 501
 CO NCRETE
 501.1 De scription. Concrete shall consist of a mixture of cement, fine aggregate, coarse aggregate and
 water, combined in the proportions specified for the various classes. Admixtures may be added as
 specifically required or permitted.
 501.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 
 Section
 
 Coarse Aggregatea
 
 1005.2
 
 Fine Aggregatea
 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag
 Fly Ash
 Cement
 Concrete Admixture
 Concrete Tinting Material
 Water
 
 1005.3
 1017
 1018
 1019
 1054
 1056
 1070
 
 a Regardless
 
 of the gradation of the coarse and fine
 aggregate used in concrete for pavement or base,
 the aggregate shall meet the quality requirements
 of coarse and fine aggregate for concrete pavement.
 501.2.1 Aggre gate Acce ptance . Quality control (QC) sampling and testing will be performed by the
 contractor and quality assurance (QA) sampling and testing will be performed by the engineer for aggregate
 in Portland cement concrete masonry in accordance with the following table at the last possible point of
 incorporation into the project. Aggregate samples may be taken either by sampling the flowing aggregate
 stream or upon approval by the engineer, from the stockpile.
 Item
 
 P ortland
 Cement
 Concrete
 Masonry
 
 Property
 Gradation of Coarse Aggregate AASHTO T 27 and T 11
 Gradation of Fine Aggregate AASHTO T 27 and T 11
 Deleterious Content MoDOT Test Method TM 71
 Absorption of Coarse Aggregate AASHTO T 85
 Thin or Elongated P ieces ASTM D 4791 (+3/4 in., 5:1)
 
 Q C Test
 Frequency
 
 Q A Test
 Frequency
 
 One QC split per
 2,500 cubic yards
 One per 500
 with a minimum of
 cubic yards
 one per project.
 per fraction
 per project.
 One independent
 QA per project.
 One per
 source per
 project.
 
 One per source
 per year.
 
 501.2.2 Re taine d Sample s. T he contractor shall retain the QC split sample, obtained as specified in Sec
 502.11.2.1.5, for seven days until requested by the engineer for comparison testing. A comparison will be
 considered favorable when the QA results of a QC retained sample are within the applicable limits specified
 in Sec 403.18.2.
 501.3 Mix De sign. T he proportions of cement, fine aggregate and coarse aggregate for concrete shall be
 approved by the engineer within the applicable limits of the specifications for the class of concrete
 specified in the contract. T he contractor shall submit a mixture designed by absolute volume methods or an
 optimized mix design method such as Shilstone method or other recognized optimization method.
 Optimized will refer to aggregate gradations that produce lower water demands, as well as improved
 workability and finishing characteristics. T he target and allowable gradation range of each fraction shall be
 included. T he contractor may be required to submit representative samples of each ingredient to
 Construction and Materials for laboratory testing.
 501.3.1 Re quire d Information. T he concrete mix design shall contain the following information:
 (a) Source, type and specific gravity of Portland cement
 
 223
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (b) Source, type (class, grade, etc.) and specific gravity of supplementary materials, if used
 (c) Source, name, type and amount of admixtures
 (d) Source, type (formation, etc.), ledge number if applicable, and gradation of the aggregate
 (e) Specific gravity and absorption of each fraction in accordance with AASHT O T 85 for coarse
 aggregate and AASHT O T 84 for fine aggregate, including raw data
 (f) Unit Weight of each fraction in accordance with AASHT O T 19
 (g) T he percent of each aggregate component used for optimized concrete mixes
 (h) T he design air content and slump
 (i) Batch weights of Portland Cement and supplemental cementitious materials
 (j) Batch weights of coarse, intermediate and fine aggregates
 (k) Batch weight of water
 501.3.2 Paving Concre te . For PCCP mixes, the gradation requirements of Sec 1005 will not apply. For all
 fractions, 100 percent of each fraction shall pass the 2-inch sieve. When Grade F is required, 100 percent
 of each fraction shall pass the 3/4-inch sieve.
 501.3.3 O ptimiz e d Masonry Concre te . For optimized PCCM mixes, the gradation requirements of Sec
 1005.2 and Sec 1005.3 will not apply. For coarse aggregate, 100 percent of each fraction shall pass the
 one-inch sieve and no more that 2.5 percent shall pass the No. 200 sieve. T his value may be increased to
 3.0 percent passing, provided there is no more than 1.0 percent of the material passing the No. 200 sieve
 in the fine aggregate. For fine aggregate, no more than 2.0 percent shall pass the No. 200 sieve for natural
 sand, and no more than 4.0 percent shall pass the No. 200 sieve for manufactured sand.
 501.3.4 Non-O ptimiz e d Masonry Concre te . When optimized aggregate gradations are not selected by
 the contractor, all provisions, including gradations requirements of Sec 1005 shall apply
 501.3.5 Fine Aggre gate Classe s. Fine aggregates are grouped into four classes and a minimum cement
 factor has been established for each class.
 501.3.6 Ce me nt Factors. T he minimum cement requirements in pounds per cubic yard of concrete for
 the various classes of sand shall be as follows:
 Cement Requirements a,b
 Class of Class A-1 Class B Class B -1 Class B -2 Class MB -2 Pavement Seal
 Sand Concrete Concrete Concrete Concrete Concreteg,h Concrete Concrete
 Ac
 
 600
 
 525
 
 610
 
 705
 
 600
 
 560
 
 Bd
 
 640
 
 565
 
 640
 
 735
 
 620
 
 560
 
 695
 
 Ce
 
 --
 
 585
 
 660
 
 750
 
 640
 
 560
 
 715
 
 Df
 
 --
 
 620
 
 695
 
 790
 
 660
 
 560
 
 735
 
 a When
 
 660
 
 used, Type IP, I(PM), IS or I(SM) cement shall be substituted on a pound for pound basis
 for Type I or Type II cement and adjustments in design mix proportions will be required to correct
 the volume yield of the mixture.
 bT he contractor may submit an optimized mix design which has a maximum 50 pounds per cubic
 yard reduction in cement from that shown in the tables. If the contractor chooses this option, the
 mixture will be subject to review, laboratory testing and approval by the engineer. All other
 requirements for the cement factor will apply.
 c Class A sand will include all sand, except manufactured sand, weighing 109 pounds per cubic foot
 or more.
 
 224
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 dClass
 
 B sand will include all chert, river and Crowley Ridge sand weighing from 106 to 108
 pounds, inclusive, per cubic foot or glacial sand weighing 108 pounds or less per cubic foot.
 e Class C sand will include all chert, river and Crowley Ridge sand weighing from 101 to 105 pounds,
 inclusive, per cubic foot.
 f Class D sand will include all sand weighing 100 pounds or less per cubic foot and any
 manufactured sand that is produced by the process of grinding and pulverizing large particles of
 aggregate or which contains more than 50 percent of material produced by the reduction of coarser
 particles. Manufactured sand produced from limestone or dolomite shall not be used in Portland
 cement concrete for driving surfaces such as bridge decks, pavements and full depth shoulders.
 gModified B-2 (MB-2) concrete may be used in-place of Class B-2 Concrete.
 hModified B-2 (MB-2) concrete shall use at least one supplementary cementitious material in
 accordance with this specification. In no case shall MB-2 concrete use less than 15 percent fly
 ash or GGBFS when used as the individual supplementary cementitious material. In no case shall
 MB-2 concrete use less than 6 percent metakaolin when used as the individual supplementary
 cementitious material.
 501.3.7 Unit We ight. T he weight per cubic foot shall be the dry rodded weight per cubic foot of the
 aggregate, determined in accordance with AASHT O T 19.
 501.3.8 Compre ssive Stre ngth Re quire me nts. Concrete classes shall meet the following compressive
 strength requirements in pounds per square inch:
 Minimum Design Compressive Strength1
 Class A-1 Class B Class B -1 Class B -2 Class MB -2 Pavement Seal
 Concrete Concrete Concrete Concrete Concrete Concrete Concrete
 6,000
 3,000
 4,000
 4,000
 4,000
 4,000
 3,000
 1Minimum
 
 compressive strength required unless otherwise specified in the contract
 documents or approved by the engineer.
 501.3.9 Absorptions. Coarse aggregate absorption tolerances shall be in accordance with Sec 502.11.3.3.
 501.4 Sampling. Sampling of fresh concrete shall be in accordance with AASHT O R 60, except that for
 central or truck mixed concrete, the entire sample for slump and air tests and for molding compressive
 strength specimens may be taken at one time after approximately one cubic yard of concrete has been
 discharged, instead of at three or more regular intervals during the discharge of the entire batch.
 Acceptability of the concrete for slump and air content and, if applicable, for strength requirements, will be
 determined by tests on these samples.
 501.5 Consiste ncy. T he slump of the concrete shall be within the limits for the respective classes of
 concrete. T he concrete shall be uniform in consistency and shall contain the minimum quantity of water
 required to produce the designated slump. T he slump of concrete mixes will be determined in accordance
 with AASHT O T 119. T he quantity of mixing water in the concrete shall be considered the net quantity
 after proper allowance has been made for absorption by the aggregate. T he slump and mixing water content
 of the concrete, when placed in the work, shall not exceed the following limits:
 Slump and Maximum Water/Cementitious Materials Ratio
 Max. Pounds of Mixing Water Per Pound of
 Class of
 Max.
 Cementitious Materials
 Concrete Slump, In.
 Air-Entrained
 Non-Air-Entrained
 A-1
 3 1/2
 0.46
 0.51
 B
 4
 0.51
 0.55
 B-1
 4
 0.44
 0.53
 B-2
 3
 0.40
 ---MB-2
 6
 0.42
 ---P avement
 ---0.50
 0.53
 Seal
 8
 ---0.53
 
 501.6 Me asure me nt of Mate rial. T he cement and aggregate for concrete shall be measured by weight.
 T he weights of coarse and fine aggregates to be used will be calculated from the proportions approved by
 
 225
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 the engineer. Batches that do not contain the proper quantities of material shall be wasted at the
 contractor's expense.
 501.6.1 We ighing Tole rance s. T he weighing and batching equipment shall be designed and maintained in
 such a condition that the material for each batch can be quickly and accurately weighed and shall be
 operated within a tolerance of plus or minus 0.5 percent for cement and plus or minus 1.0 percent for
 aggregate. T he equipment used for delivery of material to the weigh hoppers shall not permit intermingling
 of material. Weighing hoppers shall discharge completely and there shall be no accumulation of tare
 material. Scales shall be accurate to within 0.4 percent of the net load applied. T he change in load required
 to change the position of rest of the indicating element or elements of indicating scales an observable
 amount shall not be greater than 0.1 percent of the nominal scale capacity. If beam-type scales are used, a
 separate beam shall be provided for each type of material to be used and means shall be provided for
 adjustment of tare on a scale separate from those used for other material.
 501.6.2 Wate r Me te r Tole rance s. Mixing water shall be measured by volume or by weight. If measured by
 weight, scales shall be in accordance with Sec 501.6.1. T he device for the measurement shall be readily
 adjustable and under all operating conditions shall measure the required quantity within a tolerance of one
 quart or one percent, whichever is greater.
 501.6.3 Calibration Fre que ncy. Plant scales and water metering devices shall be calibrated and certified
 annually and after every plant move by an approved commercial scale service. Admixture metering devices
 shall be calibrated by a commercial scale company, the admixture company or the concrete plant company.
 Plant scales that have not been moved shall be verified six months after their calibration. A copy of the
 calibration and verification shall be provided to the engineer.
 501.7 Mixing. T he mixer shall produce concrete uniform in color, appearance and distribution of the
 material throughout the mixture. T he cement, aggregate and no less than 60 percent of the water shall be
 mixed a minimum of one minute. T he remaining water shall be added within 15 seconds after all other
 material for the batch is in the mixer. If mixers having multiple compartment drums are used, the time
 required to transfer material between compartments will be considered mixing time. T he speed at which the
 drum rotates shall be as designated by the manufacturer. If such mixing does not result in uniform and
 smooth texture concrete, a sufficient number of additional revolutions at the same speed shall be performed
 until a thorough mixing of each batch of concrete is secured. T he mixing time shall be measured from the
 time all cement, aggregate and 60 percent of the water are in the drum. T he volume of concrete mixed in
 each batch shall not exceed the manufacturer's rated capacity. T he mixer shall be equipped to automatically
 time the mixing of each batch of concrete. If the automatic timing device becomes inoperable, a manual
 timing device shall be provided to complete the day's operation.
 501.8 Ce ntral and Truck Mixe d Concre te . T he following additional requirements will apply to central
 and truck mixed concrete.
 501.8.1 Mixe r Inspe ction. All central mixers, truck mixers and agitators shall be in accordance with of
 these specifications prior to use, and inspection of the equipment shall be made periodically during the
 work. Only equipment found acceptable in every respect and capable of producing uniform results will be
 permitted.
 501.8.2 Uniformity Te sting. A uniformity test in accordance with AST M C 94 Annex A1, shall be
 performed during the annual calibration at a central mix drum plant and at the beginning of production for
 a project at a mobile paving plant.
 (a) A uniformity test shall be performed for the largest and smallest proposed batch size.
 (b) T he two samples shall be obtained within an elapsed time of no more than 15 minutes.
 (c) T he air content, slump and mix proportions of the concrete tested shall be in accordance with
 these specifications for that class of concrete or the uniformity tests shall be invalid.
 (d) T he use of a one-quarter cubic foot measure will be permitted in determination of weight per
 cubic foot.
 
 226
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (e) Cylinders may be cured in damp sand after the first 48 hours.
 (f) T he contractor may designate the mixing time for which uniformity tests are to be performed.
 T he mixing time shall be a minimum of 60 seconds. T he maximum mixing time shall not exceed
 the mixing time established by uniformity tests by more than 60 seconds for air-entrained
 concrete. T he mixed concrete shall meet the uniformity requirements specified above before any
 concrete may be used for pavement or structures. T he engineer may allow the use of the test
 concrete for appropriate incidental construction. Tests shall be performed by the contractor, in
 the presence of the engineer. No direct payment will be made for labor, equipment, material or
 testing. After operational procedures of batching and mixing are thus established, no changes in
 procedure will be permitted without re-establishing procedures by uniformity tests.
 501.8.2.1 Me asuring Mixing Time . Measurement of mixing time shall start at the time all the solid
 material is in the drum and shall end at the beginning of the next sequential operation.
 501.8.2.2 Ve rification of Mixe r. Mixer performance tests shall be repeated whenever the appearance of
 the concrete or the coarse aggregate content of samples selected in accordance with AST M C 94, as
 modified above, indicates that adequate mixing is not being accomplished.
 501.8.3 Truck Mixe d Concre te . T ruck mixed concrete shall be mixed at the proportioning plant and the
 mixer shall operate at agitating speed while in transit. T ruck mixed concrete may be mixed at the point of
 delivery, provided the cement or cement and mixing water, are added at that point. Mixing of truck mixed
 concrete shall begin immediately after the introduction of the mixing water and cement to the aggregate or
 the introduction of the cement to the aggregate.
 501.8.4 Truck Mixe r Re quire me nts. A truck mixer shall consist of a watertight revolving drum suitably
 mounted, fitted with adequate blades, and equipped with a device for determining the number of mixing
 revolutions. T ruck mixers shall produce a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass of concrete and shall
 discharge the concrete without segregation. A truck agitator shall consist of a watertight revolving drum or
 a watertight container suitably mounted and fitted with adequate revolving blades. T ruck agitators shall
 transport and discharge the concrete without segregation. Mixers and agitators shall be cleaned of
 accumulation of hardened concrete or mortar.
 501.8.5 Rating Plate . Except as hereinafter permitted, each truck mixer shall have permanently attached
 to the truck a metal rating plate issued by and in accordance with the capacity requirements of the T ruck
 Mixer Manufacturers Bureau (T MMB), as approved by NRMCA, on which is stated the maximum capacity
 in terms of volume of mixed concrete for the various uses to which the equipment is applicable. T he truck
 shall also have attached a manufacturer's data plate that shall state the actual capacity as an agitator, and
 the maximum and minimum mixing and agitating speeds. If truck mixers are used for mixing or agitating,
 the volume of concrete in each batch shall not exceed the maximum capacity shown on the metal rating
 plate issued by the T MMB, as approved by NRMCA, except that if a lower capacity for agitating is shown
 on the manufacturer's data plate, that lower capacity shall govern. T he minimum batch size for truck
 mixers shall be one cubic yard. T he engineer may reduce the batch size or reject use of any truck mixer that
 does not produce concrete uniform in color, appearance and distribution of material throughout the mass. A
 quantity of concrete that results in axle and gross loads in excess of statutory limits will not be permitted.
 501.8.6 Truck Mixing Re quire me nts. T ruck mixers and agitators shall be operated at the speed of
 rotation designated by the manufacturer of the equipment. T ruck mixed concrete shall initially be mixed no
 less than 70 or more than 100 revolutions of the drum at mixing speed after all ingredients, including water,
 are in the mixer, except that when the batch volume does not exceed 57.5 percent of the gross volume of
 the drum or 91 percent of the rated maximum capacity, the number of revolutions required for mixing shall
 be no less than 50 or more than 100. When a truck mixer or truck agitator is used for transporting
 concrete that has been completely mixed, agitation of the concrete shall continue during transportation at
 the speed designated by the manufacturer of the equipment as agitating speed. Water may be added to the
 mixture no more than two times after initial mixing is completed. Each time water is added, the drum shall
 be turned an additional 30 revolutions, or more if necessary, at mixing speed, until uniform mixing is
 accomplished. All water added will be included in determining the effective water in the mixture.
 
 227
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 501.8.7 Wate r Adjustme nts at Job Site . Each increment of water added at the job site shall be measured
 within a tolerance of one percent of the total effective water required for the batch. Water used to wash the
 drum of the mixer shall not be used as mixing water.
 501.8.8 Handling and Discharge Re quire me nts. Central or truck mixed concrete shall be delivered to
 the site of the work and shall meet the following conditions:
 (a) T he handling and discharge of concrete shall not cause segregation or damage to the concrete
 and will allow placement with a minimum of handling. All handling and discharge shall occur prior
 to initial set of the concrete.
 (b) T ruck mixed concrete shall not exceed 300 revolutions after the beginning of mixing.
 501.8.9 Non-Agitating Equipme nt. T he discharge of concrete transported in non-agitating equipment
 shall not cause segregation or damage to the concrete and will allow placement with a minimum of
 handling. All handling and discharge shall occur prior to initial set of the concrete. Bodies of non-agitating
 hauling equipment shall be smooth, mortar-tight metal containers capable of discharging the concrete at a
 satisfactory, controlled rate without segregation.
 501.8.10 Te sting Facilitie s. T he contractor shall provide a Type 1 laboratory in accordance with Sec 601
 at a paving plant for the engineer to inspect ingredients and processes used in the manufacture and delivery
 of the concrete. T he contractor shall furnish the necessary equipment and personnel to assist the engineer
 in obtaining a representative QA sample. T he ready mix producer shall notify the designated MoDOT
 representative every day that concrete is being supplied for a MoDOT project. A daily log of plant
 production shall be available for the engineer to review.
 501.8.11 De live ry Ticke ts. T he manufacturer of truck mixed concrete and of central mixed concrete for
 use in structures shall furnish to the engineer with each truck load of concrete before unloading at the site, a
 delivery ticket on which is shown information concerning the concrete as follows:
 (a) Name of concrete plant.
 (b) Serial number of the ticket.
 (c) T ruck number when a truck mixer is utilized.
 (d) Name of contractor.
 (e) Job Number, route and county designation.
 (f) MoDOT mix identification number assigned to the mix.
 (g) Specific class of concrete.
 (h) Quantity of concrete in cubic yards.
 (i) Date and time when batch was loaded or first mixing of cement and aggregate.
 (j) Number of revolutions, when truck mixed.
 501.8.12 Concre te Plant Docume ntation. T he contractor shall complete the required concrete plant
 documentation once per working day at the central ready mix or paving plant. T he documentation shall be
 made available to the engineer within 24 hours after concrete is batched.
 501.9 Volume tric Batche d and Continuous Mixe d Concre te . Upon written request by the contractor,
 the engineer may approve the use of concrete proportioned by volume. If concrete is proportioned by
 volume, the other requirements of these specifications with the following modifications will apply.
 501.9.1 Proportional De vice s. Volume proportioning devices, such as counters, calibrated gate openings
 
 228
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 or flow meters, shall be available for controlling and determining the quantities of the ingredients
 discharged. In operation, the entire measuring and dispensing mechanism shall produce the specified
 proportions of each ingredient.
 501.9.2 Controls. All indicating devices that affect the accuracy of proportioning and mixing of concrete
 shall be in full view of and near enough to be read by the operator while concrete is being produced. T he
 operator shall have convenient access to all controls.
 501.9.3 Calibration. T he proportioning devices shall be calibrated by the contractor in the presence of
 and subject to approval from the engineer. Calibration of the cement and aggregate proportioning devices
 shall be accomplished by weighing each component. Calibration of the admixture and water proportioning
 devices shall be accomplished by weight or volume. Tolerances in proportioning the individual components
 will be as follows:
 Item
 Tolerance
 Cement, Weight percent
 0 to +4
 Fine Aggregate, Weight percent
 ±2
 Coarse Aggregate, Weight percent
 ±2
 Admixtures, Weight or Volume percent
 ±3
 Water, Weight or Volume P ercent
 ±1
 
 501.9.4 Ve rification of Yie ld. Verification of the proportioning devices may be required at any time by
 the engineer. Verification shall be accomplished as follows. With the cement meter set on zero and all other
 controls set for the designated mix, the activated mixer shall discharge mixed material into a 1/4 cubic yard
 container measuring 36 x 36 x 9 inches. When the container is level-struck full, making provisions for
 settling the material into all corners, the cement meter shall show a discharge equal to the design
 proportion of cement for 1/4 cubic yard. A tolerance of ± 1/8 inch from the top of the container will be
 permitted. If the correct yield is not obtained, the proportioning devices shall be adjusted to obtain the
 design mix or the proportioning devices shall be recalibrated as directed by the engineer.
 501.9.5 Wate r Control. T he rate of water supplied shall be measured by a calibrated flow meter
 coordinated with the cement and aggregate feeding mechanism and with the mixer. T he rate shall be
 adjustable in order to control slump at the desired level.
 501.9.6 Liquid Admixture . Liquid admixtures shall be dispensed through a controlled flow meter. A
 positive means to observe the continuous flow of material shall be provided. If an admixture requires
 diluting, the admixture shall be diluted and thoroughly mixed prior to introducing the admixture into the
 dispenser. When admixtures are diluted, the ratio of dilution and the mixing shall be approved by and
 performed in the presence of the engineer.
 501.9.7 Concre te Mixe r. T he concrete mixer shall be approved by the engineer and shall be an augertype continuous mixer used in conjunction with volumetric proportioning. T he mixer shall produce
 concrete, uniform in color and appearance, with homogeneous distribution of the material throughout the
 mixture. Mixing time necessary to produce uniform concrete shall be established by the contractor and
 shall comply with other requirements of these specifications. Only equipment found acceptable in every
 respect and capable of producing uniform results will be permitted.
 501.9.7.1 Mate rial Storage Capacity. T he continuous mixer shall be capable of carrying sufficient
 unmixed dry bulk cement, fine aggregate, coarse aggregate, admixtures and water, in separate compartments
 to produce no less than 6 cubic yards of concrete at the job site. Each batching or mixing unit or both, shall
 carry in a prominent place a metal plate or plates on which are plainly marked the gross volume of the unit
 in terms of mixed concrete, discharge speed and the weight-calibrated constant of the machine in terms of
 a revolution counter or other output indicator.
 501.9.7.2 Me asure me nt of Ce me nt. T he continuous mixer shall be capable of positive measurement of
 cement being introduced into the mix. A recording meter visible to the operator and equipped with a ticket
 printout shall indicate the quantity.
 501.9.7.3 Me asure me nt of Wate r. T he continuous mixer shall provide positive control of the flow of
 
 229
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 water and admixtures into the mixing chamber. Water flow shall be indicated by a flow meter and be readily
 adjustable to provide for minor variations in aggregate moisture. T he mixer shall be capable of
 continuously circulating or mechanically agitating the admixtures.
 501.9.7.4 Scalping Scre e n. T he continuous mixer shall have a one-inch maximum size scalping screen
 over the fine aggregate bin to screen out mud balls, conglomerate lumps or any other contaminant material
 that could interrupt the flow of fine aggregate during proportioning.
 501.9.7.5 Batching O pe rations. T he continuous mixer shall be capable of being calibrated to
 automatically proportion and blend all components on a continuous or intermittent basis as required, and
 shall discharge mixed material through a conventional chute.
 501.9.8 Handling Mate rials. Storage facilities for all material shall be designed to permit the engineer to
 make necessary inspections prior to the batching operations. T he facilities shall also permit identification
 of approved material at all times, and shall be designed to avoid mixing with or contaminating by,
 unapproved material. Coarse and fine aggregate shall be furnished and handled so variations in the moisture
 content affecting the uniform consistency of the concrete will be avoided.
 501.10 Air-Entraine d Concre te . Air content for all classifications of concrete shall be determined in
 accordance with AASHT O T 152. Air-entrained concrete shall be used for the construction of the
 following items:
 (a) All retaining walls and bridge units, except culvert-type structures and seal courses.
 (b) Concrete median barriers.
 (c) All piles (not required for cast-in-place concrete piles).
 (d) Concrete pavements.
 (e) Approach slabs and paved approaches.
 (f) Concrete medians and median strips.
 (g) Sidewalks, curb ramps and steps.
 (h) Curbs, gutters, curb and gutter and surface drain basins and drains.
 (i) Concrete pedestals for signs, signals and lighting.
 501.10.1 O the r Concre te . All other concrete, except seal concrete, may be air-entrained but only in
 accordance with the requirements of these specifications.
 501.10.2 Air Conte nt Limitations. When air-entrained concrete is used, the mix design target range for
 quantity of air content by volume shall not be less than 4.5 percent or greater than 7.5 percent. When field
 measured air content exceeds 7.5 percent, but is less than or equal to 9.0 percent, the concrete may be
 placed if allowed by the contractor's quality control plan and at the contractor's risk that all other concrete
 requirements will be met, including strength. When field measured air content is less than 4.5 percent, the
 concrete may be re-dosed with air entrainment admixture in accordance with Section 501.10.4. Under no
 circumstances shall any concrete be incorporated into the work with an air content less than 4.5 percent or
 greater than 9.0 percent.
 501.10.3 Incorporation Proce dure s. Air-entraining admixtures shall be added to the concrete during the
 mixing process. T he admixture shall be of such volume and strength that the admixture can be accurately
 measured and dispensed in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations. T he dispenser shall
 consistently deliver the required quantity of admixture within a tolerance of ± 3 percent.
 501.10.4 Re -Dosing. When the measured air content is below the minimum specified limit, the contractor
 will be allowed one attempt per mixer truckload to re-dose the concrete in the field. T he contractor shall
 
 230
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 obtain approval of the a Re-Dosing Plan from the engineer prior to the start of work. T he Re-Dosing Plan
 shall address the following:
 (a) Field measurement of the air entrainment admixture
 (b) Brand of air entrainment admixture being used
 (c) Incorporation and mixing of the air entrainment admixture
 (d) T he use of additional water
 501.11 Concre te Admixture s for Re tarding Se t. If specified in the contract, an approved retarding
 admixture shall be provided and incorporated into the concrete. If not specified in the contract, the use of
 an approved retarding admixture will be permitted upon written notification from the contractor. Any
 retarding admixture shall be added in accordance with Sec 501.10.3 by means of a dispenser conforming to
 the requirements of that section. No direct payment will be made for furnishing the retarding admixture or
 for incorporating the admixture into the mixture.
 501.12 Wate r-Re ducing Admixture s. Type A water-reducing admixtures may be used in any concrete.
 When Type A water-reducing admixture is added to pavement concrete for paving purposes, a reduction of
 cement up to 25 lbs per cubic yard will be permitted. T he dosage rate of Type A water-reducing admixture
 shall be within the ranges recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the engineer. Any
 cementitious material substitution permitted by specification shall be based on the reduced cement content.
 Water-reducing admixtures shall be added in accordance with Sec 501.10.3 by means of a dispenser
 conforming to the requirements of that section. High range water-reducing admixtures may be used when
 specified or as approved by the engineer.
 501.12.1 Modifie d B-2 Utiliz e d. Modified B-2 concrete shall use a Type A or Type D water-reducer
 admixture.
 501.12.2 Silica Fume and Me takoalin Utiliz e d. Concrete utilizing silica fume or metakaolin shall use a
 water-reducer admixture that may be added by hand methods. T he amount of water contained by the waterreducer admixture shall be included in the overall water content of the concrete.
 501.12.3 Consiste ncy Re quire me nt. When a water-reducer admixture is used the maximum allowed
 slump may be increased to 6 inches for all concrete classes. T he concrete shall be homogeneous with no
 aggregate segregation.
 501.13 Acce le rating Admixture s. T he use of calcium chloride or other approved accelerating
 admixtures in concrete mixtures will not be permitted, except in concrete used for pavement repair in
 accordance with Sec 613.
 501.14 Supple me ntary Ce me ntitious Mate rials in Concre te . T he contractor may use fly ash,
 GGBFS, silica fume or metakaolin in the production of concrete in accordance with these specifications.
 Ternary mixes will be allowed for all concrete classes. Ternary mixes are mixes that contain a combination
 of Portland cement and two supplementary cementitious materials. Supplementary cementitious materials
 may be used to replace a maximum of 40 percent of the Portland cement. T he amount of each
 supplementary cementitious materials used in a ternary mix shall not exceed the limits specified herein.
 501.14.1 Fly Ash. Approved Class C or Class F fly ash may be used to replace a maximum of 25 percent
 of the Portland cement on a pound for pound basis in all concrete.
 501.14.2 Ground Granulate d Blast Furnace Slag. Approved GGBFS may be used to replace a
 maximum of 30 percent of the Portland cement on a pound for pound basis in all concrete.
 501.14.3 Silica Fume . Approved silica fume may be used to replace a percent of the Portland cement on
 a pound for pound basis. T he following limits shall apply when silica fume is used:
 Silica Fume Replacement Limits, %
 
 231
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 Class of Concrete
 Minimum Maximum
 MB-2
 6
 8
 A-1, B, B-1, B-2, P CCP, Seal
 ---8
 
 501.14.3.1 Silica Fume Re quire me nts. Silica fume shall be approved prior to use and be in accordance
 with AST M C 1240, except as noted herein. If dry compacted form, the admixture shall be 100 percent
 silica fume with no admixtures. Silica fume slurries may contain other approved admixtures, such as water
 reducers or retarders, if the admixtures are included by the manufacturer of the silica fume admixture.
 501.14.3.2 Manufacture r Ce rtification. T he contractor shall furnish to the engineer a manufacturer ’s
 certification along with the brand name, batch identification, quantity represented, percent solids and the
 type, name and quantity of any admixtures, that are provided in the silica fume admixture.
 501.14.3.3 Silica Fume Te st Re sults. T he manufacturer ’s certification shall contain results of recent
 tests conducted on samples of the silica fume material taken during production or transfer and indicating
 conformance with Tables 1 and 3 of AST M C 1240 and this specification. T he supplier shall further certify
 that the material being furnished is in accordance with this specification.
 501.14.3.4 Silica Fume Approval. For approval prior to use, the supplier shall furnish the same
 information to: Construction and Materials, P.O. Box 270, Jefferson City, MO 65102, along with any
 requested samples for testing.
 501.14.3.5 Silica Fume Slurry. Liquid silica fume admixture shall be protected from freezing at all times.
 501.14.3.6 Admixture Compatibility. All admixtures used shall be compatible with the silica fume
 admixture and shall be recommended or approved in writing by the manufacturer of the silica fume
 admixture.
 501.14.4 Me takaolin. Approved metakaolin may be used to replace a maximum of 15 percent of the
 Portland cement on a pound for pound basis in all concrete.
 501.14.4.1 Me takaolin Re quire me nt. Metakaolin shall be approved prior to use and be in accordance
 with AASHT O M321.
 
 501.14.4.2 Manufacture r Ce rtification. T he contractor shall furnish to the engineer a manufacturer ’s
 certification along with the brand name, batch identification and quantity represented.
 
 501.14.4.3 Me takaolin Te st Re sults. T he manufacturer ’s certification shall contain results of recent
 tests conducted on samples of the metakaolin taken during production or transfer and indicating
 conformance with AASHT O M321 and this specification. T he supplier shall further certify that the
 material being furnished is in accordance with this specification.
 501.14.4.4 Me takaolin Approval. For approval prior to use, the supplier shall furnish the same
 information to: Construction and Materials, P.O. Box 270, Jefferson City, MO 65102, along with any
 requested samples for testing.
 501.14.5 Source Change s. Changes in class or source of fly ash, grade and source of GGBFS, brand and
 source of silica fume or brand and source of metakaolin used in concrete structures will be permitted only
 with written approval from the engineer. Only fly ash, GGBFS, silica fume or metakaolin resulting in
 concrete of the same color shall be used in any individual unit of the structure.
 501.14.6 Mix Proportions. When fly ash, GGBFS, silica fume or metakaolin is used, an adjustment in
 design mix proportions will be required to correct the volume yield of mixture. Approval shall be obtained
 from the engineer prior to any change in mix design or proportions.
 
 232
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 501.14.7 Mixing Wate r. Maximum mixing water shall be based on total cementitious material. T he
 quantity of mixing water in the concrete shall be considered the net quantity after proper allowance has
 been made for absorption by the aggregate.
 501.14.8 Me asuring Fly Ash and Ground Granulate d Blast Furnace Slag. Fly ash or GGBFS shall be
 measured in the same manner and with the same accuracy as cement. Fly ash or GGBFS may be weighed
 separately on the same scale as cement, provided the scale increments are such that the specified weighing
 accuracy can be maintained. If the fly ash or GGBFS is weighed together with the cement, the cement shall
 be weighed first and the accuracy shall apply to the combined weight.
 501.14.9 Me asuring Silica Fume and Me takaolin. Silica fume or metakolin shall be measured by
 weight or volume within a tolerance of plus or minus 2 percent.
 501.14.10 Silica Fume and Me takaolin Batching Se que nce . Silica fume or metakaolin shall be added
 at the plant at the same point in the batch sequence as recommended by the manufacturer of the material .
 T he silica fume or metakaolin may be added by hand methods.
 501.14.11 Calculating Silica Fume Solids. For silica fume solutions, the quantity of liquid silica fume
 admixture needed to furnish the required silica fume solids shall be calculated based on the weight per gallon
 and percent solids of the silica fume admixture being used.
 501.14.12 Me asuring Ce me ntitious Mate rials. Fly ash, GGBFS, silica fume or metakaolin will be
 considered as cement when measuring mixing time.
 501.15 Comme rcial Mixture . If specified in the contract that an approved commercial mixture of
 concrete may be used, the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing, setting out for approval the
 source and proportions of the mixture proposed to be furnished. T he statement shall include the following:
 (a) T he types and sources of aggregate.
 (b) Type and source of cement and other cementitious material.
 (c) Scale weights of each aggregate proposed as pounds per cubic yard of concrete.
 (d) Quantity of water proposed, as pounds or gallons per cubic yard of concrete.
 (e) Quantity of cement proposed as pounds per cubic yard of concrete.
 501.15.1 Minimum Ce me nt Conte nt. T he concrete shall contain no less than 517 pounds of cement
 per cubic yard. T he use of fly ash, GGBFS, silica fume or metakaolin shall be in accordance with Sec
 501.14. T he plant shall comply with other requirements of these specifications or be as approved by the
 engineer. T he concrete will be subject to acceptance or rejection by visual inspection at the job site.
 501.15.2 Ce rtification. T he supplier shall furnish certification with the first truck load of each day's
 production of concrete that the material and mix proportions used are in accordance with the approved
 mixture. Upon completion of the work, plant certification shall be furnished by the supplier for the total
 quantity delivered.
 
 233
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 502
 PO RTLAND CEMENT CO NCRETE BASE AND PAVEMENT
 502.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing a Portland cement concrete base or pavement,
 with or without reinforcement as specified, shown on the plans or directed by the engineer.
 502.2 Mate rial. All material, proportioning, air-entrainment, mixing, slump and transporting for Portland
 cement concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501. All material shall be in accordance with Division
 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Emulsified Asphalt (SS-1, SS-1H, CSS-1 or CSS-1H)
 Steel Welded Wire Reinforcement for Concrete
 Concrete Curing Material
 Material for Joints
 
 Section
 1015
 1036
 1055
 1057
 
 502.3 Equipme nt. Equipment and tools necessary for handling material and performing all parts of the
 work shall be satisfactory to the engineer as to design, capacity and mechanical condition. T he equipment
 shall be at the job site sufficiently ahead of the start of construction operations to be examined thoroughly
 by the engineer and shall be in accordance with the following:
 502.3.1 Batching Plant, Mixe r and Hauling Equipme nt. T he batching plant, mixer, water measuring
 equipment, weighing and hauling equipment shall be in accordance with Sec 501.
 502.3.2 Slip-Form Construction. Concrete base or pavement may be constructed by the use of sliding
 form methods. Slip-form construction shall be in accordance with these specifications.
 502.3.2.1 Consolidating and Finishing Equipme nt. T he concrete shall be consolidated and finished by
 a slip-form paver designed to spread, consolidate and shape the concrete in one complete pass of the
 machine in such a manner to provide a smooth, dense and homogeneous pavement in conformance with
 the plans and specifications. No apparent slumping of the concrete shall occur within 6 inches of the
 pavement edge. If necessary to stop the forward movement of the paver, the vibratory and tamping
 elements shall be stopped immediately.
 502.3.3 Vibrators. Vibrators used for full width vibration of the concrete shall be of the internal type.
 Vibrating equipment shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation at a
 frequency to provide satisfactory results, but shall be no less than 4500 impulses per minute. Hand vibrators
 shall have a frequency of no less than 4500 impulses per minute. T he contractor shall have a tachometer
 available at all times for checking the vibration frequency.
 502.3.4 Concre te Saw. If sawed joints are required, equipment shall be capable of providing a groove of
 the specified dimensions in the concrete. Equipment shall be a wet-cut saw, referred to as a “ conventional
 concrete saw” or a lighter weight dry-cut saw, referred to as an “ early-entry concrete saw,” used to establish
 joints sooner than the conventional saw.
 502.3.5 Equipme nt for Se aling Joints. An approved double boiler-type heating kettle equipped with a
 mechanical agitator and a satisfactory temperature indicating device shall be required. T he equipment shall
 be capable of heating the joint sealing material uniformly without damage.
 502.3.6 Auxiliary Equipme nt. Auxiliary equipment shall be available at all times as follows:
 (a) A minimum of one footbridge designed to be readily transportable and having no contact with
 the concrete base or pavement.
 (b) Metal dyes with beveled face numerals 3 inches to 5 inches high and thick enough to make an
 indentation of 1/4 inch. A satisfactory dye shall be used for marking the location of the station
 number.
 502.3.7 Fie ld Laboratory. T he contractor shall provide a Type 1 field laboratory in accordance with Sec
 
 234
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 601.
 502.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 502.4.1 We athe r Limitations. Concrete shall not be placed upon frozen subgrade. All concrete shall be
 effectively protected from freezing until a minimum compressive strength of 3,500 psi has been attained.
 T he contractor shall provide a method, meeting the approval from the engineer, of monitoring the
 concrete that demonstrates that the concrete has been protected from freezing. Regardless of precautions
 taken, the contractor shall assume all risks, and all frozen concrete shall be replaced at the contractor's
 expense.
 502.4.2 Prote ction Against Rain. To protect against rain, the contractor shall have on location at all
 times material for the protection of the edges and surface of the unhardened concrete. T he contractor shall
 protect the concrete from damage due to rain. Failure to properly protect unhardened concrete may
 constitute cause for the removal and replacement of defective concrete at the contractor's expense.
 502.4.3 Se tting Forms. Forms shall be sufficiently supported to avoid displacement during paving
 operations. Both straight and curved forms shall be supported in such position that the face of the form
 shall be vertical on tangents and perpendicular to the superelevated section on curves. T he top of the form
 shall not vary more than 1/8 inch from the true grade line during placing, compacting and finishing
 operations. T he form alignment shall not vary more than 1/4 inch from the true alignment.
 502.4.4 Conditioning of Subgrade . When forms have been securely set to grade, the subgrade shall be
 brought to proper cross-section in accordance with Sec 209. Low areas of treated bases shall be filled only
 with concrete integral with the pavement. No direct payment will be made for the concrete used to fill
 these low areas.
 502.4.5 Proportioning and Mixing Concre te . Concrete shall be proportioned and mixed by truck or
 central mixers in accordance with Sec 501. T his shall consist of batching all aggregate, cement and water by
 means of automatic weighing or metering, with all additives dispensed automatically and interlocked with
 the automatic weighing or metering controls. For central mixed concrete, the mixing cycle shall be timed
 and interlocked with the weight batch cycle. T he weight setting controls shall be equipped such that the
 controls may be locked when directed by the engineer. T he automatic batching equipment shall be capable
 of conversion to manual operation if necessary. Manual operation shall not be permitted beyond 24 hours
 after breakdown in the automatic equipment, except by written approval of the engineer. When a project
 includes paving that cannot be performed in a normal sequence, the contractor will be permitted to place a
 maximum of 7000 square yards using manual batching methods. For all contracts having a total of no more
 than 20,000 square yards of concrete base course and concrete pavement combined, manual batching
 methods will be permitted.
 502.4.6 Placing Concre te . T he concrete shall be deposited over the entire width of the subgrade in such a
 manner as to prevent segregation and to minimize handling. Mixers, including truck mixers and trucks used
 for transporting concrete, will be permitted to discharge concrete by chute or by dumping directly on the
 subgrade or prepared base provided the underlying material is not damaged or distorted. Honeycomb in the
 concrete base or pavement edge may be cause for rejection of the concrete.
 502.4.7 Tie Bar Place me nt. T ie bars shall be supported in the proper position by chairs driven into the
 subgrade, or may be placed by approved mechanical methods prior to the consolidation of the concrete
 after the concrete has been struck off. T ie bars shall be free from dirt, oil, paint and grease. T ie bars
 required at longitudinal construction joints shall be positioned before concrete base or pavement
 consolidation.
 502.4.8 Final Strike -off, Consolidation and Finishing. Machine finishing by extrusion methods or by
 vibrating and screeding processes shall be required for all concrete except as permitted in accordance with
 Sec 502.4.8.6. After the final course of the concrete has been placed, the concrete shall be struck-off and
 thoroughly vibrated until concrete of a uniform and satisfactory density is attained. T he surface of the
 pavement shall be of uniform texture and to the proper grade and typical section.
 502.4.8.1 Consolidation. Vibrating tubes shall extend into the concrete the distance necessary to provide
 
 235
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 adequate consolidation. Vibrators shall be operated only when the machine to which the vibrators are
 attached is moving. Care shall be taken that the vibrator does not penetrate the subgrade or dislodge or
 move the joints. Vibrators shall not come in contact with the reinforcement, load transfer devices, subgrade
 or side forms.
 502.4.8.2 Adde d Finishing Wate r. Moisture in any form shall not be applied to the surface of the
 concrete except for emergency conditions. When emergency conditions exist and it becomes necessary to
 apply additional moisture to the surface of the concrete in order to complete the final finishing operation,
 water may only be applied in the form of a fine pressure spray. Under such conditions, placement of
 additional concrete on the subgrade shall be discontinued until the emergency conditions cease.
 502.4.8.3 Surface Te xture . After surface irregularities have been removed, the concrete surface shall be
 given a uniformly roughened finish. T he surface texture shall be tested in accordance with AST M E 965,
 except as modified herein, to ensure the texture is adequate for desired friction characteristics. T he test
 locations will be the same locations as identified for strength and thickness determination.
 502.4.8.3.1 Sample Containe r. Plastic sample containers for AST M E 965 testing shall be of a rigid
 material that will crack or break if the container is deformed. Damaged or deformed containers shall not be
 used.
 502.4.8.3.2 Re quire d Te xture De pth. T he results of AST M E 965 shall show a texture depth of any
 sublot, as defined in Sec 502.10.1, to have a minimum value of 1.00 mm. Any sublot showing a texture
 depth of less than 1.00 mm shall require diamond grinding of the pavement represented by this sublot to
 attain the necessary texture. All testing of the surface texture shall be completed no later than the day
 following pavement placement.
 502.4.8.3.3 Minimum Diamond Grinding Le ngth. Diamond grinding, except for bump correction,
 shall be across the entire width of the traveled way and shall be continuous for a minimum of 0.1 mile.
 502.4.8.3.4 Wave Te xture Te sting. AST M E 965 will be waived if the contractor elects to diamond grind
 or tine the concrete with a wire comb. T he concrete may be tined either longitudinally or transversely.
 502.4.8.3.4.1 Wire Comb. A wire comb shall be no less than 10 feet long with a single line of wires
 exposed to a length of approximately 4 inches. T he wire shall be blue-tempered and polished spring steel
 with nominal dimensions of 0.028 inch thick and 0.100 to 0.125 inch wide. T he wires shall be spaced to
 provide 1/2-inch clear space between wires and securely mounted in a rigid head. Except for concrete
 finished by hand methods, the wire comb shall be mechanically operated and capable of covering the full
 width of slab in a single pass, at a uniform speed and at a uniform depth. Final approval of the wire comb
 will be based on satisfactory performance during actual use
 502.4.8.3.4.2 Te xturing with Wire Comb. Successive passes of the comb shall be overlapped the
 minimum necessary to attain a continuously textured surface. T he surface texture produced shall have an
 average texture depth of approximately 0.125 inch. Small or irregular areas, or areas not suitable for
 machine texturing when adjacent surrounding concrete is ready for texturing, may be textured with a hand
 operated device producing a textured surface equivalent to that required for machine combing.
 502.4.8.4 Edging at Forms and Joints. After the final finish, but before the concrete initial set, the
 edges of the concrete along each form line, and on each side of transverse expansion joints and
 construction joints shall be worked with an edging tool having a radius of approximately 3/8 inch. A welldefined and continuous radius having a smooth, dense finish shall be produced. T he surface of the concrete
 shall not be unduly disturbed by tilting of the tool during use. Tool marks on the pavement shall be
 eliminated by brooming or dragging the surface. In doing this, the rounding of the corner of the pavement
 shall not be disturbed. All concrete on top of the joint filler shall be completely removed. All joints shall be
 tested with a straightedge before the concrete has set, and corrections made if one side of the joint is higher
 than the other.
 502.4.8.5 Station Numbe rs. T he contractor shall indent station numbers into all pavement immediately
 following the final finishing operations and before the concrete’s final set. T he numbers shall be placed at
 alternating full stations as ascertained by measurements determined by the engineer. Equations in stationing
 
 236
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 shall also be marked in the pavement. On undivided pavement, the station numbers shall be on the left side
 of the pavement with respect to the ascending stationing and shall be on the pavement edge unless an
 integral curb is involved, in which case the numbers shall be placed on the face of the curb. On divided
 pavement, station numbers shall be placed on the median side of each pavement. T he numbers shall be
 placed facing the centerline of the pavement, or the centerline of each pavement in the case of divided
 pavements. T he numbers shall be placed on a troweled area of the finished surface. No direct payment will
 be made for marking station numbers.
 502.4.8.6 Hand Finishing. Compacting, vibrating and finishing concrete by hand methods will be
 permitted:
 (a) For all curves having a form line radius of less than 200 feet or where wood forms are used.
 (b) For all irregularly shaped areas.
 (c) For pavement lanes less than 200 feet long.
 (d) For pavement lanes less than 10 feet wide.
 (e) For bridge approaches and pavement to first expansion joint.
 (f) When a breakdown of the mechanical compacting and finishing equipment occurs or in the
 event of some other emergency. After a breakdown, only material which has already been
 proportioned and which may be rendered unsatisfactory for use may be finished by hand.
 (g) For all Portland cement concrete base.
 502.5 Joints. Joints shall be of the specified type and dimensions, and constructed at the locations shown
 on the plans or as approved by the engineer. Where joints are preformed, the form or joint shall be set and
 securely fastened to ensure the joint being in the required position when the concrete is finished. T he final
 position of dowels and tie bars shall be parallel to the subgrade and perpendicular to the line of the joint.
 Dowel supporting assemblies shall conform to one of the types shown on the plans. T he concrete shall be
 placed to avoid displacement or disarrangement of the joint installations.
 502.5.1 Expansion Joints. Expansion joints shall extend for the full cross-section of the concrete
 pavement. Filler placed prior to the placement of the concrete shall be installed with a removable cap or
 edging bar as a guide for edging the joint and protection of the filler during the concrete’s placing and
 finishing. Joints constructed after the placement of concrete shall be sawed full depth, and the exposed
 edges shall be ground to a chamfer of 3/8 inch. T he filler shall rest snugly on the subgrade from form to
 form. T he joints shall be sealed in accordance with Sec 502.5.4. Upon removal of the forms, any struts or
 fins of concrete extending across the joint shall be removed to the full width of the joint and the full
 thickness of the concrete base or pavement.
 502.5.2 Construction Joints. Construction joints shall be made at the close of each day's work or when
 the work is stopped or interrupted for more than 30 minutes. T ransverse construction joint shall be located
 15 feet from the last contraction joint Construction joints shall be constructed perpendicular to the top
 surface and the centerline of the concrete base or pavement. Construction joints may be formed with a
 timber header or may be sawed full depth. T he final joint shall conform to the cross-section of the
 pavement. Before paving operations are resumed, all surplus concrete and other refuse shall be removed
 from the subgrade.
 502.5.3 Sawing Joints. Unless otherwise provided, all transverse contraction joints and all Type L
 longitudinal joints shall be sawed in a single cutting operation with all joint cuts to the dimensions shown on
 the plans. For intersections and irregular pavement, joints shall be sawed at locations as approved by the
 engineer. Sawing of the joints shall begin as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to permit sawing
 without excessive raveling. All joints shall be established before uncontrolled shrinkage cracking takes
 place. T he sawing of any joint shall be omitted if a crack occurs at or near the joint location prior to the
 time of sawing. Sawing shall be discontinued when a crack develops ahead of the saw. T he engineer reserves
 the right to have the contractor install preformed type joints on multiple width construction when the use
 
 237
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 of sawed joints fails to prevent random cracking. Any pavement with random cracking not controlled by
 dowels or tie bars shall be either removed and replaced using dowels or tie bars as appropriate to the nearest
 controlled joint or repaired with some other method approved by the engineer at the contractor's expense.
 502.5.3.1 Forming Longitudinal Joint. A joint forming device may be used to establish the longitudinal
 joint between the two driving lanes or between the driving lane and shoulder 6 foot wide or greater. T he
 pavement shall have a plan thickness of 8 inches or greater.
 502.5.3.1.1 Notification. T he contractor shall indicate in the Quality Control Plan if the longitudinal
 joint forming device is going to be utilized on the project.
 502.5.3.1.2 Joint Forming De vice . T he joint forming device shall consist of a pair of straight blades
 mounted under the paver. T he first blade shall be placed under the front of the primary pan extending
 forward between the vibrators, if mechanically possible. T he second blade shall be placed on the finishing
 pan in identical alignment to the first blade. Blade depth shall be equal to one-third of the slab thickness.
 502.5.3.1.3 De pth Ve rification. T he engineer shall have access behind the paver to randomly check joint
 formation by inserting a thin metal strip equal to one-third of the slab thickness into the formed joint.
 502.5.3.1.4 We ak Plane Ve rification. T he contractor shall take four 4-inch diameter cores in the
 longitudinal joint. Cores shall be taken and tested the following day after the first day of paving. Samples
 shall be taken from random locations determined by the engineer. T he cores shall be centered within ± ½
 inch around the joint forming trail. T he first one-third of the slab thickness and the second one-third of
 the slab thickness of each core shall be sawed off from the top and tested in the vertical position for split
 tensile strength. T he average strength ratio of the first and second cores shall be 1/3 or less.
 502.5.3.1.5 Te sting Fre que ncy. For each successive day after the first day of paving, two
 4-inch diameter cores shall be taken in the longitudinal joint. Samples shall be taken from random locations
 determined by the engineer. Cores shall be taken and tested the following day after placement. Cores shall
 be tested to determine the indirect tensile strength ratios. If satisfactory results are consistently achieved,
 the engineer may reduce the number of cores taken.
 502.5.3.1.6 Joint Continuity. T he contractor shall ensure longitudinal joint continuity between
 consecutive day's paving.
 502.5.3.1.7 Unacce ptable Re sults. If the test results or the quality of the joint forming process are not
 satisfactory to the engineer, the contractor shall saw the longitudinal joint for the length affected.
 502.5.4 Se aling Joints. All sawed contraction joints shall be unsealed, unless otherwise specified. Sawed or
 formed expansion joints shall be sealed with joint sealing material before the pavement is opened to any
 traffic, including construction traffic. Immediately prior to sealing, the joints shall be thoroughly cleaned
 and dried. T he sealing material shall be heated to the pouring temperature recommended by the
 manufacturer. Any material which has been heated above the maximum safe heating temperature will be
 rejected. Any excess material shall be removed from the pavement surface.
 502.5.5 Joint Fille r at Railroad Crossings. Bituminous filler for use between railroad crossing approach
 slabs and the crossing shall be an approved commercial bituminous mixture in accordance with Sec 401.
 T he mixture shall be tamped into a firm and compacted state.
 502.6 Curing. Immediately after the finishing operations have been completed and as soon as marring of
 the concrete will not occur, the entire surface and exposed edges of the newly placed concrete shall be
 covered and cured in accordance with one of the following methods. T he concrete shall not be left exposed
 for more than 30 minutes between stages of curing or during the curing period.
 502.6.1 White Pigme nte d Me mbrane . After the free water has left the pavement surface, the entire
 surface shall be sealed by spraying with a uniform application of white pigmented membrane curing
 material. T he contractor shall provide satisfactory equipment to ensure uniform mixture and coverage of
 curing material, without loss, on the pavement at the rate of not less than one gallon for each 200 square
 feet. If rain falls on the newly coated pavement before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage, or if
 
 238
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 the film is damaged in any other way, the contractor shall apply additional curing material to the affected
 portions. All areas cut by finishing tools subsequent to the application of the curing material shall
 immediately be given new applications at the rate specified above. If hairline cracking develops before the
 membrane can be applied, the concrete shall be initially cured with wet burlap in accordance with Sec
 502.6.2 before the membrane is placed. Membrane curing shall not be used on Portland cement concrete
 base. Emulsified asphalt may be used to cure the concrete base if the surface course is to be a bituminous
 type.
 502.6.2 Burlap. T he top surface of the concrete shall be temporarily covered with thoroughly damp
 burlap after the concrete has set sufficiently to prevent marring of the surface. Burlap shall be handled in
 such a manner that contact with earth or other deleterious substances is avoided. All burlap, except burlap
 previously used for curing concrete, shall be thoroughly washed. T he burlap shall be kept thoroughly wet
 until removed for application of the final curing material. Neither the top nor the edge of the concrete
 shall be left unprotected for more than 30 minutes. When the burlap is removed, white pigmented
 membrane curing material shall be continued by one of the approved methods.
 502.7 Re moving Forms. Forms shall be removed carefully to avoid damage to the concrete base or
 pavement. Honeycombed areas not rejected shall be immediately repaired. If the forms are removed less
 than 72 hours after placing concrete, the sides of the concrete shall be cured by one of the methods
 specified above. Any trench excavated for the forms shall be entirely backfilled so water will not stand next
 to the concrete base or pavement.
 502.8 Surface Smoothne ss. T he pavement surface shall be thoroughly tested for smoothness by
 profiling or straightedging as indicated in Sec 610.
 502.9 O pe ning to Traffic. T he concrete base and pavement shall not be opened for low volume, light
 construction traffic until the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of 2500 psi. T he
 concrete base and pavement shall not be opened to all types of traffic until the concrete has attained a
 minimum compressive strength of 3,000 psi and all sawed joints that have opened more than ¼ inch are
 sealed. Compressive strength will be determined by tests conducted in accordance with MoDOT test
 methods. Pavement shall be cleaned prior to opening to traffic.
 502.10 Mate rial Acce ptance . Acceptance will be based on the following criteria being met:
 (a) Test results indicating the concrete base or pavement meets the specification requirements
 (b) Contractor following the approved Quality Control Plan (QCP)
 (c) Favorable comparison between the contractor ’s quality control tests and the engineer ’s quality
 assurance tests. Favorable comparison will be obtained when the engineer ’s QA tests results are
 within two standard deviations from the mean of the QC test results for each individual lot of
 material. For properties not evaluated on a lot by lot basis, favorable comparison will be obtained
 when both the QC and QA tests results meet the specification requirements. Compressive strength
 and slab thickness will be evaluated on a lot by lot basis.
 502.10.1 Lot De finition. A lot shall be the surface area placed in a single day. Each lot shall be divided
 into no less than four or more than six sublots of equal surface area. For high daily production rates
 exceeding 7,500 square yards per day, the contractor may choose to divide the day’s production into two
 equal lots consisting of no less than four or more than six sublots each. T he contractor shall notify the
 engineer of the size of the sublot or of the decision to divide a day’s production into two equal lots prior to
 taking any core samples. When a day’s production involves less than 600 square yards, combine the
 following day’s or days’ production to reach 600 square yards and treat as a single lot, except while
 completing a particular mix design or project, in which case combine with the previous day’s production
 and treat as a single lot. If a project has less than 7,500 square yards of a particular mix type, the lot will be
 defined as the plan quantity shown in the contract documents.
 502.10.2 Sampling. One QC sample shall be taken for each sublot and a minimum of one QA sample shall
 be taken per lot. A sample shall be taken from the finished concrete consisting of a 4-inch diameter core
 for concrete bases or pavements less than 12 inches thick and a 6-inch diameter core for concrete bases or
 
 239
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 pavements 12 inches or greater. Sampling locations will be determined by the engineer using random
 sampling procedures in accordance with AST M D 3665.
 502.10.3 Coring. Cores shall be taken in accordance with AASHT O T 24. Cores shall not be taken until a
 minimum compressive strength of 3,000 psi has been attained. Cores shall be neatly cut with a core drill.
 T he contractor shall furnish all tools, labor and material for cutting samples and filling the cored hole. T he
 contractor shall fill the core holes with an approved non-shrink grout within one day after sampling.
 502.10.3.1 Te sting Core s. T he core thickness shall be determined by the average caliper measurement in
 accordance with AASHT O T 148. After the thickness is determined, the cores shall be sawed to an L/D
 ratio of 2.0 and tested in accordance with AASHT O T 22. Cores shall not be taken until a minimum
 compressive strength of 3,000 psi has been attained. T he contractor shall determine the compressive
 strength by approved methods. Cores shall be tested for compressive strength 28 days after placement.
 502.10.3.2 Pave me nt Thickne ss afte r Diamond Grinding. If the contractor elects to diamond grind to
 improve smoothness or surface texture, in accordance with Sec 610.5.1.3 and 610.5.1.4, then pavement
 thickness determination will be made after all smoothness correction has been completed. Cores shall be 4
 inch in diameter. Location of coring will be determined by the engineer using random sampling procedures
 in accordance with AST M D 3665.
 502.10.4 Q uality Le ve l Analysis. Compressive strength and thickness shall be evaluated for acceptance
 on a lot-by-lot basis using a Quality Level Analysis (QLA). T he QLA will consider the variability (standard
 deviation) of the material and the testing procedures, as well as the average (mean) value of the test results
 to calculate the percentage of material that is above the lower specification tolerance limit (LSL) for
 compressive strength and thickness.
 502.10.4.1 De te rmine Q uality Inde x. T he Percent Within Limits (PWL) will be based on the mean,
 standard deviation and quality index of each lot's test results as follows:
 
 240
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 502.10.4.2 De te rmine Pe rce nt Within limits. T he upper (PWLU) and lower (PWLL) will be
 determined from Table I. Total percent within limits is:
 PWLt = (PWLU + PWLL) - 100. For thickness and compressive strength in this specification,
 PWLU shall be 100.
 502.10.4.3 Utiliz ing Q uality Control Te st Re sults. T he engineer will make the Quality Level Analysis
 (QLA) within 24 hours after receipt of the contractor's test results, by determining the PWLt for each
 designated pay factor item. T he contractor's test results will be used when applicable to determine the
 PWL, provided the contractor's QC tests and the engineer's QA tests compare favorably, and provided the
 engineer's inspection and monitoring activities indicate the contractor is following the approved QC Plan.
 502.10.4.4 Mate rial Re nde re d Unfit. T he engineer may at any time reject and require the contractor to
 dispose of any batch of concrete mixture which is rendered unfit for use due to contamination, segregation,
 improper slump or improper entrained air content. Such rejection may be based on only visual inspection.
 In the event of such rejection, the contractor may take a representative sample of the rejected material in
 the presence of the engineer, and if demonstrated in the laboratory in the presence of the engineer that
 such material was erroneously rejected, payment will be made for the material at the contract unit price.
 502.10.4.5 Lowe r Spe cification Limits. T he lower specification limit (LSL) for compressive strength
 and thickness shall be:
 (a) Compressive Strength – 4,000 psi.
 (b) T hickness – Plan thickness minus 1/2 inch.
 
 241
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 502.10.5 O utlie rs. Individual compressive strength tests within a lot may be checked for an outlier in
 accordance with the determination of statistic T in AST M E 178, at a significance level of 5 percent.
 Replacement cores shall be obtained at the location designated and in the presence of the engineer. T he
 PWL shall be determined using the replacement values.
 502.11 Contractor Q uality Control.
 502.11.1 Q uality Control Plan. Prior to approval of concrete mix designs by the engineer, the
 contractor shall submit a QCP to Construction and Materials. T he QCP shall be approved prior to placing
 any concrete. T he QCP shall include:
 (a) Name and contact information should be provided for the contractor ’s representative in charge
 of QC and the project level representative if different from the contractor ’s representative.
 (b) Identify the number of sublots each lot will utilize and describe how lots and sublots will be
 designated.
 (c) State the method for determining when concrete cores can be extracted.
 (d) State the method for demonstrating the concrete has been protected from freezing.
 (e) State the location where control charts will be posted, if utilized by the contractor.
 (f) For optimized concrete mix, state the target gradation and allowable gradation ranges for each
 fraction being used.
 (g) A proposed independent third party company name, contact person, address, and phone
 number for dispute resolution.
 502.11.1.1 Third Party. T he third party shall be independent of the contractor, MoDOT consultants, and
 all project subcontractors or suppliers on each specific project. All testing of material for dispute resolution
 shall be performed by an approved laboratory that is AASHT O Accreditation Program certified in the areas
 of the material being tested.
 502.11.2 Q uality Control Te sting. T he contractor shall perform all quality control tests necessary to
 control the production and construction processes applicable to this specification and as set forth in the
 QCP. Quality control testing shall be performed by technicians qualified through MoDOT ’s technician
 certification program. Testing shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, deleterious content, coarse
 aggregate absorption, thin or elongated pieces, entrained air content, slump, pavement thickness and
 compressive strength. T he contractor shall record all test results and furnish a copy to the engineer no
 later than the beginning of the day following the test.
 502.11.2.1 Fine and Coarse Aggre gate .
 502.11.2.1.1 Aggre gate Gradation. A sieve analysis shall be performed once a week. Testing shall be
 performed in accordance with AASHT O T 27 from randomly sampled material taken from the discharge
 gate of storage bins or from the conveyor belt. Sieve analysis shall be performed on the following sieves:
 Mix Design Method
 Absolute Volume
 Optimized
 a Coarse
 
 Sieves Tested
 Maximum sieve sizea
 Sieves sizes specified by the mix design
 
 aggregate only
 
 502.11.2.1.2 De le te rious Mate rials. Deleterious content shall be determined each day at a frequency of
 one test per 7500 square yards of material placed or fraction thereof. Test shall be performed in accordance
 with MoDOT Test Method T M 71 from randomly sampled material taken from the discharge gate of the
 storage bin or from the conveyor belt. Test shall be performed on coarse aggregate fractions.
 502.11.2.1.3 Absorption. Samples for coarse aggregate absorption shall be taken from the discharge gate
 
 242
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 of the storage bins or from the conveyor belt at least once every 2,000 cubic yards with a minimum of
 once per project. Coarse aggregate absorption shall be in accordance with AASHT O T 85.
 502.11.2.1.4 Thin or Elongate d Pie ce s. T hin or elongated pieces shall be determined on samples of
 coarse aggregate taken from the discharge gate of the storage bins or from the conveyor belt. T he
 aggregate particles retained on the 3/4 in. sieve shall not exceed 5 percent when tested in accordance with
 AST M D 4791, based on a 5:1 ratio. Test shall be performed at least once every 10,000 cubic yards with a
 minimum of once per project.
 502.11.2.1.5 Re taine d Sample s. All aggregate samples taken by the contractor for determining the
 gradation, deleterious content, absorption, and thin or elongated pieces shall be retained for the engineer
 for a minimum of seven days unless otherwise instructed. T he retained sample shall be the remaining half
 of the final reduction in sample size obtained for QC testing. T hese samples shall be maintained in clean
 covered containers, without contamination, readily accessible to the engineer. T he retained sample’s
 identification shall consist of, but is not limited to:
 (a) T ime and date sampled.
 (b) Product specification number.
 (c) Type of sample, i.e. belt, bin, stockpile.
 (d) Lot and sublot designation.
 (e) Sampler/Tester.
 (f) Project Job Number.
 502.11.2.2 Slump. Slump tests shall be performed on a random basis for each 500 cubic yards of material
 produced. T he engineer will designate the random location at the time of sampling. If a day's material
 production does not exceed 500 cubic yards, one slump test shall be performed. Slump tests shall be in
 accordance with AASHT O T 119 from randomly sampled material discharged from trucks at the paving
 site. Material samples shall be in accordance with AASHT O R 60.
 502.11.2.3 Entraine d Air Conte nt. Tests for entrained air content shall be performed on a random basis
 for each 500 cubic yards of material produced. T he engineer will designate the random location at the time
 of sampling. T he minimum air content in front of the paver shall be 5.0 percent plus the air loss through
 the paver. T he air loss through the paver is determined a minimum of once per half-day production by
 sampling the concrete ahead of the paver and behind the paver and subtracting the value obtained ahead of
 the paver from the value obtained behind the paver. T he engineer shall be given notification prior to
 determining the air loss in order to witness the air loss determination. On the first day of paving, the target
 air content shall be determined immediately after placing 200 cubic yards of concrete. T he entrained air
 content of the first 200 cubic yards of concrete placed on the first day of paving, sampled in front of the
 paver, shall be greater than 6.0 percent. Tests shall be in accordance with AASHT O T 152.
 502.11.3 Corre ctive Action. As a minimum, a process shall be deemed out of control and corrective
 action taken if any one of the conditions below exists. In addition, each truckload of material en route
 prior to the process of being deemed out of control shall be tested for specification compliance.
 502.11.3.1 Aggre gate Gradation. When one test is outside the allowable range, immediate steps shall be
 taken to correct the gradation.
 502.11.3.2 De le te rious Conte nt. When one test is outside the specification limits, immediate steps shall
 be taken to correct the deleterious content.
 502.11.3.3 Slump, Air Conte nt, and Absorption. T he contractor shall halt production and make
 appropriate adjustments whenever either of the following occurs:
 (a) One point falls outside the action limit line for individual measurements or range.
 
 243
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (b) Two points in a row fall outside the specification limit but within the action limit line for
 individual measurements.
 Individual Measurements
 Control Parameter
 Action Limit
 Slump
 +1 in.
 Air Content
 4.5 to 5.0%
 Absorption
 Mix Design plus 0.3% to Mix Design plus 0.6%
 
 502.11.4 Pave me nt. For pavements with a plan thickness below 8 inches, the following shall apply:
 (a) QC shall determine compressive strength at a frequency of no less than one per 7,500 square
 yards. Compressive strength shall be determined from at least two 6- by 12-inch cylinders or from
 at least three 4- by 8-inch cylinders made in accordance with AASHT O T-23 or by the Maturity
 Method in accordance with the contract documents. QA will determine the compressive strength
 at least once per 30,000 square yards. Cylinders shall be tested in accordance with AASHT O T-22.
 A compressive strength of 3,500 shall be attained by 28-day. Sampling location will be determined
 by the engineer using random sampling procedures in accordance with AST M D 3665
 (b) QC shall determine pavement thickness of the fresh concrete at a frequency of no less than
 one per 7,500 square yards. QA will determine the pavement thickness of the fresh concrete at
 least once per 30,000 square yards. Sampling locations will be determined by the engineer using
 random sampling procedures in accordance with AST M D 3665
 (c) QC shall determine the slump, air content, gradation, deleterious, thin and elongated and
 absorption in accordance with Sec 502.11. QA will determine the slump, air content, gradation,
 deleterious, thin and elongated and absorption in accordance with Sec 502.12.
 502.11.5 Shoulde rs. Shoulders with a plan thickness 8 inches or greater shall be inspected in accordance
 with requirements applied to concrete placed in the travel way. Shoulders with a plan thickness below 8
 inches shall be handled in accordance with Sec 502.11.4.
 502.11.6 Dispute Re solution. When there are significant discrepancies between the engineer's and the
 contractor's test results, dispute resolution procedures will be used.
 502.11.6.1 Ce ase Work. T he contractor's operations may be required to cease until the dispute is
 resolved, if the test results indicate the mixture is unacceptable.
 502.11.6.2 Third Party Re solution. T he first step in dispute resolution will be to identify differences in
 procedures and to correct inappropriate procedures before moving to third party resolution. If that does
 not resolve the dispute, either the contractor or the engineer may request the approved QCP third party
 involvement. T he recommendations of the approved third party will be binding on both the engineer and
 contractor.
 502.11.6.3 Third Party Payme nt. T he contractor shall be responsible for the costs associated with third
 party testing and resolution if the final result indicates the engineer's test results were correct. Likewise the
 Commission will be responsible for the cost associated with the third party testing and resolution if the
 final result indicates the contractor's results were correct.
 502.11.6.4 O the r Adjustme nts. T he contractor will not be entitled to any additional payment for costs
 incurred due to use of the dispute resolution procedures such as, but not limited to, those for delay, cessation
 of operations, costs to subcontractors, etc. T he engineer may give consideration to adjustment of working
 days, if warranted.
 502.11.7 Concre te Mix De sign Adjustme nt.
 502.11.7.1 Fie ld Adjustme nt. When test results indicate the concrete produced does not meet the
 specification requirements or is not performing satisfactory, the contractor may adjust the mix design in
 
 244
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 the field as noted herein. Field adjustments may consist of changing the constituents listed on the approved
 mix design by no more than 5.0 percent or changing the water cement ratio by no more than 0.02 from
 the approved mix design. T he engineer shall be notified immediately when any change is made to the mix
 design. Additional fractions of material or new material will not be permitted as a field adjustment. T he
 field adjusted mix shall meet the requirements specified in Sec 501.
 502.11.7.2 Fie ld Re de sign. When the constituents listed on the approved mix design are adjusted by more
 than 5.0 percent or the water cement ratio is changed by more than 0.02, the contractor shall submit a new
 mix design meeting the requirements specified in Sec 501. T he mix design shall be submitted immediately
 to the District for approval. T he contractor will be allowed to continue production while the mix design is
 reviewed.
 502.12 Q uality Assurance . Corrective action shall be required in accordance with Sec 502.11.3 for any
 QA tests outside the action limit. T he engineer will at a minimum, independently test at the following
 frequency:
 Test
 Compressive Strength
 Thickness
 Surface Texture
 Slump
 Entrained Air Content
 Aggregate Gradation
 Coarse Aggregate Deleterious
 Aggregate Absorption
 Thin or Elongated P ieces
 
 Frequency
 1 per lot
 1 per lot
 1 per lot
 1 per day
 1 per day
 1 per project
 1 per week
 1 per 10,000 cubic yards
 1 per project
 
 502.12.1 Re taine d Sample s. T he QA inspector will test at least ten percent of the retained portion of
 the QC samples for aggregate gradation and deleterious content. T he QA inspector will test at least twenty
 percent of the QC retained samples for absorption and thin or elongated pieces. Retained samples will be
 chosen at random. A comparison will be considered favorable when the QA results of a QC retained sample
 are within the applicable limits specified in Sec 403.18.2
 502.12.2 Core Chain of Custody. QA strength and thickness cores that are not in possession of the
 engineer for the entire time from extraction till testing shall be sealed in tamper proof bags after
 extraction.
 502.12.3 Q uality Control Equipme nt. All QC mixture testing shall be performed using equipment
 maintained in accordance with Sec 403.17.3, except as follows:
 Equipment – Test Method
 (AASHTO)
 Sieves
 Mechanical Shakers - T27
 Ovens
 
 Interval
 (Month)
 Check P hysical Condition
 6
 Check Sieving Thoroughness 12
 Verify Temp. Settings
 4
 
 Balances
 
 Verify
 
 Air Meters - T152
 Compression Testing Machine - T22
 Capping Material
 Slump Cones - T119
 
 Calibrate
 Verify Load Indications
 Check Strength
 Check Critical Dimensions
 
 a Verify
 
 Requirement
 
 12 a
 12
 12
 3
 12
 
 after each move.
 
 502.13 Unacce ptable Mate rial. Any material meeting the following criteria shall be considered
 unacceptable:
 (a) If any core measurement of thickness is greater than 10 percent deficient from the plan
 thickness.
 (b) If any core measurement of compressive strength is less than 3,500 psi.
 
 245
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (c) All material with an entrained air content less than 4.0 percent.
 502.14 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the completed pavement will not be made
 except for authorized changes during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the contract
 quantity. Where required, measurement of the Portland cement concrete base and pavement complete in
 place, will be made to the nearest 1/10 square yard. T he revision or correction will be computed and added
 to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 502.15 Basis of Payme nt.
 502.15.1 Compe nsation. T he contract unit price for Portland cement concrete base and pavement will
 be considered as full compensation for all material, including reinforcement, dowels, dowel supports, tie bars
 and any other items entering into the construction of the traveled way pavement or Portland cement
 concrete shoulders, and for the cost of QC testing and smoothness testing. No additional compensation will
 be allowed for any excess thickness.
 502.15.2 Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of concrete base will be paid for at the contract unit price
 with proper allowance made for any deductions for deficiency in thickness and compressive strength. T he
 accepted quantities of Portland cement concrete pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price with
 proper allowance made for any deductions for deficiency in thickness, compressive strength, smoothness or
 marred surface.
 502.15.3 Width. When paving widths are greater than the travel lane widths, payment for profiling will
 apply to the traffic lane design driving width only, normally 12 feet. Random lane coring for thickness or
 required lane replacement will include the full paved lane width to the longitudinal joints or edge of
 shoulder, whichever is first.
 502.15.4 Pay Factors. T he total pay factor (PFt) for each lot is equal to the weighted sum of the pay
 factors (PF) for each pay factor item for each lot, and is determined as follows:
 PFt = + (0.5) PFT + (0.5) PFCS
 Where: PFT = Pay Factor for T hickness
 PFCS = Pay Factor for Compressive Strength
 T he PF for each pay factor item for each lot is based on the PWLt of each pay factor item of each lot and
 is determined as follows:
 When PWLt is greater than or equal to 70: PF = 0.5 PWLt + 55
 When PWLt is less than 70: PF = 2 PWLt - 50
 502.15.5 Small Q uantitie s. For each mix type less than 7,500 square yards, the following shall apply:
 QLA and PWL will not be required.
 Concrete mix shall be within the specified limits for compressive strength, pavement thickness, slump, air
 content, gradation, deleterious, and thin and elongated.
 Payment for each mix type will be made at 100 percent of the contract unit price if compressive strength
 is equal to or greater than 3,500 psi and the pavement thickness is not deficient by more that 10 percent
 of the plan thickness.
 502.15.6 Pave me nts. For pavements with a plan thickness below 8 inches, the following shall apply:
 (a) QLA and PWL will not be required
 (b) Concrete mix shall be within the specified limits for compressive strength, pavement
 thickness, slump, air content, gradation, deleterious, and thin and elongated.
 
 246
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (c) Payment will be made at 100 percent of the contract unit price if compressive strength is equal
 to or greater than 3500psi and pavement thickness is not deficient by more than 10 percent of
 the plan thickness
 502.15.7 Shoulde rs. Shoulders with a plan thickness below 8 inches shall be handle in accordance with Sec
 502.15.6.
 502.15.8 PWL De te rmination Table . Values in Table I are estimates of the PWL corresponding to
 specific values of the Quality Index (Q). For Q values less than zero, the table shall be subtracted from 100.
 
 Q uality Index
 (Q U or Q L)
 n=3
 0.00
 0.01
 0.02
 0.03
 0.04
 0.05
 0.06
 0.07
 0.08
 0.09
 0.10
 0.11
 0.12
 0.13
 0.14
 0.15
 0.16
 0.17
 0.18
 0.19
 0.20
 0.21
 0.22
 0.23
 0.24
 0.25
 0.26
 0.27
 0.28
 0.29
 0.30
 0.31
 0.32
 0.33
 0.34
 0.35
 0.36
 0.37
 0.38
 0.39
 0.40
 0.41
 0.42
 0.43
 
 50.00
 50.28
 50.55
 50.83
 51.10
 51.38
 51.66
 51.93
 52.21
 52.48
 52.76
 53.04
 53.32
 53.59
 53.87
 54.15
 54.43
 54.71
 54.98
 55.26
 55.54
 55.82
 56.10
 56.39
 56.67
 56.95
 57.23
 57.52
 57.80
 58.09
 58.37
 58.66
 58.94
 59.23
 59.51
 59.80
 60.09
 60.38
 60.68
 60.97
 61.26
 61.56
 61.85
 62.15
 
 TAB LE I
 Variability-Unknown Procedure
 Standard-Deviation Method
 PWL For Selected Sample Sizes
 n=4
 
 n=5
 
 n=6
 
 n=7
 
 n=8
 
 n=9
 
 n=10
 
 50.00
 50.33
 50.67
 51.00
 51.34
 51.67
 52.00
 52.33
 52.67
 53.00
 53.33
 53.66
 54.00
 54.33
 54.67
 55.00
 55.33
 55.67
 56.00
 56.34
 56.67
 57.00
 57.33
 57.67
 58.00
 58.33
 58.66
 59.00
 59.33
 59.67
 60.00
 60.33
 60.67
 61.00
 61.34
 61.67
 62.00
 62.33
 62.67
 63.00
 63.33
 63.66
 64.00
 64.33
 
 50.00
 50.36
 50.71
 51.07
 51.42
 51.78
 52.14
 52.49
 52.85
 53.20
 53.56
 53.91
 54.27
 54.62
 54.98
 55.33
 55.68
 56.04
 56.39
 56.75
 57.10
 57.45
 57.81
 58.16
 58.52
 58.87
 59.22
 59.57
 59.93
 60.28
 60.63
 60.98
 61.33
 61.68
 62.03
 62.38
 62.73
 63.08
 63.42
 63.77
 64.12
 64.46
 64.81
 65.15
 
 50.00
 50.37
 50.74
 51.10
 51.47
 51.84
 52.21
 52.57
 52.94
 53.30
 53.67
 54.04
 54.40
 54.77
 55.13
 55.50
 55.86
 56.23
 56.59
 56.96
 57.32
 57.68
 58.05
 58.41
 58.78
 59.14
 59.50
 59.86
 60.22
 60.58
 60.94
 61.30
 61.66
 62.01
 62.37
 62.73
 63.09
 63.44
 63.80
 64.15
 64.51
 64.86
 65.21
 65.57
 
 50.00
 50.37
 50.75
 51.12
 51.50
 51.87
 52.24
 52.62
 52.99
 53.37
 53.74
 54.11
 54.48
 54.86
 55.23
 55.60
 55.97
 56.34
 56.72
 57.09
 57.46
 57.83
 58.20
 58.56
 58.93
 59.30
 59.67
 60.03
 60.40
 60.76
 61.13
 61.49
 61.85
 62.22
 62.58
 62.94
 63.30
 63.66
 64.02
 64.38
 64.74
 65.09
 65.45
 65.80
 
 50.00
 50.38
 50.76
 51.13
 51.51
 51.89
 52.27
 52.65
 53.02
 53.40
 53.78
 54.16
 54.54
 54.91
 55.29
 55.67
 56.04
 56.42
 56.79
 57.17
 57.54
 57.91
 58.29
 58.66
 59.04
 59.41
 59.78
 60.15
 60.51
 60.88
 61.25
 61.62
 61.98
 62.35
 62.71
 63.08
 63.44
 63.80
 64.17
 64.53
 64.89
 65.25
 65.60
 65.96
 
 50.00
 50.38
 50.76
 51.15
 51.53
 51.91
 52.29
 52.67
 53.06
 53.44
 53.82
 54.20
 54.58
 54.95
 55.33
 55.71
 56.09
 56.47
 56.84
 57.22
 57.60
 57.98
 58.35
 58.73
 59.10
 59.48
 59.85
 60.22
 60.60
 60.97
 61.34
 61.71
 62.08
 62.44
 62.81
 63.18
 63.54
 63.91
 64.27
 64.64
 65.00
 65.36
 65.72
 66.07
 
 50.00
 50.38
 50.77
 51.15
 51.54
 51.92
 52.30
 52.69
 53.07
 53.46
 53.84
 54.22
 54.60
 54.99
 55.37
 55.75
 56.13
 56.51
 56.89
 57.27
 57.65
 58.03
 58.40
 58.78
 59.15
 59.53
 59.90
 60.28
 60.65
 61.03
 61.40
 61.77
 62.14
 62.51
 62.88
 63.25
 63.61
 63.98
 64.34
 64.71
 65.07
 65.43
 65.79
 66.15
 
 247
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 0.44
 0.45
 0.46
 0.47
 0.48
 0.49
 0.50
 0.51
 0.52
 0.53
 0.54
 0.55
 0.56
 0.57
 0.58
 0.59
 0.60
 0.61
 0.62
 0.63
 0.64
 0.65
 0.66
 0.67
 0.68
 0.69
 0.70
 0.71
 0.72
 0.73
 0.74
 0.75
 0.76
 0.77
 0.78
 0.79
 0.80
 0.81
 0.82
 0.83
 0.84
 0.85
 0.86
 0.87
 0.88
 0.89
 0.90
 0.91
 0.92
 0.93
 0.94
 0.95
 0.96
 0.97
 0.98
 0.99
 1.00
 1.01
 1.02
 1.03
 
 62.44
 62.74
 63.04
 63.34
 63.65
 63.95
 64.25
 64.56
 64.87
 65.18
 65.49
 65.80
 66.12
 66.44
 66.75
 67.07
 67.39
 67.72
 68.05
 68.37
 68.70
 69.03
 69.37
 69.71
 70.05
 70.39
 70.73
 71.08
 71.44
 71.79
 72.15
 72.50
 72.87
 73.24
 73.62
 73.99
 74.36
 74.75
 75.15
 75.54
 75.94
 76.33
 76.75
 77.18
 77.60
 78.03
 78.45
 78.91
 79.37
 79.83
 80.29
 80.75
 81.27
 81.78
 82.30
 82.81
 83.33
 83.93
 84.53
 85.14
 
 64.67
 65.00
 65.33
 65.67
 66.00
 66.34
 66.67
 67.00
 67.33
 67.67
 68.00
 68.33
 68.66
 69.00
 69.33
 69.67
 70.00
 70.33
 70.67
 71.00
 71.34
 71.67
 72.00
 72.33
 72.67
 73.00
 73.33
 73.66
 74.00
 74.33
 74.67
 75.00
 75.33
 75.67
 76.00
 76.34
 76.67
 77.00
 77.33
 77.67
 78.00
 78.33
 78.66
 79.00
 79.33
 79.67
 80.00
 80.33
 80.67
 81.00
 81.34
 81.67
 82.00
 82.33
 82.67
 83.00
 83.33
 83.66
 84.00
 84.33
 
 65.50
 65.84
 66.18
 66.53
 66.87
 67.22
 67.56
 67.90
 68.24
 68.58
 68.92
 69.26
 69.60
 69.94
 70.27
 70.61
 70.95
 71.28
 71.61
 71.95
 72.28
 72.61
 72.94
 73.27
 73.60
 73.93
 74.26
 74.59
 74.91
 75.24
 75.56
 75.89
 76.21
 76.53
 76.85
 77.17
 77.49
 77.81
 78.12
 78.44
 78.75
 79.07
 79.38
 79.69
 80.00
 80.31
 80.62
 80.92
 81.23
 81.53
 81.84
 82.14
 82.44
 82.74
 83.04
 83.34
 83.64
 83.93
 84.22
 84.51
 
 65.92
 66.27
 66.62
 66.96
 67.31
 67.65
 68.00
 68.34
 68.69
 69.03
 69.38
 69.72
 70.06
 70.40
 70.73
 71.07
 71.41
 71.74
 72.08
 72.41
 72.75
 73.08
 73.41
 73.73
 74.06
 74.38
 74.71
 75.03
 75.35
 75.68
 76.00
 76.32
 76.63
 76.95
 77.26
 77.58
 77.89
 78.20
 78.51
 78.81
 79.12
 79.43
 79.73
 80.03
 80.33
 80.63
 80.93
 81.22
 81.51
 81.81
 82.10
 82.39
 82.67
 82.95
 83.24
 83.52
 83.80
 84.08
 84.35
 84.63
 
 66.16
 66.51
 66.86
 67.21
 67.56
 67.91
 68.26
 68.61
 68.95
 69.30
 69.64
 69.99
 70.33
 70.67
 71.00
 71.34
 71.68
 72.01
 72.34
 72.68
 73.01
 73.34
 73.67
 73.99
 74.32
 74.64
 74.97
 75.29
 75.61
 75.92
 76.24
 76.56
 76.87
 77.18
 77.50
 77.81
 78.12
 78.42
 78.72
 79.03
 79.33
 79.63
 79.92
 80.22
 80.51
 80.81
 81.10
 81.38
 81.67
 81.95
 82.24
 82.52
 82.80
 83.07
 83.35
 83.62
 83.90
 84.17
 84.43
 84.70
 
 66.31
 66.67
 67.02
 67.37
 67.73
 68.08
 68.43
 68.78
 69.12
 69.47
 69.81
 70.16
 70.50
 70.84
 71.17
 71.51
 71.85
 72.11
 72.37
 72.63
 72.89
 73.15
 73.55
 73.95
 74.35
 74.75
 75.15
 75.46
 75.78
 76.09
 76.41
 76.72
 77.03
 77.34
 77.64
 77.95
 78.26
 78.56
 78.86
 79.16
 79.46
 79.76
 80.05
 80.34
 80.63
 80.92
 81.21
 81.49
 81.77
 82.05
 82.33
 82.61
 82.88
 83.15
 83.42
 83.69
 83.96
 84.22
 84.48
 84.74
 
 66.43
 66.79
 67.14
 67.49
 67.85
 68.20
 68.55
 68.90
 69.24
 69.59
 69.93
 70.28
 70.62
 70.96
 71.29
 71.63
 71.97
 72.30
 72.63
 72.97
 73.30
 73.63
 73.95
 74.28
 74.60
 74.93
 75.25
 75.57
 75.88
 76.20
 76.51
 76.83
 77.14
 77.44
 77.75
 78.05
 78.36
 78.66
 78.95
 79.25
 79.54
 79.84
 80.13
 80.42
 80.70
 80.99
 81.28
 81.56
 81.84
 82.11
 82.39
 82.67
 82.94
 83.20
 83.47
 83.73
 84.00
 84.26
 84.51
 84.77
 
 248
 
 66.51
 66.87
 67.22
 67.57
 67.93
 68.28
 68.63
 68.98
 69.32
 69.67
 70.01
 70.36
 70.70
 71.04
 71.38
 71.72
 72.06
 72.39
 72.72
 73.06
 73.39
 73.72
 74.04
 74.36
 74.69
 75.01
 75.33
 75.64
 75.96
 76.27
 76.59
 76.90
 77.21
 77.51
 77.82
 78.12
 78.43
 78.72
 79.02
 79.31
 79.61
 79.90
 80.19
 80.47
 80.76
 81.04
 81.33
 81.61
 81.88
 82.16
 82.43
 82.71
 82.97
 83.24
 83.50
 83.77
 84.03
 84.28
 84.53
 84.79
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 1.04
 1.05
 1.06
 1.07
 1.08
 1.09
 1.10
 1.11
 1.12
 1.13
 1.14
 1.15
 1.16
 1.17
 1.18
 1.19
 1.20
 1.21
 1.22
 1.23
 1.24
 1.25
 1.26
 1.27
 1.28
 1.29
 1.30
 1.31
 1.32
 1.33
 1.34
 1.35
 1.36
 1.37
 1.38
 1.39
 1.40
 1.41
 1.42
 1.43
 1.44
 1.45
 1.46
 1.47
 1.48
 1.49
 1.50
 1.51
 1.52
 1.53
 1.54
 1.55
 1.56
 1.57
 1.58
 1.59
 1.60
 1.61
 1.62
 1.63
 
 85.74
 86.34
 87.10
 87.87
 88.63
 89.40
 90.16
 91.55
 92.95
 94.34
 95.74
 97.13
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 
 84.67
 85.00
 85.33
 85.67
 86.00
 86.34
 86.67
 87.00
 87.33
 87.67
 88.00
 88.33
 88.66
 89.00
 89.33
 89.67
 90.00
 90.33
 90.67
 91.00
 91.34
 91.67
 92.00
 92.33
 92.67
 93.00
 93.33
 93.66
 94.00
 94.33
 94.67
 95.00
 95.33
 95.67
 96.00
 96.34
 96.67
 97.00
 97.33
 97.67
 98.00
 98.33
 98.66
 99.00
 99.33
 99.67
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 
 84.80
 85.09
 85.38
 85.66
 85.95
 86.23
 86.52
 86.80
 87.07
 87.35
 87.62
 87.90
 88.17
 88.44
 88.70
 88.97
 89.24
 89.50
 89.76
 90.02
 90.28
 90.54
 90.79
 91.04
 91.29
 91.54
 91.79
 92.03
 92.27
 92.50
 92.74
 92.98
 93.21
 93.44
 93.66
 93.89
 94.12
 94.33
 94.55
 94.76
 94.98
 95.19
 95.39
 95.59
 95.80
 96.00
 96.20
 96.39
 96.57
 96.76
 96.94
 97.13
 97.30
 97.47
 97.63
 97.80
 97.97
 98.12
 98.27
 98.42
 
 84.90
 85.18
 85.44
 85.71
 85.97
 86.24
 86.50
 86.76
 87.01
 87.27
 87.52
 87.78
 88.03
 88.27
 88.52
 88.76
 89.01
 89.25
 89.48
 89.72
 89.95
 90.19
 90.41
 90.64
 90.86
 91.09
 91.31
 91.52
 91.73
 91.95
 92.16
 92.37
 92.57
 92.77
 92.97
 93.17
 93.37
 93.56
 93.75
 93.94
 94.13
 94.32
 94.49
 94.67
 94.84
 95.02
 95.19
 95.35
 95.51
 95.68
 95.84
 96.00
 96.15
 96.30
 96.45
 96.60
 96.75
 96.88
 97.02
 97.15
 
 84.96
 85.23
 85.49
 85.74
 86.00
 86.25
 86.51
 86.75
 87.00
 87.24
 87.49
 87.73
 87.96
 88.20
 88.43
 88.67
 88.90
 89.12
 89.35
 89.57
 89.80
 90.02
 90.23
 90.44
 90.65
 90.86
 91.07
 91.27
 91.47
 91.68
 91.88
 92.08
 92.27
 92.46
 92.64
 92.83
 93.02
 93.20
 93.37
 93.55
 93.72
 93.90
 94.06
 94.23
 94.39
 94.56
 94.72
 94.87
 95.02
 95.18
 95.33
 95.48
 95.62
 95.76
 95.89
 96.03
 96.17
 96.30
 96.43
 96.55
 
 85.00
 85.26
 85.51
 85.76
 86.01
 86.26
 86.51
 86.75
 86.99
 87.22
 87.46
 87.70
 87.93
 88.15
 88.38
 88.60
 88.83
 89.05
 89.26
 89.48
 89.69
 89.91
 90.12
 90.32
 90.53
 90.73
 90.94
 91.13
 91.32
 91.52
 91.71
 91.90
 92.08
 92.26
 92.45
 92.63
 92.81
 92.98
 93.15
 93.31
 93.48
 93.65
 93.81
 93.97
 94.12
 94.28
 94.44
 94.59
 94.73
 94.88
 95.02
 95.17
 95.30
 95.44
 95.57
 95.71
 95.84
 95.96
 96.08
 96.21
 
 85.02
 85.28
 85.53
 85.77
 86.02
 86.26
 86.51
 86.74
 86.98
 87.21
 87.45
 87.68
 87.90
 88.12
 88.35
 88.57
 88.79
 89.00
 89.21
 89.43
 89.64
 89.85
 90.05
 90.25
 90.44
 90.64
 90.84
 91.03
 91.22
 91.40
 91.59
 91.78
 91.96
 92.14
 92.31
 92.49
 92.67
 92.83
 93.00
 93.16
 93.33
 93.49
 93.64
 93.80
 93.95
 94.11
 94.26
 94.40
 94.54
 94.69
 94.83
 94.97
 95.10
 95.23
 95.36
 95.49
 95.62
 95.74
 95.86
 95.98
 
 249
 
 85.04
 85.29
 85.53
 85.77
 86.02
 86.26
 86.50
 86.73
 86.96
 87.20
 87.43
 87.66
 87.88
 88.10
 88.32
 88.54
 88.76
 88.97
 89.17
 89.38
 89.58
 89.79
 89.99
 90.19
 90.38
 90.58
 90.78
 90.96
 91.15
 91.33
 91.52
 91.70
 91.87
 92.04
 92.22
 92.39
 92.56
 92.72
 92.88
 93.05
 93.21
 93.37
 93.52
 93.67
 93.83
 93.98
 94.13
 94.27
 94.41
 94.54
 94.68
 94.82
 94.95
 95.08
 95.20
 95.33
 95.46
 95.58
 95.70
 95.81
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 1.64
 1.65
 1.66
 1.67
 1.68
 1.69
 1.70
 1.71
 1.72
 1.73
 1.74
 1.75
 1.76
 1.77
 1.78
 1.79
 1.80
 1.81
 1.82
 1.83
 1.84
 1.85
 1.86
 1.87
 1.88
 1.89
 1.90
 1.91
 1.92
 1.93
 1.94
 1.95
 1.96
 1.97
 1.98
 1.99
 2.00
 2.01
 2.02
 2.03
 2.04
 2.05
 2.06
 2.07
 2.08
 2.09
 2.10
 2.11
 2.12
 2.13
 2.14
 2.15
 2.16
 2.17
 2.18
 2.19
 2.20
 2.21
 2.22
 2.23
 
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 
 98.57
 98.72
 98.84
 98.97
 99.09
 99.22
 99.34
 99.43
 99.53
 99.62
 99.72
 99.81
 99.86
 99.91
 99.95
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 
 97.29
 97.42
 97.54
 97.66
 97.78
 97.90
 98.02
 98.13
 98.23
 98.34
 98.44
 98.55
 98.64
 98.73
 98.81
 98.90
 98.99
 99.06
 99.14
 99.21
 99.29
 99.36
 99.42
 99.48
 99.53
 99.59
 99.65
 99.69
 99.73
 99.77
 99.81
 99.85
 99.87
 99.90
 99.92
 99.95
 99.97
 99.98
 99.98
 99.99
 99.99
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 
 96.68
 96.81
 96.92
 97.04
 97.15
 97.27
 97.38
 97.48
 97.58
 97.69
 97.79
 97.89
 97.98
 98.07
 98.17
 98.26
 98.35
 98.43
 98.51
 98.58
 98.66
 98.74
 98.81
 98.87
 98.94
 99.00
 99.07
 99.13
 99.18
 99.24
 99.29
 99.35
 99.39
 99.44
 99.48
 99.53
 99.57
 99.60
 99.64
 99.67
 99.71
 99.74
 99.76
 99.79
 99.81
 99.84
 99.86
 99.88
 99.89
 99.91
 99.92
 99.94
 99.95
 99.96
 99.97
 99.98
 99.99
 99.99
 99.99
 100.00
 
 96.33
 96.45
 96.56
 96.67
 96.79
 96.90
 97.01
 97.11
 97.21
 97.31
 97.41
 97.51
 97.60
 97.69
 97.78
 97.87
 97.96
 98.04
 98.12
 98.19
 98.27
 98.35
 98.42
 98.49
 98.55
 98.62
 98.69
 98.75
 98.81
 98.87
 98.93
 98.99
 99.04
 99.09
 99.14
 99.19
 99.24
 99.28
 99.32
 99.37
 99.41
 99.45
 99.48
 99.51
 99.55
 99.58
 99.61
 99.64
 99.66
 99.69
 99.71
 99.74
 99.76
 99.78
 99.80
 99.82
 99.84
 99.85
 99.87
 99.88
 
 96.10
 96.22
 96.33
 96.44
 96.54
 96.65
 96.76
 96.86
 96.96
 97.05
 97.15
 97.25
 97.34
 97.43
 97.52
 97.61
 97.70
 97.78
 97.86
 97.93
 98.01
 98.09
 98.16
 98.23
 98.30
 98.37
 98.44
 98.50
 98.56
 98.62
 98.68
 98.74
 98.79
 98.84
 98.90
 98.95
 99.00
 99.05
 99.09
 99.14
 99.18
 99.23
 99.27
 99.30
 99.34
 99.37
 99.41
 99.44
 99.47
 99.51
 99.54
 99.57
 99.59
 99.62
 99.64
 99.67
 99.69
 99.71
 99.73
 99.75
 
 250
 
 95.93
 96.05
 96.16
 96.27
 96.37
 96.48
 96.59
 96.69
 96.78
 96.88
 96.97
 97.07
 97.16
 97.25
 97.33
 97.42
 97.51
 97.59
 97.67
 97.75
 97.83
 97.91
 97.98
 98.05
 98.11
 98.18
 98.25
 98.31
 98.37
 98.44
 98.50
 98.56
 98.61
 98.67
 98.72
 98.78
 98.83
 98.88
 98.92
 98.97
 99.01
 99.06
 99.10
 99.14
 99.18
 99.22
 99.26
 99.29
 99.32
 99.36
 99.39
 99.42
 99.45
 99.48
 99.50
 99.53
 99.56
 99.58
 99.61
 99.63
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 2.24
 2.25
 2.26
 2.27
 2.28
 2.29
 2.30
 2.31
 2.32
 2.33
 2.34
 2.35
 2.36
 2.37
 2.38
 2.39
 2.40
 2.41
 2.42
 2.43
 2.44
 2.45
 2.46
 2.47
 2.48
 2.49
 2.50
 2.51
 2.52
 2.53
 2.54
 2.55
 2.56
 2.57
 2.58
 2.59
 2.60
 2.61
 2.62
 2.63
 2.64
 2.65
 
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 
 99.90
 99.91
 99.92
 99.93
 99.94
 99.95
 99.96
 99.96
 99.97
 99.97
 99.98
 99.98
 99.98
 99.99
 99.99
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 
 99.77
 99.79
 99.80
 99.82
 99.83
 99.85
 99.86
 99.87
 99.88
 99.90
 99.91
 99.92
 99.93
 99.93
 99.94
 99.94
 99.95
 99.96
 99.96
 99.97
 99.97
 99.98
 99.98
 99.98
 99.99
 99.99
 99.99
 99.99
 99.99
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 
 251
 
 99.66
 99.68
 99.70
 99.72
 99.73
 99.75
 99.77
 99.78
 99.80
 99.81
 99.83
 99.84
 99.85
 99.86
 99.87
 99.88
 99.89
 99.90
 99.91
 99.91
 99.92
 99.93
 99.94
 99.94
 99.95
 99.95
 99.96
 99.96
 99.97
 99.97
 99.98
 99.98
 99.98
 99.98
 99.99
 99.99
 99.99
 99.99
 99.99
 100.00
 100.00
 100.00
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 503
 BRIDGE APPRO ACH SLAB
 503.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing a reinforced concrete or asphaltic concrete
 bridge approach slab on a prepared subgrade in accordance with these specifications and as shown on the
 plans or as directed by the engineer.
 503.2 Mate rial. All material, proportioning, air-entraining, mixing, slump and transporting of Portland
 cement concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501. All material for asphalt shall meet the specification
 requirements for the mix type specified. Approach slabs shall be constructed of pavement concrete or an
 approved Class B-1 concrete mixture, or asphaltic concrete. All material shall be in accordance with
 Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete Structures
 Concrete Sealer
 Concrete Curing Material
 Material for Joints
 P olyethylene Sheeting
 
 Section
 1036
 1053
 1055
 1057
 1058
 
 503.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Concrete bridge approach slabs shall be constructed in accordance
 with Secs 703 and 706, and shall attain a compressive strength of 4,000 psi prior to opening to traffic.
 Concrete bridge approach slabs shall be textured in accordance with Sec 703. Curing shall be in accordance
 with Sec 502, except the liquid membrane-curing compounds shall be in accordance with Sec 1055 for
 bridge curing compounds. Bridge approach slabs shall require sealing with a concrete sealer.
 Asphalt bridge approach slabs shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications for the mix type
 specified.
 503.3.1 Voids Unde r Comple te d Concre te Approach Slabs. Prior to acceptance of the work, all
 underseal access holes shall be opened by the contractor to permit investigation by the engineer. Any voids
 or cavities found shall be filled by the contractor using an approved method. Care shall be taken during
 pumping operations to avoid raising the approach slab.
 503.3.1.1 Filling Hole s. At the completion of the investigation or underseal pumping, the holes shall be
 filled with sand to within one inch of the top and the remainder filled with joint sealing material.
 503.3.2 Aggre gate Base . Testing of aggregate base will be completed by the engineer.
 503.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the completed bridge approach slab will not be
 made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the
 contract quantity. Where required, measurement of the approach slab will be made to the nearest square
 yard. T his area will be measured transversely from out to out and longitudinally from end to end of bridge
 approach slab. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract
 quantity.
 503.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he amount of completed and accepted work as shown on the plans, measured
 as provided above, will be paid for at the contract unit price. No direct payment will be made for the
 reinforcing steel for concrete bridge approach slabs. No direct payment will be made for investigating void
 conditions under the completed slab or for filling any voids found for concrete bridge approach slabs.
 
 252
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 504
 CO NCRETE APPRO ACH PAVEMENT
 504.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of placement and preparation of base material and the
 construction of concrete approach pavement in accordance with these specifications, as shown on the
 plans or as directed by the engineer.
 504.2 Mate rial. All material, proportioning, air-entraining, mixing, slump and transporting of Portland
 cement concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501. Approach pavement shall be constructed of
 pavement concrete or an approved Class B-1 concrete mixture. All material shall be in accordance with
 Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Aggregate for Base
 Concrete Curing Material
 Material for Joints
 
 Section
 1007.3
 1055
 1057
 
 504.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 504.3.1 Base placement shall be in accordance with Sec 304. Concrete approach pavement and shoulders
 shall be constructed in accordance with Sec 503. Concrete approach pavement will not require sealing with
 a concrete sealer. Type A Curb, where required, shall be constructed in accordance with Sec 609.
 504.3.2 Aggregate Base Testing of aggregate base will be completed by the engineer.
 504.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the completed concrete approach pavement will
 not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the
 contract quantity. Where required, concrete approach pavement areas, including shoulders, will be measured
 to the nearest 1/10 square yard. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from
 the contract quantity.
 504.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of concrete approach pavement will be paid for at the
 contract unit price and will be considered full compensation for Type A Curb, all labor, equipment and
 material to complete the described work.
 
 253
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 505
 BRIDGE DECK CO NCRETE WEARING SURFACE
 SECTIO N 505.10 LO W SLUMP CO NCRETE.
 505.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing a wearing surface of low slump, dense
 concrete on a prepared surface in accordance with these specifications, as shown on the plans or as directed
 by the engineer.
 505.10.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Type I or II Cement
 Air-Entraining Admixture
 Water Reducing Admixture
 Burlap
 P olyethylene Sheeting
 Water
 
 Section
 1019
 1054
 1054
 1055
 1058
 1070
 
 505.10.2.1 Coarse aggregate shall be an approved crushed limestone, crushed quartzite, flint chat from the
 Joplin area or porphyry in accordance with Sec 1005.2, Gradation E, except that the sum of percentages of
 all deleterious substances shall not exceed one percent and the percentage of deleterious substances shall not
 exceed the following values:
 Item
 Percent by Weight
 Deleterious Rock
 1.0
 Shale and P yrite
 0.2
 Chert in Limestone
 0.5
 Other Foreign Material
 0.1
 
 505.10.2.2 Gradation D may be used when the plan thickness of the bridge deck overlay is 3 inches or
 greater.
 505.10.2.3 Fine aggregate shall be in accordance with Sec 1005.3 and shall be Class A sand in accordance
 with Sec 501.
 505.10.2.4 Pozzolanic material or Portland pozzolan cements shall not be used.
 505.10.3 Concre te Mixture .
 505.10.3.1 T he contractor shall submit a mix design to Construction and Materials meeting the following
 properties:
 Property
 Requirement
 Air Content, percent (minimum)
 5.0
 Slump, inches
 1/2 ± 1/2
 P ercent Fine Aggregate as P ercent of
 50
 Total Aggregate by Absolute Volume
 Cement Content, lbs./cubic yard
 818 to 827
 
 505.10.3.2 T he cement content and percent fine aggregate shall not be changed. If total mixing water,
 including free water in aggregate and liquid admixtures, varies from design mixing water to cause a change in
 batch volume of more than two percent, a new mix design will be required.
 505.10.3.3 A Type A water-reducing admixture will be required.
 505.10.3.4 During placement, the mixture shall be compacted to no less than 98 percent of the standard
 density.
 
 254
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 505.10.4 Te sting.
 505.10.4.1 Slump will be determined in accordance with AASHT O T 119. T he sample for slump testing will
 be taken at the point of placement in the structure.
 505.10.4.2 Air content will be determined by the pressure method in accordance with AASHT O T 152.
 505.10.4.3 When required, standard density, unit weight, will be determined in accordance with AASHT O T
 121. Standard density will be determined for at least each two hours of concrete production or any time
 significant fluctuations occur within the range of air content or slump.
 505.10.4.4 Compressive strength will be determined from at least two 6- by 12- inch cylinders or from at
 least three 4- by 8- inch cylinders prepared in accordance with AASHT O T 23 and tested in accordance
 with AASHT O T 22. One set consisting of two cylinders will be made for 28-day compressive strength
 from each day's production. Cylinders made for determining when to permit traffic will be made at a
 frequency determined by the engineer, and will be cured in the near vicinity and in the same manner as the
 bridge deck.
 505.10.4.5 Concrete taken as a sample for testing slump and air content shall be wasted and shall not be
 placed in the deck. If air content or slump test results are not in accordance with specifications, any
 concrete represented by those tests and any concrete in the mixer chute shall be wasted, and the necessary
 adjustments shall be made in the mix design or proportioning devices.
 505.10.4.6 When concrete density is specified, in-place density of plastic concrete will be determined in
 accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 36. In-place density will be determined at a minimum passing
 test rate of one per 100 square yards or three per continuous pour, whichever is greater. A nuclear gauge
 correction factor will be determined at least once for each day of concrete production. Work bridges
 spanning the plastic concrete shall be provided by the contractor to permit performing nuclear density
 tests.
 505.10.5 Mixing.
 505.10.5.1 Concrete shall be mixed in accordance with Sec 501.
 505.10.5.2 Mixing time for rotating paddle type mixers shall be a minimum of 60 seconds after all
 ingredients have been added. All batches shall be mixed approximately the same length of time. Material
 for a batch of concrete shall not be placed in the mixing drum until the material for the previous batch has
 been discharged.
 505.10.6 Surface Pre paration.
 505.10.6.1 On new concrete decks, the surface shall be given a very rough texture while still plastic by use
 of a wire comb or other approved texturing device which will produce a bondable surface acceptable to the
 engineer.
 505.10.6.2 On old existing concrete decks with existing wearing surfaces, the wearing surface shall be
 removed in accordance with Sec 216. On existing concrete decks without existing wearing surfaces, the
 surface shall be scarified in accordance with Sec 216.
 505.10.6.3 T he textured or scarified deck shall be sandblasted followed by an air blast. T he sandblast shall
 remove all dirt, oil and other foreign material, as well as any unsound concrete or laitance from the surface
 and edges against which new concrete is to be placed. T he compressor shall be equipped to prevent oil in
 the air supply. T hat portion of the curb and previously placed overlays against which new concrete is to be
 placed shall be sandblasted. Any loose or foreign material detected on the concrete surface prior to
 placement of the overlay shall be removed by sand or air blasting. T he concrete surface may require
 retexturing where penetration of foreign material is evident. No contamination of the retextured or
 scarified concrete surface will be permitted.
 
 255
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 505.10.6.4 To assure that the thickness of the concrete overlay above the prepared surface will be as
 specified on the plans, the clearance shall be checked in the following manner before concrete is placed. A
 filler block having a thickness 1/8 inch less than the overlay thickness shall be attached to the bottom of
 the screed. With screed guides in place, the screed shall be passed over the area to be concreted. Where the
 intended clearance does not allow use of this method, a stringline or other means shall be used, subject to
 approval from the engineer. All old concrete that does not have sufficient clearance shall be removed.
 505.10.7 Finishing Equipme nt.
 505.10.7.1 T he finishing machine shall be designed for striking off and finishing low slump concrete
 overlay. T he machine shall be mechanically powered to operate forward and reverse in a smooth manner,
 under positive control of the operator. T he basic machine shall be of a width to finish a basic 12-foot width
 of overlay and shall be adjustable for wider placements. T he finishing machine shall be designed to allow the
 screeds to be extended with bolted units to match the extension of the basic unit. T he drive wheels shall be
 of the type that may be replaced with solid rubber wheels to permit travel upon previously completed lanes
 of overlay when striking off the abutting lanes.
 505.10.7.2 T he finishing machine shall be equipped with two oscillating transverse screeds. T he screeds
 shall oscillate in a straight line. A swinging pendulum stoke shall not be used. T he front screed shall vibrate
 uniformly for the full length of the screed. T he vibrators shall be placed such that the screed vibrates
 efficiently and the frequency of the vibrators shall be controlled by the operator from the console to
 achieve the required density.
 505.10.7.2.1 Screeds shall be held positive to the machine with rollers and, unless otherwise approved by
 the engineer, shall be equipped with screed guides such as to control the profile grade of the finished
 overlay. T he screed stroke shall be synchronized to speeds not exceeding 50 strokes per minute, with
 infinite variable control from the console. T he screeds shall be capable of vertical lift when the machine is
 reversed for travel, and controlled for downward direction to the finishing position to permit feathering of
 the screeds to any previously finished surface.
 505.10.7.2.2 T he bottom face of the screeds shall be at least 5 inches wide, with an effective pressure to
 produce no less than 75 psf. T he bottom face of the screeds shall have a turned up leading edge to prevent
 tearing of the screeded surface and shall be adjustable for tilt and crown. T he screed lengths shall be such to
 produce positive strike off and density of the concrete for at least 6 inches beyond the line where the saw
 cut for the longitudinal joint is to be made and to within one inch of the curb reinforcing steel or face of
 any curb barrier already in place.
 505.10.7.3 T he machine shall be equipped with a mechanically-powered adjustable auger positioned in front
 of the lead screed. T he strike-off shall travel back and forth for the full width to be screeded and shall be
 properly designed to meter the concrete to the screeds.
 505.10.7.4 Heavy duty support rails shall be used to support the finishing machine. Support rails shall be
 adjustable and the rail shall not deflect more than 1/32 inch between adjustable supports. Support rails shall
 be placed outside the area and parallel to axis of the area to be concreted. Support rails shall extend a
 sufficient distance beyond the end of the deck to allow the finishing machine to be completely removed
 from the deck surface such that hand finishing may proceed without interruption. T he support rails shall be
 set to produce the final profile grade of the surface of the overlay. A hold-down device shot into the
 concrete will not be permitted unless the concrete is to be subsequently resurfaced. T he proposed method of
 anchoring the support rails shall be submitted to the engineer for approval.
 505.10.8 Placing and Finishing Concre te .
 505.10.8.1 A lateral support for the concrete such as 2 x 4-inch lumber attached to the deck will be
 required at least 6 inches beyond the line where the saw cut for the longitudinal joint is to be made.
 505.10.8.2 In order to avoid locating the longitudinal construction joints in a wheelpath, the joints shall be
 placed between the designated traffic lanes. T he location of the longitudinal joints shall be subject to the
 approval from the engineer.
 
 256
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 505.10.8.3 At transverse and longitudinal joints, the surface course previously placed shall be sawn to a
 straight vertical edge before the adjacent course is placed.
 505.10.8.4 T ransverse joints in the overlay will be permitted if approved by the engineer. T hese joints
 shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the centerline of bent.
 505.10.8.5 T he contractor shall take every reasonable precaution to secure a smooth riding bridge deck.
 Prior to placement operations, the contractor shall review with the engineer, equipment, procedures,
 personnel and previous results as well as inspection procedures to assure coordination. T he contractor shall
 take every reasonable precaution to ensure that concrete can be produced and placed within the specified
 limits, continuously and with uniformity.
 505.10.8.6 T he areas of half-sole and full-depth repair shall have individual concrete placement up to
 bottom of the low slump concrete wearing surface. T hese individual placements shall remain rough and
 shall be completed before the overlay course is started. Areas of half-sole, full-depth repair and all other
 patched areas shall be surface dried, sandblasted and cleaned prior to the placement of low slump concrete
 wearing surface.
 505.10.8.7 Prior to placement of low slump concrete, the cleaned surface shall be thoroughly wetted for a
 minimum of three hours, then covered with polyethylene sheeting until the time of concrete placement.
 T he surface shall be damp at the time the overlay is placed. Any standing water in depressions, holes or
 areas of concrete removal shall be blown out with compressed air. No free water or puddles of standing
 water shall exist at the time of placement.
 505.10.8.8 T he wheels of rubber wheeled vehicles or transport containers for the concrete shall not be
 permitted to contact any portion of the existing concrete surface prior to placement of the concrete.
 Protection shall be provided for the concrete surface by means of plywood, mats or other suitable material
 placed on the surface. Any loose or foreign material or rubber marks accidentally deposited on the surface
 shall be removed by the contractor prior to low slump concrete placement.
 505.10.8.9 Placement of the concrete shall be a continuous operation throughout the pour. Only the
 minimum amount of concrete necessary for proper placement shall be placed in front of the screeds. If the
 concrete paver is stopped for any reason, all plastic concrete in front of the paver shall be covered with
 wet burlap. Concrete shall be poured and finished at a minimum of 2.5 cubic yards per hour for a 12-foot
 wide pour, except when the contractor elects to pour a wider section, the rate of pour shall be increased
 proportionately. When concrete is being mixed and placed at the specified minimum rate under normal
 operations, the finishing machine shall be designed such that the elapsed time between depositing the
 concrete on the deck and final screeding shall not exceed 10 minutes.
 505.10.8.10 If concrete is added to the overlay behind the finishing machine, the area shall be
 mechanically consolidated again by the finishing machine.
 505.10.8.11 After finishing, the contractor shall check the surface with a lightweight 10-foot straightedge.
 Causes for irregularities exceeding 1/8 inch shall be eliminated and corrections shall be made.
 505.10.8.12 T he roadway surface finish shall be in accordance with Sec 703.3.5.5. T he texture shall not
 extend into the areas within approximately 12 inches of curbs.
 505.10.8.13 After texturing the concrete surface, but before applying the wet cure, all vertical joints with
 the adjacent concrete shall be sealed by painting with thinned grout consisting of equal parts cement, sand
 and sufficient water for the mixture to be the consistency of paint.
 505.10.8.14 After the joint painting is completed, the freshly placed lane and joint shall be promptly
 covered with a single layer of clean, wet burlap. Care shall be exercised to ensure that the wet burlap is well
 drained and that the burlap is placed as soon as the surface will support the burlap without deformation.
 505.10.8.15 T he wet cure shall be applied within 30 minutes after the concrete has been placed on the
 deck, except when the surface will be excessively marred by doing so, as determined by the engineer. If the
 concrete requires refinishing because of failure to meet density requirements, the time will be extended 15
 
 257
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 minutes. Failure to apply wet cure within the required time will be cause for rejecting the work affected.
 Surface concrete in the rejected area shall be removed and replaced by the contractor at the contractor's
 expense.
 505.10.8.16 T he surface shall receive a wet cure of at least 72 hours.
 505.10.8.17 After placement and cure of the low slump concrete, the finished deck will be tested to detect
 unbonded areas.
 505.10.8.18 As soon as curing has been completed, the riding surface will be thoroughly straightedged by
 the engineer and all variations exceeding 1/8 inch in 10 feet will be plainly marked. Areas more than 1/8
 inch high shall be removed by an approved device consisting of multiple cutting edges leaving a grooved
 surface finish comparable to that produced by the texturing device. A bush hammer or other impact device
 shall not be used.
 505.10.8.19 T he surface of low slump concrete shall be sealed in accordance with Sec 703.3.8 and payment
 for furnishing and placing shall be included in the contract unit price for other items.
 505.10.9 Limitations of O pe rations.
 505.10.9.1 Vehicle traffic shall not be permitted on the low slump concrete surface for 72 hours and until
 3,000 psi compressive strength is attained.
 505.10.9.2 No low slump concrete shall be placed at ambient temperatures below 45 F or above 85 F.
 Concrete placement may begin when the air temperature and deck temperature is 45 F and rising. Concrete
 shall not be exposed to freezing temperatures until a strength of 3,000 psi has been attained. Any concrete
 damaged by freezing shall be removed and replaced at the contractor's expense.
 505.10.9.3 When the weather forecast predicts temperatures of 85 F or higher, the contractor shall
 schedule placing and finishing low slump concrete during hours in which the ambient temperature will be
 lower than 85 F. T he mixed concrete when placed shall have a maximum temperature of 90 F.
 505.10.9.4 Concrete shall not be placed adjacent to a parallel surface course that is less than 72 hours old.
 T his restriction will not apply to a continuation of placement in a lane or strip beyond a joint in the same
 lane or strip.
 505.10.9.5 Preparation of the area may be started in a lane or strip adjacent to a newly placed surface the
 day following placement of the new surface. If this work is started before the end of the 72-hour curing
 period, the work shall be restricted as follows:
 (a) Sawing or other operations shall interfere with the curing process for the minimum practical
 time only, in the immediate work area only, and the curing shall be resumed promptly.
 (b) No power-driven tools heavier than 15 pounds shall be used.
 (c) Air compressors shall be operated on the deck only directly over the piers.
 (d) No loads other than construction equipment shall be permitted on any portion of the bridge
 floor that has undergone preparation prior to placement and curing of new concrete.
 505.10.10 Re moval. All material removed shall be disposed of by the contractor at the contractor ’s
 expense in a location meeting the approval of the engineer.
 505.10.11 Re pair.
 505.10.11.1 Unbonded areas will be marked by the engineer. T he contractor shall saw cut and remove the
 affected area. All saw cuts shall be straight vertical lines and form square corners at all changes in direction.
 After removal of the concrete, the surface of the area to be repaired and vertical saw cuts shall be cleaned
 of all loose or foreign material by sandblasting and then air blasting. T he surface shall be comparable to the
 original concrete surface prior to the original overlay being placed.
 505.10.11.2 T he concrete used for repair shall meet the same requirements as the original mixture. T he
 
 258
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 concrete shall be vibrated with a surface or pan-type vibrator to obtain compaction. Spud type vibrators
 shall not penetrate to contact with the original concrete. Surface finish and curing shall be in accordance
 with the specifications for the mixture used.
 505.10.12 Method of Measurement. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. T he area of concrete
 wearing surface will be measured and computed to the nearest square yard. T his area will be measured
 longitudinally from end to end of bridge deck and transversely between roadway face of curbs, excluding
 from measurement the area of drains and expansion devices. T he revision or correction will be computed
 and added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 505.10.13 Basis of Payme nt. Payment for the above described work shall be considered completely
 covered by the contract unit price per square yard of concrete wearing surface.
 SECTIO N 505.20 LATEX MO DIFIED CO NCRETE.
 505.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing a wearing surface of latex modified concrete
 on a prepared surface in accordance with these specifications as shown on the plans or as directed by the
 engineer.
 505.20.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Type I or II Cement
 Latex Emulsion Admixture
 P olyethylene Sheeting
 Water
 
 Section
 1019
 1054
 1058
 1070
 
 505.20.2.1 Aggregate shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10.2.
 505.20.2.2 Pozzolanic material or Portland pozzolan cements shall not be used.
 505.20.2.3 Latex admixture shall be kept in a suitable enclosure that will protect the admixture from
 freezing and from exposure to temperatures in excess of 85 F. Drums of latex admixture to be stored at the
 work site in direct sunlight shall be completely covered with a suitable insulating blanket material to
 maintain an enclosed temperature below 85 F.
 505.20.3 Concre te Mixture .
 505.20.3.1 T he contractor shall submit a mix design to Construction and Materials meeting the following
 requirements:
 Property
 Air Content, percent
 Slump, inches
 P ercent Fine Aggregate as
 percent of Total Aggregate
 by Absolute Volume
 Cement Content,
 lbs./cubic yard min.
 Latex Emulsion Admixture,
 gallons/cubic yard. min.
 Net Water/Cement Ratio,
 max., lbs.a water/lbs. cement
 
 Requirement
 0 to 6.5
 9 (max.)
 50 to 55
 658
 24.5
 0.40
 
 a
 
 Net water shall be considered the quantity
 of mixing water added, plus the non-solid
 portion of the latex emulsion.
 505.20.3.2 Any change in mix design or proportions shall be approved by the engineer.
 
 259
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 505.20.3.3 Anti-foam additives, as recommended by the latex emulsion manufacturer, may be required if
 the concrete mixture entrains air above the specified amount.
 505.20.3.4 Air-entraining admixtures shall not be added.
 505.20.4 Te sting. Testing will be done in accordance with Sec 505.10.4, except the slump test will be
 conducted 4 to 5 minutes after discharge from the mixer. During the waiting period, concrete shall be
 deposited on the deck and shall not be disturbed.
 505.20.5 Mixing.
 505.20.5.1 T he concrete shall be volumetrically mixed at the bridge site by a continuous mixer in
 accordance with Sec 501. In addition to other requirements, the mixer shall provide positive control of the
 latex emulsion into the mixing chamber and the latex emulsion shall calibrate to within ± 2 percent of that
 required. T he mixer shall be capable of continuously circulating the latex emulsion and shall have a flowthrough screen between the storage tank and the discharge.
 505.20.5.2 T he concrete discharged from the mixer shall be uniform in composition and consistency.
 Mixing capability shall be such that initial and final finishing operations can proceed at a steady pace. Final
 finishing shall be completed before the formation of a plastic surface film.
 505.20.5.3 T he moisture content of aggregate at the time of proportioning shall be such that water will
 not drain or drip from a sample. Coarse and fine aggregate shall be furnished and handled to avoid
 variations in the moisture content affecting the uniform consistency of the concrete.
 505.20.5.4 Each drum of latex admixture shall be mechanically agitated or hand rolled until thoroughly
 mixed prior to being introduced into the mixer storage compartment. Latex admixture that is stored in the
 mixer storage compartment overnight or during delays in mixing of four hours or more shall be agitated by
 at least two complete cycles in a continuous circulating pump or by mechanical means in the storage
 compartment. T he flow through screen shall be cleaned immediately prior to beginning proportioning and
 as often as necessary thereafter. Latex admixtures of different brands shall not be combined together in any
 manner.
 505.20.6 Surface Pre paration. Surface preparation shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10.6 except as
 specified herein.
 505.20.6.1 Prior to scarifying or chipping on concrete adjacent to latex modified concrete, 96 hours of
 curing shall elapse. If practical, all scarifying by mechanical units shall be completed prior to placing any
 latex modified concrete, unless otherwise shown on the plans. Areas from which unsound concrete and
 patches have been removed shall be kept free of slurry produced by wet sawing or wet scarifying by
 planning the work such that this slurry will drain away from the completed areas of preparation.
 505.20.6.2 On both old and new decks, within 24 hours prior to placing latex modified concrete, the entire
 surface shall be thoroughly cleaned by sandblasting followed by an air blast.
 505.20.7 Finishing Equipme nt.
 505.20.7.1 T he finishing machine shall be self-propelled and shall be capable of forward and reverse
 movement under positive control, with a provision for raising all screeds to clear the screeded surface for
 traveling in reverse. A self-propelled finishing machine with one or more rollers, augers and 1,500 to 2,500
 vpm vibratory pans shall be used. A drag float may be necessary. Any modifications will be subject to
 approval from the engineer.
 505.20.7.2 Support rails shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10.7.4.
 505.20.8 Placing and Finishing Concre te . Placing and finishing shall be in accordance with Sec
 505.10.8 except as specified herein.
 
 260
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 505.20.8.1 Prior to placement of latex modified concrete, the cleaned surface shall be thoroughly wetted
 for a minimum of three hours, then covered with polyethylene sheeting until time of concrete placement.
 T he surface shall be damp at the time the overlay is placed. Any standing water in depressions, holes or
 areas of concrete removal shall be blown out with compressed air. No free water or puddles of standing
 water shall exist at the time of placement.
 505.20.8.2 Expansion joints and dams shall be formed in the concrete overlay. Formation of the joint by
 sawing through the overlay will not be permitted.
 505.20.8.3 Texturing shall occur immediately after finishing and before the plastic film forms on the
 surface. Texturing shall be performed in a manner to prevent pulling the concrete away from an existing
 vertical face. Care shall be taken not to texture too deep and not to tear the surface.
 505.20.8.4 Screed rails and headers shall be separated from the newly placed material by passing a pointing
 trowel along the inside face. Metal expansion dams shall not be separated from the overlayment. T he
 trowel cut shall be made for the entire depth and length of rails or headers after the mixture has stiffened
 sufficiently and shall prevent the concrete from flowing back into the cut.
 505.20.8.5 During placement of the overlay, all joints with adjacent concrete shall be sealed with a mortar
 paste of equal parts cement and fine aggregate, using latex emulsion in lieu of mixing water.
 505.20.8.6 T he wet cure shall be applied promptly after the concrete has been placed on the deck without
 deforming the finished surface.
 505.20.8.7 T he surface shall receive a wet cure for at least 48 hours.
 505.20.8.8 After placement and cure of the latex modified concrete, the finished deck will be tested to
 detect unbonded areas.
 505.20.8.9 No surface sealing shall be applied to the latex modified concrete wearing surface.
 505.20.9 Limitations of O pe rations.
 505.20.9.1 No latex modified concrete shall be placed when the ambient or deck surface temperature is
 above 85 F. Deck temperature shall be determined in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 20.
 505.20.9.2 No latex modified concrete shall be placed at ambient or deck surface temperatures below 45 F.
 Latex modified concrete shall be protected to maintain a minimum specified curing temperature of 45 F.
 Any concrete damaged by freezing or that is exposed to a temperature of less than 45 during the first 8
 hours after placement shall be removed and replaced at the contractor's expense.
 505.20.9.3 T he temperature of the latex modified concrete at time of placement shall be between 45 F and
 90 F. If either the aggregate or water is heated, the maximum temperature for each shall be 100 F at the
 time of addition to the mix. Any method of heating during the mixing of concrete may be used provided
 the heating apparatus will heat the mass uniformly and avoid hot spots that will burn the material. Cement
 or aggregate containing lumps or crusts of hardened material or frost shall not be used.
 505.20.9.4 No vehicular traffic shall be permitted on the latex modified concrete surface until the concrete
 is at least 96 hours old and has attained a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 psi.
 505.20.9.5 Concrete shall not be placed adjacent to a parallel surface course that is less than 96 hours old;
 however, this restriction will not apply to a continuation of placement in a lane or strip beyond a joint in
 the same lane or strip.
 505.20.9.6 Preparation of the area, except scarifying, may be started in a lane or strip adjacent to a newly
 placed surface the day following the surface placement. If this work is started before the end of the 48-hour
 wet curing period, the work will be restricted such that any interference with the curing process is held to
 the minimum practical time.
 
 261
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 505.20.9.7 Longitudinal construction joints shall be placed between designated traffic lanes. T he location
 of the longitudinal joints will be subject to the approval from the engineer.
 505.20.9.8 T ransverse joints in the overlay may be permitted if approved by the engineer. T hese joints
 shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the centerline of bent.
 505.20.9.9 A header shall be installed in case of delay in the placement operations exceeding one-half hour
 in duration. During minor delays of one-half hour or less, the end of the placement shall be protected from
 drying with several layers of wet burlap.
 505.20.9.10 Adequate precautions shall be taken to protect freshly placed concrete from rain. All placing
 operations shall cease when rain begins. T he engineer may order removal of any material damaged by
 rainfall and such material shall be replaced in accordance with these specifications at the contractor's
 expense.
 505.20.10 Re moval. Material removal and disposal shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10.10.
 505.20.11 Re pair. Repair shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10.11.
 505.20.12 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of latex modified concrete will be in accordance with
 Sec 505.10.12.
 505.20.13 Basis of Payme nt. Payment for latex modified concrete will be made in accordance with Sec
 505.10.13.
 SECTIO N 505.30 SILICA FUME CO NCRETE.
 505.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing a wearing surface of silica fume concrete on
 a prepared surface in accordance with these specifications as shown on the plans or as directed by the
 engineer.
 505.30.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Type I Cement
 Air Entraining Admixture
 Retarding Admixture
 Water-Reducing Admixture
 Burlap
 P olyethylene Sheeting
 Water
 
 Section
 1019
 1054
 1054
 1054
 1055
 1058
 1070
 
 505.30.2.1 Silica fume shall be in accordance with Sec 501.
 505.30.2.2 Aggregate shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10.2.
 505.30.2.3 Pozzolanic material, other than silica fume or Portland pozzolan cements shall not be used.
 505.30.2.4 A retarding admixture may be permitted, if recommended by the manufacturer of the silica
 fume admixture.
 505.30.2.5 Approved Type F or G high range water-reducing admixtures will be permitted if specified or
 recommended by the supplier of the silica fume admixture.
 505.30.3 Concre te Mixture .
 505.30.3.1 T he contractor shall submit a mix design to Construction and Materials with the following
 properties:
 
 262
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Property
 Air Content, percent, minimum
 Slump, inches,
 Cement Content, pounds/cubic yard, min
 Water/Cement Ratio lbs. water/lbs. cementitous
 materials, max.
 Silica Fume, % replacement of cement
 P ercent Fine Aggregate (as percent of total fine and
 coarse aggregate by absolute volume)
 High Range Water Reducer
 
 Requirement
 5.0
 3 – 7 1/2
 640
 0.37
 6-8
 50 – 55
 As required
 
 505.30.3.2 T he water content shall include all free moisture in the fine and coarse aggregate, water content
 of the silica fume admixture and water content of the high range water reducer.
 505.30.3.3 T he contractor shall designate in the mix design letter what target the slump will be in the field.
 505.30.4 Te sting. Testing will be done in accordance with Sec 505.10.4.
 505.30.5 Mixing.
 505.30.5.1 Silica fume concrete shall be batched and mixed in accordance with Sec 501, except as herein
 specified.
 505.30.5.2 High range water-reducing admixtures shall be incorporated and mixed into the silica fume
 concrete in accordance with the silica fume admixture manufacturer's recommendations and as approved by
 the engineer. Water-reducing admixtures may be added by hand methods. T he water-reducing admixture
 shall not be mixed with the air-entraining admixture nor shall the water reducer be added to the same
 portion of the mixing water as the air-entraining admixture. Either the air-entraining admixture or the
 water-reducing admixture shall be mixed into the concrete before the other is added.
 505.30.5.3 T ruck mixed silica fume concrete shall be initially mixed for at least 70 revolutions at a rate of
 no less than 12 revolutions per minute or more than 18 revolutions per minute. T ruck mixed silica fume
 concrete shall be transported to the work site at agitating speeds of 2 to 6 revolutions per minute. After
 arriving at the work site and before use, the silica fume concrete shall be mixed for at least 30 revolutions
 at 12 to 18 revolutions per minute.
 505.30.5.4 If on-site rotating paddle-type mixers or on-site rotating drum mixers are used, the length of
 mixing time and the revolution rate shall be as recommended by the silica fume admixture manufacturer.
 505.30.5.5 T he silica fume admixture manufacturer's technical representative shall advise the engineer in
 writing of the proper batching sequence, mixing time, mixing speed and other handling procedures
 necessary to produce a uniform, homogeneous mixture in accordance with this specification prior to
 preparation of silica fume concrete trial batches or placement of any silica fume concrete.
 505.30.5.6 Prior to placement of concrete in the work, the contractor may be required to prepare trial
 batches of concrete for tests. T rial batches shall comply with and be paid for in accordance with Sec 501.
 505.30.6 Surface Pre paration. Surface preparation shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10.6.
 505.30.7 Finishing Equipme nt. T he finishing machine shall be designed for striking off and finishing
 silica fume concrete overlay. T he finishing machine, screeds, traveling strike off and support rails shall be
 in accordance with Sec 505.10.7.
 505.30.8 Placing and Finishing Concrete. Placing and finishing shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10.8
 except as noted herein.
 505.30.8.1 T he cleaned areas to receive the overlay shall be thoroughly and continuously wetted with
 water at least three hours before placement of the overlay is started, then covered with polyethylene
 
 263
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 sheeting until the time of placement. Any accumulations of water shall be dispersed or removed prior to
 applying the overlay.
 505.30.8.2 Since silica fume concrete produces very little bleed water, the engineer may require one or both
 of the following procedures to maintain a surface film until the burlap is placed.
 505.30.8.2.1 A commercially available evaporative retarder may be used judiciously with a misting device
 during the finishing process until the wet burlap is applied only to prevent the surface of the concrete from
 drying out. T he evaporative retarder shall not be used to increase surface workability.
 505.30.8.2.2 Fogging may be done to increase humidity in the area of placement. Any fogging shall be
 done with nozzles specifically designed for fogging, with a maximum rate of one gallon per minute per
 nozzle.
 505.30.8.3 T he surface shall receive a wet cure for at least 7 days. T ime when the ambient temperature is
 below 45 F will not be counted as cure time. Cure shall be continued until 3,000 psi compressive strength
 has been attained.
 505.30.8.4 T he finished deck will be examined for cracking. If cracking is found, the engineer will
 determine whether cracking is detrimental, whether remedial surface repairs are needed or whether the
 overlay in the cracked area should be removed and replaced. All remedial surface repairs, removal or
 replacement shall be done by the contractor at the contractor's expense.
 505.30.8.5 After placement and cure of the silica fume concrete, the finished deck will be tested to detect
 unbonded areas.
 505.30.8.6 No surface sealing shall be applied to the silica fume concrete wearing surface.
 505.30.9 Limitations of O pe rations. Operations shall be limited in accordance with Sec 505.10.9,
 except as noted herein.
 505.30.9.1 Vehicular traffic shall not be permitted on the silica fume concrete surface for seven days, and
 in no case until 3,000 psi compressive strength is attained.
 505.30.9.2 Silica fume concrete shall not be placed when the air temperature or deck temperature is below
 45 F or above 85 F. Concrete placement may begin when the air temperature and deck temperature are 45
 F and rising. Concrete shall not be exposed to freezing temperatures until a strength of 3,000 psi has been
 attained. Any concrete damaged by freezing shall be removed and replaced at the contractor's expense.
 505.30.9.3 When the weather forecast predicts temperatures of 85 F or higher, the contractor shall
 schedule placing and finishing silica fume concrete during hours in which the ambient temperature will be
 lower than 85 F. T he mixed concrete shall not have a temperature higher than 85 F when placed.
 505.30.9.4 Since silica fume concrete may not exhibit bleed water, the probability of plastic shrinkage
 cracking is increased. At surface evaporation rates above 0.1 pound per square foot per hour, plastic
 shrinkage cracking is probable and the contractor shall take precautions such as erecting windbreaks,
 lowering the mix temperature or delaying operations until ambient temperatures are lower. Fogging the
 concrete surface will only be permitted as provided for in this specification. Surface evaporation rates may
 be predicted from mix temperature, air temperature, relative humidity and wind velocity, using Figure 1 of
 the 1986 revised edition of ACI 308-81, Standard Practice for Curing Concrete.
 505.30.10 Re moval. Material removal and disposal shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10.10.
 505.30.11 Re pair. Repairs shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10.11.
 505.30.12 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of silica fume concrete will be in accordance with Sec
 505.10.12.
 505.30.13 Basis of Payme nt. Payment for silica fume concrete will be made in accordance with Sec
 
 264
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 505.10.13.
 SECTIO N 505.40 LATEX MO DIFIED HIGH EARLY STRENGTH CO NCRETE.
 505.40.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of a wearing surface of latex modified high early strength
 concrete constructed on a prepared surface in accordance with this specification and in accordance with
 lines, grades, thickness and typical cross sections shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 505.40.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10, Division 1000, Materials Details
 and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Latex Emulsion Admixture
 P olyethylene Sheeting
 Water
 
 Section
 1054
 1058
 1070
 
 505.40.2.1 With approval of the engineer, a Type HE high-early-strength cement, in accordance with
 AST M C 1157, may be used. Type III cement will not be permitted.
 505.40.2.2 Coarse aggregate shall be an approved crushed limestone, crushed quartzite, flint chat from the
 Joplin area, or porphyry in accordance with Sec 1005, Gradation E or Gradation F, except the percentage
 of deleterious substances shall not exceed the following values, and the sum of percentages of all deleterious
 substances shall not exceed one percent.
 Percent by
 Weight (Mass)
 Deleterious Rock
 1.0
 Shale and P yrite
 0.2
 Chert in Limestone
 0.5
 Other Foreign Material 0.1
 Item
 
 505.40.2.3 Fine aggregate shall be in accordance with Sec 1005 and shall be Class A sand in accordance with
 Sec 501.
 505.40.2.4 With approval of the engineer, other gradations of coarse or fine aggregate may be used,
 however all quality requirements, including a maximum of 2.0 percent passing the No. 200 for fine and
 coarse aggregate, shall apply and the maximum aggregate size shall not exceed that of Sec 1005, Grade E
 aggregate.
 505.40.2.5 Pozzoloanic material or Portland pozzolan cements shall not be used.
 505.40.2.6 Latex admixture shall be kept in suitable enclosures which will protect it from freezing and
 from exposure to temperatures in excess of 85 F.
 505.40.3 Concre te Mixture .
 505.40.3.1 T he concrete mixture shall meet the following requirements:
 Property
 Air Content percent
 Slump, inches
 P ercent Fine Aggregate as percent of
 total aggregate by weight
 Cement Content, lb/cu yd min.
 Latex Emulsion Admixture, gal/cu yd
 Net Water-Cement Ratio, max.
 Lbs.a of water/lbs. of cement
 
 Specif ic Value
 0 to 6.5
 3 to 6
 50 to 55
 658
 24.5
 0.40
 
 a Net
 
 water shall be considered the quantity of mixing
 water added plus the non-solid portion of the latex
 
 265
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 emulsion.
 505.40.3.2 Chloride permeability shall not be greater than 1000 coulombs when tested in accordance with
 AASHT O T 277. Tests shall be performed on specimens at 28-days. T his test shall be performed on each
 mixture submitted for approval. T he tests are to be performed by a qualified commercial laboratory.
 505.40.3.3 T he mixture shall be designed to develop a minimum 28-day compressive strength of 4,500 psi.
 505.40.3.4 Anti-foam additives as recommended by the latex emulsion manufacturer may be required if the
 concrete mixture entrained air is above the specified amount.
 505.40.3.5 Air-entraining admixtures shall not be added.
 505.40.3.6 A set control in accordance with the cement manufacturer ’s recommendation may be
 considered.
 505.40.3.7 Admixtures containing calcium chloride shall not be used.
 505.40.4 Mix De sign. T he contractor shall submit the mix design to Construction and Materials for
 approval. T he mix design shall be within the limits specified in this provision. T he mix design shall also
 include actual test results for the following information:
 (a) Air.
 (b) Slump.
 (c) Compressive strengths at 4-hours, 8-hours, 12-hours, 24-hours, 7-days and 28-days.
 Compressive strengths determined using 6 x 12 inch cylinders.
 (d) Results of chloride permeability testing.
 505.40.4.1 If other aggregate gradations than standard specifications are utilized, the contractor shall
 designate the intended target gradation and allowable gradation range for each fraction. T he target
 gradations and allowable gradation ranges will be used for inspection and quality control of the aggregates.
 505.40.4.2 Any change in mix design or proportions shall be approved by the engineer.
 505.40.5 Te sting. Testing will be done in accordance with Sec 505.10, except that the slump test will be
 conducted 4 to 5 minutes after discharge from the mixer. During the waiting period, concrete shall be
 deposited on the deck and shall not be disturbed.
 505.40.6 Mixing.
 505.40.6.1 T he concrete shall be volumetrically mixed at the bridge site by a continuous mixer in
 accordance with Sec 501. In addition to other requirements, the mixer shall provide positive control of the
 latex emulsion into the mixing chamber, and the latex emulsion shall calibrate to within ±2 percent of that
 required. T he mixer shall be capable of continuously circulating the latex emulsion and have a flow-through
 screen between the storage tank and the discharge.
 505.40.6.2 T he concrete discharged from the mixer shall be uniform in composition and consistency.
 Mixing capability shall be such that initial and final finishing operations can proceed at a steady pace. Final
 finishing shall be completed before the formation of a plastic surface film on the surface.
 505.40.6.3 T he moisture content of aggregates at the time of proportioning shall be such that water will
 not drain or drip from a sample. Coarse and fine aggregate shall be furnished and handled to avoid
 variations in the moisture content affecting the uniform consistency of the concrete.
 505.40.6.4 Each drum of latex admixture shall be mechanically agitated or hand rolled until thoroughly
 mixed prior to being introduced into the mixer storage compartment. Latex admixture that is stored in the
 
 266
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 mixer storage compartment overnight or during delays in mixing of four hours or more shall be agitated by
 at least two complete cycles in a continuous circulating pump or by mechanical means in the storage
 compartment. T he flow through screen shall be cleaned immediately prior to beginning proportioning and
 as often as necessary thereafter. Latex admixtures of different brands shall not be combined together in any
 manner.
 505.40.6.5 T he water/cement ratio shall be within 0.02 of that specified in the approved mix design. If
 adjustments for water content beyond that are necessary, a previously tested and approved mixture shall be
 used.
 505.40.6.6 Prior to placement of concrete in the work, the contractor shall be required to prepare trial
 batches of concrete for testing. T rial batches shall comply with the limits specified in this provision.
 505.40.7 Surface Pre paration. Surface preparation shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10 except as
 specified herein.
 505.40.7.1 Prior to scarifying or chipping on concrete adjacent to latex modified high early strength
 concrete, 24 hours of curing shall elapse. If practical, or unless otherwise shown on the plans, all scarifying
 by mechanical units shall be completed prior to placing any latex modified high early strength concrete.
 Areas from which unsound concrete and patches have been removed shall be kept free of slurry produced by
 wet sawing or wet scarifying by planning the work such that this slurry will drain away from the completed
 areas of preparation.
 505.40.7.2 On both old and new decks within 24 hours before latex modified high early strength concrete
 placement begins, the entire surface shall be thoroughly cleaned by hydro blasting followed by an air blast in
 accordance with Sec 505.10.
 505.40.8.0 Finishing Equipme nt.
 505.40.8.1 T he finishing machine shall be self-propelled with one or more rollers, augers and vibratory
 pans capable of 1,500 to 2,500 vpm. It shall also be capable of forward and reverse movement under
 positive control, with a provision for raising all screeds to clear the screeded surface for traveling in
 reverse. A drag float may be necessary. Any modifications shall be subject to approval from the engineer.
 505.40.8.2 Support rails shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10.
 505.40.9 Placing and Finishing Concre te . Placing and finishing shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10
 except as specified herein.
 505.40.9.1 Prior to placement of latex modified high early strength concrete, the cleaned surface shall
 thoroughly wetted for a minimum of one hour, then covered with polyethylene sheeting until time
 concrete placement. T he surface shall be damp at the time the overlay is placed. Any standing water
 depressions, holes or areas of concrete removal shall be blown out with compressed air. No free water
 puddles of standing water shall exist at the time of placement.
 
 be
 of
 in
 or
 
 505.40.9.2 Expansion joints and dams shall be formed in the concrete overlay. Formation of the joint by
 sawing through the overlay will not be allowed.
 505.40.9.3 Water shall not be added to the surface of the concrete during finishing. A commercially
 available evaporation retardant may be used judiciously with a misting device during the finishing process
 until the wet burlap is applied only to prevent the surface of the concrete from drying out. T he
 evaporation retardant shall not be used to increase surface workability.
 505.40.9.4 Texturing shall occur immediately after finishing and before the plastic film forms on the
 surface. Texturing shall be performed in a manner to prevent pulling the concrete away from an existing
 vertical face Care shall be taken not to texture too deep and not to tear the surface.
 505.40.9.5 Screed rails and headers shall be separated from the newly placed material by passing a pointing
 trowel along their inside face. Metal expansion dams shall not be separated from the new overlay. T he
 
 267
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 trowel cut shall be made for the entire depth and length of rails or headers after the mixture has stiffened
 sufficiently and shall prevent the concrete from flowing back into the cut.
 505.40.9.6 During placement of the overlay, all joints with adjacent concrete shall be sealed with a mortar
 paste of equal parts cement and fine aggregate, using latex emulsion in lieu of mixing water.
 505.40.9.7 T he overlay concrete shall be moist cured from the time placed until opened to traffic.
 505.40.9.8 T he wet cure shall be applied promptly after the concrete has been placed on the deck without
 deforming the finished surface.
 505.40.9.9 Within one hour of covering with wet burlap, a layer of white polyethylene sheeting shall be
 placed on the wet burlap. T he surface shall receive a wet cure until the latex modified high early strength
 concrete has attained a compressive strength of at least 3,200 psi.
 505.40.9.10 T he thickness of the overlay shall not exceed 3 inches, unless otherwise approved by the
 engineer.
 505.40.9.11 T he finished deck will be examined for cracking. If cracking is found, the engineer will
 determine whether cracking is detrimental, whether remedial surface repairs are needed or whether the
 overlay in the cracked area should be removed and replaced. All remedial surface repairs, removal or
 replacement shall be done by the contractor at the contractor ’s expense.
 505.40.9.12 After placement and curing of the latex modified high early strength concrete, the finished
 deck will be tested to detect unbonded areas.
 505.40.9.13 No surface sealing shall be applied to the latex modified high early strength concrete wearing
 surface.
 505.40.10 Limitations of O pe rations.
 505.40.10.1 No latex modified high early strength concrete shall be placed when the ambient or deck
 surface temperature is above 85 F. Deck temperature shall be determined in accordance with MoDOT Test
 Method T 20.
 505.40.10.2 Since latex modified high early strength concrete may not exhibit bleed water, the probability
 of plastic shrinkage cracking is increased. At surface evaporation rates above 0.1 pounds per square foot
 per hour plastic shrinkage cracking is probable and the contractor should take precautions such as erecting
 windbreaks, lowering the mix temperature or delaying operations until ambient temperatures are lower.
 Fogging the concrete surface will only be allowed, as provided for in this specification. Surface evaporation
 rates can be predicted from mix temperature, air temperature, relative humidity and wind velocity using
 Figure 1 of ACI 308-81 (revised 1986) "Standard Practice for Curing Concrete".
 505.40.10.3 A fogging system shall be in-place prior to concrete placement. T he fogging system shall
 consist of pressurized equipment that distributes water at minimum rate of 0.10 gallon per hour per square
 foot. T he fogging system shall apply the fog uniformly over the entire surface of the bridge deck. T he
 fogging system shall produce atomized water that has a droplet with a maximum diameter of 0.003 inches
 and which keeps the finished deck surface saturated without producing standing water. T he contractor shall
 submit a letter certifying that their fogging system is in accordance with this provision.
 505.40.10.4 T he fogging system shall be started progressively along the length of the deck, during or
 immediately after floating.
 505.40.10.5 No latex modified high early strength concrete shall be placed at ambient or deck surface
 temperatures below 45 F. Latex modified high early strength concrete shall be protected to maintain a
 minimum specified curing temperature of 45 F. T he contractor shall provide a method, meeting the
 approval of the engineer, of monitoring the concrete that demonstrates that the concrete has been
 maintained above the minimum curing temperature and has been protected from freezing. Any concrete
 damaged by freezing or which is exposed to a temperature of less than 45 F during the first 8 hours after
 
 268
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 placement shall be removed and replaced at the contractor's expense.
 505.40.10.6 T he temperature of the latex modified high early strength concrete at time of placement shall
 be between 45 F and 90 F. If either the aggregate or water is heated, the maximum temperature for each
 shall be 100 F at the time of addition to the mix. Any method of heating during the mixing of concrete
 may be used provided the heating apparatus will heat the mass uniformly and avoid hot spots which will
 burn the material. Cement or aggregate containing lumps or crusts of hardened material or frost shall not be
 used.
 505.40.10.7 No vehicle traffic shall be permitted on the latex modified high early strength concrete
 surface until the latex modified high early strength concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength
 of 3,200 psi. Compressive strength will be determined by tests conducted in accordance with MoDOT test
 methods.
 505.40.10.8 Concrete shall not be placed adjacent to a parallel surface course which is less than 24 hours
 old; however, this restriction will not apply to a continuation of placement in a lane or strip beyond a joint
 in the same lane or strip.
 505.40.10.9 Preparation of the area, except scarifying, may be started in a lane or strip adjacent to newly
 placed surface the day following the surface placement. If this work is started before the end of the curing
 period, the work will be restricted such that any interference with the curing process is held to the
 minimum practical time only.
 505.40.10.10 Longitudinal construction joints shall be placed between designated traffic lanes. T he
 location of the longitudinal joints shall be subject to the approval from the engineer.
 505.40.10.11 T ransverse joints in the overlay may be permitted if approval by the engineer. T ransverse
 joints shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the centerline of bent.
 505.40.10.12 A header shall be installed in case of delay in the placement operations exceeding one-half
 hour in duration. During minor delays of one-half hour or less, the end of the placement shall be protected
 from drying with several layers of wet burlap.
 505.40.10.13 Adequate precautions shall be taken to protect freshly placed concrete from rain. All placing
 operations shall stop when rain begins. T he engineer may order removal of any material damaged by
 rainfall and such material shall be replaced in accordance with this specification at the contractor's expense.
 505.40.11 Re moval. Material removal and disposal shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10.
 505.40.12 Re pair. Repair shall be in accordance with Sec 505.10.
 505.40.13 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement will be in accordance with Sec 505.10.
 505.40.14 Basis of Payme nt. T he basis for payment will be in accordance with Sec 505.10.
 
 269
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 506
 CO NCRETE O VERLAYS FO R PAVEMENTS
 SECTIO N 506.10 BO NDED CO NCRETE O VERLAYS O F ASPHALT PAVEMENTS.
 506.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of producing and placing a bonded concrete overlay on
 asphalt(BCOA) as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. T he BCOA pavement shall be in
 accordance with Sec 502, except as modified herein. T he BCOA pavement shall consist of a fiber
 reinforced concrete pavement placed over a prepared asphalt surface. Unless otherwise specified on the
 plans, the minimum BCOA pavement thickness shall be 4 inches. T he prepared base asphalt shall have a
 minimum thickness of
 3 inches.
 506.10.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, unless
 otherwise noted.
 506.10.2.1 Fibe rs. Fibrillated polypropylene fibers shall be added at a rate of 3.0 pounds per cubic yard. All
 fibers shall be measurable by weight. Fibers may be measured in bags, boxes or like containers with approval
 from the engineer. T he containers shall be sealed by the fiber manufacturer, and shall have the weight
 contained therein clearly marked by the manufacturer. No fraction of container delivered unsealed or left
 over from previous work shall be used unless weighed. Fibers shall be added to the concrete mix and mixed
 according to the fiber manufacturer's recommendations.
 506.10.2.2 Wate r-Re duce rs. An approved high range water-reducer admixture may be used. No re-dosing
 of high range water-reducing admixture will be permitted.
 506.10.3 Mix De sign.
 506.10.3.1 Mix Approval. T he contractor shall submit a mix design to Construction and Materials for
 approval in accordance with Sec 501. T he mixture shall be designed to develop a minimum 28-day
 compressive strength of 4,600 psi. T he maximum aggregate size shall be no more than one-third the
 thickness of the BCOA pavement.
 506.10.3.2 Admixture s. Any admixtures used shall be certified by the fiber manufacturer for compatibility
 with the fibers used in the concrete.
 506.10.3.3 Mix Adjustme nts. T he contractor shall not make any mix design changes during placement
 of the BCOA pavement without prior approval from the engineer.
 506.10.4 Construction Re quire me nts. T he QC/QA provisions of Sec 502 will not apply.
 506.10.4.1 Surface Pre paration. T he existing bituminous surface shall be coldmilled in accordance with
 Sec 622.10 and as indicated elsewhere in the contract.
 506.10.4.1.1 Prior to placing the BCOA pavement, the surface shall be thoroughly cleaned of all
 vegetation, dirt, mud and other objectionable material. All dust and loose particles shall be completely
 removed.
 506.10.4.1.2 T he asphalt surface temperature shall not exceed 90 F at the time of BCOA pavement
 placement. T his may require night placement, water fogging or other suitable means of obtaining a cooler
 surface. At the time of placement of the BCOA pavement, there shall be no puddled water or other
 contamination to prevent bonding of the BCOA to the asphalt surface.
 506.10.4.2 Place me nt.
 506.10.4.2.1 Provided no loose, foreign material is tracked onto the surface, trucks used for transporting
 concrete may drive on the pavement being overlaid and concrete may be deposited directly in front of the
 concrete spreader.
 
 270
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 506.10.4.2.2 T he BCOA pavement shall be free of fiber balls when placed.
 506.10.4.2.3 T he concrete temperature shall not exceed 90 F when delivered to the site.
 506.10.4.2.4 T he BCOA pavement shall be placed in a uniform thickness on a final grade that has been
 established by other means, such as cold milling.
 506.10.4.3 Surface Finish. T he surface finish of the BCOA pavement shall be in accordance with Sec
 502.
 506.10.4.4 Joints. Sawing of the joints shall not cause excessive raveling. T he joints shall be spaced
 equidistant longitudinally and transversely and at a distance approximately equal to twelve times the
 specified BCOA pavement thickness, with the following exceptions. Slight adjustments may be made in the
 joint spacing to equalize the longitudinal joints between pavement cast edges. All sawed BCOA pavement
 units shall be square, except as necessary in pavement width transitions. In such cases, slight field
 adjustments may be made to maintain relatively square units. Joint spacing for any adjustments shall not
 exceed one foot more than 12 times the specified BCOA pavement thickness. T ransverse joints on
 adjoining lanes shall match. T he minimum depth of the joints shall be one-third the BCOA and the width of
 the joint shall be 1/8 inch maximum. T he joints shall not be sealed but shall be cleaned of all deleterious
 material after sawing. T he engineer may require the contractor to replace BCOA pavement where cracking
 occurs due to late sawing at the contractor ’s expense.
 506.10.4.5 Curing. Curing compound shall be applied at 1.5 times the normal application rate. If blankets
 are used for fast tracking, the blankets shall be light in color and shall not take the place of a curing
 compound. T he temperature under the blanket shall not exceed 160 F. Blankets shall not be removed until
 the temperature under the blanket is within 40 F of the ambient temperature.
 506.10.4.6 O pe ning to Traffic. BCOA pavement shall not be opened to all types of traffic until the
 concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of 3,500 psi. Compressive strength will be
 determined by tests conducted in accordance with MoDOT Test Methods.
 506.10.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 506.10.5.1 Mate rial Furnishe d. Measurement for furnishing BCOA concrete will be made to the nearest
 0.1 cubic yard for material incorporated into the BCOA pavement.
 506.10.5.2 Mate rial Place d. Measurement for placing BCOA pavement will be computed to the nearest
 0.1 square yard.
 506.10.5.3 Pave me nt Thickne ss De te rmination. T he thickness of the BCOA pavement will be
 determined by the average caliper measurement of cores in accordance with AASHT O T 148.
 506.10.5.3.1 For the purpose of determining the constructed thickness of the pavement, cores will be
 taken at random intervals in each traffic lane at the rate of one core per 1,000 feet, or increment thereof.
 In addition, cores will be taken at all locations where thickness measurements taken during construction
 indicate a thickness deficiency sufficient to justify a deduction from the contract unit price or at any other
 locations as may be determined by the engineer. If the measurement of any core is deficient in excess of
 3/10 inch from the plan thickness, additional cores will be taken at 30-foot intervals parallel to the
 centerline ahead and behind the affected location until the extent of the deficiency has been determined.
 506.10.5.3.2 Each core will represent the pavement thickness for a distance extending one-half the
 distance to the next core, measured along the centerline. In the case of a beginning or ending core, the
 distance shall extend to the end of the pavement section.
 506.10.5.4 Pave me nt Stre ngth De te rmination. T he strength of the BCOA concrete will be determined
 by testing cylinders in accordance with AASHT O T 22. Cylinders will be tested at the rate of one per 500
 cubic yards, or increment thereof. Any 28-day cylinder strength below 4,000 psi is unacceptable.
 506.10.5. 5 Final Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the complete UT W pavement will not be made
 
 271
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract
 quantity. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 506.10.5. 6 Q uantity of Cold milling. Measurement for cold milling bituminous pavement for removal
 of surface will be made in accordance with Sec 622.10.4.
 506.10.6 Basis of Payme nt.
 506.10.6.1 Mate rial Furnishe d. T he plan quantity for the furnishing of BCOA concrete will be paid for
 at the contract unit price for BCOA concrete, per cubic yard. Reimbursement for any additional concrete
 incorporated into the BCOA pavement will be in accordance with Sec 109.5.3 and shall not exceed the unit
 contract price.
 506.10.6.2 Mate rial Place d. T he plan quantity for the placement of BCOA pavement will be paid for at
 the contract unit price for BCOA pavement, per square yard. No direct payment will be made for surface
 preparation following cold milling of the bituminous surface, or furnishing labor, equipment, reinforcement
 and other materials to place, finish, texture cure, and saw the joints in the BCOA pavement.
 506.10.6.3 Pave me nt Thickne ss. Pavement thickness determination will be made after all smoothness
 correction has been completed. If any core measurement of thickness is deficient, the contractor may
 remove and replace the pavement at the contractor's expense or leave the pavement in place, and receive
 the following deductions in payment:
 Def iciency in Thickness
 0 to 3/10 inch
 Over 3/10 inch
 
 Deductions, Percent of
 Contract Unit Price
 None
 100
 
 506.10.6.3.1 T he above deductions will be applied to a section of pavement 30 feet long and will include
 the entire paved width for a specific pass. Deductions for deficient thickness or damaged pavement may be
 entered on any estimate after the information becomes available.
 506.10.6.3.2 Any pavement that is replaced shall be of a satisfactory quality and thickness that, when
 accepted by the engineer, will be included in the pay quantity. No payment will be made for any costs
 incurred in the removal of the deficient pavement.
 506.10.6.3.3 Removal of pavement shall be from the edge to a longitudinal joint or between longitudinal
 joints and on each side of the deficient measurement until no portion of the exposed cross sections is more
 than 3/10 inch deficient, except that there shall be no less than 15 linear feet of pavement removed. If
 there remains less than 15 feet of acceptable pavement between the section that has been removed and a
 transverse contraction, expansion or construction joint, the contractor shall remove the pavement to the
 joint, at the contractor ’s expense.
 506.10.6.4 Adjustme nts. Any adjustments in payment as a result of the profilograph index or pavement
 thickness deficiency of the BCOA pavement will be made to the unit contract prices for furnishing BCOA
 concrete, per cubic yard and placing BCOA pavement, per square yard. For this purpose, the volume of
 BCOA pavement placed per cubic yard price will be adjusted to a square yard price based on the plan BCOA
 pavement thickness.
 506.10.6.5 Cold Milling. Payment for cold milling bituminous pavement for removal of surface will be
 made in accordance with Sec 622.10.5.
 SECTIO N 506.20 UNBO NDED CO NCRETE O VERLAYS O F CO NCRETE PAVEMENTS.
 506.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of placing an interlayer material on an existing concrete
 pavement and constructing an unbonded concrete overlay in accordance with the details and locations
 shown on the plans. T he standard unbounded concrete overlay design thickness is either 8 or 5 inches. T he
 eight-inch overlays are constructed similarly to new concrete pavement in terms of joint spacing and use of
 dowel bars and tie bars. T he five-inch overlays are sawed into smaller panels and require no steel. T he
 
 272
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 overlay shall be placed in accordance with Sec 502, except as herein stated.
 506.20.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, unless
 specified otherwise.
 506.20.2.1 Patching Mate rial. Patching material for use in repair of surface defects prior to the overlay
 shall consist of bituminous material, cementitious material, or other equivalent material meeting the
 approval of the engineer.
 506.20.2.2 Inte rlaye r. T he interlayer material shall be a minimum one-inch thick new bituminous or a
 geotextile fabric in accordance with Section 1011.3.7.
 506.20.2.3 Concre te . All procedures and material for the unbonded overlay shall be in accordance with
 Sec 502, including QC/QA and PWL provisions for non-reinforced concrete pavement, except the strength
 pay factor will account for 100 percent of the total pay factor. T he pay factor for thickness will not apply.
 506.20.2.4 Dowe l Bars. Dowel bars shall be in accordance with Sec 1057.1 and of the size shown on the
 plans.
 506.20.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 506.20.3.1 Handling Traffic. Preliminary work, including joint sealing and patching, may be done under
 traffic as permitted elsewhere in the contract. Prior to placement of the debonding material, the traffic
 shall be diverted as shown on the plans, and the remaining operations shall commence.
 506.20.3.2 Surface Pre paration. All holes greater than 2 inches wide and one inch deep in the surface of
 the traffic lanes, excluding shoulders, shall be filled with patching material and shall be compacted to a flat,
 tight surface.
 506.20.3.3 Expansion Joints. Any transverse expansion joints in the existing pavement shall be
 specifically marked and identified as such.
 506.20.3.4 Inte rlaye r Place me nt.
 506.20.3.4.1 Bituminous Inte rlaye r. T he surface temperature of a bituminous interlayer shall not
 exceed 90 degrees F prior to the overlay placement. T he temperature may be controlled with any means
 approved by the Engineer, including, but not limited to white curing compound and water misting.
 506.20.3.4.2 Ge ote xtile Inte rlaye r. Geotextile interlayer placement shall comply with the following
 requirements:
 506.20.3.4.2.1 Fabric shall be tight without excess wrinkles and folds.
 506.20.3.4.2.2 Fabric shall be pinned to underlying layer with bolts/nails punched through galvanized
 washers/discs every 6 ft.
 506.20.3.4.2.3 Where it occurs, fabric shall overlap by 8 ± 2 in.
 506.20.3.4.2.4 Fabric shall be damp, but not saturated, prior to concrete placement.
 506.20.3.4.2.5 T he surface temperature of the fabric shall not exceed 90 degrees F prior to the overlay
 placement.
 506.20.3.4.2.6 Fabric shall extend throughout the travelway and overlap onto the shoulder by at least 18
 inches.
 506.20.3.5 Surace Cle aning. Before the unbonded concrete overlay is placed, the interlayer surface shall
 be free of loose material.
 
 273
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 506.20.3.6 Dowe l Bars. Dowel bars for eight-inch unbounded overlays shall be installed the full width of
 the unbonded overlay and the baskets, if used, shall be firmly anchored to the interlayer surface.
 506.20.3.7 Tie Bars. T ie bars shall be installed between lanes in an eight-inch unbounded concrete overlay.
 506.20.3.8 Concre te Te mpe rature . T he concrete temperature shall not exceed 90 F when delivered to
 the site.
 506.20.3.9 Placing Concre te . Provided no loose foreign material is tracked onto the surface, trucks used
 for transporting concrete may drive on the pavement being overlaid and concrete may be deposited
 directly in front of the concrete spreader.
 506.20.3.10 Joints.
 506.20.3.10.1 Any expansion joints shall be precut in the plastic concrete to allow for slab movement
 prior to sawing. As soon as sawing is possible, the contractor shall saw two full-depth cuts on each side of
 the precut joint following the edges of the underlying expansion joint, as marked out, and the concrete
 between the saw joints shall be removed.
 506.20.3.10.2 Sawing of the contraction joints shall not cause excessive raveling. Standard joint spacing
 for a five-inch unbounded concrete overlay is 6 feet transversely and longitudinally. Standard joint spacing
 for an eight-inch unbounded overlay is 15 ft transversely and 12 ft across the full lane width. New
 transverse joints will not be required to match existing transverse joints. T he minimum depth of the sawed
 joints shall be one-third the pavement thicknesss and the width of the joint shall be 1/8-inch maximum.
 T he joints shall not be sealed, unless open more than ¼ inch, but shall be cleaned of all deleterious material
 after sawing. Concrete panels with cracking outside of the sawed joints shall be considered unacceptable.
 506.20.3.11 O pe ning Stre ngth. T he unbounded concrete overlay may be opened for light-weight traffic
 when the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of 2,500 psi. T he concrete pavement
 shall not be opened to all types of traffic until the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength
 of 3,000 psi. Compressive strength for opening to traffic shall be determined either by compressive
 strength tests in accordance with AASHT O T 22 or the maturity method in accordance with Sec 507.
 506.20.3.12 Acce ptance Te sting Proce dure s and Re porting. All testing and reporting procedures for
 the unbonded concrete overlay shall be in accordance with Sec 502.10, including QC/QA and PWL
 provisions for concrete pavement, except the following shall apply:
 506.20.3.12.1 Minimum Thickne ss. Pavement thickness determination will be made after all
 smoothness correction has been completed. T he minimum concrete overlay thickness shall be the design
 thickness less 10 percent. Any core less than the minimum thickness is unacceptable. Additional cores will
 be taken at 30-foot intervals parallel to the centerline ahead and behind the affected locations until the
 extent of the deficiency has been determined.
 506. 20.3.12.2 Compre ssive Stre ngth. After the thickness is determined, the cores shall be tested for
 compressive strength in accordance with AASHT O T 22. T he length-to-diameter (L/D) ratio of the core
 shall be measured and recorded to the nearest 0.01 inch, and the L/D ratio shall be between 1.00 and 2.00.
 If the L/D ratio of the drilled core is 1.75 or less, the compressive strength shall be corrected by
 multiplying the appropriate correction factor shown in the following table:
 L/D
 1.75 1.5 1.25 1.00
 Correction Factor 0.98 0.96 0.93 0.87
 
 Use interpolation to determine correction
 for L/D values between those given in the
 table.
 506.20.3.12.3 Pay Factor. T he Pay Factor for Compressive Strength (PFCS) will account for 100 percent
 of the total pay factor. T he total pay factor (PFt) for each lot shall be determined as follows:
 
 274
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (PFt) = (1.0) PFCS ; where the pay factor for thickness does not apply.
 T he PF for each pay factor item for each lot is based on the PWLt of each pay factor
 item of each lot and is determined as follows:
 When PWLt is greater than or equal to 70: PF = 0.5 PWLt + 55.0
 When PWLt is less than 70: PF = 2 PWLt – 50.
 506.20.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 506.20.4.1 Furnishing Concre te . Measurement for furnishing unbonded overlay concrete will be to the
 nearest 0.1 cubic yard. T he cubic yard quantity will be calculated in one of the two ways explained in Secs
 506.20.4.1.1 and 506.20.4.1.2. T hickness, profile, and smoothness requirements shall not be waived for
 either method of measurement, unless stated so in the plans or agreed to by the engineer.
 506.20.4.1.1 Fie ld Establishe d Profile . T he contractor shall establish the roadway profile prior to the
 overlay. T he profile shall be submitted to the engineer and include edge of pavement and centerline
 elevations at 50-foot intervals in tangent sections and 25-foot intervals in curve sections. T he engineer
 will determine the final profile within 7 calendar days of receipt. T he engineer will determine the required
 number of cubic yards of concrete from this profile. T his quantity will be the field established plan quantity.
 506.20.4.1.2 Existing Profile . T he contractor shall use the plan quantity shown in the contract
 documents. T he contractor shall construct the overlay to match the profile of the existing roadway. T he
 contractor may utilize traveling grade control to place the overlay.
 506.20.4.2 Placing Unbonde d Concre te O ve rlay. Measurement for placing unbonded overlay concrete
 will be computed to the nearest 0.1 square yard. Final measurement of the completed pavement will not be
 made except for authorized changes during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the
 contract quantity. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract
 quantity.
 506.20.4.3 Inte rlaye r. Measurement for the interlayer will be made to the nearest square yard.
 506.20.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 506.20.5.1 Furnishing Concre te . T he accepted volume of concrete for the unbonded concrete overlay
 will be paid for at the contract unit price for furnishing concrete, per cubic yard.
 506.20.5.2 Placing Unbonde d Concre te O ve rlay. Placement of the unbonded concrete overlay will be
 paid for at the contract unit price for placing unbonded concrete overlay per square yard. No direct
 payment will be made for furnishing labor, equipment, dowels, tie bars and other materials to place, finish,
 texture and cure the overlay including sawing and sealing, if necessary, the joints, in accordance with the
 plans and specifications.
 506.20.5.3 Payme nt Adjustme nts. Any adjustments in payment as a result of the profilograph index or
 pavement thickness deficiency of the unbonded concrete overlay will be made to the contract unit price for
 furnishing concrete and placing unbonded concrete overlay each, for the segments involved. Adjustment in
 payment for QC/QA concrete strength pay factors will be made to the contract unit price for furnishing
 concrete and placing unbonded concrete overlay, each, for the segments involved. For all adjustments, the
 furnishing concrete per cubic yard price will be adjusted to a square yard price based on the plan overlay
 thickness.
 506.20.5.4 Inte rlaye r. Payment for the interlayer will be paid for at the contract unit price per square
 yard.
 506.20.5.5 Re pairs. Payment for full depth and partial depth repairs shall be in accordance with Sec 613.
 506.20.5.6 Surve ying and Staking. Payment for contractor surveying and staking will be in accordance
 
 275
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 with Sec 105.
 SECTIO N 506.30 UNBO NDED CO NCRETE O VERLAYS O N ASPHALT PAVEMENTS.
 506.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing an unbonded concrete overlay on an
 existing asphalt surface in accordance with the details and locations shown on the plans. All work shall be
 performed in accordance with Section 506.20, except that an interlayer shall not be used.
 
 276
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 507
 STRENGTH O F CO NCRETE USING THE MATURITY METHO D
 507.1 De scription. T his specification covers the maturity method as a non-destructive means of
 determining in-place concrete strength for pavement or structural applications. T he concept of the
 maturity method is based on the combined effects of concrete age and temperature, during hydration, on
 the rate of strength gain for a specific concrete mix. T his method requires the establishment of a
 relationship between compressive strength and calculated maturity indices for a specific concrete mixture
 prior to placement of the mixture in the field. T he contractor may use the maturity method in accordance
 with this specification to estimate the compressive strength of the in-place concrete.
 507.2 Proce dure . In-place concrete strength determined by the maturity method shall be in accordance
 with AST M C 1074, except as noted herein.
 507.2.1 Maturity Me te r. T he maturity meter shall have a secure means of collecting data that is
 unalterable.
 507.2.2 Maturity Function Value s. In lieu of determining values for datum temperature, To, or
 activation energy divided by the gas constant, Q, values of 14° F or 5,000 Kelvin may be used, respectively.
 507.2.3 Standardiz ation. T he calibration of systems used for monitoring the maturity of concrete shall
 be verified every seven working days in accordance with AASHT O T 325, Sec 9.1 and AST M C 1074, Sec
 7.1.
 507.2.4 De ve lopme nt of the Stre ngth-Maturity Re lationship. T he contractor shall develop the
 strength-maturity relationship prior to placing any concrete on the project, and shall notify the engineer
 prior to development of the maturity curve. T he development of the
 strength-maturity relationship shall be done in the field using project equipment and materials.
 507.2.4.1 Pre paring Te st Spe cime ns. When the strength-maturity relationship is developed,
 compressive strength specimens shall be fabricated, cured and tested at the plant site and fabricated from a
 minimum 3 cubic yard batch of concrete. Temperature of the fresh concrete shall be measured and
 recorded. All field specimens shall be fabricated and cured in accordance with AASHT O T 23, with the
 following exceptions. Specimens shall be cured for the first 24 hours under similar or like temperature
 conditions anticipated during construction, and specimens, including the cylinder used to monitor
 temperature, shall be de-molded at approximately 24 hours and cured in accordance with AASHT O T 23.
 T he concrete mixture shall meet the specification requirements in order to determine the strengthmaturity relationship. T he concrete mixture shall be at or above the target air content established by the
 contractor.
 507.2.4.2 Re quire d Docume ntation. T he contractor shall provide the engineer with the following
 information prior to placing any concrete on the project:
 (a) T he project number, route, county, concrete job mix number and date of testing.
 (b) T he air, slump and water content from the batch of concrete tested.
 (c) T he amount and type of admixture(s) used in the concrete mix.
 (d) T he strength of each test specimen, and the average strength of test specimens at each test
 age.
 (e) Maturity index for each instrumented test specimen, and the average maturity index for the
 instrumented specimens at each test age.
 (f) A graph of the average compressive strength versus the average value of the maturity index, as
 described in the strength-maturity relationship section of AST M C 1074.
 507.2.5 Compre ssive Stre ngth Te sting. At a minimum, compressive strength tests shall be performed
 
 277
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 on three specimens, and the average strength computed at 1, 3, 7, 14 and 28 days. Production may start
 after the seven-day compressive strengths have been determined with approval from the engineer.
 507.2.6 Place me nt of Te mpe rature Se nsors. For pavement and pavement repairs, temperature sensors
 shall be embedded at approximately mid-depth and 18 inches from the edge of pavement. For other
 applications, temperature sensors shall be embedded in locations considered critical in terms of exposure
 conditions and structural requirements. Temperature sensors shall be placed at the following frequency:
 Structure Component Frequency
 P avement
 1 sensor per 3750 sq. yd., with a minimum of one in the last 50 feet of pavement
 P avement Repairs 1 sensor per 10 patches, with a minimum of one sensor in the last patch
 A minimum of one sensor at the end of the pour, with three others sensors
 Structural
 available to be placed as directed by the engineer
 
 507.3 Proportioning, Mixing, Placing and Curing Fie ld Place d Concre te . T he maturity method
 does not account for variations in strength due to proportioning, mixing, placing and curing of concrete.
 Proper methods shall be followed at all times during proportioning, mixing, placing and curing the field
 placed concrete.
 507.3.1 Fie ld Place d Concre te Mix Re quire me nts. Mix constituents of the field placed concrete shall
 not change, and mix proportions of the field placed concrete shall not vary more than 5.0 percent from
 the concrete mix used to develop the strength-maturity relationship. T he water cement ratio shall not vary
 by more than 0.02.
 507.3.2 Re quiring Imme diate Validation of Stre ngth-Maturity Re lationship. If the mix
 constituents a change more than 5.0 percent, the water cement ratio changes more than 0.02, the material
 sources change or the mixing operation changes, an immediate validation of the strength-maturity curve
 shall be done in accordance with Sec 507.4.
 507.4 Validation of Stre ngth-Maturity Re lationship. At a minimum, every seventh day of concrete
 placement a validation test shall be conducted to verify that in-place concrete strength is accurately
 represented by the strength maturity relationship. T he engineer shall be notified at least one business day in
 advance of when and where the validation test will be done.
 507.4.1 Docume ntation for Validation. T he contractor shall document the air, slump, and water
 content from the batch of concrete tested and any deviations from the original job mix.
 507.4.2 Spe cime ns for Validation. During placement of the field placed concrete, a minimum of four
 compressive strength cylinders shall be fabricated and cured as specified in Sec 507.2.4.1.
 507.4.3 Se nsor Location for Validation. A temperature sensor shall be embedded to within 1/2 inch of
 the center of one cylinder for computing the maturity index from the measured temperature history as
 specified in Sec 507.2.
 507.4.4 Te st Spe cime ns for Validation. Once the maturity index, according to the temperature
 monitored cylinder, is achieved which corresponds to the maturity index desired for the first critical action
 such as opening pavement to traffic or removing formwork, three cylinders shall be tested for compressive
 strength.
 507.4.5 Stre ngth-Maturity Re lationship Validate d. T he average compressive strength of the three
 cylinders shall be compared to the compressive strength as determined by the strength-maturity
 relationship. If the predicted strength is within 10 percent or 200 psi, whichever is less, of the actual
 compressive strength, then the strength-maturity relationship will be considered validated.
 507.4.6 Stre ngth-Maturity Re lationship Acce ptable . If the actual compressive strength is more than
 10 percent or 200 psi above the compressive strength as determined by the strength-maturity relationship,
 then a new strength-maturity relationship may be developed.
 507.4.7 Stre ngth-Maturity Re lationship Not Validate d. If the actual compressive strength is more
 
 278
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 than 10 percent or 200 psi, whichever is less, below the compressive strength as determined by the
 strength-maturity relationship, the contractor shall make cylinders to determine compressive strengths
 until a new strength-maturity relationship has been developed.
 507.5 Fie ld Docume ntation. T he contractor shall provide the engineer with the following information
 prior to taking any field action based on the strength-maturity strengths:
 (a) Project number, route, county, and date tested.
 (b) A list of each concrete lot evaluated.
 (c) Station numbers.
 (d) Quantity of concrete.
 (e) Maturity index determined for each sensor location.
 (f) Estimated strength determined for each sensor location.
 507.5.1 Calibration and Ve rification Re cords. T he contractor shall record all test results for
 equipment calibration and verification, and shall maintain all results in an organized format.
 507.5.2 Availability of Te st Re sults. Test results shall be available to the engineer at all times.
 507.6 Basis of Payme nt. No additional payment will be made for compliance with this specification.
 
 279
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 601
 FIELD LABO RATO RIES
 601.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of providing one or more laboratories at the site of work and
 at locations designated by the engineer.
 601.2 Laboratory Re quire me nts. A laboratory shall be furnished for each item of work that is specified
 in the contract as requiring such a unit. Separate laboratories will not be required for successive items of
 work when any preceding item has been completed, provided that the laboratory complies with the
 requirements for specific work. Additional laboratories may be required for the proper control of the work
 when simultaneous operations on the same item of work are being carried on at more than one location
 separated by a distance of one mile or more and separate testing operations are necessary. T he engineer will
 specify the number of laboratories required based on the operations of the contractor.
 601.2.1 T he laboratory shall be located and maintained at the site of current operations by the contractor.
 Work that requires the use of a field laboratory will not be permitted until a laboratory is provided. T he
 laboratory shall remain the property of the contractor, and shall be disposed of by the contractor upon
 completion of the work requiring the laboratory.
 601.2.2 Laboratory Approval. Laboratory verification and approval shall be required for laboratories
 performing acceptance tests for related work and shall be performed by the engineer annually; not to
 exceed 18 months.
 601.2.2.1 Equipme nt Ve rification Sample s. Equipment Verification Samples are required to verify
 equipment where QC and QA are performing acceptance test(s) on the same equipment Frequency of
 Equipment Verification Samples for permanent laboratories shall be required once per laboratory per
 quarter. Frequency of Equipment Verification Samples for mobile labs shall be required after setup and
 continued at once per quarter. Testing of samples shall be on independent equipment meeting the
 requirements as outlined in Sec 403.17.3.1. Test equipment that requires a correction factor is exempt.
 601.2.3 Regardless of the number of field laboratories specified on the plans, the number may be increased,
 decreased or completely underrun at the discretion of the engineer.
 601.3 Type 1 Fie ld Laboratory. T he Type 1 field laboratory shall be substantially constructed and
 weatherproof with wood or concrete floors, windows on at least two sides and at least one outside door.
 Windows and doors shall be equipped with screens and locks, and the necessary keys shall be furnished to
 the engineer. T he laboratory shall have a minimum of 120 square feet of floor space. T he ceiling shall be
 no less than 7 feet high. T he laboratory shall have at least one worktable 30 inches high, with a smooth
 one-piece top, no less than 8 feet long and 30 inches wide. T he laboratory shall be equipped with a storage
 shelf, a fire extinguisher, a desk and a chair. An operational electric hot plate or gas burner, having no less
 than two burners with adjustable temperature controls and capability of accommodating two 14 x 20-inch
 sample pans, shall be provided. A faucet-equipped sink capable of accommodating a 14 x 20-inch sample
 pan and connected to an operating water source of at least a 50-gallon capacity shall be provided. T he
 contractor shall keep an adequate supply of potable water available at all times. Lighting facilities shall be
 located to adequately illuminate all work in the interior of the laboratory. When required by the engineer,
 grounded electrical outlets with 110 to 120 volts, 60-Hertz continuous current and a climate control
 capable of maintaining an ambient temperature range of 72 to 80 F shall be provided. Laboratories shall be
 relocated on the project as directed by the engineer.
 601.4 Type 2 Fie ld Laboratory. T he laboratory shall be in accordance with Sec 601.3, except as follows.
 T he laboratory shall have a minimum of 200 square feet of floor space. T he laboratory shall be constructed
 with a dividing wall and doorway to allow for a separate testing work area and an office area suitable for
 computer operation meeting the engineer's approval. Telephone service shall be provided. T he laboratory
 shall be provided with an exhaust fan capable of moving a volume of air equal to at least ten times the
 volume of the laboratory each hour. Grounded electrical outlets with 110 to 120 volts, 60-Hertz continuous
 current and a climate control capable of maintaining an ambient temperature range of 72 to 80 F shall be
 provided. When a field laboratory is provided in accordance with Sec 502, at least one window shall provide
 a direct view of plant operations.
 
 280
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 601.5 Type 3 Fie ld Laboratory. T he laboratory shall be in accordance with Sec 601.4, except as follows.
 At least one window shall provide a direct view of plant operations. A locked storage area for nuclear
 equipment shall be provided that is at least 15 feet from the normal work areas. A steel box shall be
 provided in the storage area with locks for the purpose of storing nuclear equipment in accordance with
 Nuclear Regulatory Commission specifications.
 601.5.1 In accordance with Sec 401 or 402, a thermostatically controlled operating oven, capable of
 maintaining a minimum temperature of 375 F and having a capacity to accommodate at least one standard
 gallon can, shall be furnished. T he laboratory shall have a minimum of 300 square feet of floor space. T he
 laboratory shall contain a sieve shaker in accordance with AASHT O T 27, including time controls, a
 minimum sieve stacking height of 28 inches, platform adapters to accommodate 8 or 10-inch sieves, and a
 sample splitter meeting AASHT O T 248 requirements, having a minimum length of 20 inches with a 2inch maximum opening size, complete with a minimum of three pans.
 601.5.2 When a field laboratory is provided in accordance with Sec 403, the laboratory shall have a
 minimum of two outside doors and four windows. T he outside doors shall be located such that ingress and
 egress is permitted from opposite ends of the building. Each window shall provide at least 4 square feet of
 glazed area. T he laboratory shall have a minimum of 320 square feet of floor space, with a minimum width
 of 8 feet. An exhaust fan shall be provided that is capable of moving a volume of air each hour equal to at
 least ten times the volume of the laboratory. Anchored tables of adequate dimensions shall be furnished. All
 tables shall have smooth, one-piece tops. T he laboratory shall be equipped with storage shelves, a minimum
 of four chairs, a two-drawer filing cabinet and the bituminous mixture equipment described in Sec 403.6.
 Circuitry shall be such that all indicated equipment can be used without disruption. T he contractor may
 provide a facsimile machine with a private line, at the contractor ’s expense, to provide faster
 communications when mix adjustments are needed.
 601.6 Basis of Payme nt. Unless otherwise specified, no direct payment will be made for Type 1 or Type
 3 Field Laboratories. When provided in accordance with Sec 203, authorized Type 2 Field Laboratories,
 complete in place, will be paid for at the contract unit price. No direct payment will be made for relocation
 of Type 2 Field Laboratories. No direct payment will be made for furnishings, maintenance, utilities,
 heating and cooling facilities, including operation and fuel, and final removal of the laboratory.
 
 281
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 602
 MARKERS
 602.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing drain markers or steel right of way markers as
 specified in the contract documents, at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 602.2 Mate rial.
 602.2.1 All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as
 follows:
 Item
 Section
 Steel P ost for Markers 1044
 
 602.2.2 Right of way and drain marker plaques and fasteners will be furnished at the job site at no cost to
 the contractor.
 602.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Steel markers shall be set with the legend facing the centerline of
 the highway. Posts shall be set vertically and the plaques firmly attached. Posts shall be driven in
 accordance with Sec 903. Posts having battered or mushroomed tops will not be accepted.
 602.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of drain markers and right of way markers will be made
 per each.
 602.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of markers will be paid for at the contract unit price.
 
 282
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 603
 WATER LINE INSTALLATIO N
 603.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing material for, and installing water lines and
 appurtenances as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 603.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Concrete
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete
 Ductile Iron P ipe, 3 to 48 inch diameters
 P olyethylene (P E) P ipe and Tubing,
 1.2 to 3 inch diameter
 P olyethylene (P E) P ipe and Fittings,
 4 to 63 inch diameter
 P olyvinyl Chloride (P VC) P ipe and
 Fabricated Fittings, 4 to 12 inch diameter
 P olyvinyl Chloride (P VC) P ipe and
 Fabricated Fittings, 14 to 48 inch diameter
 Ductile Iron and Gray-Iron Fittings
 Rubber Gasket Joints
 Cement Mortar Lining
 Gate Valves
 Rubber-Seated Butterfly Valves
 Dry-Barrel Fire Hydrants
 Seamless Copper Water Tube
 
 Section/Specif ication
 501
 1036
 AWWA C151
 AWWA C901
 AWWA C906
 AWWA C900
 AWWA C905
 AWWA C110
 AWWA C111
 AWWA C104
 AWWA C500
 AWWA C504
 AWWA C502
 ASTM B 88, Type K
 (ASTM B 88 M, Type A)
 
 603.2.1 Se rvice Conne ctions. Service connections shall be completed in accordance with AWWA, ANSI,
 AST M or the local utility code, as applicable.
 603.2.2 Mate rial Acce ptance . T he contractor shall furnish one copy of each manufacturers' certification
 that all specified tests have been conducted and that the material and fittings are in accordance with these
 specifications.
 603.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Service shall not be interrupted without approval from the engineer
 and the proper utility official. T he contractor shall arrange the work to minimize service interruptions.
 Prior notice of at least 24 hours shall be given to the proper utility official and the engineer before any
 main is shut off. In no case shall a valve or hydrant be opened or shut without proper authorization.
 603.3.1 Construction and Installation. Construction and installation shall be in accordance with
 AWWA, ANSI, AST M, or local utility code, as applicable.
 603.3.2 Inspe ction and Acce ptance . Inspection and acceptance of the completed installation, prior to
 backfilling, shall be the responsibility of the utility owner.
 603.3.3 Appurte nance Installation. Appurtenances shall be located as shown on the plans or as directed
 by the engineer.
 603.3.4 Abandone d Wate r Mains. Abandoned water mains shall be plugged and sealed watertight by
 means of a ductile iron plug or cap, or by covering the end of the pipe with concrete of any mixture
 specified in Sec 501. T he concrete cover shall provide a minimum of 6 inches cover around the outside of
 the pipe and shall extend a minimum of 6 inches in each direction from the end of the pipe. All existing
 valves that will have pressure on one side and an abandoned main on the other side shall be closed with a
 ductile iron plug and blocked with reaction backing on the side where the main has been abandoned. A
 portion of the abandoned pipe shall be removed to allow clearance for plugging and backing.
 603.3.5 Encase me nt. Encasement, if required, shall be as specified in the contract.
 
 283
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 603.3.6 Backfilling. Material placed around and 12 inches above the top of the pipe shall be free of
 cinders, ashes, refuse, boulders, rocks or other unsuitable material. T he remainder of the trench shall be
 backfilled in accordance with Sec 726.
 603.3.7 Disinfe ction. T he completed water line installation shall be disinfected in accordance with the
 provisions of MDNR.
 603.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 603.4.1 Pipe . Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes during construction or
 where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, measurement of pipe,
 complete in place, including joint accessories, fittings and service connections greater than 2 inches inside
 diameter, will be made to the nearest linear foot along the geometrical center of the pipe with no
 exceptions for valves or fittings. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted
 from the contract quantity.
 603.4.2 Rock. Rock encountered in trenching and classified as Class 3 Excavation in Rock in accordance
 with Sec 203 will be measured to the nearest cubic yard. Measurement of yardage to be paid for as Class 3
 Excavation in Rock will be a width 18 inches greater than the inside diameter of the pipe and a depth from
 the surface of the rock as determined by the engineer to a plane 6 inches below the outside bottom of the
 pipe or to the bottom of the rock, whichever is higher. Any Class 3 Excavation in Rock performed prior to
 the establishment of the lines of demarcation and notification to the engineer will not be measured or paid
 for.
 603.4.3 Se rvice Conne ctions. Measurement of relocating service connections, 2 inches inside diameter
 or less, will be made per each.
 603.4.4 Encase me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes during
 construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, measurement
 of encasement conduit will be made to the nearest linear foot along the geometrical center of the conduit.
 Contract quantities will be used for final payment except as hereinafter provided. Measurement of
 reinforced concrete encasement, including reinforcing steel, will be made to the nearest 1/10 cubic yard.
 T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 603.5 Basis of Payme nt. Accepted water line will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the
 pay items included in the contract. No direct payment will be made for excavation or backfill except in
 accordance with Secs 206.6.3.3 and 603.4.2. No direct payment will be made for fittings regardless of the
 type of fittings used. Accessories required for fittings will be considered part of the fitting. In relocating
 service connections 2 inches inside diameter or less, no direct payment will be made for the pipe or fittings.
 No direct payment will be made for incidental construction items including, but not limited to, reaction
 backing, plugging and sealing of abandoned water mains, and for disinfecting of water lines.
 
 284
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 604
 MISCELLANEO US DRAINAGE
 SECTIO N 604.10 CO NCRETE HEADWALLS, DRO P INLETS AND MANHO LES.
 604.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing concrete headwalls, drop inlets and
 manholes in accordance with these specifications, as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 604.10.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 P recast Drainage Units
 1033
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete 1036
 
 604.10.2.1 All concrete, except that portion placed monolithic with paved surfaces, shall be Class B.
 Concrete for inverts shall be either Class B or concrete of a commercial mixture in accordance with Sec
 501. Material, proportioning, mixing, slump and transporting shall be in accordance with Sec 501.
 Concrete shall be placed, finished and cured in accordance with Sec 703.
 604.10.2.2 Steps for concrete manholes and drop inlets may be cast iron, aluminum alloy or polypropylene
 plastic coated reinforcing steel. T he portion of the step to be embedded in the concrete shall have a
 configuration that will prevent any pullout. T hese steps shall withstand a single concentrated load of 300
 pounds without distortion on that portion protruding from the wall. T he minimum width of rungs or cleats
 shall be 10 inches and shall be shaped to prevent the foot from slipping off the side. T he step shall project
 a minimum distance of 4 inches from the wall of the riser or cone section measured from the point of
 embedment. T he steps shall be embedded a minimum distance of 3 inches and shall be spaced vertically at a
 maximum distance of 16 inches.
 604.10.2.3 Steps for drop inlets may be steel step bars as shown on the plans or steps meeting the above
 requirements.
 604.10.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 604.10.3.1 All pipe built into the walls of the structure shall fit flush with the inside face of the wall. A
 joint, consisting of one layer of commercially available 55 pound smooth roll roofing, a heavy coat of
 bituminous material or other appropriate bond breaker, shall be placed around that portion of the pipe
 extending into the walls of the structure. Steps shall clear all pipes and shall be built in the wall as designated
 by the engineer. Reinforcement of these structures shall be in accordance with Sec 706, and the excavation
 shall be in accordance with Sec 206.
 604.10.3.2 Steps for concrete manholes and drop inlets shall be embedded by casting in place, mortaring or
 by friction fit. Steps cast in place shall be set through the forms and secured against displacement before
 concrete is placed. T he cavity receptacle for steps placed by friction fit shall be formed by casting in place
 a removable mold recommended for use by the manufacturer of the step.
 604.10.3.3 New manholes for existing sewers shall be constructed as shown on the plans. Cutting the
 existing sewer will be required to provide inlet and outlet connections to the new structure, and a bypass line
 shall be provided around construction at all locations where continuous sewer service will be required. Any
 portion of an existing sewer that is damaged in constructing the new manhole shall be repaired or replaced
 at the contractor ’s expense with new material of a type matching the old.
 604.10.4 Basis of Payme nt.
 604.10.4.1 T he accepted quantity of concrete headwalls, drop inlets and manholes will be paid for in the
 following manner:
 (a) Class B concrete will be measured and paid for in accordance with Sec 703 for miscellaneous
 concrete.
 
 285
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (b) Reinforcing steel will be measured and paid for in accordance with Sec 706.
 (c) Excavation will be measured and paid for in accordance with Sec 206.
 604.10.4.2 No direct payment will be made for:
 (a) Maintaining service or for cutting the existing sewer.
 (b) Weep holes, including excavation, permeable granular backfill, 4-inch drain tile, screen for inlet
 or any other work incidental thereto.
 (c) Manhole steps.
 SECTIO N 604.20 ADJUSTING DRAINAGE FACILITIES.
 604.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of adjusting manholes, catch basins, inlets and similar items
 as shown on the plans. Existing frames and covers shall be salvaged and reused if specified in the contract.
 New manhole steps shall be provided as necessary. New manhole adjusting rings (adapters) shall be provided
 if specified in the contract.
 604.20.2 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted adjustments of manholes, catch basins and inlets will be paid
 for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. No direct payment will be
 made for steps or adjusting rings.
 SECTIO N 604.30 ADJUSTING HO USE SEWER CO NNECTIO NS.
 604.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of laying or relaying sanitary sewer house connections that
 are to be relocated or that are to be reconnected to new sewers or temporarily removed to permit the
 installation of other items in the contract.
 604.30.2 Mate rial. T he size and class of pipe to be used shall be in accordance with the local authority
 having jurisdiction over the installation of sewer connections. All material shall be in accordance with
 Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Vitrified Clay Sewer and Culvert P ipe
 P lastic Joint Compound for P ipe
 Mortar for P ipe Joints
 
 Section
 1030
 1057.8
 1066
 
 604.30.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Excavation for the laying of pipe and for backfilling the trench
 shall be in accordance with Sec 726. T he adjustment shall be made to the line and grade shown on the plans
 or as directed by the engineer. Where a house sewer connection is relocated or relaid above a water main,
 Class B concrete or concrete of a commercial mixture in accordance with Sec 501 shall be used to encase
 the sewer line a minimum thickness of 6 inches. T he encasement shall extend to a point where the normal
 distance from the sewer to the water main is a minimum of 10 feet.
 604.30.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of adjusting house sewer connections will be made to
 the nearest linear foot along the geometrical center of the adjusted pipe.
 604.30.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 604.30.5.1 T he accepted quantity of adjusted house sewer connections, complete in place, will be paid for
 at the contract unit price. Payment will be considered full compensation for all necessary pipe, tees, bends,
 wyes, the cutting of and joining new pipe to old pipe or structure, excavation, backfill, traps, fittings and
 items incidental thereto.
 604.30.5.2 Payment for encasement, complete in place, will be paid for at the contract unit price.
 
 286
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 604.40 PIPE CO LLARS.
 604.40.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of metal or concrete collars constructed around a pipe joint
 as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 604.40.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Corrugated Metallic-Coated Steel Culvert P ipe,
 1020
 P ipe-Arches and End Sections
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete
 1036
 
 604.40.2.1 Metal pipe for pipe collars shall be of the same thickness and shall have the same corrugation
 dimensions as the corrugated metal pipe to be connected.
 604.40.2.2 Concrete used for collars shall be Class B or concrete of a commercial mixture in accordance
 with Sec 501.
 604.40.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 604.40.3.1 Pipe collars shall be provided for the following purposes:
 (a) Extending existing pipes where the pipe required for the extension will not form a normal joint
 with the pipe in place.
 (b) Connecting two different sizes of pipe
 (c) Connecting two pipes of different material.
 604.40.3.2 If the pipe collar design is not applicable to the type of pipe being extended, the pipe collar
 shall be modified to ensure a joint connection that will fit the pipe.
 604.40.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of pipe collars will be paid for at the contract unit
 price.
 SECTIO N 604.50 CO NNECTING PIPE TO EXISTING STRUCTURES.
 604.50.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of joining new pipe to existing manholes, box culverts,
 drop inlet boxes or sewer pipes as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 604.50.2 Construction Re quire me nts. An opening for the new pipe shall be made through the walls or
 barrel of the existing structure or pipe at the proper location and grade. T he new pipe shall be properly
 fitted into place, flush with the inner face of the existing masonry, or as nearly so as the engineer
 determines is practical. After the pipe is in place, the opening around the pipe shall be sealed watertight in
 a manner approved by the engineer. Any portion of an existing structure that is damaged in joining the new
 pipe shall be repaired or replaced, at the contractor ’s expense, with new material of a type matching the
 old. T hese requirements will be applicable in joining new pipe to another new pipe if the engineer
 determines the use of a manufactured connection joint is unnecessary.
 604.50.3 Basis of Payme nt. No direct payment will be made for connecting pipe to existing structures.
 SECTIO N 604.60 SLO TTED DRAINS.
 604.60.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing slotted drains in accordance with
 these specifications, as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 604.60.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 
 287
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Item
 Section
 Slotted Drain 1051
 
 604.60.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 604.60.3.1 T he slotted drain shall be Type A, B or C as shown on the plans.
 604.60.3.2 If Type C slotted drain is specified, the drain shall be installed such that the slanted spacer bars
 are facing upstream, sloped against the direction of the surface flow.
 604.60.3.3 Unless otherwise shown on the plans, the slotted drain shall be placed on Class A Bedding in
 accordance with Sec 726 and backfilled to the top of the grate assembly with concrete meeting the
 requirements of Sec 609.10. T he upper portion of the backfill may be placed in conjunction with the
 concrete curb or paving operations.
 604.60.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required,
 measurement of slotted drain, complete in place, will be made to the nearest linear foot along the
 geometric center of the drain. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from
 the contract quantity.
 604.60.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of slotted drain, complete in place, including coupling
 devices and any other necessary fittings, will be paid for at the contract unit price. No direct payment will
 be made for concrete required for installation of the slotted drain.
 
 288
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 605
 UNDERDRAINAGE
 605.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing underdrains and edge drains as
 shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer, and shall include excavating the trench, installing all
 required drainage media, and backfilling with material as specified or as directed by the engineer.
 605.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Aggregate for Drainage
 Geotextile
 Geocomposite Edge Drain
 Outlet P ipes
 P ipe Aggregate P avement Edge Drain
 Corrugated Metallic-Coated Steel Cross Drain and Structural Drain P ipe
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Cross Drain and Structural Drain P ipe
 
 Section
 1009
 1011
 1012
 1013
 1013
 1022
 1025
 
 605.2.1 All underdrain and edge drain pipes shall be perforated, except as specified otherwise.
 605.2.2 All special fittings, such as caps, wyes, tees and couplings, shall be of standard design and
 manufacture, and shall be compatible with the type of pipe or geocomposite drain to be used.
 605.2.3 All steel fittings shall be zinc or aluminum coated.
 605.2.4 All welds and cuts of steel pipe or fittings shall be repaired after welding, in accordance with Sec
 1020.
 605.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 605.3.1 Although probable locations of underdrains are shown on the plans, modifications may be
 necessary due to conditions found on the project. T he contractor shall perform work only as shown on the
 plans or as specified or approved in writing by the engineer.
 605.3.2 Any underdrain trenching that results in an uneven trench bottom or exposes soft, yielding or
 unstable ground in the trench bottom shall be undergraded and backfilled with drainage aggregate material of
 sufficient thickness to ensure maintenance of proper alignment and gradient for all subsequent operations.
 605.3.3 Any required drain pipe shall be firmly bedded and carefully aligned. T he pipe shall be laid with
 perforations down if the perforations are not uniformly distributed around the circumference of the pipe,
 unless otherwise shown on the plans. All longitudinal pipe shall slope toward an outlet pipe at a minimum
 rate of one inch per 10 feet. Sections shall be jointed with approved fittings. Dead ends of pipe shall be
 completely closed by means of caps or plugs. Outlet openings shall be a minimum of 6 inches above the
 ditch bottom, and shall be protected with rodent screens in accordance with Sec 1013. Outlet pipe openings
 that are not exposed shall be connected to drain as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer.
 605.3.4 Geotextile shall be used to completely envelope any drainage aggregate in trenches, except a
 geotextile will not be required when Grade 1 drainage aggregate is used, and only partial envelopment may
 be required when the underdrain abuts or is overlain by an approved open-graded base course or other
 drainage medium. A drainage geotextile wrap or sock shall envelope perforated drainage pipe when Grade 1
 or Grade 2 drainage aggregate is used, or whenever any portion of a perforated pipe used as a discharge pipe
 is backfilled with soil.
 605.3.5 Porous backfill shall be ponded with water immediately before covering to effect maximum
 settlement of backfill.
 SECTIO N 605.10 PIPE-AGGREGATE PAVEMENT EDGE DRAIN.
 
 289
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 605.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of placing a continuous pipe-aggregate edge drain under the
 edge of new pavement as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 605.10.2 Construction Re quire me nts. Aggregate shall be Grade 3, Grade 4 or Grade 5 drainage
 aggregate. Edge drain pipe shall have a nominal internal diameter of 4 inches unless otherwise shown on the
 plans.
 605.10.2.1 T he contractor shall select plastic pipe meeting these specifications, except that geocomposite
 drains shall not be used. Pavement edge drains shall be provided with outlet pipe and splash pads in
 accordance with Sec 605.60.
 605.10.2.2 T renching, placement, and backfill of underdrains shall be performed only after Type 1 or Type
 5 base is placed and compacted. Backfill material shall be compacted by three passes of a vibrating pad or
 drum-type compactor approved by the engineer.
 605.10.2.3 If a pipe-aggregate pavement edge drain is used on a pavement rehabilitation project, the
 contractor shall not install the drain until all pavement repair and required undersealing have been
 completed in the area where the edge drain is to be placed.
 605.10.2.4 Under new pavement, pipe-aggregate pavement edge drains shall be lined with geotextile and
 wrapped. Edge drains underneath stabilized permeable base shall have the geotextile wrapped around the
 outside edge and over the top of the permeable base. T he trench for pipe-aggregate pavement edge drains
 shall be lined and wrapped with a geotextile as shown on the plans.
 605.10.2.5 All longitudinal edge drains and outlet pipes installed on the project will be subject to video
 camera inspection as directed by the engineer.
 605.10.2.5.1 Video inspection shall be conducted after all paving is complete. T he engineer may randomly
 select no less than ten percent of the lateral outlet pipes for inspection and extend inspection to 500 feet
 of the mainline pipe. Inspection areas shall not overlap each other, if possible. If deficiencies are found, a
 more extensive video inspection with expanded video coverage shall be conducted, which may inspect any
 or all of the edge drains on the project, as directed by the engineer.
 605.10.2.5.2 T he video camera head shall remain centered in the pipe during the inspection. T he camera
 shall be capable of negotiating a 90˚ angle from the 4-inch outlet pipe to the 4-inch longitudinal pipe.
 Camera progress shall be clearly visible on an 8-inch or greater monitor screen. T he unit shall be able to
 record and play back the inspection. T he unit shall allow audio dubbing during the inspection. T he
 contractor shall provide a copy of the video inspection tapes to the engineer within three working days of
 inspection.
 605.10.2.5.3 If the inspection reveals crushed or compressed pipe, separated joints, obstructions within the
 pipe that prohibit the passage of the camera head, rips or cracks in the pipe wall, or longitudinal sags which
 allow silt to collect or water to stand in more than half the pipe depth, repair or replacement of the
 deficient portions of outlet or longitudinal pipe and the repair of the pavement, which is damaged by
 improper installation of the drain or the repair of deficient portions of the drain, shall be performed at the
 contractor ’s expense.
 605.10.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of pipe-aggregate edge drain will be made to the
 nearest linear foot along the centerline of the drain, center to center of fittings and junctions.
 605.10.4 Basis of Payme nt.
 605.10.4.1 Accepted quantities of pipe-aggregate edge drain will be paid for at the contract unit price per
 linear foot, or at an adjusted contract unit price per linear foot as described herein. No overrun or underrun
 of contract quantity will constitute the basis for contract adjustment, other than as provided in Sec
 605.10.4.2. No direct payment will be made for excavating the trench, backfilling and backfill material, or
 for video inspection of the outlet and longitudinal pipes. Outlet pipes will not be separately paid for, except
 in combination with any required splash pad.
 
 290
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 605.10.4.2 Adjustments in the contract unit price per linear foot of pipe-aggregate edge drain will be made
 in accordance with the following schedule where the engineer directs an increased depth of excavation from
 that shown on the plans. For purposes of determining the adjusted price, the excess depth of excavation
 will be averaged for the entire length of the drain if less than 100 feet and, if more than 100 feet, will be
 subdivided into 100-foot increments plus any remaining fraction. Any required undergrading to provide a 3inch bedding of drainage aggregate where geotextile trench lining is omitted will not be included in any
 calculation of excess depth of excavation for pay purposes.
 Average Excess Depth of Excavation
 Adjusted Price
 0 to 6 inches
 Contract P rice
 > 6 inches
 In accordance with Sec 104.3
 
 SECTIO N 605.20 GEO CO MPO SITE PAVEMENT EDGE DRAIN.
 605.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing geocomposite pavement edge
 drain at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 605.20.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 605.20.2.1 T he contractor shall furnish to the engineer a copy of the drain manufacturer's printed
 instructions for installing the edge drain at least two weeks prior to installation. Except as noted herein, the
 installation of the drain shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
 605.20.2.2 T he contractor shall not install the drain until after all pavement repairs and required
 undersealing have been completed in the area where the edge drain is to be placed.
 605.20.2.3 Each length of drain shall be joined to the adjacent length prior to installation. Splices shall
 keep adjoining lengths in proper alignment and shall not separate during installation. Splices shall have the
 same or greater compressive strength than the geocomposite edge drain, and shall be sealed against
 infiltration of the backfill material.
 605.20.2.4 T he drain shall be placed against the pavement side of the trench and shall be held in place
 while backfill is placed to a compacted height of 6 inches ± one inch, using a vibratory wheel or plate
 compactor with a rated impact force of approximately 5000 pounds. T he placement of the edge drain and
 the first lift of backfill shall be accomplished in a single continuous operation. After the first lift of backfill
 has been placed, the remainder of the backfill shall be placed and compacted by a vibratory compactor to
 the satisfaction of the engineer. Material excavated from the trench may be used for backfill, except that
 all backfill shall pass a 2-inch sieve. At the contractor's option, Grade 1 drainage aggregate may be used in
 two lifts and flooded with clean water to compact each lift. If this method is chosen, the drain shall be
 placed against the shoulder side of the trench.
 605.20.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of geocomposite pavement edge drain will be made to
 the nearest linear foot along the centerline of the drain, center to center of fittings and junctions.
 605.20.4 Basis of Payme nt. Accepted quantities of geocomposite pavement edge drain will be paid for at
 the contract unit price per linear foot. No overrun or underrun of contract quantity will constitute the basis
 for contract adjustment. No direct payment will be made for excavating the trench or backfilling and
 backfill material. Outlet pipes will not be separately paid for, except in combination with any required
 splash pad.
 SECTIO N 605.30 PIPE-AGGREGATE PAVEMENT CRO SS DRAIN.
 605.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of placing metal pipe for sub drainage purposes as shown on
 the plans or as directed by the engineer, and shall include excavating the trench and backfilling with
 material as specified or directed. Pipe-aggregate pavement cross drains shall be non-continuous and will
 typically be installed laterally beneath the pavement to improve localized drainage problems. Except as
 otherwise specified, all cross drains shall have a nominal internal diameter of 6 inches and shall be
 perforated.
 
 291
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 605.30.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 605.30.2.1 Porous backfill shall extend a minimum distance of shoulder line to shoulder line of flexible
 pavements and a minimum of 18 inches outside of each edge of rigid pavement.
 605.30.2.2 T he pipe shall be firmly bedded in the trench. Dead ends of pipe shall be completely closed by
 means of caps securely affixed to the pipe. Outlet ends shall be connected to a drain as shown on the plans
 or as directed by the engineer.
 605.30.2.3 T renching, placement and backfill of cross drains shall be performed only after Type 1 or Type
 5 base is placed and compacted.
 605.30.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of pipe-aggregate cross drain will be made to the
 nearest linear foot along the centerline of the drain, center to center of fittings and junctions.
 605.30.4 Basis of Payme nt. Adjustments in the contract unit price per linear foot of pipe-aggregate cross
 drain will be made in accordance with the following schedule where the engineer directs increased depth of
 excavation from that shown on the plans. For purposes of determining the adjusted price, the excess depth
 of excavation will be averaged for the entire length of the drain if less than 100 feet and, if more than 100
 feet, will be subdivided into 100-foot increments plus any remaining fraction. Any required undergrading to
 provide a 3-inch bedding of drainage aggregate where geotextile trench lining is omitted will not be included
 in any calculation of excess depth of excavation for pay purposes.
 Average Excess Depth of Excavation
 Adjusted Price
 0 to 6 inches
 Contract P rice
 > 6 inches
 In accordance with Sec 104.3
 
 SECTIO N 605.40 STRUCTURAL UNDERDRAIN.
 605.40.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of installing pipe, generally for draining porous or other
 backfill adjacent to concrete masonry construction, as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 T he contractor shall select either plastic or metal pipe meeting these specifications, except that
 geocomposite drains shall not be used and where plastic pipe is used, a concrete splash pad will be required.
 605.40.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 605.40.2.1 T he pipe shall be laid to the grade and alignment shown. Where a section of pipe is cast into
 concrete, the remaining pipe shall be joined to these sections with connecting bands. T he porous backfill
 material shall be placed such that the pipe will not become displaced and shall be firmly tamped under and
 around the entire pipe. Discharge ends shall be protected by approved methods to prevent obstruction until
 connections to outlets are installed.
 605.40.2.2 When the fill above the drainage system is coarse aggregate or rock fill, Grade 3, 4 or 5,
 drainage aggregate shall be used with no geotextile. When the remaining backfill is sand or soil, any
 drainage aggregate may be used with the following exceptions. For sand backfill and Grades 3, 4 and 5,
 drainage aggregate or for earth backfill and Grades 2, 3, 4 and 5 drainage aggregate, the backfill material
 shall be separated from the drainage aggregate with geotextile.
 605.40.2.3 After placement of the drain pipe, the initial lift of backfill material shall be placed around and
 over the pipe to a compacted depth not to exceed 6 inches above the pipe. T his initial lift shall be
 compacted by two passes of a vibrating pad or drum-type compactor approved by the engineer. Any
 remaining porous backfill shall be placed in loose lift thicknesses not exceeding 6 inches and each lift
 compacted by two passes of the same equipment.
 605.40.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of structural underdrain will be made to the nearest
 linear foot along the centerline of the drain, center to center of fittings and junctions.
 605.40.4 Basis of Payme nt. Accepted quantities of structural underdrain will be paid for at the contract
 unit price per linear foot. No direct payment will be made for excavating the trench or backfilling and
 
 292
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 backfill material. Outlet pipes will not be separately paid for, except in combination with any required
 splash pad.
 SECTIO N 605.50 FRENCH UNDERDRAIN.
 605.50.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of installing a drain, laterally across a pavement, using a
 trench, geotextile lining, and Grade 3 or Grade 4 drainage aggregate.
 605.50.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 605.50.2.1 French underdrains shall be constructed in the subgrade and through the shoulders to provide
 drainage at locations shown on the plans. French underdrains shall have a trench of the dimensions shown
 on the plans, filled with porous backfill material. For that part of the trench in shoulders, the trench above
 the porous backfill shall be filled with suitable earth, well compacted.
 605.50.2.2 Unless otherwise specified, both the trench width and depth of drainage aggregate shall be no
 less than 18 inches. Where directed, the trench above the drainage aggregate shall be backfilled with well
 compacted suitable earth.
 605.50.2.3 Drainage aggregate shall be placed in lifts not to exceed 18 inches in thickness and compacted
 in a manner meeting the approval of the engineer.
 605.50.2.4 All french underdrains shall be daylighted at discharge ends with minimum 10-foot lengths of
 perforated 6-inch diameter metal pipe placed at or within 3 inches of the flow line.
 605.50.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of french underdrain will be made to the nearest linear
 foot along the centerline of the drain.
 605.50.4 Basis of Payme nt. Accepted quantities of french underdrain will be paid for at the contract unit
 price per linear foot.
 SECTIO N 605.60 O UTLET PIPES AND SPLASH PADS.
 605.60.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing outlet pipes and splash pads for
 pipe-aggregate pavement edge drain, geocomposite pavement edge drain, and structural underdrain, when
 four-inch plastic pipe is used, at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 605.60.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 605.60.2.1 Unless otherwise shown, outlet pipes shall be installed perpendicular to the drain, with a two
 percent gradient.
 605.60.2.2 Concrete for splash pads shall be air-entrained and Class B, B-1 or concrete of a commercial
 mixture in accordance with Sec 501.
 605.60.2.3 Construction requirements for the splash pads shall be in accordance with Sec 609. If the
 excavation is done to neat lines, forming will not be required. Pre-cast splash pads may be substituted for
 cast-in-place splash pads where approved by the engineer.
 605.60.2.4 Outlet pipes shall be 4-inch diameter, non-perforated, schedule 40 or SDR 23.5 PVC pipe.
 Outlet connections to pipe-aggregate pavement edge drains shall be with wye connectors or 90-degree
 elbows as shown on the plans.
 605.60.2.5 Outlet pipe trenches shall not be cut prior to installation of the edge drain. Outlet installation
 shall be completed promptly and, in all cases, within 72 hours of edge drain installation except with written
 approval from the engineer. T he trench shall not be backfilled until the installation is inspected and
 approved by the engineer.
 605.60.2.6 Backfilling of excavations for outlet pipe and splash pads shall be performed in accordance with
 
 293
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Sec 203. If additional material is needed to complete the backfill, suitable material meeting the approval of
 the engineer shall be provided by the contractor at the contractor ’s expense.
 605.60.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of outlet pipes and splash pads will be made per each.
 605.60.4 Basis of Payme nt. Payment for plan quantity of outlet pipes and splash pads, in combination,
 will be made at the contract unit price for each of the items included in the contract.
 SECTIO N 605.70 AGGREGATE DRAINS.
 605.70.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of trenching and placing granular filler material wrapped
 with geotextile as shown on the standard plans or as directed by the engineer. Construction of aggregate
 drains shall be after completion of granular base courses on new pavement or at least two weeks prior to
 shoulder work or pavement repair during pavement rehabilitation.
 605.70.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 605.70.2.1 T he trench shall be constructed to the width and depth as shown on the standard plans. T he
 bottom of the trench shall be no higher than the bottom of pavement or granular base. T he trench shall be
 smooth, firm and furnish a clean exposure to the pavement bottom or granular base course.
 605.70.2.2 Any remaining trench shall be backfilled and compacted with suitable material in accordance
 with Sec 203. When erodible aggregate material such as recycled glass, tire chips or fine aggregate, are used,
 the in slope or exposed area shall be covered with a minimum of 6 inches Grade 3, Grade 4, or Grade 5
 aggregate, in accordance with Sec 1009.
 605.70.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of aggregate drains will not be made except for
 authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity.
 Where required, measurement of aggregate drains will be made to the nearest linear foot along the
 centerline of the drain from the edge of pavement to the end of the trench top.
 605.70.4 Basis of Payme nt. Accepted quantities of aggregate drain, complete in place, will be paid for at
 the contract unit price per linear foot. Payment will be considered full compensation for all labor,
 equipment, materials, and incidentals to complete this work, including excavation and geotextile wrap.
 
 294
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 606
 GUARDRAIL, CRASHWO RTHY END TERMINALS, O NE-STRAND ACCESS RESTRAINT CABLE
 AND THREE-STRAND GUARD CABLE
 606.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing guardrail, crashworthy end
 terminals, one-strand access restraint cable or three-strand guard cable as shown on the plans or as directed
 by the engineer.
 606.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Concrete
 501
 Guardrail, End Terminals, Crash Cushions,
 One-Strand Access Restraint Cable
 1040
 and Three-Strand Guard Cable
 
 606.2.1 Concre te . Concrete shall be placed, finished and cured in accordance with Sec 703.
 606.2.2 Cold We athe r. During cold weather, the weather limitations of Sec 502 will apply to concrete
 work.
 606.2.3 Ae sthe tic Guardrail. When specified, aesthetic guardrail shall be in accordance with NCHRP
 350, Test Level 3 criteria and shall be of new stock. End terminals and crash cushions for aesthetic
 guardrail shall be fabricated and installed in accordance with Sec 606.30.3.
 606.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 606.3.1 Ge ne ral. Work on guardrail or guard cable removal and replacement when the adjacent travel or
 auxiliary lane is open to traffic during non-working hours shall adhere to the following requirements:
 (a) T he contractor shall provide a schedule of work prior to the beginning of work.
 (b) Remove no more guardrail or guard cable than can be replaced in the same day.
 (c) Schedule guardrail and guard cable installation to ensure guardrail beam or guard cable is
 properly attached to all installed posts at the end of each work day.
 (d) Ensure end sections or terminals exposed to traffic meet current standards.
 (e) Notify the engineer prior to delivery of the material to the project.
 606.3.1.1 If guardrail or three-strand guard cable cannot be replaced the same day as removal, traffic
 control measures meeting the approval of the engineer shall be provided. T he contractor will not be
 compensated for any additional traffic control items required to perform this work. In all cases, the
 contractor shall ensure that the guardrail or guard cable installation is fully anchored before opening the
 adjacent lane to traffic.
 606.3.1.2 T he shoulders and slopes shall be in accordance with all standards shown on the plans or shall be
 as directed by the engineer before the installation of any guardrail, guard cable or end treatments.
 606.3.2 Fie ld Re pair of Galvaniz ing. Galvanized material shall be handled in a manner to avoid damage
 to the surface. No punching, drilling, cutting or welding will be permitted after galvanizing, except as
 approved by the engineer to provide for lapped beams, or for changes in location of splices necessitated by
 field clearances. Any galvanized material on which the galvanizing has been damaged will be rejected or
 may, with the engineer ’s approval, be repaired in accordance with Sec 1080.
 606.3.3 Posts for Guardrail and O ne -Strand Acce ss Re straint Cable .
 
 295
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 606.3.3.1 Posts may be wood or steel as shown on the plans. T he same material shall be used for all new
 installations within a single project, except for end treatments. If the project requires an extension of
 existing guardrail, the new post material for the extension shall match the existing material.
 606.3.3.2 Wood posts for end anchors shall be installed as shown on the plans.
 606.3.3.3 Posts may be installed by either drilling or driving.
 606.3.3.3.1 Posts installed by drilling shall have sufficiently sized holes to permit thorough compaction of
 backfill material around the posts. T he backfill material shall be compacted in layers not exceeding 12
 inches high.
 606.3.3.3.2 Posts installed by driving may be driven by a power hammer or any other method approved by
 the engineer. Any mushrooming on the top of the post shall be removed. Damaged zinc coating on
 galvanized posts shall be field repaired in accordance with Sec 1081. If, in the judgment of the engineer, the
 exposed portion of a wood post is split or the driving process noticeably worsens the check cracking, the
 post shall be replaced by the contractor at the contractor ’s expense.
 606.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of grading and drainage at barrier locations will be paid
 for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 SECTIO N 606.10 GUARDRAIL.
 606.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing guardrail as shown on the plans
 or as directed by the engineer.
 606.10.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 606.10.2.1 Be ams. Beams shall be spliced by lapping in the direction of traffic. T he use of 12’-6” or 25foot sections of beam rails and channels, if required, will be permitted where true line and grade can be
 maintained.
 606.10.2.2 End Anchors. End anchors shall be installed on ends of guardrail runs where crashworthy end
 terminals are not required.
 606.10.2.3 De line ators. Delineators shall be placed on all guardrail located 2 feet or less from the edge of
 the shoulder. Delineators shall be spaced at 50-foot intervals.
 606.10.2.3.1 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Delineators 1065
 
 606.10.2.3.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 606.10.2.3.2.1 Delineator reflector colors shall correspond with pavement marking. Delineators shall be
 sheeted on one side, facing oncoming traffic, unless otherwise specified. Where guardrail divides opposing
 lanes of travel, the delineators shall have retro-reflective sheeting on both sides corresponding to adjacent
 pavement markings. Guardrail located on off ramps shall have red reflective sheeting placed on the reverse
 side of the reflector. T he use of the red sheeting on the back side of guardrail delineators may be used
 wherever there is a need to discourage wrong way driving. Guardrail located on two lane roads shall have
 retro-reflective sheeting on both sides corresponding to the adjacent pavement markings. If there are not
 edgelines present, white retro-reflective sheeting shall be used.
 606.10.2.3.2.2 Delineators shall be installed according to manufacturer ’s recommendations or as shown on
 the plans.
 606.10.2.3.2.3 Any damaged or missing delineators shall be replaced by the contractor at the contractor ’s
 
 296
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 expense.
 606.10.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 606.10.3.1 Measurement of guardrail will be made to the nearest 1/2 linear foot for each increment along a
 line passing through the centerline of each post, and totaled to the nearest linear foot for the sum of the
 increments in the contract. T he length will be measured separately for each guardrail type, as shown on the
 plans, excluding bridge anchor sections, end anchors, transition sections and bullnose guardrail systems.
 Bridge anchor sections, end anchors, transition sections and bullnose guardrail systems will be measured per
 each item furnished and installed.
 606.10.3.2 Measurement for MGS Guardrail will be made to the nearest ½ linear foot for each segment
 measured along the center of the W-beam rail from the centerline of the mid-span lap splice to the
 centerline of the mid-span lap splice totaled to the nearest linear foot for the sum of the increments in the
 contract. T he length will be measured for each type of guardrail, as shown on the plans, excluding vertical
 barrier transitions, end terminals, MGS height and block transitions, MGS long span, and embedded anchor
 transitions. Vertical barrier transitions, end terminals, MGS height and block transitions, MGS long span,
 and embedded anchor transitions will be measured per each item furnished and installed.
 606.10.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of guardrail, bridge approach transitions, end
 anchors, MGS height and block transitions, MGS Long Span Guardrail, and bullnose guardrail systems,
 complete in place, will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the
 contract. No direct payment will be made for end sections or terminal connectors. No direct payment will
 be made for setting posts in rock. No direct payment will be made for guardrail delineators provided on new
 guardrail. Delineators specified for installation on existing guardrail will be measured and paid for per each.
 SECTIO N 606.20 BLANK.
 SECTIO N 606.30 CRASHWO RTHY END TERMINALS.
 606.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing crashworthy end terminals as
 shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 606.30.2 Mate rial.
 606.30.2.1 Equipment and material shall be of new stock and in accordance with Sec 1040.
 606.30.2.2 All Type A end terminal installations shall be a minimum of 50 feet long. Additional Type A or
 MGS guardrail shall be provided by the contractor, at the contractor's expense, to increase the Type A end
 terminal to a length of 50 feet. If the end terminal is to be installed on MGS rail, the additional guardrail
 supplied shall be MGS rail.
 606.30.3 Construction Re quire me nts. End terminals and crash cushions shall be fabricated and installed
 in accordance with the manufacturer's approved shop drawings, recommendations and as shown on the
 plans. Any units damaged during the term of the contract shall be replaced immediately at the contractor's
 expense.
 606.30.3.1 Where a specific end terminal or crash cushion is shown by product name, that unit shall be
 used as shown on the plans. No substitutions will be permitted without prior approval from the engineer.
 606.30.3.2 T he contractor shall not install flared Type A end terminals in medians or on curbs.
 606.30.3.3 T he contractor shall not install Type B end terminals on paved surface locations, unless the
 location is temporary and the paved area is to be resurfaced after removal of the system.
 606.30.3.4 T he contractor may use Type C, D, and E end terminals where Type B units are specified or
 shown on the plans.
 606.30.3.5 Crashworthy end terminals located 12 feet or less from the edge of the traveled way shall be
 
 297
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 furnished with a modified Type 3 object marker. T he marker size, shape, method of attachment and
 placement shall be approved by the engineer prior to installation.
 606.30.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Method of Measurement. Measurement for crashworthy end
 terminals will be made for each unit assembled, installed and complete in place. Grading for crashworthy
 end terminals will be measured in accordance with Sec 203 when roadway and drainage excavation is
 included in the contract, otherwise grading will be measured in accordance with Sec 207.
 606.30.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of Type A, B C, D and E crashworthy end terminals,
 complete in place, will be paid for at the contract unit price. Payment will be considered full compensation
 for complete installation including any backup assemblies or other items necessary for proper installation
 of the end terminal or crash cushion as required. Grading for end terminals will be paid for at the contract
 unit price for roadway and drainage excavation if included in the contract; otherwise it will be paid for as
 linear grading. If the contractor elects to use a flared Type A crashworthy end terminal, additional
 embankment as shown on the plans shall be provided at the contractor's expense.
 SECTIO N 606.40 O NE-STRAND ACCESS RESTRAINT CABLE.
 606.40.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing one-strand access restraint cable
 as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 606.40.2 Construction Re quire me nts. T he cable shall be strung directly from the reel and pulled tight
 after the initial anchoring. T he cable shall then be attached to the second anchor assembly with all
 turnbuckles fully opened. T he cable shall be completely anchored before attaching to the line posts. Only
 one splice will be permitted between anchors, located between the line posts. Splices will not be permitted
 in spans adjacent to the anchor and cable end assemblies.
 606.40.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of one-strand access restraint cable will be made to the
 nearest 1/2 linear foot for each increment, from center of end post to center of end post, and totaled to
 the nearest linear foot for the sum of the increments on the project.
 606.40.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of one-strand access restraint cable, end anchors,
 posts and hardware, complete in place, will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items
 included in the contract.
 SECTIO N 606.50 THREE-STRAND GUARD CABLE.
 606.50.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing three-strand guard cable,
 including all hardware, appurtenances and aggregate bedding, as shown on the plans or as directed by the
 engineer.
 606.50.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 606.50.2.1 Line Posts. All posts shall be driven unless otherwise directed by the engineer. Driving shall be
 accomplished with approved equipment and methods that will leave the posts in the final position, free
 from any distortion, burring or other damage. All posts shall be aligned to a tolerance of 1/4 inch for plumb
 and grade line. If rock is encountered when setting line posts, the contractor may set line posts with or
 without a soil plate. Line posts set with a soil plate shall be installed by digging or boring a hole into the
 rock to the required depth and of sufficient size for the post to be set with the soil plate attached. Line
 posts set without the soil plate shall be installed by drilling a hole to the required depth not to exceed 5
 inches in diameter. Following placement of the post, the hole shall be backfilled with a cohesive soil or sand
 in accordance with Sec 1005.3, and thoroughly tamped.
 606.50.2.2 Anchor Asse mblie s. T he specified type of anchor assembly shall be constructed at each end
 of a run of guard cable. If intermediate end anchors are required, the cable assembly shall be overlapped as
 shown on the plans. T he location of all intermediate anchor assemblies shall be determined by the
 contractor and approved by the engineer. T he concrete anchor shall be cast in place with the centerline
 normal to the line of the guard cable. T he top 12 inches of the anchor below finished ground line shall be
 formed, unless the engineer determines soil conditions permit excavation to be made to the neat lines of
 
 298
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 the anchor and the anchor cast against the undisturbed vertical soil face. Anchors shall be constructed on
 firm, stable, undisturbed soil to the minimum dimensions shown on the plans. Anchor bolts and anchor post
 slip bases shall be firmly held in the proper position supported at the top by a template during concrete
 placement. Backfill shall be thoroughly compacted with mechanical tampers with care taken to prevent
 damage to the finished concrete. Backfill shall be brought up level with the finished grade line. T he anchor
 may be cast in place or precast as either one or two units.
 606.50.2.3 Cable s. Cables shall be attached to the line posts, anchor posts, cable transition brackets and
 anchor brackets as shown on the plans. Where compensating devices or turnbuckles are required, the cables
 shall be attached to the end anchor with turnbuckles fully opened. Compensating devices and turnbuckles
 shall be installed such that no interference with the functions of any other part of the system occurs.
 Individual cables may be spliced with a device approved by the engineer. Each cable shall be stretched taught
 by mechanical means to eliminate sag between the posts. T he contractor may tighten cable hook bolts
 after final cable tensioning is complete to allow cable slack to be adequately taken up. Prior to final
 acceptance, the cables shall be tensioned in accordance with the temperature and spring compression table
 shown on the plans and all cable hook bolts tightened.
 606.50.2.4 Aggre gate Be dding. Material for aggregate bedding shall consist of a durable crushed stone,
 shot rock or broken concrete with approximately 20 percent of the pieces being between 1 inch and 3
 inches in diameter but none greater than 3 inches. T he remainder of the material shall be such that
 provides a uniform, angular appearance. Acceptance by the engineer will be made by visual inspection.
 606.50.2.5 De line ators. Delineator spacing and reflector colors shall be in accordance with Sec 606.10.
 606.50.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 606.50.3.1 Thre e -Strand Guardrail. Measurement of three-strand guard cable will be made from center
 of line post to center of line post, totaled to the nearest linear foot.
 606.50.3.2 Anchor Asse mblie s. Measurement of anchor assemblies will be made per each.
 606.50.3.3 Aggre gate Be dding. Aggregate bedding material will be measured to the nearest cubic yard of
 material.
 606.50.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of three-strand guard cable, end anchors, posts,
 hardware and aggregate bedding will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included
 in the contract. No direct payment will be made for setting posts in rock. No direct payment will be made
 for guard cable delineators provided on new guard cable. Delineators specified for installation on existing
 guard cable will be measured and paid for per each.
 
 299
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 607
 FENCING
 SECTIO N 607.10 CHAIN-LINK FENCE.
 607.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and erecting chain-link fence and gates as
 shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 607.10.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Chain-Link Fence 1043
 
 607.10.2.1 T he contractor may select either zinc-coated steel, aluminum-coated steel, aluminum alloy or
 vinyl-coated steel fencing material, except that the same kind of material shall be used throughout the
 project.
 607.10.2.2 Walk gates and drive gates, if required, shall be of the same material as that selected for the
 fence. If the project requires an extension of an existing fence, the new fence material for the extension
 shall match the existing material.
 607.10.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 607.10.3.1 T he contractor shall fill, cut or trench where necessary to produce a smooth and uniform
 ground surface so the bottom of the fabric is no more than 3 inches above the finished ground line. All
 posts shall be set plumb, true to line and grade. Terminal posts, defined as end, gate, corner and pull posts,
 shall be set in concrete. Concrete for the footings shall be Class B concrete or a commercial mixture in
 accordance with Sec 501. T he concrete footing shall be a uniform thickness around the post and shall have
 a cone or dome shaped top. At the option of the contractor, line posts may be driven or placed in dug or
 drilled holes and set in concrete or quick-setting polyurethane foam in accordance with Sec 903.3.1.2. If
 the contractor elects to drive line posts, the posts shall be of the length and driven to the depth shown on
 the plans. If posts cannot be driven to the correct depth, the posts shall be removed and placed in dug or
 drilled holes and set in foam or concrete footings. Posts damaged during installation shall be removed and
 replaced at the contractor ’s expense.
 607.10.3.2 Fabric shall not be attached to posts until the concrete footings have cured for at least five
 days. Fabric shall be securely attached to end, corner, gate and pull posts in accordance with manufacturer's
 recommendations. T he fabric shall be attached to the tension wire with hog rings, spaced as shown on the
 plans. T he fabric shall be attached to line posts with wire ties or bands spaced in accordance with
 manufacturer's recommendations. All fabric shall be taut before attaching to line posts and tension wire.
 607.10.3.3 Drive gates shall have an approximate full circle opening swing. Walk gates shall have positive
 stops to prevent the gates from swinging into the right of way.
 607.10.3.4 If the chain link fence is required to be topped with barbed wire, the barbed wire support arm
 shall be at a 45-degree angle, ± 5 degrees, from the vertical plane of the fence line extended above the
 fence, and shall be fitted with clips, slots or other device for attaching three strands of barbed wire to the
 arm. T he top strand shall be located 12 inches horizontally from the fence line, ± 3 inches, with the other
 wires spaced uniformly between the top of the fence fabric and the top outside strand of barbed wire. T he
 barbed wire arm shall be of sufficient strength to withstand a weight of 250 pounds applied at the outer
 strand of barbed wire without causing any permanent deflection of the arm. Each strand of barbed wire shall
 be pulled taut to remove all sag before the strand is attached to the extension arm.
 607.10.3.5 Post braces shall be installed for each gate, corner, pull and end post. T he brace shall extend
 from the mid point of the gate, corner, pull and end post to the midpoint of the adjacent line post. A truss
 rod shall be connected to the midpoint of the line post and run back to the bottom of the gate, corner, pull
 and end post. T he truss rod shall be equipped with a turnbuckle or other equivalent device for adjustment.
 
 300
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 607.10.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of chain-link fence will be made to the nearest linear
 foot, measured along the slope of the fabric, but shall not include gates. Measurement for gates will be made
 for each unit assembled, installed and complete in place. Double drive gates will be considered a single unit.
 Measurement for the 3-strand barbed wire extension will be made to the nearest linear foot, measured along
 the slope of the fence, but will not include gates.
 607.10.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of chain-link fence, walk and drive gates, and barbed
 wire extensions, complete in place, will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items
 included in the contract. No direct payment will be made for concrete footings, post hole excavation or for
 excavation and embankment necessary to smooth the area under the fence.
 SECTIO N 607.20 WO VEN WIRE FENCE.
 607.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and erecting woven wire fence and gates as
 shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 607.20.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Woven Wire Fence
 1043.4
 Wood P osts for Fencing 1050.2
 
 607.20.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 607.20.3.1 Posts shall be set plumb, true to line and grade. Wood corner, end, brace and pull posts shall be
 set in drilled or dug holes and backfilled with soil thoroughly tamped around the post. Steel corner, end,
 brace and pull posts and braces shall be set in concrete footings in accordance with Sec 607.10.3. Steel and
 wood line posts may be driven in lieu of setting the posts in drilled or dug holes. If the contractor elects to
 drive the line posts, the posts shall be of the length and driven to the depth shown on the plans. If the
 posts cannot be driven to the correct depth, posts shall be removed and placed in dug or drilled holes and
 set with the appropriate backfill. Posts damaged during installation shall be removed and replaced at the
 contractor ’s expense.
 607.20.3.2 Wood line posts that are to be driven shall be pointed before being treated. If surfaces of treated
 wood posts have been damaged, or if framing at the site is required, the damaged or resulting untreated
 surfaces shall be field treated with two coats of commercially available preservative of the same type used
 for the original treatment. T he second coat shall be applied after the first coat is absorbed. Creosote
 preservative shall be hot when applied.
 607.20.3.3 Corner post assemblies shall be set at all horizontal angle points greater than 15 degrees in the
 line of fence. Pull post assemblies shall be set at all vertical angle points greater than 15 degrees but at no
 greater than 660-foot intervals.
 607.20.3.4 Fabric and barbed wire shall be pulled taut before attaching to any line post. T he bottom of the
 fabric shall be no more than 3 inches above the ground at any point and necessary excavation along the
 fence shall be performed to obtain the specified clearance. Filling of depressions will not be permitted
 except where approved by the engineer. Spaces left by depressions shall be filled with strands of barbed wire
 as shown on the plans.
 607.20.3.5 Walk and drive gates shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of gates for
 chain-link fence, except the filler shall be woven wire fabric of the same material as used for the fence.
 607.20.3.6 T he contractor shall modify the typical installation for water gates to fit the conditions in the
 field and shall be approved by the engineer.
 607.20.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of woven wire fence will be made to the nearest linear
 foot, measured along the slope of the fabric, but will not include gates. Measurement for gates will be made
 for each unit assembled, installed and complete in place. Double drive gates will be considered a single unit.
 
 301
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 607.20.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity for woven wire fence and gates, complete in place,
 will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. No direct
 payment will be made for post hole excavation, backfilling, clearing of fence rows, trenching for fabric,
 placing extra strands of barbed wire for depressions, construction of water gates and all other incidental
 work or material.
 
 302
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 608
 CO NCRETE MEDIAN, MEDIAN STRIP, SIDEWALK, CURB RAMPS,
 STEPS AND PAVED APPRO ACHES
 608.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing concrete medians, median strips, sidewalks,
 curb ramps, steps and paved approaches as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. Concrete
 medians shall consist of a paved median constructed on a prepared subgrade. Concrete median strips shall
 consist of paved median strips laid over and tied to a previously constructed pavement.
 608.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete Structures
 Steel Welded Wire Reinforcement for Concrete P avement
 Epoxy Resin Material
 Red Concrete Tinting Material
 Material for Joints
 Truncated Domes
 
 Section
 1036
 1036
 1039
 1056
 1057
 1067
 
 608.2.1 Concrete sidewalks, curb ramps, and steps shall be constructed of Class B concrete.
 608.2.2 Concrete medians, median strips and paved approaches 6 inches thick or greater shall be
 constructed of Pavement concrete. Concrete medians, median strips and paved approaches less than 6
 inches thick shall be constructed of either Class B concrete or Pavement concrete.
 608.2.3 Material, proportioning, air entraining, mixing, slump and transporting of concrete shall be in
 accordance with Sec 501.
 608.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 608.3.1 Placement, finishing and curing of concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 502 When items are
 constructed on a subgrade, the subgrade shall be compacted to the specified density of the applicable
 subgrade material in accordance with Sec 209. T he subgrade shall have a sufficient moisture content such
 that moisture is not drawn out of the concrete. T ransparent membrane shall be used in lieu of pigmented
 membrane for curing concrete median strips, sidewalks, curb ramps and steps.
 608.3.2 Where tinted concrete is specified, the colored pigment shall be applied in accordance with the
 manufacturer ’s recommendations. T he final concrete surface coloration shall be medium to dark red, as
 approved by the engineer. If membrane curing is allowed by the manufacturer ’s recommendations, the
 membrane shall be a clear or transparent type.
 608.3.3 Required reinforcement and tie bars shall be positioned by bar chairs or other approved devices
 during the placing of concrete.
 608.3.4 Concrete median strips shall be attached to the pavement with tie bars as shown on the plans. T ie
 bars shall be adjusted to a minimum of 6 inches from any transverse joint.
 608.3.5 Joints for all items shall be constructed at such intervals and locations as shown on the plans or as
 directed by the engineer.
 608.3.5.1 Longitudinal joints between the median and curb, or median and adjacent concrete pavement
 shall be constructed of either non-extruding preformed joint material, or one layer of commercially
 available 55-pound roll roofing. Sawed joints shall be sealed in accordance with Sec 502.5.4.
 608.3.5.2 T ransverse joints in concrete median strips shall be constructed as shown on the plans and as
 directed by the engineer.
 608.3.6 After form removal, the area adjacent to the concrete shall be backfilled with suitable material,
 
 303
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 compacted and finished to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 608.3.7 Concrete strength and air content shall be tested at the required QC and QA frequencies. Concrete
 strength shall be tested with either cylinders or the maturity method. Concrete shall have a minimum 28day strength of 4000 psi. Air content shall be a minimum of a percent
 608.3.7.1 T he contractor shall measure concrete strength and air content at a frequency of one test per
 100 cubic yards. T he engineer shall measure concrete strength and air content at a frequency of one test
 per 500 cubic yards.
 608.3.7.2 No concrete strength and air content testing will be required on any day when the total volume
 of concrete placed in a day is less than 3 cubic yards.
 608.3.8 During cold weather, the limitations and protection in accordance with Secs 502.4.1 and 502.4.2
 will apply to this work.
 608.3.9 T ransitions from curb ramps to sidewalks, gutters or streets shall be flush and free of abrupt
 changes. All curb ramps at streets, signalized commercial entrances, and railroad crossings shall include
 truncated domes that contrast visually with the adjoining surface light on dark or dark on light.
 608.3.9.1 T runcated domes shall be aligned on a square or radial grid pattern, 24 inches deep in the
 direction of travel, and the full width of curb ramp, landings or blended transition, exclusive of flares.
 608.3.9.2 T runcated domes shall be installed as per manufacturer's specifications.
 608.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 608.4.1 Measurement of concrete median and of concrete median strip will be made to the nearest 1/10
 square yard.
 608.4.2 Concrete sidewalk and curb ramps will be measured to the nearest 1/10 square yard.
 608.4.3 T runcated domes will be measured to the nearest 0.5 square foot.
 608.4.4 Paved approaches will be measured from the beginning of the return on one side of the approach
 to the end of the return on the other side of the approach, to the nearest 1/10 square yard. Integral curb
 constructed on paved approaches will not be measured or paid for separately but will be included in the
 contract unit price for paved approaches.
 608.4.5 Final measurement of any of the above items will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. T he revision or
 correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity for that item.
 608.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 608.5.1 T he accepted quantities of concrete median, median strip, sidewalk curb ramps, truncated domes
 .and paved approach, complete in place, will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items
 included in the contract.
 608.5.2 T he accepted quantities of concrete steps will be paid for in the following manner:
 (a) Class B concrete will be paid for in accordance with Sec 703 for miscellaneous concrete.
 (b) Reinforcing steel will be paid for in accordance with Sec 706.
 608.5.3 No direct payment will be made for the following:
 (a) Furnishing or installing reinforcement.
 (b) Any incidental work required for furnishing and installing tie bars.
 
 304
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (c) Excavating or preparing the subgrade for any item contained in this specification.
 (d) T inting of concrete surface as required in the plans.
 (e) Vertical curbs or flares constructed as part of the curb ramp or landing.
 
 305
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 609
 PAVED DRAINAGE
 SECTIO N 609.10 CO NCRETE CURB, GUTTER AND PAVED DITCH.
 609.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing curb, gutter or combination curb and gutter
 and paved ditches as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 609.10.2 Mate rial. Material, proportioning, air-entraining, mixing, slump and transporting of concrete
 shall be in accordance with Sec 501. Concrete shall be either Class B or Pavement concrete. All material
 shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete Structures
 Concrete Curing Material
 Material for Joints
 
 Section
 1036
 1055.2
 1057
 
 609.10.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 609.10.3.1 T hese items shall be placed on a prepared subgrade of uniform density. Forms joined neatly and
 tightly, set accurately to alignment and grade and securely held in place by connections and bracing shall be
 used for this work. Forms for curved form lines shall be provided in a manner similar to that required for
 setting forms for concrete pavement in Sec 502. Slip-form methods may be used for placement of concrete
 curb, concrete gutter, curb and gutter and paved ditch, provided proper lines, grades and typical sections are
 maintained.
 609.10.3.2 Required reinforcement and tie bars shall be held in the specified position during the placing of
 concrete by bar chairs or other devices approved by the engineer. Joints shall be constructed at intervals
 and locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 609.10.3.3 Concrete shall be placed, finished and cured in accordance with Sec 703.
 609.10.3.4 Concrete shall be placed on the prepared and sprinkled subgrade, consolidated and struck off to
 the required thickness. Concrete shall be tamped or vibrated sufficiently to eliminate all voids and to bring
 mortar to the top, after which the surface shall be finished smooth and even. All edges shall be rounded
 with an edging tool having a 1/4-inch radius. Faces of curb shall be rounded at the top and bottom, by
 means of an approved tool, to the radius shown. After finishing, concrete shall be cured in the same
 manner as required for concrete pavement, except transparent membrane shall be used in lieu of pigmented
 membrane.
 609.10.3.5 After the concrete has set sufficiently, the forms shall be removed, and where necessary, the
 contractor shall backfill adjacent to the concrete with suitable material, compacted and finished in a
 satisfactory manner.
 609.10.3.6 During cold weather, the weather limitations and protection requirements of Sec 502 will apply
 to this work.
 609.10.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 609.10.4.1 Curb, gutter and combination curb and gutter will be measured to the nearest linear foot.
 Measurement will be made along the curb face or along the flow line of gutters exclusive of paved
 approaches.
 609.10.4.2 Paved ditches will be measured to the nearest 1/10 square yard.
 609.10.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of curb, gutter, curb and gutter, and paved ditch,
 complete in place, will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the
 contract. No direct payment will be made for the following:
 
 306
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (a) Excavation below the upper surface of the concrete of these items.
 (b) Any work necessary for preparing the subgrade and backfilling the completed item.
 (c) Furnishing or installing reinforcement.
 SECTIO N 609.20 INTEGRAL CURB.
 609.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of curb constructed on the edge of concrete pavement as
 shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 609.20.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Concrete Curing Material 1055
 Material for Joints
 1057
 
 609.20.2.1 Integral curb shall be constructed of concrete conforming to that required for concrete
 pavement, except coarse aggregate in accordance with the gradation requirements of Sec 1005 may be used.
 609.20.2.2 T he quantity of coarse aggregate in the mix may be reduced to obtain better workability.
 609.20.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 609.20.3.1 T he curb shall be an integral part of the supporting concrete pavement. T he curb may be placed
 immediately after all pavement finishing operations have taken place and before the pavement has taken
 initial set, or tie bars may be set in the freshly finished pavement to serve ultimately as a tie between the
 pavement and the curb, which may be constructed later. Neither of these methods will be required for the
 distance needed for paving equipment to be backed up near a construction joint. T he pavement surface
 within this relatively short distance shall be roughened throughout the area to be covered by the curb.
 609.20.3.2 Forms joined neatly and tightly, set accurately to alignment and grade, and securely held in
 place by connections and bracing shall be used for this work. Forms for curved form lines shall be provided
 in a manner similar to that required for setting forms for concrete pavement in Sec 502. Slip-form methods
 may be used for placement of integral curb provided all other requirements of Sec 609.20 are met.
 609.20.3.3 T he finished curb shall be true to line, grade and cross section, with the top and face finished
 smooth. T he top edges of the curb shall be rounded with approved edging tools. Curing shall be
 accomplished in the same manner as required for concrete pavement, except transparent membrane shall
 be used. Joints of preformed material shall be placed through the curb and into each underlying transverse
 pavement joint to the full depth of the joint in the pavement. T he preformed material shall extend
 entirely through the curb to within 1/4 inch of the top and face of the curb.
 609.20.3.4 Where tie bars are set in freshly finished pavement surface and membrane curing is used on the
 pavement, care shall be taken to avoid spraying the membrane on the protruding tie bars or the area on
 which the integral curb is to be placed. One of the other curing methods allowed in accordance with Sec 502
 shall be used for curing this area of the pavement.
 609.20.3.5 Integral curb straightedged parallel to the centerline shall not show a variance greater than 1/4
 inch from a 10-foot straightedge.
 609.20.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the completed integral curb will not be made
 except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract
 quantity. Where required, integral curb will be measured to the nearest linear foot along the curb face,
 exclusive of paved approaches. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from
 the contract quantity.
 609.20.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of integral curb, complete in place, will be paid for at
 
 307
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. Payment for curb constructed on
 paved approaches will be included in the contract unit price for paved approaches.
 SECTIO N 609.30 ASPHALT CURB.
 609.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing a curb of asphaltic concrete as shown on
 the plans or as directed by the engineer. All applicable provisions of Sec 403 will apply to this construction.
 609.30.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Coarse Aggregate
 Fine Aggregate
 Mineral Filler
 Asphalt Binder, P erformance Graded (P G)
 
 Section
 1002
 1002
 1002
 1015
 
 609.30.3 Composition of Mixture . T he asphaltic concrete mixture shall consist of aggregate, filler if
 needed, and asphalt binder combined in such proportions that the composition by weight of the finished
 mixture shall be within the limits specified for BP-3 or SP048 mixture in accordance with Sec 401 and Sec
 403. T he contractor shall submit in writing to Construction and Materials for approval of the job mix
 formula the contractor proposes to use for asphalt curb. A mixture demonstrating satisfactory results
 provided by the contractor may be used in lieu of the above mixtures.
 609.30.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 609.30.4.1 T he curb shall be placed in position on a primed surface by means of an approved automatic
 curb machine that shapes and compacts the mixture to the specified cross section. T he placement
 temperature of the mixture shall be approximately 260 F. All joints shall be carefully made in such a
 manner as to ensure a continuous bond between the old and new sections of the curb.
 609.30.4.2 T he newly laid curb shall be protected from traffic until the heat of the asphalt mixture has
 dissipated. Immediately after the asphalt curb has hardened, the curb shall be backfilled where required with
 suitable material.
 609.30.4.3 If painting of the asphalt curb is specified in the contract, a primer coat of commercial grade
 asphalt base aluminum paint shall be applied first.
 609.30.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Asphalt curb will be measured to the nearest linear foot.
 609.30.6 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of asphalt curb will be paid for at the contract unit
 price. No direct payment will be made for priming prior to placing the curb or for painting the completed
 curb.
 SECTIO N 609.40 DRAIN BASIN ASPHALT CURB.
 609.40.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and constructing a drain basin as shown on the
 plans or as directed by the engineer.
 609.40.2 Mate rial. Drain basins shall consist of a drop inlet of the size and type shown on the plans,
 grates and bearing plates for drop inlet, Group C pipe in the size shown on plans and concrete slope
 protection at pipe outlet as shown on plans. T hese items shall be in accordance Division 1000, Material
 Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Rock Ditch Lining
 609.60
 Grates and Bearing P lates 614
 Drop Inlet
 1033
 
 308
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 609.40.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Excavation and backfilling shall be in accordance with Secs 604
 and 725. T he adjustment shall be made to the line and grade shown on the plans or as directed by the
 engineer. T he concrete slope protection for the drain basin outlet shall be placed as shown on the plans or
 as directed by the engineer.
 609.40.4 Basis of Payme nt. Payment for the accepted drain basin, complete in place, will be paid for at
 the contract unit price per each. Payment for the accepted quantities of Class 3 excavation required for
 installing the drop inlet for the drain basin will be paid for at the contract unit price.
 SECTIO N 609.50 BLANK.
 SECTIO N 609.60 RO CK DITCH LINER.
 609.60.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing rock ditch liners at locations shown on the
 plans or as directed by the engineer.
 609.60.2 Mate rial. T he material for rock ditch liner shall consist of a predominantly one-sized, durable
 stone, shot rock or broken concrete. Acceptance by the engineer may be made by visual inspection. All
 material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Geotextile Fabric 1011
 
 609.60.2.1 Type 1 Rock Ditch Liner shall consist of material with a predominant rock size of 3 inches, a
 maximum rock size of 6 inches and a gradation such that no more than 15 percent will be less than one
 inch.
 609.60.2.2 Type 2 Rock Ditch Liner shall consist of material with a predominant rock size of 6 inches, a
 maximum rock size of 10 inches and a gradation such that no more than 15 percent will be less than 3
 inches.
 609.60.2.3 Type 3 Rock Ditch Liner shall consist of material with a predominant rock size of 12 inches, a
 maximum rock size of 20 inches and a gradation such that no more than
 15 percent will be less than 4 inches.
 609.60.2.4 Type 4 Rock Ditch Liner shall consist of material with a predominant rock size of 19 inches, a
 maximum rock size of 28 inches and a gradation such that no more than 15 percent will be less than 6
 inches.
 609.60.2.5 Bedding material shall be used under Type 3 and Type 4 Rock Ditch Liner. Bedding material
 shall consist of crushed stone or gravel with a gradation consisting of 100 percent passing the 3-inch sieve,
 30 to 70 percent passing the 1 1/2-inch sieve and 0 to 15 percent passing the No. 4 sieve.
 609.60.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Rock ditch liner shall be placed to the approximate shape and
 thickness shown on the plans for the specified ditch or as directed by the engineer. T he rock shall be
 dumped on a subgrade of reasonably uniform density and left in a rough condition meeting the approval
 from the engineer.
 609.60.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Rock ditch liner and bedding material will each be measured to the
 nearest cubic yard of material.
 609.60.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 609.60.5.1 If shown on the plans that the material for rock ditch liner is to be obtained from the right of
 way or other sources furnished by the Commission, the excavating, including all breaking, loading, and
 hauling, regardless of distance, to the site of the rock ditch liner will be paid for and considered completely
 covered under such contract items as Class A Excavation, Class C Excavation, Unclassified Excavation,
 Excavation for Structures or other applicable items. If payment is made under these conditions, separate
 payment for furnishing rock ditch liner will not be made.
 
 309
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 609.60.5.2 If the plans show material for rock ditch liner to be secured from sources cited in Sec
 609.60.5.1 and this material is made unsuitable or unattainable by the contractor's operations, the
 contractor shall provide suitable material and dispose of any surplus material at the contractor ’s expense.
 609.60.5.3 If the contract documents provide for obtaining material from the right of way or other source
 furnished by the Commission, but all or part of the required quantity of acceptable material is not available,
 unless the shortage is due to the contractor ’s operations, payment for such additional rock base material
 that the contractor will be required to furnish and haul will be made per square yard at the fixed contract
 unit price in Sec 109, and will be measured in accordance with Sec 109.1.
 609.60.5.4 If the plans do not provide for a source of material, the contractor shall provide the material.
 All costs for securing the source, quarrying, excavating, breaking and hauling the material to the site will be
 paid for at the contract unit price for Furnishing Rock Ditch Liner.
 609.60.5.5 Placing Rock Ditch Liner will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard.
 609.60.5.6 T he accepted quantity of bedding material, complete in place, will be paid for at the contract
 unit price. No direct payment will be made for excavation or for any work necessary to prepare the
 subgrade for the bedding material.
 609.60.5.7 No direct payment will be made for excavation below the upper surface of the rock ditch liner,
 or for any work necessary for preparing the subgrade and backfilling the completed item.
 SECTIO N 609.70 RO CK LINING.
 609.70.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing rock lining at the locations shown on the
 plans or as directed by the engineer.
 609.70.2 Mate rial. T he material for rock lining shall be in accordance with Sec 611.30 for Type 2 Rock
 Blanket.
 609.70.3 Construction Re quire me nts. T he rock lining material shall be placed by dumping and left in a
 rough condition to the approximate shape of the channel bottom.
 609.70.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the completed rock lining will not be made
 except for authorized changes during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the contract
 quantity. Where required, measurement will be made to the nearest cubic yard of material in place in the
 completed rock lining. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the
 contract quantity.
 609.70.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of rock lining, complete in place, will be paid for at
 the contract unit price. No direct payment will be made for any excavation required to place the rock
 lining.
 
 310
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 610
 PAVEMENT SMO O THNESS
 610.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of measuring the smoothness of the final pavement surface.
 Smoothness shall be measured using the International Roughness Index (IRI). T he following pavement
 types shall comply with this specification:
 a) Multi-lift asphalt construction contained in Secs 401 and 403.
 b) Concrete pavement construction contained in Secs 502 and 506.
 c) Combination of surface planning, such as diamond grinding or milling, and single lift asphalt
 construction contained in Secs 401 and 403.
 d) Single lift asphalt construction contained in Secs 401 and 403.
 610.2 Mate rial Re quire me nts.
 610.2.1 Ine rtial Profile r. IRI shall be computed from profile data collected with an inertial profiler (IP)
 that meets the requirements of AASHT O M 328
 610.2.2 ProVAL Software . T he ProVAL software program shall be used to compute IRI smoothness and
 locate areas of localized roughness (ALR) in accordance with MoDOT T M-59.
 610.2.3 Straighte dge . A rolling 10-foot straightedge shall be used for checking longitudinal elevation
 changes. A 4-foot straightedge shall be used for checking transverse elevation changes.
 610.3 Ce rtification. All inertial profilers used to collect data on MoDOT projects shall be annually
 certified at the MoDOT certification site in accordance with T M-59. T he operator of the IP shall be
 certified through the MoDOT technician certification program.
 610.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 610.4.1 Smoothne ss Incre me nts. Length of pavement shall be defined in the following increments for
 the purpose of smoothness acceptance:
 a) Section – A section is a day’s paving and shall begin and terminate at the construction joints.
 Interruptions designated by the engineer which cause placement to cease and begin at a new
 location will considered as a separate section for that day’s operation if the separate section is
 greater than 250 feet.
 b) Segment – Sections shall be divided into segments of 0.1 mile lengths with the exception of the
 last segment. If the last segment is greater than 250 feet and less than 0.1 mile, then the segment
 shall be measured for smoothness as an independent segment. If the last segment is 250 feet or
 less, the profile for that segment shall be included in the evaluation for the previous segment. T he
 combined segment IRI shall be weighted for the length.
 610.4.2 Profiling Are as.
 610.4.2.1 Profiling will be applicable to the surface of all the following:
 a) Mainline paving
 b) Auxiliary lanes, turning lanes and ramps for projects or combination of projects, consisting of
 more than 0.5 mile of total profilable pavement.
 610.4.2.2 Profiling will not be required for the following exceptions:
 (a) Bridge decks, bridge approach slabs and concrete approach pavements.
 
 311
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (b) Pavement on horizontal curves with centerline radius of curve less than 1000 feet and
 pavement within the superelevation transition of such curves.
 (c) Pavement on vertical curves having a "K" value less than 90 and a length less than 500 feet.
 (d) Pavement width transitions.
 (e) Fifty feet in direction of travel on each side of utility appurtenances such as manholes and
 valve boxes.
 (f) Fifty feet in direction of travel on each side of intersecting routes with special grade transition.
 (g) Shoulders.
 (h) Interruptions designated by the engineer which provide independently placed sections shorter
 than 50 feet.
 (i) T he last 15 feet of any section where the prime contractor is not responsible for the adjoining
 surface.
 (j) Any lane which abuts an existing lane not constructed under the same contract.
 610.4.2.3 In addition to the exceptions in Sec 610.4.2.2, profiling may be waived by the engineer if staging
 of the overall project; such as multiple entrance lane gaps, lane staging, etc.; affects the normal paving
 operation, or if multiple profile exceptions continuously exist on a large portion of the same roadway.
 Upon waiver, exempted areas shall be checked with a 10-foot straightedge.
 610.4.3 Longitudinal Straighte dging. Any pavement surface not measured with an inertial profiler
 shall be measured with a 10-foot straightedge. T he straightedge path in the longitudinal direction for
 driving lanes will be located three feet from the outside edge and for shoulders will be located in the center.
 Additional paths with suspect roughness may be selected at the engineer ’s discretion. Shoulders that are
 paved integrally with an adjacent driving lane will not require straightedging. T he engineer also has
 discretion to use a straightedge for spot checking pavement that had been measured with an inertial
 profiler. Any variations in the longitudinal direction exceeding 1/4 inch in 10 feet on shoulders and 1/8
 inch in 10 feet on all other pavements shall be marked for correction in a manner approved by the
 engineer.
 610.4.4 Transve rse Straighte dging. T he engineer shall randomly check driving lanes, regardless of the
 smoothness measurement method used, for variations in the transverse direction with a 4-foot straightedge.
 Any variations in the transverse direction more than 1/4 inch shall be marked for correction in a manner
 approved by the engineer.
 610.4.5 Full De pth Pave me nt and Multi-lift O ve rlays. T hese construction procedures apply to
 pavement treatments described in Sec 610.1 (a) and (b).
 610.4.5.1 Q uality Control Te sting. T he contractor shall perform quality control (QC) testing on all
 eligible profiling areas and provide electronic files for smoothness data in .PFF file format to the engineer
 in accordance with the testing and reporting procedures in MoDOT T M-59. Reported IRI for each segment
 is the average of both wheel paths. Furnishing inaccurate test results may result in decertification of the
 inertial profiler operator. Average segment IRIs shall meet the threshold require,ent in Table 1.
 610.4.5.2 Q uality Assurance Te sting. T he engineer will perform quality assurance (QA) testing with a
 MoDOT inertial profiler to verify the QC test results. T he engineer shall select a continuous portion of
 roadway; not adjacent to the beginning or ending of the project limits and free to the degree possible of
 exempted areas, such as bridges; that constitute at least 10 percent of the project lane-miles, which will be
 designated as the QA test length. T he beginning and ending of the QA test length shall be clearly marked
 with paint. Both the contractor and engineer shall measure the IRI in both wheel paths for the entire QA
 test length with their respective inertial profilers. T he start and stop of the inertial profiler runs shall be
 
 312
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 triggered automatically. T he contractor inertial profiler run on the QA test length may constitute the
 regular QC test result or may be run independently from previous QC test results. T he contractor shall
 provide the electronic file for the QA test length run in .PFF format to the engineer within 24 hours of
 testing. T he IRI value for each segment within the QA test length shall be computed as the average of both
 wheel paths. T he absolute value of the difference between the contractor and engineer IRIs shall be
 computed for each segment within the QA test length. T he average of the absolute values of the IRI
 difference shall be 8 inches/mile or less. T he absolute value of the IRI difference for any single segment
 shall be 12 inches/mile or less.
 610.4.5.3 Are as of Localiz e d Roughne ss. An area of localized roughness (ALR) is any length of
 pavement with a continuous 25-foot average IRI measured in the right wheel path that exceeds the
 maximum threshold set in Table 1. ALRs shall be corrected.
 610.4.5.4 Me thod of Corre ction. Corrective action to eliminate ALRs and improve the average IRI shall
 be accomplished by a method approved by the engineer. Diamond grinding may be used for bumps, but the
 use of an impact device, such as a bush hammer, will not be permitted. Total grinding depth shall be limited
 to ¼ inch. Satisfactory longitudinal grinding is acceptable as the final surface of the corrected pavements.
 All corrective work shall be completed prior to determination of pavement thickness. T he contractor shall
 reprofile the corrected lengths to verify smoothness compliance and submit an electronic data file in .PFF
 format to the engineer within 48 hours after testing.
 
 Treatment
 Type
 Full Depth P avement
 or Multi-Lift Overlay
 > 3-inches
 
 Table 1
 Posted speed > 45 mph
 Posted speed ≤ 45 mph
 Maximum Segment IRI Maximum ALR IRI Maximum Segment IRI Maximum ALR IRI
 (in/mi)
 (in/mi)
 (in/mi)
 (in/mi)
 80.0
 
 125.0
 
 80.0
 
 175.0
 
 Posted speed > 45 mph
 Posted speed ≤ 45 mph
 and AADT > 3500
 or AADT ≤ 3500
 Multi-Lift Overlays
 Maximum Segment IRI Maximum ALR IRI Maximum Segment IRI Maximum ALR IRI
 ≤ 3-inches
 (in/mi)
 (in/mi)
 (in/mi)
 (in/mi)
 80.0
 125.0
 125.0
 175.0
 
 610.4.5.5 Me thod of Corre ction. Corrective action to eliminate ALRs and improve the average IRI shall
 be accomplished by a method approved by the engineer. Diamond grinding may be used for bumps, but the
 use of an impact device, such as a bush hammer, will not be permitted. Total grinding depth shall be limited
 to ¼ inch. T he final surface texture of corrected pavement shall be comparable to adjacent sections that do
 not require correcting. Satisfactory longitudinal grinding is acceptable as the final surface of the corrected
 pavements. All corrective work shall be completed prior to determination of pavement thickness.
 610.4.6 Multi-tre atme nt O ve rlays. T hese construction procedures apply to pavement treatments
 described in Sec 610.1 (c).
 610.4.6.1 Q uality Control Te sting. T he requirements are the same as Sec 610.4.5.1, except that
 segment average IRIs shall meet the threshold requirements for multi-lift overlays less than or equal to 3
 inches in Table 1.
 610.4.6.2 Q uality Assurance Te sting. T he requirements are the same as Sec 610.4.5.2.
 610.4.6.3 Are as of Localiz e d Roughne ss. All ALRs, defined in Sec 610.4.5.3 exceeding 175.0
 inches/mile shall be corrected.
 610.4.6.4 Me thod of Corre ction. Corrective action to eliminate ALRs and improve the average IRI shall
 be accomplished with a method approved by the engineer. Diamond grinding bumps shall only be permitted
 for a 1½ inch or greater single lift overlay. Grinding depth shall be limited to ¼ inch. T he contractor shall
 reprofile the corrected lengths to verify smoothness compliance and submit an electronic data file in .PFF
 format to the engineer within 48 hours after testing.
 610.4.7 Single Lift O ve rlays. T hese construction procedures apply to pavement treatments described in
 
 313
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Sec 610.1 (d).
 610.4.7.1 Pre -Construction Q uality Control Te sting. Prior to performing any surface work or
 pavement repairs, the contractor shall profile the right wheel path in accordance with T M-59. T his
 control profile will serve as the baseline for calculating percent improvement for the project.
 610.4.7.2 Post-Construction Q uality Control Te sting. As soon as practical after resurfacing, the
 contractor shall profile the right wheel path again. T he same stationing shall be used to ensure a direct
 comparison with the pre-construction profile.
 610.4.7.3 Post-Construction Q uality Assurance Te sting. T he requirements are the same as Sec
 610.4.5.2, except that the testing shall only be performed in the right wheel path.
 610.4.7.4 Me thod of Corre ction. Corrective action to improve the average IRI shall be accomplished
 with a method approved by the engineer. Diamond grinding bumps shall only be permitted for a 1½ inch or
 greater single lift overlay. Grinding depth shall be limited to ¼ inch. T he final surface texture of corrected
 pavement shall be comparable to adjacent sections that do not require correcting.
 610.4.8 Marre d Surface Are a. Any area of a segment that has corrective diamond grinding performed
 without grinding the entire segment shall be defined as a marred surface area.
 610.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 610.5.1 Fixe d Value Improve me nt. T he following basis of payment procedures shall apply to all
 pavement treatments described in Sec 610.1 (a), (b) and (c).
 610.5.1.1 Smoothne ss Adjustme nt. Smoothness adjustments will be paid per segment based on the IRI
 before any corrections, except for the allowances in Sec 610.5.1.4. Any segment with an IRI above the
 maximum limit in Tables 2 and 3 must be corrected through a method approved by the engineer to achieve
 the desired smoothness. When paving widths are greater than the travel lane widths, incentive payment will
 apply to the driving lane design width only.
 610.5.1.2 Ince ntive s.Incentive payment for smoothness shall be based on either Table 2 or Table 3. Table
 2 shall be used for all pavements, having a final posted speed greater than 45 mph, except multi-lift
 overlays less than or equal to 3 inches on routes with AADT less than or equal to 3500 and multitreatment overlays on routes with AADT less than or equal to 3500. Table 3 shall be used for pavements
 having a final posted speed of 45 mph or less and multi-lift overlays less than or equal to 3 inches on routes
 with AADT less than or equal to 3500 and multi-treatment overlays on routes with AADT less than or
 equal to 3500 at any posted speed. Constant-width acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be considered as
 mainline pavements.
 Table 2
 International Roughness Index, Percent of
 Inches Per Mile
 Contract Price
 40.0 or less
 105
 40.1 - 54.0
 103
 54.1 - 80.0
 100
 80.1 or greater
 
 100 a
 
 Table 3
 International Roughness Index, Percent of
 Inches Per Mile
 Contract Price
 70.0 or less
 103
 70.1- 125.0
 100
 125.1 or greater
 a After
 bAfter
 
 100 b
 
 correction to 80.0 inches per mile or less.
 correction to 125.0 inches per mile or less.
 
 610.5.1.3 Se gme nt Corre ction. If the contractor elects to diamond grind an entire segment and the
 
 314
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 corrected surface drops below the maximum IRI limits in the designated Table, then the contractor cannot
 receive any incentives, but the marred surface area deductions for that segment will be waived.
 610.5.1.4 Se ction Corre ction. If the contractor elects to diamond grind an entire section then all
 segments within the section will be eligible for their respective incentives and the marred surface area
 deductions for that section will be waived.
 610.5.2 Pe rce nt Improve me nt. T he following basis of payment procedures shall apply to all pavement
 treatments described in Sec 610.1 (d).
 610.5.2.1 T he contract price for resurfacing will be adjusted based on the improvement in profile index
 according to Table 4 for each segment with an initial IRI greater than 60 inches per mile. Any segment
 with an initial IRI less than or equal to 60 inches per mile shall receive no percent improvement price
 adjustment if the segment IRI after placement of the overlay is also less than or equal to 60 inches per
 mile. Any segment with an initial IRI less than or equal to 60 inches per mile that has an IRI greater than
 60 inches per mile after placement of the overlay shall be paid at 97 percent of the contract unit price for
 pavement, but no correction shall be required.
 Table 4
 Percent Improvement
 Percent of Contract Unit Price
 (Change in IRI / Initial IRI) X 100
 For Pavement
 35.0 or greater
 103
 20.0 to 34.9
 100
 0.0 to 19.9
 c After
 
 97 c
 
 correction to 0.0 or greater
 
 610.5.3 Marre d Surface De ductions. A minimum deduction of 20 percent of the contract unit price of
 the paving quantities will be made for marred surface areas as defined in Sec 610.4.7. T he deduction will be
 applied to an area of pavement extending from edge of the pavement to a longitudinal joint or between
 longitudinal joints in that section of pavement affected. If the length of the section affected is less than 10
 feet, the deduction will be computed for 10 feet.
 610.5.4 Te sting Cost. T he contract unit price for pavement will be considered as full compensation for all
 items entered into the construction of the pavement including the cost of smoothness testing.
 610.5.5 Dispute Re solution. Any dispute between the engineer and contractor regarding IRI QC/QA
 comparisons that cannot be settled at the project office level shall be arbitrated with the MoDOT reference
 profiler per the test procedure in T M-59. T he results of the reference profiler shall be binding for the
 engineer and contractor.
 
 315
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 611
 EMBANKMENT PRO TECTIO N
 SECTIO N 611.10 BLANK.
 SECTIO N 611.20 BLANK.
 SECTIO N 611.30 RO CK BLANKET.
 611.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing a protective blanket of rock or broken
 concrete on slopes or stream banks.
 611.30.2 Mate rial. T he material for rock blanket shall be durable stone or broken concrete containing a
 combined total of no more than 10 percent of soil, sand, shale or non-durable rock. T he material shall
 contain a large percentage of pieces as large as the thickness of the blanket will permit, with enough
 smaller pieces of various sizes to fill the larger voids. For Type 1 Rock Blanket, at least 40 percent of the
 mass shall be of pieces having a volume of one cubic foot or more. For Type 2 Rock Blanket, at least 60
 percent of the mass shall be of pieces having a volume of one cubic foot or more. Acceptance of quality
 and size of material will be made by visual inspection at the job site.
 611.30.3 Construction Re quire me nts. A trench at the toe of the slope shall be excavated to the depth
 shown on the plans, or to a depth of 2 feet if not otherwise shown. T he slopes shall be in accordance with
 the proper cross section and shall be compacted to a uniform density as required for adjacent material. T he
 rock or broken concrete shall be placed on the slope, to the specified thickness, elevation and extent, and
 manipulated such that most of the flat sides are in contact, thereby eliminating large voids. T he finished
 surface of the blanket shall present an appearance free from segregation and with a proportionate quantity
 of the larger pieces showing.
 611.30.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement will be made to the nearest cubic yard of material in
 place in the completed blanket.
 611.30.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 611.30.5.1 If shown on the plans that the material for rock blanket is to be obtained from the right of way
 or other source furnished by the Commission, the excavating, including all breaking, loading and hauling,
 regardless of distance to the site of the rock blanket, will be paid for and considered completely covered
 under such contract items as Class A Excavation, Class C Excavation, Unclassified Excavation, Excavation
 for Structures, or other applicable items. If payment is made under these conditions, separate payment for
 furnishing rock blanket will not be made.
 611.30.5.1.1 If the plans show material for rock blanket to be secured from such sources and this material
 is made unsuitable or unattainable by the contractor's operations, the contractor shall provide suitable
 material and dispose of any surplus material at the contractor ’s expense.
 611.30.5.1.2 If the plans provide for obtaining material from the right of way or other source furnished by
 the Commission, but all or part of the required quantity of acceptable material is not actually available,
 payment will be made under Sec 109 for the purchase and delivery of any additional rock blanket material
 that will be required.
 611.30.5.2 If the plans do not provide for a source of the material, the contractor shall provide the
 material, and all costs of securing the source, quarrying, excavating, breaking and hauling the material to
 the site will be paid for and completely covered by the contract unit price per cubic yard for furnishing rock
 blanket. If material suitable for rock blanket is encountered within the limits of the right of way or other
 sources furnished by the Commission, and the material is used in the construction of the rock blanket, then
 payment will be made in accordance with Sec 611.30.5.1.
 611.30.5.3 Payment for placing rock blanket will be made at the contract unit price per cubic yard. No
 direct payment will be made for excavating the trench or for backfilling.
 
 316
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 611.40 BLANK
 SECTIO N 611.50 REVETMENT.
 611.50.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of slope or bank protection of the type specified in the
 plans, constructed at locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 611.50.2 Mate rial. Acceptance of quality and size of material will be made by visual inspection at the job
 site.
 611.50.2.1 Stone for light stone revetment shall be sound, durable and free from cracks and other structural
 defects that would cause the revetment to deteriorate. T he stone shall not contain any soapstone, shale or
 other material easily disintegrated. T he stone shall be in blocks at least 7 inches thick perpendicular to the
 slope and shall have approximately rectangular faces 7 inches wide or more. All blocks shall weigh at least
 25 pounds, and at least 75 percent shall weigh no less than 50 pounds.
 611.50.2.2 Stone for heavy stone revetment shall be in accordance with Sec 611.50.2.1, except that the
 blocks shall be at least 12 inches thick perpendicular to the slope and all blocks shall weigh no less than 50
 pounds, and at least 60 percent shall weigh no less than 100 pounds.
 611.50.2.3 At the contractor's option, concrete blocks may be substituted for stone, provided the concrete
 blocks meet the size and weight specifications for stone. T he blocks shall be made of either Class B
 concrete or concrete of a commercial mixture with material, proportioning, mixing, slump and
 transporting of concrete in accordance with Sec 501. Blocks may be precast and then laid in the required
 location, or the blocks may be cast in place on the slope, provided joints are spaced such that the joints will
 completely sever the concrete into blocks no larger than 2 x 4 feet with the long dimension horizontal and
 with vertical joints broken. If cast in place, concrete shall be placed, finished and cured in accordance with
 Sec 703.
 611.50.2.4 T he contractor may use broken concrete as blocks for revetment provided all protruding
 reinforcement, trash, asphaltic concrete, and other extraneous materials are removed prior to placement in
 waters of the United States, and their associated floodplains.
 611.50.2.5 Broken concrete used as revetment shall be reasonably well graded, and contain a combined
 total of no more than 15 percent of soil or gravel. T he gradation shall consist of pieces ranging in volume
 from 0.1 cubic foot to 1 cubic foot. T he contractor shall break larger slabs to conform to this requirement.
 T he maximum volume of any piece shall not exceed 3 cubic feet. Acceptance of the quality and size of this
 material will be made by visual inspection at the job site.
 611.50.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Unless otherwise approved, the slopes upon which revetment are
 to be placed shall be in accordance with the section shown on the plans. T he slopes shall be compacted to a
 uniform density as required for adjacent material. T he revetment shall be started in a trench below the toe
 of the slope shown on the plans and shall progress upward. Each stone or block shall be laid perpendicular
 to the slope, shall be firmly bedded against the slope and against adjoining stones or blocks, and shall be laid
 with well-broken joints. Only one layer of stone or blocks perpendicular to the slope will be permitted.
 After revetment has been placed, the voids shall be filled with spalls or small stones in such a manner that
 all revetment stones or blocks are tightly wedged. T he finished surface shall present a uniform appearance
 true to line, grade and section.
 611.50.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of revetment will be made to the nearest square yard.
 611.50.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of revetment will be paid for at the contract unit
 price for each of the pay items included in the contract. No direct payment will be made for excavating the
 trench or for any required backfilling.
 SECTIO N 611.60 CO NCRETE SLO PE PRO TECTIO N.
 611.60.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing a concrete slope protection by placing
 concrete on the finished earth slope as shown on the plans.
 
 317
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 611.60.2 Mate rial. Slope protection shall be of Class B concrete, with material, proportioning, mixing,
 slump and transporting of concrete in accordance with Sec 501. Concrete shall be placed, finished and cured
 in accordance with Sec 703.
 611.60.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 611.60.3.1 Concrete shall be placed on a prepared, compacted subgrade of uniform density, and shall be
 consolidated and struck off to the required thickness. Joints shall be the full depth of the concrete and shall
 consist of material in accordance with Sec 1057.6.
 611.60.3.2 T he surface of the paved slope shall have a broom or burlap drag finish and shall be cured in the
 same manner as required for concrete pavement, except that transparent membrane shall be used in lieu of
 pigmented membrane.
 611.60.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement will be made to the nearest square yard.
 611.60.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of concrete slope protection will be paid for at the
 contract unit price. No direct payment will be made for any excavating or for other work necessary in
 preparing the subgrade or for any backfilling required.
 SECTIO N 611.70 GABIO NS.
 611.70.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of installing welded wire fabric gabions and gabion
 mattresses, and twisted hexagonal mesh gabions and revet mattresses at locations shown on the plans or as
 directed by the engineer, and shall be of the size included in the contract.
 611.70.2 Mate rial.
 611.70.2.1 T he gabion baskets or mattresses shall be made of welded wire fabric or twisted hexagonal mesh.
 T he baskets shall be in accordance with AST M A 974 for welded wire fabric gabions and gabion mattresses
 and AST M A 975 for twisted hexagonal mesh gabions and revet mattresses.
 611.70.2.2 Rock used in the gabions or mattresses shall be crushed limestone with a maximum and
 minimum size according to the basket manufacturer ’s recommendation.
 611.70.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 611.70.3.1 T he contractor shall follow the manufacturer's recommended procedures for installation.
 611.70.3.2 Cut compaction shall be performed in all Class A material areas where the baskets are
 constructed. T he exposed material, to a depth of 6 inches, shall be manipulated and compacted to no less
 than the required density. T he material above this compacted plane shall be spread in layers, each being
 wetted or dried as necessary and compacted to the specified density. T he entire volume of material so
 handled and compacted, including the 6-inch layer compacted in place, will be considered as Compacting in
 Cut. All Class A material having a liquid limit of 40 or more, including the 6-inch layer compacted in place,
 shall be compacted at no less than the optimum moisture content.
 611.70.3.3 Excavated material beyond the limits of the baskets shall be backfilled with gravel or crushed
 rock material meeting the approval of the engineer.
 611.70.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 611.70.4.1 T he pay limits for excavation for gabions and mattresses will be a line coincidental with the
 bottom and non-exposed side of the baskets. Excavation quantities will be measured to the nearest cubic
 yard.
 611.70.4.2 Measurement of gabions and mattresses will be made to the nearest cubic yard.
 
 318
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 611.70.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 611.70.5.1 T he quantity to be paid for gabions and mattresses will be the number of cubic yards of gabions
 and mattresses measured in the final position. Job conditions and availability will determine the actual size
 of baskets to be used. Any costs that might occur will be included and paid for in the cost per cubic yard of
 gabions and mattresses.
 611.70.5.2 Gabions and mattresses will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard.
 611.70.5.3 Excavation quantities will be paid for under the appropriate classified excavation items.
 
 319
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 612
 IMPACT ATTENUATO RS
 612.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing, installing, operating, maintaining, cleaning,
 relocating, replacing and removing impact attenuators as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer
 in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
 612.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as shown below. Rock salt shall meet the satisfaction of the engineer.
 Item
 Sand
 Retroreflective Sheeting
 Temporary Traffic Control Devices
 
 Section
 1005
 1042
 1063
 
 612.3 Safe ty Re quire me nts. All impact attenuators shall be manufactured specifically for traffic control
 purposes and shall be in accordance with the MUT CD and any applicable safety and design codes. T he
 contractor shall submit the manufacturer ’s certification that units supplied comply with crash test
 requirements of NCHRP 350, Test Level 3 and have received FHWA acceptance.
 612.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 612.4.1 Truck or Traile r Mounte d Atte nuator. A truck mounted attenuator or trailer mounted
 attenuator (T MA) shall be used for all moving operations conducted under traffic and as specified in the
 contract. Each T MA shall consist of an impact attenuator unit, a support vehicle, and a truck-mounted or
 trailer mounted flashing arrow panel. Any damaged T MA shall be removed from service and either repaired
 or replaced to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 612.4.2 Sand Fille d Impact Atte nuator. Configuration, location, and relocation of the sand filled impact
 attenuators shall be as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 612.4.2.1 Sand shall be measured and placed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and
 weights shown for each module. Sand shall have a maximum moisture content of five percent at the time
 of installation. Rock salt shall be five percent of the required weight in each module, and shall be uniformly
 dispersed in the sand.
 612.4.2.2 A decal designed as a Type I object marker with MoDOT fluorescent orange retroreflective
 sheeting or a Type 3 object marker with MoDOT Type 3 yellow sheeting shall be applied to the lead
 module facing traffic for arrays located 12 feet or less from the edge of the traveled way.
 612.4.2.3 Damaged or deficient modules shall be replaced by the contractor in accordance with Sec 616.4.
 612.4.2.4 When no longer needed, modules and sand shall be removed and shall remain the property of the
 contractor.
 612.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 612.5.1 Impact attenuators, including relocation, will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the
 pay items included in the contract.
 612.5.2 Furnishing and installing replacement sand barrels will be paid for at the contract unit price. Final
 payment for this item will be based on the actual number of modules replaced.
 
 320
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 613
 PAVEMENT REPAIR
 613.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of performing full depth pavement repair, partial depth
 pavement repair, retrofitting dowel bars, or cross stitching pavement at locations as shown on the plans or
 as directed by the engineer.
 613.2 Mate rial. All material, unless specified otherwise in this specification, shall be in accordance with
 Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Epoxy or P olyester Bonding Agents for Dowels
 Concrete Curing Material
 Material for Joints
 
 Section
 1039
 1055
 1057
 
 613.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 613.3.1 All pavement repair subsequent to sawing or removal of any pavement shall be accomplished in
 the same day, except as follows. If approved by the engineer, sawing may be accomplished the day before
 removal, but shall be repaired the following working day. Any damage caused to the pavement due to presawing, such as edge spalling, shall be repaired by the contractor at the contractor ’s expense.
 613.3.2 Repairs shall be made to only one lane at a time, unless the traffic control plan specifies otherwise.
 Any material that cannot be recycled shall be disposed of at a location furnished by the contractor, or at
 locations on the right of way approved by the engineer. If the material is disposed of outside the right of
 way, an acceptable written agreement with the property owner on whose property the material is placed
 shall be submitted to the engineer by the contractor.
 613.3.3 If the repaired area is not to be resurfaced, the overcut from the sawing operation shall be filled
 with an expansive mortar, epoxy, polyester or joint material as approved by the engineer.
 613.3.4 Weather limitations shall be in accordance with Sec 502 for placement of concrete material and
 Sec 403 for placement of bituminous material.
 613.3.5 All repaired areas shall be finished to provide a smooth ride, and to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 Repaired areas shall be checked by stringline if required by the engineer. When stringlined, the surface of
 the repaired area shall not vary more than ⅛ inch per 10 feet
 from a straight line between the surface of the existing pavement on each side of the repaired area,
 regardless of whether the repair is to be resurfaced or not.
 613.3.6 Any damage to the existing pavement, joints and cracks adjacent to the pavement repair, caused
 by the contractor ’s operation shall be repaired at the contractor ’s expense.
 SECTIO N 613.10 FULL DEPTH PAVEMENT REPAIRS.
 613.10.1 De scription. Full depth pavement repairs shall consist of removing specified areas of existing
 variable thickness Portland cement concrete pavement and subsequent bituminous overlays and replacing
 the removed material with non-reinforced Portland cement concrete as shown on the plans.
 613.10.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 613.10.2.1 Specified areas of full depth pavement repair shall be saw cut full depth around the perimeter of
 the patch prior to removal, except that cuts along the shoulder line may be waived by the engineer when
 the pavement can be removed without damage to the shoulder. An approved saw, such as a diamond saw,
 shall be used for perimeter cuts. A rock saw shall not be used for a perimeter cut, but may be used to make
 cuts through the interior portion of the area to be removed for stress relief. T he full depth of the
 pavement shall be removed without mechanically breaking in place, and with a minimum disturbance of
 sound base. Any aggregate base disturbed by the contractor shall be recompacted or removed. Unstable base
 aggregate shall be removed and replaced in accordance with Sec 304 as directed by the engineer. Subgrade
 
 321
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 compaction shall be performed in areas of unstable subgrade in accordance with Sec 210, if directed by the
 engineer. If subgrade compaction is performed, the aggregate base shall be replaced. Compaction shall be to
 the satisfaction of the engineer and inspection will be made visually.
 613.10.2.2 All full depth pavement repairs exceeding 30 feet in length shall be constructed with tie bars
 along the longitudinal centerline joint in accordance with Sec 502. Dowel bars, tie bars and holes shall be as
 shown on the plans. Dowel bars and tie bars shall be epoxy coated. Bar holes shall be drilled to the specified
 diameter and to the depth shown on the plans. Equipment designed to drill multiple holes simultaneously
 will only be allowed provided such equipment causes no damage to existing pavement. T he holes shall be
 blown clean and allowed to dry. T he holes shall be injected with an approved epoxy or polyester bonding
 agent in accordance with Sec 1039.30 and shall fill the voids around the bar. T he bonding agent shall be
 thoroughly mixed in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations prior to injection into the
 holes. T he bonding agent shall be injected into the hole by inserting the injection device to the back of the
 hole and slowly withdrawing the device while dispensing sufficient material to completely fill the void
 around the bar when inserted. Other methods may be used as approved by the engineer. T he contractor
 shall use a method to prevent the bonding agent from flowing from the hole during placement of the bar
 and to create an effective face at the entrance of the hole. T he bar shall be inserted into the hole with a
 twisting motion so the material in the back of the hole is forced up and around the bar. T he bars shall be
 placed parallel to the surface and the centerline of the traveled way and shall not vary more than ¼ inch in
 alignment. Bars shall be firmly seated prior to placing concrete.
 613.10.2.3 All material, proportioning, air-entraining, mixing and transporting of concrete shall be in
 accordance with Sec 501 as applicable to pavement concrete. T he concrete may contain Type III cement,
 calcium chloride, an accelerator or other admixtures approved by the engineer.
 613.10.2.4 Construction of full depth repairs shall be in accordance with Sec 502 except as follows.
 613.10.2.4.1 T he concrete shall have a minimum 28-day strength of 4000 psi. T he design strength shall be
 verified by compressive strength testing of cylinders cured under the same conditions as the full depth
 repair patches. For QC testing by the contractor three 4- by 8-inch or two 6- by 12-inch cylinders of
 concrete from a single batch shall be cast for every 250 square yards of full depth repair. For QA testing by
 the engineer three 4- by 8-inch or two 6- by 12-inch cylinders of concrete from a single batch shall be cast
 for every 1000 square yards of full depth repair or at least once per project. T he compressive strength shall
 be the average of the cylinder breaks.
 613.10.2.4.2 T he concrete shall have a minimum air content of 4 percent. T he air content shall be
 measured once for every day’s production.
 613.10.2.4.3 T he concrete opening strength to all traffic shall be 2000 psi. T he opening strength shall be
 verified by either compressive strength testing of cylinders in accordance with Sec 613.10.2.4.1 or the
 maturity method in accordance with Sec 507.
 613.10.2.5 If the concrete pavement has been previously resurfaced, the repair area shall be filled with
 Portland cement concrete to the surface of the existing bituminous overlay, even when the existing surface
 is to be removed by milling, unless contract provisions allow the milling to occur prior to the pavement
 repair operation.
 613.10.2.6 When the concrete pavement requires all milled areas to be resurfaced in the same work day
 prior to opening the pavement to traffic, pavement repairs identified after milling will be marked for future
 repair, and the area shall be resurfaced as planned for that work day. No additional lifts of hot-mix asphalt
 will be allowed until the marked pavement is repaired. T he pavement repair shall be performed in
 accordance with Sec 613.10.2.5.
 613.10.2.7 Immediately after finishing and as soon as marring of the concrete will not occur, the entire
 surface of the newly placed concrete shall be cured in accordance with one of the following methods.
 613.10.2.7.1 If the existing pavement has been or is to be resurfaced, an asphalt emulsion shall be applied
 at a rate of 0.1 gallon per square yard, or as directed by the engineer.
 
 322
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 613.10.2.7.2 If the existing pavement surface is concrete and will not be resurfaced, curing shall be in
 accordance with Sec 502.
 613.10.2.7.3 When the ambient air temperature is below 50 F, insulated curing mats, approved by the
 engineer, shall be used throughout the curing period. Curing compound or asphalt emulsion shall be applied
 prior to placing the insulated blankets. T he insulated curing mats shall not be applied until the curing
 material has dried sufficiently to prevent adhesion.
 613.10.2.8 Sawing of internal transverse and longitudinal joints and mitigation of uncontrolled cracking
 shall be in accordance with Sec 502.5.3.
 613.10.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 613.10.3.1 Measurement for full depth sawing will be made to the nearest linear foot for the combined
 length of perimeter diamond saw cuts and of internal transverse saw cuts at 6 foot or greater intervals.
 613.10.3.2 Measurement for drilling dowel or tie bar holes and furnishing and installing dowels or tie bars
 will be made per dowel or tie bar.
 613.10.3.3 Measurement for furnishing and placing Portland cement concrete will be made to the nearest
 1/10 square yard.
 613.10.3.4 Measurement of subgrade compaction will be made to the nearest square yard.
 613.10.3.5 Measurement of aggregate base will be made to the nearest square yard.
 613.10.4 Basis of Payme nt. Accepted quantities of full depth pavement repair will be paid for at the
 contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. No direct payment will be made for
 aggregate base material used to replace unstable subgrade.
 SECTIO N 613.20 CLASS A PARTIAL DEPTH PAVEMENT REPAIRS.
 613.20.1 De scription.
 613.20.1.1 Class A partial depth pavement repair shall consist of repairing spalled areas or reestablishing
 joints or cracks in concrete pavement. Reestablishment of a joint or crack shall consist of removing
 concrete on each side of the joint or crack, placing a compressible insert to reestablish the joint or crack,
 and filling the area with Portland cement concrete, elastomeric concrete or epoxy mortar. T his work shall
 be performed on concrete pavements that have not been resurfaced and are either not to be resurfaced as
 part of the contract work or the resurfacing is to be less than 3 inches thick.
 613.20.1.2 If dowel bars are structurally damaged during the removal process, if the concrete below one
 half of the slab depth is unsound or damaged during removal, or if the area indicates pumping, movement of
 the subbase, or structural pavement failure, full depth pavement repair shall be performed in accordance
 with Sec 613.10.
 613.20.2 Mate rial.
 613.20.2.1 Concrete coarse aggregate for Portland cement concrete shall be Gradation E or Grade F in
 accordance with Sec 1005 or an optimized aggregate gradation approved by the engineer. T he optimized
 aggregate gradation shall have 100 percent passing the ¾ inch sieve. Portland cement concrete mix shall
 have a minimum of 4 percent air content.
 613.20.2.2 Elastomeric concrete components shall be in accordance with manufacturer recommendations.
 T he Construction and Materials Division shall be consulted for product approval.
 613.20.2.3 Epoxy mortars shall be in accordance with Sec 623.
 613.20.2.4 Compressible inserts shall be rectangular and shall have a minimum thickness of ¼ inch. T he
 
 323
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 material shall be preformed fiber expansion joint filler in accordance with Sec 1057 or, if approved by the
 engineer, other material may be used.
 613.20.2.5 Type 2, Class B liquid membrane-forming compounds, in accordance with AASHT O M 148,
 shall be used for curing Portland cement concrete patch material. Prior to use, the contractor shall provide
 to the engineer the manufacturer ’s certification that the curing material is in accordance with this
 specification. Elastomeric concrete and epoxy mortar patch materials shall be cured in accordance with
 manufacturer recommendations.
 613.20.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 613.20.3.1 Re moval of Concre te . Repair limits shall extend beyond the delaminated or spalled area by
 one to two inches. Boundaries of any removal shall be kept square or rectangular. If repair areas are less
 than 2 feet apart, the areas shall be combined as one repair. T he maximum amount of spalling allowed on
 the edges of the channel will be ⅜ inch. T he minimum depth of removal shall be 2 inches for Portland
 cement concrete and according to manufacturer ’s recommendations for elastomeric concrete and epoxy
 mortar. T he maximum depth of removal shall not exceed half the slab thickness. Concrete shall be
 removed by a milling process. Residue slurry from milling operations shall be removed in accordance with
 Sec 622.30.3.8. If the top of dowel bars are exposed but not structurally damaged, the exposed section of
 the dowel bar shall be coated with an approved bond breaker.
 613.20.3.1.1 Milling. Milling equipment shall be in accordance with Sec 622.10, and shall be equipped
 with a device for stopping at a preset depth. Milling may be performed either across lanes or parallel to the
 pavement centerline. After milling, the bottom of the repair area shall be checked by sounding to ensure all
 unsound material has been removed. Any unsound material remaining shall be chipped free. All transverse
 sides of the removal shall be uniform and tapered 30° to 60° from vertical by milling or chipping. If
 excessive concrete is removed, or dowel bars are damaged to the extent to require full depth pavement
 repair, the cost for the repair shall be at the contractor ’s expense.
 613.20.3.1.2 Full De pth Pave me nt Re pair Re quire d. If during the removal of material for partial
 depth pavement repair the pavement constituted full depth pavement repair in accordance with Sec
 613.20.1.2, removal operations shall cease at that location. T he contractor may conduct full depth
 pavement repair at that time, or temporarily patch the area and perform full depth pavement repair at a
 later date. If the location is opened to traffic prior to the full depth pavement repair, all loose material
 shall be removed and either a bituminous material approved by the engineer or a concrete mixture in
 accordance with Sec 613.20.2 shall be used to patch the location. Reestablishing joints or cracks in
 temporary repairs by sawing will not be required. Material provided for temporary patches shall be provided
 at the contractor ’s expense.
 613.20.3.2 Cle aning. T he exposed faces of the concrete shall be free of loose particles, oil, dust, traces of
 bituminous material and any other contaminants before repair material is placed. T he procedure shall
 produce a clean, roughened surface, such as can be produced by sandblasting or, shotblasting. All residue shall
 be removed with air blasting equipment just prior to placement of material. T he air from the air blasting
 equipment shall be free of contaminants.
 613.20.3.3 Joint and Crack Pre paration.
 613.20.3.3.1 Transve rse Joints and Cracks. When placing a partial depth pavement repair directly
 against a transverse joint or crack, a compressible insert shall be placed against the joint or crack to form a
 bond breaker between the patch material and joint or crack. A pliable material shall be used to reform
 cracks along the existing paths. T he new joint or crack shall be formed to the same width as the existing
 joint or crack. T he compressible insert shall be placed into the existing joint to a minimum depth of one
 inch below the bottom of the repair and shall extend a minimum of one inche beyond each end of the
 prepared repair boundaries.
 613.20.3.3.2 Longitudinal and Ce nte rline Joints. When placing a partial depth pavement repair
 directly against the centerline or an adjacent lane joint, a compressible insert, a thin polyethylene strip no
 less than ⅛ inch thick or asphalt impregnated roofing felt shall be placed along the joint prior to placing
 the patching material.
 
 324
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 613.20.3.3.3 Shoulde r Joints. When placing a partial depth pavement repair along a lane and shoulder
 joint, the repair edge shall be formed if the shoulder is either soil, aggregate or bituminous material. T he
 form shall be placed even with the surface and slightly below the repair depth. If the shoulder is concrete,
 then the repair interface at the joint shall be in accordance with Sec 613.20.3.3.2.
 613.20.3.3.4 Re e stablishme nt of Joint and Cracks. At locations where repairs include existing
 pavement joints, both longitudinal and transverse, the initial reestablishment of the joint in the plastic
 concrete shall be accomplished with an approved preformed joint filler and shall be made to the same width
 as the existing joint. Existing cracks shall be reestablished using a compressible insert of a width equal to the
 existing crack width, except the insert shall be no less than ¼ inch thick. T he material insert shall be placed
 into the existing joint or crack to a minimum depth of one inch below the bottom of the repair, shall
 extend the full length of the joint or crack and shall extend to the top of the proposed pavement profile.
 T he material shall prevent the concrete from flowing into the existing joint or crack. Sawing to reestablish
 the joint or crack will not be permitted.
 613.20.3.4 Mate rial Place me nt.
 613.20.3.4.1 Bonding Mate rial. Bonding material shall be applied in a thin even coat, shall cover the
 entire area, including the repair walls, shall overlap the pavement surface and shall be in accordance with
 the following.
 613.20.3.4.1.1 For Portland concrete, Type II or Type III epoxy resin material in accordance with Sec
 1039 or grout shall be used. When epoxy material is used, the concrete shall be placed while the epoxy is
 still tacky. If the epoxy sets prior to placement of the concrete, the hardened epoxy material shall be
 removed and the pavement repair area shall be cleaned in accordance with Sec 613.20.3.2. When grout is
 used, mortar shall be in accordance with Sec 1066, except it shall consist of equal parts of cement and sand.
 If the grout dries prior to placing the concrete, the dried or hardened grout shall be removed and the
 pavement repair area shall be cleaned in accordance with Sec 613.20.3.2.
 613.20.3.4.1.2 For elastomeric concrete, the bonding material properties and application shall be in
 accordance with manufacturer recommendations.
 613.20.3.4.1.3 For epoxy mortar, a neat low viscosity epoxy in accordance with Sec 623.20 shall be used.
 613.20.3.4.2 Place me nt of Re pair Mate rial. Epoxy mortar shall not be used to repair spalls caused by
 reinforcing steel corrosion. No standing water shall be present at the time of placement of the material.
 Retempering of the Portland cement concrete mixture with water will not be permitted. Concrete material
 shall be placed into the channel and consolidated with a small spud vibrator. Vibrators with diameters greater
 than one inch will not be permitted. Care shall be taken not to touch the compressible insert with a
 vibrator. On very small repairs and as approved by the engineer, hand tools may be used to work the repair
 material and attain adequate consolidation. Elastomeric concrete shall be handled, prepared and mixed in
 accordance with manufacturer recommendations. Epoxy mortar components shall be handled, prepared and
 mixed in accordance with Sec 623. Any segregated areas shall be removed and replaced at the contractor ’s
 expense.
 613.20.3.4.3 Finishing and Te xturing. Repair material shall be finished to match the cross section of
 the existing pavement. T he repair material shall be screed from the center of the repair out to the repair
 boundaries. Excess patch material from finishing may be used to fill any saw cut run-outs that extend
 beyond the repair perimeter, if the material can fully penetrate the run-outs, otherwise, an approved low
 viscosity epoxy shall be used to fill the saw cut run-outs. After finishing, the repair shall be appropriately
 textured to approximate the texture of the existing pavement.
 613.20.3.4.4 Se aling and Curing. For Portland cement concrete patch material the repair and slab
 interface shall be sealed by painting the repair perimeter with a 1:1 cement-water grout. Concrete repair
 material shall be cured in accordance with Sec 502.6.1, except a double application of curing material in
 accordance with Sec 613.20.2.5 shall be placed over the repaired area. Elastomeric concrete shall be cured
 in accordance with manufacturer recommendations. Epoxy mortar shall be cured in accordance with Sec
 623.
 
 325
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 613.20.3.5 O pe ning to Traffic.T raffic shall not be permitted on the repaired pavement until the patch
 material has attained a minimum compressive strength of 1,600 psi, but shall be a minimum of two hours
 after placement or the time recommended by the manufacturer.
 613.20.3.6 Acce ptance . All pavement repairs will be sounded by the engineer prior to acceptance.
 Sounding will not be performed until the repair material has reached design compressive strength and the
 repair has been open to traffic for a minimum of 30 days. If sounding indicates unsound material, the entire
 pavement repair shall be removed to the limits designated by the engineer and replaced by the contractor at
 the contractor ’s expense.
 613.20.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 613.20.4.1 Measurement for repairing spalled areas, cracks or joints will be made to the nearest 1/10 square
 yard. Any material removed beyond the repair area designated by the engineer due to the removal methods
 used by the contractor will not be included in the measurement for pavement repair. Measurement of all
 concrete material furnished and placed in the repair of spalled areas, cracks or joints will be made to the
 nearest 1/10 cubic yard.
 613.20.4.2 If an area designated for partial depth pavement repair requires full depth pavement repair in
 accordance with Sec 613.20.1.2, measurement for material removed as part of the partial depth pavement
 repair work at that location will be made to the nearest 1/10 square yard.
 613.20.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities for Class A partial depth pavement repair will be
 paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. Full depth pavement
 repairs required due to negligence by the contractor will be at the contractor ’s expense. All other full depth
 pavement repairs will be paid for in accordance with Sec 613.10.
 SECTIO N 613.30 CLASS B PARTIAL DEPTH PAVEMENT REPAIRS.
 613.30.1 De scription.
 613.30.1.1 Class B partial depth pavement repair shall consist of removing areas of unsound concrete or
 bituminous material to a maximum depth of one half of the concrete pavement thickness and replacing the
 unsound material with an approved bituminous mixture. T his work shall be performed on projects that
 include resurfacing as part of the contract.
 613.30.1.2 If dowel bars are structurally damaged during the removal process, if the concrete below one
 half of the slab depth is unsound or damaged during removal, or if the area indicates pumping, movement of
 the subbase or structural pavement failure, full depth pavement repair shall be performed in accordance
 with Sec 613.
 613.30.2 Mate rial. T he material used for Class B partial depth pavement repairs shall be either the
 bituminous surface mix specified in the contract for resurfacing the existing pavement or a bituminous
 commercial mix in accordance with Sec 401.5.3 Tack material shall be in accordance with Sec 407.2.
 613.30.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 613.30.3.1 Re moval of Bituminous and Concre te Mate rial.
 613.30.3.1.1 At areas shown on the plans or where unsuitable material is exposed during coldmilling
 operations and identified by the engineer to be repaired, all loose and unsuitable bituminous material shall be
 removed by milling or other approved methods. Concrete material shall be removed in accordance with Sec
 613.20.3.1. Around the perimeter of the repair, the sides shall be relatively vertical, and concrete surfaces
 shall have a roughened face, such as can be produced by milling or other means approved by the engineer.
 T he minimum depth of the repair shall be 2 inches. T he area shall be cleaned to remove loose material and
 shall have a relatively uniform depth. If the top of dowel bars are exposed but not structurally damaged, the
 exposed section of the dowel bar shall be coated with an approved bond breaker.
 
 326
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 613.30.3.1.2 If during the removal of material for partial depth pavement repair, the pavement constitutes
 full depth pavement repair in accordance with Sec 613.30.1.2, removal operations shall cease at that
 location. T he contractor may conduct full depth pavement repair at that time, or the contractor may
 temporarily patch the exposed area in accordance with Sec 613.20.3.1.2, and perform full depth pavement
 repair at a later date.
 613.30.3.2 Cle aning. T he exposed faces of the concrete shall be free of loose particles, dust and any
 other contaminants before repair material is placed. T he procedure shall produce a clean, roughened
 surface, such as can be produced by sandblasting, shotblasting, or high pressure water blasting. All residue
 shall be removed with air blasting equipment just prior to placement of material. T he air from the air
 blasting equipment shall be free of contaminants.
 613.30.3.3 Place me nt of Re pair Mate rial. T he repair area shall be suitably tacked on the sides and
 bottom to ensure bonding of any remaining loose material, as well as bonding of the repair material. T here
 shall be no ponding of the tack liquid at the time the area is filled. T he repair area shall be filled with an
 approved bituminous surface mixture, and thoroughly compacted over the entire repair area to a density
 approved by the engineer. Areas greater than 3 inches in depth shall be filled in two lifts, each thoroughly
 compacted. Reestablishing of joints by sawing will not be required.
 613.30.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 613.30.4.1 Measurement of Class B partial depth pavement repairs for removing material will be made to
 the nearest 1/10 square yard. Any material removed beyond the repair area designated by the engineer due
 to the removal methods used by the contractor will not be included in the measurement for pavement
 repair. Measurement for furnishing and placing the bituminous material will be made to the nearest 0.1 ton.
 613.30.4.2 If an area designated for partial depth pavement repair requires full depth pavement repair in
 accordance with Sec 613.30.1.2, measurement for material removed as part of the partial depth pavement
 repair work at that location will be made to the nearest 1/10 square yard.
 613.30.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities for Class B partial depth pavement repair will be
 paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. Payment for tack
 liquid is incidental to the pay item for furnishing and placing bituminous material. Full depth pavement
 repairs required due to improper means and methods by the contractor will be at the contractor ’s expense.
 All other full depth pavement repairs will be paid for in accordance with Sec 613.10.
 SECTIO N 613.35 CLASS C PARTIAL DEPTH PAVEMENT REPAIR
 613.35.1 De scription. Class C partial depth pavement repair shall consist of performing repairs in asphalt
 pavements, including composite pavements that have an asphalt surface. T his work includes removal of
 unsound pavement to the depth specified on the plans, or as directed by the engineer, and replacement with
 an approved asphalt mixture.
 613.35.2 Mate rial. T he material used for Class C partial depth repairs shall be the asphalt surface mix
 specified in the contract, or a mix approved by the engineer.
 613.35.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 613.35.3.1 Re moval of Bituminous Mate rial. All unsuitable pavement shall be removed by milling or
 other method approved by the engineer. For composite pavements, the repair may extend into the
 underlying concrete pavement if deterioration is found at that depth. T he minimum depth of repair shall be
 2 inches. T he repair area shall be square or rectangular in shape. T he exposed faces of the repair area shall
 be cleaned to remove loose material. Material removed from the repair area shall be disposed of off right of
 way unless otherwise approved by the engineer.
 613.35.3.2 Place me nt of Re pair Mate rial. T he repair area shall be adequately tacked on the sides and
 bottom to ensure bonding of the repair material. T he repair area shall be filled with the approved asphalt
 mixture and thoroughly compacted over the entire area to a density approved by the engineer. Areas
 greater than 3 inches in depth shall be filled and thoroughly compacted in two lifts. For pavements that will
 
 327
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 receive a final overlay, the final compacted surface of the repair shall be level with, or not more than ¼
 inches above, the surrounding pavement. If the repair will be the final driving surface, smoothness shall be
 in accordance with Sec 610.4.3 and Sec 610.4.4.
 613.35.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 613.35.4.1 Re moval of Bituminous Mate rial. Measurement of removal for Class C partial depth repairs
 will be made to the nearest 1/10 square yard. For composite pavements, this removal includes both asphalt
 and concrete material. Any material removed beyond the repair area designated by the engineer due to the
 removal methods used by the contractor will not be included in the measurement.
 613.35.4.2 Furnishing and Place me nt of Re pair Mate rial. Measurement for furnishing and placing
 the asphalt repair material will be made to the nearest 0.1 ton.
 613.35.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities for Class C partial depth pavement repair will be
 paid for at the contract unit price of the pay items included in the contract. Payment for tack liquid is
 incidental to the pay item for furnishing and placing bituminous material.
 SECTIO N 613.40 DO WEL BAR RETRO FIT.
 613.40.1 De scription of Work. T his work shall consist of sawing partial depth slots across cracks,
 cleaning the slots, placing dowel bars in the slots, placing a joint forming insert to reestablish the crack and
 backfilling the slots with concrete.
 613.40.2 Mate rial.
 613.40.2.1 Re pair Mate rial. Rapid set concrete patching material shall be used. T he maximum aggregate
 size in the gradation shall be ½ inch. Prior to use, the material shall be approved by the engineer. Material
 having completed current testing through AASHT O’s NT PEP will be considered for qualification upon
 submittal of a written request by the manufacturer with accompanying documentation. T he material shall
 be handled, prepared and mixed in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations. T he contractor
 shall supply a manufacturer ’s certification to the engineer for each lot of material furnished. Certification
 shall include the name of the manufacturer and a manufacturer ’s certification statement that the material
 supplied is the same as the material that was qualified.
 613.40.2.2 Dowe l Bars. Dowel bars shall be 1½ x 18 inches and in accordance with Sec 1057, except the
 entire dowel bar shall be coated.
 613.40.2.3 Expansion Caps for Dowe l Bars. Caps shall be tight fitting and made of ¼ inch thick nonmetallic material that will allow ¼ inch movement at each end of the dowel bar.
 613.40.2.4 Joint Inse rt. To re-establish the crack, a compressible insert, in accordance with Sec
 613.20.2.4, shall be used. T he material shall fit tight around the dowel bar and to the bottom and edges of
 the slot. T he material shall be capable of remaining in a vertical position and tight to all edges during
 placement of the repair material to prevent the concrete backfill from flowing into the existing crack and
 pavement voids.
 613.40.2.5 Bar Chairs. Bar chairs may be metal epoxy-coated chairs or a non-metallic material.
 613.40.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 613.40.3.1 Pre paration of Slots. Two saw cuts shall be made in the pavement to outline the longitudinal
 sides of each dowel bar slot. T he slots shall be sawed to a depth and length that allows the center of the
 dowel to be placed at mid-depth in the pavement slab. T he slots shall be 2½ inches wide. T he contractor
 shall provide a method, approved by the engineer, that will align the slots parallel to centerline of the
 roadway with a maximum variation of ⅛ inch from a true parallel line. Slots in a wheel path shall be created
 by using saws with gang-mounted diamond blades, capable of simultaneously making six saw cuts for three
 dowel bar slots at the desired slot spacing. Equipment shall not cause damage to the existing pavement. All
 saw slurry shall be removed from the slot and pavement. No water residue or paste shall be allowed to flow
 
 328
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 onto lanes open to traffic or into closed drainage systems. If pneumatic hammers or other equipment used
 during concrete removal operations cause damage to pavement that is to remain, the concrete removal
 operations shall be discontinued and shall not resume until the contractor has taken corrective measures.
 T he pneumatic hammer will not be permitted to break through the concrete, and if this occurs, a full depth
 pavement repair shall be conducted at the contractor ’s expense. T he bottom of slots shall be flat. T he
 edges of the slots shall be cleaned by sandblasting to produce a rough surface. Blasting operations shall not
 damage the surrounding pavement. T he newly exposed concrete surface shall be free of spalls, burrs, latence
 and all contaminants detrimental to achieving an adequate bond. T he maximum amount of spalling allowed
 on the edges of the slots will be ⅜ inch. T he point of curvature at the bottom of either end of the slot shall
 be ½ inch beyond the dowel bars end.
 613.40.3.1.1 After the construction of a slot, the pavement shall not be opened to traffic until all six
 retrofit dowel bars are in place, cured, and the work is completed at that location. T he tires of construction
 vehicles will not be permitted to travel on slots where concrete has been removed.
 613.40.3.1.2 Multiple saw cuts parallel to the centerline within the slot removal boundaries may be sawed
 to allow removal of material from the dowel bar slots and to provide a level surface for the feet of the
 dowel bar chairs.
 613.40.3.1.3 All slots shall be cleaned with moisture-free, oil-free, compressed air to remove any
 remaining dust, residue, debris and moisture. T he contractor shall then seal the existing transverse joint and
 all cracks at the bottom and the sides of the dowel bar slot with a silicone sealant to prevent any repair
 material from entering into these areas.
 613.40.3.2 Place me nt of Dowe l Bars, Joint Inse rts and Re pair Mate rial.
 613.40.3.2.1 Prior to inserting a dowel bar in a slot, expansion caps shall be placed on each end of the bar.
 A minimum ¼ inch gap shall be maintained in the expansion caps. A dowel bar chair shall hold the bar
 firmly centered in the slot and at a minimum of ½ inch above the bottom of the dowel slot. T he dowel bar
 chairs shall not allow movement of the dowel.
 613.40.3.2.2 When placing the dowel bar in the slot, care shall be taken to avoid getting any graphite
 grease onto the sides or bottom of the slot. If the debonding agent on the dowel bar contaminates any of
 the surfaces of the slot, the dowel bar shall be removed and the slot sandblasted to remove the
 contamination.
 613.40.3.2.3 T he dowel bar shall be inserted into the slot such that the chair legs are in the saw cut kerfs at
 the bottom of the slot. T he bars shall vary no more than ¼ inch from the pavement surface and shall be
 parallel to the centerline of the pavement. Bars shall be firmly centered in the slot at the midpoint of the
 pavement slab. T he legs of the bar chairs shall be snug against the slot wall.
 613.40.3.2.4 A joint insert shall be placed into the slot as a filler material to maintain the crack as shown
 on the plans. When in place, the insert shall extend from the bottom of the slot to the surface of the
 pavement, with half the dowel length extending on each side of the insert. If for any reason the insert or
 dowel bars shift during placement of the repair material, the work will be rejected and shall be redone at the
 contractor ’s expense.
 613.40.3.2.5 Just prior to placement of the repair material, one or more passes of an air blast shall be used
 to provide a dust free, clean slot.
 613.40.3.2.6 T he rapid set concrete patching material shall be placed in the slot, consolidated, textured and
 cured as recommended by the manufacturer.
 613.40.3.3 O pe ning to Traffic. T raffic shall not be permitted on the repaired pavement until the rapid
 set concrete patching material has attained a minimum compressive strength of 1,600 psi, but shall be a
 minimum of 2 hours or the time recommended by the manufacturer.
 613.40.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity for dowel bar retrofit will be paid for at the contract
 unit price per dowel bar, complete in place.
 
 329
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 613.50 CRO SS STITCHING.
 613.50.1 De scription of Work. T he work shall consist of repairing longitudinal pavement cracks by
 pinning the pavement slabs together with a series of alternating tie bars.
 613.50.2 Mate rial.
 613.50.2.1 Tie Bars. T ie bars shall be in accordance with Sec1057 and as shown on the plans.
 613.50.2.2 Epoxy. Epoxy or Polyester Bonding Agents for Dowels shall be in accordance with Sec1039.
 613.50.3 Construction Re quire me nts
 613.50.3.1 At each cross-stitch location, holes shall be drilled at a 35 degree angle to the pavement
 surface, starting a variable distance from the longitudinal joint, in a direction perpendicular to the crack.
 T he drill bit diameter shall not exceed 1⅛ inch. Drilling shall alternate back and forth on either side of the
 longitudinal crack from hole to hole. Drilled holes shall not penetrate through the bottom of the slab.
 Drilled holes shall contain no loose debris and be completely clean.
 613.50.3.2 Epoxy shall be injected or poured into each hole. A tie bar shall be inserted in each hole such
 that the epoxy material is evenly distributed around the bar and extruding from the surface opening. Each
 bar shall be inserted far enough to allow 1½ inch of cover as shown in the plans.
 613.50.3.3 T he pavement surface shall have all excess epoxy removed and have a flush finish.
 613.50.3.4 T raffic shall not be permitted on the repaired pavement until the epoxy bonding material has
 cured in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations.
 613.50.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of cross stitching will be made per tie bar at each
 individual location.
 613.50.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity for cross stitching will be paid for at the contract unit
 price per cross stitch tie bar, complete in place. No direct payment will be made for any drilling, cleaning or
 epoxy material necessary to complete the work.
 
 330
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 614
 DRAINAGE FITTINGS
 SECTIO N 614.10 GRATES AND BEARING PLATES.
 614.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing parallel bar grates and bearing
 plates, and curved vane grates and frames of the size and design shown on the plans.
 614.10.2 Mate rial.
 614.10.2.1 Parallel bar grates and bearing plates, and curb inlets shall be constructed of structural steel
 meeting the requirements of AST M A 36 and shall be fabricated as shown on the plans. Welds shall be of
 full section and sound throughout. Obvious dimensional defects and structural discontinuity of welds will be
 cause for rejection. All welding residue shall be removed. All tightly contacting surfaces shall be completely
 sealed by welding. Removal of welding beads will not be required except on bearing surfaces. Parallel bar
 grates and bearing plates, and curb inlets shall be hot-dip galvanized after fabrication in accordance with
 AASHT O M 111. Bolts, nuts and washers shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHT O M 232 or shall
 be mechanically galvanized. If mechanically galvanized, the coating thickness, adherence and quality
 requirements shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 232, Class C. Damaged spelter coating shall be
 repaired in accordance with Sec 1081.
 614.10.2.2 Curved vane grates and frames shall be constructed of cast gray iron, meeting the requirements
 of AASHT O M 306 and shall be fabricated as shown on the plans. Stainless bolts and washers shall be in
 accordance with Sec 901.3.
 614.10.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Parallel bar grates and bearing plates, curb inlets, and curved
 vane grates and frames shall be installed as shown on the plans. Curved vane grates shall be properly
 oriented to the direction of water flow. Curved vane grates installed at low points shall be oriented as
 directed by the engineer.
 614.10.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of parallel bar grates and bearing plates, and curved
 vane grates and frames will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the items included in the
 contract.
 SECTIO N 614.20 AUTO MATIC FLO O DGATE.
 614.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing automatic floodgates of standard
 design to fit the opening shown on the plans. Type 1 floodgates shall be installed on concrete structures.
 Type 2 floodgates shall be installed on corrugated metal pipe. Gates shall be of the off-vertical type if
 shown on the plans.
 614.20.2 Mate rial.
 614.20.2.1 Automatic floodgates shall have a frame and flap constructed of cast iron meeting the
 requirements of AASHT O M 105, minimum Class 30.
 614.20.2.2 Each link shall be provided with commercial grade bronze bushings permanently lubricated and
 installed at the factory. For hydraulic heads greater than 10 feet, the bottom of the links shall be provided
 with an adjusting screw to align seating faces on the cover properly with respect to the seat. For hydraulic
 heads less than 10 feet, adjusting screws will not be required, however, the seating faces on the cover shall
 properly align with respect to the seat. T he links shall be designed to prevent the cover from rotating far
 enough to become wedged in the open position.
 614.20.2.3 T he seat shall be one-piece cast iron with a raised section around the perimeter of the waterway
 opening to provide the seating face, and shaped to provide two pivot bosses extended above the top of the
 waterway opening.
 614.20.2.4 All anchor bolts, assembly bolts, screws and nuts shall be of stainless steel having ample section
 to withstand safely the forces created by operation of the gate under a hydraulic head. Quantity and size of
 
 331
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 anchor bolts shall be as recommended by the manufacturer, except there shall be a minimum of four bolts.
 Each anchor bolt shall be furnished with two nuts to facilitate installation and alignment of the flat back
 gates when attached to concrete.
 614.20.2.5 T he contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification that the floodgate being supplied is
 in accordance with the specified material requirements and that the floodgate will operate properly under
 the specified hydraulic head. If the hydraulic head is not specified, the height of fill above the pipe will be
 considered the hydraulic head.
 614.20.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Automatic floodgates shall be carefully machined, watertight and
 automatic in operation. Floodgates shall react to any difference in water level, and shall be hinged to seat
 accurately. Floodgates shall be attached in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations for
 corrugated metal pipes or concrete structures.
 614.20.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of automatic floodgates, complete in place including
 connection to concrete structure or corrugated metal pipe, will be paid for at the contract unit price for
 each of the items included in the contract.
 SECTIO N 614.30 MANHO LE FRAME AND CO VER AND CURB INLET.
 614.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing manhole frames and covers,
 curb inlets or any items of similar nature. Manhole frames and covers, curb inlets or any items of similar
 nature shall be of the size and type necessary to fit appurtenant details shown on the plans, shall be of a
 standard design and shall meet the approval of the engineer.
 614.30.2 Mate rial. T he manhole frames and covers, curb inlets or any items of similar nature shall be
 constructed of cast iron in accordance with AASHT O M 105. Specific classes, if required, will be shown on
 the plans.
 614.30.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Bearing surfaces of both the frame and cover shall be finished to
 a non-rocking fit. T he fixture shall be set securely as shown on the plans to prevent displacement during
 the placing of concrete. All concrete placed adjacent to the fixture shall be thoroughly vibrated.
 614.30.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of these items or items of similar nature, complete in
 place, will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 
 332
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 616
 TEMPO RARY TRAFFIC CO NTRO L
 616.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing, installing, operating, maintaining, cleaning,
 relocating and removing temporary traffic control devices and equipment, and the removal and relocation
 or covering and uncovering of existing signs and other traffic control devices in accordance with the
 contract documents or as directed by the engineer. For purposes of this specification, the work zone will be
 defined as the area between the first and last temporary traffic control device as shown on the plans for the
 work being performed.
 616.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Temporary Traffic Control Devices 1063
 
 616.3 Safe ty Re quire me nts.
 616.3.1 All traffic control devices shall be in accordance with the MUT CD and any applicable safety and
 design codes.
 616.3.2 T he contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification of crashworthiness, per NCHRP 350 or
 AASHT O Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware (MASH) Evaluation Criteria, for FHWA Category 1 traffic
 control devices and appurtenances. T he contractor shall furnish the FHWA acceptance letter for FHWA
 Category 2 and Category 3 traffic control devices and appurtenances. T he FHWA acceptance letter shall
 indicate that the device and appurtenance complies with the crash test requirements of NCHRP 350 or
 (MASH), Test Level 3 (T L-3). Regardless whether the device meets NCHRP 350 or (MASH) criteria, the
 engineer reserves the right of final approval. Installation of a device prior to the engineer's approval will
 be at the contractor's risk.
 616.3.3 T he contractor shall:
 (a) Designate an individual as the Work Zone Specialist (WZS) who is knowledgeable and
 competent by training and/or certification in the principles of proper temporary traffic control in
 accordance with Chapter 6 of the MUT CD, and who has the primary responsibility, with sufficient
 authority, for implementing the traffic management plan and other safety and mobility aspects of
 the project. T he WZS shall be directly involved with daily traffic management, and shall
 communicate pertinent information with the engineer either in person or via telecommunication.
 Duties of the WZS shall include monitoring the work zone to ensure an efficient flow of traffic,
 correcting any failed or misaligned traffic control signs or devices, and recommending traffic
 management improvements to the engineer. T he name, certification, and a 24-hour contact
 number for the WZS shall be provided to the engineer prior to the start of work. If the contractor
 makes a change in the designated WZS, the engineer shall be notified immediately. T he WZS shall
 be trained and certified by a qualified person as defined by the Occupational Safety and Health
 Administration. T he WZS shall have a card and/or certificate that includes the WZS’s name,
 instructor ’s name and title, training entity/agency, date of training, and signature of the instructor.
 Re-certification shall be required a minimum of every four years.
 (b) Ensure all contractor personnel are trained in traffic control to a level commensurate with
 their responsibilities.
 (c) Obtain authorization from the engineer for any lane closure or traffic shift at least two
 working days prior to the planned closure or lane shift. Requests for complete road closures, or any
 imposition of height, width or weight restrictions shall be submitted to the engineer for approval
 at least 15 calendar days prior to the planned closure or restriction. T he engineer reserves the
 right to deny any request for lane closure, traffic shift, road closure or restrictions of height, width
 or weight that the engineer determines could be in conflict with other known or anticipated traffic
 impacts, including but not limited to, outstanding permits that have been issued by the Commission
 for oversized or overweight loads.
 
 333
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (d) Perform quality control of work zones to promote consistency and ensure compliance with
 contract documents, policies and guidelines.
 616.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 616.4.1 Performance and operational aspects of the devices shall be in accordance with the latest editions
 of the MUT CD and the Missouri Quality Standards for Temporary T raffic Control Devices.
 616.4.1.1 All traffic control devices shall be removed as soon as practical when the devices are no longer
 needed. When work is suspended for short periods of time, traffic control devices that are no longer
 appropriate shall be turned away from traffic, removed or covered. All temporary traffic control devices
 shall be removed after the completion of construction and shall remain the property of the contractor
 unless specified otherwise. All permanent traffic control devices that are in conflict with temporary traffic
 control devices shall be covered or removed as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. Upon
 completion of the work, all permanent traffic control devices to remain in place shall be restored to
 original condition.
 616.4.1.2 All sign covers shall meet the requirements of the MoDOT Quality Standards for Temporary
 T raffic Control Devices.
 616.4.1.3 All permanent traffic control devices relocated on a temporary basis shall be moved in the
 timeframe designated by the engineer, and shall remain visible to the traveling public during all stages of
 construction. T he contractor shall place temporarily relocated permanent traffic control devices in the
 final location when construction is complete. Damaged devices shall be replaced by the contractor at the
 contractor ’s expense.
 616.4.2 T he contract will indicate the minimum requirements for traffic control. With the engineer ’s
 approval, the contractor may add to the traffic control plan any temporary traffic control devices or
 services the contractor considers necessary to adequately protect the public and the work. Device quantities
 may be adjusted accordingly.
 616.4.2.1 Signs and sign quantities for blasting areas will not be included in the contract traffic control
 plan. T he contractor will be responsible for furnishing, installing, maintaining and removing blasting zone
 signs in accordance with the MUT CD, at the contractor ’s expense. Placement of blasting zone signs will be
 subject to approval from the engineer.
 616.4.2.2 All changes to the traffic control plan resulting from contractor staging revisions, including
 proposed total road closures for the contractor ’s convenience, shall be submitted in writing to the engineer
 for review and acceptance prior to implementation. Device quantities may be adjusted accordingly.
 616.4.2.3 If the engineer determines the need for additional traffic control devices not included in the
 traffic control plan, the contractor will be notified in writing to provide the additional devices.
 Reimbursement for authorized changes to the traffic control plan will be made in accordance with Sec
 104.3, unless covered by contract unit prices.
 616.4.2.4 T he contractor shall monitor traffic flow through the project and verify that all traffic control
 devices are in place and functioning properly during both daytime and nighttime conditions, as applicable.
 If the contractor determines that a deficiency in any traffic control device exists, the contractor shall take
 corrective action. No additional payment will be made for the corrective action.
 616.4.2.5 As soon as possible after observing a traffic control deficiency, the engineer will report the
 deficiency to the contractor, either verbally or in writing. After receiving notification, if the contractor
 does not make corrections within an agreed upon timeline, order records or suspension of the work may
 occur. Regardless of the severity of the deficiency, corrections shall be made as soon as possible to maintain
 a quality work zone.
 616.4.2.5.1 T he severity of a deficiency will be categorized as follows:
 
 334
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (a) Category 1 – Presents an immediate danger to the traveling public or workers and needs to be
 addressed immediately.
 (b) Category 2 – T he situation doesn’t pose an immediate threat to either the public or the
 workers, but can impact the proper functioning of the work zone.
 (c) Category 3 – T he situation doesn’t impact the functioning of the work zone but is more of a
 maintenance or aesthetic issue.
 616.4.2.5.2 When the engineer determines that the contractor has not made a good faith effort in
 correcting a deficiency as agreed upon in Sec 616.4.2.5, an order record will be issued and the contractor
 will be notified of the following timelines to correct the deficiency.
 (a) A Category 1 deficiency shall be corrected within one hour.
 (b) A Category 2 deficiency shall be corrected within 24 hours.
 (c) A Category 3 deficiency shall be corrected within 96 hours.
 616.4.2.5.3 When the engineer determines the contractor has not made a good faith effort in complying
 with an order record issued in accordance with Sec 616.4.2.5.2, the following action may be taken:
 (a) A second order record will be issued.
 (b) T he engineer may find the contractor in violation of the contract in accordance with Sec 105.
 616.4.2.5.4 For reoccurring deficiencies of similar nature within the contractor ’s control, the engineer may
 issue order records in accordance with Sec 616.4.2.5.3, bypassing Sec 616.4.2.5.2 requirements.
 616.4.2.6 T he contractor shall provide written notice to the engineer of any pedestrian or vehicular
 accident when physical evidence or other information suggests an accident has occurred in the work zone.
 T he contractor shall obtain and provide to the engineer copies of law enforcement accident reports for any
 accidents in the work zone.
 616.4.3 Each flagger, automated flagger assistance devices (AFAD) operator, portable signal flagging device
 (PSFD) operator and pilot vehicle operator shall maintain a valid flagger certification card that certifies
 the individual has been trained by a qualified person as defined by the Occupational Safety and Health
 Administration, in the principles and procedures of flagging in accordance with Chapter 6 of the MUT CD.
 Flagger certification cards shall include the flagger ’s name, instructor ’s name and title, training
 entity/agency, date, and signature of the instructor. Flagger certifications shall be provided to the engineer
 prior to flagging operations. Flagger re-certification shall be required a minimum of every four years.
 Certifications will not be required in emergency situations that arise due to actions beyond the contractor ’s
 control when flagging is necessary to maintain safe traffic control on a temporary basis. All flagging,
 AFAD, PFD and pilot vehicle operations shall be in accordance with the MUT CD. Flaggers and pilot
 vehicles shall be provided as shown on the plans or as approved or directed by the engineer. When not
 specified in the plans, the contractor may use a Type B (Red/Yellow Lens) AFAD PSFD or pilot vehicle to
 supplement the flagging operation upon approval from the engineer. When two-way traffic is maintained
 over a single lane, each flagger, AFAD operator, if used in tandem, and pilot vehicle operator involved in
 the traffic flagging operation shall be equipped with a portable, two-way, communication system approved
 by the engineer. When the AFED or PSFD are not in use they shall be removed from the roadside.
 616.4.4 Crossovers for hauling material will be permitted only at locations indicated in the traffic control
 plan or as authorized by the engineer. Modifications to specified locations shall be in accordance with
 applicable portions of Sec 104. Crossovers shall be signed in accordance with the traffic control plan.
 When the project has been completed, temporary crossovers shall be removed and the area restored to
 original condition. Existing crossovers shall be restored to original condition, including surface material.
 616.5 Lighting Re quire me nts.
 616.5.1 All construction-related vehicles and equipment, except for haul trucks within paving operations,
 shall be equipped with a USDOT-approved warning light. Lights shall be amber in output, mounted such that
 the lights are visible to traffic from 360 degrees and activated while in the work zone.
 
 335
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 616.5.2 Work zone lighting shall be provided between dusk and dawn as specified in Secs 616.5.2.1 and
 616.5.2.2. Lighting systems shall be positioned such that the lighting systems do not cause glare or hot
 spots, i.e. concentrated areas of high lighting intensity when compared to the average, for motorists,
 spillover to adjacent properties or become safety concerns. When work zone lighting is required, a lighting
 plan shall be submitted to the engineer for review 14 days prior to the start of operations. T he lighting
 plan shall show the areas to be illuminated, the type and layout of the lighting systems and calculations of
 average maintained footcandles.
 616.5.2.1 Work area lighting shall be provided in areas where construction equipment and labor are active.
 Lighting shall provide a minimum maintained intensity of 5 footcandles.
 616.5.2.2 Overhead lighting shall be provided for flaggers and other specified locations shown on the plans.
 Lighting in these areas shall provide a minimum maintained intensity of 5 footcandles.
 616.5.2.3 Type A, Type C, and Sequential lights shall be visible on a clear night from a distance of 3,000
 feet (2). Type B lights shall be visible on a sunny day when viewed without the sun directly on or behind the
 device from a distance of 1,000 feet (2).
 (1) Length of time that instantaneous intensity is equal to or greater than effective intensity.
 (2) T his visibility must be maintained within a solid angle 9-degrees on each side of the vertical
 axis, and 5-degrees above and 5-degrees below the horizontal axis.
 Sequential flashing warning lights shall be placed within the merging taper and be able to communicate with
 other lights with the sequence. T he lights should be capable of being spaced at least 60 feet apart with an
 offset capability of at least 6 feet.
 Warning lights shall be battery- or solar-powered and consist of a single unit (head and housing).
 616.6 Flashing Arrow Pane l. T he contractor shall deploy, operate and maintain flashing arrow panels as
 specified on the plans for the duration of the project, in accordance with the manufacturer ’s
 recommendations, at the contractor ’s expense. A minimum vertical clearance of 7 feet shall be maintained
 from the edge of pavement to the bottom of the flashing arrow panel.
 616.6.1 When not in use, trailer-mounted flashing arrow panels shall be stored in accordance with Sec
 107.5.
 616.6.2 Control programs shall be as follows:
 (a) Flashing Caution: Flash the two highest and two lowest lamps on panel simultaneously.
 (b) Alternating Diamond Caution: Flash eight lamps in a form of a diamond and alternates
 diamonds from left side to right side.
 (c) Flashing Left or Right Arrow: Flash five lamps in the arrowhead and five lamps in the
 horizontal shank simultaneously.
 (d) Sequential Arrow Left or Right Arrow: Five lamps in the arrowhead will move across the
 panel. T he horizontal shank increases in length as the arrowhead moves across the panel.
 (e) Double Arrow: Flash five lamps in both the left and right arrowheads and three lamps in the
 horizontal shank simultaneously.
 T he contractor has the option to use the sequential arrow or alternating diamond caution modes on mobile
 operations.
 616.7 Change able Me ssage Signs. T he contractor shall place the changeable message sign (CMS) at the
 location shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. T he CMS shall not be located in the median.
 
 336
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 616.7.1 T he contractor shall deploy, operate and maintain the CMS as specified in the traffic control plan
 and in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations for the duration of the project at the
 contractor ’s expense. T he contractor shall program the CMS as directed by the engineer.
 616.7.2 When the CMS is not in use, the message board shall be turned away from traffic. When not
 required for longer than a 24-hour period, the CMS shall be stored in accordance with Sec 107.5.
 616.8 Work Zone Traffic Signals. Work Zone T raffic Signals (WZT S) provide one-lane, two-way
 temporary traffic control through the use of a temporary traffic signal or a portable traffic signal
 programmed for two-phase operation. WZT S shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 Unless otherwise shown on the plans, the contractor may choose either method to fulfill the WZT S
 requirement.
 616.8.1 T he contractor shall notify the engineer at least 48 hours prior to the work zone traffic signal
 installation. After installation, the contractor shall receive approval from the engineer prior to activating
 the WZT S system. T he contractor shall provide a service technician to be available for day, night and
 weekend trouble calls as required under test period requirements in Sec 902. T he contractor shall furnish the
 telephone number or other contact information where the technician can be reached.
 616.8.1.1 T he contractor shall operate and maintain the WZT S, at the contractor ’s expense, as specified
 in the traffic control plan until two-way traffic is restored.
 616.8.1.2 When the WZT S is not in use, the signal heads shall be covered to the satisfaction of the
 engineer.
 616.8.1.3 Adequate traffic control, including flaggers, shall be provided at the contractor ’s expense during
 the startup and shutdown of the WZT S installation. If the WZT S installation becomes inoperable due to
 alterations, malfunctions or periods of shutdown for required maintenance when one-way traffic control is
 required, the contractor shall provide adequate traffic control, including flaggers, at the contractor ’s
 expense.
 616.8.1.4 All signal timing and programming shall be provided by the contractor and furnished to the
 engineer for approval prior to use. T he contractor shall ensure proper signal timing is provided for the
 duration of the project. T he contractor shall provide the locations of the vehicle detection zones.
 616.8.1.5 T he WZT S and lighting system shall be removed after two-way traffic has resumed or as directed
 by the engineer. All equipment shall remain the property of the contractor.
 616.8.1.6 Measurement of WZT S systems, consisting of lighting and traffic signals at both ends of a onelane, two-way section, will be made per each.
 616.8.2 Te mporary Traffic Signals. Temporary traffic signals and lighting shall be in accordance with Sec
 902.3.
 616.8.3 Portable Traffic Signals. Portable traffic signals shall be in accordance with Sec 1063. T he
 contractor shall place the portable traffic signal (PT S) units a minimum of 6 feet beyond the edge of
 shoulder at the location shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. Each unit shall be level to the
 satisfaction of the engineer. Each PT S shall be delineated with a minimum of five non-metallic drum-like
 channelizers. T he PT S shall not be located in the median.
 616.8.3.1 When not required for a longer than a 24-hour period, the PT S shall be stored in accordance with
 Sec 107.5.
 616.8.3.2 T he contractor shall deploy, operate and maintain the PT S in accordance with the
 manufacturer ’s recommendations. T he contractor shall provide two copies of the operating manual to the
 engineer.
 616.8.3.3 Overhead lighting with an average maintained intensity of 0.6 footcandles shall be provided and
 
 337
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 maintained at each PT S location as authorized by the engineer.
 616.9 Portable Signal Flagging De vice . Portable signal flagging devices (PSFD) shall be installed on
 each side of roadway per direction and in accordance with Sec 1063.9.
 616.10 Radar Spe e d Advisory Syste m.
 616.10.1 T he contractor shall place the changeable message sign Radar Speed Advisory System at the
 location shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 616.10.2 T he contractor shall deploy, operate and maintain the Radar Speed Advisory System as specified
 in the traffic control plan an in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations for the duration of
 the project at the contractor's expense. T he contractor shall program the Radar Speed Advisory System as
 directed by the engineer and shall not include advertising, animation, rapid flashing, dissolving, exploding,
 scrolling, or other dynamic elements as stated in Chapter 2L of the MUT CD.
 616.10.3 When the Radar Speed Advisory System is not in use, it shall be turned away from traffic. When
 not required for longer than a 24-hour period, the Radar Speed Advisory System shall be stored in
 accordance with Sec 107.5.
 616.11 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement for relocation of post-mounted signs will be made to the
 nearest square foot of sign area.
 616.12 Basis of Payme nt. All temporary traffic control devices authorized for installation by the
 engineer will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. No
 direct payment will be made for the following:
 (a) Incidental items necessary to complete the work, unless specifically provided as a pay item in
 the contract.
 (b) Installing, operating, maintaining, cleaning, repairing, removing or replacing traffic control
 devices.
 (c) Covering and uncovering existing signs and other traffic control devices.
 (d) Relocating temporary traffic control devices, including permanent traffic control devices
 temporarily relocated, unless specifically included as a pay item in the contract.
 (e) Worker apparel.
 (f) Flaggers, AFADs, PFDs, pilot vehicles, and appurtenances at flagging stations.
 (g) Furnishing, installing, operating, maintaining and removing construction-related vehicle and
 equipment lighting.
 (h) Construction and removal of temporary equipment crossovers, including restoring pre-existing
 crossovers.
 (i) Provide and maintaining work zone lighting and work area lighting.
 
 338
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 617
 CO NCRETE TRAFFIC BARRIER
 SECTIO N 617.10 PERMANENT CO NCRETE TRAFFIC BARRIER.
 617.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing permanent concrete traffic barrier as shown
 on the plans or as directed by the engineer. For purposes of this specification, permanent concrete traffic
 barrier will be defined as Type A, B, C, D or any modification of these types.
 617.10.2 Mate rial. All reinforcing steel shall be Grade 60 deformed bar, and all reinforcing steel and
 dowels shall be epoxy coated. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section/Specif ication
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete
 1036
 Concrete Curing Material
 1055
 Dowel Bars
 1057
 P reformed Fiber Expansion Joint Material
 1057
 Joint Sealer
 1057
 Joint Filler
 1057
 P restressing Strands
 AASHTO M 203
 
 617.10.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 617.10.3.1 Permanent concrete traffic barrier shall be constructed of Class B or B-1 concrete. Concrete
 shall be air-entrained with 28-day compressive strength of 4,000 psi. Material, proportioning, airentraining, mixing, slump and transporting shall be in accordance with Sec 501. Concrete shall be placed
 and finished in accordance with Sec 703. Permanent concrete traffic barrier shall be cured in accordance
 with Sec 502.
 617.10.3.2 Permanent concrete traffic barrier shall be constructed using an extrusion machine or forms
 specifically designed for constructing cast-in-place reinforced concrete traffic barrier. Precast units will not
 be permitted. Barriers that do not exhibit a consistent surface shall be corrected to the satisfaction of the
 engineer.
 617.10.3.3 When extruded construction is used, station numbers shall be indented into the 10-inch high
 sloped face of the Type A and B barrier and 10 inches above the base of Type C and D barrier in accordance
 with Sec 502. Station numbers will not be required in the pavement when placed on the concrete traffic
 barrier.
 617.10.3.4 For retrofit installation, dowels shall be installed in accordance with Sec 1039.30.
 617.10.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. T he revision or
 correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity. Where required,
 measurement for each type of permanent concrete traffic barrier, including barrier height transitions, will
 be made to the nearest 1/2 linear foot for each continuous length and totaled to the nearest linear foot for
 the sum of the lengths.
 617.10.5 Basis of Payme nt. Accepted permanent concrete traffic barrier will be paid for at the contract
 unit price for each of the types specified in the contract. No direct payment will be made for reinforcing
 steel, dowels, joint filler material, and sawed joints.
 SECTIO N 617.20 TEMPO RARY TRAFFIC BARRIER.
 617.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing, installing, relocating and removing
 temporary traffic barrier as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. For purposes of this
 specification, temporary concrete traffic barrier will be defined as Type F concrete traffic barrier or
 approved alternate barrier system that meets NCHRP 350 criteria and has FHWA acceptance.
 
 339
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 617.20.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000 Materials Details and Sec
 1064.2.2.1.
 617.20.2.1 New temporary traffic barrier will not be required; however, barrier shall be in a serviceable
 condition during installation and relocation as determined by the engineer.
 617.20.2.2 Two-loop or three-loop temporary Type F concrete traffic barrier may be used at the option of
 the contractor.
 617.20.2.2.1 For two-loop style temporary traffic barrier, as well as two-loop and three-loop styles used in
 combination, the bottom washer, retainer bolt and nut will be required. Visual cracks in the loop steel will be
 cause for rejection of the barrier unit by the engineer.
 617.20.2.2.2 Existing two-loop concrete barrier owned by contractors or previously accepted two-loop
 concrete barrier in a manufacturer ’s stockpile (inventory) will be allowed for use on MoDOT projects if:
 (a) T he barrier was fabricated prior to January 1, 2004.
 (b) Either the MoDOT acceptance stamp is legible on the barrier or certification is provided by
 the contractor stating that the barrier was fabricated prior to January 1, 2004, and in accordance
 with MoDOT specifications.
 (c) T he barrier is in acceptable condition.
 617.20.2.3 Other types of temporary traffic barrier will be allowed if the barrier has been approved in
 accordance with Sec 1064 and meets the project specific need as approved by the engineer.
 617.20.3 Ce rtification. T he contractor shall provide to the engineer a barrier manufacturer's certification
 that the barrier furnished is in accordance with the contract documents prior to use.
 617.20.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 617.20.4.1 As directed by the engineer, damaged units shall be immediately replaced and removed from the
 right of way at the contractor's expense.
 617.20.4.2 All barrier sections shall remain the property of the contractor unless specified otherwise in the
 contract.
 617.20.4.3 Equipment or material shall be stored a minimum of 3 feet away from loop system Type F
 temporary concrete traffic barrier. For other temporary barriers approved for use, equipment or material
 shall be stored no closer than the maximum deflection that occurred during NCHRP 350 impact tests or
 specified by the manufacturer.
 617.20.4.4 Temporary concrete traffic barrier shall not be anchored unless shown on plans or approved by
 the engineer. Anchoring of Type F temporary concrete traffic barrier shall be as shown on the plans. Twoloop style Type F temporary concrete traffic barrier shall not be anchored. Other types of temporary
 traffic barrier shall be anchored in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 617.20.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of temporary traffic barrier and relocated temporary
 traffic barrier will be made to the nearest 1/2 linear foot for each continuous length and totaled to the
 nearest linear foot for the sum of the lengths. Measurement of temporary traffic barrier height transitions
 and relocated temporary traffic barrier height transitions will be made per each.
 617.20.6 Basis of Payme nt. Accepted temporary concrete traffic barrier and temporary concrete traffic
 barrier height transitions will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the
 contract. Accepted relocated temporary concrete traffic barrier and relocated temporary concrete traffic
 barrier height transitions will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the
 contract.
 
 340
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 617.30 TRAFFIC BARRIER DELINEATO RS.
 617.30.1 De scription. T his work shall include furnishing, installing and maintaining retroreflectorized
 traffic barrier delineators as shown on the plans or as designated by the engineer.
 617.30.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Delineators 1065
 
 617.30.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 617.30.3.1 Delineators shall be placed on all traffic barrier spaced at 50-foot intervals.
 617.30.3.2 Delineator reflector colors shall correspond with pavement marking. Delineators shall be
 sheeted on one side, facing oncoming traffic, unless otherwise specified. Where permanent concrete traffic
 barrier divides opposing lanes of travel, the delineators shall have retroreflective sheeting on both sides
 corresponding to adjacent pavement marking.
 617.30.3.2.1 Delineators mounted on permanent concrete traffic barrier shall be anchored with galvanized
 mechanical fasteners that prevent movement in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 617.30.3.2.2 Delineators mounted on temporary concrete traffic barriers shall be mounted to the traffic
 barrier in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
 617.30.3.3 Any damaged or missing delineators shall be replaced by the contractor at the contractor's
 expense.
 617.30.4 Basis of Payme nt. No direct payment will be made for traffic barrier delineators provided on
 new permanent concrete traffic barrier or temporary traffic barrier. Delineators specified for installation
 on existing permanent concrete traffic barrier will be measured and paid for per each.
 
 341
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 618
 MO BILIZATIO N
 618.1 De scription. T his item shall consist of the preparatory work and operations, including, but not
 limited to, those necessary for the movement of personnel, equipment, supplies and incidentals to the
 project site, for the establishment of all offices, buildings and other facilities necessary for work on the
 project, except as provided in the contract as separate pay items, payment for the actual cost of the
 contract bond and railroad liability insurance and for all other work and operations that must be performed
 or costs incurred prior to beginning work on the various items on the project site.
 618.2 Basis of Payme nt. Payment for the actual cost of the contract bond and railroad liability insurance
 will be authorized upon presentation of invoices at least four days prior to the estimate date. Receipted
 invoices for payments previously permitted on the estimate shall be submitted to the engineer within 27
 days of the date of the estimate on which payment was made or such payment will be deducted from future
 estimates. T he amount paid, but no more than the contract price for mobilization, will be deducted from
 the contract price for mobilization and the remainder will be used as the basis for partial payments which
 will be allowed on the next estimate under the following schedule. Each partial payment will be the lesser of
 either 25 percent of the remaining contract price for the item of mobilization or 2.5 percent of the
 original contract price. T he term “ original contract price” will be construed as the total dollar value of the
 construction items of the original contract.
 (a) T he first partial payment will be made when five percent of the original contract amount is
 earned.
 (b) T he second partial payment will be made when ten percent of the original contract amount is
 earned.
 (c) T he third partial payment will be made when 25 percent of the original contract amount is
 earned.
 (d) T he fourth partial payment will be made when 50 percent of the original contract amount is
 earned.
 (e) When the engineer has accepted the contract for maintenance in accordance with Sec 105, any
 amount bid for mobilization exceeding ten percent of the original contract price, less the amount
 for the contract bond and Railroad Liability Insurance, will be paid.
 618.2.2 Nothing herein shall be construed to limit or preclude partial payments otherwise provided by the
 contract.
 
 342
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 619
 PAVEMENT EDGE TREATMENT
 619.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of the elimination of pavement edge differential.
 619.2 Mate rial. Wedge slopes shall be constructed of an approved material or an approved preformed
 unit. Acceptance of wedge slope material will be based on visual examination.
 619.3 Construction Re quire me nts. At the contractor's option, elimination of pavement edge
 differential may be accomplished by either conducting operations in such a manner that traffic is exposed
 to no more than a two-inch differential, by constructing a wedge shaped slope adjacent to the pavement
 edge or by furnishing and installing temporary concrete traffic barrier in accordance with Sec 617.
 619.3.1 Wedge slopes shall be constructed as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. Slope
 material, other than preformed units, shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 619.3.2 Wedge slope material shall be removed and the pavement edge returned to a vertical face prior to
 placement of adjacent shoulder or pavement material. Material used to construct wedge slope shall be
 disposed of as approved by the engineer.
 619.3.3 Temporary concrete traffic barrier shall be installed as shown on the plans or as directed by the
 engineer.
 619.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction or when appreciable errors are found in the contract quantities. Where required,
 measurement will be made to the nearest linear foot along each edge of pavement for all locations actually
 treated. No location will be measured more than once, regardless of the number of applications. T he
 revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 619.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of pavement edge treatment will be paid for at the
 contract unit price for the units constructed. Payment will be considered full compensation for all labor,
 equipment and material to construct, maintain, replace, remove and dispose of pavement edge treatment.
 No direct payment will be made for more than one application at any location.
 
 343
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 620
 PAVEMENT MARKING
 620.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing, installing, maintaining and removing temporary
 and permanent pavement marking as shown on the plans, as specified herein or as directed by the engineer.
 620.2 Ge ne ral.
 620.2.1 All roadways open to traffic shall have either temporary or permanent pavement markings.
 Temporary pavement marking may be used in lieu of permanent marking for no more than 14 days after
 completion of final paving operations or, in the case of pavement markings placed in rumble strips, for no
 more than 14 days after completion of rumble strips, except as otherwise allowed in Sec 620.10.2.3.1.
 620.2.2 All pavement marking shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the MUT CD and the FHWA
 Standard Highway Signs at the time of the bid opening.
 620.2.3 All pavement marking shall be uniform in appearance with crisp, well-defined edges and shall be
 uniform in width and thickness. Surface distribution of the beads shall be uniform.
 620.2.4 Longitudinal pavement marking shall not be placed on longitudinal joints.
 620.2.5 T he contractor will be responsible for the protection of all liquid pavement marking until the
 pavement marking has reached a no-track state as determined by the engineer.
 620.2.6 Damage to pavement marking as a result of the contractor ’s operations, including resurfacing of
 shoulders, shall be repaired or replaced at the contractor ’s expense.
 620.2.7 All pavement marking shall be installed in accordance with this specification and all
 manufacturer ’s recommendations. Manufacturer ’s written application or installation instructions shall be
 provided by the contractor to the engineer.
 620.2.8 When surface preparation is required, the area prepared shall be 1 inch wider than the final
 pavement marking and shall meet the requirements of Sec 620.20.1.4. T he method of surface preparation
 shall not cause structural damage to the pavement and shall meet the approval of the engineer.
 SECTIO N 620.10 TEMPO RARY PAVEMENT MARKING.
 620.10.1 Ge ne ral.
 620.10.1.1 Q uality Control and Q uality Assurance . Quality Control and Quality Assurance shall be in
 accordance with Sec 620.40.
 620.10.1.2 Te mporary Pave me nt Marking following O blite ration of Existing Markings. When the
 contractor obliterates existing pavement markings by cold milling, grinding, resurfacing or for any other
 operation, the contractor shall, at the contractor ’s expense, provide and maintain temporary pavement
 marking in accordance with the plans and as specified in Sec. 1048.10 until permanent pavement markings
 are in place. T he contractor shall place temporary or permanent pavement markings on all open lanes of
 traffic at the completion of each daily operation prior to leaving the work zone unattended. At no time
 shall more than one mile of roadway be unmarked. Pavement marking shall be replaced in the same
 configuration as the previously existing pavement marking unless otherwise shown on the plans or directed
 by the engineer.
 620.10.1.3 Two-lane, two-way roadways shall be marked as shown on the plans. When T RPMs or tape is
 used to mark the centerline of two-lane, two-way roadways, no-passing zone signs shall be posted as shown
 on the plans in lieu of marking the no-passing zones. When paint is used for temporary markings the nopassing zone signs are not required, however the temporary paint shall be applied according to Sec
 620.10.2.3.6 No-Passing Zones.
 620.10.1.4 On resurfacing projects, when the adjacent layer of resurfacing has not been placed and the
 
 344
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 existing centerline or lane line marking has been obliterated, the temporary marking shall be placed on the
 higher layer at the centerline of the roadway or lane. Any temporary pavement marking damaged,
 displaced or missing before the final pavement marking is installed shall be replaced at the contractor's
 expense within two hours upon notification from the engineer.
 620.10.1.5 If temporary pavement marking is to be in place for more than the time limit specified in Sec
 620.2.1, the engineer may require that temporary paint be placed and maintained at the contractor ’s
 expense. See Sec 620.10.2 for paint specifications.
 620.10.1.6 For temporary marking durations of less than two weeks and when removal of the temporary
 marking is not required, temporary non-removable pavement marking tape may be used as specified in Sec
 620.10.4.
 620.10.1.7 Te mporary Pave me nt Marking for Traffic Patte rn Change s.. T he contractor shall place
 temporary pavement markings for bypasses, lane shifts, narrow lanes and other traffic pattern changes as
 shown on the plans. Temporary paint shall not be used in lieu of tape without approval from the engineer.
 T he contractor shall install and maintain temporary pavement marking until the permanent marking
 material has been placed as specified in the contract.
 620.10.1.8 For temporary pavement marking of traffic pattern changes on the final driving surface that
 will require subsequent removal of the temporary markings, temporary removable pavement marking tape
 shall be used as specified in Sec 620.10.3, unless otherwise shown on the plans or approved by the engineer.
 620.10.2 Te mporary Pave me nt Marking Paint.
 620.10.2.1 De scription.. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing temporary pavement marking
 paint at locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. T he type of paint used for temporary
 pavement marking shall be standard waterborne, except that high build waterborne may be used in lieu of
 standard waterborne at no additional cost to the Commission. T he weather limitations for standard and
 high build waterborne shall be as specified in Sec 620.20.2.4. When ambient air and surface temperatures
 are below 60° F, cold weather paint may be used in accordance with Sec 620.10.6 at no additional cost to
 the Commission.
 620.10.2.2 Mate rial.. Temporary pavement marking material paint and glass beads shall be in accordance
 with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Standard Acrylic Waterborne P avement Marking P aint 1048.20.1.1
 Type P Drop-On Glass Beads
 1048.30
 
 620.10.2.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 620.10.2.3.1 Temporary paint may be used as temporary pavement markings for the duration of the
 project. Retrorefletivity shall be maintained as specified in Sec 620.40.2.2.4, at the contractor ’s expense,
 for as long as the temporary pavement marking paint is in place.
 620.10.2.3.2 T he minimum thickness of the painted markings shall be no less than 15 mils. Lane lines,
 edge lines and no-passing lines shall be 4 inches in width. Type P beads shall be applied at a minimum rate
 of 15 lbs./100 sq.ft. of the painted surface area.
 620.10.2.3.3 It is allowable to place a temporary paint line prior to cutting the rumble strip along that line.
 After cutting the rumble, the remaining portion of the temporary paint line is considered sufficient
 temporary pavement marking until the permanent line can be placed.
 620.10.2.3.4 When temporary pavement marking paint is used on the final driving surface, and durable
 pavement marking is to be used for the permanent marking, all temporary paint shall be removed prior to
 applying the durable pavement marking. Removal will be at the contractor ’s expense unless otherwise
 specified in the contract. Removal shall be in accordance with Sec 620.20.1.4.
 
 345
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 620.10.2.3.5 When temporary pavement marking paint is used on the final driving surface and paint is to
 be used for the permanent marking, all temporary paint shall be installed in the same location and in the
 same sequence as the final pavement marking such that no temporary pavement marking will be visible
 after the final pavement marking is installed. Any temporary pavement marking that remains visible after
 final pavement marking shall be removed at the contractor ’s expense.
 620.10.2.3.6 No-Passing Zone s. When paint is used for temporary marking on two-lane, two-way
 roadways, all no passing zone lines shall be marked prior to leaving the work zone unattended.
 620.10.2.4 Equipme nt. All equipment for application of pavement marking paint shall be as specified
 in Sec 620.20.2.3.
 620.10.3 Te mporary Re movable Pave me nt Marking Tape .
 620.10.3.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing, placing and maintaining temporary
 removable pavement marking tape at locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 620.10.3.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Temporary Removable P avement Marking Tape 1048.10.2
 
 620.10.3.3 Construction Re quire me nts. All temporary removable pavement marking tape within the
 project limits shall be maintained by the contractor at the contractor ’s expense in a manner approved by
 the engineer. All temporary removable marking tape shall be installed according to the manufacturer's
 recommendations.
 620.10.4 Te mporary Non-Re movable Pave me nt Marking Tape .
 620.10.4.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing, placing and maintaining temporary nonremovable pavement marking tape at locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 620.10.4.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Temporary Non-Removable P avement Marking Tape 1048.10.3
 
 620.10.4.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Temporary non-removable pavement marking tape shall be
 installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
 620.10.5 Te mporary Raise d Pave me nt Marke rs.
 620.10.5.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of providing, installing, maintaining and removing
 retroreflective temporary raised pavement markers (T RPMs) on roadway lane lines, centerlines or edge
 lines as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 620.10.5.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Temporary Raised P avement Markers 1048.10.4
 
 620.10.5.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 620.10.5.3.1 T RPMs shall be of the colors shown on the plans unless otherwise directed by the engineer.
 Reflective faces shall be oriented to face traffic. T RPMs shall be installed according to the manufacturer's
 recommendations and placed as shown in the Missouri Standard Plans for Highway Construction
 
 346
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 620.10.5.3.2 T RPMs, with covers, shall be used for Seal Coat as defined in Sec 409 and for surface
 treatment projects as defined in Sec 413 with the exception of Sec 413.30 and Sec 413.31.
 620.10.5.3.3 On resurfacing projects, T RPMs shall be removed prior to placement of the next lift of
 asphalt. T RPMs placed on final wearing surfaces shall be removed in their entirety after permanent striping
 is placed. No T RPMs, shall be left on Commission Right of Way.
 620.10.6 Cold We athe r Pave me nt Markings.
 620.10.6.1 De scription. Cold weather pavement marking paint is described as cold weather waterborne
 paint or cold weather acrylic copolymer fast drying paint that is manufactured for use within the weather
 limitations specified herein.
 620.10.6.2 Applications. Cold weather pavement marking paint may only be used for temporary
 pavement marking or as a substitute for standard waterborne paint when approved by the engineer, at no
 additional cost to the Commission. Cold weather pavement marking paint shall not be used as a permanent
 pavement marking in lieu of high build waterborne paint or any durable pavement marking.
 620.10.6.3 We athe r Limitations. Cold weather paint shall not be used except when the ambient air
 temperature and pavement surface temperature is greater than 35° F but less than 60° F. T he pavement
 surface temperature and ambient air temperature shall be ascending from 35° F before striping operations
 begin. Cold weather pavement marking shall not be applied if the weather forecast for the eight hour period
 immediately following final application includes precipitation or temperatures below 35° F.
 620.10.6.4 Mate rial. Cold weather pavement marking paint and glass beads shall be in accordance with
 Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Type P Drop-On Glass Beads
 1048.30.2
 Acrylic Copolymer Fast Dry P avement Marking P aint 1048.10.1.1.1
 Cold Weather Waterborne P avement Marking P aint
 1048.10.1.1.2
 
 620.10.6.5 Construction Re quire me nts. Cold weather pavement marking paint shall be applied to a wet
 thickness of no less than 15 mils. T he mil thickness shall be increased as needed to account for the
 porosity of the pavement to achieve a target bead embedment of 60%. T he wet film thickness of the
 applied paint may be tested with a paint thickness gauge as directed by the engineer. Type P beads shall be
 applied at a minimum rate of 15 lbs./100 sq.ft. of the painted surface area.
 620.10.6.5.1 Paint may be heated before application to a maximum temperature of 120° F for waterborne
 paint and 125° F for acrylic copolymer paint.
 620.10.7 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of temporary pavement marking paint,
 temporary removable tape, temporary non-removable tape and temporary raised pavement markers will
 not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the
 contract quantity. No measurement will be made for any temporary pavement markings, regardless of type,
 when used as temporary pavement marking due to obliteration of existing markings as defined in Sec
 620.10.1.2.
 620.10.7.1 Measurement of temporary pavement marking paint, temporary removable marking tape and
 temporary non-removable marking tape, when required, will be measured per linear foot.
 620.10.7.2 Measurement of Temporary Raised Pavement Markers (T RPMs), when required, will be
 measured per each.
 620.10.8 Basis of Payme nt.
 620.10.8.1. T he accepted quantity of temporary pavement marking paint, temporary removable tape,
 temporary non-removable tape and temporary raised pavement markers will be paid for at the contract
 
 347
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. Payment will be made for initial installation
 only and not for repair or replacement.
 620.10.8.2 No payment will be made for any temporary pavement markings, regardless of type, when used
 as temporary pavement marking due to obliteration of existing markings as defined in Sec 620.10.1.2.
 SECTIO N 620.20 PERMANENT PAVEMENT MARKING.
 620.20.1 Ge ne ral.
 620.20.1.1 Q uality Control and Q uality Assurance . Quality Control and Quality Assurance shall be in
 accordance with Sec 620.40.
 620.20.1.2 When installing permanent pavement marking, the contractor shall match the pavement
 marking sequence on the roadway just in advance of the project limits in order to provide a seamless and
 continuous marking from old to new pavement for future striping operations.
 620.20.1.3 If the permanent pavement marking cannot be placed according to these specifications and the
 road is to be opened to traffic with no permanent pavement marking in place, the contractor shall, at the
 direction of the engineer, place and maintain temporary pavement marking at the contractor ’s expense.
 T he contractor shall remove, collect and properly dispose of all temporary pavement marking and place
 the permanent pavement marking according to these specifications and as directed by the engineer.
 620.20.1.4 Surface Pre paration. T he surface on which permanent pavement marking is to be placed
 shall be clean, dry and free of all debris, laitance, curing compound and any other contaminants that may
 hinder the adhesion of the system to the surface. Permanent pavement marking shall not be applied in
 damp conditions or if there is any evidence of surface moisture on the pavement.
 620.20.1.4.1 Prior to the installation of durable pavement markings, any pre-existing pavement markings
 shall be removed to prepare the surface for the new application.
 620.20.1.5 Tole rance for Pave me nt Marking Line s.
 (a) Lateral deviation from the planned alignment shall not exceed one inch in 100 feet.
 (b) Width tolerance shall be as follows:
 Pavement Marking Line Width Tolerance
 4-inch
 + 1/4 inch
 6-inch and 8-inch
 1/4 inch
 10-inch or greater
 1/2 inch
 
 (c) Length of intermittent lines shall be ±3 inches of the planned length.
 620.20.2 Pave me nt Marking Paint.
 620.20.2.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing waterborne pavement marking
 paint and drop-on glass beads in accordance with these specifications at locations shown on the plans or as
 directed by the engineer.
 620.20.2.2 Mate rial. Material for application of pavement marking paint shall be in accordance with
 Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Drop-On Glass Beads
 1048.30
 Standard Acrylic Waterborne P avement Marking P aint
 1048.20.1.1
 High Build Acrylic Waterborne P avement Marking P aint 1048.20.1.2
 
 620.20.2.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 
 348
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 620.20.2.3.1 All equipment shall be designed for pavement marking and shall be maintained in such a
 condition to properly and evenly apply marking paint and drop-on glass beads per these specifications.
 620.20.2.3.2 Paint shall be applied with self-propelled equipment using spray guns designed and adjusted to
 apply paint at the required thickness and width. Finished markings shall have well-defined edges, uniform
 cross section thickness and uniform bead distribution across the surface of the line. If there is any evidence
 of gun clogging, splattering or uneven paint distribution, painting operations shall cease until equipment is
 restored to proper operation.
 620.20.2.3.3 Waterborne paint shall not be heated above 120° F before application.
 620.20.2.3.4 Waterborne paint shall only be used as specified in the contract and plans. Waterborne paint
 shall not be used for stop lines, arrows, words and symbols.
 620.20.2.4 We athe r Limitations.
 620.20.2.4.1 T he pavement surface temperature and air temperature shall be determined by the contractor
 each day prior to the pavement marking operation and at any other time deemed necessary by the
 engineer. Temperatures shall be obtained in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M20.
 620.20.2.4.2 For waterborne paint applications, the pavement surface temperature and ambient air
 temperatures shall be above 50° F and rising before marking operations may begin. Waterborne paint shall
 not be applied if the forecast conditions for the eight hours immediately following final application include
 precipitation or temperatures below 50° F.
 620.20.2.5 Standard Wate rborne Paint. Standard waterborne paint shall be applied to a wet thickness of
 no less than 15 mils. T he mil thickness shall be increased as needed to account for the porosity of the
 pavement and to achieve a target bead embedment of 60%. T he wet film thickness of the applied paint
 shall be tested by the contractor with a paint thickness gauge or by other methods approved by the
 engineer.
 620.20.2.5.1 Type P drop-on glass beads, in accordance with Sec 620.30, shall be used for standard
 waterborne build paint applications.
 620.20.2.6 High Build Wate rborne Paint. High build waterborne paint shall be applied to a wet
 thickness of no less than 25 mils. T he mil thickness shall be increased as needed to account for the
 porosity of the pavement and to achieve a target bead embedment of 60%. T he wet film thickness of the
 applied paint shall be tested by the contractor with a paint thickness gauge or by other methods approved
 by the engineer.
 620.20.2.6.1 Type L drop-on glass beads, in accordance with Sec 620.30.3, shall be used for high build
 waterborne paint applications.
 620.20.3 Durable Pave me nt Markings
 620.20.3.1 Durable Pave me nt Marking Line s.
 620.20.3.1.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing durable pavement marking
 lines in accordance with manufacturer ’s recommendations at locations shown on the plans or as directed by
 the engineer. Glass beads, when required, shall be in accordance with Sec 620.30.
 620.20.3.1.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Durable P avement Marking Materials 1048.20.2
 Drop-On Glass Beads
 1048.30
 
 349
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 620.20.3.1.3 Equipme nt. T he application equipment shall have a system capable of applying the material
 per manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 620.20.3.1.4 We athe r Limitations. T he pavement marking shall only be applied during dry weather and
 on dry pavement surfaces. T he pavement surface temperature and ambient air temperature shall be in
 accordance with the material manufacturer ’s recommendations throughout the application and during the
 specified time for curing of the material.
 620.20.3.2 Durable Inte rse ction Pave me nt Markings.
 620.20.3.2.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing white stop lines, arrows, words
 and symbols in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations at locations shown on the plans or as
 directed by the engineer. Glass beads, when required, shall be in accordance with Sec 620.30.
 620.20.3.2.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and as
 specified in Sec 1048.20.2.3.
 620.20.3.2.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 620.20.3.2.3.1 Durable Intersection Pavement Markings shall be installed according to the manufacturer's
 recommendations. Material used shall be from the MoDOT Qualified Products list available at MoDOT.org.
 A copy of the manufacturer ’s installation instructions shall be provided to the engineer prior to the
 intersection pavement marking pre-activity meeting.
 620.20.3.2.3.2 Intersection markings shall be installed in a groove when recommended by the material
 manufacturer and at no additional cost to the Commission. Surface mounting is allowable when that option
 is listed in the manufacturer ’s recommendations and the product is approved for surface mounting on
 MoDOT ’s Qualified Products list.
 620.20.3.2.3.3 Arrows, words and symbols shall be white and may be formed from one piece or multiple
 pieces of preformed pavement marking material or a durable liquid marking method specifically designed
 for intersection marking.
 620.20.3.2.4 Acce ptance . Acceptance for durable intersection pavement markings shall be in accordance
 with Sec 620.40.2.2.1, except that a night time visual inspection will be made in lieu of measurement of
 retroreflectivity. If, in the opinion of the engineer, the retroreflectivity appears to be unacceptable,
 measurement of retroreflectivity will be made per MoDOT Test Method T M 80 for each intersection
 marking.
 620.20.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 620.20.4.1 Final measurement of permanent pavement marking will not be made except for authorized
 changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. T he revision or
 correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 620.20.4.2 Where required, measurement of 4-inch, 6-inch, 8-inch, 12 inch and 24-inch pavement
 marking will be made to the nearest linear foot. Where intermittent lines are specified, deductions will be
 made for the gaps in pavement marking.
 620.20.4.3 Where required, measurement of durable intersection markings will be made per each.
 620.20.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 620.20.5.1 T he accepted quantity of permanent pavement marking lines and intersection markings will be
 paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract, except as specified
 in Sec 620.20.5.2.
 620.20.5.2 Payment for permanent pavement marking lines shall be adjusted based on retroreflectivity
 measurements per Sec 620.40.2.2.4.
 
 350
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 620.30 DRO P-0N GLASS BEADS
 620.30.1 Drop-O n Glass Be ad Application. Drop-on glass beads shall be mechanically applied to the
 pavement marking directly behind the material application guns. T he glass beads shall be applied in a
 manner that prevents the glass bead from rolling and covering the surface of the glass bead with pavement
 marking material. T he application shall result in approximately 60% embedment of the glass beads into the
 pavement marking. Glass beads shall be applied evenly and shall completely cover the painted area. If beads
 are not embedding properly all operations shall cease until corrective actions are made.
 620.30.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and as
 specified in Sec 1048.30.
 620.30.3 Type P Glass Be ads. Type P glass beads shall be applied at a minimum application rate of 10 lbs.
 per 100 sq.ft. of surface area of pavement marking material.
 620.30.4 Type L Glass Be ads. Type L glass beads shall be applied at a minimum application rate of 15 lbs.
 per 100 sq.ft. of surface area of pavement marking material in order to achieve desired wet reflectivity
 characteristics.
 620.30.5 Basis of Payme nt. No payment will be made for drop-on glass beads. T he cost of providing and
 placing glass beads is included in the cost of pavement marking paint and durable pavement marking.
 620.40 Q uality Control and Q uality Assurance .
 620.40.1 Q uality Control. T he contractor shall control and monitor the quality of the work for all
 temporary and permanent pavement markings and removal.
 620.40.1.1 Q C for Te mporary and Pe rmane nt Pave me nt Marking Paint. T he contractor shall
 ensure paint and bead applications meet all contract requirements by conducting quality control (QC)
 evaluations including, but not limited to, calibration of the paint and bead application guns for the
 predetermined striping speed before beginning pavement marking operations, periodic verification of wet
 mil thickness, periodic measurement of line width, monitoring of the bead application rate and visual
 inspections of the bead embedment, distribution and retention.
 620.40.1.1.1 Initial QC evaluations shall be conducted at the start of each pavement marking operation
 each day as well as at the start of marking on each type of pavement surface. T hereafter, periodic checks
 shall be conducted as needed to ensure quality work is maintained throughout the marking operation.
 620.40.1.1.2 Air and surface temperatures shall be checked in accordance with Sec 620.20.2.4.1 at the start
 of each day prior to beginning pavement marking operations.
 620.40.1.2 Q C for Durable Pave me nt Marking. All applicable QC measures in Sec 620.40.1.1 shall
 also apply to durable pavement markings, as well as any additional QC measures included in the
 manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 620.40.1.3 Q C for Te mporary Raise d Pave me nt Marke rs. Temporary raised pavement markers shall
 be monitored and maintained in place as specified in the Missouri Standard Plans for Highway Construction.
 620.40.2 Q uality Assurance . T he engineer or designated representative will be responsible for
 monitoring the work and quality control efforts of the contractor. Measurement of retroreflectivity of the
 pavement markings shall be done by the engineer.
 620.40.2.1 Re trore fle ctivity. T he engineer will measure the average retroreflectivity of pavement
 markings with a 30-meter geometry mobile retroreflectometer for each 0.1 mile segment per line. At the
 engineer ’s discretion, such as for small quantities of permanent pavement markings or for any quantity of
 temporary pavement marking, the engineer may use a hand held retroreflectometer in accordance with
 MoDOT Test Method T M 80 to measure retroreflectivity.
 
 351
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 620.40.2.1.1 Measurement of retroreflectivity will not be done within the first fourteen (14) days
 following completion of all pavement marking. T he contractor is responsible for ensuring the pavement
 markings are clean and protected from damage prior to measurements being taken. Any failed
 retroreflectivity readings due to unclean pavement markings or for other surface damage shall not be
 grounds for dispute of the readings.
 620.40.2.2 Acce ptance .
 620.40.2.2.1 Pavement marking will be evaluated by the engineer for acceptance following installation.
 T he engineer will notify the contractor of any pavement markings that fail to meet acceptance. Reasons
 for failure could include, but are not limited to, failed retroreflectivity readings, incorrect color, incorrect
 location, poor alignment, poor adherence to the pavement surface, insufficient thickness, width or length
 and insufficient bead embedment.
 620.40.2.2.2. Once notified by the engineer of any failed permanent pavement markings, the contractor
 shall repair or replace the failed areas within 30 days at no cost to the commission.
 620.40.2.2.3 After acceptance of the permanent pavement markings by the engineer the contractor shall
 be released from further performance responsibility except for latent defects.
 620.40.2.2.4 Retroreflectivity (millicandelas/m2/lux) acceptance requirements and payment adjustments
 for painted and durable lines shall be as follows and as defined herein:
 Standard Waterborne Paint (Type P B eads)
 White
 Yellow
 % Payment
 ≥350
 ≥275
 105%
 300-349
 225-274
 100%
 80%a
 High B uild Waterborne Paint (Type L B eads)
 White
 Yellow
 % Payment
 ≥450
 ≥350
 105%
 400-449
 300-349
 100%
 270-299
 
 196-224
 
 300-399
 225-299
 80%a
 Durable Pavement Marking Lines (Type L B eads)
 White
 Yellow
 % Payment
 ≥450
 ≥350
 105%
 400-449
 300-349
 100%
 225-299
 80%a
 Waterborne Paint on Seal Coat Surf aces
 White
 Yellow
 % Payment
 ≥150
 ≥150
 100%
 Temporary Pavement Marking Paint
 White
 Yellow
 % Payment
 
 300-399
 
 275 b
 
 200 b
 
 100%
 
 ≥200 c
 
 ≥175 c
 
 Maintain
 
 a Contractor
 
 has the option to accept this deduction or to correct and improve payment.
 requirement for initial application of temporary paint.
 c Temporary paint shall be maintained to this level at the contractor ’s expense until permanent marking is
 installed.
 bMinimum
 
 620.40.2.2.4.1 Paint markings that fail to meet acceptance requirements, including retroreflectivity
 readings, shall be reapplied at the contractor ’s expense. Durable markings that fail to meet acceptance
 requirements, including retroreflectivity readings, shall be removed and replaced at the contractor ’s
 expense.
 620.40.2.2.4.2 Payme nt Adjustme nt. After all 0.1 mile segment of permanent painted and durable
 pavement marking lines have been completed, and corrected when necessary, to a level that meets or
 
 352
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 exceeds all acceptance criteria, payment adjustments will be applied to each 0.1 mile segment for final
 retroreflectivity readings in accordance with Sec 620.40.2.2.4.
 620.40.2.2.4.2.1 When a subsequent measurement of retroreflectivity is necessary due to corrective work,
 and the 30-meter geometry mobile retroreflectometer is needed to perform the subsequent measurement,
 the actual cost to the Commission to perform the subsequent measurement will be deducted from the
 payment made to the contractor for pavement marking.
 SECTIO N 620.50 PAVEMENT MARKING REMO VAL
 620.50.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of all necessary operations for removal of existing
 pavement marking lines and intersection markings as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer.
 620.50.2 Construction Re quire me nts. All pavement marking designated for removal, regardless of the
 type of existing marking, shall be completely removed to the satisfaction of the engineer with minimal
 damage to the pavement. No more than five percent of the existing marking shall remain upon completion
 of the work. T he pavement surface shall not be left scarred to such an extent that, in the opinion of the
 engineer, the obliterated area is misleading to motorists. Any excess damage or scarring of the pavement
 shall be repaired at the contractor's expense.
 620.50.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 620.50.3.1 Final measurement will not be made, except for authorized changes, during construction or
 where significant errors are found in the contract quantity. T he revision or correction will be computed and
 added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 620.50.3.2 Where required, measurement for the removal of pavement markings will be made to the
 nearest linear foot per 4-inches of width. For intermittent lines, deductions will be made for gaps in the
 removal. Measurement will not be made for removal of pavement marking within the limits of a bypass
 roadway or other roadway to be obliterated at the completion of the project. Measurement of symbols will
 be made per each.
 620.50.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of pavement marking removal will be paid for at the
 contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 
 353
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 621
 FLO WABLE BACKFILL
 621.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing flowable backfill as specified on the plans or
 otherwise permitted for compacted backfill and other cavity filling uses.
 621.2 Mate rial.
 621.2.1 All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as
 follows:
 Item
 Fly Ash
 Cement
 Admixtures
 Water
 
 Section
 1018
 1019
 1054
 1070
 
 621.2.2 Fine aggregate shall be in accordance with Sec 1005.3, except for the percent passing the No. 200
 sieve. Aggregate shall be fine enough to stay in suspension in the mortar to the extent required for proper
 flow, and shall be in accordance with the following gradation:
 Sieve Size Percent Passing
 3/4 inch 100
 No. 200 0-10
 
 621.3 Composition of Mixture . T he contractor shall submit to the engineer a mix design with the
 proportions and source of material, admixtures, dry cubic yard batch weights and actual 28-day compressive
 test results. T he 28-day compressive strength of the mixture shall exceed 50 psi.
 621.3.1 Consiste ncy. Flowable backfill will be tested by filling an open-ended 3-inch diameter, 6-inch high
 cylinder to the top with the mixture and immediately pulling the cylinder straight up. T he correct
 consistency of the mixture shall produce an approximate
 8-inch diameter circular-type spread with no segregation. Adjustments to the proportions of fine aggregate
 or water may be made to achieve proper solid suspension and optimum flowability with approval from the
 engineer, except the theoretical yield shall be maintained at one cubic yard for the given batch weights.
 621.3.2 Comme rcial Mixture s. Approved commercial brand mixtures intended specifically for use as
 flowable backfill may be used, provided the specified strengths are obtained.
 621.3.2.1 If approved for use, the material shall be placed in accordance with the manufacturer's
 recommendations, and a copy of the manufacturer ’s recommendations shall be furnished to the engineer.
 621.3.2.2 T he manufacturer shall submit a request for approval along with appropriate documents to
 Construction and Materials for testing and evaluation. Upon approval of the material, the brand name will
 be placed on a list of qualified commercial brand flowable backfill material.
 621.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 621.4.1 T he open ends of the area to be backfilled shall be plugged, and the void area filled without the use
 of a vibrator.
 621.4.2 Care shall be taken to prevent the movement of any structure from the designated location or
 intrusion of flowable backfill into undesirable locations. If such movement or intrusion occurs, the engineer
 may require the affected structure to be excavated and replaced to the proper grade at the contractor's
 expense.
 621.4.3 If flowable backfill is placed in more than one layer, the base layer shall be thoroughly roughened
 and all loose and foreign material removed before placing the next layer.
 
 354
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 621.4.4 No flowable backfill shall be covered or accepted until a minimum compressive strength of 30 psi
 has been attained, as demonstrated by failure to deform or crush underfoot when a pressure of
 approximately 30 psi is applied. If the backfill does not harden to support the required load, the backfill
 shall be removed and replaced with an acceptable material at the contractor ’s expense.
 621.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. T he revision or
 correction will be computed and added or deducted from the contract quantity. If flowable backfill is
 specified, where required, measurement will be made by the computed volume to the nearest 1/10 cubic yard
 of the voids to be filled, as determined from the dimensional area of the open area and totaled to the
 nearest cubic yard. If flowable backfill is used as an alternate to compacted backfill specified in the contract
 or as shown on the plans, measurement will be made as required for the item specified.
 621.6 Basis of Payme nt. If flowable backfill is specified, the accepted quantity will be paid for at the
 contract unit price. No additional payment will be made if flowable backfill is used as an alternate to
 compacted backfill.
 
 355
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 622
 PAVEMENT AND BRIDGE SURFACE REMO VAL AND TEXTURING
 622.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of removing or texturing the surface of existing pavement and
 bridge decks as shown on the plans. T he term “ pavement” as used in Sec 622 will be considered reference to
 the paved portion of the highway within the limits of construction, including bridge decks.
 622.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 622.2.1 T he pavement surface shall be removed or textured to the depth, width, grade and cross slope
 shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 622.2.2 Unless specified otherwise in the contract, the contractor shall accept full ownership of all
 material generated by removal or texturing operations and shall indemnify the Commission of
 responsibility for and pay all costs relating to generation, handling, storage, treatment, transportation,
 disposal, or any future use of the material.
 622.2.3 Depth transitions at the beginning and end of a project, side roads, bridge ends or other locations
 shown on the plans shall be milled by using equipment and a process approved by the engineer. T he
 equipment will not be required to have an automatic grade leveling and slope control device or a means of
 removing and discharging millings from the pavement, unless specified otherwise. Any necessary pavement
 marking in the transition areas shall be as directed by the engineer and at the contractor ’s expense.
 622.2.3.1 A temporary asphalt wedge transition shall be installed, maintained, and removed at the
 contractor's expense for each vertical lip created from a cold milled depth transition when the contractor
 opens the cold milled depth transition to traffic prior to resurfacing. T he temporary asphalt wedge shall be,
 in the opinion of the engineer, of sufficient length and texture to provide a smooth transition from the
 existing pavement or bridge surface to the cold milled surface. Temporary asphalt wedges shall be removed
 prior to the resurfacing.
 622.2.4 T he contractor shall provide signing informing motorists of coldmilled areas open to traffic, at the
 contractors expense. T he contractor may use static signs, changeable message signs, or a combination
 thereof to provide this warning. Signing shall be deployed in advance of an exit from the mainline prior to
 the milled area to allow motorists an opportunity to take an alternate route. Signing shall also be placed on
 any ramps leading into the milled area. If an alternate route cannot be provided, deployment of the signs
 shall be located in advance of the milled area to allow motorists to safely negotiate the section of milled
 pavement. Sign locations shall be approved by the engineer prior to installation. Signing shall be in
 accordance with Sec 616. Sign layout for static signs shall be as shown in the standard plans. Changeable
 message signs shall be programmed as directed by the engineer.
 SECTIO N 622.10 CO LD MILLING EXISTING PAVEMENT FO R REMO VAL O F SURFACE
 622.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of coldmilling the existing pavement surface to the depth,
 profile and cross slope shown on the plans and removing and disposing of the milled material.
 622.10.2 Equipme nt.
 622.10.2.1 T he equipment for milling and removing the pavement surface shall be capable of removing a
 thickness of bituminous or concrete material to the specified depth and providing a uniform profile and
 cross slope.
 622.10.2.2 T he equipment shall be capable of accurately and automatically establishing profile grades
 within 1/8 inch of each edge of the machine. T he milling equipment shall be regulated by an automatically
 controlled grade leveling and slope control device. T he device shall provide control for producing a
 uniform surface to the established grade and a cross slope in accordance with the typical section. T he
 device shall also be equipped with the necessary controls to permit the operator to adjust or vary the slope
 as directed by the engineer.
 622.10.2.3 T he equipment shall have provisions for controlling dust and other particulate matter created
 
 356
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 by the cutting action. T he equipment shall also have an effective means of removing cuttings from the
 pavement and discharging them into a hauling unit, all in one operation, as the pavement is milled.
 622.10.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 622.10.3.1 Except for cold milling of depth transitions sections and butt joints, all pavement that is cold
 milled for the purpose of resurfacing shall receive the first lift of resurfacing during the same day or night
 work shift as the cold milling operation.
 622.10.3.2 T he milling operations, except in depth transition areas, shall be regulated by an automatically
 controlled grade leveling and slope control device.
 622.10.3.3 T he roadway pavement surface shall be removed and planed around and over manholes, utility
 valves and drainage appurtenances within the limits of the work as directed by the engineer. Any damage to
 manholes, utility valves or drainage appurtenances by the removal and planning operation shall be repaired
 by the contractor at the contractor ’s expense. After removal of existing material around manholes, utility
 valves and other appurtenances, the contractor shall place a temporary wedge around the appurtenance.
 T he temporary wedge shall consist of bituminous or another approved material at a slope that will allow
 safe transition over the appurtenance by through traffic and of a thickness and design that the material
 remains intact while under traffic. Bituminous wedges shall be removed prior to resurfacing.
 622.10.3.4 T he milled surface of each layer shall be substantially free from waves or irregularities. T he
 final milled surface shall not vary from a 10-foot straightedge, applied parallel to the centerline, by more
 than 1/4 inch. Spalled areas presenting a hazard shall be repaired using an approved bituminous pavement.
 T he texture of the final milled surface shall be a grid surface with discontinuous longitudinal striations.
 622.10.3.5 Existing shoulder material shall be removed as necessary to ensure no ponding of water on the
 driving surface occurs after the milling operation.
 622.10.3.6 Care shall be exercised not to damage existing concrete pavement. T he concrete pavement
 surface may be scarified as shown on the plans or approved by the engineer.
 622.10.3.7 Loose material not picked up by the milling machine shall be removed from the roadway or
 bridge deck surface immediately behind the milling operation, except in areas with earth or stabilized
 aggregate shoulders. Loose material may be swept to the shoulders as approved by the engineer.
 622.10.3.8 T he contractor shall provide pavement marking as shown on the plans through the limits of
 the milled surfaces in accordance with Sec 620.
 622.10.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required,
 measurement for removal of the existing pavement surface will be computed to the nearest square yard.
 T he correction will be added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 622.10.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of removal of existing surface will be paid for at the
 contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. No direct payment will be made for
 removal of shoulder material by milling or other methods as required to provide drainage in accordance
 with Sec 622.10.3.5, unless shoulders are to be removed as part of the contract. No direct payment will be
 made for loading, hauling, stockpiling or disposing of milled material, repairing spalled areas, placing and
 removing temporary wedges, providing temporary pavement marking or performing other items incidental
 to completion of this work.
 SECTIO N 622.20 CO LD MILLING PAVEMENT FO R A DRIVING SURFACE.
 622.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of fine-tooth coldmilling to improve the profile, cross
 slope or texture of an existing pavement surface as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. T he
 finished profile shall provide a smooth riding surface, free from gouges, and shall have a uniform textured
 appearance.
 
 357
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 622.20.1.1 Locations may be field adjusted in length by the engineer, not to exceed 1/4 mile for any one
 location and provided the total area for all locations is not changed, without change in payment. All
 specified locations shall be milled.
 622.20.1.2 Contractors shall make their own conclusions concerning the quantity of material to be
 removed. T he actual depths of milling will vary due to rut depths, drainage and profile requirements.
 622.20.2 Equipme nt. Equipment for profiling, texturing and removing the pavement surface shall be in
 accordance with Sec 622.10, except as modified herein.
 622.20.2.1 T he minimum drum cutting width shall be 12 feet, unless specified otherwise in the contract.
 622.20.2.2 T he carbide cutting teeth shall be uniform in diameter, with a uniform length of ± 0.02inch. In
 addition, the tooth holder blocks shall be uniform and shall not vary the cutting radius of the mandrel by
 more than ± 0.02 inch.
 622.20.2.3 Removing millings from the pavement and discharging the millings into a hauling unit may be
 individual operations.
 622.20.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 622.20.3.1 Removal of material for rut removal shall be to the approximate depth of the bottom of the
 wheel rut in the lane being milled. T he bottom of the rut shall be textured, but only minimal material
 removed. Milling shall be done in an approximate lane width, but may start to the right of the centerline in
 the approximate left wheelpath, extending into the shoulder to allow drainage, leaving the existing
 centerline marking in place.
 622.20.3.2 Removal of material for surface texturing shall be done for the full lane width, to the depth
 needed in order to texture all of the described areas.
 622.20.3.3 After the proper combination of mandrel speed and forward speed have been established to
 produce the required texture, the daily operation shall be uniform and continuous for other than repair or
 emergency operations. T he milling machine shall not be halted to load or unload trucks, or to take on
 water.
 622.20.3.4 T he entire surface shall be textured, substantially free from waves or irregularities, and shall not
 vary from a 10-foot straightedge, applied parallel to the centerline, by more than 1/8 inch. T here may be
 occasional exceptions where the bottom of a wheelpath may not be textured in order to maintain an
 acceptable profile. Spalled areas shall be repaired using an approved bituminous patching material.
 622.20.3.5 T he texture produced for the finished pavement shall be a uniform surface with longitudinal
 striations. T here shall be a maximum lateral distance of 0.2 inch between adjacent longitudinal striation
 mark lines. T he longitudinal distance from the center of a strike mark to the center of the next successive
 strike mark in line shall not exceed 5 inches. T he longitudinal successive strike marks shall approximate a
 continuous grooved line. T he difference between the high and low of the surface texture shall be
 approximately 1/16 inch.
 622.20.3.6 T he pavement surface shall be removed and milled around and over appurtenances, such as
 manholes, utility valves and drainage features, within the limits of the work as directed by the engineer.
 Any damage to appurtenances by the milling and removal operation shall be repaired by the contractor at
 the contractor ’s expense. T he final milled pavement surface shall be smoothly transitioned at all
 appurtenances located in the pavement to maintain an acceptable profile.
 622.20.3.7 Material adjacent to the lane being milled shall be removed as necessary to provide a smooth
 transition and to ensure no ponding of water on the driving surface after the milling operation. T here will
 be no pay for additional milling width beyond lane width as required for drainage. Removal in the traffic
 lanes shall be with the same equipment, providing the same texture. Removal of shoulder material may be
 with other milling equipment meeting the engineer's approval.
 
 358
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 622.20.3.8 Loose material not picked up by the milling machine shall be removed from the roadway
 immediately behind the milling operation. In areas with earth or aggregate shoulders, the loose material
 may be swept to the shoulders when approved by the engineer. If required by the engineer, the finished
 surface shall be wetted just prior to returning to traffic to reduce traffic visibility problems due to dust.
 622.20.3.9 Obliterated edgelines next to a shoulder will not be required to be replaced by the contractor,
 unless specified in the contract. Any other pavement marking removed by the contractor ’s operations
 shall be replaced with temporary pavement marking in accordance with Sec 620, except when permanent
 pavement marking is specified in the contract. Prior to installation of permanent pavement marking, all
 joints and cracks shall be cleaned and sealed with hot-poured, elastic type concrete joint sealer in
 accordance with Sec 1057.
 622.20.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. T he roadway lane width will be assumed for computing milling
 quantities. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where
 appreciable errors are found in contract quantity. Where required, measurement for coldmilling of the
 existing pavement surface will be computed to the nearest square yard. T he corrections will be added to or
 deducted from the contract quantity.
 622.20.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of coldmilling of existing pavement surface will be
 paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. No direct payment
 will be made for loading, hauling, stockpiling or disposing of milled material, repairing spalled areas,
 temporary pavement marking or other items incidental to completion of the work.
 SECTIO N 622.30 DIAMO ND GRINDING O F EXISTING PO RTLAND CEMENT CO NCRETE
 PAVEMENT.
 622.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of grinding concrete pavement to provide good riding
 characteristics, a surface texture and proper drainage. T he finished surface shall be as shown on the plans or
 as directed by the engineer.
 622.30.2 Equipme nt. T he equipment shall be of a size that will grind a strip at least 3 feet wide using
 diamond blades, and shall not cause spalls at cracks, joints or other locations.
 622.30.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 622.30.3.1 T he construction operation shall be scheduled and proceed in a manner that produces a uniform
 finished surface. Auxiliary or ramp lane grinding shall transition from the edge of the mainline as required
 to provide drainage and an acceptable riding surface. Grinding of bridge decks will not be permitted unless
 specified in the contract.
 622.30.3.2 Pavement undersealing or pavement repair, if required, shall be completed prior to any grinding.
 622.30.3.3 Grinding shall be accomplished in a manner that eliminates joint or crack faults and provides
 lateral drainage by maintaining a constant cross slope between grinding extremities in each lane. A
 maximum tolerance of 1/16 inch will be allowed for adjacent sides of joints and cracks, except that under
 no circumstances shall the grinding depth exceed
 1/4 inch from the top of the original surface. When grinding across faulted joints, a minimum of a 20-foot
 transition onto the approach side slab shall be used.
 622.30.3.4 T he cross slope of the pavement shall be as shown on the plans and shall have no depressions
 or misalignment of slope greater than 1/4 inch in 12 feet when measured with a 12-foot straightedge placed
 perpendicular to the centerline. Areas of deviation shall be reground. Straightedge requirements will not
 apply across longitudinal joints or outside the ground area.
 622.30.3.5 As soon as practical after grinding, the surface will be straightedged longitudinally and all
 variations exceeding 1/8 inch in 10 feet will be plainly marked. Areas of deviation shall be reground.
 622.30.3.6 Substantially all of the pavement surface shall be textured. Extra depth grinding to eliminate
 minor depressions in order to provide texturing on 100 percent of the pavement surface will not be
 
 359
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 required. No unground surface area between passes will be permitted, except as specified otherwise in the
 contract documents.
 622.30.3.7 T he grinding process shall produce a final pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in
 appearance with a longitudinal line type texture. T he line-type texture shall contain parallel longitudinal
 corrugations that present a narrow ridge corduroy-type appearance. T he peaks of the ridges shall be
 approximately 1/32 inch higher than the bottoms of the grooves. T he grooves shall be evenly spaced.
 T here shall be approximately
 50-55 grooves per foot, measured perpendicular to the centerline.
 622.30.3.8 T he contractor shall remove and dispose of all residue from the grinding in a manner and at a
 location to satisfy environmental regulations. T he contractor shall have the engineer ’s approval for the
 method of spreading and disposal of the residue prior to beginning any grinding operations.
 622.30.3.8.1 Solid residue shall be removed from the pavement surface before any residue is blown by
 traffic action or wind.
 622.30.3.8.2 Residue shall not be permitted to encroach on open lanes.
 622.30.3.8.3 T he residue shall not enter into gutters or closed drainage systems. Suitable means to restrict
 the infiltration of the residue into a closed drainage system shall be provided.
 622.30.3.8.4 T he contractor may disperse residue onto unpaved shoulders, adjacent roadside embankments,
 or median ditch areas of divided highways where the residue runoff can percolate into the soil, unless
 specified otherwise in the contract. T he spread rate shall not generate surface runoff. If surface runoff
 occurs at a grinding location, the contractor shall haul the residue to an approved location at the
 contractor ’s expense.
 622.30.3.8.5 Discharge of any residue runoff shall not flow into adjacent rivers, streams, lakes, ponds or
 other open bodies of water.
 622.30.3.8.6 Residue shall not be spread within 100 feet of any streams, lakes or other open bodies of
 water, or within 15 feet of a water filled ditch.
 622.30.3.8.7 T he contractor shall use appropriate equipment and methods so the discharging of the residue
 does not cause erosion of soil or damage to established vegetation along the roadway. T he contractor shall
 repair and reseed any areas where the discharge of grinding residue causes damage to roadway slopes or
 vegetated areas at the contractor ’s expense.
 622.30.3.8.8 If the solids concentration of discharged residue at any particular area is determined to be
 excessive by the engineer, the contractor shall provide equipment and material to flush the areas with water
 as directed by the engineer, at the contractor ’s expense.
 622.30.3.8.9 Obliterated edgelines next to a shoulder will not be required to be replaced by the contractor
 unless specified in the contract. Any centerline or lane line markings removed by the contractor ’s
 operations shall be replaced with temporary pavement marking material in accordance with Sec 620, unless
 permanent pavement marking material is specified in the contract. Prior to installation of permanent
 pavement marking material, all joints and cracks shall be cleaned and sealed if specified in the contract.
 622.30.3.9 T he pavement shall be cleaned prior to opening to traffic as directed by the engineer.
 622.30.4 Smoothne ss Re quire me nts.
 622.30.4.1 Prior to performing any grinding work, but after completion of all pavement repairs,the
 contractor shall provide a control International Roughness Index (IRI) per pavement segment, as defined
 in Sec 610.4.1 (b), from the right wheel path of each lane being diamond ground in accordance with T M59. T his control IRI will be used to identify the required smoothness for the project.
 622.30.4.1.1 Each segment of the finished ground surface shall be reprofiled in the right wheel path and
 
 360
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 have a final IRI per segment of 65 percent of the control IRI or 80 inches per mile, whichever is greater.
 622.30.4.1.2 Depressed pavement areas due to subsidence or other localized causes and areas where the
 maximum cut at mid panel or a fault restricts further grinding, will be excluded from testing with the
 inertial profiler when approved by the engineer.
 622.30.4.1.3 After the initial diamond grinding operation has been profiled, additional correction shall be
 performed, where determined necessary by the engineer, to reduce the average segment profile to the
 specified final profile requirements. T he contractor will not be allowed to make corrective grinding to
 increase the percent of pay when the final IRI is in accordance with Sec 622.30.4.1.1. On pavement
 segments where corrections are necessary, additional profiles shall be made to verify that the corrections
 have produced an average final profile in accordance with Sec 622.30.4.1.1.
 622.30.4.1.4 T he engineer shall use the ProVAL software program to compute IRIs in accordance with
 T M-59. T he contractor shall provide the raw unfiltered profile data file in .ppf format.
 622.30.4.2 Inertial profile testing shall not be performed in excluded areas as defined in Sec 610.4.2.2.
 622.30.4.2.1 Excluded areas shall be tested with a 10 foot straightedge in accordance with Sec 610.4.3.
 622.30.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required,
 measurement will be made to the nearest square yard. Measurement will be based upon the full pavement
 lane width. No deduction will be made for gaps within the pavement lane to avoid striping, raised
 pavement markers, manholes or other structures.
 622.30.6 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of ground pavement surface will be paid for at the
 contract unit price for diamond grinding concrete pavement.
 Payment will be considered full
 compensation for all labor, equipment, material and incidentals to complete this work, including hauling
 and disposal of grinding residue and cleaning the pavement prior to opening to traffic.
 622.30.6.1 T he contract unit price for diamond grinding will be adjusted based on the final IRI for any
 segment before corrections, according to the following schedule:
 IRI, inches per mile Increase in Contract Unit Price
 40.0 or less
 $0.25
 40.1 to 54.0
 $0.15
 54.1 to 80.0
 None
 80.1 or greater
 None*
 *After
 
 correction to either equal to or less than 65 percent
 of the control IRI or 80.0 inches per mile.
 622.30.6.2 At the contractor's expense, segments with an IRI not in accordance with Sec 622.30.4.1.1,
 after the initial grinding, shall be corrected until the IRI is reduced in accordance with Sec 622.30.4.1.1,
 unless waived by the engineer.
 SECTIO N 622.40 DIAMO ND GRINDING O F NEW PO RTLAND CEMENT CO NCRETE PAVEMENT.
 622.40.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of grinding new Portland cement concrete pavement to
 provide good riding characteristics and surface texture. T he finished surface shall be as shown on the plans.
 622.40.2 Equipme nt. T he grinding equipment shall be in accordance with Sec 622.30.2.
 622.40.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 622.40.3.1 Paving. When diamond grinding is used as the final texturing for new Portland cement
 concrete pavement, concrete paving shall be in accordance with Sec 502, except as follows. All joints shall
 be protected to prevent grinding residue from entering. Joints to be diamond ground shall be cleaned and
 sealed in accordance with Sec 502 after diamond grinding is completed.
 
 361
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 622.40.3.2 Smoothne ss Re quire me nts.
 622.40.3.2.1 No diamond grinding shall be done until the pavement has attained a strength sufficient to be
 opened to all types of traffic. All diamond grinding shall be completed on any section prior to opening that
 section to other than construction traffic, unless approved by the engineer.
 622.40.3.2.2 T he final pavement surface from the grinding process shall be in accordance with Sec
 622.30.3.7. All grooves and adjacent passes shall be parallel to each other and the roadway, with no
 variation. Adjacent passes shall completely lap with no unground surface between, however, they shall not
 overlap more than 1 1/2 inches. Adjacent passes shall be within 1/8 inch of the same height as measured
 with a 3-foot straightedge. No less than
 98 percent of the specified surface shall be textured by grinding. T here shall be no ridge between lanes. Any
 remaining ridges on the outside edge next to the shoulder greater than 1/8 inch high shall be feathered out
 to the satisfaction of the engineer in a separate operation.
 622.40.3.2.3 Any deficiencies in the final surface due to improper contractor operations or equipment
 shall be corrected by the contractor, at the contractor ’s expense.
 622.40.3.2.4 T he contractor shall remove and dispose of all residue from grinding operations in accordance
 with Sec 622.30.3.8.
 622.40.4 Basis of Payme nt. No direct payment for diamond grinding new concrete pavement will be
 made. Diamond grinding new concrete pavement will be considered as part of the work paid for under the
 contract unit price for Portland concrete pavement in accordance with Sec 502.
 
 362
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 623
 CO NCRETE BO NDING CO MPO UND, EPO XY MO RTAR AND EPO XY
 PO LYMER CO NCRETE O VERLAY
 SECTIO N 623.10 CO NCRETE BO NDING CO MPO UND.
 623.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of preparing the surface, furnishing and applying the
 concrete bonding compound to be used to bond plastic concrete mortar to hardened concrete as shown on
 the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 623.10.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Type II Epoxy 1039
 
 623.10.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 623.10.3.1 Surface Pre paration. T he surface of the hardened concrete to which the plastic concrete
 mortar is to be bonded shall be surface dry and thoroughly cleaned such that all loose and unsound concrete
 is removed prior to application of the bonding agent.
 623.10.3.2 Application. T he bonding agent shall be applied when both the air and surface temperature is
 within the manufacturer ’s written recommendations.
 623.10.3.2.1 Components shall be mixed in accordance with manufacturer ’s written recommendations.
 T he components may be warmed with indirect heat to a maximum temperature of 100 F to reduce the
 viscosity. No solvents shall be added to the compound.
 623.10.3.2.2 T he mixed bonding agent shall be applied in such a manner as to thoroughly work the bonding
 compound into the hardened concrete surface. T he thickness of the application shall be 20 to 25 mils. If
 the concrete absorbs the bonding agent, additional coats shall be applied until the correct thickness is
 attained.
 623.10.3.2.3 T he plastic concrete mortar shall be placed while the bonding agent is still tacky. If there is a
 delay in placing the plastic concrete mortar and the bonding agent becomes tack free, another coat of
 bonding agent shall be applied.
 623.10.4 Basis of Payme nt. No direct payment will be made for furnishing material, surface preparation
 or application.
 SECTIO N 623.20 EPO XY MO RTAR.
 623.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of preparing the surface, furnishing and applying epoxy
 mortar as shown on the plans.
 623.20.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Type III Epoxy 1039
 Sand for Mortar 1039
 
 623.20.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 623.20.3.1 Surface Pre paration. T he surfaces to which the epoxy mortar is to be applied shall be free of
 dust, water or any other material that may affect the adhesion.
 623.20.3.2 Application. T he epoxy mortar shall be prepared and placed when the weather is dry and the
 
 363
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 air temperature is in accordance with the manufacturer ’s written recommendations.
 623.20.3.2.1 T he contractor shall mix only the number of containers of material that can be placed in 20
 to 40 minutes.
 623.20.3.2.2 Epoxy shall be thoroughly mixed in accordance with the manufacturer ’s written
 recommendations. Mixing shall continue as permitted to ensure uniformity.
 623.20.3.2.3 When the epoxy material has been thoroughly mixed, sand shall be added at the
 manufacturer ’s recommended rate while mixing continues. After the proper quantity of sand has been
 added, mixing shall continue until the mixture is uniform.
 623.20.3.2.4 Areas to be patched or leveled shall be thoroughly primed with an application of neat epoxy.
 After the area is primed, the mortar shall be placed and struck off to grade. T he surface shall have a rough
 finish equal to that of a Portland cement concrete deck.
 623.20.3.2.5 T he patched or leveled area shall be protected during the curing period to prevent damage.
 Material shall be cured in accordance with the manufacturer ’s written recommendations. Curing
 acceleration by direct flame application will not be permitted.
 623.20.4 Basis of Payme nt. No direct payment will be made for furnishing material, surface preparation
 or application.
 SECTIO N 623.30 EPO XY PO LYMER CO NCRETE O VERLAY.
 623.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and applying thin polymer concrete overlays
 in a prime coat, plus two courses on designated bridge structures as shown on the plans or as directed by the
 engineer.
 623.30.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Epoxy Resin for Epoxy P olymer Concrete Overlay 1039
 Aggregate for Epoxy P olymer Concrete Overlay
 1039
 
 623.30.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 623.30.3.1 Manufacture r Re pre se ntation. T he overlay manufacturer's representative shall witness the
 entire testing phase of each field test. T he manufacturer's representative shall verify that all operations are
 performed by acceptable practices.
 623.30.3.2 Handling and Storage of Mate rial. Handling and storage of material shall be in accordance
 with the manufacturer ’s written recommendations.
 623.30.3.3 Fie ld Te st. Prior to the start of the overlay operation, a test area of the complete overlay
 system shall be placed on the bridge deck in a contractor proposed location that is approved by the
 engineer. When multiple bridges are included in a project, a test area will be required on each bridge. T he
 contractor may utilize one-half of the bridge deck or an area equal to one day's placement operation,
 whichever is smaller, as a field test. T he degree of cleaning used on the test area shall be the minimum used
 on the remainder of the structure. T he surface for the test overlay shall be prepared in accordance with the
 test method prescribed in ACI 503R - Appendix A of the ACI Manual of Concrete Practice to establish an
 approved cleaning practice. T he approved cleaning practice shall remove all potentially detrimental
 material which may interfere with the bonding or curing of the overlay. Concrete shall be sound, with
 mortar soundly bonded to the coarse aggregate, with clean and open pores to be considered adequate for
 bond. All areas of asphalt and pavement markings shall be removed. Preparation of the surface shall
 produce a surface relief equal to International Concrete Repair Institute (ICRI) surface preparation level 6
 or 7 or AST M E 965 pavement macrotexture depth of 0.04 to 0.08 inch.
 
 364
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 623.30.3.3.1 Visible moisture on the prepared deck at the time of placing the overlay will not be permitted.
 Moisture in the deck shall be checked by taping a plastic sheet to the deck for a minimum of 2 hours in
 accordance with AST M D4263.
 623.30.3.3.2 In addition to the above requirements, the cleaning practice shall provide an adhesion
 strength test result greater than 250 psi or a failure area into the base concrete that is greater than 50
 percent of the test area. After the test area has cured for a minimum of 72 hours, adhesion shall be checked
 in accordance with ACI 503R. A test result will be the average of three tests on a sample area of the test
 patch. A minimum of three sample areas per test patch shall be tested. Successful test results will be required
 from each sample area.
 623.30.3.3.3 If the test of a sample area fails to meet the above requirements due to a cohesive failure of
 the substrate concrete, the adhesive strength of the sample area will be considered acceptable.
 623.30.3.3.4 Successful completion of the adhesion strength tests will be required before the full-scale
 overlay operation is to begin. All cleaning operations shall equal those used for the adhesion strength test
 areas, in both profile and cleanliness. If changes are made to the established cleaning practice, new adhesion
 strength testing shall be performed at the contractor ’s expense.
 623.30.3.3.5 Test patches shall be installed with the same material, equipment, personnel, timing, sequence
 of operations and curing period that will be used for the installation of the overlay.
 623.30.3.3.6 If the test fails, the contractor shall remove the material represented by the failed test
 patches and provide another test patch, at the contractor ’s expense, until satisfactory test results are
 obtained.
 623.30.3.4 Surface Pre paration. Before placement of the overlay, the entire deck surface shall be
 prepared by the cleaning practice established in the field adhesion strength tests in accordance with Sec
 623.30.3.3, except that sand blasting will not be permitted.
 623.30.3.4.1 If the engineer determines that the weather has changed significantly since the application of
 the field test patch, the contractor shall verify through adhesion strength tests that the practice is
 acceptable, at the contractor ’s expense.
 623.30.3.4.2 No traffic of any kind shall be permitted on any portion of the deck which has been shot
 blasted or on the overlay without approval from the engineer. T he time between surface preparation and
 application of the first course shall not exceed 24 hours.
 623.30.3.4.3 All patching and cleaning operations shall be inspected and approved prior to placing the
 overlay.
 623.30.3.4.4 If the deck or intermediate course is contaminated by foreign material or water after initial
 cleaning, the contamination and any detrimentally affected overlay material shall be removed. Both
 courses shall be applied prior to opening the area to traffic.
 623.30.3.5 Equipme nt. T he contractor's equipment shall be as recommended by the epoxy manufacturer.
 623.30.3.6 Epoxy Mixture . Mixing of epoxy components shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's
 recommendations, except that the use of a volumetric mixer will be required. When mineral fillers are
 specified, the mineral fillers shall be inert and non-settling or readily dispersible. Material showing a
 permanent increase in viscosity or the settling of pigments that cannot be readily dispersed with a paddle
 shall be replaced at the contractor's expense. At least 95 percent of the filler shall pass the No. 200 sieve.
 623.30.3.7 Application. Application of epoxy shall be performed by the supplier or by a factory trained
 or licensed applicator with written approval from the manufacturer of the epoxy system.
 623.30.3.7.1 T he handling and mixing of epoxy shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's written
 recommendations. T he overlay material shall not be placed when weather or surface conditions are such
 that the material cannot be properly handled, placed and cured within the specified requirements of traffic
 
 365
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 control, or when rain is forecasted within 24 hours of application.
 623.30.3.7.2 T he overlay shall consist of a two-course application of epoxy and aggregate. A prime coat
 shall be used if recommended by the manufacturer. Each of the two courses shall consist of a layer of epoxy
 covered with a layer of aggregate in sufficient quantity to completely cover the epoxy. T he thickness of
 each course shall be approximately equal. T he total thickness of the overlay shall be no less than 1/4 inch.
 623.30.3.7.3 T he temperature of the bridge deck surface at the time of application shall be less than 90 F
 and in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendation.
 623.30.3.7.4 Dry aggregate shall be applied in such a manner as to cover the epoxy mixture completely
 within 5 minutes of application. T he dry aggregate shall be placed in a manner such that the level of the
 epoxy mixture is not disturbed.
 623.30.3.7.5 T he first course shall be swept to remove loose aggregate prior to the second course
 application. Sweeping shall be done without removing embedded aggregate. First course applications which
 do not receive enough aggregate prior to gelling shall be removed and replaced. A second course applied
 with insufficient aggregate may be left in place, but additional applications shall be placed at the
 contractor ’s expense before opening to traffic.
 623.30.3.7.6 T he thickness of the overlay shall be verified to be at least 1/4-inch, measured from the deck
 surface to the top of the resin. T he contractor shall provide a minimum 1/2-inch diameter hole at a rate of
 at least one hole per 100 feet of traffic lane. Hole placement shall be at locations designated by the
 engineer. T hin areas shall be recoated and reverified at the contractor ’s expense.
 623.30.3.7.7 When additional applications or recoating are required, the engineer may require additional
 adhesion strength tests by the contractor, at the contractor ’s expense, in accordance with ACI 503R to
 verify the contractor's procedure.
 623.30.3.7.8 All adhesion strength test areas, thickness test holes or any debonded areas shall be repaired
 by filling with overlay material before final acceptance.
 623.30.3.7.9 T he epoxy concrete overlay shall be cured at least one hour, or until brooming or vacuuming
 can be performed without tearing or otherwise damaging the surface. No traffic or equipment shall be
 permitted on the overlay surface during the curing period.
 623.30.3.7.10 After the curing period, all loose aggregate shall be removed by brooming or vacuuming and
 the next overlay course applied as specified in the contract documents.
 623.30.3.7.11 T he polymer mixture shall not be permitted to run into drains.
 623.30.3.7.12 Unless otherwise specified, the epoxy concrete overlay courses shall be applied over the
 expansion joints and joint seals of the bridge deck. T he expansion joints and joint seals shall be provided
 with a bond breaker. Prior to opening to traffic, the overlay shall be removed over each joint by removal
 of the bond breaker in accordance with the overlay manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 623.30.3.7.13 Prior to opening a section to public or construction traffic, the overlay shall be allowed to
 cure in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations. First course applications shall not be opened
 to traffic.
 623.30.3.7.14 Damaged or debonded areas of an epoxy concrete overlay course shall be removed and
 repaired prior to acceptance. Repair shall consist of saw-cutting in rectangular sections to the top of the
 concrete deck surface and replacing the various courses in accordance with this specification at the
 contractor ’s expense.
 623.30.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, the area
 of polymer concrete overlay will be measured and computed to the nearest square yard. T his area will be
 measured longitudinally from end to end of bridge deck and transversely between the roadway face of curbs,
 
 366
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 excluding the area of the expansion device, if any. T he revision or correction will be computed and added
 to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 623.30.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of epoxy polymer concrete overlay will be paid for at
 the contract unit price.
 SECTIO N 623.40 PO LYMER CO NCRETE.
 623.40.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing polymer concrete as shown on the
 plans or as directed by the engineer.
 623.40.2 Manufacture r Re pre se ntation. T he manufacturer's representative shall be present at the start
 of surface preparations and polymer concrete installation for at least one day. T he contractor shall furnish
 the manufacturer's recommendations to the engineer as to the acceptability of all aspects of the operation.
 T he contractor shall contact the manufacturer ’s representative at least two weeks prior to installation.
 623.40.3 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 P olymer Concrete 1039
 
 623.40.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 623.40.4.1 Equipme nt. T he contractor's equipment shall be in accordance with the manufacturer ’s
 recommendations.
 623.40.4.2 Surface Pre paration. Portland cement concrete shall be allowed to cure and dry for a
 minimum of seven dry days prior to installing the polymer concrete. Days with cold, wet or inclement
 weather which may be a detriment to curing of the Portland cement concrete will not count in this seven
 day minimum curing and drying time. T he concrete surface shall be dry when placing the polymer concrete.
 T he substrate shall be structurally sound and sandblasted to be free of all foreign matter, grease, dirt and
 laitance for all areas that will be in contact with the polymer concrete. Steel surfaces shall be cleaned in
 accordance with SSPC-SP 10 surface preparation requirements. After sandblasting is completed, the joint
 shall be cleaned of debris by using oil and water free compressed air at a minimum of 90 psi or by
 vacuuming. T hese areas shall then be primed in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 623.40.4.3 Place me nt. T he polymer concrete shall be mixed, placed and cured in accordance with the
 manufacturer's recommendations and as shown on the plans. Before opening to traffic, the material shall be
 tack free and fully cured as determined by the engineer.
 623.40.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, the
 volume of polymer concrete will be measured to the nearest 1.0 cubic feet of accepted, in-place polymer
 concrete. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 623.40.6 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of polymer concrete will be paid for at the contract
 unit price.
 
 367
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 624
 GEO TEXTILE CO NSTRUCTIO N
 624.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of installing geotextile for use in subsurface drainage, in
 erosion control, as a permeable separator or as otherwise specified.
 624.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Geotextile 1011
 
 624.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Geotextile shall be placed in accordance with AASHT O M 288 for
 the appropriate application.
 624.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Geotextile used for lining drain trenches, wrapping drain pipe or for
 control of piping through structural joints and facing panels will not be separately measured. Geotextile
 used for other purposes will be measured to the nearest square yard of surface area covered without regard to
 any overlap.
 624.5 Basis of Payme nt. Geotextile used for lining drain trenches, wrapping drain pipe or for control of
 piping through structural joints and facing panels will be considered as incidental and will be included in the
 contract unit price for the drain or structure. T he accepted quantity of geotextile used for other purposes
 will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. No direct
 payment will be made for securing pins or other incidental items.
 
 368
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 625
 SLAB STABILIZATIO N
 SECTIO N 625.10 SLAB UNDERSEALING.
 625.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of stabilizing Portland cement concrete pavement by
 furnishing, hauling and pumping high density polyurethane or asphalt cement under the concrete slab. T his
 work shall be completed after any required pavement repair and prior to the placement of any new overlay
 material.
 625.10.2 Mate rial.
 625.10.2.1 High De nsity Polyure thane .
 625.10.2.1.1 T he material shall be a hydrophobic, closed cell, high density polyurethane system with the
 following physical characteristics and properties:
 Property
 
 Requirement
 
 Density, min., per ASTM D 1622 4.0 ± ½lb/ft 3
 Compressive Strength, min.,
 80 psi
 per ASTM D 1621
 Tensile Strength, min.
 90 psi
 Volume Change, max.
 +5.0 percent
 90 percent of compressive strength
 Curing Rate
 within 15 minutes after injection
 
 625.10.2.1.2 T he material shall be hydrophobic in the material’s component reaction such that the
 injected product is not significantly compromised by soil moisture or free water under the pavement
 625.10.2.1.3 When requested by the engineer, pumping units in service shall perform a product density test
 by injecting a sample of the unit’s polyurethane material into a test cylinder of known volume. T he
 sample’s density shall be in accordance with Sec 625.10.2.1.1.
 625.10.2.1.4 When requested by the engineer, the contractor, in the presence of the engineer, shall inject
 the polyurethane material into a container holding 40 gallons of ambient temperature water at 70 F. T he
 resulting product shall demonstrate consistent, closed cell polyurethane material.
 625.10.2.1.5 All stored polyurethane material shall be handled in accordance with the manufacturer ’s
 recommendations.
 625.10.2.2 Asphalt Ce me nt.
 625.10.2.2.1 Asphalt cement material shall meet AST M D3141. T he Contractor shall provide a supplier
 certification with each shipment in accordance with Sec 1015.3.1.
 625.10.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 625.10.3.1 Ge ne ral.
 625.10.3.1.1 Pavement stabilization operations will not be allowed when daytime temperatures are below
 35 F or if the subgrade is frozen.
 625.10.3.1.2 A hole pattern shall be submitted for approval at least 7 days prior to starting slab
 stabilization operations. Drilled holes shall be a maximum of 1 1/2 inches in diameter, drilled smooth,
 vertical and round. Holes drilled with a break out in excess of 1 1/2 inches outside the hole diameter will be
 unacceptable.
 625.10.3.1.3 T he Contractor shall provide equipment capable of detecting slab lift to measurements of
 0.001 inch. Pavement lifted in excess of 0.125 inch or pavement cracked as a result of the undersealing
 
 369
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 will be unacceptable.
 625.10.3.1.4 Proof of full undersealing, such as material seeping from joints, cracks, or edges; vertical slab
 movement; or other visual indication, as determined by the engineer, will be required prior to acceptance.
 When required, deflection testing shall be performed in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 64. No
 testing shall be performed if the slabs are beginning to lock-up. Tests shall not be performed during Spring
 thaw conditions or when the subgrade is frozen.
 625.10.3.1.5 Undersealing materials shall not enter into gutters or closed drainage systems. Residue shall
 not be spread within 100 feet of any streams, lakes or other open bodies of water or within 15 feet of a
 water filled ditch. All removed material shall be disposed of in an environmentally acceptable manner in
 accordance with all Federal, State, and local regulations.
 625.10.3.1.6 All drill tailings, spilled material, and other debris shall be cleaned up at the end of each
 working day or before the lane is opened to traffic.
 625.10.3.1.7 T he drill holes shall be filled flush with the pavement surface using a material to match the
 existing surface.
 625.10.3.1.8 T he Contractor shall supply certification for the accuracy of the method used to measure the
 amount of material used on the project.
 625.10.3.2 High De nsity Polyure thane .
 625.10.3.2.1 Injection nozzles shall prevent leakage during injection and shall be removed at completion
 of the injection or driven into the injection hole to a minimum depth of 1-1/4 inches below the pavement
 surface.
 625.10.3.2.2 Any excessive material on the pavement surface shall be removed from the area and the
 holes shall be sealed with polyurethane material or in accordance with Sec 625.10.3.1.7.
 625.10.3.2.3 T he pavement shall not be open to traffic until a minimum of 30 minutes after pumping
 operations have ceased.
 625.10.3.3 Asphalt Ce me nt.
 625.10.3.3.1 Asphalt cement shall be heated to a temperature between 380 F and 450 F before pumping
 operations begin.
 625.10.3.3.2 Pumping operations shall cease when asphalt cement seeps from cracks and joints. Pumping
 shall not resume until visible asphalt cement has congealed.
 625.10.3.3.3 T he Contractor shall provide adequate shielding to ensure passing traffic is not sprayed by
 asphalt cement.
 625.10.3.3.4 T he pavement shall not be open to traffic until a minimum of 30 minutes after pumping
 operations have ceased.
 625.10.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 625.10.4.1 High density polyurethane material shall be measured to the nearest pound.
 625.10.4.2 Asphalt cement shall be measured to the nearest gallon in accordance with Sec. 1015.
 625.10. 4.3 Measurement of testing for deflection will be per joint, crack or pavement repair patch per
 traffic lane in which testing is performed. Testing prior to undersealing and testing after undersealing will be
 measured separately.
 625.10.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of undersealing material and deflection testing
 
 370
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price. Payment will be considered full compensation for all
 labor, equipment and material necessary to complete the described work.
 SECTIO N 625.20 SLAB JACKING.
 625.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of injecting high density polyurethane or cementitious
 grout under a sunken section of concrete pavement and raising it back to the correct profile for an
 acceptable ride and positive drainage.
 625.20.2 Mate rial.
 625.20.2.1 High density polyurethane used for slab jacking shall meet the requirements of Sec. 625.10.2.
 625.20.2.2 T he material used in grouting shall consist of a mixture of Portland cement, fly ash and water
 proportioned as specified or as approved by the engineer. All material shall be in accordance with Division
 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Fly Ash
 Cement, Type I, II or III
 Water
 
 Section
 1018
 1019
 1070
 
 625.20.2.3 Grout shall meet the following minimum requirements:
 (a) Flow cone efflux time shall be 10 to 16 seconds, as determined in accordance with AST M C
 939.
 (b) T he minimum design strength at minimum efflux time shall be 600 psi at seven days,
 determined in accordance with AST M C 942, with the exception that storage of compressive
 specimens after 24 hours shall be placed in a 100 percent humidity cabinet.
 625.20.2.4 At least three weeks prior to the beginning of this work, the contractor shall submit the
 proposed mixture to the engineer. T he submittal shall include the mix design, source and type of all
 material test results of the grout showing one-day, three-day and seven-day compressive strengths, efflux
 time, time of initial and final set by the Gilmore needle in accordance with AST M C 266 and time delayed
 to molding specimens after mixing grout. T he time delay between mixing and molding will be the maximum
 holding time permitted in the field. Sufficient quantities of all mixture components to permit laboratory
 verification of the grout properties listed herein shall accompany the mix design submittal. Approximately
 10 pounds of Portland cement and 30 pounds of fly ash shall be furnished.
 625.20.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Construction requirements shall be in accordance with Sec
 625.10.3.1 and specifically as follows.
 625.20.3.1 Ge ne ral.
 625.20.3.1.1 T he contractor shall establish a finish target profile using an elevation measuring device or
 string line. Each profile shall be accepted by the engineer prior to work being performed at that location.
 625.20.3.1.2 Pumping operations shall cease when the slab has achieved the target profile. T he Contractor
 shall provide equipment capable of detecting slab lift to measurements of 0.001 inch. Pavement lifted in
 excess of 0.125 inch over the accepted profile or pavement cracked as a result of the slab jacking will be
 unacceptable.
 625.20.3.1.3 T he engineer may require the contractor to verify positive drainage on the lifted slab by
 flooding the surface area.
 625.20.3.2 High De nsity Polyure thane . Construction requirements shall be in accordance with Sec
 625.10.3.2.
 
 371
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 625.20.3.3 Ce me ntitious Grout.
 625.20.3.3.1 Any admixtures used shall be incorporated in accordance with the manufacturer's
 recommendations. Admixtures may be added by hand methods. Admixtures shall be measured within a
 tolerance of plus or minus three percent of the required quantity.
 625.20.3.3.2 Personnel, scales and equipment necessary for calibrating the proportioning devices and for
 verifying the accuracy of proportions shall be furnished by the contractor and shall be available at all times.
 All equipment shall be calibrated by the contractor in the presence of the engineer, and subject to approval
 from the engineer. Verification of the accuracy of the scales and other dispensing methods may be required
 at any time deemed necessary by the engineer, but will be performed at least once each day of operation.
 625.20.3.3.3 Weight proportioning and volume proportioning equipment, accuracy, calibration and
 verification shall be in accordance with Sec 501.
 625.20.3.3.4 Grout may be re-tempered with water. Prior to re-tempering the grout, the engineer shall be
 notified.
 625.20.3.3.5 T he cement and fly ash for grout shall be measured by weight or volume. T he quantity of
 cement and fly ash to be used shall be calculated from the approved mix design. Batches not containing the
 proper quantities of material will be unacceptable.
 625.20.3.3.6 Filling holes shall be in accordance with Sec 625.10.3.1.7.
 625.20.3.3.7 T he contractor may disperse residue onto unpaved shoulders, adjacent roadside embankments
 or median ditch areas of divided highways where the residue runoff can percolate into the soil, unless
 specified otherwise in the contract. T he spread rate shall not generate surface runoff. If surface runoff
 occurs at a grinding location, the contractor shall remove the residue to an approved location at the
 contractor ’s expense.
 625.20.3.3.8 T raffic shall not be permitted on the undersealed pavement until three hours after the end of
 pumping operations, and after all drill holes have been plugged.
 625.20.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 625.20.4.1 High density polyurethane material shall be measured to the nearest pound.
 625.20.4.2 Portland cement will be measured to the nearest pound.
 625.20.4.3 Fly ash will be measured to the nearest pound.
 625.20.4.4 Measurement of testing for deflection will be per joint, crack or pavement repair patch per
 traffic lane in which testing is performed. Testing prior to undersealing and testing after undersealing, will
 be measured separately.
 625.20.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted slab jacking material and deflection testing quantities will be
 paid for at the contract unit price. Payment will be considered full compensation for all labor, equipment
 and material necessary to complete the described work.
 
 372
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 626
 RUMBLE STRIPS
 626.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing rumble strips as shown on the plans or as
 directed by the engineer.
 626.2 Construction Re quire me nts. Rumble strips shall be milled into bituminous and concrete
 pavements to produce a neat and uniform finish. Milled material shall be handled in accordance with Sec
 622. Any damage to the pavement or pavement marking resulting from the contractor ’s operations shall
 be repaired or replaced to the satisfaction of the engineer by the contractor, at the contractor ’s expense.
 On roadways open to traffic, rumble strips shall be in place no later than five days after the final paving
 operations.
 626.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, rumble
 strips will be measured separately for each shoulder and the centerline, which will be measured along the
 centerline of the travel way, and made to the nearest 1/10 station. T he revision or correction will be added
 to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 626.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of rumble strips will be paid at the contract unit price per
 1/10 station. Payment will be considered full compensation for all labor, equipment, and material necessary
 to complete the described work, including loading, hauling, stockpiling and disposal of milled material; and
 any other incidental items.
 
 373
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 627
 CO NTRACTO R SURVEYING AND STAKING
 627.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of providing the necessary surveying and staking for the
 successful prosecution of the work.
 627.2 Staking Re quire me nts. Staking work shall be in accordance with general accepted surveying
 practices and provisions of the contract. T he MoDOT 's current Engineering Policy Guide (EPG), 238.4,
 may be used as guidance and is available on MoDOT ’s web site.
 627.2.1 T he contractor shall preserve all right of way monuments, benchmarks control points and
 reference marks set by the engineer. If any monumentation is damaged, destroyed or disturbed by the
 contractor, the cost of replacement will be at the contractor ’s expense and will be deducted from the
 payment for the work.
 627.2.2 All surveying shall be documented by the contractor in a written form acceptable to the engineer.
 During performance of the work, all surveying documents shall be available and supplied to the engineer
 upon request, at the contractor ’s expense. All documents shall be labeled with the route, state job number,
 county, contractor name, survey party supervisor and date.
 627.2.3 T he engineer will furnish and set control points with known coordinates. T he engineer will furnish
 all coordinate data to lay out the job and locate benchmarks as shown on the plans. T he contractor shall
 provide all other staking necessary for the successful prosecution of the work, including all staking
 necessary to facilitate the relocation of utilities. All alignment control established by the contractor shall
 be referenced, and a copy of the references shall be furnished to the engineer.
 627.2.4 Any surveying or measurements necessary for computing pay quantities will be performed by the
 engineer. T he contractor shall notify the engineer at least two working days prior to disturbing any areas
 used to calculate pay quantities.
 627.2.5 All surveying work performed by the contractor shall be sufficient and accurate to construct the
 work in accordance with the contract documents. Any delays or additional costs to the project which result
 from insufficient or inaccurate staking or time lost for corrective action will be considered as a
 nonexcusable and noncompensable delay.
 627.2.6 T he construction centerline shown on the plans shall be accurately established and the control
 points of all curves shall be referenced. If it is necessary to introduce an equation in order to match the
 plan stationing or if a plan equation is changed, such changes will be at the written direction of the
 engineer.
 627.2.7 Adjustments necessary to provide accurate staking or match improvements to existing features
 shall be immediately brought to the attention of the engineer T he engineer will determine the nature of the
 discrepancy and will make revisions as necessary. T he contractor shall perform any restaking required by
 such revisions. Any reimbursement due to the contractor for additional staking due to design errors will be
 in accordance with Sec 109.4.3.
 627.2.8 After the centerline has been established and referenced, centerline elevations shall be taken at all
 stations and at any other points required to ensure the computation of accurate quantities. Centerline
 elevations shall be based on the plan datum. All benchmarks shown on the plans shall be checked.
 627.2.8.1 In the event a difference of plus or minus 0.01 foot exists in elevation for any benchmark shown
 on the plans, check levels shall be run and shown in the notes. T he elevations shall be corrected to plan
 elevation at each benchmark where any difference occurs, and shall be noted in the field notes. If a plan
 benchmark has been disturbed or if correction of the plan elevation is not feasible, a full explanation shall
 be made in the notes. T he contractor shall furnish to the engineer a listing of benchmarks prior to
 beginning construction.
 627.2.8.2 If original plan cross sections differ from existing conditions by an average deviation in excess of
 one foot, the contractor shall immediately notify the engineer. T he engineer will be responsible for taking
 
 374
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 cross-sections where deviations are determined to exist.
 627.2.9 After completing any bridge, box culvert or retaining wall staking, the contractor shall furnish to
 the engineer structural layout plan sheets which show the location of all points that have been staked. At
 the time of furnishing the marked layout sheets, the contractor shall meet with the engineer to review the
 layout a minimum of two working days before construction begins.
 627.2.10 Upon completion of the project, the contractor shall provide to the engineer all original
 surveying field notes, layouts and computations in standard bound survey notebooks or in a form acceptable
 to the engineer.
 627.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. No measurement will be made for contractor surveying and staking.
 T his work shall be considered a lump sum unit when a pay item is provided in the contract.
 627.4 Basis of Payme nt. When a pay item is provided in the contract, contractor furnished surveying
 and staking will be paid for at the contract lump sum price and will be considered full compensation for the
 following:
 (a) Performing this work.
 (b) All material, labor, tools, equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 (c) For all effects, impacts, cumulative impacts, incidental and consequential costs, loss or damage
 arising from, relating to or produced by error or discrepancies in surveys or staking and plans based
 on such surveys or staking, and any cost, including time effects, to correct the errors or
 discrepancies.
 627.4.1 Payment for surveying and staking will only be made when a pay item is provided in the contract.
 If no pay item is provided, all costs associated with surveying and staking shall be considered included in the
 cost of other bid items.
 627.4.2 Payment for contractor furnished surveying and staking completed, not to exceed the contract
 item amount, will be made upon written request by the contractor. Such a request shall be submitted to the
 engineer two business days prior to the progress estimate date.
 627.4.3 Complete payment will not be made until the contractor has provided all of the original surveying
 field notes, layouts, computations and notebooks to the engineer.
 
 375
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 701
 DRILLED SHAFTS
 701.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing cast-in-place reinforced concrete drilled shafts
 and rock sockets, as required, to serve as a structural foundation. T his work shall provide reinforced
 concrete shafts cast in cylindrically excavated holes extending sufficiently into soil or sound rock to
 adequately support the structure and all externally applied loads for which the shaft was designed. T he
 drilled shaft foundation, including the rock socket, where required, shall be constructed in accordance with
 these specifications, as shown on the plans and in accordance with other specifications included in the
 contract documents. When directed by the engineer, corrections made by the contractor will be
 noncompensable and any effect on time of performance nonexcusable.
 701.2 Pre construction Submittals. At least 30 days prior to drilled shaft construction, the contractor
 shall submit to the engineer for review an installation plan for the construction of drilled shafts. T he
 installation plan shall be of sufficient detail to outline the contractor ’s intended overall construction
 sequence and methods of excavation for the drilled shafts, including use of slurry, placement of reinforcing
 steel, details of concrete delivery to the site, an emergency construction joint method, placement of
 concrete in a continuous pour, including operational procedures for tremie or pump, and methods to
 prevent and handle delays in concrete batching and delivery to the site. T he installation plan shall include
 details of casings to be used, if applicable, including calculations showing the ability of the casing to
 withstand anticipated hydraulic and earth pressures, and to withstand stresses due to installation without
 undue deformation. T hese details shall include methods for casing handling, splicing, straightening and outof-round correction. Calculations included in the installation plan shall be signed and sealed by a registered
 professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Missouri.
 701.3 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with this specification, Division 1000, Material
 Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete
 Concrete Admixtures
 Concrete Curing Material
 Mortars and Grout
 Water
 
 Section
 1036
 1054
 1055
 1066
 1070
 
 701.3.1 Concre te . Drilled shafts shall be constructed of Class B-2 concrete, and all material,
 proportioning, mixing and transporting of concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501, except as specified
 herein. An air entrainment admixture shall be used. A high range water-reducing admixture may be used to
 increase the slump to a maximum of 9 inches ± 1 inch. If used, the water-reducing admixture shall be added
 only after the concrete has reached the job site to reduce the potential for flash setting. T he concrete mix
 for drilled shafts shall be dense, homogeneous, fluid and resistant to segregation, and shall consolidate under
 self-weight. T he concrete mix shall have a set time that ensures that fluidity is maintained throughout the
 shaft concrete placement and removal of temporary casing, if used. A concrete retarder in accordance with
 AASHT O M 194, Type B, may be incorporated into the mix to retard set approximately two hours.
 Concrete for drilled shafts shall have a 28-day minimum compressive strength of 4,000 psi. Portland
 cement shall be Type I or Type II. T he maximum water to cement ratio of a concrete mix to be placed
 under water shall be 0.45.
 701.3.2 Casing. Welded or seamless steel permanent casings shall be in accordance with AST M A 252,
 Grade 2, unless otherwise specified. T he contractor shall furnish two copies of certification from the
 fabricator detailing the designated specification with which the furnished casings comply.
 701.3.2.1 Shop Drawings. Shop drawings for permanent steel casings shall be prepared in accordance with
 Sec 1080 and shall be submitted to the engineer prior to installation of the casings.
 701.3.2.2 Condition of Casings. Casings shall be smooth, clean and watertight. For out-of-round
 tolerance of steel casings before and after installation, the departure of any point on the periphery of the
 casing from a true circle shall not exceed one inch, measured radially.
 
 376
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 701.3.2.3 Exte nt of Casing Le ngth. Permanent casings, if required, shall be continuous wherever possible
 or practical. T he permanent casing shall terminate at the specified elevation, and the concrete shall be
 trimmed to within tolerances specified in Sec 701.4.16 prior to acceptance of the completed drilled shaft.
 Permanent casings shall be extended into rock, as needed, to provide a positive seal and to stabilize the
 shaft excavation against collapse, excessive deformation, or flow of water. Casings meeting all specified
 requirements shall be installed from the work platform to the elevations shown on the plans. Where drilled
 shafts are located in open water areas, casings shall be extended from at least 18 inches above the water
 elevation and unless otherwise specified in the contract documents, to the specified bottom of casing
 elevation to protect the shaft concrete from water action during placement and curing of concrete.
 701.3.2.4 Use of Te e th or Cutting Edge . T he casing may be fabricated with teeth or a cutting edge to
 facilitate insertion into the rock.
 701.3.2.5 Splice s. Splicing of permanent casings is not desirable and will only be permitted when approved
 by the engineer. If splices are required, the welding process shall be in accordance with the requirements
 specified herein. T he contractor shall be fully responsible for the adequacy of welds during driving.
 701.3.2.6 We lding. Shop welding of casings shall be performed by a fully-automated welding process to
 develop the full capacity of the shell. All welding shall be in accordance with Sec 1080, except that shop
 welding of casings will not require radiographic inspection. Inspection will be of a visual nature. If evidence
 indicating poor welding is found, the engineer may require radiographing. Field-welded splices of sections of
 the steel casings shall be made by shielded metal-arc welding procedures performed by a MoDOT-certified
 field welder using properly dried low-hydrogen E7018 electrodes that have been protected from the
 elements to maintain the dry condition. T he welds shall be full penetration, watertight and of x-ray quality
 in accordance with Sec 1080.
 701.3.3 Slurry. Drilling slurry will be defined as mineral slurry, polymer slurry, natural slurry formed during
 the drilling process, water or other fluids used to maintain stability of the drilled shaft excavation to aid in
 the drilling process or to maintain the quality of the rock socket. In addition, the terms mineral slurry and
 polymer slurry, as used herein, will be defined as the final mixed composite of all additives, including
 manufactured mineral or polymer slurry additives required to produce the acceptable drilling slurry.
 701.3.3.1 Slurry Usage . Drilling slurry shall be used if detailed in the approved installation plan, if in
 accordance with the contract documents or if approved in writing by the engineer. Drilling slurry may be
 used at the contractor ’s option if the slurry is not in accordance with the contract documents; however,
 any slurry shall be approved by the engineer prior to use. Drilling slurry, when used, will be noncompensable
 and effect on time of performance due to the use of the slurry will be nonexcusable.
 701.3.3.2 Ge ne ral Prope rtie s. T he material used to make the slurry shall not be detrimental to the
 concrete or surrounding ground strata. Mineral slurries shall have both a mineral grain size that remains in
 suspension and sufficient viscosity and gel characteristics to transport excavated material to a suitable
 screening system. Polymer slurries shall have sufficient viscosity and gel characteristics to transport
 excavated material to suitable screening systems or settling tanks. T he percentage and specific gravity of
 the material used to make the slurry shall be sufficient to maintain the stability of the excavation and to
 allow proper concrete placement. If approved by the engineer, the contractor may use water and on-site
 soils as a drilling slurry. In that case, the range of acceptable values for density, viscosity and pH, as shown
 in the following table for bentonite slurry, shall be met, except that maximum density shall not exceed 70
 pounds/cubic foot. When water is used as the drilling fluid to construct rock sockets in limestone, dolomite,
 sandstone or other formations that are not erodible, the requirements for slurry testing will not apply if the
 entire fluid column is replaced with fresh water after drilling. To do so, fresh water should be introduced at
 the top of the casing and existing water used during drilling should be pumped out of the excavation from
 near the base of the socket until the entire volume of fluid has been replaced.
 701.3.3.3 Pre paration. Prior to introduction into the shaft excavation, the manufactured mineral or
 polymer slurry admixture shall be pre-mixed thoroughly with clean, fresh water and for adequate time in
 accordance with the slurry admixture manufacturer ’s recommendations allotted for hydration. Water used
 for mixing shall be in accordance with Sec 1070. Slurry tanks of adequate capacity will be required for slurry
 mixing, circulation, storage and treatment. No excavated slurry pits will be allowed in lieu of slurry tanks
 without written approval from the engineer. Adequate desanding equipment will be required as necessary to
 
 377
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 control slurry properties during the drilled shaft excavation in accordance with the values provided in the
 table below. Desanding will not be required for signposts or lighting mast foundations unless specified in the
 contract documents.
 701.3.3.4 Control Te sts. Control tests using a suitable apparatus shall be performed by the contractor on
 the slurry to determine density, viscosity, sand content and pH of freshly mixed slurry, recycled slurry and
 slurry in the excavation. Tests of slurry samples from within one foot of the bottom and at mid-height of
 the shaft shall be conducted in each shaft excavation during the excavation process to establish a consistent
 working pattern. A minimum of four sets of tests shall be conducted during the first eight hours of slurry use
 on the project. When the results show consistent behavior, the testing frequency may be decreased to one
 set every four hours of slurry use, or as otherwise approved by the engineer. Reports of all tests, signed by
 an authorized representative of the contractor, shall be furnished to the engineer on completion of each
 drilled shaft. An acceptance range of values for the physical properties will be as shown in the table below.
 701.3.3.5 Sampling. When slurry samples are found to be unacceptable, the contractor shall bring the
 slurry in the shaft excavation to within specification requirements. Concrete shall not be poured until
 resampling and testing results produce acceptable values. Prior to placing shaft concrete, the contractor
 shall take slurry samples from within one foot of the bottom and at mid-height of the shaft. Any heavily
 contaminated slurry that has accumulated at the bottom of the shaft shall be removed. Disposal of all slurry
 shall be done in areas approved by the engineer. T he contractor shall perform final shaft bottom cleaning
 after suspended solids have settled from the slurry mix.
 Range of Acceptable Values f or Mineral and Polymer Slurries in Fresh Water
 Without Additives
 Dry
 Test
 Property
 B entonite Emulsif ied Polymer
 Units
 Polymer
 Method
 Density
 (Unit Weight)
 At Introduction
 63.5 - 66.8 < 63
 < 63
 lb/ft 3
 P rior to Concreting 63.5 - 70.5 < 63
 
 < 63
 
 Marsh Funnel
 Viscosity
 At Introduction
 
 Density
 Balance
 
 32 – 60
 
 33 – 43 b
 
 50 – 80 b sec/qt
 
 P rior to Concreting 32 – 60
 
 33 – 43 b
 
 50 – 80 b
 
 pH
 At Introduction
 
 8 – 10
 
 8 – 11
 
 7 – 11
 
 --
 
 P rior to Concreting 8 – 10
 Sand Content
 At Introduction
 <4
 
 8 – 11
 
 7 – 11
 
 --
 
 <1
 
 <1
 
 P rior to Concreting < 10
 Maximum Contact
 4
 Timea
 
 <1
 
 <1
 
 72
 
 72
 
 Marsh
 Funnel
 pH
 P aper or
 pH
 Meter
 
 P ercent AP I Sand
 by
 Content
 Volume
 Kit
 Hours
 
 a Without
 
 agitation and sidewall cleaning.
 viscosities may be required to maintain excavation stability in loose or
 gravelly sand deposits.
 bHigher
 
 701.4 Construction.
 701.4.1 Prote ction of Existing Structure s. All precautions shall be taken to prevent damage to existing
 structures and utilities. T hese measures shall include, but are not limited to, monitoring and controlling the
 vibrations from the driving of casing or drilling of the shaft, and selecting construction methods and
 procedures that shall prevent excessive caving of the shaft excavation.
 701.4.2 Te chnique Shafts. When required by the contract documents, the contractor shall demonstrate
 the adequacy of methods and equipment used during construction of the first drilled shaft, which shall be an
 out of position technique shaft, constructed with reinforcement as identified for production shafts on the
 plans. T his technique shaft shall be drilled in the position as directed by the engineer and drilled to the
 
 378
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 maximum depth for any production shaft shown on the plans. If at any time the contractor is unable to
 demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the engineer, the adequacy of methods or equipment and alterations
 required, an additional technique shaft(s) may be required. Technique shafts shall be cut off 3 feet below
 groundline, buried or otherwise disposed of as specified in the contract documents or as directed by the
 engineer. Once approval has been given to construct production shafts, no changes will be permitted in the
 methods of equipment used to construct the shaft without approval from the engineer. When a technique
 shaft is not required, construction of the first production shaft will be used to determine if the methods and
 equipment used by the contractor are acceptable. Failure at any time to demonstrate to the engineer the
 adequacy of methods or equipment will be cause for the engineer to require appropriate alterations in
 equipment or method by the contractor to eliminate unsatisfactory results.
 701.4.3 Construction Se que nce . Excavation to footing elevation shall be completed before shaft
 construction begins, unless otherwise authorized by the engineer. Any disturbance to the footing area caused
 by shaft installation shall be repaired by the contractor prior to pouring the footing. When drilled shafts
 are to be installed in conjunction with embankment placement, the contractor shall construct drilled shafts
 after placement of fills. Drilled shafts constructed prior to the completion of fills shall not be capped until
 the fills have been placed as near to final grade as possible, leaving only the necessary work room for
 construction of the caps.
 701.4.4 Ge ne ral Equipme nt and Me thods. T he contractor shall perform excavations through whatever
 material is encountered to the dimensions and elevations shown on the plans. T he contractor ’s methods
 and equipment shall be suitable for the intended purpose and for whatever material is encountered.
 701.4.4.1 Ge ne ral Equipme nt. T he contractor shall provide equipment capable of constructing shafts to
 a depth equal to the deepest shaft tip elevation shown on the plans plus 15 feet, or as otherwise specified in
 the contract documents. When a rock socket is identified on the plans at a shaft location, the definition of
 “ shaft tip elevation”, for the purposes of this subsection, shall be taken to refer to the bottom of the rock
 socket.
 701.4.4.2 Ge ne ral Me thods. Excavations required for shafts and rock sockets shall be completed in a
 continuous operation. T he contractor shall be responsible for ensuring the stability of the shaft excavation
 and the surrounding soil. When obstructions, either expected or unexpected, are encountered, the
 contractor shall notify the engineer promptly. Either the dry method, wet method, temporary casing
 method, permanent casing method if specified, or combinations, as necessary, shall be used to produce
 sound, durable concrete drilled shafts free of defects. T he permanent casing method shall be used only when
 required by the contract documents. Blasting excavation methods will not be permitted. When a rock
 socket is required, the engineer will be the sole judge as to what constitutes the top of sound rock. Sound
 rock will be considered as the point where the rock is sufficient quality to allow the permanent casing to be
 seated. T he engineer may order in writing additional depths of rock socket below the top of sound rock as
 considered necessary to improve the foundation. If the top surface of the sound rock is found to be inclined
 across the width of the shaft, the contractor shall immediately notify the engineer. T he contractor shall
 use an airlift, or other method approved by the engineer, to clean the bottom of the shaft excavation.
 701.4.4.2.1 Dry Construction Me thod. T he dry construction method shall be used only at sites where
 the groundwater table and site conditions, generally stiff to hard clays or rock above the water table, are
 suitable to permit construction of the shaft in a relatively dry excavation and where the sides and bottom
 of the shaft remain stable without any caving, sloughing or swelling and allow visual inspection prior to
 concrete placement. T he dry method shall consist of drilling the shaft excavation, removing accumulated
 seepage water and loose material from the excavation and placing the shaft concrete in a relatively dry
 excavation. T he dry construction method shall be used only when shaft excavations, as demonstrated in a
 technique shaft or first production shaft, have 12 inches per hour or less of seepage.
 701.4.4.2.2 We t Construction Me thod. T he wet construction method shall be used at sites where a dry
 excavation cannot be maintained for placement of the shaft concrete. T his method shall consist of drilling
 the shaft excavation below the water table, keeping the shaft filled with water, natural slurry formed during
 the drilling process, mineral slurry or polymer slurry to contain seepage and groundwater movement, and to
 maintain stability of the hole perimeter until excavation to the final depth and placement of the
 reinforcing cage and concrete has been completed. T his procedure will require placing the shaft concrete
 with either a tremie or concrete pump beginning at the shaft bottom, and displacing the water or slurry as
 
 379
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 concrete is placed. Temporary partial depth casings near the ground surface shall be provided to aid shaft
 alignment and position and to prevent sloughing of the top of the shaft excavation. Where drilled shafts
 are located in open water areas, shafts shall be constructed by the wet method using casings extending from
 above the water elevation to the plan casing tip elevation to protect the shaft concrete from water action
 during placement and curing. T he casing shall be installed in a manner that produces a positive seal at the
 bottom of the casing.
 701.4.4.2.3 Te mporary Casing Construction Me thod. T he temporary casing construction method
 shall be used at all sites where the stability of the excavated hole or the effects of groundwater cannot be
 controlled by other means. In this method, the hole shall be advanced through caving material by the wet
 method in accordance with Sec 701.4.4.2.2. When a formation is reached that is nearly impervious, a
 casing shall be placed in the hole and sealed. Drilling may proceed by the dry method to the projected
 depth. T he placement of concrete shall proceed by the dry or wet method, except that the casing shall be
 withdrawn after the concrete is placed. In the event seepage conditions prevent use of the dry method,
 excavation shall be completed by the wet method. Before and during casing withdrawal, a 5-foot minimum
 head of fresh concrete above the bottom of the casing shall be maintained at such a level that fluid trapped
 behind the casing is displaced upward out of the shaft excavation without mixing with or displacing the
 shaft concrete. Casing extraction shall be at a slow, uniform rate with the pull in line with the axis of the
 shaft. Temporary casings shall be removed while the concrete is still workable and the slump of the
 concrete is between 6 and 10 inches. Vibratory hammers shall not be used for casing installation or removal
 within
 50 feet of other shafts that have been completed less than 24 hours earlier. T he reinforcing cage shall not
 be damaged or displaced when withdrawing the temporary casing.
 701.4.4.2.4 Pe rmane nt Casing Construction Me thod. T he permanent casing construction method
 shall be used only when required by the contract documents or authorized by the engineer. T he casing shall
 be continuous between top and bottom elevations shown on the plans. Vibratory hammers shall not be used
 for casing installation within 50 feet of shafts that have been completed less than 24 hours earlier.
 701.4.5 Slurry.
 701.4.5.1 Time Limitations. When bentonite slurry is used, the contractor shall adjust construction
 operations such that the maximum time that slurry is in contact with the bottom 5 feet of the shaft, the
 time from the end of drilling to the beginning of concrete placement, does not exceed four hours without
 agitation. If the four-hour limit is exceeded, the bottom 5 feet of the shaft shall be overreamed prior to
 performing other operations in the shaft. For rock sockets constructed in shale using polymer slurry,
 concrete placement shall begin within 72 hours of starting the rock socket excavation to avoid degradation
 of the shaft sidewall. Before concrete placement begins, foundation inspection, when required, cleaning
 operations and reinforcing steel placement shall be completed and approved by the engineer. T hese
 operations will be included in the 72-hour time limit. If concrete placement is not begun within the time
 limit, the contractor shall take corrective measures to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 701.4.5.2 Le ve l of Slurry. During construction, the level of slurry shall be maintained at a height
 sufficient to prevent caving of the excavation. If the engineer determines that the slurry construction
 method is failing to produce the desired final results, the contractor shall discontinue operations and
 propose an alternate method for approval from the engineer. Correction for a failed slurry construction
 method will be noncompensable and any effect on time of performance nonexcusable.
 701.4.5.3 Slurry Manufacture r’s Re pre se ntative . When manufactured mineral or polymer slurry
 additives are to be incorporated into the drilling slurry mix, the contractor shall provide the technical
 assistance of a representative of the mineral or polymer slurry additive manufacturer at the site prior to
 introduction of the slurry into the first shaft where slurry use will be required, and during drilling and
 completion of a minimum of one shaft to adjust the slurry mix to the specific site conditions.
 701.4.5.4 Drilling Fluids for Rock Socke t Excavation. For rock sockets excavated in limestone,
 dolomite, sandstone or other formations that are not erodible and cannot be constructed in the dry, only
 water shall be used as the drilling fluid, except that when other slurry types are used in drilling through
 overburden, that slurry shall be removed and replaced with fresh clean water prior to rock socket
 excavation. For rock sockets excavated in geomaterial that may be eroded by drilling water, such as shales,
 
 380
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 a polymer slurry will be required prior to beginning rock socket drilling through completion of concreting
 the rock socket.
 701.4.6 Cle aning of Shaft or Casing Side walls. Cleaning of the shaft or casing sidewalls shall occur by
 a method approved by the engineer as necessary to remove the depth of softening or to remove excessive
 slurry cake buildup.
 701.4.7 Ge ne ral Excavation Conside rations. T he plans will indicate the top of shaft elevations and the
 estimated bottom of shaft elevations between which the drilled shaft shall be constructed. Drilled shafts
 may be extended deeper when the engineer determines that the foundation material encountered while
 drilling the shaft excavation is unsuitable or is not the same as anticipated in the design of the drilled shaft.
 Drilled shafts may be shortened when the engineer determines the material encountered is better than that
 anticipated, or based on the results of load tests.
 701.4.7.1 Time Re strictions. T he integrity of the drilled shaft excavation shall be maintained by the
 placing of reinforcement and concrete in a timely manner following completion of the excavation. No two
 adjacent shafts shall be excavated at the same time, and shafts shall not be constructed within 24 hours of
 the completion of an adjacent shaft if the center-to-center spacing is less than 3 shaft diameters.
 701.4.7.2 Disposal of Excavate d Mate rial. Excavated material removed from the shaft and any drilling
 fluids used shall be disposed of in accordance with the contract documents, as directed by the engineer, and
 in compliance with federal and state laws.
 701.4.7.3 Worke r Entry Into Shaft Excavation. T he contractor shall not allow workers to enter the
 shaft excavation for any reason, unless both a suitable casing has been installed and adequate safety
 equipment and procedures have been provided to workers entering the excavation.
 701.4.8 Une xpe cte d O bstructions. When unexpected obstructions are encountered, the contractor shall
 notify the engineer immediately. Obstructions are defined as a impenetrable objects that a) cannot be
 removed or excavated with augers fitted with soil or rock teeth, drilling buckets and/or underreaming tools
 and b) cause a significant decrease in the rate of excavation advancement, relative to the rate of
 advancement for the rest of the shaft excavation with the particular strata that the obstruction is located
 in. T he engineer will be the sole judge of the significance of any reduced rate of shaft advancement and
 shall be present to evaluate the occurrence of the obstructions. Subsurface obstructions at drilled shaft
 locations shall be removed by the contractor. Such obstructions may include man-made materials such as
 old concrete foundations and natural materials such as boulders. T he contractor shall employ special
 procedures or tools which may include but are not limited to: chisels, boulder breakers, core barrels, air
 tools, hand excavation, temporary casings, and increasing the hole diameter. Blasting will not be permitted.
 In the event, unexpected obstructions are encountered, the contractor shall strictly follow the procedure
 provided for a differing site condition set forth in Sec 104. Any adjustment to the contract amount or time
 will only be those expressly permitted by the contract documents and only to the extent expressly
 provided in the contract documents. No contract adjustment will be determined, as to entitlement or
 amount on any basis other than under the contract as a differing site condition. Specifically, but not by way
 of limitation, the contractor agrees that the contractor will not be entitled to any contract adjustment
 arising from encountering an unexpected obstruction on the basis that, with respect to the obstruction, the
 Commission made: (1) a positive representation; (2) of a material fact; (3) which was false or incorrect; (4)
 as to which positive representation of material fact the contractor lacked knowledge that the
 representation was false or incorrect;
 (5) upon which positive representation of material fact the contractor asserts that the contractor relied;
 and (6) was damaged as a direct result of the positive representation of material fact.
 701.4.9 Lost Tools. Drilling tools lost in the excavation will not be considered obstructions and shall be
 promptly removed by the contractor. All work required to remove lost tools or to perform associated
 corrective work, including but not limited to repair of hole degradation due to removal operations, will be
 noncompensable and any effect on time of performance nonexcusable.
 701.4.10 Excavation Inspe ction.
 701.4.10.1 Inspe ction Equipme nt. T he contractor shall maintain at the job at all times, all equipment
 
 381
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 suitable for use in the shaft inspection.
 701.4.10.2 Re moval of Exce ss Se dime nt and Wate r. Final shaft depth shall be measured with approved
 methods after final cleaning by airlift, or other method approved by the engineer. Unless otherwise stated
 in the contract documents, a minimum of 50 percent of the base of each shaft shall have less than 1/2 inch
 of sediment at the time of concrete placement. T he maximum depth of sediment or any debris at any place
 on the base of the shaft shall not exceed 1 1/2 inches. For dry excavations, the maximum depth of water
 shall not exceed 3 inches prior to concrete pour. Shaft cleanliness will be verified by the engineer for wet or
 dry shafts.
 701.4.10.3 Vide o Came ra Inspe ction. T he primary means of inspecting a shaft excavation, steel casing
 and the rock socket shall be by video camera lowered into the shaft. T he contractor shall furnish all
 equipment necessary to conduct the camera inspection. T he contractor shall operate the camera and
 supporting equipment under the direction of the engineer in such a manner as to obtain optimum results
 from the equipment. T he video camera and lighting equipment shall be capable of operating in dry or
 submerged conditions encountered during the inspection. T he excavated shaft shall have the engineer ’s
 approval prior to proceeding with construction.
 701.4.10.3.1 Equipme nt. Methods and equipment for controlling the camera will be subject to approval
 from the engineer and achievement of a satisfactory video record.
 701.4.10.3.2 Drawings. T he contractor shall submit layout drawings to the engineer showing the relative
 position of all components of the video inspection system, including type and size of barge or other work
 area. T he information submitted shall include a written description of the operating procedure in a step-bystep sequence and shall state the source of power.
 701.4.10.3.3 Shaft Inspe ction. Inspection of a shaft by video camera shall be performed as directed by
 the engineer. T he excavated shaft, including the rock socket when applicable, shall be thoroughly cleaned
 of all loose fragments, sediment and turbidity prior to inspection. T he camera shall be operated such that
 optimum clarity of detail can be obtained and all surface areas of the shaft, including the rock socket and
 the rock socket’s base, can be observed. All scanning of the rock surfaces shall be recorded. After
 completion of the inspection of a rock socket, the engineer will direct whether or not drilling of the shaft
 shall be continued to a greater depth. Recordings shall be furnished to and shall become the property of the
 engineer upon completion of the work.
 701.4.11 Foundation Inspe ction. NX size cores will be required for drilled shafts with rock sockets, where
 NX refers to the nominal diameter of rock core, and the NX core barrel has a 2 1/8-inch inside diameter.
 At least 15 days prior to drilled shaft construction the contractor shall drill one NX size core at the center
 of each rock socket to a depth of 10 feet or twice the diameter of the rock socket, whichever is greater,
 below the bottom of the rock socket. T he contractor shall use the foundation inspection hole to determine
 the amount of casing needed and casing ordered prior to foundation inspections holes is at the contractor ’s
 risk. T he contractor may be directed to extend the rock socket to a lower elevation, resulting from the
 engineer ’s evaluation of the foundation inspection cores.
 701.4.11.1 Log of Excavate d Mate rial. T he contractor shall maintain a log of excavated material for
 each foundation inspection hole, and a rough draft of the logs shall be delivered to the engineer within 24
 hours of completion of the boring. A typed log prepared by a geologist or engineer along with
 recommendations for the tip of casing shall be delivered to the engineer within 5 days. T he log shall include
 the following:
 (a) T he amount of NX cored per run and the amount recovered. All core loss shall be noted and
 explained. Clay layers shall be noted and located on the log by depth.
 (b) T he Rock Quality Designation (RQD) for the NX core. T he bedding thickness and degree of
 weathering shall also be noted.
 (c) One unconfined compression test per 5 feet of NX core, unless otherwise specified by the
 contract documents or directed by the engineer, shall be run on samples of NX core from the rock
 socket. T he results of these tests shall be delivered to the engineer. T he results of the unconfined
 
 382
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 compression tests shall be reported in units of kips per square foot (ksf). Any effect on time of
 performance resulting from delays in delivery of the above test results to the engineer will be
 nonexcusable.
 (d) Color photographs of the core.
 701.4.11.2 Storage and Labe ling of Rock Core s. Rock cores shall be stored in structurally sound core
 boxes and shall be protected from the elements. T he core boxes shall be properly labeled to indicate
 location, depth, beginning elevation, contractor and date, and shall be delivered to the engineer.
 701.4.12 Re inforcing Ste e l Cage Fabrication and Place me nt. T he reinforcing steel cage, consisting
 of the longitudinal bars, ties, spirals, cage stiffener bars, spacers, centering devices, and other necessary
 appurtenances, shall be completely assembled as a unit, and shall be placed immediately after the shaft
 excavation is inspected and accepted, and just prior to shaft concrete placement. Temporary internal cage
 stiffeners shall be removed as the cage is placed in the shaft such that interference with the placement of
 concrete does not occur.
 701.4.12.1 Re inforcing Tie s, Splice s and Cle arance s. All reinforcing steel in the shaft shall be doublewire tied and supported such that the steel remains within the allowable tolerances specified herein during
 placement of concrete or casing removal. Splices shall be located as shown on the plans and in accordance
 with plan details. With approval from the engineer, mechanical bar splices meeting the requirements
 specified in the contract documents may be used. Mechanical bar splices in adjacent bars shall be staggered
 not less than 30 inches apart. Welding of reinforcing steel will not be permitted. T he reinforcing steel cage
 shall have sufficient rigidity to prevent racking or permanent deformations during delivery or installation.
 
 Shaf t Diameter
 2'-0" or less
 3'-0"
 4'-0"
 5'-0" or larger
 
 Concrete Cover
 Uncased Casing Remains
 3"
 3"
 3"
 3"
 4"
 4"
 6"
 6"
 
 Casing Withdrawn
 4"
 4"
 4"
 6"
 
 701.4.12.2 Space rs. Rolling spacers for reinforcing steel shall be used to minimize disturbance of the shaft
 sidewalls and to facilitate removal of the casing during concrete placement. Concrete spacers or other
 approved non-corrosive spacing devices shall be used at sufficient intervals, near the bottom and along the
 shaft at intervals not exceeding 5 feet , to ensure concentric location of the cage within the shaft
 excavation. When the vertical steel is greater than one inch in diameter, the maximum spacing may be
 increased to 10 feet. As a minimum, a set of spacers shall be provided within 2 feet of both the top and
 bottom of the shaft. In addition, one set of spacers shall be provided at both 2 feet above and below each
 change in shaft diameter. Non-corrosive spacers shall be provided at a minimum of one spacer per 30
 inches of circumference of cage with a minimum of three at each level to maintain the required
 reinforcement clearances. T he spacers shall be of adequate dimension to maintain the specified clearance
 between the outside of the reinforcing cage and the side of the excavated hole or casing.
 701.4.12.3 Bottom Supports. Approved non-corrosive bottom supports shall be provided for the
 reinforcing cage to ensure that the reinforcing is the correct distance above the bottom of shaft. T he
 bottom supports shall not be used to support the weight of the cage. In the event that the shaft has been
 excavated below the anticipated tip elevation, the reinforcing cage shall be extended at the lower tip end by
 lap lengths for No. 11 bars or smaller or by use of mechanical connectors. Splices of adjacent bars will not
 need to be staggered in this situation and all of the reinforcing bars may be spliced at a given location.
 Reinforcement will not be required for the bottom 12 inches.
 701.4.12.4 Durability of Space rs. Concrete spacers and bottom supports shall be constructed of concrete
 equal in quality and durability to the concrete specified for the shaft. Spacers fabricated from reinforcing
 steel shall be epoxy coated.
 701.4.12.5 Prote ction of Re inforcing Cage . T he reinforcing cage bottom supports shall be positioned
 such that the reinforcing steel is not allowed to come into contact with the soil or rock and to ensure that
 the bottom of the cage is maintained at the proper distance above the base as identified in the contract
 
 383
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 documents or directed by the engineer.
 701.4.12.6 Che ck of Tole rance s for Place me nt of Re inforcing Cage . T he elevation of the top of the
 reinforcing cage shall be checked before and after the concrete is placed. T he reinforcing cage shall be
 maintained within the specified tolerances, and the contractor shall make corrections to those tolerances,
 as required, to the satisfaction of the engineer. No additional shafts shall be constructed until the contractor
 has modified the reinforcing cage support to obtain the required tolerances.
 701.4.13 Concre te Place me nt.
 701.4.13.1 Ge ne ral Conside rations. Accumulations of water in casings and excess sediment at the base
 shall be removed as described herein before the concrete is placed. No concrete shall be placed until all
 casings, if used, within a 15-foot radius have been installed. Within the 15-foot radius, all driving or
 vibratory installation methods shall be discontinued until the concrete in the last shaft has set at least five
 days. Concrete placement shall begin as soon as possible after completion of the excavation, inspection
 and setting of the reinforcing cage, and shall proceed in a continuous operation from the bottom of the
 shaft to the plan construction joint or above as specified herein. An unplanned stoppage of work may
 require an emergency construction joint during the shaft construction.
 701.4.13.1.1 Place me nt of Concre te in the Shaft. Concrete shall be placed for each shaft with the flow
 of concrete directed down the center of the shaft. Concrete shall be placed by free fall or through a tremie
 or concrete pump. T he free fall placement method will only be permitted in dry holes when approved by
 the engineer. T he maximum height of free fall placement shall be 80 feet. Concrete placed by free fall shall
 fall directly to the base without contacting either the reinforcing cage or hole sidewall. Drop chutes may be
 used to direct concrete to the base during free fall placement.
 701.4.13.1.2 Exte nt of Concre te Place me nt. Concrete placement shall continue after the shaft is filled
 until good quality concrete, as determined by the engineer, is evident at the plan construction joint at the
 top of the shaft and until a minimum of 18 inches of concrete, measured vertically, has been expelled.
 Immediately after concrete placement has been completed, all contaminated concrete and deleterious
 material accumulated above the top of shaft shall be removed to within one foot of plan top of shaft. Any
 concrete remaining above the top of shaft shall be carefully removed to the plan construction joint after
 curing and excess casing removal.
 701.4.13.1.3 Time Limitations. T he elapsed time from the beginning of concrete placement in the shaft
 to the completion of the placement shall not exceed two hours. All admixtures shall be adjusted for the
 conditions encountered on the job so the concrete remains in a workable plastic state throughout the twohour placement limit. Prior to concrete placement, the contractor shall provide test results of both a trial
 mix and a slump loss test conducted by an approved testing laboratory using approved methods to
 demonstrate that the concrete meets the two-hour requirement. T he contractor may request a longer
 placement time if a concrete mix is provided that will maintain a slump of 6 inches or greater over the
 longer placement time in the entire shaft as demonstrated by trial mix and slump loss tests. T he trial mix
 and slump loss tests shall be conducted using concrete and ambient temperatures approved for site
 conditions.
 701.4.13.1.4 Ade quacy of Concre te Place me nt Me thod. Failure to demonstrate the adequacy of
 concrete placement methods or equipment during construction of any technique or production shafts will
 be cause for the engineer to require appropriate alterations in equipment or methods by the contractor to
 eliminate unsatisfactory results. Drilled shafts that are completed, but do not meet the concrete placement
 requirements, will be unacceptable. T he contractor shall correct all unacceptable completed shafts to the
 satisfaction of the engineer at the contractor ’s expense.
 701.4.13.2 Concre te Place me nt by Tre mie . T remies used to place concrete shall consist of a tube of
 sufficient length to discharge concrete at the shaft base elevation. T he tremie shall have sufficient weight
 to rest on the shaft bottom before the start of concrete placement and to prevent curling of the tremie line
 during placement of the concrete. T he tremie shall not contain aluminum parts that may come in contact
 with the concrete. A tremie shall consist of a watertight tube having an inside diameter of no less than 10
 inches and fitted with a hopper at the top. T he inside and outside surfaces of the tremie shall be clean and
 smooth to permit both flow of concrete and unimpeded withdrawal during concrete placement. T he tremie
 
 384
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 wall thickness shall be adequate to prevent crimping or sharp bends that restrict concrete placement.
 T remies used for depositing concrete in a dry drilled shaft excavation shall be supported such that the free
 fall of the concrete is less than 80 feet at all times.
 701.4.13.2.1 Adjustme nt of Concre te Fre e Fall or Rate of Concre te Flow. If the free fall concrete
 causes the shaft excavation to cave or slough, the contractor shall control the movement of concrete by
 reducing the free fall of the concrete or the rate of flow of concrete into the excavation. T he contractor
 shall be responsible for proposing, developing, and after approval from the engineer, implementing
 corrective work.
 701.4.13.2.2 Tre mie O pe ration. Underwater placement of concrete shall not begin until the tremie is at
 the shaft base elevation. T he discharge end of the tremie shall be constructed to permit the free radial flow
 of concrete during placement operations. T he tremie discharge end shall remain immersed as deep as
 practical in the concrete, but shall be no less than 5 feet at all times. T he tremie shall be supported such as
 to permit free movement of the discharge end over the entire top surface of the work and to permit rapid
 lowering when necessary to retard or stop the flow of concrete. T he discharge end shall be sealed closed at
 the start of work to prevent water from entering the tube before the tube is filled with concrete. After
 placement has started, the level of the concrete in the tremie shall be maintained above the level of slurry
 or water in the borehole at all times to prevent water or slurry intrusion into the shaft concrete. If water
 enters the tube after placement is started, the tremie shall be withdrawn, the discharge end resealed, and the
 placement restarted. T he flow of concrete shall be continuous until the work is completed.
 701.4.13.2.3 Re moval of Tre mie O rifice From Concre te . If at any time during the concrete pour,
 when using the wet construction method, the tremie line orifice is removed from the fluid concrete column
 and discharges concrete above the rising concrete surface, the entire drilled shaft will be considered
 defective. In such a case, the contractor shall remove the reinforcing cage and concrete, complete any
 necessary sidewall cleaning or overreaming as directed by the engineer, and repour the shaft. Corrections
 made by the contractor will be noncompensable and any effect on time of performance nonexcusable.
 701.4.13.3 Concre te Place me nt by Pump. Concrete pumps and lines may be used for concrete
 placement by either the wet or dry construction method. All pump lines shall have a minimum diameter of
 5 inches and shall be constructed with watertight joints. Concrete placement shall not begin until the pump
 line discharge orifice is at the shaft base elevation. For the wet construction method, a plug or similar
 device shall be used to separate the concrete from the fluid in the hole until pumping begins. T he plug shall
 either be removed from the excavation or shall be of a material that does not cause a defect in the shaft if
 the plug is not removed. T he discharge orifice shall remain at least 5 feet below the surface of the fluid
 concrete. If at any time during the concrete pour the pump line orifice is removed from the fluid concrete
 column and discharges concrete above the rising concrete level, the shaft will be considered defective. In
 such a case, the contractor shall remove the reinforcing cage and concrete, complete any necessary sidewall
 cleaning or overreaming as directed by the engineer, and repour the shaft. Corrections made by the
 contractor will be noncompensable and any effect on time of performance nonexcusable.
 701.4.13.4 Drop Chute s. Drop chutes may be used to direct placement of free fall concrete down the
 center of the shaft excavations where the maximum depth of water does not exceed one inch. T he free fall
 method of placement shall not be used in wet excavations. Drop chutes shall be a smooth tube constructed
 either as a continuous one-piece unit or as removable sections. Aluminum drop chutes will not be
 permitted. Concrete may be placed through either a hopper at the top of the tube or side openings as the
 drop chute is retrieved during concrete placement. T he drop chute shall be supported such that the free fall
 of the concrete measured from the bottom of the chute is less than 80 feet at all times.
 701.4.14 Construction Joints. Unless otherwise approved by the engineer, construction joints shall be
 made only where shown on the plans. All planned reinforcing steel shall extend uninterrupted through
 joints. Unless otherwise shown on the plans, horizontal joints may be constructed without keys. Surfaces of
 fresh concrete at horizontal construction joints shall be rough floated sufficiently to thoroughly
 consolidate the surface and to intentionally leave the surface in a roughened condition. Shear keys, if
 required, shall consist of formed depressions in the surface covering approximately one-third of the contact
 surface.
 701.4.15 Concre te Prote ction and Curing. For at least 48 hours after shaft concrete has been placed,
 
 385
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 no construction operations that will cause soil movement adjacent to the shaft shall be conducted, except
 for movement of light construction equipment. Portions of drilled shafts exposed to a body of water shall
 be protected from the action of water by leaving the forms in place for at least seven days after concrete
 placement or until the shaft concrete reaches a minimum strength of 2,500 psi. After placement, the
 temporarily exposed surfaces of the shaft concrete shall be cured to prevent loss of water by use of one or
 more of the approved methods. Curing shall be in accordance with Sec 502.
 701.4.16 Construction Tole rance s. During excavation of the shaft, the contractor shall make frequent
 checks on the plumbness, alignment and dimensions of the shaft. Any deviation exceeding the allowable
 construction tolerances specified herein shall be corrected with a procedure approved by the engineer.
 Drilled shaft excavations constructed in such a manner that the concrete shaft cannot be completed within
 the required tolerances will not be accepted. Correction methods shall be submitted by the contractor for
 the engineer ’s approval. Drilled shaft construction shall not begin until approval has been obtained. When
 a shaft excavation is completed with unacceptable tolerances, the contractor shall propose, develop and,
 after approval from the engineer, implement corrective work. Redesign drawings and computations
 submitted by the contractor shall be signed by a professional engineer registered to practice in the State of
 Missouri. T he following construction tolerances will apply to drilled shafts unless stated otherwise in the
 contract documents:
 (a) Temporary casing diameters shall provide a final shaft diameter as shown on the plans. When
 approved by the engineer, the contractor may provide a larger casing at the contractor ’s expense.
 (b) Shafts shall be constructed such that the center of the top of the shaft is within 3 inches of
 plan position in the horizontal plane at the plan elevation for the top of the shaft.
 (c) T he vertical alignment of a vertical shaft excavation shall not vary from the plan alignment
 by more than 1/4 inch per foot of depth. T he alignment of a battered shaft excavation shall not
 vary by more than 1/2 inch per foot of the distance along the axis of the shaft from the prescribed
 batter.
 (d) After all the shaft concrete is placed, the top of the reinforcing steel cage shall be no more
 than 6 inches above and no more than 3 inches below plan position.
 (e) T he top elevation of the shaft shall be no more than one inch above or 3 inches below the
 plan top of shaft elevation.
 (f) T he bottom of the shaft excavation shall be normal to the axis of the shaft within a tolerance
 of 3/8 inch per foot of shaft diameter.
 701.4.17 Inte grity Te sting. T he completed shaft shall be subjected to the specified testing methods, such
 as concrete coring or sonic logging testing, to determine the extent of any defects that may be present.
 Work and material required for testing shall be furnished by the contractor and will be paid for in
 accordance with the contract documents. If testing reveals voids or discontinuities in the concrete that, as
 determined by the engineer, indicate that the shaft is not structurally adequate, the shaft will be rejected.
 T he contractor shall then repair, replace or supplement the defective shaft in a method approved by the
 engineer. T he construction of additional drilled shafts shall be discontinued until the contractor
 demonstrates the adequacy of the shaft construction method to the satisfaction of the engineer. Any
 additional work required by the contractor as a result of shaft defects will be noncompensable and any
 effect on time of performance nonexcusable.
 701.4.17.1 Concre te Coring. At locations where concrete coring is to be provided, as indicated in the
 contract documents or as directed by the engineer, the following will apply. Upon completion of placing
 concrete and after waiting a minimum of 48 hours, the top surface of concrete shall be cleaned of laitance
 and any unsound concrete, and then one core hole shall be drilled completely through the shaft concrete
 and the rock socket to approximately one foot below the bottom of the rock socket of each shaft.
 Provisions for the inspection of the concrete surface shall be in accordance with the applicable
 requirements described herein. Core holes shall be drilled at locations specified by the engineer. T he holes
 shall be drilled to recover NX size cores. T he core samples recovered shall be labeled as to the location
 from which the samples were taken. T he samples shall be delivered to the engineer for examination. If the
 cores indicate defective concrete in the shaft, which in the judgment of the engineer impairs the strength
 
 386
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 of the completed shaft, the contractor shall drill additional cores as directed by the engineer. If the
 concrete is found to be defective, the contractor shall submit to the engineer in writing a proposal for
 correction, and those corrective procedures shall be approved by the engineer before such corrective work
 is undertaken. T he cored holes in non-defective concrete shall be filled with grout such that all voids are
 filled. All grout used for core holes shall be in accordance with Sec 1066. No direct payment will be made
 for grout and grouting.
 701.4.17.2 Sonic Logging Te sting. T he contractor shall perform non-destructive integrity testing on
 completed drilled shafts and rock sockets using the crosshole sonic logging (CSL) method for concrete
 drilled shafts. T he tests shall be conducted as indicated on the plans or other contract documents, or as
 directed by the engineer. Sonic logging measurements and data interpretation shall be performed by a CSL
 consultant with at least two years of experience in CSL drilled shaft testing. T he contractor shall submit the
 testing organization experience record to the engineer, along with a written description of the testing
 procedures, operation manuals for the testing equipment, and samples of previous test results indicating
 both sound and defective concrete. T he contractor shall inform the engineer of scheduled test dates at least
 seven days prior to CSL testing. T he contractor shall provide reasonable access to the shaft top for
 performance of the sonic logging testing.
 701.4.17.2.1 Installation of Pipe s. T he contractor shall furnish and install 2-inch nominal inside
 diameter steel pipes, AST M A 53, Standard Weight, for use in sonic testing of each drilled shaft. Pipes shall
 be installed in each drilled shaft at the locations shown on the plans, as required by the testing agency or as
 directed by the engineer. T he pipes shall be sufficiently regular and free from defects to permit the free and
 unobstructed passage of the probes. T he pipe shall be installed such that all internal joints are flush.
 Stiffening devices such as mandrels, tape or similar material to seal the joints shall not be used. Pipe shall be
 watertight with clean internal and external faces, the latter to ensure a good bond between the concrete and
 the pipes. T he pipes shall be fitted with a screw-on watertight shoe and cap and shall be securely fixed to
 the interior of the reinforcement cage with a minimum cover of 3 inches from the shaft periphery. T he
 pipes shall be as near to parallel as possible, equally spaced and vertical. Where several sections of pipe are
 required to reach the full length, joints shall be made watertight. T he pipes shall be filled with water and
 plugged or capped before shaft concrete is poured. T he upper end of the pipe shall not be left open after
 the pour. T he pipes shall extend at least 3 feet above the top of the concrete in the shaft to compensate
 for water displaced by insertion and removal of the transmitter, receiver, and cable. For shafts with a rock
 socket, the lower end of the pipes shall extend to the bottom of the rock socket. Care shall be taken during
 the drilled shaft concrete pour to not damage the pipes. If a tremie is used, the tremie shall not be
 permitted to rest on top of the pipes during the pour. After completion of the sonic logging and final
 acceptance of the drilled shaft, the contractor shall fill the access pipes with grout.
 701.4.17.2.2 Sonic Logging Equipme nt. T he sonic logging equipment furnished by the CSL consultant
 shall consist of all necessary supplies, support equipment and power to perform the sonic logging testing
 requirements as described herein.
 701.4.17.2.3 Sonic Logging Te st Proce dure . T he drilled shaft shall be tested between 2 and 40 days after
 concrete placement. T he following procedures shall apply:
 (a) Pipes shall be checked to ensure the pipes are free from blockages and are filled with water any
 addition of water shall be noted and reported.
 (b) Levels shall be taken on top of each pipe, each pipe shall be plumbed and the length shall be
 recorded.
 (c) Testing shall be performed between each pair of adjacent pipes around the shaft perimeter and
 also in pairing combinations between each pipe with all other pipes in the shaft. If concrete coring
 is performed to confirm the nature of an anomaly identified during CSL testing, a subsequent CSL
 survey shall be performed using the concrete core hole(s) and the CSL access pipes.
 (d) All tests shall be carried out with the probes in the same horizontal plane unless the engineer
 directs that defects be further evaluated with the probes on different horizontal planes.
 (e) T he probes shall be raised simultaneously from the bottom of the pipes ensuring that all slack
 
 387
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 is taken out of the cables before the analyzer is switched on, and that the distance between
 transducers remains constant during the course of the test. T he speed of ascent shall be less than
 12 inches per second. Measurements shall be taken at 3-inch intervals or less. Anomalies indicated
 by reduced velocity in the drilled shaft concrete and significantly lower energy shall be reported. If
 anomalies are detected, additional tests with two or more sources per receiver with vertical offsets
 of greater than or equal to 20 inches may be conducted at the request of the engineer between the
 same tubes unless the anomaly is within 20 inches of the bottom of the shaft.
 (f) T he contractor shall provide accurate measurements of probe depths on the logs.
 701.4.17.2.4 Re cord of Te sting. Preliminary results of the testing shall be provided on site prior to the
 CSL consultant leaving the site. A detailed CSL report and test data shall be submitted to the engineer within
 seven days. T he CSL report shall be signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer. T he CSL report shall
 include, but is not limited to, the following: project identification and dates of testing, a table and schematic
 showing shafts tested with accurate identification of tube coordinates and collar elevation, name of
 personnel that performed the tests and interpretation and those personnel’s affiliation, equipment used,
 data logs, interpretation, analysis, and results. T he data logs shall include XY plots of velocity and energy
 versus depth. CSL data shall be processed to provide easy to understand 2D cross-sections between tubes for
 all tube pair combinations. T hese plots shall be annotated by the CSL consultant as appropriate to delineate
 anomalous results. If offset surveys are performed as part of 3D tomography, data plots shall include 3D
 volumetric images for the entire shaft, color-coded, to indicate velocity or energy variations along the
 shaft. Locations and geometry of anomalies or unconsolidated zones shall be identified in 3D color images
 with detailed discussion. T he results for CSL and 3D surveys shall be based on the percentage decrease in
 velocity as correlated to the following Concrete Condition Rating Criteria (CCRC). T he velocity of good
 concrete shall be established from a nearby zone of good concrete. Deviations from the velocity shall be
 used for determining the Concrete Condition Rating.
 Concrete Condition Rating Criteria
 Concrete
 Rating
 Velocity
 Indicative
 Condition Rating Symbol
 Reduction
 Results
 Good
 G
 0 to 10%
 Acceptable concrete
 Minor concrete contamination
 Questionable
 Q
 10% to 25%
 or intrusion. Questionable
 quality concrete.
 P ossible defects exist,
 possible water slurry
 P oor
 P /D
 > 25%
 contamination, soil intrusion,
 and or poor quality concrete.
 Water intrusion, or water
 Water
 W
 V= 4760 to 5005 ft/sec filled gravel intrusion with
 few or no fines present.
 Soil intrusion or other severe
 No Signal
 NS
 No signal received
 defect absorbed the signal,
 tube debonding if near top.
 
 701.4.17.2.5 Corre ction of Unacce ptable Re sults. T he contractor shall immediately inform the
 engineer of any suspected anomalies, honeycombing or poor concrete quality detected by testing. T he
 contractor and CSL consultant shall duly perform further tests as directed by the engineer to evaluate the
 extent of any detected anomalies. Core drilling, or other investigative methods as approved by the
 engineer, shall be performed to further investigate the anomaly. If a defect is confirmed, the contractor
 shall bear all costs involved with the shaft coring, grouting and remediation. If no defect is found the length
 of the core will be eligible for payment. Within 14 days of the completion of testing, the contractor shall
 provide a report signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Missouri providing
 the results of the additional investigations and recommendations to accept or repair the shaft. T he report
 shall also contain recommendations for modification of construction procedures to prevent defects for
 subsequent shaft installations. T he dates of the completion of drilling, cleaning, steel placement and
 concrete pour shall also be provided. Construction above the top of shaft shall not be performed until the
 shaft has been accepted by the engineer.
 701.5 Drille d Shaft Load Te sts. All load tests, when required by the contract documents, shall be
 completed and submitted to the engineer for review and approval before construction of any production
 drilled shafts. T he locations of load test shafts, the maximum loads to be applied, the test equipment to be
 
 388
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 furnished by the contractor, and the actual sequence of the load testing shall be as shown on the plans or as
 specified in the contract documents. After completion of testing, test shafts not used as production shafts
 shall be cut off at an elevation 3 feet below the finished ground line. T he portion of shafts cut off shall be
 disposed of by the contractor, at the contractor ’s expense, in a manner approved by the engineer.
 701.6 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 701.6.1 Drille d Shaft. Accepted drilled shafts will be measured for payment to the nearest 0.10 linear
 foot of length along the axis of each shaft complete-in-place. For shafts without a rock socket,
 measurement will be from the plan top of the shaft elevation to the bottom of the shaft. For shafts with a
 rock socket, measurement will be from the plan top of the shaft to the top of the rock socket. “ Top of the
 rock socket” will be defined as the upper elevation at which rock occurs across the entire width of the
 shaft, as determined by the engineer. Reinforcing steel will be measured for payment in accordance with Sec
 706.
 701.6.2 Rock Socke t. T he accepted rock sockets, if required, will be measured for payment to the nearest
 0.10 linear foot of length along the axis of each rock socket in-place from the top elevation of the rock,
 as determined by the engineer and in accordance with Sec 701.6.1, to the bottom of the rock socket as
 built. In the event that additional rock socket construction is directed by the engineer, the additional length
 will be measured to the nearest 0.10 linear foot. Reinforcing steel will be measured for payment in
 accordance with Sec 706.
 701.6.3 Te chnique Shafts. Accepted technique shafts, if required, will be measured for payment to the
 nearest 0.10 linear foot of length along the axis of each shaft in-place from the plan top of the shaft
 elevation to the bottom of the rock socket or shaft as built for each size of acceptable technique shaft
 drilled, including rock socket. Reinforcing steel will be measured for payment in accordance with Sec 706.
 701.6.4 Te le vision Came ra Inspe ction. Payment for one complete television camera inspection of each
 shaft, including the rock socket when applicable, will be included in the payment for drilled shafts. Any
 additional television inspections required by the engineer due to extending the rock socket to a greater
 depth or when supplementary inspections are required by the engineer and no defects are found, will be
 measured for payment as supplementary television camera inspection, per each.
 701.6.5 Foundation Inspe ction Hole s. Measurement for payment for foundation inspection holes will
 be to the nearest 0.10 linear foot of length along the axis of each hole by the linear foot. Measurement will
 be from the top of the rock socket to the bottom of the foundation inspection hole. If the engineer directs
 foundation inspection borings more than 10 feet or twice the diameter of the rock socket, whichever is
 greater, below the anticipated bottom of the rock socket elevation as shown on the plans, measurement for
 payment for that portion of the boring in excess of 10 feet below or twice the diameter anticipated bottom
 of the rock socket elevation as shown on the plans will be to the nearest 0.10 linear foot of excess.
 701.6.6 Concre te Coring. Measurement for payment for concrete cores will be to the nearest 0.10 linear
 foot of length along the axis of the shaft from the top of concrete to a point as determined by the
 engineer, and may extend the entire length of the shaft plus one foot below the bottom of the rock socket.
 701.6.7 Sonic Logging Te sting. Sonic logging testing of drilled shafts, as required, will be measured for
 payment per each.
 701.6.8 Drille d Shaft Load Te sts. Load tests will be measured for payment per each load test performed.
 701.7 Basis of Payme nt.
 701.7.1 Drille d Shaft. Payment will be considered full compensation for all steel casing required, costs of
 drilling, excavation, slurry, cleaning, an acceptable method of inspection as required, furnishing and placing
 concrete, grouting and incidental work and material required by the contract documents. Payment for any
 drilled shaft installed and accepted will be at the contract unit price per linear foot for the diameter of the
 drilled shafts specified, irrespective of the character of the material actually encountered during excavation.
 No additional compensation will be made for concrete required to fill an oversized casing or for oversized
 excavation. If the method of construction requires that drilled shaft casing be seated into the sound rock
 
 389
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 such that the bottom of the casing is below the determined top of sound rock elevation, payment for
 excavation below the top of the sound rock layer (top of the rock socket) will be included in the payment
 for the rock socket. If sound rock is encountered within the excavation at which point a rock auger, core
 barrel or other rock-removing specialty tool must be used by the contractor before the top of the sound
 rock elevation to be used as “ top of the rock socket” is confirmed by the engineer, that work will be paid
 for as rock socket excavation. Payment for reinforcing steel will be in accordance with Sec 706.
 701.7.2 Rock Socke t. Payment will be considered full compensation for drilling, excavation, slurry,
 cleaning, dewatering, an acceptable method of inspection as required, furnishing and placing concrete, and
 incidental work and material according to the contract documents. For payment purposes the length of any
 rock socket installed and accepted shall be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the
 diameter of the rock socket specified, irrespective of the character of the material actually encountered
 during excavation. In the event that the engineer orders additional rock socket construction, payment for
 the additional length will be at the rate of 150 percent of the contract unit price per linear foot of rock
 socket up to a maximum additional length of 8 feet. Any work necessary to extend the length of the rock
 socket more than the additional 8 feet will be paid for as changes in the work in accordance with Sec 104.3.
 Payment at the adjusted rate will be considered full compensation for the additional excavation into rock,
 all additional concrete, except reinforcing steel, including any and all splices, and all incidentals necessary
 to complete the work down to the elevation designated by the engineer. Reinforcing steel will be paid for in
 accordance with Sec 706.
 701.7.3 Te chnique Shafts. Payment for technique shafts will be in accordance with the contract unit
 prices for the appropriate drilled shaft and rock socket diameters. Payment will be considered full
 compensation for any steel casing required, all costs of drilling, excavation, an acceptable method of
 inspection as required, furnishing and placing concrete, grouting and incidental work, and material necessary
 to satisfactorily construct the technique shafts according to the contract documents. Reinforcing steel will
 be paid for in accordance with
 Sec 706.
 701.7.4 Une xpe cte d O bstructions. Contract adjustment, in time or amount, resulting from encountering
 any obstructions in the work covered by Sec 701 will be made only if the obstruction constitutes a differing
 site condition, as defined by the contract. Contract adjustments will be determined only under the terms of
 the contract for adjustments in time or compensation due to encountering a differing site condition.
 Contract adjustments will be allowed only to the extent, in type and amount of contract adjustment, that
 such adjustment is expressly allowed for or permitted by the contract documents, specifically: (1) Secs
 109.4 through 109.4.3 for cost adjustment; (2) Sec 109.11 for any compensable delay to the work to deal
 with the obstruction, but not for any effect upon the unchanged work; and (3) Sec 108.14 to determine any
 adjustment in contract time.
 701.7.5 Vide o Came ra Inspe ction. Payment for one complete video camera inspection of each shaft,
 including the rock socket when applicable, will be paid at the unit bid price. Any additional video camera
 inspections required by the engineer due to extending the rock socket to a greater depth, or when
 supplementary inspections are required by the engineer and no defects are found, will be paid for at the
 contract unit bid price for video camera inspection. Payment will not be made for supplementary video
 camera inspections that reveal defects due to the contractor ’s operation. Payment for video camera
 inspection will be considered full compensation for moving in equipment, flushing turbid water from the
 shaft, conducting the actual scanning as specified, furnishing video recording, removing equipment, and all
 tools, labor and any incidentals necessary to complete the work.
 701.7.6 Foundation Inspe ction Hole s. Payment for foundation inspection holes will be at the contract
 unit price and will be considered full compensation for drilling or coring the holes, extracting and packaging
 the samples or cores, laboratory testing, delivering the samples or cores to the specified MoDOT location
 and for all other expenses necessary to complete the work. If the engineer directs foundation inspection
 borings more than 10 feet or twice the diameter of the rock socket, whichever is greater, below the
 anticipated bottom of rock socket elevation as shown on the plans, payment for that portion of the boring
 in excess of 10 feet or twice the diameter of the rock socket, whichever is greater, below the anticipated
 bottom of the rock socket elevation as shown on the plans will be at the rate of 150 percent of the
 contract price per linear foot of excess.
 
 390
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 701.7.7 Concre te Coring. Payment for concrete coring will be considered full compensation for all
 material, labor, tools, equipment, grouting and incidentals necessary to complete the work. T he number of
 feet of cored holes may vary from the estimated quantities, but the contract unit price shall prevail
 regardless of the variation. When concrete coring has not been setup as a contract item and is eligible for
 payment, payment for concrete coring will be made per foot at the fixed contract unit price specified in
 Sec 109.
 701.7.8 Sonic Logging Te sting. Payment for sonic logging testing of drilled shafts as required by the
 engineer will be made at the contract unit price per each for sonic logging testing. No payment will be made
 for supplementary sonic logging testing to evaluate defects. Payment for sonic logging testing will be
 considered full compensation for providing all equipment, access pipes, conducting the actual probing
 measurements as specified, furnishing reports, removing equipment, and all tools, labor and any incidentals
 necessary to complete the work. T he number of sonic logging inspections may vary from the estimated
 quantities, but the contract unit price shall prevail regardless of the variation.
 701.7.9 Drille d Shaft Load Te sts. Payment will be at the contract unit price and will be considered full
 compensation for all costs related to the performance of the load tests as specified by the contract
 documents.
 701.7.10 We lding Inspe ction. If evidence of poor welding is found, radiographing or other nondestructive testing of welds required by the engineer will be noncompensable and any effect on time of
 performance nonexcusable.
 
 391
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 702
 LO AD-BEARING PILES
 702.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and driving concrete and steel load-bearing piles
 to the minimum nominal axial compressive resistance and penetration required, at the location shown on
 the plans.
 702.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Section/Specif ication
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete
 1036
 Cast-In-P lace P ile Shells (Thick Shell Type)
 ASTM A 252 Grade 2 or 3
 Welded or Seamless Steel P ipe
 AASHTO M 270, Grade 50
 Closure P lates
 (ASTM A 709 Grade 50)
 AASHTO M 270, Grade 50
 Structural Steel P ile
 (ASTM A 709 Grade 50)
 Fluted P ipe
 SAE-1010 or SAE-1015
 Forged Steel Tips or Noses
 SAE-1020
 ASTM A 27, Grade 65-35
 P ile P oint Reinforcement
 or ASTM A 148, Grade 9060
 Galvanizing
 1080, ASTM A 123
 Galvanizing Repair
 1080, ASTM A 780*
 
 *Zinc rich paints will not be allowed.
 702.2.1 Cast-In-Place Concre te Pile s. Cast-in-place concrete piles shall consist of Class B-1 concrete
 cast in pre-driven metal shells. T he metal shells shall be in accordance with the shape, size and minimum
 shell thickness shown on the plans, or to an approved equivalent section. All material, proportioning, airentraining, mixing, slump and transporting of concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501. Metal shells
 shall hold the original form without distortion after being driven, and shall be free from water, soil and
 other deleterious matter when concrete is cast in the shells.
 702.2.2 Structural Ste e l Pile s. Structural steel piles shall be of the size, weight and structural shape
 shown on the plans. Piles shall not have a camber or sweep in excess of 1/8 inch multiplied by the length of
 pile in feet divided by five. Steel piles shall be stored such that damage to the piling does not occur.
 702.2.3 Pile Point Re inforce me nt. Pile point reinforcement shall be furnished and installed on loadbearing piles at locations shown on the plans. Pile point reinforcement for steel piles shall be furnished and
 installed in accordance with Sec 1080, except as modified herein.
 702.2.4 Pile Le ngth. T he contractor shall be fully responsible for the lengths the contractor furnishes for
 driving to obtain the specified minimum nominal axial compressive resistance and penetration. T he pile
 lengths shown on the plans shall be considered approximate lengths.
 702.2.5 Te st Pile s. Test piles shall be of the same material and size as the permanent piles. Test piles shall
 be of such length as to permit driving the tips to an elevation 10 feet below that indicated by plan lengths.
 702.2.6 Ce rtification. For structural steel piles and thick shells for cast-in-place piles, the contractor
 shall furnish two copies of a certification from the pile manufacturer or fabricator setting out the
 designated specification with which the material furnished complies.
 702.3 Equipme nt.
 702.3.1 Driving Equipme nt. Piles shall be driven with power-driven hammers, or by a combination of
 power-driven hammer and water jets. Power-driven hammers will be defined as hammers operated by steam,
 air or diesel power. For determining the energy per blow of diesel power hammers without a fully enclosed
 ram, the manufacturer's energy rating for the hammer will apply and may be assumed equal to the ram
 weight times the stroke. If the contractor desires to check a diesel power hammer against an approved
 
 392
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 steam hammer on a specified type of pile at a particular site, the contractor may do so at the contractor ’s
 expense, and the checked rating of the diesel powered hammer will be used in determination of pile nominal
 axial compressive resistances at that site. Diesel hammers that have a fully enclosed ram shall be equipped
 with a gauge and accompanying charts which evaluate the equivalent manufacturer's rated energy being
 produced under any driving condition.
 702.3.2 Le ads. Pile driver leads shall be constructed in such a manner as to afford freedom of movement
 of the hammer, and leads shall be held in position by guys or stiffener braces to ensure support to the pile
 during driving. Inclined leads shall be used for the driving of battered piles.
 702.3.3 Followe rs. Followers may be used in driving piles only if approved in writing by the engineer. If a
 follower is used, one pile of every group of ten shall be driven without a follower to determine the available
 nominal axial compressive resistance of the group.
 702.3.4 Wate r Je ts. Water jets used to aid in driving piles shall be sufficient in number to deliver a volume
 and pressure of water at the jet nozzles that will freely erode the material adjacent to the pile. T he use of
 water jets shall be discontinued before the final penetration is reached, and piles shall be driven to secure a
 final penetration of no less than 2 feet if the nature of the soil permits.
 702.3.5 Hamme r Ene rgy. T he minimum energy developed by hammer per blow shall be no less than the
 following:
 Hammer Energy
 Minimum Hammer Energy Required per Blow,
 foot-pound (ft-lb)
 The largest of the following:
 (a) 3.0 ft-lb/lb times the total pile weight in
 Steel Shells for
 pounds, including mandrel if used
 Cast-In-P lace
 Type of P ile
 
 (b) 8,000 ft-lb.
 The largest of the following:
 (a) 3.0 ft-lb/lb times the total pile weight in
 pounds, including mandrel if used.
 Structural Steel (b) 32 ft-lb/kip times the minimum nominal axial
 compressive resistance in kips, divided by the
 pile batter factor, B, if applicable.
 (c) 8,000 ft-lb.
 
 702.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 702.4.1 Te st Pile s. T he contractor shall furnish and drive test piles at locations specified. Where required,
 test piles shall be driven to refusal or to a capacity 50 percent greater than that shown on the plans. In all
 cases, test piles shall be driven to at least the minimum tip elevation shown on the plans for permanent
 piles. If no minimum tip elevation is shown on the plans, piles shall have a tip elevation at least 10 feet
 below the bottom of the supported footing or 10 feet below the natural ground line, whichever is lower,
 unless specifically authorized otherwise by the engineer. Test piles shall be driven with the same type of
 equipment as will be used for driving the permanent piles. Before driving test piles, the excavation shall be
 completed to an elevation no more than 2 feet above the proposed grade at the point where a test pile is to
 be driven. Test piles not driven in a permanent location shall be cut off, or pulled and backfilled as
 approved by the engineer.
 702.4.2 Load-Be aring Pile s. Load-bearing piles shall not be driven until after the excavation for the
 footing has been substantially completed. T he heads of piles shall be protected against damage during
 driving. T he procedure incident to the driving of piles shall not subject piles to excessive and undue abuse.
 Any pile broken or damaged by reason of internal defects, by improper driving, or driven outside of the
 pile’s proper location, shall be removed and replaced, or a second adjacent pile may be driven if this can be
 done without detriment to the structure, as determined by the engineer.
 702.4.3 Pre boring. Where piles are to be driven through more than 5 feet of compacted embankment
 that has been in place for less than five years, holes shall be prebored entirely through the embankment to
 
 393
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 the lowest elevation of the natural ground line adjacent to the embankment, or as shown on the plans. T he
 holes shall have a diameter no less than that of the pile. After the pile is placed in the hole and before
 driving begins, the space remaining around the pile shall be filled with sand or other approved material
 before and maintained full during the driving of the pile.
 702.4.3.1 Other locations where preboring for piles will be required will be shown on the plans. At such
 locations, holes shall be prebored to the elevation specified prior to pile placement. T he holes shall have a
 diameter no less than that of the pile and shall be large enough to avoid damage to the pile being driven
 through the hole in hard material. T he size of the hole shall be approved by the engineer before preboring
 is started. Pilot holes of lesser diameter than the pile shall not extend below the pile tip. For holes not
 prebored into hard rock, the hole shall be filled with sand or other approved materials prior to or after
 placement of the pile. For holes prebored into hard rock, the hole shall be filled with sand or other
 approved materials prior to placement of the pile. At all locations, the hole shall be maintained full with
 sand or other approved material during the driving of the pile. T he pile shall then be driven in accordance
 with Sec 702.4.11.
 702.4.4 Pile Place me nt Tole rance s. Final position of piles shall be no more than 1/4 inch per foot from
 the vertical or from the batter line shown on the plans. T he maximum variation of the head of the pile
 from the position shown on the plans shall be no more than 2 inches, except that piles in footings entirely
 below the finished ground line may not vary more than 6 inches. All piles forced upward by the driving of
 adjacent piles or by any other cause shall be redriven to the required minimum nominal axial compressive
 resistance and penetration.
 702.4.5 Pile Point Re inforce me nt. Each point shall be manufactured in one piece of cast steel. Pile
 points furnished for cast-in-place concrete piles shall be attached to the pile as shown on the plans. Pile
 points for structural steel piles shall be furnished with the minimum point web and flange thickness at the
 location of attachment to the pile equal to the thickness of that portion of the pile being attached thereto
 multiplied by the factor (t) shown below with additional requirements as described herein.
 Material
 (t)
 ASTM A 27 Grade 65-35 (450-240) 2.0
 ASTM A 148 Grade 90-60 (620-415) 1.6
 
 702.4.5.1 T he point shall extend onto the pile a minimum of 1/2 inch for both faces of the web and for
 the end one-fourth of the inside face of each flange.
 702.4.5.2 T he web portion of the point shall protrude a minimum of 0.2 times the flange width below the
 pile with the flange portion of the pile point transitioning to a protrusion depth of no less than the pile
 point flange thickness at the extreme ends.
 702.4.5.3 T he point shall be attached to the pile with a full penetration weld along each flange. Weld
 backing shall be furnished for the total width of each flange.
 702.4.5.4 T he point extension onto the web of the pile may be omitted if alternating 1 1/2-inch x 1/4inch fillet welds are placed on each side of the web.
 702.4.5.5 Welding of the point to the pile shall be by a MoDOT-certified welder. Properly dried low
 hydrogen electrodes of the E70XX series shall be used with adequate protection from the elements in
 accordance with Sec 1080. T he contractor shall be fully responsible for the adequacy of welds during
 driving.
 702.4.6 Splice s. Full length piles shall be driven wherever possible and practical. If extensions and splices
 are permitted or required by the engineer, splices shall be made as follows. All welding, including splicing of
 steel shells and structural steel piles, and support or reinforcing angles welded to steel piles, shall be in
 accordance with Sec 1080 and performed by a MoDOT-certified field welder using properly dried lowhydrogen E7018 electrodes that have been protected from the elements to maintain the dry condition.
 Steel shells for cast-in-place concrete piles shall be spliced as shown on the plans. Structural steel piles shall
 be spliced with a butt joint as shown on the plans. T he contractor may furnish lengths of cast-in-place pile
 shells that incorporate no more than one splice per pile or structural steel piles that incorporate no more
 
 394
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 than one splice per pile for lengths up to and including 40 feet. No more than two splices will be permitted
 in each structural steel pile furnished for lengths exceeding 40 feet. In preparation of piles prior to driving,
 the use of individual sections less than 8 feet long will not be permitted. Additional field splices necessary
 to extend structural steel piles or cast-in-place pile shells to reach adequate bearing material shall be limited
 to one per pile, unless authorized by the engineer.
 702.4.7 Cut-O ffs. T he tops of all piles shall be cut off square at cut-off elevations.
 702.4.8 Prote ctive Coatings.
 702.4.8.1 Bitume n and Paint. Before the coatings are applied, steel shall be thoroughly cleaned. A
 commercially available bituminous coating, as approved by the engineer, shall be applied heavily to steel
 shells and structural steel piles in end bents for a length of 3 feet below the bottom of the concrete cap. All
 exposed steel piles shall have a bituminous coating 3 feet below and one foot above the finished ground
 line. Unless otherwise specified in the contract documents, all other exposed surfaces of steel shells and
 structural steel piles, including bracing, shall be coated with one 6-mil thickness of an approved gray epoxy
 mastic in accordance with the epoxy mastic manufacturer ’s recommendations. Protective coatings will not
 be required below the normal low water line or for galvanized piles and bracing.
 702.4.8.2 Galvaniz ing. Steel shells for cast-in-place piles, and bracing shall be galvanized as shown on the
 plans an in accordance with AST M A 123 and Sec 1080. All pile below the pile concrete encasement shall
 be galvanized down to an elevation as shown on the plans. At the contractor's option, the entire pile length
 may be galvanized. Repairs to the galvanized coating and coating and field galvanizing shall be in
 accordance with AST M A 780. Zinc rich paints will not be allowed. Repairs and field galvanizing will not be
 required where the pile will be encased in concrete or below below the limits specified herein. Galvanizing
 material shall be omitted or removed one inch clear of weld locations. T he method used to omit or remove
 the galvanizing material shall be masking, grinding or other methods as approved by the engineer. If a weld
 location falls within an area where galvanizing is required, clean the weld area making sure to remove all
 welding slag. T hen field galvanize the weld area in accordance with AST M A 780.
 702.4.9 Time Re strictions. Concrete footings shall not be placed on cast-in-place piles until at least 12
 hours after the last pile in the footing has been cast. No piling shall be driven within a radius of 20 feet of
 concrete that has not attained a minimum compressive strength of 1,500 psi. Compressive strength will be
 determined by tests performed in accordance with approved methods.
 702.4.10 FHWA-modifie d Dynamic Formula. T he following formula shall be used to determine the
 nominal axial compressive resistance, P, of piles when other methods of determination are not specified in
 the contract documents:
 P = 1.75(E)0.5log 10(10N) – 100
 
 P = Nominal Axial Compressive Resistance measured during pile driving in kips
 E = Developed hammer energy in foot-pounds (Joules). T his is the kinetic energy in the ram at
 impact for a given blow and may be assumed equal to the ram weight times the stroke.
 N = Number of hammer blows for 1.0 inch of pile permanent set in blows/inch.
 702.4.10.1 T he above formulas will be applicable only if:
 (a) T he hammer has an unrestricted fall.
 (b) T he pile head is not broomed, crushed or splintered.
 (c) T here is no appreciable bounce of the hammer after striking the pile.
 (d) T he penetration is at a uniform or uniformly decreasing rate.
 702.4.10.2 For piles driven to a batter, the nominal axial compressive resistance, P, in the equations
 
 395
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 provided in Sec 702.4.10 shall be divided by the pile batter factor, B, in order to calculate the value of N,
 the number of hammer blows for 1.0 inch of pile permanent set.
 B = 0.1 (10 - m), pile batter factor
 (1 + m 2)
 m = the tangent of the angle of batter to a vertical line
 702.4.11 Minimum and Maximum Limits of Pile Driving. Piles shall be driven to at least the
 minimum tip elevation indicated on the plans. If no minimum tip elevation is shown on the plans, piles
 shall have a tip elevation at least 10 feet below the bottom of the supported footing or 10 feet below the
 natural ground line, whichever is lower, unless specifically authorized otherwise by the engineer. Piles shall
 be driven to attain a nominal axial compressive resistance determined in accordance with Sec 702.4.10 and
 no less than that shown on the plans as the minimum nominal axial compressive resistance.
 702.4.11.1 Pile Driving to Hard Rock. Prior to driving structural steel piles, the contractor shall review
 the boring logs to determine the depth at which rock may be anticipated. T he contractor shall be attentive
 to the physical conditions associated with pile refusal on hard rock. When indication of hard rock occurs,
 in no case shall the pile be driven more than 3 blows when the hammer is operating at maximum rated
 energy and the penetration per blow is equivalent to or less than 10 blows per 0.5 inch. Driving shall cease
 immediately to avoid damage to the pile and to reduce the risk of injury.
 702.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 702.5.1 Te st Pile s. Test piles will be measured to the nearest linear foot of pile authorized and driven.
 702.5.2 Load-Be aring Pile s. Piles in place will be the actual length of all piles, except test piles,
 measured to the nearest foot for that portion of each pile that remains permanently in the structure. For
 galvanized pile, no separate measurement will be made for the part of the pile that is not galvanized.
 702.5.3 Pre boring. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes during construction
 or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, measurement of prebored
 holes required under the provisions of Sec 702.4.3 will be made to the nearest linear foot of each hole
 specified or directed by the engineer. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted
 from the contract quantity.
 702.5.4 Pile Point Re inforce me nt. Pile point reinforcement will be measured per each.
 702.6 Basis of Payme nt.
 702.6.1 Te st Pile s. Test piles will be paid for at the contract unit price. Test piles, if driven and used as
 permanent piles in place, will be paid for as test piles, and not as load-bearing piles in place.
 702.6.2 Load-Be aring Pile . T he accepted quantity of load-bearing pile in place will be paid for at the
 contract unit price for each of the items included in the contract. No direct payment will be made for
 incidental items necessary to complete the work unless specifically provided as a pay item in the contract.
 702.6.3 Pile Cut-O ffs. No direct payment will be made for pile cut-offs.
 702.6.4 Pre boring. Preboring will be paid for at the contract unit price. No direct payment will be made
 for backfilling.
 702.6.5 Pile Point Re inforce me nt. Pile point reinforcement, where specified, will be paid for at the
 contract unit price per each.
 702.6.6 Splice s. Splices may be required to extend a structural steel or steel shell pile to reach the
 minimum nominal axial compressive resistance. Any additional splices authorized to achieve the minimum
 nominal axial compressive resistance will be paid for as an additional 8 feet of pile in place at the contract
 unit price.
 
 396
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 702.6.7 Prote ctive Coatings. No direct payment will be made for coating exposed surfaces of steel shells,
 structural steel piles and bracing. Payment for coating the structural steel piles and sway bracing as described
 herein, and all material, excavation, labor, tools, equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the
 protective coating items will be considered completely covered under the contract unit price for other
 items.
 
 397
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 703
 CO NCRETE MASO NRY CO NSTRUCTIO N
 703.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing culverts, bridges and other concrete structures
 as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 703.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Bearing P ads for Structures
 Concrete Sealer
 Concrete Curing Material
 Concrete Tinting and Staining Material
 Material for Joints
 
 Section
 1038
 1053
 1055
 1056
 1057
 
 703.2.1 Concre te Re quire me nts. All material, proportioning, air-entraining, mixing, slump and
 transporting of Portland cement concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501.
 703.2.2 Mate rial Source Change s. Changes in sources of cement and aggregate will be permitted only
 with written approval from the engineer. Aggregate of essentially the same characteristics, except as noted
 in Sec 1005, and cements resulting in concrete of the same color, shall be used in any individual unit of the
 structure. T he superstructure will be considered an individual unit of the structure unless otherwise shown on
 the plans.
 703.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 703.3.1 False work. Falsework for concrete masonry construction shall be adequate to support and hold
 the forms true to lines, camber and grades shown on the plans. If requested by the engineer, the contractor
 shall submit detailed plans for falsework, including the supporting design computations. T he engineer's
 acceptance of the plans will not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for obtaining satisfactory
 results. T he falsework shall be constructed in general accordance with the submitted plans. Falsework and
 forms for single and multi-span concrete frames and for continuous concrete slab and girder-type bridges
 shall be provided for the full length of each continuous or monolithic unit and for the full width of the
 structure before starting concrete placement in that unit. T he use of shims or blocking shall be held to a
 minimum. Jacks shall be placed at approved locations to secure and maintain the required camber. Means
 shall be provided by the contractor for accurately determining settlement of the falsework while the
 falsework is being loaded. T he contractor shall correct for any settlement of forms or falsework during the
 concrete placing process.
 703.3.2 Forms. Forms for concrete shall be built true to the lines and grades specified, and shall be mortartight and of sound material adequate to prevent distortion during the placing and curing of concrete. All
 concrete shall be formed unless otherwise specified. A concrete pad of approved thickness may be used as a
 form for the unexposed bottom of end bent beams on piles. If required by the engineer, formwork plans
 shall be submitted by the contractor before formwork is started. If during or after placing the concrete the
 forms sag or bulge, the affected concrete shall be removed, the forms realigned and new concrete placed.
 Construction camber to accommodate shrinkage or settlement impairing the strength of the structure by
 the reduction of depth will not be permitted. T he forms shall be designed for following minimum criteria: a
 fluid pressure of 150 pounds per cubic foot, and for a live load of 50 pounds per square foot on horizontal
 surfaces and 30 pounds per square foot on vertical surfaces for impact and vibration.
 703.3.2.1 Face lumber of forms for exposed surfaces of concrete shall have a smooth dressed surface free
 of loose knots, knotholes and other defects. T he spacing of supports and the thickness of face lumber shall
 be adequate to prevent distortion due to the pressure of the concrete. Form material shall be placed with
 horizontal joints. T riangular moulding, smooth on three sides and having a 3/4-inch width on each of the
 two form sides, shall be used to bevel all exposed edges of the structure, except where special bevels are
 shown on the plans.
 703.3.2.2 Forms reused shall be in good condition.
 
 398
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 703.3.2.3 Design and construction of forms shall permit the removal of the forms without damage to the
 concrete. Cofferdam braces or struts that will extend through any exposed concrete section will not be
 permitted. Forms under copings and around offsets may be given a draft of no more than one inch per foot
 to permit removal without damage to the concrete. For narrow walls where access to the bottoms of the
 forms is not otherwise obtainable, an opening shall be provided to allow chips, dirt, sawdust or other foreign
 material to be removed immediately prior to placing concrete.
 703.3.2.4 Form lining will be permitted, and will be required for exposed curved surfaces. Liners other than
 plywood may be used with approval from the engineer.
 703.3.2.5 Fiber tubes for column forms above the ground line shall have a finish free of gaps or overlaps in
 the inside ply and shall be coated inside with a waterproofing material that will not stick or bond to, or
 discolor the concrete surface of the column. Fiber tubes for column forms from 6 inches below the finished
 ground line down may show seams, shall be waterproofed and need not be removed.
 703.3.2.6 If wood forms are to be used in combination with metal forms, form details shall be submitted for
 approval if requested by the engineer. Steel panels, or panels with metal frames and wood that leaves
 permanent impressions or ridges shall not be used, except for concrete box culvert-type structures and
 other non-exposed areas.
 703.3.2.7 T he inside of all forms shall be oiled, except for forms having composition linings. T he oil used
 shall be a light, clear paraffin-based oil or other approved material that will not discolor or damage the
 exposed concrete surface. T he coating shall be applied before placing reinforcing steel.
 703.3.2.8 T ies, spreaders and all metal appliances used inside of forms to hold the forms in correct
 alignment and location shall be constructed such that after removal of the forms, the metal may be
 removed to a depth of at least one inch below the surface of the concrete. Metal tie rods used inside the
 forms where concrete will have an exposed surface shall be of a type that will not produce a cavity at the
 surface of the concrete greater than 1 1/2 inches in diameter. Bolts and rods used as ties shall not be
 removed by pulling the bolts and rods through the concrete. Wire ties and pipe spreaders will not be
 permitted, and metal or wood spreaders, which are separate from form ties, shall be removed as concrete is
 being placed. A bolt-through method of supporting forms for massive substructure units may be used with
 approval from the engineer. No form ties shall be embedded in concrete above the roadway surface on
 bridges, except that coil ties and threaded rods may be permitted through the vertical face of the base and
 vertically through the top of barrier curbs. Coil ties, and all metal to be embedded in barrier curbs shall be
 epoxy-coated or galvanized.
 703.3.2.9 Cavities produced by the removal of metal tie rods shall be filled with mortar composed of
 approximately one part Portland cement to two parts sand or a non-shrinking, non-staining type of
 mortar. After the cavities are filled, the finished surface shall be left smooth, even and uniform in color and
 texture with minimal evidence of shrinkage. White cement may be added to the mortar if necessary to
 obtain the required color. T ie rod cavities in surfaces against which backfill is to be placed shall be filled
 with mortar or an approved plastic compound in accordance with Sec 1057. Patching of tie rod cavities in
 the interior surfaces of box girders will not be required.
 703.3.2.10 Fiber tubes for voids shall be properly designed for the use indicated. T he outside surface shall be
 waterproof. Distortion of the tubes shall be prevented. T he ends shall be covered with suitably designed
 mortar-tight caps. If material used for capping tubes expands when moist, preformed joint filler 5/16 inch
 thick shall be used around the perimeter of the caps to prevent distortion, or another method approved by
 the engineer.
 703.3.2.11 Steel tubes for voids shall be properly designed for the use indicated. Excessive distortion shall
 be prevented in handling, storage and placing. T he diameter of the tube shall be as shown on the plans with
 a tolerance of plus zero and minus 3/4 inch. T he ends of tubes shall be covered with suitably designed
 mortar-tight metal end caps.
 703.3.2.12 T ubes for producing voids in concrete slab superstructures shall be accurately located in
 positions shown on the plans and shall be positively anchored to the joists carrying the floor forms.
 
 399
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Anchors and ties shall be designed to leave a minimum of supporting material exposed in the bottom of the
 finished slab of the completed structure. Details of proposed anchorage and ties for the tubes shall be
 submitted for approval before work is started on the bridge superstructure. One 3/4-inch diameter weephole
 shall be provided near each end of each tube. Weepholes shall be placed in straight lines parallel to bents,
 and shall extend through the forms and be kept open at all times. T ubes shall be protected from moisture
 and heat until concrete is placed. Distortion of tubes after placing of concrete shall not increase the tubes’
 vertical axis by more than 1/2 inch.
 703.3.2.13 Falsework and form removal from under any structural concrete unit shall not be started until
 the concrete has attained at least the required compressive strength shown. T he falsework support of all
 concrete spans of a continuous or monolithic series shall be first released from the center of all spans, and
 shall proceed simultaneously from all span centers each way toward adjacent bents. Release shall be in such
 a manner as to permit the concrete to gradually and uniformly take stresses due to the self weight of the
 concrete. Compressive strength will be determined by tests conducted in accordance with AASHT O T 22.
 Class of Concrete Compressive Strength, psi, min.
 B
 2750
 B-1
 3000
 B-2
 3000
 
 703.3.2.14 Except in accordance with Sec 703.3.6, forms for vertical surfaces of bridge superstructures
 shall be removed as soon as the concrete is self-supporting to permit prompt patching of tie holes.
 703.3.2.15 Girders and beams shall not be set on bent cap until the concrete in the bent cap has attained at
 least the required compressive strength shown in Sec 703.3.2.13.
 703.3.3 Placing Concre te . Placing concrete in any unit of a structure shall not begin until preparations
 for placing and finishing are satisfactory to the engineer. Concrete shall be placed in the form in layers as
 near final position as practical with minimum handling. Each placement shall be completed in a continuous
 operation with no interruption in excess of 45 minutes between the placing of contiguous portions of
 concrete. Where a finishing machine is to be used, the machine shall be moved over the area to be finished
 immediately prior to placing concrete in any bridge deck pour to facilitate checking reinforcement cover
 and slab thickness. T his checking shall be done in the presence of the engineer and with the screeds in the
 finishing position. Placing of concrete for bridge decks shall proceed uniformly for the full width of the
 placement. Once begun, placing of concrete in the superstructure of a continuous or monolithic series of
 spans shall proceed as rapidly as good construction practice will permit until all concrete in that series is
 placed. Vibrators having a minimum frequency of 4,500 impulses per minute shall be used to thoroughly
 consolidate the concrete in the forms and around the reinforcing steel. Sufficient vibrators shall be on hand
 to ensure continuous placement of the concrete without delay. T he vibrators shall not be used for moving
 concrete nor shall vibrators penetrate or disturb previously placed layers of concrete after initial set.
 Vibration shall not cause segregation of the material. Reinforcing steel protruding through transverse or
 longitudinal headers shall not be disturbed until the concrete is at least 24 hours old.
 703.3.3.1 Where placing operations involve dropping the concrete more than 5 feet, the concrete shall be
 deposited as approved by the engineer to avoid segregation and contamination. Where concrete is placed in
 the interior of pneumatic caissons, the concrete may be deposited through air locks or other approved
 devices, and the requirement of dropping the mixture no more than 5 feet may be waived.
 703.3.3.2 Concrete shall be worked under and around the reinforcing steel without displacing the steel.
 Forms and reinforcing steel above concrete being placed, and placing equipment shall be kept clean and free
 from coatings of hardened concrete. Water used for flushing the equipment shall be discharged clear of the
 concrete and forms.
 703.3.3.3 Concrete shall be placed around the tubes forming voids in slab spans using methods to prevent
 the displacement of the tubes. For tubes having an inside diameter greater than 14 inches, the concrete
 shall be placed in three layers. T he first layer shall extend from the floor forms up to a plane 1/4- tube
 diameter above the bottom of the tubes and the second layer to 3/4-tube diameter. For tubes 14 inches or
 smaller, the concrete shall be placed in two layers, with the lower layer extending to the middle of the tube.
 Each layer shall be vibrated and allowed to settle after placing, before the next succeeding layer is placed.
 
 400
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 T he succeeding layer shall be deposited while the concrete in the layer below is still plastic enough to
 permit intermixing the two layers by use of a vibrator.
 703.3.3.4 T he sequence of placement of concrete for roadway slabs on a continuous series of spans will be
 shown on the plans, along with the minimum rates of placement required for the basic sequence and for
 combinations thereof. T he basic sequence of placement shall be observed unless it can be demonstrated that
 the contractor can place and satisfactorily finish combined placements at the required rate. If the
 contractor wishes to alter the placing sequence or to combine units, the contractor shall submit a written
 request subject to approval from the engineer.
 703.3.3.5 Concrete for substructure units shall be placed in the dry unless otherwise approved by the
 engineer. If the supporting material at plan elevation of the bottom of a pile footing is not sufficiently
 stable to support the concrete, the material shall be stabilized, or the bottom of the footing shall be formed
 to adequately support the concrete. T he stabilizing of material or forming under pile footings will be at the
 contractor ’s expense.
 703.3.3.6 Depositing concrete under water will be permitted if provided for in the contract documents or
 upon written approval from the engineer. T he concrete shall be placed by tremie bottom dump bucket or
 mechanically applied pressure. T he concrete shall be placed in the final position in still water and shall not
 be vibrated or disturbed after being deposited. Concrete placed under water for seal courses shall be Seal
 Concrete in accordance with
 Sec 501.
 703.3.3.7 Conveying, placing and pumping equipment shall have adequate capacity, be suitable for the
 intended work and shall be operated to produce a continuous stream of uniform concrete. Equipment shall
 be arranged to prevent transmission of vibration to freshly placed concrete. T he system through which the
 concrete is pumped shall be manufactured such that no aluminum parts will come into contact with the
 concrete.
 703.3.3.8 At the completion of concrete placement, the last concrete in the pipeline shall not be used.
 703.3.3.9 Concrete used for filling cavities or crevices as directed by the engineer and as required in Sec 206
 shall be Class B concrete. T his concrete shall be unformed mass concrete placed separately from and prior
 to the placing of footing concrete.
 703.3.3.10 When a closure pour is specified on the bridge plans, or is necessary for other requirements, the
 closure pour between slabs poured independently shall be expansive Class B-2 concrete. Unpolished
 aluminum powder shall be added to the Class B-2 concrete as recommended by the powder manufacturer or
 as approved by the engineer for controlled expansion. A shrinkage compensating cement may be
 substituted for the unpolished aluminum powder and cement. If a shrinkage compensating cement is
 substituted, the type and amount shall be approved by the engineer.
 703.3.3.10.1 Prior to placing the closure pour, the contractor shall release the falsework to allow the initial
 deflection in the slab extension. T he contractor shall obtain approval from the engineer prior to placing
 the closure pour.
 703.3.3.10.2 T he slab area to be in contact with the closure pour shall be sandblasted to remove all foreign
 matter and shall be cleaned to remove all dirt and loose material. After the slab area has been cleaned and
 any damaged epoxy coating on the reinforcing bars repaired, an epoxy-bonding compound shall be applied
 to the slab area to be in contact with the closure pour. T he concrete bonding compound and application
 shall be in accordance with Sec 623.
 703.3.3.10.3 Immediately following application and before the concrete bonding compound has set, the
 closure pour shall be placed.
 703.3.4 Joints in Concre te Masonry. Construction and expansion joints in concrete masonry shall be
 located where shown on the plans, except that in case of an unforeseen contingency, an emergency
 construction joint may be permitted.
 
 401
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 703.3.4.1 Surfaces of construction joints shall be roughened or scored unless shear keys are shown on the
 plans. T he face edges of all joints shall be carefully finished, and feathered edges shall be avoided. When the
 placing of concrete is temporarily discontinued, the concrete shall be cleaned of laitance and other
 objectionable material after becoming firm enough to retain form, and shall be thoroughly wetted before
 placing new concrete. Contraction joints in floor slabs of truss bridges may be sawed. Waterstops and
 flashings as shown on the plans shall be continuous if practical. Splices shall be watertight.
 703.3.4.2 Preformed sponge rubber expansion joint material shall be of the dimensions shown on the plans.
 Splices shall be held to a practical minimum and shall be made by lacing with copper wire or soft-drawn
 galvanized steel wire. All joint material shall be securely stitched to one face of the concrete with No. 10
 gage copper wire or No. 12 gage soft-drawn galvanized steel wire. Unless joint sealing is specified, the
 sponge rubber material shall be left exposed for the material’s full length with clean and true edges.
 703.3.4.3 Geotextile filter cloth, three feet wide double in thickness, meeting the requirements of Sec
 1011.3.4, shall be centered on transverse joints in top slab and sidewalls for both cast-in-place and precast
 box culverts.
 703.3.5 Concre te Finishe s. Riding surfaces shall be finished true to the alignment, grade, cross section
 and camber shown on the plans. T hese surfaces shall be finished by use of an approved mechanical finishing
 machine. On skewed structures the finishing machine shall be adjusted to finish the surface approximately
 parallel to the skew if the angle of skew exceeds 45 degrees, or if the angle of the skew exceeds 30 degrees
 and the placement width divided by the span length equals or exceeds 0.8. Vibratory screeds shall not be
 used, including those that are a part of the proposed finishing machine.
 703.3.5.1 Machine finishing shall be with an approved self-propelled mechanical finishing machine. T he
 engineer may waive the use of a finishing machine on isolated irregular shaped areas of the bridge surface.
 T he finishing machine shall travel on adjustable rails or guides set to proper grade, and supported outside
 the limits of the finished riding surface. Where a longitudinal joint is shown on the plans, the finishing
 machine rails or guides shall be placed as close as practical to the longitudinal joint. T he rails shall be
 supported to limit the full operating load deflection between supports to 1/8 inch or less. T he rails shall be
 placed parallel with the centerline of roadway or the longitudinal axis of the area to be finished. Where
 supports are located such that fresh concrete must be placed around the supports, the rails or guides shall be
 furnished in sections of 10 feet or less and placed above the concrete surface. T he sections and supports
 shall be removed and the holes filled with concrete immediately after the final straightedging. T he finishing
 machine shall make sufficient passes to obtain the specified cross section and surface finish. T he final pass
 of the machine shall be of the maximum practical length, and shall be coordinated with the rate of
 placement. Finishing machine loads will not be permitted on concrete that has not reached a compressive
 strength of 3200 psi.
 703.3.5.2 Where hand finishing of riding surfaces is permitted, the surface shall be finished to the specified
 cross section and surface texture .
 703.3.5.3 Sufficient work bridges shall be provided to complete the work in an orderly and continuous
 manner. Work bridges shall be supported outside the limits of concrete placement.
 703.3.5.4 T he riding surface shall be checked with a 10-foot straightedge immediately after the final
 finishing operation. T he straightedge shall be pulled lightly across the surface from one edge of the finished
 area to the other without interruption. Reaching from outer edges to the center of the finished area will not
 be permitted. Each transverse pass shall overlap the previously straightedged portion by approximately
 one-half the length of the straightedge. T he straightedge shall not be used to cut or move concrete from its
 finished position. Any irregularities, bumps or improperly finished areas shall be refinished and the surface
 again checked by repeating the straightedging operation.
 703.3.5.5 T he roadway surface, except within 12 inches of the inside face of the curb, shall be textured as
 soon as the condition of the concrete will permit. T he roadway finishing shall otherwise be in accordance
 with Sec 502.4. Hand-operated devices producing a satisfactory texture will be permitted. At the
 contractor's option, a finned float with a single row of fins may be used. T he grooves produced by the
 finned float shall be approximately 1/8 inch wide at 5/8 to 3/4-inch centers and shall be approximately 1/8
 inch deep. T his operation shall be performed at such a time and in such a manner that the desired texture
 
 402
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 will be achieved while minimizing displacement of the layer aggregate particles.
 703.3.5.6 As soon as curing has been completed, the riding surface will be thoroughly straightedged by the
 engineer, and all variations exceeding 1/8 inch in 10 feet will be plainly marked. Areas more than 1/8 inch
 high shall be removed by an approved device consisting of multiple cutting edges leaving a grooved surface
 finish comparable to that produced by the broom. T he use of a bush hammer or other impact device will
 not be permitted.
 703.3.5.7 Unless an armored joint is shown on the plans, construction and expansion joints in the roadway
 surface shall be carefully edged and left free of all mortar and concrete. If shown on the plans, these joints
 shall be sealed with joint sealing material. Joints shall be dry and cleaned immediately before the joints are
 sealed. Required joint sealing shall be done prior to surface sealing the bridge deck.
 703.3.5.8 Surface finish for concrete masonry units, other than those specified in Sec 703.3.5, shall begin
 immediately following removal of the forms. Fins and irregular projections shall be removed. Form tie
 cavities, holes, honeycomb spots in other than exposed surfaces, and other defects shall be thoroughly
 cleaned, saturated with water and carefully pointed with a mortar in accordance with Sec 703.3.2.9.
 Repaired surfaces shall be satisfactorily cured.
 703.3.5.9 Bridge seats shall be finished to a smooth even surface. Where lead plates or fabric pads are used
 to seat steel bearing plates, the area under the lead plates or fabric pads shall be finished to within 1/8 inch
 above plan elevation and shall be dressed to a uniform, level bearing with a Carborundum brick or power
 grinder after the concrete has set sufficiently to fix the larger particles of sand. T he deviation of the
 bearing seat from a true level surface shall not exceed 1/16 inch. Where elastomeric bearing pads are used,
 the finishing of 1/8 inch above plan elevation and grinding of the bridge seat area will not be required. Wells
 for anchor bolts shall be completely filled with an expansive-type mortar in accordance with Sec 1066
 after the steel has been erected and adjusted. In lieu of wells, anchor bolt holes may be drilled in accordance
 with Sec 712. Keyways, anchor bolt wells, holes and other depressions that might collect water and freeze
 shall be sealed.
 703.3.6 Curing Concre te .
 703.3.6.1 Bridge De cks. Curing compound for bridge decks shall be Type 1-D liquid membrane-forming
 curing compound in accordance with Sec 1055 Bridge Curing Compounds, except that if diamond grinding is
 specified, either Type 1-D or Type 2 liquid membrane-forming curing compound in accordance with Sec
 1055 may be used for the surfaces to be textured by diamond grinding. Wet curing is required and shall be
 performed in accordance with Sec 703.3.6.1.4.
 703.3.6.1.1 Application Rate . T he material shall be approved by the engineer prior to use and shall be
 applied at the manufacturer ’s recommended rate, but no less than 150 square feet per gallon.
 703.3.6.1.2 Conve ntional Te xturing. When conventional texturing is specified, fresh concrete shall be
 sprayed immediately with a curing compound following texturing as specified in Sec 703.3.5.5. T he
 application of the curing compound shall progress such that no more than 10 linear feet of the textured
 concrete surface is exposed without curing compound at any time.
 703.3.6.1.3 Diamond Grinding. When diamond grinding is specified in lieu of conventional deck
 texturing, fresh concrete shall be sprayed immediately after surface floating to smooth surface with curing
 compound as specified in Sec 703.3.6.1.
 703.3.6.1.4 We t Curing. T he contractor shall submit to the engineer a plan to monitor the free moisture
 and maintain continuous free moisture for the 7 day period. T he concrete shall be covered with clean mats
 as soon as the curing compound has dried sufficiently to prevent adhesion, and the concrete surface will
 support the curing mat without marring or distorting the finish, but no more than 90 minutes after the
 concrete is floated or textured. If the concrete mix contains more than 15 percent fly ash or slag or
 combination thereof and remains plastic after 90 minutes, coverage with mats may be delayed, as directed
 by the engineer, until the surface will support the curing mat without marring or distorting the finish. T he
 mats shall be sufficiently wet at the time of placement to prevent moisture absorption from the finished
 surface. T he contractor shall control the run-off so as not to cause a traffic hazard or soil erosion. T he
 
 403
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 continuous wet cure shall be maintained a minimum of seven days and until the concrete has attained a
 minimum compressive strength of 3,000 psi.
 703.3.6.1.5 O pe ning to Construction Activitie s. Light material and equipment weighing less than
 1,000 pounds may be carried onto the bridge deck after the deck concrete has been in place at least 24
 hours, provided curing is not interfered with and the surface texture is not damaged. Vehicles, material and
 equipment needed for construction activities and weighing less than 4,000 pounds shall not be moved onto
 any span until after the last placed deck concrete has attained a compressive strength of at least 3,200 psi.
 Loads in excess of the above shall not be moved onto the bridge deck until the deck concrete has reached
 the compressive strength specified on the plans. Placement of barrier walls on bridge decks shall not begin
 until the 7 day wet cure is complete and the deck has reached the minimum compressive strength shown on
 the plans.
 703.3.6.1.6 O pe n To Traffic. Structures shall not be opened to any public vehicular traffic until at least 10
 days after the last placement of deck concrete and until such time that the concrete has attained the
 compressive strength specified on the plans.
 703.3.6.1.7 Railroad Bridge . Railroad bridge decks to be waterproofed shall not be cured with liquid
 membrane-forming compound.
 703.3.6.2 Concre te Masonry Not to be Se ale d. Curing of exposed concrete masonry surfaces not to be
 sealed shall be initiated after finishing operations are completed and as soon as marring of the concrete will
 not occur by application of the curing process. T he surface of exposed concrete shall be covered and cured
 in accordance with one of the following methods. Concrete adjacent to construction joints shall be wet
 cured, and other locations shall be either wet cured or cured by application of Type 1-D liquid membraneforming curing compound in accordance with Sec 1055. Curing mats for curing exposed surfaces shall be
 kept wet for 72 hours. T he mats shall remain in place until the mats are dry, or if not dry, at least 24 hours
 after the wet curing period. Concrete shall not be left exposed for more than 30 minutes between stages of
 curing and during the curing period.
 703.3.6.2.1 Damp Proofe d. Surfaces to be damp proofed shall not be cured with liquid membrane-forming
 compound.
 703.3.6.2.2 Footings. Footings may be cured by submersion with approval from the engineer.
 703.3.6.2.3 Pre cast Me mbe rs. Steam curing or curing by complete submersion in water will be permitted
 for precast members. If steam curing is applied, the jets shall not impinge directly on the concrete or on
 the forms, free circulation around the units shall be maintained, the steam shall be thoroughly saturated at
 all times, and the temperature around the concrete shall be raised no more than 40ºF per hour and shall not
 exceed 160ºF at any time. After the steam curing period, the temperature inside the chamber shall be
 reduced at a rate of no more than 40ºF per hour until the temperature has reached about 20ºF above the
 temperature of the air to which the concrete will be exposed.
 703.3.6.3 Concre te Masonry to be Se ale d. Curing of exposed concrete masonry surfaces to be sealed
 shall be initiated after finishing operations are completed and as soon as marring of the concrete will not
 occur by application of the curing process.
 703.3.6.3.1 Curing. Concrete curing shall be performed in accordance with Sec 703.3.6.1, except for
 curbs, parapets, medians and bridge barriers.
 703.3.6.3.2 Curbs, Parape ts, Me dians and Bridge Barrie r.
 703.3.6.3.2.1 Curing. Curing compounds for sealed concrete masonry shall be Type 1-D liquid membraneforming curing compound in accordance with Sec 1055 Bridge Curing Compounds. Wet curing will not be
 required for curbs, parapets, medians and bridge barriers.
 703.3.6.3.2.2 Application Rate . T he material shall be approved by the engineer prior to use and shall be
 applied at the manufacturer ’s recommended rate, but no less than 150 square feet per gallon.
 
 404
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 703.3.6.3.2.3 Application Time . T he application of the curing compound shall progress such that no
 more than 10 linear feet of the textured concrete surface is exposed without curing compound at any time.
 703.3.7 Bridge De ck Surface Te xturing. For conventional texturing, the roadway surface shall be
 textured in accordance with Sec 703.3.5.5 prior to the application of the curing compound.
 703.3.7.1 When diamond grinding is specified, following the curing period and the attainment of design
 strength, the deck surface shall be diamond ground in accordance with the following.
 703.3.7.1.1 T he bridge deck shall be diamond ground in accordance with Sec 622.30, except traffic control
 and closure for grinding operations shall be as specified by other portions of the contract documents,
 except as noted herein. Grinding may proceed after design strengths are attained and shall be completed
 prior to opening to any traffic other than construction traffic.
 703.3.7.1.2 Bumps and high areas shall be removed prior to the start of final grinding operations in
 accordance with Sec 703.3.5.6. Typically 1/8 inch, and no more than 1/4 inch shall be removed from the
 plan profile of the deck. T he final surface shall be textured to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 703.3.7.1.3 T he surface of the approach slabs and deck shall be ground simultaneously in a longitudinal
 manner to a distance 2 feet from the bridge barrier.
 703.3.8 Surface Se aling for Concre te . Bridge decks shall be sealed with one application of an approved
 penetrating concrete sealer in accordance with Sec 1053. T he penetrating concrete sealer shall also be
 applied to the top surface of the concrete bridge approach slabs, top and roadway faces of sidewalks, curbs,
 parapets, medians and barrier. T he surfaces of deck patching shall not be sealed unless the surface of the
 rest of the deck is being sealed. T he surface of a Latex Modified Concrete overlay shall not be sealed. T he
 surface of all other dense concrete overlays shall be sealed.
 703.3.8.1 Equipme nt. Application equipment shall be as recommended by the manufacturer except as
 mentioned below. A low pressure, high volume method of application shall be used that will not atomize the
 silane. Hand pump sprayer shall not be used. T he spray equipment, tanks, hoses, brooms, rollers, coaters,
 squeegees, etc. shall be free of foreign matter, oil residue and water prior to applying the treatment.
 703.3.8.2 Cle aning and Surface Pre paration. Surfaces which are to be treated shall meet the approved
 product's requirements for surface condition. Sealing shall not be done until all concrete construction or
 repair has been completed and cured to the requirements of the manufacturer. T he contractor shall furnish
 the engineer with written instructions for the surface preparation requirements.
 703.3.8.2.1 Sealing shall be done after the bridge deck has been textured or diamond ground.
 703.3.8.2.2 At a minimum, the surface shall be thoroughly cleaned to remove dust, dirt, oil, wax, curing
 components, efflorescence, laitance, coatings and other foreign materials. T he manufacturer or
 manufacturer's representative shall approve the use of chemicals and other cleaning compounds to
 facilitate the removal of these foreign materials before use. T he treatment shall be applied within 48 hours
 following surface preparation.
 703.3.8.2.3 Cleaning equipment shall be fitted with suitable traps, filters, drip pans and other devices to
 prevent oil and other foreign material from being deposited on the surface.
 703.3.8.3 Te st Application. Prior to final application, the contractor shall treat a measured test coverage
 area on horizontal and vertical surfaces of the different components of the structure to be treated for the
 purpose of demonstrating the desired physical and visual effect on an application or of obtaining a visual
 illustration of the absorption necessary to achieve the specified coverage rate. In the latter case, the
 applicator shall use at least ½ gallon (1.9 liter) of treatment following the manufacturer's recommended
 method of application for the total of the test surfaces. Horizontal test surfaces shall be located on the
 deck and on the curb or sidewalk, and vertical test surfaces shall be located on a parapet or safety barrier
 curb so that the different textures are displayed.
 703.3.8.4 Application. T he sealer shall be applied by thoroughly saturating the concrete surfaces so that
 
 405
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 one gallon of material shall not be spread over more than 200 square feet.
 703.3.8.4.1 T he concrete surface temperature shall be between 35ºF and rising and 100ºF and falling.
 703.3.8.4.2 At a minimum, the wet cure must be complete and the moisture content of the concrete must
 be at or below 8 percent as measured by a moisture meter.
 703.3.8.4.3 Allow concrete to dry a minimum of 48 hours after any measurable precipitation.
 703.3.8.4.4 T he treatment shall be spread from puddles to dry areas.
 703.3.8.4.5 If the applicator is unable to complete the entire application continuously, the location where
 the application was stopped shall be noted and clearly marked.
 703.3.8.5 Prote ction of Adjoining Surface s and the Public.
 703.3.8.5.1 When applying the sealer, the contractor shall protect adjoining surfaces of the structure that
 are not to be sealed. T he contractor shall also make provision to protect the public from overspray.
 703.3.8.5.2 Asphalt and mastic type surfaces shall be protected from spillage and overspray. Any asphalt
 pavement damaged by the sealer will result in removal and replacement at the contractor ’s expense. Joint
 sealants, traffic paints and asphalt overlays may be applied to the treated surfaces 48 hours after the
 treatment has been applied. Adjoining and nearby surfaces of aluminum or glass shall be covered where
 there is possibility of the treatment being deposited on the surfaces. Plants and vegetation shall be
 protected from overspray by covering with drop cloths. Precautions shall be followed as indicated on the
 manufacturer's product and material safety data sheet.
 703.3.8.6 O pe ning to Traffic. T raffic may be allowed on a deck when the material is tack free.
 703.3.9 Hot We athe r Concre ting. T he contractor shall schedule placing and finishing of bridge deck
 concrete during hours in which the ambient temperature will be lower than 85ºF. T he mixed concrete when
 placed in the deck forms shall have a temperature no higher than 85ºF, however, if the contractor starts the
 concrete placement at least 30 minutes after sundown and covers the concrete with wet burlap when it will
 not mar the surface, but before morning solar radiation dries the surface and implements, to the extent
 possible, precautionary measures for hot weather concreting recommended in ACI 305R ‘Hot Weather
 Concreting’, then the concrete temperature can be increased to 90ºF.
 703.3.10 Cold We athe r Concre ting. Concrete work shall proceed on all structures, except bridge
 superstructures, whether or not heating will be required, unless it can be definitely established that the
 overall progress of the project will not be affected. Placing of concrete in the superstructure of a
 continuous or monolithic series of spans once begun shall be continued within the provisions of cold
 weather concreting procedures until all the concrete in that series is placed. Concrete placed in cold weather
 shall be protected from freezing during the curing period. Concrete shall not be placed on frozen ground, or
 against steel or concrete surfaces with temperatures lower than 35ºF. Concrete shall not be placed where the
 ambient temperature is below 35ºF without prior approval from the engineer. Concrete in bridge
 superstructures shall not be placed where the ambient temperature is below 40ºF without prior approval
 from the engineer.
 703.3.10.1 T he aggregate, the water, or both, shall be heated during the season when the atmospheric
 temperature may drop below 40ºF. Aggregate shall not be heated higher than 150ºF. T he temperature of the
 aggregate and water combined shall not be higher than 100ºF when the cement is added. Any method of
 heating during the mixing of concrete may be used, provided the heating apparatus will heat the mass
 uniformly and avoid hot spots that will burn the material. T he temperature of the concrete at the time of
 placing in the forms shall be no lower than 45ºF for concrete in footings, massive piers and abutments, or
 less than 60ºF for all other concrete.
 703.3.10.2 When the ambient temperature is below 40ºF, with the approval from the engineer, curing of
 superstructure concrete, substructure units above ground surface, retaining walls and box culverts of more
 
 406
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 than 15 square feet opening shall be accomplished by methods that will prevent concrete from freezing.
 T he minimum compressive strength required for form removal and ending protection from freezing shall
 be in accordance with Sec 703.3.2.13. T he contractor shall furnish temperature monitoring equipment and
 accessories that demonstrate to the engineer that concrete has been protected from freezing, with payment
 for such equipment and accessories included in the contract unit price for concrete. Exposed surfaces of the
 concrete shall be kept moist during the curing process. Substructure concrete below ground surface may be
 protected by submersion provided the temperature of the water is maintained between 40° and 80° F for
 seven days.
 703.3.10.3 Concrete headwalls for pipe culverts, drop inlets and box culverts of 15 square feet or less
 openings, may be placed without air temperature limitations, but the contractor shall be responsible for
 proper protection from freezing during placing and curing of the concrete.
 703.3.11 Exte nding and Wide ning Structure s. Extending and widening of existing concrete structures
 shall be in accordance with the details shown on the plans. A continuous groove at least one inch deep shall
 be sawed in the faces of the existing concrete as a guide for the line of break to prevent spalling. Surfaces of
 existing concrete that are to come in contact with new concrete shall be thoroughly cleaned, saturated with
 water and painted with an epoxy mortar of paint consistency or other approved products. T he new
 concrete shall be placed immediately after the cement grout has been applied. If new concrete is to be
 placed against the natural finish of existing concrete work, the surface shall be roughened by
 bushhammering or other approved methods before being cleaned and treated. Before applying a new
 concrete riding surface, any existing bituminous surfacing shall be removed, and the exposed concrete
 surface shall be roughened by bushhammering or other approved methods before being cleaned and treated.
 Work incidental to joining new concrete to existing concrete will be at the contractor ’s expense.
 703.3.12 Ste nciling Structure Ide ntification Numbe rs. Bridge numbers shall be stenciled in black
 paint on all concrete bridges. T he letters shall be capitals and 2 to 3 inches high. T he bridge numbers shall
 be stenciled on concrete surfaces at two locations as directed by the engineer.
 703.3.13 Ae sthe tic Concre te Stain. T his stain shall consist of a two coat acrylic resin system. T he
 surface preparation and application shall be in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations. Field
 approval of the proposed material will be in accordance with Sec 1056.
 703.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made unless changes from contract plans
 are authorized by the engineer during construction, or appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity.
 T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity. Where
 required, quantities for concrete masonry will be computed from dimensions shown on the plans, or as
 revised in writing by the engineer because of changes to the contract plans or due to appreciable errors, and
 will be computed to the nearest 1/10 cubic yard for each structure. No deduction will be made for the space
 occupied by reinforcing steel, conduit or piles. Deductions will be made for the space occupied by the tubes
 in voided slabs.
 703.4.1 Measurement of concrete quantities in seal courses will be made for the actual quantity placed,
 except that this quantity will be limited to that included within vertical planes 18 inches outside the neat
 lines of the footings, and to the maximum depth shown on the plans or as authorized by the engineer.
 703.4.2 Measurement of concrete quantities used to fill cavities or crevices will be made for the accepted
 quantity placed below the authorized elevation of the structure footing.
 703.4.3 Final measurement for diamond grinding will not be made except for authorized changes during
 construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. T he revision or correction will
 be computed and added to or deducted from contract quantity.
 703.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of concrete masonry, complete in place, will be paid for
 at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 703.5.1 T he accepted quantity of concrete used to fill cavities or crevices below final authorized bottom
 elevation of the footing structure will be paid for based on the accepted quantity per cubic yard at the fixed
 unit price specified in Sec 109.
 
 407
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 703.5.2 No direct payment will be made for incidental items necessary to complete the work unless
 specifically provided as a pay item in the contract documents. No direct payment will be made for concrete
 required to fill overbreak where footings or walls are cast against vertical faces of rock or shale excavation.
 703.5.3 Payment for diamond grinding will be made per square yard of surface.
 703.5.4 No direct payment will be made for furnishing and applying the surface sealer and all incidental
 work. Payment shall be considered completely covered by the contract unit price for other items.
 703.5.5 Payment for the work necessary to complete a closure pour, including all material, labor, tools,
 equipment and incidentals, will be made and considered completely covered under the contract unit price
 for the applicable pay item for the slab.
 
 408
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 704
 CO NCRETE MASO NRY REPAIR
 704.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of removing deteriorated concrete, preparing the repair site,
 forming where required, placing and finishing new concrete or qualified special mortar, applying epoxy and
 applying concrete crack filler in the required areas.
 704.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows. T he qualified special mortar shall be from the qualified rapid set concrete patching material
 listing available from Construction and Materials or MoDOT ’s web site.
 Item
 Concrete
 Concrete Bonding Compound and Epoxy Mortar
 Gradation E Coarse Aggregate
 Type III Cement
 Type III Epoxy & Epoxy P olymer Concrete Overlay
 Concrete Crack Filler
 Water
 
 Section
 501
 623
 1005
 1019
 1039
 1053
 1070
 
 704.3 Type s of Re pair.
 704.3.1 Re pairing Concre te De ck (Half-Soling). T his work shall consist of partial removal and
 replacement of bridge deck concrete in the required areas.
 704.3.2 De ck Re pair With Void Tube Re place me nt. T his work shall consist of partial removal and
 replacement of bridge deck concrete and removal and replacement of the deteriorated void tube in the
 required areas.
 704.3.3 Full De pth Re pair. T his work shall consist of complete removal and replacement of the bridge
 deck concrete in the required areas.
 704.3.4 Modifie d De ck Re pair. T his work shall consist of the removal and replacement of visibly loose
 or spalled bridge deck concrete and placement of concrete in the areas where the reinforcing steel is
 exposed. T he repair concrete for these areas shall be Class B-1.
 704.3.5 Supe rstructure Re pair (Unforme d). T his work shall consist of repairing the deteriorated
 concrete on the bottom of the bridge deck in the required areas with a qualified special mortar.
 704.3.6 Slab Edge Re pair. T his work shall consist of repairing the edge of the bridge deck by removing
 deteriorated concrete and patching the required areas with a qualified special mortar. All repairs made within
 4 inches of the edge of the bridge deck, regardless of the repair thickness, will be considered slab edge repair.
 Portions of the bridge deck areas requiring repair that extend more than 4 inches from the edge of the
 bridge deck shall be repaired as superstructure repair (unformed) or full depth repair.
 704.3.7 Substructure Re pair (Forme d). T his work shall consist of formed substructure repair. T he
 required areas shall be patched with Class B-1 concrete. Coarse aggregate shall be Gradation E in accordance
 with Sec 1005.
 704.3.8 Substructure Re pair (Unforme d). T his work shall consist of unformed substructure repair. T he
 required areas shall be patched with a qualified special mortar.
 704.3.9 Epoxy Se aling. T his work shall consist of applying an epoxy material to the concrete in the
 required areas.
 704.3.10 Concre te Crack Fille r. T his work shall consist of applying a concrete crack filler to the
 concrete in the required areas.
 704.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 
 409
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 704.4.1 Re moval Re quire me nts. T he type of repair and areas to be repaired will be outlined by the
 engineer. All loose, deteriorated and unsound concrete in the required repair areas shall be removed by
 conventional hand/mechanical, hydro demolition or other approved equipment to a depth as specified
 herein and as directed by the engineer. Slight deck imperfections surrounded by sound concrete shall be
 cleaned of all dirt, loose material and deteriorated concrete. If reinforcing steel is not exposed, deck repair
 work will not be required.
 704.4.1.1 Bridge De cks to be Cove re d with Asphalt or Concre te We aring Surface . T he existing
 bridge deck shall be scarified for the concrete wearing surface as specified in the contract documents and in
 accordance with Sec 505. Slight bridge deck imperfections of 0.5 inch or less in depth below the prepared
 deck surface that are surrounded by sound concrete, and the reinforcing steel is not exposed, shall not be
 half-soled. T hese areas shall be cleaned by hand tools, sand or hydro blasting to remove all dirt, loose
 material and deteriorated concrete before the application of the asphalt or concrete wearing surface.
 Asphalt or concrete for these areas shall be placed monolithic with the wearing surface in accordance with
 Sec 403 or Sec 505.
 704.4.1.2 Bridge De cks to be cove re d with Epoxy Polyme r Concre te O ve rlay. Preparing and
 cleaning the existing bridge deck shall be in accordance with Sec 623.
 704.4.1.3 Conve ntional Hand/Me chanical Equipme nt. Conventional hand/mechanical equipment
 consisting of jackhammers no heavier than the 35-pound class shall be used for concrete removal. For
 bridge decks rated 5 or below, the jackhammers shall not be heavier than the 65-pound class. Chipping
 hammers from the 15-pound class shall be used to remove concrete from beneath any reinforcing bars,
 where required. T he bits shall be sharp in order to reduce pounding. Jackhammers shall be operated to
 minimize damage to the sound concrete around the patch area. Other methods that would be less damaging
 to the concrete and reinforcement may be used with approval from the engineer.
 704.4.1.4 Patch Re pair Hydro De molition Equipme nt. T he hydro demolition equipment shall be
 capable of removing concrete to the specified depth and shall be capable of removing rust and concrete
 particles from exposed reinforcing bars. All water used in hydro demolition shall be potable in accordance
 with Sec 1070. Stream or lake water will not be permitted. T he contractor shall take necessary precautions
 during hydro demolition to prevent damage to the remaining structure and adjacent property as a result of
 runoff. Slab drains receiving runoff from the contractor ’s operation shall be temporarily plugged. T he
 discharge water shall not be released from the site until the broken concrete, aggregate and other settleable
 solids have been removed through filtration, sediment basins or other approved methods. T he contractor
 shall control dust and run-off in accordance with applicable governmental regulations. Environmental
 protection shall be in accordance with Sec 107. Hydro demolition shall not impede or interfere with
 maintaining traffic. Heavy equipment, such as vacuum trucks for removal of concrete debris, will not be
 permitted to place wheel loads on the deck areas where deteriorated concrete has been removed.
 704.4.1.5 Concre te Re moval. A boundary perimeter with one-inch vertical sides shall be established
 outside the deteriorated area. T he deteriorated concrete shall be removed as required to provide good sound
 concrete on which new concrete can be placed and satisfactorily bonded to the reinforcing bars. T he areas
 of repair shall be made approximately rectangular with the sides generally perpendicular to the surface
 being repaired. T hese areas shall be carefully removed such that reinforcement is not disturbed or damaged.
 For full depth repair, a saw cut outside the deteriorated area shall also be made on the bottom of the bridge
 deck, except on voided slab, solid slab and box girder bridges without entry access. Other acceptable
 methods for saw cutting the bottom of the deck may be used with approval from the engineer. No more
 than one-fourth of the column perimeter shall be removed at any one time, and no more than one-eighth
 of the column perimeter if the repair is completed under live load. Once the one-quarter or one-eighth
 limit has been reached, the column shall be repaired before any further column removal is done.
 704.4.1.6 Re inforcing Bar Expose d. All exposed reinforcing bars shall be thoroughly cleaned by sand or
 hydro blasting to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 704.4.1.6.1 Supe rstructure and Substructure Re pair. T he concrete within the boundary area for
 superstructure repair (unformed), substructure repair (formed) and substructure repair (unformed) shall be
 removed a minimum of one inch beyond the inside edge of any exposed reinforcing bars, including the main
 
 410
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 reinforcement.
 704.4.1.6.2 De ck Re pairs. T he minimum depth of repair for repairing concrete deck (half-soling) or
 modified deck repair shall expose the upper layer of the top mat of reinforcing steel. When the bond
 between existing concrete and a reinforcing bar has been destroyed, or more than half the diameter of a
 reinforcing bar is exposed, the concrete adjacent to the reinforcing bar shall be removed to a depth that will
 permit the concrete to bond to the entire periphery of the bar. A minimum of one-inch clearance shall be
 maintained.
 704.4.1.6.3 If a reinforcing bar is exposed during slab edge repair, the concrete adjacent to the bar shall be
 removed to a depth that will permit a qualified special mortar to bond to the entire periphery of the bar. A
 minimum of one-inch clearance shall be maintained.
 704.4.1.7 Re inforce me nt Re pair. Particular care shall be taken not to disturb or damage reinforcing bars.
 All exposed reinforcing bars shall be thoroughly cleaned by sand or hydro blasting. Cut or broken bars or
 bars with 25 percent or more cross sectional area lost shall be spliced 24 diameters on each side of the
 damage with new bars of the same size in accordance with Sec 706. Damaged existing epoxy coated
 reinforcement shall be repaired in accordance with Sec 710.
 704.4.1.8 Mate rial Disposal. All material removed shall be disposed of in accordance with Sec 202.
 704.4.2 Pre paration of the Re pair Are a.
 704.4.2.1 Patch Pre paration Re quire me nts. After removal of deteriorated concrete, the area to be
 repaired shall be sand or hydro blasted to remove all foreign matter, dirt, free standing water and loose
 material. T he hydro demolition process will not require sand or additional hydro blasting unless the bonding
 surface of the repair area becomes contaminated or unsatisfactory prior to placement of new concrete. T he
 area to come in contact with new concrete shall be cleaned as stated above, saturated with water and
 painted with a concrete bonding compound or an epoxy mortar prior to the placement of new concrete. A
 concrete bonding compound shall be used for all structures with the following exception. An epoxy mortar
 shall be used on box girder, voided and solid slab structures and on structures where a cathodic protection
 system is to be installed.
 704.4.2.2 Epoxy Se aling Pre paration. T he area to be sealed shall be cleaned by sand blasting. Prior to
 sealing the concrete, all loose particles and foreign matter shall be removed using oil-free and water-free
 compressed air or a vacuum of at least 90 psi.
 704.4.2.3 Concre te Crack Fille r Pre paration. T he area to fill the cracks shall be cleaned by pressure
 washing with at least 2500 psi, 3 days minimum prior to the crack filler application and 2 days after any
 measurable precipitation.
 704.4.3 Applying Epoxy. T he area to be sealed shall be sealed with a qualified Type III epoxy or epoxy
 material for epoxy polymer concrete overlay. Sealing shall be completed before the application of any
 overlay. T he cleaning, sealing and epoxy application shall proceed only as approved by the engineer, in
 accordance with the manufacturer ’s written recommendations. T he epoxy application and rate of coverage
 shall be in accordance with manufacturer ’s recommendations, with a maximum coverage of 100 square feet
 per gallon.
 704.4.3.1 Applying Concre te Crack Fille r. T he area to fill the cracks shall be filled with a low viscosity
 polymer crack filler. T he concrete crack filler application and rate of coverage shall be in accordance with
 the manufacturer ’s recommendations, with a maximum coverage of 100 square feet per gallon. T he
 broadcasting of dry blasting sand shall be applied only as approved by the engineer, in accordance with the
 manufacturer ’s written recommendations with a maximum coverage of 1 to 2 lbs/sq.yd. starting
 approximately 10 minutes after crack filling operation has started.
 704.4.4 Place me nt of Ne w Concre te .
 704.4.4.1 Concre te Place me nt Re quire me nts. Concrete shall be placed before the concrete bonding
 compound or epoxy mortar has begun to set. Deck repair concrete shall be placed in the repair area to
 
 411
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 match the top of the original deck surface. For bridges to be covered with concrete wearing surface, deck
 repair concrete shall be placed in the repair area up to the bottom of the proposed concrete wearing
 surface. T he finished repair area shall have a light broom texture for bonding of the deck seal, except
 bridges to be covered with concrete wearing surface shall have a rough surface for bonding of the concrete
 wearing surface. All joints shall be formed to match any existing joint pattern.
 704.4.4.2 Concre te Re quire me nts. Concrete for concrete deck repair shall be Class B-2, except that
 solid slab, voided slab and box girder structures shall be the same class as the existing deck concrete and as
 specified in Secs 704.3.4 and 704.4.4.3. T he repair area shall not be opened to any traffic until the
 concrete has reached a compressive strength of 3,200 psi. Type III cement may be used to accelerate the
 set. T he coarse aggregate shall be Gradation E in accordance with Sec 1005. Accelerating additives
 containing chlorides will not be permitted.
 704.4.4.3 Bridge De cks with Cathodic Prote ction Syste m. Concrete for repairing the concrete deck
 shall be Class B-1. T he repair area shall not be opened to any traffic until the concrete has reached a
 compressive strength of 3200 psi. Type III cement may be used to accelerate the set. T he coarse aggregate
 shall be Gradation E in accordance with Sec 1005. Accelerating additives containing chlorides will not be
 permitted. All half-sole repairs made on the deck shall be Class B-1 concrete that has a maximum chloride
 ion content of 5 pounds per cubic yard. All full depth repairs made on the deck shall be chloride-free Class
 B-1 concrete from the bottom of the deck to within one inch of the lowest rebar of the top layer of
 reinforcing steel. T he remainder of the repair shall be Class B-1 concrete with a maximum chloride ion
 content of 5 pounds per cubic yard.
 704.4.4.4 Curing. T he repaired areas shall be cured in accordance with Sec 703. T he cleaning and
 application of the epoxy polymer concrete overlay to the deck shall proceed only as approved by the
 engineer in accordance with the manufacturer ’s written recommendations.
 704.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt. T he extent of repair may vary from the estimated quantities, but the
 contract unit price shall prevail regardless of the variation. Final measurement will not be made for
 preparation of the existing deck. No duplication of measurement will be made for full depth repair,
 repairing concrete deck (half-soling), deck repair with void tube replacement, slab edge repair,
 superstructure repair (unformed) or modified deck repair. No duplication of measurement will be made for
 substructure repair, unformed and formed.
 704.5.1 Repairing concrete deck (half-soling), deck repair with void tube replacement, full depth repair,
 modified deck repair, superstructure repair (unformed) and substructure repair (formed and unformed) will be
 measured to the nearest square foot.
 704.5.2 Slab edge repair will be measured to the nearest linear foot.
 704.5.3 No measurement will be made for epoxy sealing.
 704.5.4 Measurement of reinforcing steel replaced due to excess section loss will be made to the nearest 10
 pounds.
 704.5.5 Filling concrete cracks will be measured to the nearest square foot.
 704.6 Basis of Payme nt. Accepted quantities of concrete masonry repairs will be paid for at the contract
 unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. No direct payment will be made for epoxy
 sealing. Payment for accepted quantities of reinforcing steel replaced due to excess section loss will be paid
 for at the fixed contract unit price specified in Sec 109.15. No payment will be made for replacement of
 reinforcing steel cut or broken by the contractor.
 
 412
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 705
 PRESTRESSED CO NCRETE MEMBERS FO R BRIDGES
 705.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing prestressed concrete members,
 complete in place, in the superstructure of bridges. T his work shall cover both prestressed and posttensioned members.
 705.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Section
 P restressed Concrete Members for Bridges 1029
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete Structures 1036
 
 705.3 Equipme nt. Prestressing equipment shall be in accordance with Sec 1029.
 705.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 705.4.1 Post-Te nsione d Me mbe rs. Post-tensioned members shall be in accordance with Sec 1029.
 705.4.2 Ere ction. Erection of the structure shall be in accordance with the working drawings. Camber of
 beams, measured as the differential between adjacent beams in the final location, shall be no more than 1/8
 inch per 10 feet of span, and in no case greater than 1 inch. T he butt joints between precast panels shall be
 caulked to prevent excessive grout leakage between panels.
 705.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of prestressed concrete members, complete in place, in
 the finished structure will be based on contract plan quantities. Final measurement will not be made,
 prestressed concrete members will be computed to the nearest linear foot for each structure and each type
 of prestressed concrete member.
 705.6 Basis of Payme nt. Accepted prestressed concrete members will be paid for at the contract unit
 price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 
 413
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 706
 REINFO RCING STEEL FO R CO NCRETE STRUCTURES
 706.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing reinforcing steel of the designated
 shape, size and grade as shown on the plans.
 706.2 Mate rial.
 706.2.1 All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as
 follows:
 Item
 Section
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete 1036
 
 706.2.2 Reinforcing steel shall be accurately cut and bent to the dimensions and shapes shown on the plans.
 Cutting and bending tolerances for reinforcing steel shall be in accordance with the Concrete Reinforcing
 Steel Institute's Manual of Standard Practice. Flame-cutting of uncoated reinforcing steel will be permitted.
 706.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 706.3.1 Reinforcing steel shall be protected from damage at all times. When placed in the work and before
 concrete is placed, reinforcing steel shall be free from dirt, oil, paint, grease, loose mill scale, thick rust,
 any dried mortar and other foreign substances. A thin layer of powdery rust may remain. All reinforcing
 steel required for superstructure concrete, such as slabs, girders and beams and top slabs of culverts with
 more than a 4-foot span, shall be held securely in correct position with approved metal or plastic bar
 supports and ties. Reinforcing bars shall be positively secured against displacement. For bridge decks and top
 slabs of culverts, bars in the top mat shall be tied at all intersections except where spacing is less than or
 equal to 12 inches in each direction, in which case alternate intersections shall be tied. At other locations,
 the bars shall be firmly tied at alternate crossings or closer. T he steel shall be tied in the correct position
 with proper clearance maintained between the forms and the reinforcement. T he contractor shall construct
 the unit as shown on the plans. Measurements to reinforcing steel will be made to the centerline of bar,
 except where the clear distance from face of concrete is shown on the plans.
 706.3.2 Bars shall not be spliced, except as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 706.3.3 Mechanical bar splice systems, as shown on the plans, shall be capable of developing 125 percent
 of the specified yield strength of the bar being spliced and shall be installed in accordance with the
 manufacturer's recommendations and as modified herein.
 706.3.3.1 T he contractor shall furnish to the engineer a manufacturer's certification stating that the
 mechanical bar splice systems are in accordance with this specification. T he certification shall include or
 have attached specific results of tests showing yield and ultimate tensile load capacities.
 706.3.3.2 T he splicing system may attach directly to the bars being coupled or may be of a type that
 provides reinforcing bars of like size that lap with the bars being joined. A threaded-type splice system will
 be required where clearance considerations require the splicing device to be placed flush to the face of the
 construction joint for the initial concrete placement.
 706.3.3.3 Regardless of the type of splicing system that will be used, the total bar lengths for bars indicated
 in the bill of reinforcing steel are determined based on the end of the bars being located flush to the face of
 the construction joint. No additional payment will be made for any additional bar lengths required for the
 mechanical bar splices. Reinforcing bar lengths shown in the bill of reinforcing steel may require
 modification to accommodate the specific mechanical bar splice system that will be used. T he contractor
 shall determine the actual reinforcing bar lengths to accommodate the manufacturer's recommendations for
 installation of the mechanical bar splices.
 706.3.3.4 For mechanical bar splice systems that require laps with the reinforcement, the minimum lap
 length in inches on each side of the joint shall be as shown in the tables below provided that the actual
 cover to the nearest concrete surface or actual bar spacing is no less than minimums shown.
 
 414
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Minimum Lap Lengths
 Location 2
 - Vertical B ars
 - Horizontal and Inclined B ars - Horizontal and Inclined B ars
 with more than 12 inches of
 with 12 inches or less of f resh
 f resh concrete cast below bars concrete cast below bars
 Location 1
 
 f 'c = 3 ksi
 
 f 'c = 4 ksi
 
 f 'c = 3 ksi
 
 f 'c = 4 ksi
 
 Minimums
 (Inches)
 
 B ar
 Epoxy
 Epoxy
 Epoxy
 Epoxy
 Plain
 Plain
 Plain
 Plain
 Cover Spacing
 Size
 Coated
 Coated
 Coated
 Coated
 4
 29
 37
 25
 32
 22
 33
 19
 29
 1½
 2½
 5
 
 36
 
 46
 
 31
 
 40
 
 28
 
 41
 
 24
 
 36
 
 1⅞
 
 3⅛
 
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 11
 
 43
 50
 57
 64
 72
 80
 
 56
 65
 74
 83
 94
 104
 
 37
 43
 49
 55
 62
 69
 
 48
 56
 64
 72
 81
 90
 
 33
 38
 44
 49
 55
 61
 
 49
 57
 65
 74
 83
 92
 
 29
 33
 38
 43
 48
 53
 
 43
 50
 57
 64
 72
 80
 
 2¼
 2⅝
 3
 3½
 3⅞
 4¼
 
 3¾
 4⅜
 5
 5¾
 6⅜
 7⅛
 
 Values are LRFD Class B splices based on the following modification factors:
 λrl = 1.3 (Location 1), λrl = 1.0 (Location 2), λcf = 1.0 (Plain), λcf = 1.5 (Epoxy),
 λrc = 0.4 (Minimum reinforcement confinement factor)
 706.3.3.4.1 For reinforcement with cover or spacing less than required minimums shown in the table
 provided in Sec 706.3.3.4, the required minimum lap length in the table shall be multiplied by the
 reinforcement confinement adjustment ratio, B.
 B = d b , if B > 2.5, then B = 2.5
 0.4cb
 Where:
 d b = diameter of bar (inches)
 cb = the smaller of the distance from center of bar to the nearest concrete surface and one half the
 center-to-center spacing of the bars (inches)
 706.3.3.4.2 Mechanical bar splice systems that require laps with the reinforcement shall not be used for
 voided slab and solid slab bridges. Systems that require laps shall be Grade 60 deformed bars in accordance
 with Sec 1036. Epoxy-coated bars shall have epoxy-coated mechanical bar splices.
 706.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required,
 measurement of reinforcing steel will be made to the nearest 10 pounds for each structure. T he weight will
 be the plan weight of uncoated bars, and will not include mechanical bar splice systems, clips, wire,
 supports, spacers or other fastening devices for holding the reinforcement in place. Allowances will not be
 made for an overrun in scale weights of bars. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or
 deducted from the contract quantity. Mechanical bar splice systems will be measured per each.
 706.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of reinforcing steel including any approved mechanical
 bar splice systems, complete in place, will be paid for at the contract unit price.
 
 415
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 707
 CO NDUIT SYSTEM O N STRUCTURE
 707.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing all material and equipment and
 performing all work necessary to create a complete conduit system as shown on the plans.
 707.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Electrical Conduit
 1060
 P ull and Junction Boxes 1062
 
 707.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 707.3.1 Conduit systems shall be free from corrosion, restrictions, sharp edges and debris. T he ends of
 conduit runs shall be protected by bushings and shall be temporarily capped if conductor cable is not
 installed immediately. Conduit shall be rigidly held in place to prevent misalignment during placement of
 concrete. Reinforcing bars shall not be cut, bent, displaced or otherwise altered unless authorized by the
 engineer. All joints shall be rigid and waterproof. A 1/2-inch diameter drain hole in all low points of
 conduits and junction boxes where exposed and a 1/2-inch rigid steel conduit drop from the low point if the
 conduit and junction boxes are encased in concrete, shall be provided for drainage of water. Exposed ends of
 such drains shall be covered with either a commercial bronze or a stainless steel insect screen having an
 open area between 60 percent and 70 percent, held in place with a conduit bushing.
 707.3.2 After placing concrete, the conduit around which the concrete is placed shall be tested by the
 contractor, in the presence of the engineer, for continuity and freedom from obstruction by pulling a steel
 ball through the entire length. T he steel ball shall have a diameter 1/2 inch smaller than the inside diameter
 of the conduit being tested. Galvanized pullwires shall be installed in conduit for pulling wiring by others.
 707.3.3 Junction box covers shall have a waterproof seal securely fastened in place. Junction boxes shall be
 drilled and tapped for all conduit connections.
 707.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. T he work provided herein will not be measured for payment, but will be
 considered a lump sum unit.
 707.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted conduit system on structure will be paid for at the contract lump
 sum price.
 
 416
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 710
 EPO XY CO ATED REINFO RCING STEEL
 710.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing epoxy-coated reinforcing steel of the
 shape, size and grade shown on the plans, and in accordance with Sec 706, except as modified herein.
 710.2 Mate rial.
 710.2.1 All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000 Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Epoxy Coated Reinforcing Steel 1036
 
 710.2.2 Epoxy coated reinforcing steel shall not be flame-cut.
 710.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 710.3.1 Handling. All systems for handling epoxy-coated bars shall have padded contact areas. If, in the
 judgment of the engineer, the coating is damaged to the extent that the coating can no longer provide the
 intended protection and cannot be satisfactorily patched, the material shall be returned to the coating
 applicator for repair or shall be replaced.
 710.3.2 Place me nt.
 710.3.2.1 Epoxy-coated bars shall be held securely in the correct position with approved metal bar
 supports coated with plastic or epoxy or on plastic bar supports, and shall be held in place by use of plasticcoated tie wires or molded, plastic clips. When placing epoxy-coated bars, the bars shall be prevented from
 coming into contact with other steel items such as drains and shear connectors.
 710.3.2.2 T he contractor shall prevent damage to the epoxy coating when placing and vibrating concrete.
 In order to prevent damaging the coated bars, the vibrator head shall be covered with a sheet of rubber, and
 shall be equipped with a rubber tip with a maximum diameter of 2 1/2 inches. Another resilient material
 may be substituted for rubber as approved by the engineer.
 710.3.2.3 After the reinforcing bars are secured to approved bar supports, a final visual inspection will be
 made, and all uncoated or damaged areas shall be coated or repaired in accordance with Sec 710.3.3 as
 directed by the engineer.
 710.3.3 Re pairing Bars. All damaged areas of epoxy coating shall be patched with the material specified
 in Sec 1036, and in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. All sheared or cut ends of bars,
 end areas left bare during the coating process, and any areas where the entire coating is removed shall be
 patched. All repairs shall be completed as soon as practical, and in the case of bare end areas and sheared
 ends, before visible oxidation of the surface occurs.
 710.3.4 Me chanical Bar Splice s. Requirements for mechanical bar splice systems shown on the plans
 shall be in accordance with Sec 706. Epoxy coated mechanical bar splices shall be used with epoxy-coated
 reinforcing steel, and if the epoxy coating is damaged, shall be repaired in accordance with Sec 710.3.3 as
 directed by the engineer.
 710.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of epoxy-coated reinforcing steel will be made for plan
 weight of uncoated bars in accordance with Sec 706.4.
 710.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 710.5.1 T he accepted quantity of epoxy-coated reinforcing steel, including any approved mechanical bar
 splice systems, complete in place, will be paid for at the contract unit price.
 710.5.2 Repair of damaged epoxy coating will be at the contractor ’s expense.
 
 417
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 711
 PRO TECTIVE CO ATINGS FO R EXPO SED CO NCRETE SURFACES
 711.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of the surface preparation and application of protective
 coatings for sealing and protecting exposed concrete elements. T he locations and elevations of the
 protective coatings shall be as shown on the bridge plans. T he work involving temporary coating on
 weathering steel bridges shall also include the removal of the temporary coating.
 711.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Section
 P rotective Coating Material 1059
 
 711.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 711.3.1 Prote ctive Coating - Concre te Be nts and Pie rs (Ure thane ). T his protective coating shall
 consist of a modified urethane or polyurethane elastomer. New concrete shall cure a minimum of 28 days
 prior to application of the protective coating. T he coating shall be applied to dry surfaces. T he surface
 preparation and application shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. T he surface
 preparation shall include removal of all loose or delaminated concrete, as well as any other contaminants
 or latent materials. T he coating shall be applied to obtain a minimum dry film thickness of 40 mils. Any
 unevenly applied film that causes ponding of water shall be given additional coats as directed by the
 engineer.
 711.3.2 Prote ctive Coating - Concre te Be nts and Pie rs (Epoxy). T his protective coating shall consist
 of a two-component, modified polyamide converted epoxy, clear or gray in color. New concrete shall cure
 a minimum of 28 days prior to application of the protective coating. T he coating shall be applied to dry
 surfaces. T he surface preparation and application shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's
 recommendations. T he surface preparation shall include removal of all loose or delaminated concrete, as
 well as any other contaminants or latent materials. T he coating shall be applied to obtain a minimum dry
 film thickness of 6 mils.
 711.3.3 Concre te and Masonry Prote ction Syste m. T his protective coating shall consist of a clear
 penetrating siloxane or silane based sealer. T he surface preparation and application shall be in accordance
 with the manufacturer's recommendations. Field approval of the proposed material will be in accordance
 with Sec 1059.
 711.3.4 Sacrificial Graffiti Prote ction Syste m. T his system shall consist of a clear coating that can be
 removed with a hot water wash. T he surface preparation and application shall be in accordance with the
 manufacturer's recommendations. Field approval of the proposed material will be in accordance with Sec
 1059.
 711.3.5 Te mporary Coating - Concre te Be nts and Pie rs (We athe ring Ste e l). T his protective
 coating shall consist of a clear temporary coating applied to the concrete substructure for protection
 against staining from weathering steel girders during initial weathering. T he surface preparation and
 application shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. T he concrete substructure
 shall be cured a minimum of 14 days prior to application, unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer.
 T he coating shall be applied to the concrete substructure before the erection of structural steel. T he
 temporary coating shall be removed by the contractor after construction of the deck and curbs is complete,
 or as directed by the engineer.
 711.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of protective coatings for exposed concrete surfaces will
 be paid for at the contract lump sum price.
 
 418
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 712
 STRUCTURAL STEEL CO NSTRUCTIO N
 712.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of the field construction of bridges and structures made of
 structural steel and miscellaneous metals.
 712.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Shear Connectors
 P aint for Structural Steel
 Structural Steel Fabrication
 Coating of Structural Steel
 
 Section
 1037
 1045
 1080
 1081
 
 712.3 Handling, Transporting, Storing and Ere cting. Fabricated material shall be properly braced and
 supported at all times to prevent damage from torsional, vertical and lateral deflections. Members or
 shipped material showing possible damage during handling, transporting, storing or erecting will be subjected
 to nondestructive tests as directed by the engineer. T he costs of these tests will be at the contractor ’s
 expense. Fabricated structural steel shall be stored on suitable supports. T rough sections shall be stored in a
 manner to provide drainage. Any material that has become bent shall be straightened before being
 assembled or shall be replaced, if necessary. Material intended for use in the finished structure shall not be
 used by the contractor for erection or temporary purposes unless such use is provided for in the contract,
 or with written approval from the engineer.
 712.4 False work. Staging and falsework necessary for the erection of the structure shall be furnished and
 placed and, upon completion of the erection, removed by the contractor. If required, plans for falsework
 shall be submitted to the engineer before starting the work, but the engineer's acceptance of the plans will
 not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for obtaining satisfactory results.
 712.5 Ere ction. Erection of all parts of the structure shall be in accordance with the erection diagram or
 working drawings. Surfaces to be in permanent contact shall have all burrs and loose scale removed. Before
 erection, machine finished surfaces shall be cleaned of the protective coating, other than the primer
 permitted by the contract, and contact surfaces shall be given a heavy coat of graphite and oil.
 Connections match-marked in the shop shall be erected in accordance with those match marks.
 Interchange or reversal of match-marked connections will not be permitted. Any damage or distortion of
 members will not be permitted.
 712.5.1 Fit-up and Drifting. T russ spans, plate girders and continuous I-beams shall be supported to
 maintain required camber during erection. High-strength bolted field splices and primary connections,
 except for trusses and structures carrying live load erection stresses, shall have no less than one-half of the
 holes filled with a combination of fitting-up bolts and cylindrical drift pins. No more than 50 percent of
 this combination shall be fitting-up bolts. Splices and primary connections carrying erection traffic during
 erection or truss connections shall have no less than three-fourths of the holes filled with drift pins and
 bolts with no more than 50 percent of being fitting-up bolts. T he specified ratio of pins to bolts shall apply
 to each element of the splice, for example, top flange, web and bottom flange of girders. Fitting up bolts
 shall be the same diameter as the high-strength bolts. High strength bolts may be used for fitting-up bolts,
 and may be left in place, as long as they are not damaged during erection. High strength bolts will be
 considered damaged and shall be replaced if they are tensioned past snug tight, used to draw two members
 together, driven into place with a hammer, or have any deformation of the threads. Drift pins shall be sized
 to provide a driving, tight fit that maintains structure geometry during erection. Reaming of the holes to
 aid in drifting the connections will not be permitted. Fitting-up bolts shall be placed uniformly to draw the
 entire splice tight. All fitting-up bolts and drift pins shall be properly installed before beginning high
 strength bolt installation. Holes that do not match shall be reamed only with approval from the engineer.
 Drifting that would distort the metal will not be permitted.
 712.5.2 Be arings. T he lead plates or preformed rubber and fabric pads shall be approximately 1/8 inch
 thick and 1/2 inch greater in length and width than the bottom bearing plates under which the plates are to
 be placed. Lead plates shall weigh approximately 8 psf. Preformed rubber and fabric pads shall be in
 
 419
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 accordance with Sec 1038. Shop drawings will not be required for lead plates or preformed rubber and fabric
 pads. Lead plates or preformed rubber and fabric pads will be considered incidental to bearings, and payment
 will be considered as covered under the contract unit price for bearings.
 712.5.3 Anchor Bolts. Anchor bolt wells for superstructures shall be formed in the substructure units in
 accordance with the details shown on the plans utilizing permanently placed galvanized corrugated steel
 pipe in accordance with AASHT O M36 Type 1 avoiding direct metallic contact with other reinforcement.
 Other removable forming material may be used and shall not be left in place. Where permitted or required,
 the anchor bolt wells may be omitted, and in lieu thereof, holes drilled into the substructure without cutting
 any reinforcments. T he anchor bolt holes shall be drilled in the exact location shown, to the required depth
 and perpendicular to the plane of the bridge seat. T he drilled holes shall be at least 1 inch larger than the
 bolt diameter. When the anchor bolts are set in wells or holes, the wells or holes shall be clean and dry prior
 to grouting with an expansive mortar in accordance with Sec 1066. Excess mortar forced out of the holes
 shall be removed. T he location of anchor bolts in relation to the center of slotted holes provided in
 movable plates and shoes shall be varied to compensate for the movement of spans due temperatures above
 or below 60 F. Nuts on anchor bolts through moving parts of expansion bearings shall be adjusted to
 provide ample clearance for free movement of the span.
 712.5.4 Grouting. Grouting under bearing plates and castings to build the bearing plates and castings to the
 proper grade will not be permitted. Steel shims the full size of the plate of the bearing device may be used
 for this purpose. Shims shall be placed between the bottom of the stringers and the top of bearing plates, if
 practical, and shall be straightened to a plane surface.
 712.6 Fie ld We lding. All field welding shall be performed in accordance with Sec 1080.
 712.6.1 Ce rtification. All field welders shall be certified to weld on all steel products incorporated in
 MoDOT projects.
 712.6.2 Te sting. Field welders shall be certified by a test facility with an established accredited American
 Welding Society (AWS) Certified Welder Program as defined in the current AWS Standard QC 4. Welders
 shall be certified per the current QC 7 Standard for AWS Certified Welders. T he code of acceptance shall
 be AWS Bridge Welding Code D1.5 and qualifications range shall include the processes, positions, filler and
 base metal type as the work requires. Certification maintenance per applicable AWS Code of Acceptance
 shall be the responsibility of the certification holder. A copy of the current welder's certification from the
 AWS test facility shall be delivered to the engineer. T he engineer may require recertification if there is
 specific reason to question the welder's ability.
 712.6.3 We lding Proce dure s. Welding procedures shall be submitted for review prior to welding, at the
 engineer ’s request. T he engineer may verify the quality of a certified welder at any time.
 712.7 High-Stre ngth Bolt Installation.
 712.7.1 Bolte d Parts. T he slope of surfaces of bolted parts in contact with the bolt head and nut shall not
 exceed one in 20 with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis. All bolted parts, including underhead
 bearing areas and joint surfaces within the grip of the bolt, shall fit solidly together when assembled in the
 snug tight condition, and shall not be separated by gaskets or any other interposed compressible material.
 When assembled, all joint surfaces, including those adjacent to the bolt heads, nuts or washers, shall be free
 of scale, dirt, burrs, other foreign material and other defects that would prevent solid seating of the parts.
 Contact surfaces within friction-type joints shall be free of oil and paint, except in accordance with Sec
 1081.3.9, lacquer, rust inhibitor and galvanizing. All bolts, nuts and washers shall be free of rust, burrs, dirt,
 other foreign material and other defects that would prevent proper tensioning. All nuts for coated highstrength bolts shall be properly lubricated with a visible water-soluble lubricant. All nuts for uncoated highstrength bolts shall be properly lubricated with a water-soluble lubricant that is oily to the touch.
 712.7.2 Snug Tightne ss of Conne ctions. Regardless of the method of final tightening used to install the
 fasteners, the joint and all fasteners shall first be brought to the snug tight condition. Snug tight will be
 defined as the tightness where all faying surfaces of the joint are in firm contact as attained by a few
 impacts of an impact wrench or the full effort of a person using an ordinary spud wrench. Following the
 initial snug tightening of the fitting-up bolts, the remaining holes shall be filled with high strength bolts and
 
 420
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 tightened to a snug tight condition. All final bolts completing the connection shall be high strength and
 required nominal diameter. Snug tightening shall progress systematically from the most rigid part of the
 connection to the free edges. Bolts shall be retightened in a similar manner as necessary until all bolts are
 simultaneously snug tight, and the section is fully compacted with the bolted parts of the joint in full
 contact. For Type 3 and Type 1 bolts that will be field coated, if a connection is not completely tightened
 within five days of snug tightening, the contractor shall remove five percent or five bolts (whichever is
 less) of a given connection and conduct rotational capacity testing in accordance with Sec 1080 to verify
 nut lubrication. For bolted field splices, the amount of bolts specified for bolt removal shall apply to each
 element of the splice (top flange, web and bottom flange). If the rotational capacity test is unacceptable,
 all bolts shall be removed, inspected, relubricated and may then may be reinstalled. For galvanized bolts, the
 above condition shall be met as well as the threads of the bolts and nuts shall be inspected for galling prior
 to final tensioning. Any bolts or nuts with threads that are galled shall be removed and replaced.
 712.7.3 Bolt Te nsion. Each fastener shall be tightened to provide, when all fasteners in the joint are tight,
 at least the minimum bolt tension shown below for the size and grade of fastener used. T hreaded bolts shall
 be tightened by methods described in Secs 712.7.5, 712.7.6 or 712.7.7. If required because of bolt entering
 and wrench operation clearances, tightening may be done by turning the bolt while the nut is prevented
 from rotating. On non-parallel abutting surfaces where bevel washers will not be required, the nut shall be
 torqued against the non-sloping surface. Nuts shall be placed on the inside face of exterior girders, the top
 of girder flanges or in other situations the least exposed position, except if inaccessible for turning, on a
 sloping surface or otherwise approved by the engineer. Impact wrenches, if used, shall be of adequate
 capacity and sufficiently supplied with air to perform the required tightening of each bolt in approximately
 10 seconds. Bolts or nuts, once tensioned and subsequently loosened (turned), shall not be used as
 permanent bolts or nuts. Bolt tension calibration devices shall be calibrated and certified as to accuracy by a
 private testing lab within one year before usage, or at any time the tensioning process indicates that the
 calibration is in error.
 B olt Tension
 English
 Minimum B olt Tension
 B olt Size
 (lb x 1000)
 (in.)
 A 325
 A 490
 1/2
 12
 15
 5/8
 19
 24
 3/4
 28
 35
 7/8
 39
 49
 1
 51
 64
 1 1/8
 56
 80
 1 1/4
 71
 102
 1 3/8
 85
 121
 1 1/2
 103
 148
 
 712.7.4 Washe rs. All fasteners shall have a hardened washer under the nut or bolt head, whichever is
 turned in tightening. All fasteners over all oversized or slotted holes shall also have a hardened washer
 under the non-turned element. Where an outer face of the bolted parts has a slope of more than one in 20
 with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis, a smooth beveled washer shall be used to compensate for
 the lack of parallelism.
 712.7.5 Calibrate d Wre nch Me thod. When calibrated wrenches are used to provide the bolt tension
 specified in Sec 712.7.3, the wrench setting shall be such as to induce a bolt tension 5 to 10 percent in
 excess of the specified value. Wrenches shall be calibrated at least once each working day by tightening in a
 device capable of indicating actual bolt tension no less than three typical bolts of each diameter from the
 bolts to be installed. Power wrenches shall be adjusted to stall or cut out at the selected tension. If manual
 torque wrenches are used, the torque indication corresponding to the selected tension shall be noted and
 used in the installation of all bolts of the tested lot. Nuts shall be in tightening motion when torque is
 measured. After the joint has been brought to a snug tight condition, all bolts in the joint shall be tightened
 by progressing systematically from the most rigid part of the joint to the free edges. When using calibrated
 wrenches to install several bolts in a single joint, the wrench shall be returned to "touch up" bolts
 previously tightened, which may have been loosened by the tightening of subsequent bolts, until all are
 tightened to the selected tension. During tightening, there shall be no rotation of the part not turned by the
 
 421
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 wrench.
 712.7.6 Turn-of-Nut Me thod. When the turn-of-nut method is used to provide the bolt tension, there
 shall first be enough bolts brought to a snug tight condition as defined in Sec 712.7.2 to ensure that the
 parts of the joint are brought into full contact with each other. Following this initial operation, bolts shall
 be placed in any remaining holes in the connection and brought to snug tightness. All bolts in the joint shall
 then be tightened additionally by the applicable nut rotation specified below, with tightening progressing
 systematically from the most rigid part of the joint to the free edges. During this operation, there shall be
 no rotation of the part not turned by the wrench.
 Nuta Rotation f rom Snug Tight Condition
 Disposition of Outer Faces of B olted Parts
 One f ace normal to B oth f aces sloped not
 B olt length measured
 B olt
 bolt axis and other f ace more than 1:20 f rom
 f rom underside of
 f aces
 sloped not more than normal to bolt axis
 head to extreme end
 normal
 1:20 (bevel washer not (bevel washers not
 of point
 to bolt axis
 used)
 used)
 Up to and including 4
 1/3 turn
 1/2 turn
 2/3 turn
 diameters
 Over 4 diameters but not
 1/2 turn
 2/3 turn
 5/6 turn
 exceeding 8 diameters
 Over 8 diameters but not
 2/3 turn
 5/6 turn
 1 turn
 exceeding 12 diameters
 a Nut
 
 rotation shall be relative to bolts, regardless of the element (nut or bolt) being
 turned. For bolts installed by one-half of a turn and less, the tolerance will be ± 30
 degrees. For bolts installed by two-thirds of a turn and more, the tolerance will be ± 45
 degrees.
 712.7.7 Load Indicating Bolt Me thod. T ightening by this method will be permitted, provided it can be
 demonstrated by the following procedure that the bolt has been tightened, at a minimum, to the bolt
 tension indicated in Sec 712.7.3. T hree bolts of a representative length and of the same grade, diameter and
 condition as those under inspection shall be placed individually in a calibration device capable of indicating
 bolt tension. T here shall be a washer under the part turned in tightening each bolt. Each bolt specified shall
 be tightened in the calibration device until the spline drive has sheared off. When this method is used to
 provide the bolt tension, all bolts in the joint shall be tightened in stages to prevent or minimize slackening
 of the installed bolts. T he first stage shall be to tighten all bolts to a snug tight condition at which point all
 of the faying surfaces of the joint shall be firmly in contact. T he final stage of tightening to full tension
 shall be accomplished by progressing systematically from the most rigid part of the joint to the free edges.
 712.7.8 Bolt Le ngth. When snug tight, the beginning of the bolt threads shall be even with or project
 slightly beyond the nut. When properly tensioned, the bolt projections beyond the nut shall be as such to
 prevent the nut from engaging the thread runout.
 712.7.9 Bolt Te nsion Calibration De vice . A Skidmore-Wilhelm Calibrator or an acceptable equivalent
 tension measuring device will be required at each job site during erection. Periodic testing, at least once each
 working day when the calibrated wrench method is used, shall be performed to assure compliance with the
 installation test procedures required for the tightening method used, and to perform pre-installation job site
 rotational-capacity testing. Bolts too short for the Skidmore-Wilhelm Calibrator may be tested using direct
 tension indicators (DT I). T he DT I shall be calibrated in the Skidmore-Wilhelm Calibrator using longer
 bolts. Bolt tension calibration devices shall be calibrated and certified as to accuracy by a private testing
 laboratory within one year before usage or at any time the accuracy is questionable.
 712.7.10 Rotational-Capacity Te sting. T he rotational-capacity test shall be performed on each
 rotational-capacity lot prior to the start of bolt installation. Hardened steel washers shall be part of the
 test, regardless if washers will not be required as part of the installation procedure. Bolt, nut, and washer
 when required, combinations as installed shall be only from the established and tested rotational-capacity
 lot.
 712.7.11 We athe re d Bolts. Weathered or rusted bolts or nuts not in accordance with Secs 712.7.1,
 712.7.3 and 712.7.10 shall be cleaned and relubricated prior to installation. Recleaned or relubricated bolt,
 nut and washer assemblies shall be retested in accordance with Sec 712.7.10 prior to installation.
 
 422
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 712.7.12 Inspe ction. T he engineer will observe the installation and tightening of bolt assemblies to
 determine that the selected tightening procedure is properly used, and will determine that all bolt assemblies
 are tightened. T he following verification inspection will be used:
 (a) Either the engineer, or the contractor in the presence of the engineer, will use an inspecting
 torque wrench and bolt tension calibration device furnished by the contractor.
 (b) Five bolt assemblies of a representative length, and of the same grade, diameter and condition
 as those under inspection will be placed individually in a calibration device capable of indicating
 bolt tension. T here will be a washer under the part turned in tightening each bolt. Each bolt
 specified will be tightened in the device by any convenient means to the minimum tension
 specified in Sec 712.7.3. T he inspecting torque wrench then will be applied to the tightened bolt,
 and the torque necessary to turn the nut or head 5 degrees, approximately one inch at 12-inch
 radius, in the tightening direction will be determined. Of the five values obtained, the highest and
 the lowest values will be disregarded, with the average of the remaining three being taken as the job
 inspecting torque to be used in the manner specified in Sec 712.7.12. T he inspecting torque will be
 re-established at intervals of no more than 30 calendar days or at any time appreciable changes are
 encountered.
 (c) Bolts represented by the sample prescribed in Sec 712.7.12 that have been tightened in the
 structure will be inspected by applying, in the tightening direction, the inspecting wrench and the
 wrench’s job inspecting torque to 10 percent of the bolts, but no less than two bolts, selected at
 random in each connection. If no nut or bolt head is turned by this application of the job
 inspecting torque, the connection will be accepted as properly tightened. If any nut or bolt head is
 turned by the application of the job inspecting torque, this torque shall be applied to all bolts in the
 connection. All bolts whose nut or head was turned by the job inspecting torque shall be tightened
 and re-inspected.
 (d) Calibrated wrench tightening will be verified during actual installation in the assembled steel
 work. T he wrench adjustment selected by the calibration shall not produce a bolt or nut rotation
 from snug tight greater than permitted in Sec 712.7.6.
 712.8 Fie ld Coating. Field coating of structural steel shall be in accordance with Sec 1081.
 712.9 Ste e l Bar Dams. Steel bar dams placed at expansion devices on existing bridges to serve as headers
 for surfacing material shall be installed in a manner that will not interfere with the movement of the
 expansion devices.
 712.10 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 712.10.1 Ste e l and Iron. Payment for structural steel and wrought iron weights will be based on contract
 plan quantities. T he theoretical weight of the various sections will be used to compute the contract plan
 quantities of the material incorporated in the completed structure. No allowance will be made for overrun
 in scale weights or for erection bolts, excess field bolts or similar items, or the weight of any coating,
 galvanizing or weld material.
 712.10.2 Bolts. T he weight of steel bolts for steel-to-steel connections will be included in the contract
 plan quantities for fabricated structural steel on the basis of following weights per 100 bolts:
 B olt Weights a
 B olt Size Weight
 (in.)
 (lb)
 5/8
 40
 3/4
 65
 7/8
 95
 1
 135
 a T hese
 
 specified
 weights will be
 
 423
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 considered to cover
 the head, nut, any
 required washers
 and only that part
 of the bolt extending
 outside the grip
 of steel.
 712.10.3 Conne ction to Concre te or Timbe r. T he weight of bolts connecting steel to concrete or
 timber will be included for payment as fabricated structural steel, and the full weight of the bolts will be
 computed.
 712.10.4 Castings. Castings will be computed on the basis of the theoretical weight of the material in the
 completed structure, and no allowance will be made for overrun in scale weights or for the weight of any
 coating material, galvanizing material or other protective coatings.
 712.10.5 Accuracy of We ights. Weights of structural steel, wrought iron and castings will be computed to
 the nearest 10 pounds of the total weight of each class of material in the completed structure.
 712.10.6 Coatings. For recoating or overcoating, the contract documents will indicate the estimated
 number of tons to be coated for informational purposes.
 712.10.6.1 We ight Me asure me nt. If the contract specifies a unit of measurement of coating steel
 structures in tons, the weight of the steel to be cleaned and coated will be based on plan quantities to the
 nearest 1/10-ton. T he weight will not vary with the number of coats applied.
 712.10.6.2 Surface Are a Me asure me nt. If the contract specifies a unit of measurement of coating steel
 structures in square feet, the area of the girders or stringers to have surface preparation performed or to be
 coated will be computed to the nearest 100 square feet. T he bearings, diaphragms, stiffeners and all other
 miscellaneous steel within the limits of surface preparation or of the field coatings will not have the area
 computed and will be considered completely covered by the area computations of the girders or stringers.
 T he area will not vary with the number of coats applied. Final measurement will not be made.
 712.10.6.3 Lump Sum Me asure me nt. Measurement will not be made when the contract specifies units
 of measurement per lump sum.
 712.10.7 Bar Dams. A steel bar dam shall consist of the complete assembly on both sides of the expansion
 joint and will be considered a unit.
 712.10.8 She ar Conne ctors. T he weight of shear connectors will be based on the theoretical weight and
 will be included for payment in the weight of material to which the connectors are attached.
 712.11 Basis of Payme nt.
 712.11.1 Fabricate d Ste e l. Payment for fabricated structural steel, fabricated wrought iron, steel castings
 and gray iron castings will be based on the contract plan quantities. Any change in the contract plan
 quantities based on approved change orders will be paid for at the contract unit price. Payment for the shop
 prime coat, including inaccessible areas, will be included in the cost of fabricated structural steel, and no
 direct payment will be made. No direct payment will be made for coating bolted field connections, touchup, galvanizing, applying protective coating to machined surfaces or for cleaning coatings and rust streaks
 from finished concrete.
 712.11.2 Hardware . Bolts for attaching timber members to any part of a structure will be classified as
 hardware and no direct payment will be made.
 712.11.3 Coatings. Payment for surface preparation and applying field coatings to the structural steel, if
 specified as a contract item, will be based on the contract plan quantities. Any change in the contract plan
 quantities, based on approved change orders, will be paid for at the contract unit price. If no contract item
 is specified for surface preparation or applying field coatings, no direct payment will be made. Payment for
 
 424
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 the shop applied coatings, including inaccessible areas, will be considered completely covered by the cost of
 the fabricated structural steel. No direct payment will be made for the surface preparation or applying field
 coatings to the bearings, diaphragms, stiffeners and all other miscellaneous steel within the limits of surface
 preparation or of the field coatings. No direct payment will be made for stencils, paint and painting
 specified in Sec 1081. No direct payment will be made for field touch-ups specified in Sec 1081.
 712.11.4 Bar Dams. T he accepted number of steel bar dams will be paid for at the contract unit price.
 
 425
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 713
 THRIE BEAM FO R BRIDGE GUARDRAIL
 713.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and erecting steel thrie beam guardrail, including
 beams, posts and all appurtenances, as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 713.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Guardrail Material 1040
 
 713.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Anchor bolts for posts shall be set with suitable templates in
 position and securely fixed to prevent displacement during concreting operations. T he areas upon which
 the bases of the posts are to bear shall be dressed smooth to a true plane. Posts shall be aligned by the use of
 shims such that the post deviates no more than 1/2 inch from true alignment after final adjustment.
 713.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement of the completed thrie beam for bridge guardrail will
 not be made except for authorized changes during construction or if appreciable errors are found in the
 contract quantity. Where required, measurement of thrie beam for bridge guardrail will be made to the
 nearest linear foot for each structure, measured along the face of the thrie beam and from center to center
 of end posts. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract
 quantity.
 713.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of thrie beam for bridge guardrail, complete in place, will
 be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 
 426
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 715
 VERTICAL DRAIN AT END BENTS
 715.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing a vertical drain system consisting
 of drain core, geotextile fabric, perforated and unperforated drain pipe, couplers and a rodent screen as
 shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 715.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Geotextile
 Geocomposite Drainage Material
 Miscellaneous Drainage Material
 Corrugated Metallic-Coated Steel P ipe Underdrain
 
 Section
 1011
 1012
 1013
 1022
 
 715.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 715.3.1 T he contractor shall install the vertical drain system in accordance with the manufacturer's
 recommendations.
 715.3.2 If the core of the drain is not perforated, modifications shall be made to the core to provide
 adequate drainage into the drain pipe as approved by the engineer.
 715.3.3 Vertical and horizontal joints shall be constructed to form an uninterrupted drain face after
 compaction is completed. All joints shall have an overlap of geotextile to prevent any intrusion of fill
 material into the drain. Horizontal joints shall be designed to drain downward. Any cracks or openings in
 the drain adjacent to the fill will be cause for rejection of the drain, and the drain shall be replaced by the
 contractor, at the contractor ’s expense.
 715.3.4 T he backfill material shall be placed and compacted in accordance with Sec 206. T he backfill shall
 be placed in such a manner as to prevent damage to the vertical drain system. T he backfill material shall be
 as approved by the engineer.
 715.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. T he work provided herein will not be measured for payment, but will be
 considered completely paid for as a system, per each.
 715.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted vertical drain system, complete in place, will be paid for at the
 contract unit price for vertical drain at end bents, per each. No direct payment will be made for excavation,
 backfilling, compaction, drain pipe or other material and work
 
 427
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 716
 NEO PRENE BEARINGS
 SECTIO N 716.10 PLAIN AND LAMINATED NEO PRENE BEARING PADS.
 716.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing complete factory-produced
 plain or laminated neoprene bearing pads as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 716.10.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Elastomeric Bearing P ads 1038
 
 716.10.3 Construction Re quire me nts. T he neoprene pads shall be bonded to the bearing seat with an
 epoxy adhesive, in accordance with the bearing manufacturer ’s recommendations for bonding neoprene to
 concrete to prevent sliding.
 716.10.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement will be made per each. T he plain neoprene bearing pad,
 complete in place, shall include the plain neoprene bearing pad and any incidental materials needed to
 complete the work. T he laminated neoprene bearing pad, complete in place, shall include the laminated
 neoprene bearing pad and any incidental material needed to complete the work.
 716.10.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of plain neoprene bearing pads will be paid for at the
 contract unit price.
 SECTIO N 716.20 LAMINATED NEO PRENE BEARING PAD ASSEMBLY.
 716.20.1 De scription. T his item shall include furnishing and installing complete factory produced bearings
 as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 716.20.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Elastomeric Bearing P ads 1038
 
 716.20.3 Construction Re quire me nts. All sole plates shall be furnished with the bearings as a complete
 unit and directly welded to the girder or stringer as shown on the plans. T he neoprene pads shall be bonded
 to the bearing seat with an epoxy adhesive in accordance with the bearing manufacturer ’s recommendations
 for bonding neoprene to concrete to prevent sliding.
 716.20.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement will be made per each. T he laminated neoprene bearing
 pad assembly, complete in place, shall include the steel sole plate, laminated neoprene bearing pad, anchor
 bolts, heavy hexagon nuts, coating and any incidental material needed to complete the work.
 716.20.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of laminated neoprene bearing pad assemblies will be
 paid for at the contract unit price.
 SECTIO N 716.30 TYPE “N” PO LYTETRAFLUO RO ETHYLENE (PTFE) BEARINGS.
 716.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing complete factory produced
 Type “ N” PT FE bearings as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 716.30.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Type “ N” P TFE Bearings 1038
 
 428
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 716.30.3 Construction Re quire me nts. All sole plates shall be furnished with the bearings as a complete
 unit and directly welded to the girder or stringer as shown on the plans. At the time of installation, the
 stainless steel sliding face of the upper element and the PT FE sliding face of the lower element shall have
 the surface finish specified and shall be free of all dust, dirt, moisture or any other foreign matter. T he
 neoprene pads shall be bonded to the bearing seat with an epoxy adhesive in accordance with the bearing
 manufacturer ’s recommendations for bonding neoprene to concrete to prevent sliding. T he top and bottom
 plates shall be properly aligned before gluing pads.
 716.30.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement will be made per each. T he type “ N” PT FE bearing,
 complete in place, shall include the steel sole plate, stainless steel plates, PT FE face on the stainless steel
 plates, laminated neoprene bearing pad, anchor bolts, heavy hexagon nuts, coating and any incidental
 material needed to complete the work.
 716.30.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of type “ N” PT FE bearings will be paid for at the
 contract unit price.
 
 429
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 717
 FLEXIBLE JO INT SYSTEMS
 SECTIO N 717.10 PREFO RMED CO MPRESSIO N SEAL.
 717.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing a preformed compression seal
 for joints as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. Structural steel for the joints shall be
 furnished and installed as shown on the plans.
 717.10.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 P reformed Compression Seals 1073
 
 717.10.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 717.10.3.1 Shop Drawings. Shop drawings for structural steel for expansion joint systems shall be
 prepared in accordance with Sec 1080. T he dimensions of the seal shall be shown on the shop drawings for
 the armored joint. Shop drawings will not be required when the seal is placed against concrete or existing
 steel armor.
 717.10.3.2 Installation. T he preformed compression seal shall be installed in joints in one continuous
 piece without field splices. Factory splicing will be permitted for joints in excess of 53 feet. T he area of
 steel armor to come in contact with preformed compression seal lubricant adhesive shall be sand blasted
 prior to installing the seal. Sand blasting will be considered acceptable when the steel surfaces have been
 cleaned to an SSPC-SP10 degree of cleanliness. T he lubricant adhesive shall be applied in a continuous film
 to the sides of the seal and to the joint surfaces just prior to placing the seal in the joint. T he seal shall be
 installed with an installation tool recommended by the manufacturer, in a manner that prevents the seal
 from being damaged and from being in tension. Twisting, curling and nicking the seal will be prohibited.
 Lubricant adhesive on top of the installed seal shall be removed before drying. Unless the installation tool
 is capable of installing the seal without elongation prior to placement, the seal shall be pre-cut to the exact
 length for the joint plus ends as shown in the contract documents. T he pre-cut seal shall be installed and
 measured for stretch. T he seal shall be removed and reinstalled if the seal stretch length exceeds five
 percent of the pre-cut length.
 717.10.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction or where significant errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, the
 preformed compression seal will be measured to the nearest linear foot based on measurement from
 roadway face of curb to roadway face of curb along the centerline of the joint. T he revision or correction
 will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity. No measurement will be made of
 portions of the joint that extend past the roadway face of curbs.
 717.10.5. Basis of Payme nt. Preformed compression seals, including all material, coating, equipment,
 labor, fabrication, installation and any other incidental work necessary to complete this work, will be paid
 for at the contract unit price.
 SECTIO N 717.20 STRIP SEAL.
 717.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing a watertight strip seal for joints
 as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. T he structural steel for the joints shall be furnished
 and installed as shown on the plans.
 717.20.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item Section
 Strip Seal 1073
 
 430
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 717.20.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 717.20.3.1 Shop Drawings. Shop drawings for structural steel for expansion joint systems shall be
 prepared in accordance with Sec 1080. T he drawings shall show in detail the type, size, location of anchors,
 and sequence of installation. T he dimensions of the seal shall be shown on the shop drawings for the
 armored joint. T he cavity in the steel armor (also known as an extrusion) shall be of a dimensional
 tolerance that prevents the lug of the strip seal gland from slipping loose. T he upper lip of the extrusion
 shall extend over the bottom lip to avoid pinching the gland when the expansion joint system is in a closed
 position. Shop drawings will not be required when the seal is placed in existing steel extrusions.
 717.20.3.2 Installation. T he area of steel armor to come in contact with strip seal lubricant adhesive
 shall be sand blasted prior to installing the seal. Sand blasting will be considered acceptable when the steel
 surfaces have been cleaned to an SSPC-SP10 degree of cleanliness. T he strip seal shall be made watertight
 with a lubricant adhesive for bonding the neoprene gland to the steel extrusion as recommended by the
 manufacturer. T he contractor shall obtain the services of a qualified technical representative, approved by
 the manufacturer of the expansion system and acceptable to the engineer, to assist during the installation.
 T he installation shall not occur without the technical representative being present.
 717.20.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, the
 strip seal will be measured to the nearest linear foot, based on measurement from the roadway face of curb
 to roadway face of curb along the centerline of the joint. T he revision or correction will be computed and
 added to or deducted from the contract quantity. Portions of the joint that extend past the roadway face of
 curbs will not be measured for payment.
 717.20.5. Basis of Payme nt. Strip seals, including all material, coating, equipment, labor, fabrication,
 installation, technical assistance, and any other incidental work necessary to complete this work, will be
 paid for at the contract unit price.
 SECTIO N 717.30 SILICO NE EXPANSIO N JO INT SEALANT.
 717.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing the backer rod and silicone
 expansion joint sealant for joints as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. Structural steel for
 the joints shall be furnished and installed as shown on the plans.
 717.30.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Silicone Expansion Joint Sealant 1057
 
 717.30.3 Construction Re quire me nts. T he contractor shall furnish to the engineer the manufacturer's
 written product information, installation procedures and instructional information at least two weeks prior
 to installation. T he contractor shall obtain the services of a qualified technical representative approved by
 the manufacturer of the expansion system and acceptable to the engineer, to assist during the installation.
 T he contractor, the technical representative and the engineer shall meet to review and clarify installation
 procedures and requirements prior to starting the work. T he start of surface preparations and sealant
 installation shall not occur without the technical representative being present. T he technical representative
 shall be present for at least one day at the start of surface preparations and sealant installation.
 717.30.3.1 Shop Drawings. Shop drawings for structural steel for expansion joint systems shall be
 prepared in accordance with Sec 1080. T he dimensions of the seal shall be shown on the drawings for the
 armored joint. Shop drawings will not be required when the sealant is placed against concrete or existing
 steel armor.
 717.30.3.2 Surface Pre paration. T he concrete or steel surface shall be prepared for priming and sealant
 placement. New Portland cement concrete shall be fully cured and allowed to dry a minimum of seven days.
 T he joint shall be cleaned of all gravel, loose material and other contaminates before sand blasting. Areas
 that will be in contact with the sealant shall be sand blasted with a clean, hard aggregate that will leave little
 
 431
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 to no dust residue. Sand blasted concrete surfaces will be considered acceptable when areas that will be in
 contact with the sealant have a roughened surface with clean, exposed aggregate. T he surface shall be free
 of foreign matter or plastic residue. Sand blasted steel surfaces will be considered acceptable when the steel
 surfaces have been cleaned to an SSPC-SP10 degree of cleanliness. After sand blasting is completed, the
 joint shall be cleaned of debris using oil-free and water-free compressed air or a vacuum, either being at least
 90 psi.
 717.30.3.3 Priming. Priming shall immediately follow sand blasting and cleaning and will only be
 permitted to proceed when the air and substrate temperatures are at least 40 F and rising. Sand blasting,
 priming and sealing shall be performed on the same day. T he entire sand blasted surface shall be primed.
 Application and drying times for primers shall be in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 All leftover primer shall be properly disposed.
 717.30.3.4 Joint Installation. T he backer rod shall be installed as specified on the plans and in
 accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations. All voids in the installed backer rod shall be filled to
 prevent sealant leakage.
 717.30.3.5 Se alant Place me nt. T he sealant thickness and recess depth shall be as shown in the contract
 documents and shall be measured during installation at approximately 2 foot intervals. Adjustments to
 correct sealant thickness to within ± 1/8-inch tolerance shall be made before the sealant begins to set.
 Sealant placement will only be permitted when the air and substrate temperatures are above 40 F, below 90
 F and 5 F above the dew point. T he joint surfaces shall be kept clean and dry during sealing. T he joint shall
 remain clean and dry during the sealing operation. Sealing shall be performed using a pneumatic gun in
 accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations. End of seal treatment at vertical faces of curbs,
 sidewalks or parapets shall be as recommended by the manufacturer and as shown in the contract
 documents. Sealant placed incorrectly shall be removed and replaced at the contractor's expense.
 717.30.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, the
 silicone expansion joint sealant will be measured to the nearest linear foot based on measurement from the
 roadway face of curb to roadway face of curb along the centerline of the joint. T he revision or correction
 will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity. Portions of the joint that extend
 past the roadway face of curbs will not be measured for payment.
 717.30.5 Basis of Payme nt. Silicone expansion joint sealant, including all materials, coating, equipment,
 labor, fabrication, installation, technical assistance and any other incidental work necessary to complete
 this work, will be paid for at the contract unit price.
 SECTIO N 717.40 SILICO NE JO INT SEALANT FO R SAW CUT AND FO RMED JO INTS.
 717.40.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of sealing the saw cut and formed joints as shown in the
 contract documents.
 717.40.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Silicone Joint Sealant for Saw Cut and Formed Joints 1057
 
 717.40.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 717.40.3.1 Saw Cut Joints. Joints shall be sawed as shown on the plans as soon as the concrete has
 hardened sufficiently to permit sawing of a neat straight joint with minimal raveling, and before
 uncontrolled shrinkage cracking occurs. All joints shall be sawed to the required dimension and cleaned by
 sand blasting, wire brushing or other methods approved by the engineer in accordance with the
 manufacturer ’s recommendations. Joint interfaces shall be fully cured and dry, or free of moisture at the
 time of installation. All loose particles shall be removed by oil-free and water-free compressed air or a
 vacuum of at least 90 psi before the application of the backer rod and sealant.
 
 432
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 717.40.3.2 Forme d Joints. Any joints 0.25 inch or greater shall be cleaned and packed with backer rod
 and silicone joint sealant. Any joints less than 0.25 inch shall be cleaned and caulked with silicone joint
 sealant as shown on the plans. All joint interfaces shall be cleaned by grinding, saw cutting, sand blasting,
 wire brushing or other methods approved by the engineer in accordance with the manufacturer ’s
 recommendations. New Portland cement concrete shall be fully cured and allowed to dry a minimum of
 seven days. T he joint interfaces shall be free of moisture at the time of installation. All loose particles shall
 be removed by oil-free and water-free compressed air or vacuum of at least 90 psi before the application of
 the backer rod and sealant.
 717.40.3.3 Joint Backe r Rod. T he backer rod shall be used in the joint slot to ensure the sealant adheres
 to the sidewalls or interface of the joint. All joint areas requiring a backer rod shall be packed with a closedcell, expanded polyethylene foam to obtain the appropriate depth of the sealant. T he backer rod shall be
 slightly oversized for the joint width, and shall be resilient, compressible in nature, nonabsorbent, nonshrinking and compatible with the sealant.
 717.40.3.4 Se alant Place me nt. Sealant shall be placed in the proper configuration as shown on the plans.
 Joint sealer shall be protected from dust and other foreign matter until cured to a tack-free condition. T he
 sealant shall fill the joint from the bottom to slightly below the surface currently being applied.
 Immediately after placement and before a skin forms, the sealant shall be tooled to force the sealant
 against the joint face and to recess the bead approximately 1/8 inch.
 717.40.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. No measurements will be made.
 717.40.5 Basis of Payme nt. No direct payment will be made for this work.
 SECTIO N 717.50 O PEN CELL FO AM JO INT.
 717.50.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing an open cell foam joint system
 as shown on the plans, as directed by the engineer and in accordance with the manufacturer ’s requirements.
 717.50.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Open Cell Foam Joints 1073
 
 717.50.3 Construction Re quire me nts. T he contractor shall have a manufacturer ’s representative on
 site for the joint installation. T he representative shall be responsible for ensuring the surface preparation
 and joint installation are done in accordance with the manufacturer ’s requirements.
 717.50.3.1 Fie ld Splice s. T he Open Cell Foam shall be installed in one continuous piece without field
 splices, unless otherwise specified on the plans or directed to by the engineer. Open Cell Foam shall be
 spliced with silicone called for in Sec 1057 and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations
 717.50.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction or where significant errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, the open
 cell foam joint will be measured to the nearest linear foot based on measurement from roadway face of curb
 to roadway face of curb along the centerline of the joint. T he revision or correction will be computed and
 added to or deducted from the contract quantity. No measurement will be made of portions of the joint that
 extend past the roadway face of curbs.
 717.50.5 Basis of Payme nt. Open cell foam joint, including all material, coating, equipment, labor,
 fabrication, installation and any other incidental work necessary to complete this work, will be paid for at
 the contract unit price for Open Cell Foam Joint.
 SECTIO N 717.60 PREFO RMED SILICO NE O R EPDM EXPANSIO N JO INTS.
 717.60.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing a preformed silicone or EPDM
 expansion joint seal for joints as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer and in accordance with
 
 433
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 the manufacturer ’s requirements.
 717.60.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and
 specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 P reformed Silicone or EP DM Expansion Joints 1073
 
 717.60.3 Construction Re quire me nts. T he contractor shall furnish to the engineer the manufacturer's
 written product information, installation procedures and instructional information at least two weeks prior
 to installation. T he contractor shall obtain the services of a qualified technical representative approved by
 the manufacturer of the expansion joint seal and acceptable to the engineer, to assist during the
 installation. T he contractor, the technical representative and the engineer shall meet to review and clarify
 installation procedures and requirements prior to starting the work. T he start of surface preparations and
 seal installation shall not occur without the technical representative being present. T he technical
 representative shall be present for at least one day at the start of surface preparations and seal installation.
 717.60.3.1 Surface Pre paration. T he concrete or steel surface shall be prepared for priming and seal
 placement. New Portland cement concrete shall be fully cured and allowed to dry a minimum of seven days.
 T he joint shall be cleaned of all gravel, loose material and other contaminates before sand blasting. Areas
 that will be in contact with the sealant shall be sand blasted with a clean, hard aggregate that will leave little
 to no dust residue. Sand blasted concrete surfaces will be considered acceptable when areas that will be in
 contact with the sealant have a roughened surface with clean, exposed aggregate. T he surface shall be free
 of foreign matter or plastic residue. Sand blasted steel surfaces will be considered acceptable when the steel
 surfaces have been cleaned to an SSPC-SP10 degree of cleanliness. After sand blasting is completed, the
 joint shall be cleaned of debris using oil-free and water-free compressed air or a vacuum, either being at least
 90 psi. Using a rag saturated in denatured alcohol, wipe clean both vertical faces of the expansion joint
 opening.
 717.60.3.2 Priming. Priming shall immediately follow sand blasting and cleaning and will only be
 permitted to proceed when the air and substrate temperatures are at least 40° F and rising. Sand blasting,
 priming and installing the seal shall be performed on the same day. T he entire sand blasted surface shall be
 primed. Application and drying times for primers shall be in accordance with the manufacturer ’s
 recommendations. All leftover primer shall be properly disposed.
 717.60.3.3 Installation. T he preformed silicone or EPDM expansion joint seal shall be installed in joints
 in one continuous piece without field splices. T he locking adhesive and seal shall be applied in accordance
 with the manufacturer ’s recommendations, in a manner that prevents the seal from being damaged and
 from being in tension. Twisting, curling and nicking the seal will be prohibited. Unless the installation tool
 is capable of installing the seal without elongation prior to placement, the seal shall be pre-cut to the exact
 length for the joint plus ends as shown in the contract documents or as directed by the engineer. T he precut seal shall be installed and measured for stretch. T he seal shall be removed and reinstalled if the seal
 stretch length exceeds five percent of the pre-cut length at the contractor ’s expense.
 717.60.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction or where significant errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, the
 preformed silicone or EPDM expansion joint will be measured to the nearest linear foot based on
 measurement from roadway face of curb to roadway face of curb along the centerline of the joint. T he
 revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity. No
 measurement will be made of portions of the joint that extend past the roadway face of curbs.
 717.60.5 Basis of Payme nt. Preformed silicone or EPDM expansion joint, including all material, coating,
 equipment, labor, fabrication, installation and any other incidental work necessary to complete this work,
 will be paid for at the contract unit price for Preformed Silicone or EPDM Expansion Joint.
 
 434
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 718
 TEMPO RARY BRIDGE
 718.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing all material, labor and equipment necessary for
 fabricating, constructing, transporting and erecting the superstructure components, maintaining,
 disassembling, cleaning, transporting superstructure components to storage and removing a temporary
 bridge as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 718.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Section/Specif ication
 Removal of Bridges
 216
 Load Bearing P ile
 702
 Structural Steel Construction
 712
 Guardrail and Guard Cable Material
 1040
 Lumber and Timber
 1050
 Structural Steel Fabrication
 1080
 Coating of Structural Steel
 1081
 Structural Steel Tubing
 ASTM A 500, Grade 46
 
 718.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Temporary bridges and approaches shall be constructed at the
 location, length and elevation shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. If necessary to prepare
 the crossing for traffic, approach embankments or excavation and surfacing shall be provided. T he
 contractor shall maintain in good condition the temporary structure, approaches and embankments until
 the permanent structure is opened to traffic. T he contractor shall then remove the temporary structure, all
 refuse, debris and approach fills. T he site shall be left in a neat and acceptable condition before acceptance
 of the work. Any portion of the superstructure furnished by the contractor shall in its entirety become the
 property of the Commission.
 718.3.1 Substructure . T he substructure shall include all portions of this structure not classified as
 superstructure elsewhere in these specifications. T he substructure shall generally include the piling, sway
 bracing, timber, attaching devices and any excavation or backfill not included as a roadway item necessary
 to construct this structure. All piling shall be pulled or removed in accordance with Sec 216. After removal,
 all portions of the substructure will remain the property of the contractor.
 718.3.2 Prote ctive Coating. Structural steel tubing furnished by the contractor shall be cleaned and coated
 using System G in accordance with Sec 1081. T he prime coat and epoxy intermediate coat shall be applied
 in the shop. After disassembly, any areas of the tubing where the coating is damaged shall be cleaned and
 coated using System G prime coat and epoxy intermediate coat in accordance with Sec 1081. No coating
 will be required on the remaining superstructure. Protective coating of the steel piling and sway bracing will
 not be required.
 718.3.3 Supe rstructure Partially Furnishe d by Contractor. T he contractor shall furnish the cap
 beam units. T he portion of the superstructure to be furnished by the Commission will include the
 superstructure spans. Each end bent cap beam unit shall include the channels, cover plate, stiffener, end
 plates and bottom bearing plates. Each intermediate bent cap beam unit shall include the angles, cover
 plate, stiffeners, end plates and bottom bearing plates. Each cap beam unit shall be fabricated and fully
 assembled in the shop. All holes and slots shall be shop drilled full size. New high-strength bolts, nuts and
 washers shall be furnished by the contractor, as required for the assembly of the cap beams, as shown on
 bridge plans.
 718.3.4 Supe rstructure Furnishe d by the Commission. T he superstructure furnished by the
 Commission will be stored at the location described on the bridge plans. New high-strength bolts, nuts and
 washers for the superstructure furnished by the Commission shall be used for any reassembling of the
 temporary bridge units.
 718.3.5 Transporting and Ere cting Supe rstructure . T he contractor shall transport the superstructure
 units to the job site for erection. After the substructure piling and sway bracing have been completed to
 
 435
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 correct line and grade, holes shall be field drilled in the pile at locations shown on the plans to attach the
 cap beam in conformity with the plan line and grade. Field reaming or enlargement in any manner of holes
 in any superstructure unit will not be permitted. T he structure shall be maintained by the contractor, at the
 contractor ’s expense, during usage until final storage. Any damage, regardless of cause, shall be repaired by
 the contractor, at the contractor ’s expense, prior to final acceptance. T he contractor ’s responsibility for
 work shall be in accordance with Sec 107.
 718.3.6 Re moving and Storing Supe rstructure . After the permanent bridge is open to traffic, the
 superstructure of the temporary bridge shall be disassembled, removed, cleaned and transported to the
 storage area, as directed by the engineer, to the location described on the bridge plans. T he superstructure
 units shall be cleaned of all dirt and other debris to the satisfaction of the engineer. T he contractor shall
 notify and make arrangements with the engineer a minimum of 24 hours prior to storing the
 superstructure. T he estimated weight of each individual superstructure unit will be 18,000 pounds.
 718.3.6.1 Disasse mbly. T he thrie beam rail and channel for the splice between spans at each intermediate
 bent shall be removed, set back (bent no. 2 to span 1, bent no. 3 to span 2, etc.) and securely attached to
 the rail or channel on each exterior unit. T he remainder of the thrie beam rail shall remain fully assembled
 and attached as part of each exterior superstructure unit for storage. Splice plates for attaching the exterior
 units to the interior units shall be removed, turned inward and securely attached to the interior unit
 connection plates or bearing stiffeners. T he cap beams and bottom bearing plates shall be removed and
 stored as units. T he bearing anchor bolts shall be greased and capped before transporting to the storage
 area. T he structural tubing shall be removed and stored. All attaching bolts, nuts, etc. shall be placed on one
 of the parts from which the hardware was removed.
 718.3.6.2 Storage . T he sequence of storage shall be such that the end spans are readily accessible without
 relocating other spans. Storage shall be by span with an exterior unit set in a relatively level position on
 timber blocks placed just inside each bearing such that the unit is a minimum of 6 inches off the ground.
 T he other exterior unit shall be stacked on top of the first exterior unit, followed by the interior units of
 the same span. Each stacked unit shall be separated with timber blocks by a minimum of 6 inches. All spans
 shall be stored in a similar manner. T he cap beam units shall be stored on the interior unit of an adjacent
 span with a minimum of one cap beam unit per span. T he structural steel tubing shall be stored on the
 interior unit of an end span.
 718.3.6.3 Hardware . New high-strength bolts, nuts and washers in like sizes shall be furnished by the
 contractor to the engineer to replace those that are either loosened or removed during disassembly of the
 temporary bridge. T he new high-strength bolts, nuts and washers shall be supplied in separate watertight
 containers for each span stored.
 718.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. All excavation necessary in constructing and removing approach
 embankment, as directed by the engineer, will be measured and included with regular roadway excavation
 quantities. Measurement of the piles in place will be the actual length measured to the nearest foot for the
 portion of each pile that remains for the use of the temporary bridge. All other work items will not be
 measured for payment, but will be considered as part of the lump sum unit.
 718.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he substructure, partial furnishing of superstructure, transporting and erecting
 superstructure, and removing and storing superstructure will be paid for at the contract unit price for each
 of the pay items included in the contract. Payment will be considered full compensation for all labor,
 equipment and material, including attaching hardware, to complete the described work. Any salvage value
 of the substructure shall be reflected in the contract unit price.
 
 436
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 720
 MECHANICALLY STABILIZED EARTH WALL SYSTEMS
 720.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and constructing mechanically stabilized earth
 wall systems in accordance with these specifications, as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 720.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Concrete
 P ipe P ile Spacers
 Select Granular Backfill for Structural Systems
 Geotextile
 Miscellaneous Drainage Material
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete
 Resin Anchor Systems
 Mechanically Stabilized Earth Wall System Components
 
 Section
 501
 724
 1010
 1011
 1013
 1036
 1039
 1052
 
 720.2.1 Whenever a wall system is located adjacent to and within ten feet of the limits of a permanent
 roadway, the steel reinforcement used in the concrete elements of the wall system shall be epoxy coated.
 T his requirement will not apply to soil reinforcement and corresponding attachments used for connecting
 the reinforcement to the wall system units.
 720.2.2 Reinforcement for wall system units shall be either Grade 60 deformed bars or an equivalent steel
 welded wire reinforcement. Reinforcement for coping or top cap units shall be Grade 60 deformed bars.
 720.2.3 Joint material for large block wall systems shall be used in accordance with the wall manufacturer ’s
 recommendations.
 720.2.4 T he unit fill that is used for small block wall systems shall consist of a granular backfill in
 accordance with Gradation D or E of Sec 1005.
 720.2.5 Class B or B-1 air entrained concrete shall be used for the coping or top cap units used for the wall
 system. Class B or B-1 concrete shall be used for cast-in-place concrete leveling pads used for the wall
 system.
 720.3 De sign Re quire me nts.
 720.3.1 Only the mechanically stabilized earth wall systems shown in the bridge prequalified products
 listing will be allowed for use by the contractor. T he bridge prequalified products list may be obtained
 through Bridge or MoDOT ’s web site. Any deviations from the prequalified wall system details previously
 submitted to Bridge shall be specifically outlined in the cover letter submitted with the design plans, details
 and computations.
 720.3.2 Small block wall systems will be permitted for uses where the wall height does not exceed ten feet.
 T his limit may be exceeded up to a maximum height of 12 feet to accommodate peaks in the wall or to
 accommodate lengths of the wall that do not exceed more than ten percent of the total wall length. T he
 height of the wall will be determined by measuring from the top of the concrete leveling pad to the top of
 the cap on the wall.
 720.3.3 T he contractor shall submit six complete sets of the manufacturer ’s design plans, details and
 computations for each individual wall structure to the engineer. All submitted information shall be clear and
 complete, and thoroughly checked before the information is submitted. All submitted information shall be
 legible and of sufficient contrast to be suitable for archiving in accordance with MoDOT ’s current practice
 for archiving. Submitted information determined to be unsuitable for archiving purposes will be returned for
 corrective action.
 720.3.4 T he contractor will be solely responsible for the content of the design plans, details and
 computations that are submitted, and for the performance of the wall system. T he contractor shall be
 
 437
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 solely responsible for ensuring that the information submitted by the manufacturer is in accordance with all
 contract plans and specifications and with the wall system used. Completed design plans shall contain all
 material, fabrication and construction requirements for erecting the wall system complete in place. T he
 completed design plans shall show the longitudinal and lateral layout of the drainage systems used for the
 wall system. T he contractor shall be responsible for the internal and external stability of the structure
 including compound stability. Overall global stability will be the responsibility of the engineer.
 720.3.5 All design plans, details and computations submitted for distribution shall be signed, sealed and
 stamped in accordance with the laws relating to architects and professional engineers (Chapter 327,
 RSMo).
 720.3.6 Mechanically stabilized earth wall systems shall be designed in accordance with the AASHT O
 specifications shown on the plans and in accordance with additional publications or specifications
 referenced within the AASHT O specifications. T he seismic performance category, angle of internal
 friction for the selected granular backfill for structural systems and other design requirements shown on the
 plans shall be incorporated into the design of the wall system.
 720.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 720.4.1 Small Block Wall Syste ms.
 720.4.1.1 T he contractor shall use a unit fill to fill the voids of the blocks for the wall system. T his unit
 fill shall extend a minimum distance of 12 inches beyond the extreme back face of the wall system. Each
 course of the wall system shall have the unit fill in place before the next course of the wall system is
 placed.
 720.4.1.2 Precast top cap units shall be used on small block wall systems. T he top cap units shall be
 permanently attached as shown on the plans, utilizing either a resin anchor system or an equivalent detail.
 720.4.1.3 Any equivalent details used shall be part of the prequalified mechanically stabilized earth wall
 system details on file for the manufacturer of the wall system.
 720.4.2 Large Block Wall Syste ms.
 720.4.2.1 A Class 1 geotextile filter cloth shall be placed between the wall and the select granular backfill
 for structural systems at all joints between the individual wall system units.
 720.4.2.2 Precast or cast-in-place coping shall be placed on large block wall systems in accordance with the
 design plans. Capstone may be used in lieu of coping whenever coping is specified on the design plans.
 When coping or capstone is used, the maximum distance between construction joints shall be 20 feet. T he
 joints for coping or capstone should align with the vertical joints in the MSE wall face.
 720.4.3 Drainage Re quire me nts. A drainage system shall be provided at the base of the wall system near
 the facing elements and at the interface of the select granular backfill for structural systems and the
 retained backfill. T he drainage system shall consist of a perforated pipe wrapped in a Class 2 geotextile to
 prevent clogging of the perforations. T he pipe shall be placed in such a manner that water drains freely
 from the pipe. When the wall length is such that the slope of the pipe becomes excessive in the engineer ’s
 judgment, lateral drain pipes shall be installed underneath the concrete leveling pad.
 720.4.4 Foundation Pre paration. T he foundation for the wall system shall be graded level for a width
 equal to or exceeding the length of the reinforcing strips, or as shown on the plans. Prior to wall
 construction, the foundation, if not on rock, shall be compacted as directed by the engineer. Any
 foundation soils found to be unsuitable shall be removed and replaced, as directed by the engineer.
 720.4.5 Le ve ling Pad. An unreinforced cast-in-place concrete leveling pad shall be provided at the
 foundation level for each base unit of the wall system. T he leveling pad shall be built to the elevations
 shown on the plans and shall not be raised in elevation to allow for the use of a particular wall system. T he
 leveling pad shall be built a minimum width of 12 inches and a minimum depth of 6 inches. T he concrete
 on the leveling pad shall be cured a minimum of 12 hours before any of the wall system panels are placed.
 
 438
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 720.4.6 Batte r Re quire me nts. Wall systems shall be built with some inward batter, as determined by the
 wall system manufacturer, to accommodate the horizontal movement created by the placement and
 compaction of selected granular backfill for structural systems. Facing elements out of alignment shall not
 be pulled or pushed into proper place, as that may cause damage to the facing element or soil
 reinforcement strips. If misalignment occurs, the select granular backfill for structural systems and the soil
 reinforcement strips shall be removed and the facing elements reset to the proper alignment.
 720.4.7 Pipe Pile Space rs.
 720.4.7.1 T he contractor shall install pipe pile spacers at pile locations in the select granular backfill of
 the mechanically stabilized earth walls to protect the soil reinforcement when driving pile for bridge
 substructure at end bents when shown on the bridge plans. T he pipe pile spacers shall be accurately located
 and capped for future pile construction.
 720.4.7.2 T he pipe pile spacers shall be in accordance with the requirements of Sec 724 for Group C
 “ Flexible Pipe – Metal” or “ Flexible Pipe – T hermoplastic”.
 720.4.7.3 T he pipe pile spacers shall have an inside diameter greater than that of the pile and large enough
 to avoid damage to the pipe when driving the pile. T he size of pipe pile spacers shall be subject to approval
 by the engineer before work is started. T he bottom of the pipe pile spacers shall be placed below the
 bottom of the MSE wall leveling pad as shown on the plans. T he pipe pile spacers shall be filled with sand
 or other approved material after the pile is placed and before being driven. Shop drawings of the pipe pile
 spacers will not be required.
 720.4.7.4 In lieu of using pipe pile spacers, the contractor will have the option of driving the piles before
 construction of the mechanically stabilized earth wall and placing the soil reinforcing and backfill material
 around the piling. T he contractor must adequately support the piling to insure that proper pile alignment is
 maintained during the wall construction. T he contractor's plan for bracing the pile shall be submitted to the
 engineer for review.
 720.4.8 Se le ct Granular Backfill for Structural Syste ms Place me nt.
 720.4.8.1 Select granular backfill for structural systems shall be placed concurrently with the placement of
 the retained backfill. T he placement of the select granular backfill for structural systems shall closely
 follow the erection of each course of the wall system and shall be placed in such a manner to avoid any
 damage or disturbance to the wall material or any misalignment of the facing elements of the wall system.
 Any wall system material that becomes damaged or disturbed during the installation of the wall system shall
 be removed, replaced or corrected at the contractor's expense, as directed by the engineer. Whenever
 placement of the select granular backfill for structural systems results in the wall facing system being
 misaligned or distorted outside the limits of this specification, the contractor shall correct the
 misalignment or distortion as directed by the engineer.
 720.4.8.2 T he select granular backfill for structural systems shall be compacted in accordance with Sec 203,
 with the following exceptions:
 (a) T he minimum density shall be no less than 95 percent of maximum density, determined in
 accordance with AASHT O T 99.
 (b)When the material used contains more than 30 percent retained on the 3/4-inch sieve, a
 method of compaction consisting of at least four passes by a heavy roller shall be used.
 (c) T he moisture content of the material prior to and during compaction shall be uniformly
 distributed throughout each layer. T he placement moisture content shall be no lower than three
 percentage points less than the optimum moisture content and shall be no more than the optimum
 moisture content.
 (d) Compaction within 3 feet of the back face of the wall system shall be achieved by at least three
 passes of a lightweight mechanical tamper, roller or vibratory system.
 
 439
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (e) T he contractor shall ensure that runoff within the wall system construction site is directed
 away from the wall facing during construction, and that runoff from adjacent areas of the general
 construction site is directed such that runoff does not enter the wall system construction site.
 (f) Class 1 geotextile material shall be placed between the select granular backfill for structural
 systems, and the retained backfill and over the top of the select granular backfill for structural
 systems to prevent piping of in-situ soil into the wall system.
 (g) Tamping-type (sheep’s foot) rollers shall not be used for compaction of the select granular
 backfill for structural systems.
 720.4.8.3 T he select granular backfill for structural systems shall be initially placed parallel to the wall
 system, and at the rear and middle of the soil reinforcement strips, and then moved toward the facing
 elements of the wall system. Construction equipment shall at no time come in direct contact with the soil
 reinforcement strips. Each course or layer shall be compacted up to or slightly above the location of the
 next connection for the reinforcement strips prior to placing the next layer of reinforcement strips as
 designated in the erection sequence provided by the manufacturer of the wall system.
 720.4.9 Construction Tole rance s.
 720.4.9.1 Wall systems shall be built in accordance with the dimensions and elevations specified on the
 plans and in accordance with the requirements of the system manufacturer. Alignments shall be maintained
 within the following dimensional tolerances:
 Item
 Final Horizontal Joint Gaps Between Adjacent Facing P anels
 (Large Block Walls)
 Final Vertical Joint Gaps Between Adjacent Facing P anels
 (Large Block Walls)
 Final Joint Gaps Between Adjacent Modular Block Units
 (Small Block Walls)
 Vertical and Horizontal Alignment
 of Facing Elements (All Wall Systems)
 Soil Reinforcement Strip Elevations
 (All Wall Systems)
 
 Tolerance
 ± 1/8 in.
 ± 1/4 in.
 ± 1/4 in.
 ± 1/16 in. per ft
 ± 1 in.
 
 720.4.9.2 Vertical alignments shall be measured along a theoretical vertical line established from the top of
 the wall system to the base of the wall system. For small block walls that have a built-in setback, the
 alignment shall be measured along the theoretical vertical line and the straight line that describes the
 horizontal setback.
 720.4.10 Te chnical Assistance . T he contractor shall be responsible for having a technical advisor from
 the wall system manufacturer available for assistance during the installation of the wall system.
 720.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 720.5.1 Measurement of mechanically stabilized earth wall systems will be made to the nearest square foot.
 T he quantity to be paid will be measured from the wall outline as shown on the plans. No adjustments in the
 measured quantity will be permitted for additional wall area required to meet the minimum wall elevations
 shown on the plans for any particular wall system.
 720.5.2 Measurement of pipe pile spacers will be made per each.
 720.5.3 Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where
 appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. T he revision or correction will be computed and added
 to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 720.5.4 No measurement will be made for required excavation for placement of the leveling pad for the
 wall system. All other excavation required for the construction of the wall system will be included in
 
 440
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 roadway items.
 720.6 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of mechanically stabilized earth wall systems, complete
 in place, will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 Payment for furnishing and installing pipe pile spacers complete in place including all equipment, labor and
 any other incidental work necessary to complete this item will be considered completely covered by the
 contract unit price for pipe pile spacers. No direct payment will be made when the contractor does not use
 pipe pile spacers.
 
 441
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 724
 PIPE CULVERTS
 724.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of providing pipe or pipe arch of the diameter or shape
 designated, laid upon a firm bed and backfilled as specified. Where appropriate this specification will also
 apply to pipe arches.
 724.1.1 T he contract will specify either the type of pipe or the group of permissible types of pipe. If a
 group of permissible types is specified, the contractor may use any of the types listed within the specified
 group and size range as follows:
 
 Rigid Pipe
 Reinforced Concrete Culvert P ipe
 Vitrified Clay P ipe
 Flexible Pipe – Metal a
 Aluminum Coated Steel P ipe
 P olymer Coated Steel P ipe
 Aluminum Alloy P ipe
 Bituminous Coated Steel P ipe
 Zinc Coated Steel P ipe
 
 Group A b Group Bb Group C
 Size
 Size
 Size
 ALL
 ALL
 ALL
 ALL
 ALL
 ALL
 Size
 
 Size
 
 Size
 
 ALL
 ALL
 ALL
 NA
 NA
 
 ALL
 ALL
 ALL
 NA
 NA
 
 ALL
 ALL
 ALL
 ALL
 ALL
 
 Flexible Pipe - Thermoplastic
 Size
 Size
 Size
 Double Wall
 ≤ 30”
 ≤ 30”
 ≤ 30”
 P olypropylene P ipe
 Triple Wall
 30” – 60” 30” – 60” 30” – 60”
 Corrugated
 ≤ 24”
 ≤ 60”
 ≤ 60”
 P olyethylene P ipe
 Steel Reinforced ≤ 24”
 ≤ 60”
 ≤ 60”
 P olyvinyl Chloride P ipe (P VC)
 ≤ 36”
 ≤ 36”
 ≤ 36”
 a
 
 Metal Pipe used for storm sewer applications shall be Type IA or
 Type IR.
 b Pipe used for storm sewers under the influence of a pavement
 section or future anticipated influence of a pavement section which
 has a 3,500 ADT or greater shall be Group A pipe. Pipe used in other
 storm sewer applications shall be Group B. No other substitutions
 will be allowed.
 724.1.2 If the contract specifies pipe culverts by group and the contractor elects to furnish metal pipe, the
 culvert shall be constructed in accordance with Sec 725. If the contractor elects to furnish vitrified clay or
 reinforced concrete pipe, the culvert shall be constructed in accordance with Sec 726. If the contractor
 elects to furnish thermoplastic culvert pipe, the culvert shall be constructed in accordance with Sec 730.
 724.1.3 When Group A, Group B and Group C pipe are specified, two pipe diameters will be shown on the
 plans at those locations. T he first dimension will indicate the diameter of pipe that shall be provided if the
 contractor elects to provide pipe for that location with a corrugated interior wall, and the second
 dimension provided in parenthesis will indicate the diameter of pipe that shall be provided if the contractor
 elects to provide pipe for that location with a smooth interior wall. Helical rib (Type IA) pipe may be
 considered to have varying hydraulic coefficients and may be substituted in accordance with FHWA HD-5
 hydraulic design of highway culverts considering the corrugation configuration at the joints. T he specified
 diameters may be the same or different and will be dependent upon the design features for that pipe
 location. Regardless of which diameter of pipe is selected for a given location, the pipe flow line shall be
 maintained at the elevations shown on the plans.
 724.1.4 T he contractor may elect to furnish pipe one size larger than specified so long as the minimum fill
 heights are met. No additional compensation shall be given for the larger diameter pipe or any related
 items necessary to construct the larger pipe.
 724.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 
 442
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 724.2.1 Construction Loads. Before heavy construction equipment is operated over the pipe, the
 contractor shall provide adequate depth and width of compacted backfill or other cover to protect the pipe
 from damage or displacement. Any damage or displacement shall be repaired or corrected at the
 contractor ’s expense.
 724.2.2 Installation. Pipe installation shall be according to the plans and specifications. Care shall be
 taken when preparing the subgrade and compacting fill around the pipe especially in the haunch areas. T he
 contractor shall verify adequate compaction during construction of the pipe by performing density tests.
 724.2.3 Pipe Plugs. T he ends of all pipe stubs for future connections at inlet and manhole structures, and
 all pipe installed as part of future sewers, shall be sealed with approved plugs. T he plugs shall be installed in
 such a manner that infiltration of soil into the pipe is prevented.
 724.3 Pe rformance Inspe ction, Pe rformance Re port and Evaluation.
 724.3.1 T he contractor shall conduct either manual performance inspection or remote performance
 inspection along with performance reporting and evaluation as it relates to this specification.
 724.3.2 T he contractor shall notify the Engineer at least five workdays before conducting a performance
 inspection. T he inspection shall be performed no sooner than 30 days after the completion of the finished
 grade when not below pavement and after the completion of the aggregate base when any portion of the
 culvert pipe is below pavement. T he condition of the culvert pipe shall allow for an accurate inspection.
 T he contractor shall inspect the entire length of the pipe. T he frequency of inspection shall be as follows:
 a) 100% of locations for Group A pipe
 b) 25% of locations for Group B. Locations to be determined by the engineer. Criteria for selection
 will include pipes under large fills or any locations of potential concern.
 c) Group C pipe shall be inspected at the discretion of the engineer.
 d) If issues are found with any pipe from the performance inspection the engineer may require that
 all pipe be inspected according to this specification.
 724.3.3 T he actual inside diameter of flexible pipe products shall be determined for the purposes of
 measuring deflection by averaging nine equally spaced measurements at one location in the barrel of an
 unloaded pipe. If the pipe has a corrugated interior, the measurements shall be from the top of corrugation
 to top of corrugation as viewed from the inside of the pipe.
 724.3.4 T he contractor shall furnish a video recording of each inspection. T he recording shall identify
 the date and time of the inspection, a description of the culvert pipe, the location, and the viewing
 direction. T he recording shall be for the entire run of the culvert pipe being inspected. T he contractor
 shall provide sufficient enough source of light to allow all areas of concern to be readily observed on the
 video recording in a digital, reproducible format on one of the following media types: DVD, CD or other
 media type approved by the engineer.
 724.3.5 Manual Inspe ction. Perform a manual inspection by entering the culvert pipe to record video
 and to make measurements. Culverts should be entered only by inspection personnel trained in working
 with confined spaces and using procedures in full compliance with applicable State, Local, and Federal
 OSHA regulations. T he manual inspection shall include the following at a minimum:
 1) Measure the deflection of the culvert pipe to the nearest 1/4 inch. A minimum of three
 measurements shall be taken: vertically from the crown to invert (12 o’clock to 6 o’clock), and at
 60 degrees from vertical (2 o’clock to 8 o’clock and 4 o’clock to 10 o’clock).
 2) Measure crack width using a crack comparator, micrometer or a feeler gage capable of
 measuring 0.01 inch. Other measuring devices may be used if approved by the Engineer. Record the
 measurements and include them in the written inspection performance report including: For rigid
 culvert pipe, document the location, length, width, and greatest width of each crack exceeding .01
 
 443
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 inch. For flexible culvert pipe (Corrugated Metal Pipe and T hermoplastic Pipe), document the
 location and length of all cracks.
 3) For all culvert pipe, measure and record the widest gap at each joint in the run.
 4) For culvert pipe with manufactured seams, measure the location, length, and greatest width of
 any separation at the seam.
 5) Measure the location, length and greatest width of each crack and the widest gap at each culvert
 pipe entering a drainage structure or transition.
 724.3.6 Remote Inspection. Perform a remote inspection by using a crawler mounted camera with low
 barrel distortion to record video and that has the capability to make measurements. In addition deflection
 shall be measured by either laser profiling and measuring technology or use of a mandrel capable of
 verifying deflection on a minimum of 9 points. Laser profiling and measurement technology must be
 certified by the company performing the work to be in compliance with the calibration criteria as per
 MoDOT T M 84. Reports shall be submitted by electronic media in a format approved by the Engineer.
 724.3.7 Inspe ction Crite ria. Based on the type of culvert pipe, in the measurements and acceptance
 criteria shall be in accordance with the table below. Also record the location of any other defect not listed
 in the table and describe the defect. Potential defects include, but are not limited to damaged coatings on
 corrugated metal pipe, racking, dents, protrusions, misalignment of line or grade, slabbing, and excessive
 corrugating of thermoplastic pipe. For each measurement location in a culvert pipe, record the length from
 the left end of the pipe according to roadway stationing.
 Inspection Criteria
 P ipe Type
 
 Measurement
 Equipment
 
 Manual: Video
 Camera
 Rigid Culvert
 P ipe
 
 Remote: Crawler
 mounted camera with
 crack measuring
 capability
 
 Manual: Video
 Camera
 Flexible
 Culvert P ipe
 with
 Hydraulically
 Smooth Interior
 
 Remote: Crawler
 mounted camera with
 crack measuring
 capability and laser
 profiler or Crawler
 mounted camera with
 crack measuring
 capability and 9 point
 minimum mandrel
 
 Type of Measurement
 
 Joint gaps
 
 Crack widths
 
 Joint gaps
 
 Crack widths
 
 Limitations
 Soiltight in
 accordance
 with AASHTO P P
 63-09
 Greater than
 .01 inch less
 than 0.10
 crack
 Greater than
 0.1 inch
 crack
 Soiltight in
 accordance
 with
 AASHTO P P
 63-09
 None
 allowed
 Greater than
 5% less than
 7.5%
 
 Deflection
 
 Crack widths
 
 Greater than
 7.5%
 Soiltight in
 accordance
 with
 AASHTO P P
 63-09
 None allowed
 
 Deflection
 
 Greater than
 5% less than
 7.5%
 
 Joint gaps
 Manual: Video
 Camera
 Flexible
 Culvert P ipe
 Remote: Crawler
 with
 mounted camera with
 Corrugated Interior
 crack measuring
 capability and mandrel
 
 Greater than
 7.5%
 
 444
 
 Required
 Action
 Seal joints with
 excessive gap
 
 Note for future
 evaluation
 
 Unacceptable
 
 Seal joints with
 excessive gap
 
 Unacceptable
 Replace
 deficient pipe
 or 50% of pay
 item for entire
 line
 Unacceptable
 
 Seal joints with
 excessive gap
 Unacceptable
 Replace
 deficient pipe
 or 50% of pay
 item for entire
 line
 Unacceptable
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 724.3.8 Pe rformance Re port. T he contractor shall provide a performance report for each performance
 inspection per drainage structure. Each report shall include:
 a) Project number and County-Route-Section
 b) Date of performance inspection
 c) Type and size of culvert pipe including any transitions in pipe run
 d) T ime of video recording
 e) Location (e.g. station and offset) and viewing direction.
 f) Summary of all defects including type, measurement, and location
 g) For remote inspections using a mandrel, indicate in the performance report the size of the
 mandrel and whether or not it was successfully pulled through the culvert pipe.
 h) For remote inspections using a crawler mounted camera with laser profiler, include:
 1) T hree dimensional model of the culvert pipe based on the laser profile measurements.
 2) Digital profile of culvert pipe extracted from the inspection video
 3) Calculations of the ovality, capacity and delta of the culvert pipe
 4) Explanation as to why data was unattainable for any section of the culvert pipe
 T he contractor shall submit a performance report to the Engineer within 5 days of completing the
 performance inspection of the culvert pipe run. Submit the performance report in an electronic format
 approved by the Engineer.
 724.3.9 Culve rt Pipe Evaluation. T he culvert pipe shall be evaluated based on the Performance report.
 Defects exceeding limitations in this specification will require an action plan addressing noted deficiencies.
 Other defects will require the contractor to submit an action plan to the Engineer.
 724.3.10 Re pairs. Required repairs shall be made at no additional cost to the Department and to the
 satisfaction of the Engineer. T he contractor shall submit their required action plan including repair process
 and/or revised installation plan to the Engineer for approval at least 7 days before performing the repairs.
 T he action plan shall provide written confirmation from the culvert pipe manufacturer that the repair
 methods are appropriate. Any repairs shall have a performance evaluation conducted of the repaired
 portion of the culvert pipe and any culvert pipe potentially affected by the repair work 30 days after the
 repair has been made, at no additional cost to the Department.
 724.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 724.4.1 Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where
 appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. When two different diameters of pipe are shown on
 the plans for a given location for Group A, Group B or Group C pipe, the quantity of pipe installed will be
 based on the plan quantity for the larger diameter pipe and will not be considered as an appreciable error in
 the contract quantity if the smaller allowed diameter pipe is used. Where required, measurement of pipe,
 complete in place, will be made to the nearest foot along the geometrical center of the pipe. T he revision
 or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 724.4.2 When concrete pipe is used, the length of the structure may be increased by no more than 3 feet as
 necessary to avoid cutting the pipe, but such increased length will not be included in the contract quantity
 for payment.
 
 445
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 724.4.3 When PVC pipe is used, measurement will include any other pipe used to protect the pipe from
 exposure to sunlight.
 724.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 724.5.1 T he accepted quantities of pipe, complete in place, including all necessary tees, bends, wyes,
 coupling bands, cutting and joining new pipe to existing pipe or structures, unless otherwise specified, will be
 paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 724.5.2 T he accepted quantities of corrugated metal drop inlets and metal curtain walls, complete in place,
 including coupling bands, toeplates, nuts and bolts will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the
 pay items included in the contract.
 724.5.3 Unless specified otherwise, no direct payment will be made for the following:
 (a) Beveling, skewing or additional work required in laying pipe with beveled or skewed ends.
 (b) Work involved in elongating pipe.
 (c) Any required backfilling, except as specified in Sec 206.6.3.
 (d) Construction of bedding or for bedding material.
 (e) Furnishing and installing plugs.
 (f) Material or work required for placing couplings on exposed ends of pipe.
 724.5.4 Payment for removal of unsuitable material and for backfilling will be made in accordance with Sec
 206.6.3, unless the unsuitable material is a result of the contractor's operations, in which case the removal
 and backfilling shall be at the contractor's expense.
 
 446
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 725
 METAL PIPE AND PIPE ARCH CULVERTS
 725.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of providing corrugated metal pipe or pipe arch of the
 diameter or shape designated, laid upon a firm bed and backfilled as specified. Where pipe is referred to, this
 specification will also apply to pipe-arch, where appropriate. Pipe shall be in accordance with Sec 724.
 725.1.1 If the contract specifies corrugated metallic-coated steel pipe culverts of 60-inch diameter or
 larger, the contractor may substitute structural plate pipe of like sizes, lengths and thicknesses of steel,
 constructed in accordance with Sec 727, at the contractor ’s expense.
 725.1.2 If the contract specifies corrugated metallic-coated steel pipe or corrugated aluminum alloy pipe,
 or if the contract specifies pipe culverts by group and the contractor elects to furnish corrugated metalliccoated steel pipe or corrugated aluminum alloy pipe, the thickness of metal and size of corrugation for the
 respective pipe size shall be as shown on the plans unless otherwise specified. T he overfill height shown on
 the plans or in the contract shall be used to determine the proper sheet thickness and size of corrugation
 for the individual pipe culvert. T he minimum cover shall be measured as shown on the plans.
 725.1.3 When Group A pipe is specified and the contractor elects to furnish polymer coated corrugated
 metal culvert pipe or corrugated aluminum-coated steel culvert pipe, the following shall apply:
 725.1.3.1 T he thickness of the coated sheet shall be a minimum thickness as follows:
 Minimum G auge of Steel Pipe
 Pipe Dia. Inches 2 ⅔" x ½" or ¾” x ¾”
 x 7 ½” spiral rib
 3" x 1" or 5” x 1” Corr.
 Corr.
 < 42"
 14
 14
 42" < 60"
 12
 12
 60" < 78"
 10
 12
 78" < 90"
 8
 12
 90" < 108"
 N/A
 12
 108" and above N/A
 10
 
 725.1.3.2 T he predominate soil type in the area of any metal pipe installation shall have a pH in the range
 of 5 to 9 (4 to 9 for polymer coated pipe) using AASHT O T-289 test method.
 725.1.3.3 For bedding or backfill material that has greater than 35 percent passing the #200 sieve, the
 resistivity of the bedding or backfill shall be > 1500 ohm-cm (> 750 ohm-cm for polymer coated pipe)
 using AASHT O T-288 test method.
 725.1.3.4 T he contractor shall conduct any required pH and resistivity testing and report compliance to
 the engineer at least 30 days prior to installation.
 725.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Corrugated Metallic-Coated Steel Culvert P ipe,
 P ipe-Arches and End Sections
 Bituminous Coated Corrugated Metal Culvert P ipe,
 P ipe Arch
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Culvert P ipe and
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Structural P late
 P olymer Coated Corrugated Metal Culvert P ipe and
 P ipe Arches
 
 Section
 1020
 1021
 1024
 1027
 
 725.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 725.3.1 Handling. All pipe shall be handled to avoid damage. Pipe having damaged coating, any localized
 
 447
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 bends in excess of five percent of the specified pipe diameter, or any dent in excess of 1/2 inch will be
 unacceptable, regardless of previous approvals. Rejected damaged pipe may be used if repaired to the
 satisfaction of the engineer.
 725.3.2 Laying Pipe .
 725.3.2.1 T he pipe shall be carefully laid true to lines and grades shown on the plans. Riveted pipe shall be
 installed with the outside laps of circumferential joints pointing upstream and with no longitudinal lap
 placed on the bottom 120 degrees of the pipe on the sides. Any pipe that is not in true alignment or that
 shows any undue settlement after laying shall be taken up and re-laid at the contractor's expense. If shown
 on the plans or directed by the engineer, camber shall be built into the pipe structure to compensate for
 settlement from fill loads.
 725.3.2.2 T ransverse field joints shall be of such design that the successive connection of pipe sections will
 form a continuous line free from appreciable irregularities in the flow line. Each successive length of pipe
 in a field joint shall be adjusted longitudinally or circumferentially when necessary such that coupling bands
 will properly engage the corrugations in both lengths of pipe.
 725.4 Installation, Be dding And Backfill Mate rial. Metal pipe, bedding, backfill and installation shall
 be in accordance with AASHT O LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Section 26 and as shown on the
 plans and specifications. When conflicts occur between AASHT O Section 26 and the plans and
 specifications the plans and specifications shall apply.
 725.4.1 Be dding and Backfill Mate rial. Bedding and backfill material shall meet the requirements of
 AASHT O M 145, A-1, A-2-4, A-2-5 or A-3. Bedding material shall have a maximum particle size of 1.25
 inches. Backfill shall be free of organic material, stones larger than 1.5 inches or frozen lumps. Moisture
 content shall be in the range of optimum content to permit thorough compaction. For pipes with a
 corrugated exterior backfill gradations shall have a maximum particle size that will permit filling of the
 corrugations. Flowable backfill, such as low strength mortar may also be used providing flotation resistance
 and adequate void fill coverage.
 725.4.2 Foundation and Be dding Construction. A stable and uniform bedding shall be provided for the
 pipe and protruding features of the drainage structure. T he middle of the bedding equal to one-third the pipe
 outside diameter should be loosely placed, while the remainder shall be compacted to a minimum 90 percent
 of maximum density based upon standard proctor test. A minimum bedding depth of twice the corrugation
 depth shall be provided prior to placement of the pipe unless otherwise specified. When rock or unyielding
 material is present in the trench, a minimum bottom bedding of 6.0 inches shall be provided. If soft or
 unstable material is encountered the material shall be removed to a minimum depth of 10 inches below the
 bottom of the pipe and replaced with suitable granular material. Payment for any unsuitable material will be
 made per Sec 206.
 725.4.3 Backfill Construction. Structural backfill shall be placed and compacted in layers not exceeding
 a loose lift thickness of 8 inches and brought up evenly. T he side to side differential shall not exceed 24.0
 inches or one-third of the rise of the structure. Backfill shall continue to not less than 1.0 ft. above the top
 of the pipe. Structural backfill shall be worked into the haunch area and compacted by hand. All backfill
 shall be compacted to a minimum 90 percent standard density based upon standard proctor test. Special
 compaction means may be necessary in the haunch area. Ponding or jetting structural backfill to achieve
 compaction shall not be permitted without the permission of the Engineer.
 725.5 Shop Elongation. Round corrugated steel pipe 48 inches or greater in diameter may be furnished
 round or shop elongated. T he contractor shall maintain elongation during backfilling and embankment
 construction such that the vertical height of the opening after the embankment has been completed shall
 be no less than the diameter of the pipe or greater than the pre-elongated height.
 725.6 Corrugate d Me tal Drop Inle ts. T he contractor shall install corrugated metal drop inlets of the
 proper size and length at the locations shown on the plans. T he drop inlet shall be constructed of the same
 base metal and thickness of corrugated metal used in the culvert pipe and shall be in accordance with Sec
 1020 or Sec 1024.
 
 448
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 725.7 Corrugate d Me tal Curtain Walls. T he contractor shall install metal curtain walls of the proper
 size and shape at locations shown on the plans. Metal curtain walls shall be constructed of the same base
 metal used in the culvert pipe and shall be of the thickness of metal shown on the plans and in accordance
 with Sec 1020 or Sec 1024.
 
 449
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 726
 RIGID PIPE CULVERTS
 726.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of providing concrete and vitrified clay pipe of the diameter or
 shape designated, laid upon a bed and backfilled as specified on the plans, or as directed by the engineer.
 Pipe shall be in accordance with Sec 724.
 726.1.1 If the contract specifies reinforced concrete pipe or pipe culverts by group and the contractor
 elects to furnish reinforced concrete pipe, the type of installation and the class of pipe shall be in
 accordance with the plans for the applicable allowable overfill height.
 726.1.2 If the contract specifies vitrified clay pipe or if the contract specifies pipe culverts by group and
 the contractor elects to furnish vitrified clay pipe, such pipe shall be placed in a trench in accordance with
 the plans for the allowable overfill height.
 726.1.3 If the contract specifies non-reinforced concrete pipe, the contractor may, at no additional cost to
 the Commission, furnish reinforced concrete pipe of like sizes and strengths in accordance with these
 specifications.
 726.1.4 If reinforced concrete pipe is specified in the contract or elected for use by the contractor, pipe of
 a higher class may be used, but payment will be made for the class of pipe specified in the contract for that
 culvert.
 726.1.5 T he class of pipe or type of installation shall be as shown on the plans or as approved by the
 engineer.
 726.1.6 T he type of pipe permitted in extending an existing pipe shall conform to the type used in place,
 except as otherwise specified in the contract or prohibited by any of the requirements set out herein.
 726.1.7 If standard strength vitrified clay pipe is specified in the contract or elected for use by the
 contractor, extra strength vitrified clay pipe may be used, but payment will be made for standard strength
 vitrified clay pipe. Only extra strength vitrified clay pipe shall be used under roadways. Standard strength
 vitrified clay pipe will be permitted only where vehicular traffic is not anticipated.
 726.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Reinforced Concrete Culvert
 Vitrified Clay Sewer and Culvert P ipe
 Reinforced Concrete Elliptical Culvert
 Reinforced Concrete Arch Culvert
 P lastic Joint Compound for Vitrified Clay and Concrete P ipe
 Material for Joints
 Mortars and Grout
 
 Section
 1026
 1030
 1034
 1035
 1057
 1057
 1066
 
 726.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 726.3.1 Laying. Rigid pipe shall be carefully laid as shown on the plans, with hub, bell or groove ends
 upstream and with the spigot or tongue end entered the full length into the adjacent section of pipe.
 Elliptically reinforced pipe shall be oriented and laid such that the top and bottom of the pipe, as marked
 on the pipe, are in the proper position. If the pipe is to be laid below the ground line, a trench shall be
 excavated to the required section and depth to permit required compaction of the backfill under the
 haunches and around the pipe. Any pipe that is not in true alignment or that shows any undue settlement
 after laying, but before the fill is placed, shall be removed and re-laid at the contractor's expense. Camber
 shall be built into the pipe structure as shown on the plans or as approved by the engineer. All joints,
 except for field or private entrance culverts, shall be sealed with an approved plastic compound, tubular
 joint seal, an external wrap, cement mortar or other approved methods to create a soil tight condition.
 Rubber gasket joints may be used at no additional cost to the Commission. Where permissible lift holes
 
 450
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 have been used, the holes shall be filled with approved material or plug and sealed as required for culvert
 pipe joints. Lifting devices shall have sufficient bearing on the inside of the pipe to avoid damage resulting
 from a concentration of stresses around the lift holes. T he joint between the bell and spigot shall be
 uniform for the full circumference and within allowable design tolerances.
 726.3.1.1 If rubber gasket-type pipe or vitrified clay pipe is specified or used, joints shall be installed in
 accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
 726.3.1.2 In sealing rigid pipe with mortar, the mortar contact areas of all pipe ends shall be damp when
 mortar is applied. After applying mortar to the entire interior surface of the bell or groove, the spigot or
 tongue end shall be forced into position. Any remaining void in the bell or groove shall be filled with a hub
 of mortar built up adjacent to the bell, or a bead of mortar built up around a groove-type joint. T he interior
 joints of either type of pipe shall be finished flush with the surface of the pipe. T he outside surface of
 mortar joints shall be cured with membrane curing compound.
 726.3.1.3 In sealing rigid pipe with plastic joint compound, trowel grade compound shall be applied to the
 mating surfaces of both the tongue and groove, or to the entire interior surface of the bell and the upper
 portion of the spigot. T he joints shall be forced together with excess compound extruding both inside and
 outside the joint. Rope or tape type plastic compound shall be applied in accordance with the
 manufacturer's recommendations. Excess compound shall be removed from the interior surface where
 accessible. T ubular joint seals shall be installed as recommended by the manufacturer.
 726.3.1.4 If external wrap is used, the wrap shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer ’s
 recommendations.
 726.3.2 Be dding. Bedding for reinforced concrete pipe shall consist of Category 1, Category 2 or
 Category 3 soil as shown on the plans.
 726.3.2.1 Category 1 soil shall consist of a well-graded mixture of stone fragments, gravel and sand in
 accordance with AASHT O M 145, Group A-1 or A-3.
 726.3.2.2 Category 2 soil shall consist of non-plastic or moderately plastic granular material with a silt
 content higher than that of Category 1, and shall be in accordance with AASHT O
 M 145, Group A-2 or A-4.
 726.3.2.3 Category 3 soil shall consist of silty clays, and shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 145,
 Group A-5, A-6 or A-7.
 726.3.3 Installation.
 726.3.3.1 Installation of Pipe Prior to Placing Embankme nt. After the pipe has been laid, the
 material in the haunch and lower side zones shall be placed to a minimum width of one pipe diameter
 outside the pipe. T he haunch and lower side material shall be compacted to the required densities shown on
 the plans. When all material has been placed and compacted up to the springline of the pipe, the remaining
 fill material shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of the adjacent fill. If a subtrench will be
 required to install the pipe to the specified grade, the width of the trench shall be shown on the plans.
 Sufficient clearance shall be provided in order to attain the required compaction in the haunch and outer
 bedding zone.
 726.3.3.2 Installation of Pipe Afte r Placing Embankme nt. T he roadway embankment shall be placed
 and compacted to the required density to a minimum elevation of one foot below the bottom of the
 pavement base material. A trench, in accordance with the section shown on the plans, shall be excavated
 through the embankment to a depth sufficient to place the required bedding and maintain the specified
 grade of the pipe. Bedding shall be placed to the required thickness and grade and shall not be compacted
 under the middle one third of the pipe. T he bedding outside the middle one third of the pipe and the
 material in the haunch and lower side zones shall be compacted up to the springline of the pipe. T he
 placement of the remainder of the embankment material above the springline shall be compacted in
 accordance with the requirements for the adjacent fill.
 
 451
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 726.3.3.3 Extra Stre ngth Vitrifie d Clay Pipe . Vitrified clay pipe shall be laid in a trench with a width,
 on a plane level with the top of the pipe, no greater than that shown on the plans for the respective pipe
 diameter. T he trench shall have a minimum depth of one outside pipe diameter plus 16 inches. If the
 original ground line is below an elevation one foot above the top of the proposed pipe, embankment shall
 be constructed to at least one foot above the proposed pipe prior to excavating the trench. T he trench
 walls shall be as nearly vertical as practical. Prior to laying the pipe, the bottom of the trench shall be
 covered with a bedding, consisting of a 4-inch layer of sand. After laying the pipe, the trench shall be
 backfilled with sand around the pipe for at least 10 percent of the height of the pipe. T he sand shall be
 thoroughly compacted by the use of tampers or by flooding. T he remainder of the trench shall be backfilled
 in accordance with Sec 726.3.4.
 726.3.3.4 Be dding in Unsuitable Mate rial. If rock is encountered, the bedding depth shall be increased
 to 1/12 the outside diameter of the pipe, but no less than 6 inches. T he width of the cushion excavation
 shall be 1.33 times the outside diameter of the pipe, but no less than 24 inches wider than the outside
 diameter of the pipe. If soft, spongy or unstable material is encountered, the material shall be removed and
 replaced with soil compacted to the level specified for the lower side zone.
 726.3.4 Backfilling. Backfilling shall be placed as soon as practical in accordance with Sec 206. Suitable
 backfill and embankment material, free from large lumps, clods or rocks, shall be compacted in accordance
 with Sec 203. Care shall be taken to properly compact the backfill under the haunches of pipe-arch. Before
 heavy construction equipment is operated over the pipe, the contractor shall provide an adequate depth
 and width of compacted backfill or other cover to protect the pipe from damage or displacement. Any
 damage or displacement shall be repaired or corrected at the contractor's expense.
 
 452
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 727
 STRUCTURAL PLATE PIPE AND STRUCTURAL
 PLATE PIPE-ARCH CULVERTS
 727.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing built-up structural plate round pipe
 or built-up structural plate pipe-arch with a full metal bottom of galvanized corrugated metal plate curved
 sections bolted together to form the required shape shown on the plans. T he thickness of the structural
 plate shall be as specified in the contract.
 727.2 Mate rial.
 727.2.1 All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as
 follows:
 Item
 Section
 Structural P late P ipe and P ipe-Arches
 1023
 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Structural P late 1024
 
 727.2.2 T he size and shape of the plates shall be such that the finished structure will have the dimensions
 shown on the plans.
 727.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 727.3.1 Handling. All pipe shall be handled with care to avoid damage. Pipe having damaged coating, any
 localized bends in excess of five percent of the specified pipe diameter or any dent in excess of 1/2 inch
 will be rejected at the site of the work, regardless of previous approvals. Rejected damaged pipe may be
 used, if repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 727.3.2 Laying Pipe . T he structure shall be carefully laid true to lines and grades. Any structure that is not
 in true alignment or that shows undue settlement shall be taken up and relaid at the contractor's expense. If
 shown on the plans or directed by the engineer, camber shall be built into the structure to compensate for
 settlement from embankment loads.
 727.3.3 Be dding and Backfill Mate rial. T he bed for structural plate pipe and pipe-arch culverts shall be
 formed in accordance with Sec 725.4, except if rock is encountered, the trench shall be excavated to a
 minimum depth of 8 inches below the bottom of the pipe.
 727.3.4 Backfilling.
 727.3.4.1 Except where the backfill or embankment is to be formed of stone or rock fill, the material shall
 be placed in accordance with Sec 725.4.3, except as modified herein. Layers of backfill or embankment
 shall be kept at approximately the same elevation on opposite sides of the structure at all times during the
 progress of the work in order to equalize the loading. T his method of filling and compacting shall be
 continued until the top of the embankment is at an elevation level with the top of the structure.
 727.3.4.2 If the backfill or embankment over and around the structural plate pipe or pipe-arch is specified
 to be formed of stone or rock fill, a protective inner layer of backfill material, in accordance with
 AASHT O M 145, Classification A-1, A-2-4, A-2-5 or A-3, preferably mixed with earthy material, tamped
 into place in contact with the structure, and surrounded by a carefully placed outer layer of rock, shall be
 built up as the work proceeds around the perimeter of the structure above a specially prepared foundation.
 T he protective layer shall be placed during the progress of the backfilling and placing of the embankment
 or rock fill in a manner and of sufficient thickness to protect the surface of the structure from injury to the
 coating.
 727.3.5 Shop Elongation. T he contractor shall maintain elongation during backfilling and embankment
 construction such that the vertical height of the opening after the embankment has been completed shall
 be no less than the diameter of the pipe or greater than the pre-elongated height. Steel and aluminum
 structural plate round pipe shop elongation, if required, shall be as shown on the plans. Pipe arches shall not
 be elongated.
 
 453
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 727.3.6 Be ve le d End Se ctions. T he plans will indicate where beveled end sections are required and the
 slope of the cutting line. On skewed round structures with beveled end sections, the end sections shall be
 rotated as required to better fit the adjacent roadway slope. Shop elongation shall be in accordance with Sec
 727.3.5.
 727.4 Inspe ction and Re place me nt. Inspection and replacement of structural plate pipe and pipe-arch
 culverts shall be in accordance with Sec 725.4, except deflection testing and maximum deflection allowed
 will not apply.
 727.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 727.5.1 Measurement of structural plate pipe, complete in place, will be made to the nearest foot along the
 geometrical center of the structure.
 727.5.2 Measurement of structural plate pipe-arch, complete in place, will be made to the nearest foot
 along the center of the vertical dimension of the structure.
 727.5.3 Excavation for placing structural plate pipe and pipe-arches will not be measured, except when the
 excavation for the installation is shown on the plans as Class 3 Excavation.
 727.6 Basis of Payme nt.
 727.6.1 T he accepted quantities of structural plate pipe or structural plate pipe-arch culverts, complete in
 place, will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 727.6.2 Unless specified otherwise, no direct payment will be made for the following:
 (a) Beveling, skewing or for any additional work required in laying structural plate structures with
 beveled or skewed ends.
 (b) Work involved in elongating.
 (c) Backfilling, except as specified in Sec 206.6.3.
 (d) Construction of bedding or for bedding material.
 (e) Excavation and backfilling, except when Class 3 Excavation is shown on the plans in
 accordance with Sec 206.
 (f) Furnishing and installing plugs.
 (g) Work or equipment to perform deflection testing.
 Specifications Section 30 and as shown on the plans and specifications. When conflicts occur between
 AASHT O Section 30 and the plans and specifications the plans and specifications shall apply.
 
 454
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 730
 THERMO PLASTIC PIPE CULVERT
 730.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of providing thermoplastic pipe of the diameter designated,
 placed and backfilled as specified in the contract documents or as directed by the engineer. Pipe shall be in
 accordance with Section 724.
 730.1.1 If the contract specifies thermoplastic pipe or if the contract specifies culvert pipe by group and
 the contractor elects to furnish thermoplastic pipe, the allowable overfill height shall be in accordance with
 the plans, unless specified otherwise. Minimum cover will be measured as shown on the plans.
 730.1.2 When furnishing thermoplastic pipe, the pipe shall meet the properties described in the
 appropriate section of this specification and be installed in accordance with the standard plans. When
 section properties or fill heights outside of the specification are required for use, a special design shall be
 prepared by the contractor for approval by the engineer. T he special design shall include all relevant
 engineering data, stub compression values, and be stamped by a professional engineer registered in the State
 of Missouri.
 730.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Metallic-Coated Steel End Sections
 P recast Concrete Flared End Sections
 P olyethylene Culvert P ipe
 P olypropylene Culvert P ipe
 P olyvinyl Chloride (P VC) Culvert P ipe
 
 Section
 1020
 1032
 1047
 1041
 1028
 
 730.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 730.3.1 Handling. All pipe shall be handled to avoid damage. Damaged pipe will be unacceptable and shall
 be repaired or replaced at the contractor ’s expense to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 730.3.2 Laying.
 730.3.2.1 Flexible pipe shall be laid as shown on the plans, with bell ends upstream and with the spigot end
 entered the full length into the adjacent section of pipe. Any pipe that is not in true alignment or that
 shows any undue settlement after laying shall be taken up and relaid at the contractor's expense. Camber
 shall be built into the pipe structure to allow for settlement from fill loads if shown on the plans or directed
 by the engineer.
 730.3.2.2 Joints shall be soiltight and shall be installed such that the connection of pipe sections will form
 a continuous line free from appreciable irregularities in the flow line. Field joints may be corrugated bands,
 double bell couplings, bell and spigot pipe ends with a rubber o-ring gasket in accordance with AST M F 477,
 or an alternative connection approved by the engineer. All joints shall comply with the soiltight joint
 performance criteria of AASHT O PP-63.
 730.3.3 Ultraviole t Prote ction.
 730.3.3.1 If PVC pipe is specified in the contract or elected for use by the contractor, none of the PVC
 pipe shall be exposed to sunlight after installation. T he minimum distance required to protect the exposed
 open end of a PVC pipe from sunlight will be one-half of the pipe diameter from the opening. T he use of a
 different pipe material from the appropriate pipe group other than PVC is required in areas requiring
 ultraviolet protection.
 730.4 Installation, Be dding and Backfill. T hermoplastic pipe installation, bedding and backfill shall be
 installed in accordance with AASHT O LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Section 30 and as shown
 on the plans and specifications. When conflicts occur between AASHT O Section 30 and the plans and
 specifications the plans and specifications shall apply.
 
 455
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 730.4.1 Bedding and Backfill Material. Bedding and backfill material shall meet the requirements of
 AASHT O M145, A-1-a, A-1-b, A-2-4 or A-2-5. Bedding material shall have a maximum particle size of
 1.25 inches. Backfill shall be free of organic material, stones larger than 1.5 inches or frozen lumps.
 Moisture content shall be in the range of optimum content to permit thorough compaction. For pipes with
 a corrugated exterior, backfill gradations shall have particle size that will permit filling of the corrugations.
 Flowable backfill, such as low strength mortar may also be used providing flotation resistance and adequate
 void fill coverage.
 730.4.2 Foundation and Be dding Construction. A stable and uniform bedding shall be provided for the
 pipe and an protruding features of the drainage structure. T he middle of the bedding equal to one-third the
 pipe outside diameter should be loosely placed, while the remainder shall be compacted to a minimum 90
 percent of maximum density based upon standard proctor test. A minimum of 4.0 inches of bedding shall be
 provided prior to placement of the pipe unless otherwise specified. When rock, soft, unstable, or unyielding
 material is present in the trench bottom, a 6.0 inche minimum foundation shall be provided in addition to
 bedding. Payment for any unsuitable material will be made per Sec. 206.
 730.4.3 Backfill Construction. Structural backfill shall be placed and compacted in layers not exceeding
 a loose lift thickness of 8.0 inches and brought up evenly and simultaneously on both sides of the pipe to
 an elevation not less than 1.0 ft. above the top of the pipe. Structural backfill shall be worked into the
 haunch area and compacted by hand. All backfill shall be compacted to a minimum 90 percent standard
 density based upon standard proctor test. Special compaction means may be necessary in the haunch area.
 Ponding or jetting structural backfill to achieve compaction shall not be permitted without the permission
 of the Engineer.
 730.5 Ske we d Ends. A pipe end may be cut to a maximum angle of 10 degrees to provide a skewed end.
 
 456
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 731
 PRECAST REINFO RCED CO NCRETE
 MANHO LES AND DRO P INLETS
 731.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing precast concrete manholes and
 drop inlets as shown on the plans.
 731.2 Mate rial.
 731.2.1 All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as
 follows:
 Item
 P recast Drainage Units
 Concrete Curing Material
 P lastic Joint Compound for Vitrified
 Clay and Concrete P ipe
 Tubular Joint Seal
 Mortars and Grout
 
 Section
 1033
 1055
 1057
 1057
 1066
 
 731.2.2 Concrete for footings shall be Class B, Class B-1 or concrete of a commercial mixture in
 accordance with Sec 501. Air entrainment will not be required.
 731.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 731.3.1 Excavation and Backfilling. Excavation and backfilling for precast reinforced concrete
 manholes and drop inlets shall be in accordance with Sec 206.
 731.3.2 Place me nt. Precast concrete manhole and drop inlet sections shall be constructed as shown on
 plans, and joints sealed in accordance with Sec 726.
 731.3.3 Footings. Footings shall be constructed as shown on the plans. Concrete shall be float finished and
 shall be cured in accordance with Sec 502. Forms will not be required.
 731.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 731.4.1 Final measurement of precast concrete manholes and drop inlets will not be made except for
 authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity.
 Where required, measurement of precast concrete manholes and drop inlets, complete in place, will be
 made to the nearest foot as shown on the plans. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to
 or deducted from the contract quantity. T he depth of the structure will be the vertical distance from the
 top of the uppermost precast section to the invert flowline.
 731.4.2 Final measurement for excavation will not be made except for authorized changes during
 construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, excavation will
 be measured and paid for in accordance with Sec 206. T he revision or correction will be computed and
 added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 731.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 731.5.1 T he accepted quantities of precast manholes and drop inlets, complete in place, including any
 necessary cutting or joining new pipe or existing pipe to the structure unless otherwise specified, will be
 paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 731.5.2 No direct payment will be made for, backfilling except as specified in Sec 206, footing concrete,
 steps, weep holes, including excavation, permeable granular backfill, 4-inch drain tile, screen for inlet or
 any other work incidental thereto.
 
 457
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 732
 FLARED END SECTIO NS
 732.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing precast concrete or metal flared
 end sections of the size and shape shown on the plans.
 732.1.1 Precast concrete flared end sections shall be used with concrete or vitrified clay culvert pipe.
 732.1.2 End sections for thermoplastic pipe may be either precast concrete or metal flared end sections.
 When Group A Pipe is specified, aluminum coated metal or concrete flared end sections shall be used.
 732.1.3 Safety slope end sections may be used with concrete, thermoplastic, or metal culvert pipe.
 732.1.4 A tapered sleeve may be required to join an end section to a run of pipe as outlined in the standard
 plans.
 732.1.5 At the option of the contractor and at no cost to the Commission, the contractor may use a
 tapered sleeve to join thermoplastic pipe to flared end sections when not required by the plans.
 732.1.6 At the option of the contractor and at no cost to the Commission, the contractor may use a one
 size larger flared end section when joining to thermoplastic pipe to aid fitment.
 732.2 Mate rial.
 732.2.1 All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as
 follows:
 Item
 Section/Specif ication
 Metal Flared End Sections
 1020
 P recast Concrete Flared End Sections
 1032
 P lastic Joint Compound for Vitrified Clay
 1057
 and Concrete P ipe
 Tubular Joint Seal
 1057
 Mortar for P ipe Joints
 1066
 Safety Bars and Longitudinal Bars
 ASTM A 53, Schedule 40
 Bar Grate
 ASTM A 575, Grade 1020
 
 732.2.2 Cast-in-place toe walls for precast concrete flared end sections shall be constructed of Class B or B1 concrete, or concrete of a commercial mixture in accordance with Sec 501. Material, proportioning, air
 entraining, mixing, slump and transporting of Portland cement concrete shall be in accordance with Sec
 501. Air-entrained concrete will not be required. Concrete shall be placed and cured in accordance with Sec
 703. Precast toe walls shall be constructed of any of the above specified concrete mixtures or these walls
 may be constructed of the same mixture used to fabricate the precast concrete flared end sections. Precast
 toe walls may be cured in accordance with Sec 703 or in the same manner as the flared end sections.
 732.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 732.3.1 Flared end sections shall be joined to pipes or pipe-arches as shown on the plans and shall be placed
 to the line and grade of the structure on a uniformly firm soil foundation shaped to fit the lower part of the
 end section.
 732.3.1.1 Pre cast Concre te Flare d End Se ctions. T he joint material between the end section and the
 adjoining pipe shall be the same as that used for the pipe joints, and shall be installed in the same manner.
 Toe walls shall be of the size and shape shown on the plans and may be precast or cast-in-place. Forming of
 cast-in-place toe walls will not be required.
 732.3.1.2 Me tal Flare d End Se ctions. T he end section shall be joined to the pipe or pipe-arch as shown
 on the plans. T he toe plate, if specified, shall be set in a trench or driven to the proper elevation. Care
 shall be taken to avoid damage to the metal.
 
 458
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 732.3.2 Safe ty Slope End Se ction. T he safety slope end section shall consist of a metal-flared end
 section, safety bars, toe plate extension, if required in the contract, and any fasteners required for
 attachment to the culvert pipe.
 732.3.2.1 Construction Re quire me nts. Safety slope end sections shall be attached as shown on the
 plans and shall be placed to the line and grade of the structure on a uniformly firm soil foundation shaped
 to fit the lower part of the end section.
 732.3.2.2 Toe Plate Exte nsion. T he toe plate extension, if required, shall be attached to the end section
 as shown on the plans.
 732.3.2.3 Safe ty Bars. T he number, size and spacing of safety bars shall be as shown on the plans. A bar
 grate system, as shown on the plans, may be substituted for safety bars.
 732.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of precast concrete, plastic or metal flared end sections
 and safety slope end sections will be made per each.
 732.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of flared end sections and safety slope end sections,
 complete in place, will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the items included in the contract.
 When two different diameters of pipe are shown on the plans for a given location for Group B or Group C
 pipe, the contract unit price for the flared end section or safety slope end section that would be required for
 the larger diameter pipe will be used for payment purposes. No direct payment will be made for any
 excavation or bedding required for placement of an end section, toe walls or toe plates. Any damaged
 sections required to be replaced due to the contractor ’s actions shall be at the contractor ’s expense.
 Payment for tapered sleeves will be included in the contract unit price for pipe.
 
 459
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 733
 PRECAST CO NCRETE BO X CULVERTS
 733.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing precast concrete box culverts as
 shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. Unless otherwise required in the contract, where the
 construction of cast-in-place single or multi-cell reinforced concrete box culverts is specified, the
 contractor shall have the option of constructing such culverts using precast reinforced concrete box
 sections and headwalls subject to the conditions specified in the contract.
 733.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Subsurface Drainage Geotextile
 P recast Concrete Box Culverts
 P lastic Joint Compound for Vitrified
 Clay and Concrete P ipe
 Tubular Joint Seal
 Mortars and Grout
 
 Section
 1011
 1049
 1057
 1057
 1066
 
 733.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 733.3.1 Subgrade Pre paration and Be dding. T he excavation and backfilling for the precast box
 sections and end sections shall be in accordance with Sec 206, except a layer of granular material at least 6
 inches thick shall be placed immediately below the elevation of the bottom of the box and end sections.
 T he granular material shall be in accordance with Sec 1007 for Type 1 aggregate and shall be placed to
 extend at least 18 inches on each side of the structure. T he bedding shall be compacted to provide uniform
 support for the bottom of the box and end sections.
 733.3.2 Place me nt. T he individual box section shall be placed as shown on the plans with the groove end
 upstream and the spigot end extended full length into the adjacent downstream section of box.
 733.3.2.1 Joints.
 733.3.2.1.1 All joints between individual box sections shall be sealed with an approved plastic joint
 compound or a tubular joint seal. T rowel grade compounds shall be applied to both mating surfaces. Rope or
 tape-type plastic joint compounds and tubular joint seals shall be applied in accordance with the
 manufacturer's recommendations. Excess compound shall extrude from both the inside and outside of the
 joint when box sections are assembled. Excess compound shall be removed from the interior surface. T he
 joint gap between individual box sections shall be uniform for the full perimeter.
 733.3.2.1.2 Filter cloth 2 feet in width and double thickness shall be centered over the top and sides of all
 joints between individual box sections with edges sealed with mastic or two sided tape. Filter cloth shall be a
 subsurface drainage geotextile in accordance with Sec 1011.
 733.3.2.1.3 When cast-in-place concrete box culvert collars are shown on the plans and the alternate
 precast option is used, precast box culvert ties shall be used in accordance with standard plans to connect
 individual box sections. Regular strength connections shall be supplied unless specified otherwise.
 733.3.2.2 Lift and Core Hole s. Lift holes shall be filled with expansive mortar or tapered precast mortar
 plugs to provide a permanent watertight section, and shall be finished flush on the inside of the box. Lift
 and core holes are to be sealed with approved materials. Filter cloth at joints may be extended to cover
 patched holes in lieu of sealing.
 733.3.2.3 Multi-Ce ll Box Culve rt. When multi-cell box culverts are used, a 1 1/2-inch minimum space
 shall be left between the adjacent precast sections. Following the installation of the end sections, the 1 1/2inch space between the parallel sections shall be entirely filled with mortar for grout. After the mortar has
 attained sufficient strength, sections shall be backfilled in accordance with Sec 206.
 
 460
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 733.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 733.4.1 If the contractor chooses to construct the alternate precast box culvert, measurement will be made
 as provided for the equivalent cast-in-place structure.
 733.4.2 Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where
 appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, if a precast box culvert is specified in
 the contract, the precast box culvert, complete in place including end sections, will be measured to the
 nearest foot along the geometrical center of the culvert floor. T he revision or correction will be computed
 and added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 733.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 733.5.1 T he accepted optional precast concrete box culvert, including end sections, will be paid for at the
 contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 733.5.2 If a precast box culvert is specified in the contract, the accepted quantities for the precast box
 culvert, complete in place including end sections, will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the
 pay items included in the contract.
 733.5.3. No direct payment will be made for furnishing, placing or compacting the Type 1 granular bedding
 material. Replacement of unsuitable material below the 6-inch bedding will be paid for in accordance with
 Sec 206.
 
 461
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 734
 INSTALLATIO N O F PIPE BY HO RIZO NTAL BO RING METHO DS
 734.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing reinforced concrete pipe culvert
 (gasket-type) or steel pipe by horizontal boring methods underneath existing pavements at locations shown
 on the plans or as directed by the engineer. T he minimum depth of installation shall be dependent upon the
 method used and the diameter of the pipe, and will require review and approval from the engineer before
 the start of this work.
 734.2 Mate rial. T he class of pipe specified in the contract item will be determined for vertical load only.
 Additional reinforcement or strength of pipe required to withstand jacking pressure shall be determined by
 the contractor and shall be furnished at the contractor's expense. If pipe ramming or auger boring is the
 horizontal boring method specified for use, steel casing pipe shall be used. All material shall be in
 accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Section
 Reinforced Concrete Culvert, Storm Drain and Sewer P ipe 1026
 Fiberglass-Reinforced P olymer Mortar P ipe
 1075
 
 734.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 734.3.1 T he contractor shall protect the horizontal bore work area as shown on the plans.
 734.3.2 Variations from theoretical alignment and grade for the completed pipe shall not exceed 0.5 feet
 for each 100 feet of pipe. Pavement or ground surface heave or settlement above the installation will not
 be permitted. To determine if heave or settlement is occurring, the contractor shall undertake surface
 monitoring measurements.
 734.3.3 T he excavated hole shall be no more than 0.1 foot greater than the outside diameter of the pipe.
 Sluicing and jetting with water as a primary means of soil cutting will not be permitted. When material
 tends to cave in from outside these limits, a metal shield shall be used ahead of the first section of pipe
 when pipe jacking, microtunneling or auger boring.
 734.3.4 If the excavated hole is formed by Horizontal Directional Drilling (HDD), the boring equipment
 used to bore the hole shall be of proper type and in proper working order to ensure the work is performed
 to the satisfaction of the engineer. T he size of installations by the directional drilling method shall be
 limited to those that can be accomplished by using a 24-inch maximum-sized reamer, unless approved by
 the engineer.
 734.3.5 Holes bored by HDD shall be cleaned of excess material before pipe is jacked or pulled into place.
 Holes bored by the methods of auger boring, microtunnelling or pipe jacking shall be cleaned as pipe is
 being jacked or pushed simultaneously into place.
 734.3.6 Any areas resulting from caving or excavation outside the above specified limits shall be backfilled
 with a cellular concrete grout designed and produced in accordance with AST M C 796, and with a method
 that will fill the voids. T he excavated area around the pipe shall be sealed with grout for a minimum
 distance of 3 feet from the outside face of the fill or cut slope.
 734.3.7 If steel casing pipe to be left in place is used with this installation method, the contractor may
 delete the gasket type joints for the limits of the jacked pipe. Steel casing pipe shall be welded by a certified
 welder or shall have a mechanical means of locking pipe joints into place.
 734.3.8 Entry or exit pits or shafts shall be adequately sloped and shored prior to boring.
 734.3.9 If the horizontal boring method chosen for use is pipe jacking or microtunneling, resilient joint
 cushioning material shall be used between individual pipe segments during the pipe jacking or
 microtunneling process. T his material shall be 0.5 inch thick for pipe diameters up to 30 inches, and shall
 be 0.75 inch thick for pipe diameters equal to or greater than 30 inches.
 
 462
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 734.3.10 If the horizontal boring method chosen for use is auger boring or pipe ramming, an adequate steel
 leading-edge band shall be used to protect the leading edge of the pipe from obstacles in the boring path.
 734.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required,
 measurement of horizontal bore installed pipe, complete in place, will be made to the nearest foot along
 the geometrical center of the pipe. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted
 from the contract quantity. T he length of structure may be increased by no more than 3 feet as necessary
 to avoid cutting the pipe, but such increased length will not be included in the contract quantity for
 payment.
 734.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 734.5.1 All cost for work area protection will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay
 items included in the contract.
 734.5.2 T he accepted quantities of horizontal bore installed pipe, complete in place, will be paid for at the
 contract unit price for each of the items included in the contract. Payment will be considered full
 compensation for excavation and backfilling of the jacking pits, disposal of excess excavation from boring
 operations, grout for filling voids, disposal of excess drilling fluids, video inspection or camera recording
 equipment, and any other incidental items or equipment necessary to complete the described work.
 
 463
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 735
 CULVERT PIPE LINER
 735.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of providing and installing pipe liner in existing culvert pipes.
 735.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Section
 P ipe Liner 1046
 Grout
 1066
 
 735.2.1 T he joints shall be soil-tight with no gaskets required.
 735.2.2 Approval for interlocking methods may be obtained by submitting the proposed system to
 Construction and Materials.
 735.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Before any pipe liner construction is started, the culvert to be lined
 shall be thoroughly cleaned of all sediment and debris. Existing culvert ends that are damaged or impede
 installation shall be straightened or removed at the engineer's direction at the contractor ’s expense. T he
 dimensions of the pipe liner shall meet the following requirements:
 Culvert Pipe Liner Dimensions
 Liner
 
 Existing
 Pipe
 
 Size (ID)
 in.
 12
 15
 18
 21
 24
 27
 30
 33
 36
 42
 46
 48
 54
 60
 72
 
 Clearancea
 Minimum Maximum
 in.
 in.
 0.5
 2
 0.5
 3
 0.5
 3
 0.5
 3
 0.5
 4
 1
 4
 1
 4
 1
 4
 1
 4
 1
 6
 2
 6
 2
 6
 2
 8
 2
 9
 2
 10
 
 ID
 Minimum
 in.
 9
 11
 13
 15
 17
 20
 22
 24
 26
 30
 33
 35
 39
 43
 52
 
 a Clearance
 
 shall be the difference between
 the inside diameter (ID) of the existing pipe
 and the outside diameter (OD) of the pipe
 liner.
 735.3.1 T he pipe liner shall be joined into a continuous length by an approved interlocking method. Each
 joint shall be checked for soil-tightness before each section of pipe liner is inserted.
 735.3.2 T he insertion may be made by pushing or pulling the assembled pipe liner from either end of the
 culvert. T he insertion operation shall not cause the joints to separate. A temporary nose cone or plug may
 be necessary to guide the pipe liner past minor obstructions. T he handling of pipe liner shall be in a manner
 such that the pipe liner is not damaged. Pipe liner with deep scratches or gouges shall be removed and
 replaced at the contractor ’s expense.
 735.3.3 After the pipe liner has been completely inserted, inspected in place by the engineer, and cooled to
 the temperature of the existing culvert, the liner shall be cut off as directed by the engineer and grouted in
 place.
 
 464
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 735.3.3.1 Expansive grout shall be contain only enough water to make the grout stiff, but workable. T he
 grout shall extend into the annular space between the existing culvert and pipe liner for a minimum
 distance of 6 inches from the face of the pipe to a flexible grout stop comprised of flexible foamed
 polyethylene, pavement joint backer rod or other material approved by the engineer. Care shall be taken
 such that the grouting pressure does not exceed the external hydrostatic collapse resistance of the liner.
 735.3.3.2 Drainage of the annular space between the culvert and pipe liner shall be provided by drilling a
 circumferential line of weep holes in the lower half of the pipe liner approximately 2 inches from the
 downstream grout stop. T he weep holes shall be no less than 3/8 inch or more than 1/2 inch in diameter
 and shall be spaced circumferentially at 3-inch centers starting at the invert and extending upward to the
 spring line of the pipe liner.
 735.3.4 T he pipe liner shall be anchored to the existing culvert by either using a minimum of two 1/2-inch
 diameter bolts with washers or other methods approved by the engineer. T he pipe liner shall be centered in
 the existing pipe by either anchor bolts installed at the upstream end, spaced equal distance, above the
 spring line or other methods approved by the engineer.
 735.4 Me thod O f Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required,
 measurement of pipe liner, complete in place, will be made to the nearest foot along the geometrical center
 of the pipe liner. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract
 quantity. T his item shall include all material, labor, equipment and excavation necessary to complete the
 described work.
 735.5 Basis O f Payme nt. T he accepted quantities for the pipe liner, complete in place, will be paid for at
 the contract unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract.
 
 465
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 801
 LIME AND FERTILIZER
 801.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of the application of agricultural lime and commercial
 fertilizer and soil preparation for seeding and sodding on areas shown on the plans or designated by the
 engineer.
 801.2 Mate rial.
 801.2.1 Material used for soil neutralization, unless otherwise specified, shall be agricultural lime with no
 less than 90 percent passing the No. 8 sieve containing no less than 65 percent calcium carbonate
 equivalent.
 801.2.2 Agricultural lime shall be furnished from a source that has been tested and certified in accordance
 with the Missouri Agricultural Liming Materials Act. T he quantity of material required to provide the
 specified pounds of effective neutralizing material (E.N.M.) per acre shall be determined from the producer
 or distributor's certification of analysis furnished by the Director of the Missouri Agriculture Experiment
 Station, Columbia, Missouri in accordance with the Missouri Agricultural Liming Materials Act. T he
 contractor shall provide a copy of this certification to the engineer prior to application. If agricultural lime
 is furnished as a commercially bagged product, pelletized or otherwise, with a guaranteed product analysis
 shown on the bag listing the elemental properties and gradation, the E.N.M. shall be provided to the
 engineer. Material may be accepted on the basis of bag label analysis.
 801.2.3 Fertilizer shall be a standard commercial product which, when applied at the proper rate, will
 supply the quantity of total nitrogen (N), available phosphoric acid (P205) and soluble potash (K20), as
 specified in the contract. Material may be accepted on the basis of bag label analysis or supplier's
 certification, and shall be accordance with all applicable Missouri fertilizer laws.
 801.3 Equipme nt. Lime and commercial fertilizer shall be applied by mechanical equipment designed for
 this purpose.
 801.4 Construction Re quire me nts.
 801.4.1 T he area to be limed and fertilized will be the area specified within the limits of construction. T he
 area shall have a uniform surface free from rills, washes and depressions, and shall conform to the finished
 grade and cross section shown on the plans. T he soil shall be thoroughly broken up, worked, tilled and
 loosened to a minimum depth of 2 inches. T he seedbed or sodbed shall be prepared by loosening the
 existing soil on the slope, rather than by the addition of loose soil.
 801.4.2 Lime and fertilizer shall be applied evenly at the rates specified in the contract, and only when the
 soil is in a tillable condition. After application, the lime and fertilizer shall be thoroughly mixed into the
 soil to a minimum depth of 2 inches, except when applied hydraulically on slopes steeper than 2:1. Lime
 and fertilizer shall be applied separately, but may be incorporated into the soil in one operation. Lime and
 fertilizer shall be applied no more than 48 hours before the seed is sown unless otherwise authorized by the
 engineer.
 801.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of the area that has been limed and fertilized will be made
 to the nearest 1/10 acre.
 801.6 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of liming and fertilizing will be paid for at the contract
 unit price. No direct payment will be made for liming and fertilizing areas for which seeding or sodding
 items are included in the contract.
 
 466
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 802
 MULCHING
 802.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of applying vegetative mulch and a specified stabilization
 covering as indicated in the contract.
 802.2 Mate rial.
 802.2.1 Ve ge tative Mulch. Vegetative mulch shall be prairie hay or straw from oats, rye, wheat or barley.
 Prairie hay shall consist of any combination of any of the following plants: Big Bluestem, Little Bluestem,
 Indiangrass, Sideoats Grama and native wildflowers. Mulch may also be composted material from clearing
 and grubbing operations. If composted material from clearing and grubbing operations are used the particle
 size shall be such it can be adequately spread and does not exceed 6 inches in length. Mulch shall be free of
 prohibited weed seed as stated in the Missouri Seed Law and shall be relatively free of all other noxious and
 undesirable seed. T he mulch shall be clean and bright, relatively free of foreign material and shall be dry
 enough to spread properly.
 802.2.2 Mulch O ve rspray. Mulch overspray shall be either virgin wood cellulose fibers or recycled paper
 mulch. T he mulch shall be produced by either the ground or cooked fiber process, shall not be water soluble
 and shall have the following properties:
 Property
 Moisture Content, percent by weight, max
 Organic Matter-Wood Fiber, percent by weight, min
 pH
 
 Requirement
 15
 80
 4.3-8.5
 
 802.2.3 Ce rtification. T he contractor shall furnish a certification for mulch and a manufacturer's
 certification that the mulch overspray material are in accordance with these specifications.
 802.3 Construction Re quire me nts. All seeded areas shall be mulched. Disturbed areas outside of
 authorized construction limits shall be mulched at the contractor's expense.
 802.3.1 Application. Vegetative mulch shall be applied at a minimum rate of 2 1/2 tons per acre. All
 mulch shall be distributed evenly within 24 hours following the seeding operation. Following the mulching
 operation, precautions shall be taken to prohibit foot or vehicular traffic over the mulched area. Any
 mulch that is displaced shall be replaced at once, but only after the work preceding the mulching which was
 damaged as a result of the displacement has been repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer. T he
 contractor may use erosion control blankets in lieu of mulch.
 802.3.2 Stabiliz ation. Vegetative mulch shall be secured from movement by either mulch overspray or
 embedment as indicated in the contract documents, or other methods as approved by the engineer.
 802.3.2.1 Mulch O ve rspray. Mulch overspray shall be applied over the vegetative mulch as a separate
 operation. Mulch overspray shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations at a
 minimum rate of 750 pounds per acre.
 802.3.2.2 Ve ge tative Mulch Embe dme nt. Mulch shall be embedded in the soil a sufficient depth to
 prevent the loss of mulch by wind or water erosion and approximately parallel to the roadbed grade.
 802.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. T his item will not be measured for payment.
 802.5 Basis of Payme nt. No direct payment will be made for providing and securing mulch. T he accepted
 quantities of mulch will be considered completely covered by the contract unit price for seeding.
 802.5.1 No direct payment will be made for maintaining mulch prior to acceptance for maintenance. On
 previously accepted mulched areas, the engineer may authorize areas to be repaired in accordance with Sec
 104.3.
 802.5.2 No additional payment will be made for erosion control blankets used in lieu of mulch at the
 
 467
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 contractor ’s option.
 
 468
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 803
 SO DDING
 803.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing sod on areas shown on the plans or as
 designated by the engineer.
 803.2 Mate rial.
 803.2.1 T he type of sod will be designated on the plans. T he sod shall be densely rooted and thriving, free
 of all prohibited and noxious weeds as defined by the Missouri Department of Agriculture and reasonably
 free of all other weeds. T he sod shall be grown from seed varieties that are favorable for the Missouri
 climate conditions. T he sod may be cut in strips or rolls.
 803.2.2 T urf type tall fescue and Kentucky bluegrass sods shall be grown from a blend of at least three
 separate varieties for each sod. Buffalograss sod shall be of a variety exhibiting salt tolerance.
 803.2.3 All sod shall be in accordance with the Missouri Plant Law and the Missouri Department of
 Agriculture’s Code of State Regulations regulating the growth, sale and shipping of nursery stock in the
 state of Missouri. T he contractor shall provide a valid certificate of inspection from the state of origin to
 the engineer prior to the placement of any sod.
 803.3 Construction Re quire me nts. T he sod bed shall be prepared in accordance with Sec 801. T he bed
 shall be in a firm but uncompacted condition with a relatively fine texture when the sod is placed. T he sod
 bed and the sod shall be moist when the sod is laid. All sod shall be placed to produce tight joints. Sod placed
 on slopes 3:1 or steeper and in the flow line of ditches shall be secured with wooden pegs or metal clips.
 803.4 Acce ptance . No sodded areas will be accepted until the sod is fully rooted into the sod bed and
 thriving. Sod will not be accepted in the dormant state.
 803.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement will be made to the nearest square yard of accepted sodded
 surface area.
 803.6 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of sodding will be paid for at the contract unit price. No
 direct payment will be made for additional sod bed preparation or for the replacement of sodded areas not
 accepted by the engineer.
 
 469
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 804
 TO PSO IL
 804.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing approved selected topsoil at the
 locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 804.2 Mate rial. Topsoil shall be obtained from sources approved by the engineer. Topsoil shall be a fertile,
 friable and loamy soil of uniform quality, without admixture of subsoil material, and shall be free from
 material such as hard clods, stiff clay, hardpan, partially disintegrated stone, pebbles larger than one inch in
 diameter and other impurities. Topsoil shall be relatively free from grass, roots, weeds and other
 objectionable plant material or vegetative debris undesirable or harmful to plant life or which will prevent
 the formation of a suitable seedbed.
 804.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 804.3.1 T he engineer shall be notified sufficiently in advance of the opening of any material source to
 permit the engineer to prepare for necessary checking and measurement. Topsoil shall be secured from
 areas from which the topsoil has not been previously removed either by erosion or mechanical methods.
 T he soil shall not be removed in excess of the depth approved by the engineer. T he contractor shall furnish
 the source of material, unless otherwise shown on the plans. During the period of removal of the topsoil
 material, the site shall be kept drained, and when all material has been removed, the site shall be left in a
 neat and presentable condition to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 804.3.2 T he surface on which the topsoil is to be placed shall be free of all loose rock and foreign material
 greater in any dimension than one half the depth of the topsoil to be added. T he surface shall be raked or
 otherwise loosened just prior to being covered with topsoil. Topsoil shall be placed and spread over the
 designated areas to the depth shown on the plans. After settling, the completed work shall conform to the
 thickness shown on the plans. After spreading, all large clods and foreign material shall be removed by the
 contractor.
 804.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Topsoil will be measured to the nearest cubic yard, based on area
 multiplied by the average depth as determined by the engineer.
 804.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of topsoil will be paid for at the contract unit price,
 including hauling from any distance.
 
 470
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 805
 SEEDING
 805.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and sowing seed as specified in the contract. All
 disturbed areas shall be seeded except for sodded areas, surfaced areas, solid rock, and slopes consisting
 primarily of broken rock.
 805.2 Mate rial.
 805.2.1 T he seed shall be grown and processed in the United States or Canada and shall comply with the
 requirements of the Missouri Seed Law. Certain lots of seed may be desirable for the advancement of a local
 ecotype when specified, and will be the only seed permitted. T he following percentages for purity and
 germination or pure live seed will be the minimum requirements in the acceptance of seed, unless otherwise
 permitted by the engineer.
 Seed Requirements
 Non-native
 G rasses
 Bermuda Grass
 Smooth
 Bromegrass
 Kentucky
 Bluegrass
 Orchardgrass
 P erennial
 Ryegrass
 Tall Fescue
 Red Fescue
 Timothy
 Cereal or Cover
 Crop
 Annual Ryegrass
 Redtop
 Oat Grain
 Rye Grain
 Wheat Grain
 Wildrye, Virginia
 Wildrye, Canada
 
 Scientif ic Name
 
 Purity G erminationa
 
 Cynodon dactylon
 
 95
 
 80
 
 Bromus inermis
 
 85
 
 80
 
 P oa pratensis
 
 85
 
 80
 
 Dactylis glomerata
 
 85
 
 80
 
 Lolium perenne
 
 98
 
 85
 
 Festuca arundinacea
 Festuca rubra
 P hleum pratense
 
 97
 97
 98
 
 85
 85
 85
 
 Purity G ermination
 Lolium multiflorum
 Agrostis alba
 Avena sativia
 Secale cereale
 Triticum aestivum
 Elymus virginicus
 Elymus canadensis
 
 98
 92
 98
 98
 97
 
 Pure Live
 Seed
 
 Pure Live
 Seed
 
 85
 85
 85
 80
 85
 
 60
 60
 Pure Live
 Legumes
 Purity G ermination
 Seed
 Korean Lespedeza Lespedeza stipulacea
 98
 85
 Alsike Clover
 Trifolium hybridum
 98
 85
 Red Clover
 Trifolium pratense
 98
 85
 White Clover
 Trifolium repens
 98
 85
 Hairy Vetch
 Vicia villosa
 97
 80
 P artridge P ea
 Chamaecrista fasciculate
 98
 80
 Variety(s) Pure Live
 Native G rasses
 Scientif ic Name
 Purity
 Seed
 Mo. Ecotype
 Big Bluestem
 Andropgon gerardii
 Roundtree
 40
 Kaw
 Blue Grama
 Bouteloua gracilis
 40
 Mo. Ecotype
 Sharp’s
 Buffalograss
 Buchloe dactyloides
 65
 Improved
 Texoka
 Mo. Ecotype
 Indiangrass
 Sorghastrum nutans
 Rumsey
 50
 Cheyenne
 Mo. Ecotype
 Little Bluestem
 Schizachyrium scoparium
 Aldous
 40
 Cimmaron
 Eastern
 Tripsacum dactyloides
 Mo. Ecotype
 G amagrass
 
 471
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Sideoats Grama
 
 Bouteloua curtipendula
 
 Switchgrass
 
 P anicum virgatum
 
 Wildrye, Virginia
 Elymus virginicus
 Wildrye, Canada
 Elymus canadensis
 Cluster Fescue
 Festuca paradoxa
 Rough Dropseed Sporobolus compositus
 P rairie Dropseed Sporobolus heterolopus
 P rairie Cordgrass
 Spartina pectinata
 a Will
 
 Mo. Ecotype
 El Reno
 Trailway
 Mo. Ecotype
 Trailblazer
 Cave-in-Rock
 
 40
 
 80
 60
 60
 
 Mo. Ecotype
 Mo. Ecotype
 
 not apply if unhulled or unscarified seed is specified.
 
 805.2.2 If the specified quantity is in pounds of seed, no reduction will be permitted in the specified
 quantity of seed if the purity or germination or both, are higher than the minimum required by the
 specifications. If the specified quantity is in pounds of pure live seed, the pure live seed quantity shall be
 determined from the actual percentage shown by the supplier for native grasses or by multiplying the actual
 percentages of purity times the actual percentage of germination, including hard seed for other seed.
 805.2.3 All leguminous seed shall be inoculated or treated with the proper quantity of cultures approved for
 the particular legume to be sown. Leguminous seed will include alsike clover, Korean lespedeza, red clover,
 white clover, hairy vetch, partridge pea and slender bush clover.
 805.2.3.1 T he inoculant for treating leguminous seed shall be a nitrogen-fixing bacteria culture. T he
 inoculant containers shall be plainly marked with the expiration date for use. T he manufacturer's
 recommendations for inoculating seed shall be followed.
 805.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 805.3.1 T he seedbed shall be prepared in accordance with Sec 801. Seeding shall be done before the seedbed
 becomes eroded. Seed shall be uniformly applied at no less than the rates specified.
 805.3.2 Disturbed areas outside of authorized construction limits shall be seeded at the contractor's
 expense.
 805.3.3 All seeded areas shall be mulched in accordance with Sec 802.
 805.4 Acce ptance . Acceptance of permanent seeding will be made when seeded disturbed areas meet the
 requirements for final stabilization as defined in the current state operating permit for land disturbance.
 Inspection for acceptance will be made within 60 days after seeding, excluding seeding dates that fall
 between September 30 and March 1. Seeding that occurs between September 30 and March 1 will be
 inspected no earlier than May 1.
 805.5 Ce rtification. T he contractor shall certify the seed and seed mixture meets the contract
 requirements and be in accordance with Sec 805. T he certification shall list the seed type, lot numbers,
 pure live seed, percent germination, and quantity used for each lot. In lieu of listing the lot specific
 information, the certification may include attached individual bag label analysis for all seed used.
 805.6 Corre ctive Action. Inadequate stands shall be reworked and reseeded within the time period agreed
 upon at the contractor ’s expense. On previously accepted seeded areas, the engineer may authorize eroded
 areas to be repaired in accordance with Sec 104.3.
 805.7 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of seeding will be made of the area seeded to the nearest
 1/10 acre.
 805.8 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of seeding will be paid for at the contract unit price. No
 direct payment will be made for liming, fertilizing or seedbed preparation.
 
 472
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 806
 PO LLUTIO N, ERO SIO N AND SEDIMENT CO NTRO L
 806.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing, installing, maintaining and removing temporary
 pollution, erosion and sediment control measures; furnishing and placing permanent erosion control
 features; or a combination of both as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 806.2 Sche dule of Work. Prior to the preconstruction conference and the start of construction, the
 contractor shall submit schedules for the implementation of temporary pollution control and temporary
 and permanent erosion control work, as applicable, for construction operations. T he contractor's schedule
 shall address specifically the pollution and erosion control measures planned at all streams or other bodies
 of water. No work shall start until the pollution and erosion control schedules and methods of operations
 have been approved by the engineer. Any delay of the work resulting from failure to submit acceptable
 pollution and erosion control schedules and methods of operations will be considered nonexcusable.
 806.3 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as herein.
 806.4 Construction Re quire me nts. T he engineer will limit the surface area of erodible earth material
 exposed by clearing and grubbing or by excavation, borrow and fill operations in accordance with the
 following. T he engineer may direct the contractor to provide immediate permanent or temporary
 pollution control measures to prevent contamination of adjacent streams or other bodies of water. Such
 work may involve the construction of temporary berms, dikes, dams, sediment basins and slope drains, and
 use of temporary mulches, seeding or other control devices or methods as necessary to control erosion and
 pollution.
 806.4.1 If erosion and sediment control measures, as shown on the plans, are not suitable due to site
 conditions, a suitable system of Best Management Practices (BMP) as defined by the applicable Missouri
 State Operating Permit for land disturbance activities and the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
 (SWPPP), shall be applied as approved by the engineer.
 806.4.2 T he contractor shall exercise effective management practices throughout the life of the project to
 control pollution. Pollutants such as chemicals, fuels, lubricants, bitumen, raw sewage or other harmful
 material shall not be discharged on or from the project. Temporary pollution control measures, such as
 storage and handling of petroleum products and other pollutants, shall be coordinated with temporary and
 permanent erosion and sediment control features specified in the contract to ensure economical, effective
 and continuous erosion and pollution control. T hese requirements will also apply to work within easements
 designated by the Commission.
 806.4.3 T he contractor shall incorporate all permanent erosion, sediment, and pollution control features
 into the project at the earliest practical time. Temporary measures shall be used to correct conditions that
 develop during construction which were not foreseen during the design stage, that are needed prior to
 installation of permanent pollution control features, or that are needed temporarily to control erosion and
 sediment that develops during normal construction practices, but are not associated with permanent control
 features on the project.
 806.4.4 Installation of temporary control measures shall be scheduled to coincide with clearing and
 grubbing operations, but before grading operations begin. T he project land area disturbance shall not exceed
 one acre without installation of erosion and sediment controls. T he total project land disturbance area shall
 not exceed 20 acres without written approval from the engineer.
 806.4.5 T he engineer may allow additional land disturbance acreage if appropriate BMP's including
 temporary seeding and mulching, have been applied to previously disturbed areas and the contractor has the
 resources to apply the BMP's to the expanded area.
 806.4.6 Unless otherwise provided or approved in writing by the engineer, construction operations in
 streams or other bodies of water shall be restricted to those areas that must be entered for the construction
 of temporary or permanent structures. Streams or other bodies of water shall be promptly cleared of all
 falsework, piling, debris or other obstructions placed therein or caused by construction operations.
 
 473
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 806.4.7 Fording of streams or other bodies of water with construction equipment will not be permitted,
 except as allowed by the engineer. Temporary bridges or other structures shall be used when frequent
 crossing of streams or other bodies of water is necessary. Unless otherwise approved in writing by the
 engineer, mechanized equipment shall not be operated in streams or other bodies of water except as may be
 required to construct channel changes and temporary or permanent structures. If a Corps of Engineer
 Section 404 or Department of Natural Resources Section 401 permit is applicable for a project, the permit
 requirements and conditions will prevail.
 806.4.8 T he contractor shall obtain all necessary permits to cover all project-associated activities on
 external sites that are not located on MoDOT right of way or easements. Project-associated activities
 includes borrow areas, plant sites, and staging areas. All costs associated with the permits and pollution
 control shall be at the contractor's expense, including providing, installing, maintaining, and removal of all
 erosion and sediment control devices, and final stabilization of disturbed areas.
 806.4.9 In the event of conflict between these requirements and the pollution control laws, rules or
 regulations of other federal, state or local agencies, the more restrictive laws, rules or regulations will apply.
 806.4.10 T he contractor is encouraged to incorporate mulch from the clearing and grubbing operation into
 the BMP’s on the project. BMP’s may consist of compost filled socks, compost filter berms, soil
 protection cover or any other method as approved by the engineer.
 806.4.11 Unless otherwise specified, or directed by the engineer, all temporary erosion and sediment
 control measures shall be removed by the contractor after permanent erosion and sediment control
 measures are established and the project has achieved final stabilization as defined in the SWPPP.
 Biodegradable erosion and sediment control materials may be allowed to be incorporated into the project in
 accordance with the SWPPP, as approved by the engineer. Rock from ditch checks and other temporary
 sediment devices may be repositioned to serve as ditch liner in accordance with the SWPPP, and as directed
 by the engineer.
 SECTIO N 806.10 TEMPO RARY BERMS.
 806.10.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing and maintaining temporary berms at the
 top of slopes or transverse to the centerline of fills as shown on the plans.
 806.10.2 Mate rial. Type B berms shall consist of graded material from within the project limits, rock, or
 other suitable material approved by the engineer. Type C berms shall consist of rock with a predominant
 size between 4 inches and 12 inches.
 806.10.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Temporary berms shall be constructed and maintained to the
 approximate dimensions shown on the plans.
 806.10.3.1 Type B Be rms. Type B berms shall be machine compacted with a minimum of three passes
 over the entire width of the berm. Material removed from Type B berms shall be incorporated in the
 embankment when possible. T he contractor shall remove and dispose of any excess or unsuitable material
 to a location approved by the engineer.
 806.10.3.1 Type B berms shall drain to a compacted outlet at slope drain. On transverse berms, the top
 width of the berms may be wider and the side slopes flatter to allow equipment to pass over these berms
 with minimal disruption.
 806.10.3.2 Type C Be rms. Vegetative mulch, erosion control blanket or geotextile fabric shall be placed
 on the upslope of the Type C berm. T he vegetative mulch shall be placed in such a manner that the final
 compacted thickness is 2 inches. T he material for the vegetative mulch shall be in accordance with Sec
 802. T he straw layer erosion control blanket or geotextile fabric shall be removed and replaced as directed
 by the engineer.
 806.10.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of Type B and C berms will be made to the nearest
 linear foot.
 
 474
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 806.10.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of Type B and C berms will be paid for at the
 contract unit price and will be considered full compensation for material, installation, maintenance,
 removal and any other hand work necessary to construct the berms. No payment will be made for the straw
 layer, erosion control blanket or geotextile fabric on the Type C berm. No payment will be made for any
 seeding and mulching needed after removal.
 SECTIO N 806.20 TEMPO RARY SLO PE DRAINS.
 806.20.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing, constructing maintaining and removing
 temporary slope drains to carry water down slopes and to reduce erosion. T he method selected shall be
 approved by the engineer prior to construction.
 806.20.2 Construction Re quire me nts. T he contractor shall provide temporary, impermeable slope
 drains to carry water or water with suspended solids down fill slopes until permanent erosion control
 measures are established. T he contractor shall provide temporary slope drains on fillslopes at
 approximately 500-foot intervals or as directed by the engineer. All temporary slope drains shall be
 adequately anchored to the slope to prevent disruption of flow. T he inlet ends shall include a ditch check
 and be constructed to channel water into the temporary slope drain. Outlet ends shall have some means of
 dissipating the energy of the water to reduce erosion downstream and have the ability to capture sediment.
 After removal, the contractor shall restore the site of the slope drains to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 806.20.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of temporary slope drains will be made to the nearest
 linear foot.
 806.20.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of temporary slope drains will be paid for at the
 contract unit price. Payment shall include furnishing, constructing, maintaining and removing temporary
 slope drains, and restoration of the slope drain sites. No payment will be made for any seeding and
 mulching needed after removal.
 SECTIO N 806.30 TEMPO RARY DITCH AND INLET CHECKS.
 806.30.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing, constructing, maintaining, removing and
 disposing of temporary ditch and inlet checks.
 806.30.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 806.30.2.1 Rock Ditch Che cks. Rock ditch checks shall be constructed in accordance with the plans, or
 as directed by the engineer, and shall have a minimum effective height of 18 inches. T he predominant size
 of the rock used shall range between 4 inches and 12 inches.
 806.30.2.2 Alte rnate Ditch Che cks. Alternate ditch checks shall be constructed in accordance with the
 manufacturer's specifications, and as shown on the plans, or as directed by the engineer. Alternate ditch
 checks shall have a minimum effective height of 9 inches, shall follow guidance provided in the SWPPP,
 and shall perform to the level that meets or exceeds the requirement of the current Missouri Operating
 Permit.
 806.30.2.2.1 Unless otherwise disallowed, the contractor has the option to construct rock ditch checks in
 lieu of alternate ditch checks. Rock ditch checks constructed in lieu of alternate checks shall have a
 minimum effective height of 18 inches. Spacing shall be increased, as determined by the engineer, to
 account for the additional height of rock ditch check. T he toe-to-top capacity requirements shown on the
 plans will be used to determine the spacing.
 806.30.2.3 Inle t Che cks. Inlet checks shall be installed in accordance with the plans or as directed by the
 engineer to prevent sediment from entering drop inlets, manholes, and other openings to culverts and
 closed drainage systems.
 806.30.2.3.1 Inlet checks shall be constructed in accordance with Sec 806.30.2.1, rock ditch checks, and
 shall completely surround the inlet or other structure, as indicated on the plans. Other allowable methods of
 
 475
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 protecting inlets will be listed in the SWPPP.
 806.30.2.4 Curb Inle t Che cks. Curb inlet checks shall consist of socks filled with rock, or other fillers of
 sufficient weight to keep the device in place. Curb inlet checks shall be installed in the gutter or as shown
 on the plans. Other proprietary devices may be used, as approved by the engineer.
 806.30.3 Mainte nance . T he contractor shall monitor the condition of all temporary checks and repair or
 replace checks that are not functional. T he contractor shall remove sediment in accordance with Sec
 806.110. Alternate ditch checks shall be maintained in accordance with this provision and the
 manufacturer's specifications or as directed by the engineer.
 806.30.4 Re moval. All types of temporary checks shall remain in service until removal has been approved
 by the engineer. Removal shall be in accordance with Sec 806.4.11 and as stated herein. T he contractor
 shall remove any sediment from the check, remove the check, and restore the area to match existing
 ground condition. When necessary, seeding and mulching shall be in accordance with Secs 802 and 805
 respectively, and shall be considered incidental.
 806.30.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 806.30.5.1 Measurement of rock ditch checks will be made to the nearest linear foot as measured along the
 top of the check. Rock ditch checks constructed in lieu of alternate checks will be included in this
 measurement for payment. Inlet checks, except for curb inlet checks, will be included in this measurement
 for payment.
 806.30.5.2 Measurement of alternate ditch checks will be made to the nearest linear foot as measured along
 the top of the check.
 806.30.5.3 No measurement will be made for any portion of a check that exceeds the length necessary to
 adequately span the ditch as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 806.30.5.4 Measurement of curb inlet checks will be made per each check.
 806.30.6 Basis of Payme nt.
 806.30.6.1 T he accepted quantities of rock ditch checks, alternate ditch checks, inlet checks, and curb inlet
 checks will be paid for at the contract unit price for each pay item included in the contract. If the engineer
 determines unusual conditions warrant complete replacement of a check, payment will be made for the
 replacement check at the contract unit price.
 806.30.6.2 Payment for sediment removal shall be in accordance with Sec 806.110.
 SECTIO N 806.40 SEDIMENT BASINS.
 806.40.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing and maintaining temporary or permanent
 sediment basins as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. T his work shall include clearing and
 excavation to construct the basin, disposal of excavated material, and providing and installing rock or
 other stabilizing material as approved by the engineer. For temporary basins, removal, backfilling, and site
 restoration is also included in the work.
 806.40.2 Construction Re quire me nts. T he sediment basin shall be an excavated or dammed storage
 area with defined side slopes. Inlet and outlet areas shall be lined with rock of sufficient size to withstand
 the water flow. In lieu of rock, other allowable liners may be used as described in the SWPPP. Outlets may
 be constructed with a riser pipe, surface skimmers, or stabilized spillway, or a combination of one or more
 of these features.
 806.40.2.1 T he inlet of a sediment basin shall be constructed with a wide cross-section and a minimum
 grade to prevent turbulence and to allow deposition of soil particles.
 806.40.2.2 Sediment shall be removed and disposed in accordance with Sec 806.110, and before the depth
 
 476
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 reaches approximately one-half the original depth of the sediment basin in any part of the pool.
 806.40.2.3 Temporary sediment basins shall remain in service until removal has been approved by the
 engineer. Removal shall be in accordance with Sec 806.4.11 and as stated herein. T he contractor shall
 remove any sediment from the basin, backfill, compact all excavations, restore the area to match existing
 ground conditions, and seeding and mulching in accordance with Secs 802 and 805 respectively.
 806.40.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 806.40.3.1 Measurement of excavation to construct sediment basin will be made to the nearest tenth of a
 cubic yard.
 806.40.3.2 Measurement of rock placed to construct sediment basins will be made to the nearest tenth of a
 cubic yard.
 806.40.4 Basis of Payme nt.
 806.40.4.1 T he accepted quantities for excavation to construct sediment basins will be paid for at the
 contract unit price. Payment includes clearing, excavation, removal, backfilling and final grading.
 806.40.4.2 T he accepted quantity for rock used to construct sediment basins will be paid for at the contract
 unit price. Payment shall include furnishing, placing, and removal of rock.
 806.40.4.3 No direct payment will be made for seeding and mulching necessary to restore the area after
 removal.
 806.40.4.4 Payment for sediment removal shall be in accordance with Sec 806.110.
 SECTIO N 806.50 TEMPO RARY SEEDING AND MULCHING.
 806.50.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and applying fertilizer, seed, vegetative mulch
 or other acceptable cover, in disturbed areas authorized by the engineer. Temporary seeding and mulching is
 utilized to establish a quick ground cover that reduces erosion in disturbed areas where staging requires the
 area to be disturbed again at a later date, and for areas that are complete but current seasonal conditions are
 not favorable for applying permanent seeding. Finish grading will not be required except for areas that will
 not receive further grading prior to permanent seeding. Hydraulic seeding and fertilizing in accordance with
 Sec 805 will be permitted.
 806.50.2 Construction Re quire me nts. Seeding and mulching shall be a continuous operation on all cut
 and fillslopes, excess material sites and borrow pits during the construction process. All disturbed areas shall
 be seeded and mulched as necessary to control erosion. When a project is shown in the contract to be
 constructed in stages and operations in those staged areas are suspended for a significant amount of time,
 the contractor shall receive payment for temporary seed and mulch. When the engineer allows the
 contractor to disturb additional ground beyond the restrictions in Sec 806.4.4 solely to enhance the
 contractor ’s operation, the contractor shall not receive compensation for temporary seed or mulch, as
 required by the engineer, for ground cover for areas exceeding the restrictions in Sec 806.4.4.
 806.50.2.1 T he contractor shall provide permanent seeding and mulching as shown on the plans following
 temporary seeding. Any preparation of the seed bed that might be necessary prior to permanent seeding
 shall be considered incidental to temporary seeding.
 806.50.2.2 Temporary seeding mixtures of cereal grains shall be applied at a minimum rate of 100 pounds
 per acre. All erodible seeded areas shall provide a minimum of 20 plants of the species planted per square
 foot on at least two random counts per acre in representative areas of the field. For areas with a large
 percentage of rock, the number of living plants shall be proportional to the percentage of erodible surface,
 as determined by the engineer. T he counts will be conducted 60 days after the species is planted.
 806.50.2.3 Mulch placed over temporary seed mixtures shall be applied in accordance with Sec 802.
 
 477
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 806.50.2.4 Fertilizer shall be applied at a rate of 40 pounds nitrogen (N) per acre.
 806.50.2.5 Lime will not be required for temporary seeding.
 806.50.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of temporary seeding areas will be made to the nearest
 tenth of an acre. No measurement will be made for mulch.
 806.50.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of temporary seeding will be paid for at the contract
 unit price per acre. Payment for fertilizer and mulch shall be included in the cost of temporary seeding.
 SECTIO N 806.60 SEDIMENT TRAP.
 806.60.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing, maintaining and removing sediment traps
 as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 806.60.2 Construction Re quire me nts.
 806.60.2.1 Sediment traps shall be constructed as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. T raps
 may require excavation, or placement of rock of sufficient size to impound water, or a combination of
 excavation and placement of rock.
 806.60.2.2 Sediment traps shall be installed with clearing and grubbing operations or as directed by the
 engineer. T he contractor shall monitor sediment levels and remove sediment in accordance with Sec
 806.110.
 806.60.2.3 Sediment traps shall remain in service until removal has been approved by the engineer.
 Removal shall be in accordance with Sec 806.4.11 and as stated herein. T he contractor shall remove any
 sediment from the trap, backfill, compact all excavations, restore the area to match existing ground
 condition, and seeding and mulching in accordance with Secs 802 and 805 respectively.
 806.60.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 806.60.3.1 Measurement of excavation to construct sediment traps will be made to the nearest tenth of a
 cubic yard.
 806.60.3.2 Measurement of rock placed to construct sediment traps will be made to the nearest tenth of a
 cubic yard.
 806.60.4 Basis of Payme nt.
 806.60.4.1 T he accepted quantity for excavation to construct sediment traps will be paid for at the
 contract unit price. Payment includes clearing, excavation, removal, backfilling, and final grading.
 806.60.4.2 T he accepted quantity for rock used to construct sediment traps will be paid for at the contract
 unit price. Payment shall include furnishing, placing, and removal of rock.
 806.60.4.3 No direct payment will be made for seeding and mulching necessary to restore the area after
 removal.
 806.60.4.4 Payment for sediment removal will be in accordance with Sec 806.110.
 SECTIO N 806.70 SILT FENCE.
 806.70.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing, installing, maintaining, and removing of a silt
 fence to control sediment along slopes and other designated areas. T he quantity of silt fence shown on the
 plans may be increased or decreased, as directed by the engineer. T he engineer may also modify the
 location as necessary to improve the effectiveness of the silt fence. Variations in quantity and location will
 not be considered as a change in work.
 
 478
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 806.70.2 Mate rial. When geotextile fabric is used, material shall be in accordance with Sec 1011. All other
 material shall be as specified in the SWPPP.
 806.70.2.1 Posts. Wood, steel or synthetic posts may be used. Posts shall be of sufficient length, but no
 less than 4 feet, to ensure adequate embedment while fully supporting the fence and shall have sufficient
 strength to resist damage during installation and to support applied loads while in service.
 806.70.2.2 Pre fabricate d Fe nce . Prefabricated fence systems may be used if the systems meet all of the
 above material requirements.
 806.70.3 Construction and Mainte nance Re quire me nts.
 806.70.3.1 Fabric Fe nce . T he contractor shall install silt fence as shown on the plans and at other
 locations directed by the engineer. Fence construction shall be adequate to handle the stress from hydraulic
 and sediment loading. Fabric at the bottom of the fence shall be buried a minimum of 6 inches to prevent
 flow under the barrier. T he trench shall be backfilled, and the soil compacted over the fabric. Fabric splices
 with a minimum 2-foot overlay shall be located only at a support post. Any installation method acceptable
 to the engineer will be allowed as long as the effectiveness and intent of the silt fence is achieved.
 806.70.3.1.1 Post spacing shall not exceed 5 feet. Posts shall be driven a sufficient depth into the ground
 or placed on closer spacing as necessary to ensure adequate resistance to applied loads.
 806.70.3.1.2 T he silt fence shall be fastened securely to the upslope side of the post. When wire support
 fence is used, the wire shall extend into the trench a minimum of 2 inches.
 806.70.3.2 Alte rnate Fe nce Type s. Alternate silt fence types shall be in accordance with the SWPPP or
 as approved by the engineer.
 806.70.3.3 Mainte nance . T he contractor shall monitor the condition of all fences and repair or replace
 fences that are not functional as long as the fences are necessary to contain sediment runoff. Any
 deficiencies shall be corrected by the contractor in accordance with the SWPPP. In addition, the contractor
 shall review the effectiveness of silt fences in areas where construction activities have changed the natural
 contour and drainage runoff. Where deficiencies exist, additional silt fences shall be installed as approved or
 directed by the engineer.
 806.70.3.4 Se dime nt. T he contractor shall remove and dispose of sediment in accordance with Sec
 806.110. Segments of silt fence that receive heavy sediment loading may require a secondary silt fence or
 installation of other controls to adequately contain sediment.
 806.70.3.5 Re moval. Silt fence shall be removed in accordance with Sec 806.4.11 and as specified herein.
 T he contractor shall remove and dispose of any excess silt accumulation along the fence, shall restore the
 area to match existing ground condition, and seeding and mulching in accordance with Secs 802 and 805
 respectively.
 806.70.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Silt fence will be measured to the nearest linear foot from end to end
 of each separate installation.
 806.70.5 Basis of Payme nt.
 806.70.5.1 T he accepted quantities of silt fence will be paid for at the contract unit price.
 806.70.5.2 No direct payment will be made for seeding and mulching necessary to restore the area after
 removal.
 806.70.5.3 Payment for sediment removal will be in accordance with Sec 806.110.
 SECTIO N 806.80 TEMPO RARY PIPE.
 806.80.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of installing and removing temporary pipe utilized to carry
 
 479
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 water under temporary roadways, silt fences, berms or other locations determined by the engineer and to
 prevent the contractor's equipment from coming in direct contact with water when crossing an active
 stream, intermittent streams created during heavy rainfalls or other bodies of water.
 806.80.2 Mate rial. Any pipe approved by the engineer may be used.
 806.80.3 Construction Re quire me nts. Installation of temporary pipe shall be in accordance with the
 specifications for permanent pipe and shall prevent water from causing erosion around the pipe. All
 backfill material for pipes shall be placed in 6-inch lifts and mechanically compacted. Compaction tests will
 not be required. Temporary pipe placed in intermittent or active streams shall be backfilled with clean rock
 of sufficient size to withstand normal stream flows.
 806.80.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of temporary pipe will be made to the nearest linear
 foot for those pipes specified on the plans.
 806.80.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of temporary pipe will be paid for at the contract
 unit price for temporary pipes specified on the plans. No payment will be made for temporary pipes that
 the contractor chooses to install to facilitate construction. Unless provided as a pay item in the contract
 documents, no direct payment will be made for the placement and removal of the backfill material or rock.
 SECTIO N 806.90 ERO SIO N CO NTRO L BLANKETS AND TURF REINFO RCEMENT MATS.
 806.90.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and placing erosion control blankets (ECBs)
 and turf reinforcement mats (T RMs) on slopes or ditches for short-term or long-term protection of seeded
 areas at locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 806.90.2 Mate rial. ECBs and T RMs shall be used as designated in the contract or as approved by the
 engineer. T he contractor shall provide ECBs and T RMs of the type specified in the contract and shall
 provide a manufacturer's certification stating that they are in accordance with Sec 1011.
 806.90.3 Construction Re quire me nts. ECBs and T RMs shall be installed and maintained according to
 the manufacturer's recommendations.
 806.90.4 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of ECBs and T RMs will be made to the nearest square
 yard of surface area covered.
 806.90.5 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of ECBs and T RMs will be paid for at the contract
 unit price for each of the pay items included in the contract. If ECBs and T RMs are used in lieu of other
 erosion control measures, payment will be made at the contract unit price for the pay items in the contract
 for the respective items that the blanket replaces.
 SECTIO N 806.100 TEMPO RARY STREAM CRO SSING.
 806.100.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of constructing a temporary stream crossing to facilitate
 the movement of equipment across a stream.
 806.100.2 Construction Re quire me nts. T he contractor shall be responsible for the design, installation,
 maintenance and removal of the temporary stream crossing and any structures installed for the
 construction of the temporary stream crossing. Appropriate measures shall be taken to maintain near
 normal downstream flows and to minimize flooding upstream. T he temporary stream crossing shall be
 constructed to permit the free movement of the stream’s aquatic life. Fill material, if allowed by the Corps
 of Engineer permit, shall be clean rock of sufficient size to withstand normal stream flows.
 806.100.2.1 Prior to construction of the temporary stream crossing, all information shall be submitted to
 the engineer as needed for the issuance or modification of the Corps of Engineer permit. T he contractor
 shall not begin construction on any temporary stream crossing without written permission from the
 engineer.
 806.100.2.2 All approaches to the temporary stream crossing shall be maintained such that all storm water
 
 480
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 runoff is diverted to retention devices.
 806.100.2.3 When the temporary stream crossing is no longer needed, the crossing shall be removed as
 soon as possible and the area shall be restored to pre-project conditions or to the satisfaction of the
 engineer.
 806.100.3 Basis of Payme nt. No direct payment will be made for the design, installation, maintenance or
 removal of temporary stream crossings. T he contractor shall be responsible for all costs, including damage
 and penalties.
 SECTIO N 806.110 SEDIMENT REMO VAL.
 806.110.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of removing and disposing of sediment from sediment
 control devices, such as ditch and inlet checks, sediment basins, sediment traps, silt fence, and other devices
 that accumulate sediment.
 806.110.2 Construction Re quire me nts. T he contractor shall monitor sediment levels in all sediment
 control devices and remove sediment prior to the level reaching approximately one-half the design heights
 for checks and fences, and one-half the storage capacities for basins and traps. T he engineer may require
 sediment removal from devices prior to levels reaching the specified limits.
 806.110.2.1 T he contractor shall dispose of the sediment in a location that does not allow the sediment to
 erode back into the sediment devices or to pollute streams or other bodies of water.
 806.110.3 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Measurement of sediment removal will be made to the nearest
 tenth of a cubic yard.
 806.110.3.1 No measurement will be made for sediment removal that accumulates due to the contractor's
 failure to complete erosion control measures in accordance with the SWPPP or as directed by the engineer.
 T he engineer shall determine the volume of sediment that will be excluded from payment due to a lack of
 required erosion control measures.
 806.110.3.2 No measurement will be made for removing any remaining sediment during final removal of
 the sediment control devices.
 806.110.4 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantity of sediment removal will be paid for at the contract
 unit price.
 
 481
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 808
 PLANTING TREES, SHRUBS AND
 O THER PLANTS
 808.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and planting material in the locations shown on
 the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 808.2 Mate rial.
 808.2.1 Plants.
 808.2.1.1 T rees, shrubs and other plants shall be nursery stock and shall be true to type and name in
 accordance with the current edition of Standardized Plant Names published by the American Joint
 Committee on Horticultural Nomenclature. T he plants shall have well developed branch systems and
 vigorous healthy root systems. All stock shall be well formed and the trunks of trees shall be uniform. T he
 plants shall be free from insects, disease and defects such as knots, sun-scald, injuries, serious abrasions of
 the bark or objectionable disfigurements. T hin, weak plants will not be accepted. All nursery stock shall
 qualify under the AmericanHort Horticultural Standards of the current American Standard for Nursery
 Stock, ANSI Z60.1. Substitution of plant stock or other material will not be permitted except with
 approval from the engineer.
 808.2.1.2 All measurements for height, spread, branching, caliber and root spread or ball size shall be as
 specified in the current AmericanHort American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1. Acceptance of
 plant material will be made only at the planting site following the completion of the planting work, except
 that acceptance for height, spread and number of branches will be made before pruning the plant. Each
 shipment shall be accompanied by an invoice showing sizes and varieties of material and ANSI Z60.1
 certification.
 808.2.1.3 All plant stock shall be certified free of insects and disease by the Missouri Department of
 Agriculture.
 808.2.1.4 All bare root stock shall be dug and packed with care to avoid injury to or removal of roots. Each
 variety shall be packed in separate bundles. Each bundle shall be clearly labeled. Roots shall be protected
 with wet straw, moss or other material such that the plants arrive with roots in a moist and healthy
 condition.
 808.2.1.5 Plants specified by ball diameter shall be balled and wrapped and shall be lifted from the ground in
 such a manner as to retain as many roots as possible. Such plants shall be dug and transported such as to
 provide and retain a firm ball of the original soil. T he ball shall be wrapped with burlap or other approved
 material and securely tied to keep the ball firm and intact. Balls shall be adequately protected from rain or
 sudden changes in weather. T rees or other plants will not be accepted if the balls of earth are loosened or
 broken.
 808.2.1.6 Plants specified as container-grown shall have grown in that container sufficiently long for new
 fibrous roots to have developed such that the root mass will retain its shape and hold together when
 removed from the container, however, the root mass shall not have grown in the container long enough to
 have become pot bound. T he container shall be sufficiently rigid to hold the ball shape protecting the root
 mass during shipping. T he containers of all container grown plants shall be removed just prior to planting.
 808.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 808.3.1 Planting Date s. Planting shall be performed during either the fall phase or the spring phase or
 both, as specified in the contract. T he beginning dates specified in the contract for the respective phases
 will be the date to begin work days for the planting in that phase.
 808.4 Care and Re place me nt.
 808.4.1 T he contractor shall be responsible for the proper care of all plants until final inspection and
 acceptance of the plants has been made by the engineer.
 
 482
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 808.4.2 Any plant that, in the judgment of the engineer, is not in a healthy growing condition at the time
 of final plant inspection shall be replaced by the contractor, at the contractor ’s expense, in accordance
 with the original specifications, except that additional peat moss will not be required for the backfill
 material. No maintenance will be required for those plants replaced under this replacement specification.
 808.4.3 Final Plant Inspe ction. T he final inspection of plants will be made as soon as practical after
 August 15. Plants not accepted at the time of final plant inspection will be marked and shall be replaced in
 the fall in accordance with the dates specified in the contract. T he contractor will be relieved of all further
 responsibility for plants that are accepted at the time of final plant inspection.
 808.5 Me thod of Payme nt. From the total amount of work items and material allowances of each
 biweekly estimate, there will be deducted 25 percent to be retained until final acceptance.
 808.6 Basis of Payme nt. T he accepted quantities of plants, complete in place, will be paid for at the
 contract unit price for each plant of the type, species and size required by the contract. No direct payment
 will be made for incidental items such as supporting posts, mulch, peat moss, edging and water necessary for
 this work.
 
 483
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 901
 HIGHWAY LIGHTING
 901.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing lighting equipment and material as
 shown on the plans. All work shall meet NEC, NESC and NEMA standards. Existing lighting shall be
 maintained in effective operation by the contractor except for shutdowns with approval from the engineer
 for alterations or final removal.
 901.2 Te mporary Lighting.
 901.2.1 Temporary lighting shall consist of furnishing, installing and maintaining wood poles, luminaires,
 bracket arms, power cable, connection to a power source, mounting hardware and all other material
 necessary to provide the temporary installation. Any Commission furnished items shall be installed by the
 contractor. Temporary lighting specified as part of a temporary signal installation shall be installed on the
 signal poles unless otherwise shown on the plans.
 901.2.2 Luminaires shall be 150-watt high pressure sodium with a Type III medium distribution, semi-cutoff
 light distribution. Luminaires shall be mounted 30 feet above the pavement unless otherwise shown on the
 plans. Bracket arms shall be oriented at right angles to traffic flow unless otherwise shown on the plans.
 Photoelectric controls shall be provided and may be installed in the luminaires or in a separate control box
 at the option of the contractor, unless otherwise shown on the plans. Any existing lighting shall not be
 taken out of operation until the temporary lighting is ready for operation and with approval from the
 engineer. All temporary lighting equipment shall be removed by the contractor after the new installation is
 in operation or as directed by the engineer. Contractor furnished equipment that will remain the property
 of the contractor may be new or used stock. Contractor furnished equipment that will become the property
 of the Commission shall be of new stock and shall meet all applicable specifications. Commission owned
 equipment will remain the property of the Commission and shall be disposed of as shown on the plans or as
 directed by the engineer.
 901.2.3 T he contractor shall pay all electrical costs incurred by operation of the temporary lighting until
 the lighting is removed or until the lighting is accepted for maintenance. For temporary lighting
 installations where there is not an existing power supply, the contractor shall make any necessary
 arrangements for providing power to the temporary lighting. Portable generators may be used to provide
 power to temporary lighting, but any failure of the lighting system due to generator failure will be
 considered a malfunction as specified in Sec 901.14. No direct payment will be made for power costs. All
 wire and cable for temporary lighting shall be suspended overhead with proper clearance or buried as shown
 on the plans.
 901.2.4 Temporary lighting shall be installed to meet the construction schedule. T he contractor maintain
 the lighting in proper operating condition in accordance with Sec 901.14. Any damage to the lighting
 installation shall be repaired by the contractor at the contractor's expense.
 901.3 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Concrete
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete
 Wood P oles for P ower Supplies and
 Temporary Installation
 Electrical Conduit
 Electrical Conductors
 P ull and Junction Boxes
 High-Strength Bolts, Nuts and Washers
 Low-Carbon Steel Bolts, Nuts and Washers
 Galvanized Coating of Steel Lighting P oles
 and Appurtenances
 Lighting Equipment
 High-Strength Anchor Bolts
 Structural Low Alloy Steel for Base P lates
 
 Section/Specif ication
 501
 1036
 1050
 1060
 1061
 1062
 1080
 1080
 1080
 1091
 ASTM F 1554
 AASHTO M 270, Grade 50
 
 484
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 Structural Low Alloy Steel for Base P lates
 Stainless Steel Bolts, Screws and Washers
 Stainless Steel Nuts
 Circular Steel P ile Foundation
 Steel H-P ile Foundation
 
 Screw Anchor Foundation
 Shaft
 Helix
 Helix Core
 
 Connector P lates and Steel Closure P lates
 for Circular P ipes and Connector P lates for
 H-P ile and Screw Anchor Foundations
 
 (ASTM A 709, Grade 50)
 ASTM A 193, Grades B5, B6,
 B7 or B16
 ASTM A 194
 ASTM A 252, Grade 2 or
 ASTM A 500, Grade B/C
 ASTM A 709, Grade 36
 ASTM A 252, Grade 2 or
 ASTM A 500, Grade B/C
 ASTM A 575, Grade M 1010 or
 AASHTO M 270, Grade 36
 (ASTM A 709, Grade 36)
 ASTM A 575, Grade M 1023 or
 AASHTO M 270, Grade 36
 (ASTM A 709, Grade 36)
 AASHTO M 270, Grade 36
 (ASTM A 709, Grade 36)
 
 901.3.1 Bolts, nuts and washers specified to be galvanized shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHT O
 M 232 (AST M A 153), Class C, or mechanically galvanized in accordance with AASHT O M 298 (AST M B
 695) Class 55. Except for anchor bolts, galvanizing thickness shall not exceed 6 mils. For anchor bolts and
 nuts and for high strength bolts and nuts, except those in accordance with AST M A325, the contractor
 shall furnish to the engineer a test report certified to be the last completed set of mechanical tests for each
 size in each shipment. For high strength bolts and nuts in accordance with AST M A325, the contractor
 shall furnish to the engineer a copy of the manufacturer's inspection test report for each production lot or
 shipping lot furnished and shall certify the bolts furnished are in accordance with the specifications. Bolts
 and nuts in accordance with AST M A 307 shall be accompanied by a manufacturer's statement that the
 bolts and nuts were manufactured in accordance with AST M A 307.
 901.3.2 Concrete shall be of the class specified in the contract. Material, proportioning, mixing, slump and
 transporting of concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501 for the specific class specified.
 901.3.3 Equipment and material shall be of new stock unless the contract provides for relocation of
 existing units or use of units furnished by others. New equipment and material shall be in accordance with
 ICEA, NEMA, NESC, NFPA and the regulations of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, as applicable,
 and shall meet the approval from the engineer.
 901.4 Equipme nt List. An approved list of lighting equipment is required in accordance with Sec 902.4.5
 prior to installation.
 901.5 Lighting Pole s. T he contractor shall furnish the length of pole and bracket rise shown on the
 plans. T he cable entrance at the bracket arm shall be a field drilled 1 1/4-inch hole. T he edges of the hole
 in steel poles shall be deburred and coated with commercially available inorganic zinc-rich paint. All cable
 entrance holes shall be fitted with a suitable rubber grommet. A grounding conductor shall provide grounding
 continuity for all metallic, noncurrent carrying poles in one circuit. T he grounding conductor shall be
 securely connected to the grounding electrode on the supply side at the main disconnect switch.
 901.6 Navigation Lighting. T he navigation lighting system shall consist of furnishing and installing all
 cable, conduit, controllers, lanterns, lamps, supports and all other equipment as shown on the plans. Bridge
 navigation lights shall be installed in accordance with T itle 33 CFR, Part 118, the manufacturer ’s
 recommendations and the following:
 901.6.1 Lanterns mounted in an inverted position shall have a hole in the tip of the lens to prevent water
 from collecting in the lantern. Lamps shall be properly installed and oriented for the applications.
 901.6.2 As part of the system, a photoelectric cell shall be provided in accordance with Sec 1091. T he
 photoelectric cell shall be mounted on the control station such that all lanterns within the system operate
 simultaneously and shall illuminate only during hours of darkness or low visibility.
 901.6.3 Equipment used for general illumination of the bridge shall be designed such that the light
 
 485
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 navigation.
 901.6.4 T he contractor shall maintain navigational lighting on bridges during all construction and provide
 permanent navigation lighting on the bridge when the bridge spans the river and falsework has been
 removed. Existing navigation lighting shall remain in use or temporary navigation lighting installed during
 the construction period as required. Upon the notice to proceed, the contractor shall maintain and operate
 the navigation lights until the permanent navigation lights are in operation and the test period completed.
 Temporary lights and reflectors shall be of the same color and characteristic and have a range of visibility
 equal to that prescribed for permanent navigation lights.
 901.6.5 T he contractor shall notify the engineer in writing the date the navigation lighting system will be
 ready for testing. With approval from the engineer, the contractor shall place the navigation lighting
 system in operation for a 15 consecutive day test period. T he test period shall not be started until all
 lanterns in the system are ready to be tested. T he system shall be tested as a unit. Any failure or
 malfunction of equipment during the test period shall be corrected at the contractor's expense and the
 navigation lighting system tested for an additional 15 consecutive day period. T his procedure shall be
 repeated until the navigation lighting system has operated to the engineer's satisfaction for 15 consecutive
 days.
 901.6.6 When the test period is initiated and until completed, the contractor shall provide a service
 technician in accordance with Sec 901.14.
 901.6.7 Before acceptance of the work, the contractor shall furnish the engineer with maintenance
 information in accordance with Sec 901.16 of all navigation lighting equipment including, but not limited
 to, lanterns, lamps and auxiliary equipment.
 901.7 Contactors. At the option of the contractor, mercury load relays may be used in lieu of contactors.
 901.8 Powe r Supply Asse mbly. T he power supply assembly shall consist of all equipment mounted on a
 service pole or pedestal as shown on the plans. T he configuration and installation of the equipment
 mounted on the assembly shall meet the safety requirements and approval of the utility company or
 municipality furnishing power for operation. All contractor provided meter boxes and disconnect boxes
 shall be constructed of aluminum or stainless steel. All hinges, catches and other hardware shall be nonferrous metal or stainless steel.
 901.8.1 Service poles shall consist of wood poles and crossarms, insulators, necessary pole line hardware,
 conduit, ground rods, guy wires and anchors and all other accessories and appurtenances mounted on the
 pole, except those items furnished by the utility company or municipality, or specified separately in the
 contract.
 901.8.2 Pedestals shall consist of two W6 x 9 or two W6 x 15 galvanized steel posts, a concrete footing
 and all other accessories and appurtenances mounted on the post, except those items furnished by the
 utility company or municipality, or specified separately in the contract.
 901.8.3 Main disconnect switches shall be separately housed on the power supply. T he disconnect cabinet
 shall contain a Type A or Type B circuit breaker in accordance with Sec 1091, of the rating shown on the
 plans.
 901.8.4 Circuit breaker cabinets and meters shall not be installed on the street or walk side of the pole or
 pedestal.
 901.8.5 Meter sockets provided by the contractor shall be UL approved and shall be in accordance with the
 requirements of the utility company or municipality providing power.
 901.9 Rigid Conduit Syste m. Conduit shall be placed as shown on the plans. Rigid conduit shall be
 installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of Sec 902.
 901.10 Tre nching and Backfilling.
 
 486
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 901.10.1 T he depth of trenching and backfilling for conduit and cable-conduit shall be no less than shown
 on the plans. Conduit or cable-conduit shall not be placed in a trench prior to inspection of the trench by
 the engineer. All disturbed areas shall be restored to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 901.10.2 Type I, 24-inch trenching for cable-conduit will be specified if the excavated material would be
 classified as Class A Excavation, as defined in Sec 203 and no material is in evidence that might cause
 mechanical damage to cable-conduit. T he cable-conduit shall be laid on the bottom of the trench and the
 trench backfilled. In lieu of Type I, 24-inch trenching, the cable-conduit may be installed by plowing. T he
 cable-conduit shall be placed at a minimum depth of 18 inches and the soil over the installation shall be
 recompacted to the approximate original in-place density.
 901.10.3 Type II, 24-inch trenching for cable-conduit will be specified if the excavated material would be
 classified as Class A Excavation, as defined in Sec 203 and material is in evidence that might cause
 mechanical damage to cable-conduit. Type II trenching will also include trenching in rock embankment.
 T he cable-conduit shall be embedded in sand as shown on the plans and the trench backfilled.
 901.10.4 Type III, 21-inch trenching for cable-conduit will be specified if material that would be classified
 as other than Class A Excavation, as defined in Sec 203, is encountered. T he cable-conduit shall be
 embedded in sand as shown on the plans and the trench backfilled.
 901.10.5 T renches shall be excavated to the width and depth necessary for conduit installation as shown on
 the plans. All trenches shall be backfilled as soon as practical after the installation of conduit or cableconduit. Cinders, broken concrete and other hard or objectionable material that might cause mechanical
 damage to conduit or cable-conduit shall not be used for backfilling to an elevation 12 inches above the top
 of conduit or cable-conduit. T he bottom of the trench shall be free of such material before the conduit is
 placed. Backfill material shall be deposited in layers not exceeding 6 inches deep and each layer shall be
 compacted to the approximate density of the adjacent material by an approved method before the next
 layer is placed. Red burial tape imprinted with "CAUT ION - BURIED CABLE BELOW" shall be installed
 in all trenches and plowing operations at approximately 1/3 to 1/2 of the depth of the trench. If the trench
 is to be located under a shoulder that is to be stabilized, the trenching, installation of conduit or cableconduit and backfilling the trench shall be completed before the shoulder stabilization construction is
 started. Unless the lighting poles are in place, a coil of cable or cable-conduit of sufficient length to reach
 the proposed handhole shall be buried near each pole location. T he coil shall be covered such that damage
 will not occur.
 901.11 Pull and Junction Boxe s. Pull and junction boxes shall be installed at locations shown on the
 plans in accordance with Sec 902.
 901.12 Pole Foundations and Installation.
 901.12.1 Concrete foundations for ground mounted poles shall be Class B concrete and shall have
 dimensions no less than shown on the plans. Concrete shall be placed, finished and cured in accordance with
 the applicable provisions of Sec 703. Forms will not be required for concrete placed below the finished
 ground line. All conduit and anchor bolts shall be rigidly installed before the concrete is placed. All portions
 of the anchor bolts extending above the foundation shall be threaded. Anchor bolts shall align with bolt
 holes on the transformer base or base plate. Installation of poles on integral concrete median and
 foundations shall be as shown on the plans. T he concrete foundation shall be flush with the finished grade
 or surface and shall not extend above the finished grade on slopes.
 901.12.2 Steel circular and H-pile foundations for ground mounted poles shall be installed in a hole of the
 approximate dimensions shown on the plans and secured by tamped, wet limestone screenings. Steel pile
 foundations with poles attached may be installed as a unit. T he steel connector plate shall be at the proper
 elevation and properly oriented to receive the transformer base. T he connector plate shall be flush with
 the finished grade or surface and shall not extend above the finished grade on slopes.
 901.12.3 T he torque for screw anchor foundations shall not exceed the maximum torque rating shown on
 the fabricator's shop drawings. T he steel connector plate shall be at the proper elevation and properly
 oriented to receive the transformer base. T he connector plate shall be flush with the finished grade or
 
 487
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 901.12.4 Leveling and raking of poles on structures may be accomplished by the use of shims, not to
 exceed a total of 1/2 inch on bolts.
 901.12.5 If poles are to be placed on existing foundations or structures with anchor bolts in place, the
 contractor shall furnish poles with a base plate to fit the anchor bolt spacing.
 901.13 Luminaire s. Luminaires for roadway lighting shall be adjusted to give proper illumination on the
 roadway. Luminaires for underpass lighting shall be interconnected with one-inch minimum rigid conduit in
 accordance with Sec 902 unless other provisions are incorporated into the structure. T he contractor shall
 place the standard identification marker, which is included with the lamp, in accordance with the latest
 version of ANSI C136.15.
 901.14 Circuits. Circuits shall be properly labeled in all handholes, pull boxes and junction boxes by means
 of round aluminum identification tags with a minimum thickness of 0.1 mil attached to the cables with
 copper wire. Prior to energizing any circuit, the insulation resistance to ground of each completed lighting
 circuit shall be tested and shall be no less than 10 megaohms. Any circuit less than 10 megaohms to ground
 will be rejected. T he contractor shall provide a suitable 500-volt direct current, zero to 100-megaohm
 range resistance measuring device for making the resistance test. T he circuit test shall be performed by the
 contractor in the presence of and documented by the engineer.
 901.14.1 After the circuits have been tested and found acceptable, the contractor shall, upon approval
 from the engineer, energize the lighting circuits for a 15 consecutive day test period. All circuits being
 energized from a control station shall be tested as a system. T he entire system shall be tested as a unit. Any
 malfunction on any circuit shall be corrected and the system tested for an additional 15 consecutive day
 period. T his procedure shall be repeated until the lighting system has operated to the engineer's satisfaction
 for 15 consecutive days.
 901.14.2 When the test period is initiated and until completed, or following the turn-on of temporary
 lighting, the contractor shall provide at least one service technician to remain in the area and be available
 for day, night and weekend trouble calls. T he contractor shall furnish the name, address and telephone
 number where each designated technician can be reached at all times. If the lighting system malfunctions
 and a designated technician cannot be reached or cannot arrive at the location in a reasonable time in the
 judgment of the engineer, the engineer may exercise the option to direct MoDOT personnel or a third
 party to correct the malfunction. If this option is invoked, the entire cost of the work performed by
 MoDOT personnel or the third party will be computed in accordance with Sec 108.9 and deducted from
 monies due the contractor. Whether or not the engineer elects to correct the malfunction, nothing in this
 specification shall be construed or interpreted to relieve the contractor of any liability for personal injury
 or property damage resulting either directly or indirectly from a malfunction during the test period. T he
 contractor and surety shall indemnify and save harmless the State, the Commission, and the Commission’s
 agents, employees and assigns for any legal liability for such a malfunction.
 901.15 Installation of Cable and Cable -Conduit.
 901.15.1 Cable-conduit shall be installed in a trench of the type specified. Cable-conduit runs shall be
 continuous without splice between the control panel, handholes, pull boxes, poles and junction boxes. All
 conduit ends shall be sealed around the cables with a readily workable, soft, sealing compound. T he
 compound shall be workable at 30 F and shall not melt or run at temperatures up to 175 F. Cable-conduit
 shall be allowed to "snake" in the trench, but there shall be no sharp bends and if two or more cableconduits are placed in a common trench, the cable-conduit shall not cross each other. For concrete
 foundations, rigid conduit of sufficient size to facilitate the pulling of cable-conduit shall be cast in the
 foundation as shown on the plans. T he cable-conduit shall be installed through the rigid conduit. Cableconduit shall extend a minimum of 18 inches above the top of the foundation. T he conduit of the cableconduit shall then be cut off circumferentially approximately 6 inches above the base plate in the
 transformer base or pole, leaving the cables exposed for connection. Where placed under paved roadways,
 other paved areas and any type of shoulder, the cable-conduit shall be installed in rigid conduit. Standard
 commercial duct fittings shall be used to connect conduit of cable-conduit to rigid conduit as shown on the
 plans and the cables shall continue without splice through the conduit to the nearest pole base. T he ground
 wire shall be attached to a ground lug.
 
 488
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 wire shall be attached to a ground lug.
 901.15.2 Splices shall be made only in pull boxes, junction boxes and pole bases. More than four cables
 shall not be spliced in above ground tee splices in pole bases and junction boxes immediately adjacent to
 wall mounted brackets or underpass luminaires. More than three pairs of power cables shall not be spliced at
 any other location. Straight or line splices shall only be made in pole bases and junction boxes immediately
 adjacent to underpass luminaires or wall-mounted brackets unless otherwise approved by the engineer. For
 underpass lighting or wall-mounted brackets, the cables shall continue unspliced to the nearest junction box
 or luminaire housing if junction boxes are not shown on the plans. Tee splices shall only be made at the
 locations shown on the plans.
 901.15.2.1 Cables shall be continuous and unspliced to the first light pole. Line splicing in all types of
 poles, above ground junction boxes and luminaire housings shall be accomplished with a pre-molded fused
 connector assembly. Line splicing in all breakaway pole bases shall be accomplished with a pre-molded fused
 slip connector assembly as shown on the plans. After a conductor splice is made, the conductor splices shall
 be insulated with a protective rubber boot designed for the pre-molded connector. All above ground tee
 splices shall be accomplished with a splice block with a molded plastic insulating cover. Any required taping
 shall be accomplished with splice tape. All sharp points and edges of the connector shall be padded and all
 voids filled with extra wraps of plastic tape. Tape shall not be stretched excessively or in such a manner as
 to cause creeping.
 901.15.2.2 Underground cable splices, if specified, shall be made in a pull box. Straight or line splices shall
 be made with copper-clad pressed sleeves or an approved equivalent. Tee splices shall be made with a
 pressed sleeve, split or unsplit type, or an approved equivalent. All splices shall be protected with a resin
 splice kit installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
 901.15.3 Cable shall be pulled with a minimum of dragging on the ground or pavement. Frame mounted
 pulleys or other suitable devices shall be used for pulling cables out of conduits into pull boxes. Lubricants
 may be used to facilitate pulling cable. Slack in each cable shall be provided by coiling 6 feet of cable in
 each pull box and 3 feet of cable in each junction box. Where cable-conduit enters a pull box, conduit shall
 be cut away from cables in accordance with Sec 902.
 901.16 Mainte nance Information. Before acceptance of the work, the contractor shall furnish the
 engineer four copies of the manufacturers' written instructions for maintenance and operation of all
 lighting equipment and wiring diagrams of the installation or system. At a minimum, the manufacturer's
 instructions shall include documented, organized instructions, wiring and component layout diagrams, and
 parts lists with part numbers.
 901.17 Final Cle an Up. Final clean up of right of way shall be in accordance with Sec 104.
 901.18 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 901.18.1 Measurement of trenching, including backfilling, except for rigid conduit, will be made to the
 nearest linear foot along the centerline of the trench. No measurement of trenching will be made for rigid
 conduit.
 901.18.2 Measurement of rigid conduit will be made to the nearest linear foot as shown on the plans.
 Contract quantities will be used in final payment except as hereinafter provided.
 901.18.3 Measurement of power cable, pole and bracket cable, multi-conductor cable, wire and cableconduit will be made to the nearest 10 linear feet as shown on the plans. Contract quantities will be used in
 final payment except as hereinafter provided.
 901.18.4 Measurement of luminaires and bracket arms, including all required material and hardware, will be
 made per each as separate items.
 901.18.5 Measurement of Type AT poles, including the transformer base and all specified hardware, will be
 made per each. Foundations for Type AT poles, including all specified material, will be made per each.
 
 489
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 safety barrier curb blisters will not be measured for payment with the Type B pole.
 901.18.7 Measurement of Type MB poles, complete in place, will be made per each as a single item,
 including the footing and the integral portion of median barrier. No direct payment will be made for the
 footing or integral portion of median barrier for Type MB poles.
 901.18.8 Measurement of control stations, including all specified equipment, will be made per each.
 901.18.9 Measurement of power supply assemblies, including all specified equipment and cable, will be made
 per each. T he conduit attached to the power supply pole or pedestal and any necessary attachment
 hardware shall be included with the power supply and no direct payment will be made.
 901.18.10 Measurement of pull boxes, including all specified material, will be made per each.
 901.18.11 For those items on which final payment is based on contract quantities, final measurement will
 not be made except for authorized changes during construction or where appreciable errors are found in the
 contract quantity. T he revision or correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract
 quantity.
 901.18.12 Measurement of temporary lighting installations will be made per lump sum.
 901.18.13 Measurement of navigation lighting systems will be made per lump sum.
 901.18.14 Measurement of substituted items in accordance with Sec 901.15 will be made based on metric
 dimensions, quantities and contract unit price.
 901.19 Basis of Payme nt.
 901.19.1 Accepted highway lighting will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items
 included in the contract.
 901.19.2 If the contract does not contain a contract unit price for Type III T renching, and material that
 would be classified as other than Class A Excavation, as defined in Sec 203, is encountered on construction,
 payment for such trenching will be paid for at the contract unit price of three times the contract unit price
 for Type II T renching per linear foot.
 901.19.3 Accepted navigation lighting systems, complete in place, will be paid for at the contract unit
 price. Payment will be considered full compensation for all labor, material and equipment to perform the
 described work, including, but not limited to, furnishing and installing all cable, conduit, controllers, light
 fixtures, lamps, and supports.
 901.19.4 No direct payment will be made for transformer bases.
 
 490
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 902
 TRAFFIC SIGNALS
 902.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing traffic signal equipment and
 material as shown on the plans. All work shall be in accordance with NEC, NESC and NEMA standards.
 902.2 Ge ne ral. Existing traffic signals shall be maintained in effective operation by the contractor,
 except for shutdowns approved by the engineer for alterations or final removal. After any modifications
 have been made or after work is begun on an existing signal installation, the contractor shall maintain the
 signals in accordance with Sec 902.21. T he contractor shall notify local traffic control agencies at least
 two days, excluding weekends and state holidays, prior to operational shutdown of any traffic signal. T he
 contractor shall notify the engineer at least two days, excluding weekends and state holidays, prior to
 disconnecting existing vehicle or pedestrian detection. All traffic signal equipment that the contractor uses
 or installs on the project, whether furnished by the Commission or the contractor, either on a temporary
 or permanent basis, shall, upon installation or upon initial use by the contractor, be operated and
 maintained by the contractor until the project is complete and accepted. Any malfunction of an existing
 signal installation resulting from the contractor ’s operation, regardless of the nature of the work, shall be
 corrected at the contractor's expense in accordance with Sec 902.21. Signal timing will be provided to the
 contractor by the engineer. Programming of the controller will be the responsibility of the contractor,
 except when waived by the engineer. If any adjustments are required to the operation of an existing signal
 installation due to the contractor's operation, the contractor shall provide a minimum of two working days
 notice to the engineer.
 902.3 Te mporary Traffic Signals. Installation of temporary traffic signals shall consist of furnishing and
 installing poles for span wire signals, span and tether wires, control and power cable, power supply and
 connection to a power source, the controller, signal heads, detectors, luminaires, and all mounting hardware,
 unless specified otherwise. Maintenance of the installation and all other equipment and material necessary
 to provide the temporary installation will be the responsibility of the contractor. If the temporary traffic
 signal installation is not shown on the plans, the contractor shall submit a plan to the engineer for
 approval prior to the installation of temporary signals. Any existing or Commission furnished signal
 equipment to be used in the temporary signal shall be shown on the temporary signal plan. Temporary
 signals shall have the signal heads covered until placed in operation. A minimum of two signal faces, in
 accordance with Sec 1092, shall be oriented toward each street approach positioned a minimum of 8 feet
 apart, center to center, and a minimum of 16 feet above the surface of the traveled way to the bottom of
 the backplate. Existing signals shall not be taken out of operation until the temporary signals are ready for
 operation and approved by the engineer. A flashing operation shall be used during shutdown of the
 temporary signals.
 902.3.1 All temporary signal equipment shall be removed by the contractor after the new installation is in
 operation, or as directed by the engineer. Contractor furnished equipment that will become the property of
 the Commission shall be of new stock and shall meet all applicable specifications. Contractor furnished
 equipment that will remain the property of the contractor may be new or used. Commission owned
 equipment will remain the property of the Commission, unless specified otherwise, and shall be disposed of
 as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 902.3.2 T he contractor shall pay all electrical costs incurred by operation of the temporary signals and
 new signal systems until the signals are accepted for maintenance. For temporary signal installations where
 an existing signal power supply is not available, the contractor shall make any necessary arrangements to
 provide power to the temporary signals. Portable generators shall not be used to provide power to
 temporary signals. No direct payment will be made for power costs. All wire and cable for temporary
 signals shall be suspended overhead with proper clearance or buried a minimum of 18 inches underground.
 902.3.3 Temporary signal installations shall be installed to meet the construction schedule. T he contractor
 shall provide a minimum of two working days notice to the engineer prior to the signal turn-on. T he
 contractor shall maintain the signals in proper operating condition, in accordance with Sec 902.21. Any
 damage to the traffic signal installation from any cause whatsoever shall be repaired by the contractor at
 the contractor's expense.
 902.4 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 
 491
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 as follows:
 Item
 Concrete
 Galvanized Coating of Traffic Signal P osts and
 Appurtenances
 High-Strength Bolts, Nuts and Washers
 Low-Carbon Steel Bolts, Nuts and Washers
 Structural Low Alloy Steel
 Luminaires
 Signs
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete
 Wood P oles for P ower Supplies and Temporary
 Installations
 Electrical Conduit
 Electrical Conductors
 P ull and Junction Boxes
 Fiber Optic Interconnect
 Signal Equipment
 High-Strength Anchor Bolts
 Nuts for Anchor Bolts
 Stainless Steel Bolts, Screws and Washers
 Stainless Steel Nuts
 
 Section/Specif ication
 501
 1080
 712
 712
 712
 901
 903
 1036
 1050
 1060
 1061
 1062
 1092
 1092
 ASTM F 1554
 ASTM A 563, Grade C, D or DH
 or ASTM A 194, Grade 2 or 2H
 ASTM A 193, Grades B5, B6,
 B7 or B16
 ASTM A 194
 
 902.4.1 Bolts, nuts and washers, except stainless steel, shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHT O M
 232 (AST M A 153), Class C or mechanically galvanized in accordance with AASHT O M 298 (AST M B
 695), Class 55. Except for anchor bolts, galvanizing thickness shall not exceed 6 mils. Anchor bolts shall
 have a minimum yield strength of 55,000 psi and a minimum elongation of 14 percent in 2 inches or 12
 percent in 8 inches. For anchor bolts and nuts, and for high strength bolts and nuts, except those in
 accordance with AST M A325, the contractor shall furnish to the engineer a test report certified to be the
 last completed set of mechanical tests for each size in each shipment. For high strength bolts and nuts in
 accordance with AST M A325, the contractor shall furnish a copy of the manufacturer's inspection test
 report for each production lot or shipping lot furnished to the engineer and shall certify the bolts furnished
 are in accordance with the requirements specified. Bolts and nuts specified to meet AST M A 307 shall be
 accompanied by a manufacturer's statement that the bolts and nuts were manufactured in accordance with
 AST M A 307.
 902.4.2 Concre te . Concrete shall be of the class specified in the contract. Material, proportioning,
 mixing, slump and transporting of concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501 for the specific class
 specified. Concrete shall be placed, finished and cured in accordance with Sec 703.
 902.4.3 Equipment and material shall be of new stock unless the contract provides for relocation of
 existing units or use of units furnished by others. New equipment and material shall be the product of
 reputable manufacturers, shall be in accordance with Caltrans 170 Specifications, ICEA, IMSA, IT E,
 MUT CD, NEMA, RET MA, NEC and the regulations of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, as
 applicable, and shall meet the approval of the engineer.
 902.4.4 T he configuration and installation of equipment mounted on substation and service poles shall be
 in accordance with the requirements of the utility company or municipality furnishing electrical power.
 902.4.5 T he Commission will include Form D-15 in the Electronic Deliverables listing the lighting and
 signal equipment to be installed. T he contractor shall complete the list by writing in the name of the
 equipment manufacturer and catalog number of each item listed. A list of preapproved equipment and
 material is available on the MoDOT web site. Only items on the latest revision of the preapproved list will
 be accepted for use. A completed list shall be submitted electronically to the engineer and shall be approved
 in writing before items are installed. Approval of the items on the list will not relieve the contractor of
 responsibility for satisfactory performance of the installation.
 
 492
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 902.5 Signal He ads. Each signal head of one or more signal faces shall be conventional or, if designated
 on the plans, optically limiting. T he contractor may furnish aluminum or polycarbonate signal heads. T he
 position of signal indications shall be as specified in the contract. Each traffic signal face shall consist of a
 number of identical signal section housings rigidly fastened together. Signal heads shall not be painted in the
 field.
 902.5.1 Housing, Door and Visor. If existing housings are to be combined with new housings, the new
 housings shall be adaptable to the existing.
 902.5.2 Louve rs. Louvers, if specified in the contract, shall be installed in a tunnel visor with the fins or
 baffles in a vertical position.
 902.5.3 Hardware . Fittings shall be secured to the signal housing by a closed threaded nipple and hex nut.
 Cast nipples shall not be used.
 902.5.4 Backplate s. Stainless steel bolts, nuts and flat washers shall be used to fasten the backplate to the
 head. Bolt lengths shall be selected to not interfere with maintenance operations. Any connection to the
 top of any signal section shall be watertight.
 902.5.5 O ptically Limiting Signal He ads. T he signal section shall be a self-contained assembly
 consisting of an optical unit, section housing, housing door, terminal block and necessary gaskets to ensure
 a weatherproof unit. T he optically limiting signal head shall be capable of separate mounting or inclusion in
 a signal face containing two or more signal sections. If existing housings are to be combined with new
 housings, the new housings shall be adaptable to the existing. Each signal section shall be installed and
 directed and the optical limiter masked in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations to provide
 indications in accordance with the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 902.5.6 Painting and Finishing. All metal parts reused for modification of a signal installation shall be
 painted in accordance with the requirements for new material. If the painted surface of any equipment is
 damaged, the surface shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 902.6 Signs. Signs for signal installations, including all material required for sign mounting, shall be
 furnished by the contractor. Signs shall be manufactured in accordance with Sec 903, and mounted as shown
 on the plans.
 902.7 Posts and Mast Arms. Prior to installation, manufacturer and drawing numbers shall be submitted
 by the contractor to the engineer for approval in writing. Four copies of applicable pre-approved drawings
 shall be supplied with the poles.
 902.8 Span Wire Asse mblie s. Span wire assemblies shall include 3/8-inch steel messenger wire, 1/4-inch
 tether wire, guy wire, all bolts, nuts, washers, clamps, cable straps, and other appurtenances shown on the
 plans or necessary for proper installation. Messenger wire shall be Class A galvanized, high-strength grade,
 seven-wire strand in accordance with AST M A 475. Tether wire shall be seven-wire high-strength steel
 cable. Splicing of messenger and tether wires will not be permitted. Clamps shall be fabricated from low
 alloy steel. Steel posts for span wire assemblies shall have wire inlets and cable guides with 1-1/2 inch
 raintight insulator bushings and other features specified in the contract, and shall be in accordance with Sec
 1092. Wood poles and steel posts for span wire assemblies shall be as specified in the contract and as shown
 on the plans. Luminaire bracket arms, if specified, will be at the contractor ’s expense. Conduit, junction
 boxes, service entrance caps, attachment hardware or other appurtenances on the wood poles or steel posts
 as shown on the plans will be at the contractor ’s expense.
 902.9 Powe r Supply Asse mbly. T he power supply assembly shall be in accordance with Sec 901.
 902.10 Luminaire Control. If luminaires are specified as part of the signal conduit and wiring system on
 the signal posts or on separate light poles, a lighting control cabinet shall be provided and installed as
 shown on the plans.
 902.11 Traffic Controlle r Asse mblie s.
 
 493
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 902.11.1 Wiring. All wiring shall be insulated, stranded copper wire and shall be neatly bundled and secured
 with plastic cable ties. For double controller cabinets, all wiring for each intersection shall be terminated in
 the same compartment of the cabinet as the signal controller for that intersection. Incoming field circuits
 shall be routed horizontally from the conduit to the back of the cabinet, then vertically to the terminal
 block. All terminals shall be labeled and not be visibly obstructed. All field leads shall be identified by means
 of round aluminum identification tags with a minimum thickness of 0.1 mil attached to the cables with a
 copper wire to correspond with the plans. T he outgoing signal circuits shall be of the same polarity as the
 line side of the power supply, and the common return of the signal circuits shall be of the same polarity as
 the ground side of the power supply. T he power supply shall be provided through three single conductor
 cables. T he ground side of the power supply shall be carried throughout the controller in a continuous
 circuit, and shall be secured to a ground bus bar in an approved manner. All field conductors shall be
 terminated in the controller cabinet.
 902.11.2 Back Pane l Wiring. All wiring on the backside of the controller back panel shall be neatly
 bundled and secured with plastic cable ties. Any multi-conductor cable between the controller or auxiliary
 equipment and the back panel shall be contained in an expandable braided sleeve. All wiring shall be discrete
 insulated wires and shall be soldered directly to lugs on the back of terminal blocks and sockets. Printed
 circuit boards shall not be used.
 902.12 Inte rconne ct Type s. T he interconnect type shall be as shown on the plans.
 902.12.1 Programming. T he contractor shall install the system software in all computers to be used with
 the system as directed by the engineer, and shall program the local intersection controllers and the system
 master with all operating parameters and timing provided by the engineer.
 902.12.2 Te le phone Cable and Conduit. T he telephone connection for the closed loop system will be
 coordinated by the engineer. T he contractor shall contact the engineer a minimum of two weeks prior to
 the installation of the power supply assembly. T he telephone network interface block shall be located on
 the power supply assembly. Two separate one-inch rigid conduits shall be installed for the telephone cable
 and shall be encased in the concrete base of the power supply and the base of the controller cabinet. One
 conduit shall be for the telephone cable from the telephone company pedestal to the power supply
 assembly, and the other conduit shall be from the power supply to the controller cabinet. T renched
 telephone conduit may be installed parallel in the same trench as the conduit containing power cable. If
 telephone company cables cannot be installed at the same time as the telephone conduit, then a nylon pull
 string shall be installed in the conduit. Telephone cables shall not be exposed, except to facilitate
 connection to the telephone interface block. Telephone cables shall not be installed in the same conduit as
 the power cables. Any exposed conduit openings shall be filled with pliable duct sealant. T he contractor
 shall supply the telephone cable between the telephone interface on the power supply and the telephone
 interface in the controller cabinet. T he cable shall be a four-twisted-pair, shielded cable in accordance with
 local telephone company recommendations.
 902.12.3 Close d Loop Inte rconne ct. T his work shall consist of furnishing, installing and testing a
 complete arterial master closed loop system comprised of intersections as shown on the plans. T he system
 shall include all equipment listed or shown on the plans, and shall include any incidental items necessary for
 the satisfactory operation of the system.
 902.12.4 Twiste d Pair Inte rconne ct. T his work shall consist of furnishing, installing and testing a
 complete twisted pair interconnect system comprised of intersections shown on the plans. T he twisted pair
 system shall include all equipment listed or shown on the plans and shall include any incidental items
 necessary for the satisfactory operation of the system.
 902.12.4.1 Twiste d Pair Inte rconne ct Cable . Splices will not be permitted between controllers.
 902.12.4.2 Twiste d Pair Inte rconne ct Installation. Twisted pair interconnect cable and the system shall
 be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and as shown on the plans.
 902.12.5 Wire le ss Te le me try Inte rconne ct Syste m. T his work shall consist of furnishing, installing
 and testing a complete wireless interconnect system comprised of intersections shown on the plans. T he
 wireless interconnect system shall include all equipment listed or shown on the plans and shall include any
 
 494
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 incidental items necessary for the satisfactory operation of the system. Telemetry radios and antennas
 shall be installed and set up in accordance with the plans, these specifications, and the manufacturer ’s
 recommendations for a fully functioning system.
 902.12.5.1 Ante nna Syste m. Antennas shall be positioned to receive maximum signal strength by
 adjusting the antenna direction while monitoring signal strength through the telemetry radio. Antenna
 mounts shall be securely fastened to the poles as shown on the plans. Antenna cable shall be installed inside
 metal poles and conduit as shown on the plans. External cable on poles shall not exceed 3 feet unless
 approved by the engineer. Approved external cable runs exceeding 3 feet shall be secured using
 manufacturer specified hangers at a maximum spacing of 3 feet. Cable terminations shall be made in
 accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations. Connectors shall be installed after cable has been
 pulled into place. Connectors outside of cabinets shall be sealed in accordance with the manufacturer ’s
 recommendations. Any holes made in metal poles shall be deburred and protected with grommets. Drip
 loops shall be provided between the antenna connector and the metal pole entrance or first pole clamp.
 Cable bends shall be in accordance with the manufacturer ’s specified bending radius. Antenna cable shall be
 continuous without splice between the antenna and the antenna surge protector in the controller cabinet.
 902.12.5.2 Grounding. A separate ground rod shall be installed for each pole with an antenna. T he ground
 rod shall be as shown on the plans and shall be installed in a pull box adjacent to the pole, where available.
 Ground wires shall be No. 2 AWG minimum, and shall be securely attached to the ground rod by cadwelding.
 T he ground wire shall be attached to the ground lug in metal poles. For wood pole mounting, the ground
 wire shall be attached directly to the antenna mount and securely fastened to the pole with wire clamps at 3
 feet maximum spacing. Copper compression lugs shall be used to attach the ground wire to ground lugs in
 poles or on antenna mounts.
 902.12.6 Fibe r O ptic Inte rconne ct Syste m. All system equipment shall be installed in accordance with
 the plans, standard specifications and the manufacturer ’s recommendations, and shall result in a fully
 functioning system.
 902.12.6.1 Splice Cabine t. T he splice cabinet will be required only when shown on the plans. T he splice
 cabinet shall be installed adjacent to controller cabinets and shall be a Type 336 cabinet with an Electronic
 Industries Alliance (EIA) 19-inch rack cage and a fiber distribution unit. Splice cabinets shall be installed on
 a separate concrete base as shown on the plans and in accordance with Sec 902.15.
 902.12.6.2 Fibe r O ptic Close d Loop Syste m Compone nts. T he principal components of the fiber
 optic closed loop system, including but not limited to, the local intersection controller(s), the on-street
 system master and the system software, shall be supplied by the contractor and shall be compatible with
 any existing systems.
 902.12.6.2.1 Syste m Maste r Controlle r. T he system master controller shall consist of a fiber-ready
 NEMA or Type 170 controller as shown on the plans, prom module, Type 170 only, and all necessary
 connectors and cables. T he system master shall include a fiber optic data link. T he system master
 controller shall be installed in the local controller cabinet designated on the plans. A separate cabinet will
 not be required.
 902.12.6.2.2 Local Controlle r Asse mbly. T he local controller assembly shall consist of a fiber-ready
 NEMA or Type 170 actuated traffic controller assembly in accordance with Sec 1092 and the plans. T he
 local controller shall include a fiber optic data link.
 902.12.6.3. Fibe r O ptic Inte rconne ct Cable .
 902.12.6.3.1 T he contractor shall provide trained and experienced personnel to supervise the installation
 of the fiber optic cable. Fiber optic cable shall be installed by trained personnel having a minimum of oneyear current installation experience in fiber optic systems. T he contractor shall provide a certification for
 each person installing fiber cable. T he certification shall show the amount of experience, the company or
 companies where experience was obtained and fiber optic training received. Methods of fiber optic
 installation, connections, splicing or other types of work with fiber optic cable shall be approved by the
 engineer before implementation by the contractor.
 
 495
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 902.12.6.3.2 Installation of the fiber optic cable shall also be in accordance with the manufacturer's
 recommendations and practices. If the manufacturer's recommendations or practices appear to conflict
 with this specification, the matter shall be brought to the attention of the engineer for resolution.
 902.12.6.3.3 Fiber optic interconnect cable shall be installed in continuous runs for each system, in
 conduit, pull boxes, splice cabinets or traffic signal controller cabinets. Splices outside of the splice cabinets
 or controller cabinets will not be permitted. Only those fiber tubes to be accessed in splice cabinets,
 controller cabinets and distribution units shall be opened, and only active fibers in that tube or tubes shall be
 cut and spliced. T he manufacturer's recommended procedures for a mid-span access shall be followed.
 Continuous fiber tubes shall be neatly coiled, ensuring that the minimum bend radii are not violated, and
 shall be organized in the fiber distribution unit. T he continuous fibers in the fiber tube(s) that have been
 opened shall be coiled in the appropriate splice tray. T he fibers to be spliced shall be connected by fusion
 splicing methods with a maximum loss of 0.10 decibels, and the splice shall be held and secured in a fusion
 splice organizer on the trays. T he dark fibers in the
 6-fiber cable shall be secured to the splice organizer on the appropriate tray, but will not need to be spliced.
 902.12.6.3.4 T he contractor shall document the location and termination of all fibers in the appropriate
 cabinet. Written documentation shall be left in the cabinet and one copy shall be provided to the engineer.
 902.12.6.3.5 Each end of the interconnect cable shall be sealed with a manufacturer approved end cap or
 pulling grip for use during installation. T hese caps or grips shall be removed only after complete
 installation of the cable and for the cable acceptance testing. End caps shall be installed to remain in place
 where fibers are not to be terminated.
 902.12.6.3.6 T he minimum bending radius and the maximum pulling force of the interconnect cable, as
 defined by the fiber optic cable manufacturer, shall not be exceeded during installation. Pulling of the cable
 shall be hand assisted at each pull box, splice cabinet and controller cabinet. T he cable shall not be kinked,
 crushed or forced around a sharp corner. Pulling equipment may be used, however, all pulling equipment and
 hardware shall maintain the cable's minimum bend radius. Equipment that may contact the cable, such as
 sheaves, bending shoes, capstans and quadrant blocks, shall be designed for use with fiber optics. Where
 pulling equipment such as a winch is used, cable tension shall be continuously monitored. T his may include
 use of a winch with a calibrated maximum tension or a dynamometer or in-line tensiometer.
 902.12.6.3.7 If a lubricant is used, the lubricant shall be of the water based type as approved by the cable
 manufacture and shall be compatible with the pre-lubricated polyvinyl chloride conduit. Prior to use, the
 lubricant type and manufacturer ’s name shall be supplied to the engineer for approval.
 902.12.6.3.8 Sufficient slack shall be left at each splice cabinet and controller cabinet to allow proper
 termination. Each pull box adjacent to a signal cabinet or a splice cabinet shall contain a minimum of 60
 feet of coiled cable. Mid-block pull boxes shall contain a minimum of
 10 feet of coiled cable. Stored cable shall be neatly coiled as per the manufacturer's minimum bending radius
 specification. Where the size of the box precludes the coiling of cable above the minimum bending radius,
 the cable shall pass straight through the pull box.
 902.12.6.3.9 T he conduit containing only fiber optic interconnect cable shall be polyvinyl chloride or high
 density polyethylene conduit in accordance with Sec 1060 and shall be orange in color. A No. 14 AWG
 stranded copper tracer wire or a pull tape with a tracer wire shall be installed in the conduit.
 902.12.6.3.10 At each pull box and controller cabinet, the interconnect cable shall be visibly marked
 "Caution - Fiber Optic Cable" by self-adhesive, weatherproof tags.
 902.12.6.4 Te sting. After the fiber optic cable installation, each fiber in each section shall be tested for
 attenuation and continuity, as a minimum. T he contractor shall provide all personnel, equipment,
 instrumentation and supplies necessary to perform all testing. Any sections that fail the testing shall be
 replaced at the contractor ’s expense, and retested. All testing shall be performed in an accepted manner
 and in accordance with the testing equipment manufacturer's recommendations. All data shall be recorded
 and submitted to the engineer.
 902.12.6.4.1 Atte nuation. T he end-to-end attenuation shall be measured for each link after installation
 
 496
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 by insertion loss testing.
 902.12.6.4.1.1 T he launch cable shall be connected to the light source and the receive cable to the power
 meter. T he two reference cables shall then be connected via a termination hub. A reference power reading
 (P1) shall then be taken and recorded.
 902.12.6.4.1.2 T he system link to be tested shall then be inserted between the launch and receive cables
 using two termination hubs. A test power reading (P2) shall then be taken and recorded.
 902.12.6.4.1.3 T he link attenuation (A) in decibels shall be recorded as the mathematical difference
 between the reference power (P1) and the test power (P2).
 902.12.6.4.1.4 Insertion loss testing shall be performed in both directions along the link. T he direction of
 the test shall be recorded in the documentation.
 902.12.6.4.2 Transmitte r/Re ce ive r Powe r Le ve ls. T he output power levels at the network hardware
 transmitters and receivers shall be measured and recorded for system documentation. T he power meter shall
 be connected to the transmitter side of the equipment with a system jumper. T he transmit power level shall
 then be read and recorded. T he transmitter shall then be re-connected to the cable link and the power
 meter connected to the receiver side of the equipment. T he receiver power level shall then be read and
 recorded.
 902.12.6.4.3 Continuity. Continuity tests shall be used to determine whether a test or system jumper does
 or does not pass light. A continuity test shall also be used to assure the fibers have not been crossed over in
 the jumper and to assure that the transmit fiber goes to the receiver fiber. To perform the continuity test, a
 high-intensity flashlight shall be aimed into the connector at one end, while an observer watches for a
 flicker of light at the other end.
 902.12.6.4.4 O ptical Time Domain Re fle ctome te r. An Optical T ime Domain Reflectometer (OT DR)
 shall be used to evaluate the quality and length of cable reels prior to use. T he fiber loss in decibels/km and
 the length of each reel shall be recorded in the documentation. T he maximum attenuation of the cable shall
 be 3.5 decibels/km nominal, measured at room temperature at 850 nanometers, equivalent for single mode.
 A hard copy of OT DR signature traces for all system links shall be made and provided in the
 documentation.
 902.12.7 Syste m Acce ptance Te st. In addition to the standard testing requirements, the contractor shall
 successfully complete and document a four-part system acceptance test, in the presence of the engineer,
 unless approved otherwise, as follows:
 (a) System Master Acceptance Test
 (b) Office Computer Acceptance Test
 (c) Notebook Computer Acceptance Test
 (d) System Operational Test
 902.12.7.1 Syste m Maste r Acce ptance Te st. T he system master acceptance test shall be conducted after
 all traffic signal improvements and the initial eight-hour training session has been completed. T he test shall
 include the following:
 (a) T he contractor shall simulate a fault at a local controller and verify that the fault is recorded in
 the permanent log in the master and that the master automatically dials the office computer and
 transmits the same information.
 (b) T he contractor shall verify that scheduled timing plans change based on time of day.
 (c) T he contractor shall change one offset at a local controller and verify the change has been
 made and implemented at the local controller.
 
 497
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (d) T he contractor shall verify a traffic responsive plan change is made at the appropriate time.
 T his shall be demonstrated with simulated detector data.
 (e) T he contractor shall verify all programming data for the master and all locals can be
 downloaded/uploaded via the front panel RS-232 connection on the system master.
 902.12.7.2 O ffice Compute r Acce ptance Te st. T he office computer acceptance test shall be conducted
 after successful completion of the system master acceptance test and shall include the following:
 (a) A simulated fault at a local controller shall be recorded in the office computer log. T he
 contractor shall verify the entry by printing a log report.
 (b) T he contractor shall reschedule a timing plan change and verify that the event happens at the
 new time.
 (c) T he contractor shall make a timing plan change and verify the change has been made at the
 local controller.
 (d) T he contractor shall print a report that shows all plan changes for the previous 24 hours.
 (e) T he contractor shall print a report showing volume and occupancy values from all system
 detectors for the previous 24 hours.
 (f) T he contractor shall call up a real-time intersection display.
 902.12.7.3 Note book Compute r Acce ptance Te st. T he notebook computer acceptance test shall consist
 of the same tests performed for the office computer acceptance test, except all reports shall be displayed
 on the screen. T his test shall be conducted only after the office computer acceptance test has been
 successfully completed. In addition, a complete local controller database shall be uploaded and downloaded
 from one controller to another using only the notebook computer, the cable provided and the two
 controllers.
 902.12.7.4 Syste m O pe rational Te st. T he system operational test shall be conducted after the system
 master, office computer and notebook computer acceptance tests have been successfully completed. T he
 system operational test shall consist of a 30-day operational period, during which system failures are
 recorded. Any failure or malfunction of equipment during the test period shall be corrected at the
 contractor's expense, and the signal or system shall be tested for an additional 30 consecutive day period.
 T his procedure shall be repeated until the signal equipment has operated to the engineer's satisfaction for
 30 consecutive days. System failures will be defined, as a minimum:
 (a) Local intersection controller failing to respond to the system master.
 (b) System master failing to respond to either the office or notebook computer.
 (c) A system detector failure.
 902.12.8 Thirty-Day Syste m O pe rational Te st. T he 30-day test shall replace the 15-day test period
 outlined in Sec 902.21. Liquidated damages will only be accumulated between the end of working days and
 the start of the final 30 consecutive day test period.
 902.12.9 Docume ntation. Complete system documentation shall be provided. Documentation, as a
 minimum, shall include the results of all testing and shall be recorded along with date of test, name of
 person performing the test, brand name, model number, serial number of equipment used during test, and
 any other pertinent information and data.
 902.13 De te ctors.
 902.13.1 Induction De te ctor Probe s. Detector probes installed under bridge decks shall be protected by
 
 498
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 completely encapsulating the probe in a conduit system. Probes shall be oriented such that the detection
 zone is above the bridge deck, and shall be installed in gasketed junction boxes anchored to the bottom of
 the deck. T he junction boxes shall have a minimum size of 6 x 6 x 4 inches and the probes shall be rigidly
 anchored in the box. T he probes shall be no more than 18 inches below the top of the bridge deck. Conduit
 shall be sized such that the probe and cable can be pulled through the conduit. Any conduit bends shall be
 such that the probe and cable can be pulled through the bend. External conduit on the structure shall be in
 accordance with Sec 902.16.
 902.13.2 Induction Loop De te ctors. A slot for the installation of induction loop cable shall be sawed in
 the pavement as shown on the plans. Slots shall not be sawed until seven days after placement of Portland
 cement concrete. Each loop shall have a separate lead-in slot to the conduit. A separate conduit shall be
 installed between the sawed loop slot and the first pull box for each loop. T he conduit opening at the end
 of the lead-in slot shall be at the bottom of the sawed slot. T he slot shall be clean. T he cable shall be
 pushed into the slot without damaging the insulation. After the loop cable is spliced to the lead-in cable,
 and before the slot is sealed, the resistance of the loop and lead-in cable to ground shall be checked. T he
 resistance test shall be performed by the contractor in the presence of the engineer and documented. After
 a satisfactory test, showing a resistance no less than 10 megaohms, the slot shall be sealed. T he conduit
 opening at the end of the lead-in slot and any drilled conduit holes in the pavement shall be sealed with a
 pliable duct sealant prior to the application of loop sealant. All sawed slots shall then be sealed with an
 approved detector loop sealant. All detector cable between the loop and detector amplifier shall be twisted
 at least three turns per foot.
 902.13.3 Microwave and Ultrasonic De te ctors. Microwave and ultrasonic detectors shall be mounted at
 the locations shown on the plans in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. All wiring shall be
 continuous and unspliced from the detector unit to the controller. T he contractor shall make any necessary
 adjustments for proper operation of the detector.
 902.13.4 Vide o De te ction Syste ms. T his work shall consist of furnishing, installing and placing into
 operation a vehicle detection system that detects vehicles by processing video images and providing
 detection outputs to a traffic signal controller. T he system shall include all equipment shown on the plans
 and described in these specifications, and shall include any incidental items necessary for the satisfactory
 operation and maintenance of the system. T he video detection system shall be installed per the
 manufacturer's recommendations. All cable runs shall be continuous without splice from the cabinet to the
 camera. If requested by the engineer, a factory certified representative from the supplier shall be available
 for on-site assistance for a minimum of one day during installation.
 902.13.4.1 Came ra. T he bottom of the video camera shall be mounted a minimum of 30 feet above the
 pavement.
 902.13.4.2 Extra Se rvice O utle t. A separate grounded service outlet shall be provided in the controller
 cabinet for supplying power to the video detection system. Use of the grounded service outlet located on
 the cabinet door will not be permitted.
 902.13.4.3 Monitor. T he monitor shall be installed to automatically power on when the cabinet door is
 opened and automatically power off when the cabinet door is closed. A manual on/off switch shall also be
 provided.
 902.13.5 De te ctor Loop Se alant. Loop sealant shall be proportioned, mixed and installed per the
 manufacturer's specifications and recommendations. After the loop slots are cut into the pavement, the
 surface shall be thoroughly cleaned, and all loose debris shall be removed. After application of the sealant,
 the roadway shall be tack-free and capable of being open to the motoring public within four hours without
 tracking. Loop sealant shall fully encapsulate the loop wires as shown on the plans. Backer rods shall be
 placed to ensure a one-inch depth coverage of loops. Excessive overfill will not be permitted.
 902.14 Pull and Junction Boxe s. Pull and junction boxes shall be installed at locations as shown on the
 plans. Pull boxes placed in traveled ways, auxiliary lanes, shoulders and low profile islands shall be concrete.
 902.14.1 Conduit shall enter the pull box in the side of the box and shall extend a minimum of 2 inches and
 a maximum of 4 inches as shown on the plans. If it becomes necessary to increase the excavation depth
 
 499
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 and extend the pull box, no direct payment will be made. T he excavated opening outside the pull box shall
 be wide enough to allow compaction of the backfill material. Cinders, broken concrete, broken rock or
 other hard or undesirable material shall not be used for backfilling. T he backfill material shall be placed in
 layers not to exceed 6 inches deep, and each layer shall be thoroughly compacted before the next layer is
 placed. Where preformed pull boxes are used, the holes for the conduit shall be drilled as recommended by
 the manufacturer. T he holes shall be round and no more than 1/2 inch larger than the conduit.
 902.14.2 Drains for pull boxes shall be constructed as shown on the plans.
 902.14.3 T he top surface of all pull boxes shall be flush with surfaced areas and approximately one inch
 above earth or sodded areas.
 902.14.4 If preformed pull boxes are specified, the contractor may use standard concrete pull boxes in lieu
 of the Class 1 or 2 preformed pull boxes, or the Type A double concrete pull box in lieu of the Class 3
 preformed pull boxes. For installations requiring different voltages for lighting and signal applications, the
 Type B double concrete pull box may be used in lieu of two preformed pull boxes at the contractor's
 expense. If the Type B double concrete pull box is specified, no substitutions will be permitted.
 902.14.5 Class 5 preformed pull boxes shall be in accordance with all requirements in the contract
 documents. Installation of Class 5 pull boxes shall be as shown on the plans and in accordance with the
 manufacturer's recommendations.
 902.15 Concre te Base s. Excavation for bases shall be made in a neat and workmanlike manner. While
 concrete is being placed, forms shall be level and sufficiently rigid to prevent warping or deflection.
 Concrete shall be Class B or concrete of a commercial mixture in accordance with Sec 501. Conduit, ground
 rods and anchor bolts shall be held rigidly in place before and during concrete placement. Tops of all bases
 shall be finished level and the perimeter edged to a radius of 1/2 inch. Exposed surfaces of bases shall be
 finished in a workmanlike manner as soon as practical after removing forms. Concrete shall be placed,
 finished and cured in accordance with Sec 703.
 902.15.1 Post Base s. Concrete bases for posts shall be in accordance with the dimensions shown on the
 plans. Metal forms no less than 26 inches high shall be used for all Type A bases. T he top 12 inches of
 Type F bases shall be formed. Reinforcing steel for concrete bases shall be in accordance with Sec 706.
 Anchor bolts for steel posts and mast arms shall be as shown on the fabricator ’s approved shop drawings.
 Conduit shall extend above all post bases a nominal 4 inches.
 902.15.2 Controlle r Base s. Concrete bases for controllers shall be constructed as shown on the plans.
 Aprons will be considered part of the controller base. A minimum of four anchor bolts shall be used for
 single controller cabinets and a minimum of six anchor bolts shall be used for double controller cabinets.
 T he size of anchor bolts for controller cabinets shall be as specified by the cabinet manufacturer. A ground
 rod shall be placed into the ground with a minimum of 8 feet of earth contact as shown on the plans. Bases
 for double controller cabinets shall have two ground rods, one positioned in each compartment. Conduit
 shall extend above all controller bases no more than one inch. Bases for double controller cabinets shall
 have two conduits to the first pull box, one positioned in each compartment. All conduit openings in the
 controller cabinet or controller cabinet base shall be sealed with a pliable duct sealant in accordance with
 Sec 901.15 after wiring is completed.
 902.16 Conduit Syste ms. T he contractor may furnish and install rigid steel, intermediate metal,
 polyvinyl chloride (PVC) schedule 40 or high-density polyethylene (HDPE) conduit. Conduit shall be
 placed a minimum of 18 inches below finished grade and shall slope to a pull box at a minimum rate of 0.5
 percent unless otherwise shown on the plans. A change in direction of conduit shall be accomplished by
 bending the conduit uniformly to a radius that will fit the location, or by the use of standard bends or
 elbows. T he minimum radius of the bend shall be six times the internal diameter of the conduit. Nipples
 shall be used to eliminate cutting and threading where short lengths of conduit are required. If it becomes
 necessary to cut and thread steel conduit, exposed threads will not be permitted. All conduit and fittings
 shall be free from burrs and irregularities. All conduits shall be cleaned and swabbed before cables are
 installed. All fittings shall be tightly connected to the conduit. Open ends of conduit placed for future use
 shall be capped or plugged. If approved by the engineer, conduit may be installed either by trenching or
 pushing; however, payment will be made by the method specified in the contract for that conduit.
 
 500
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Functionally equivalent English measure items may be substituted by the contractor for metric items
 specified or shown on the plans in accordance with Sec 901.15 upon approval from the engineer.
 902.16.1 Trace r Wire . All conduits shall contain a bare or green-jacketed No. 14 AWG stranded copper
 tracer wire. T racer wire shall not be pulled into the controller cabinet or bases. An additional 6 feet of
 tracer wire shall be coiled in each pull box. T racer wire in pull boxes shall be capped, not electrically bonded
 to any ground wires, labeled "T RACER" and tagged in accordance with Sec 902.19.
 902.16.2 Me tal Conduit. All metal conduit ends shall be provided with a bushing to protect the cable
 from abrasion. All metal conduits shall be electrically bonded by conduit clamps and bare No. 6 AWG
 stranded copper wire. All metal conduits in the controller base shall be electrically bonded to the power
 company ground.
 902.16.3 Polyvinyl Chloride and High-De nsity Polye thyle ne Conduit. A bare No. 6 AWG stranded
 copper ground wire shall be installed in all conduits, except PVC that contains only fiber optic cable, and
 shall be attached to the ground lug in signal posts, except as otherwise specified in this section. All bare
 ground wires shall be electrically bonded. All bare ground wires in the controller base shall be electrically
 bonded to the power company ground.
 902.16.4 Conduit in Tre nch. T renches shall be excavated to the width and depth necessary for conduit
 installation. All trenches shall be backfilled as soon as practical after the installation of conduit. Cinders,
 broken concrete and other hard or objectionable material that might cause mechanical damage to the
 conduit shall not be used for backfilling within
 6 inches of the top of the conduit. T he bottom of the trench shall be free of such material before the
 conduit is placed. Conduit shall not be placed without approval of the trench from the engineer. Backfill
 material shall be deposited in the trench in layers not exceeding
 6 inches deep and each layer shall be compacted to the approximate density of the adjacent material by an
 approved method before the next layer is placed. Red burial tape imprinted with "CAUT ION - BURIED
 CABLE BELOW" shall be installed in all trenches at approximately one-third to one-half of the depth of
 the trench. All disturbed areas shall be restored to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 902.16.5 Pushe d Conduit. If pushed conduit is specified, the conduit shall be installed without disturbing
 the existing surface. Pushed conduit may be placed by jacking, pushing, boring or other approved means.
 902.16.6 Conduit in Me dian. If conduit in median is specified, the conduit shall be placed on the existing
 pavement prior to construction of the raised median. If conduit is to be placed in concrete traffic barrier,
 the conduit shall be held rigidly in place before placement of concrete.
 902.16.7 Exte rnal Conduit on Structure . For existing structures, or if provisions are not made in the
 plans for providing a conduit raceway in new structures as described in Sec 707, the conduit shall be external
 conduit on structure. Conduit on structure will include conduit on bridges, retaining walls or other structures,
 and shall be installed as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. T he final location of all conduit
 and junction boxes shall be approved by the engineer before installation begins. Conduit shall not be
 attached to prestressed concrete girders or prestressed, precast concrete deck panels. T he conduit shall be
 secured to the concrete with clamps at no more than 5-foot intervals. Concrete anchors shall be in
 accordance with federal specification FF-S-325, Group II, Type 4, Class I, and shall be galvanized in
 accordance with AST M A 153, B 695-91 Class 50, or constructed of stainless steel. T he minimum
 embedment in concrete shall be 1 3/4 inches. T he supplier shall furnish a manufacturer's certification that
 the concrete anchors meet the required material and galvanizing specifications. If necessary to anchor the
 conduit to steel bridge members, the attachment method shall not involve drilling, grinding or welding.
 Attachment method to steel members shall be approved by the engineer. Junction boxes shall be installed as
 shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. Junction boxes shall be surface-mounted and installed
 such that covers are accessible. If the conduit crosses a bridge expansion joint, a conduit expansion fitting
 shall be used. T he expansion fitting shall provide a minimum movement in either direction as shown on the
 plans or as specified by the engineer. Junction boxes, expansion fittings and any hardware or material
 required for conduit installation shall be at the contractor ’s expense.
 902.17 Signal Face s. Vehicle and pedestrian signal faces shall be covered or turned away from approaching
 traffic until placed in operation. When ready for operation, the signal faces shall be securely fastened in
 
 501
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 position facing approaching traffic. Incandescent lamps installed by the contractor shall be installed
 horizontally with the open segment of the filament facing up. Vehicle and pedestrian signal faces shall be
 aimed laterally at the approximate center of the lane or lanes the signal face controls. Signal faces shall be
 aimed at a point behind the stop line a distance corresponding to the following requirements:
 Approach Speed, mph Distance, f eet
 30
 160
 40
 240
 50
 330
 60
 430
 70
 560
 
 902.18 Post Ere ction. Post bases shall be securely anchored to concrete bases. Pedestal posts shall be
 erected vertically without the use of leveling nuts. Metal posts for span wire and cantilever mast arms shall
 be adjusted by leveling nuts. All posts for span wire and cantilever mast arms shall be raked as directed by
 the engineer. All signal posts shall be grounded by a bare No. 6 AWG stranded copper wire running from the
 ground lug inside the post to a clamp fastened on metal conduit at the top of the concrete base to a ground
 rod or through nonmetallic conduit to the ground bus in the controller.
 902.19 Wiring.
 902.19.1 All cable runs shall be continuous and unspliced from the connections in the terminal block of the
 signal head or disconnect hanger to the terminal strip in the controller cabinet, from the signal terminal
 block to another signal terminal block or as shown on the plans. When a terminal compartment is
 provided, all cable runs shall be continuous from the terminal compartment to the terminal strip in the
 controller cabinet. When parallel connections are required from an overhead signal head on a mast arm to a
 side-mounted signal head, cable shall be routed from the controller to the terminal compartment of the
 signal on the mast arm and then parallel-circuited back to the side mounted signal. All other conductor
 cable combinations to signal heads shall be as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. Where
 double controller cabinets are specified, wires shall be sorted between the controller and first pull box such
 that field wires enter the associated controller compartment.
 902.19.2 Power cable runs shall be continuous and unspliced from the power disconnect switch located on
 the power supply to controller cabinet terminals. Power cable shall be encased in conduit of the size shown
 on the plans. Energized power cables shall run to circuit breakers. T he neutral cable shall be terminated on
 the neutral bus bar and the equipment ground conductor shall be terminated on the ground bus in the
 controller cabinet.
 902.19.3 Where luminaires are required, pole and bracket cable shall be installed between the luminaire and
 the power source at the base of the post. Each luminaire shall be connected to the power source by No. 12
 AWG conductors with suitably sized equipment grounding conductor. A premolded fused connector assembly
 shall be installed on each conductor carrying current between the source cable and the pole and bracket
 cable. T he assembly and cable shall be insulated with a protective rubber boot designed for the premolded
 connector.
 902.19.4 Induction loop dimensions shall be as shown on the plans. T he engineer will determine the exact
 location of loops. Each induction loop shall be connected to the detector by a separate lead-in cable.
 Single-conductor No. 14 AWG cable shown on the plans is an approximation of cable quantity required to
 construct the induction loop. If the number of turns shown on the plans is not in accordance with the
 manufacturer's recommendation for the sensing units furnished, the plans will be revised, and the induction
 loop cable will be field measured and quantities adjusted accordingly. Induction loop detector cable shall be
 installed in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. Induction loop detector lead-in cable will be
 shown on the plans as two-conductor No. 14 AWG cable. Should the manufacturer recommend a different
 type of cable, the two-conductor cable shall be revised to the manufacturer's specification, but will be
 considered completely covered by the contract unit price for loop detector lead-in cable. Cable for loop
 detectors shall be continuous from the terminal strip in the controller cabinet to a splice with the detector
 leads in the pull box adjacent to the detector. T he conductor splice shall be soldered without an open flame.
 T he soldered splice shall then be capped and inserted into a direct buried splice kit.
 
 502
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 902.19.5 Where practical, color codes shall be followed such that the red insulated conductor connects to
 the red indication terminal, orange to yellow and green to green. Circuits shall be properly labeled in the
 controller cabinet and all pull boxes by means of round aluminum identification tags with a minimum
 thickness of 0.1 mils, attached to the cables with a copper wire. Information stamped on the tags shall
 identify equipment served by the conductor cable in accordance with designations used on the plans.
 902.19.6 Cables shall be pulled through conduit by a cable grip providing a firm hold on exterior coverings.
 Cable shall be pulled with a minimum of dragging on the ground or pavement. Frame-mounted pulleys or
 other suitable devices shall be used for pulling cables out of conduit into pull boxes. Lubricants may be used
 to facilitate pulling cable. Polyester rope will not be permitted to facilitate pulling of cable. Slack in each
 cable shall be provided by a 6-foot loop coiled in each pull box and a 3-foot loop coiled in each junction
 box. All signal posts and controllers shall be grounded by bare No. 6 AWG stranded copper wire.
 902.20 Te st Equipme nt. During installation of equipment and material, the contractor shall furnish to the
 engineer suitable equipment to test all or part of the completed facility to establish compliance with
 requirements of the contract. Minimum test equipment shall be a voltmeter, ohmmeter and ammeter. For
 testing induction loop detectors, the contractor shall also provide a suitable 500-volt, direct current, 0 to
 100- megaohm range, hand-operated, resistance measuring device.
 902.21 Te st Pe riod. After the project is open to normal traffic, the contractor shall notify the engineer in
 writing the date the signal or signal system will be ready for testing. Upon concurrence from the engineer,
 the contractor shall place the signal or signal system in operation for a 15 consecutive day test period. A
 signal operated independently of other signals or signal systems shall be tested as a single installation. A
 signal operated as part of a system shall not be tested until all signals in the system are ready to be tested. A
 system shall be tested as a unit. Any failure or malfunction of equipment during the test period shall be
 corrected at the contractor's expense, and the signal or signal system tested for an additional 15
 consecutive day period. T his procedure shall be repeated until the signal equipment has operated to the
 engineer's satisfaction for 15 consecutive days. T he contractor shall, in the presence of the engineer,
 demonstrate the proper action of the controller's monitor as part of the testing system, if applicable.
 902.21.1 When the test period is initiated and until the test period is completed, following the turn on of
 temporary traffic signals or after work is begun on an existing signal installation, the contractor shall
 provide at least one service technician to remain in the area and be available for day, night and weekend
 trouble calls. T he contractor shall furnish the name, address and telephone number where each designated
 technician can be reached at all times. In the event of a malfunction, the contractor shall provide adequate
 traffic control for the intersection until the signals are restored to normal operation. Adequate traffic
 control shall be as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer. If the signal or signal system
 malfunctions and a designated technician cannot be reached or cannot arrive at the intersection in a
 reasonable time in the judgment of the engineer, then the engineer may exercise the option to direct
 MoDOT personnel or a third party to correct the malfunction in the presence of the engineer. If this
 option is invoked, the entire cost of the work performed by MoDOT personnel or the third party will be
 computed as described in Sec 108.9 and deducted from the payments due the contractor.
 902.21.2 Whether or not the engineer elects to correct the signal malfunction, nothing in this
 specification shall be construed or interpreted to relieve the contractor of any liability for personal injury
 or property damage that results either directly or indirectly from a signal malfunction during the test
 period. T he contractor and surety shall indemnify and save harmless the State, the Commission, the
 Commission’s agents, employees and assigns for any legal liability incurred for such a signal malfunction.
 902.22 Mainte nance Information. Before acceptance of the work, the contractor shall furnish the
 engineer with three copies of the manufacturer's instructions for maintenance and operation of all signal
 equipment including, but not limited to, controllers, conflict monitors, load switches, detectors, software,
 interconnect and auxiliary equipment. At a minimum, the manufacturer's instructions shall include
 organized written instructions, wiring diagrams, diagrams showing component layouts and parts lists with
 part numbers and serial numbers, where applicable. Serial numbers listed by the supplier will be verified with
 the shipping invoice and on the controller and conflict monitor received for installation. T he contractor
 shall furnish three copies of wiring diagrams of the installation or system. T he cabinet wiring diagrams shall
 include labeling for all field terminal connections and shall provide an orientation of the terminal layout
 that conforms to the intersection information specified.
 
 503
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 902.23 Final Cle an Up. Final clean up of right of way shall be in accordance with Sec 104.
 902.24 Me thod of Me asure me nt.
 902.24.1 Measurement of temporary traffic signal installations will be made per lump sum.
 902.24.2 Measurement for the following items will be made per each:
 (a) Signal heads and luminaires,
 (b) Posts,
 (c) Power supply assemblies, including all specified equipment,
 (d) T raffic controller assemblies, including all specified equipment,
 (e) System software, including installation,
 (f) System master, including all specified items,
 (g) Telemetry radios and antennas for wireless interconnect systems, including all specified
 equipment,
 (h) Video detection systems, including all specified equipment,
 (i) Pull boxes, including all specified material,
 (j) T raining, including all specified training,
 (k) Modems, including all specified equipment,
 (l) Splice cabinet, including all specified items,
 And includes all necessary material, hardware, equipment and specified incidental items,
 902.24.3 Measurement of push button detectors, microwave detectors and induction probe detectors will be
 made per each. Measurement of two-channel card rack mounted detectors will be made per each detector
 card.
 902.24.4 Final measurement of concrete for bases will not be made, except for authorized changes in
 construction or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, measurement
 of concrete for bases, including all specified material, will be made to the nearest 1/10 cubic yard as shown
 on the plans. T he revision or correction will be computed, and added to or deducted from the contract
 quantity.
 902.24.5 Final measurement of conduit will not be made, except for authorized changes in construction or
 where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, measurement of conduit will be
 made to the nearest linear foot as shown on the plans. T he revision or correction will be computed, and
 added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 902.24.6 Final measurement of conductor will not be made, except for authorized changes in construction
 or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, measurement of conductor
 will be made to the nearest 10 linear feet as shown on the plans. T he revision or correction will be
 computed, and added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 902.24.7 Measurement of signal sign areas will be made to the nearest 1/10 square foot for each sign and to
 the nearest square foot for the total.
 
 504
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 902.25 Basis of Payme nt. Accepted traffic signals will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of
 the pay items included in the contract. No direct payment will be made for any incidental items necessary
 to complete the work unless specifically provided as a pay item in the contract.
 902.25.1 Temporary traffic signals will be paid for at the contract unit price. No direct payment will be
 made for guys, conduit and junction boxes on poles, hardware, lighting bracket arms, or any other item for
 which separate payment is not provided.
 902.25.2 Accepted post bases will be paid for at the contract unit price. Payment will be considered full
 compensation for all labor, equipment and material to complete the described work, and will include all
 excavation, removal and disposal of all material encountered within the limits of the work.
 902.25.3 Luminaire bracket arms, if specified, will be at the contractor ’s expense.
 902.25.4 No direct payment will be made for cable, conduit and any additional work required to connect
 the power supply assembly to the utility company facilities.
 902.25.5 No direct payment will be made for the card rack assembly and card rack power supplies.
 902.25.6 Payment for the telephone cable and associated pushed or trenched conduit will be considered
 fully covered under the contract unit price for the power supply assembly.
 902.25.7 Furnishing and installing the system master controller, including all connectors and cables to
 provide a fully functioning system, will be paid for at the contract unit price per each. Payment for
 furnishing and installing telephone interface panels, an extra service outlet, door alarm, dial-up modem and
 all aspects of the system acceptance test, including all incidental items required to provide a fully
 functioning system, will be considered completely covered by the contract unit price for the system master.
 902.25.8 For closed loop systems, if the Commission does not furnish the system software, the system
 software will be paid for at the contract unit price per each. If the Commission furnishes system software
 or has committed to purchase system software in another contract, no payment will be made for the
 software. T his shall include versions of previously supplied software. Installing and programming local
 intersection controllers and the system master will be at the contractor ’s expense.
 902.25.9 Accepted video detection systems will be paid for at the contract unit price. Payment will be
 considered full compensation for all labor, equipment and material to complete the described work, and for
 placing the specified equipment into operation to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 902.25.10 No direct payment will be made for junction boxes.
 902.25.11 Furnishing and installing telemetry radios, power supplies, interface cables, diagnostic pads and
 other items necessary for the proper operation of the radios will be paid for at the contract unit price for
 the Spread Spectrum Telemetry Radio.
 902.25.12 Furnishing and installing antenna cable, including connectors, surge arrestors and other items
 necessary for proper operation, will be paid for at the contract unit price of
 RG-8/U Coaxial Cable.
 902.25.13 If training is specified in the contract documents, training will be paid for at the contract unit
 price. Payment will be considered full compensation for all labor, equipment and material to conduct the
 training.
 902.25.14 T he accepted quantities of fiber optic cable, including installation, termination and testing of
 the fiber optic interconnect cables, all connectors, hardware, tags and other incidentals needed to provide a
 fully functioning system, will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot. T he installation,
 termination and splicing of fibers in splice cabinets and fiber distribution units, including all connectors and
 other incidentals, will be considered fully covered under the contract unit price.
 902.25.15 T he fiber optic data link in the system master, including all incidental items required for proper
 
 505
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 operation, will be paid for at the contract unit price per each for the system master.
 902.25.16 Furnishing and installing the dial-up modem including all connectors and cables necessary for
 proper operation will be paid for at the contract unit price per each.
 902.25.17 Furnishing and installing the local controller assembly, including all connectors and cables to
 provide a fully functioning system, will be paid for at the contract unit price per each.
 902.25.18 Furnishing and installing the fiber optic data links (modems) in the local controllers including all
 incidental items required to provide a fully functioning system, will be paid for at the contract unit price
 per each for controller assembly.
 902.25.19 Furnishing and installing the fiber distribution unit for controller cabinets, including all mounting
 hardware and incidentals, will be paid for at the contract unit price per each for controller assembly.
 902.25.20 Furnishing and installing the splice cabinet, including the rack cage, fiber distribution unit,
 grounding and other incidental items will be paid for at the contract unit price per each.
 902.25.21 Payment for the telephone cable and associated pushed or trenched conduit will be considered
 fully covered under the contract unit price for the power supply assembly.
 902.25.22 No direct payment will be made for warranties.
 902.25.23 No direct payment will be made for tracer or ground wires.
 902.25.24 Highway signal signs an mounting hardware will be paid for at the contact unit price for each of
 the items included in the contract. No direct payment will be made for incidental items necessary to
 complete the work, unless specifically provided as a pay item in the contract.
 
 506
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 903
 HIGHWAY SIGNING
 903.1 De scription. T his work shall consist of furnishing and installing highway signs as shown on the
 plans. All signs shall be in accordance with the MUT CD. Any signs not detailed on the plans shall be in
 accordance with Standard Highway Signs by the U.S. Department of T ransportation, Federal Highway
 Administration.
 903.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically
 as follows:
 Item
 Section/Specif ication
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete
 1036
 Highway Sign Material
 1042
 Delineators, Mile and Marker P osts
 1044
 P aints for Structural Steel
 1045
 Electrical Conduit
 1060
 Expansive Mortars
 1066
 Low-Carbon Steel Bolts, Nuts and Washers
 1080
 Structural Carbon Steel
 1080
 Structural Low Alloy Steel
 1080
 Low-Carbon Steel Anchor Bolts
 1080
 High-Strength Anchor Bolts
 ASTM F 1554
 High-Strength Bolts, Nuts and Washers
 1080
 Galvanized Coating of Structural Steel, Tubular Steel Sign
 1081
 Supports, Sign Trusses and Appurtenances
 
 903.2.1 Sign Posts and Tubular Ste e l Sign Supports.
 Item
 Section/Specif ication
 Wood P osts
 1050
 Steel P ipe P osts
 ASTM A 53, Grade B, or ASTM A 500, Grade B
 Galvanizing of Steel P ipe
 ASTM A 53
 P osts
 Structural Steel Welding
 AWS A5.1 or AWS A5.5
 Electrodes
 Structural Steel P osts
 AASHTO M270 Grade 50 or 50w
 U-Channel P osts
 ASTM A 499, Grade 60
 
 903.2.2 O ve rhe ad Sign Trusse s.
 Item
 Aluminum Extruded Tube
 Aluminum P ermanent Mold Castings
 Aluminum Sand Castings
 Aluminum P late
 Aluminum Structural Shapes
 Aluminum P ipe Handrail
 Aluminum P ipe Fittings for
 Schedule 10 P ipe
 
 Specif ication
 ASTM B 221, 6061-T6
 ASTM B 108, A 356.0-T61
 ASTM B 26, 356.0-T6
 ASTM B 209, 6061-T6
 ASTM B 308, 6061-T6
 ASTM B 241, 6061-T6 or 6063-T6
 ASTM B 26, 356.0-T6 or
 ASTM B 108, A 356.0-T61
 ASTM B 211, 6061-T6 or
 Aluminum Grating
 ASTM B 221, 6061-T6 or 6063-T6
 Bearing Bars
 ASTM B 211, 6061-T6 or
 Cross Bars
 ASTM B 221, 6061-T6 or 6063-T5 or T6
 Aluminum Washers
 ASTM B 209, 2024-T4 or Alclad 2024T4
 Aluminum Beveled Washers
 ASTM B 221, 2024-T4
 Filler Wire for Welding Aluminum
 AWS A 5.10 ER5356, ER5556
 Stainless Steel U-Bolts
 ASTM A 276 Chromium-Nickel Grade, min. yield 30,000 psi
 Stainless Steel Bolts, Nuts, Screws
 ASTM A 320 or SAE J405D, Austenitic
 and Washers
 Steel, min. yield 30,000 psi
 Structural Steel Welding Electrodes
 AWS A 5.1 or AWS A 5.5
 
 507
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 903.2.3 Hardware . Bolts, nuts and washers specified to be galvanized shall be galvanized in accordance
 with Sec 1081. Except for anchor bolts, galvanizing thickness shall not exceed
 6 mils. For high strength bolts, the contractor shall furnish to the engineer a copy of the manufacturer's
 inspection test report for each production lot or shipping lot furnished, and shall certify the bolts furnished
 are in accordance with Sec 1080.
 903.2.4 Concre te . Concrete shall be of the class specified in the contract. Material, proportioning,
 mixing, slump and transporting of concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501 for the specific class
 specified. Concrete shall be placed, finished and cured in accordance with Sec 703.
 903.2.5 Equipme nt and Mate rial. Equipment and material shall be of new stock unless the contract
 provides for relocation of existing units or use of units furnished by others. New equipment and material
 shall meet the approval of the engineer.
 903.3 Construction Re quire me nts.
 903.3.1 Footings for Trusse s and Posts.
 903.3.1.1 Bolt-Down Installations. Class B concrete shall be used to construct all footings and end
 supports for overhead sign trusses, tubular steel sign supports and posts with bolt-down bases. Footings shall
 be formed, unless in the judgment of the engineer, soil conditions permit excavation to be made to the neat
 lines of the footings and the footings cast against the undisturbed vertical soil face. In all cases, the top 12
 inches below finished ground line shall be formed. Footings shall be placed on firm, stable, undisturbed soil
 to the minimum depth shown on the plans. Backfill shall be thoroughly compacted, and care taken to
 prevent damage to finished concrete. Backfill shall be brought up level with the finished ground line.
 Anchor bolts shall be firmly held in proper position, supported at the top, during placement of concrete.
 903.3.1.2 Embe dde d Installations. Class B or B-1 concrete, or concrete of a commercial mixture
 meeting the requirements of Sec 501 shall be used for the footings for embedded-type sign posts, except as
 otherwise allowed herein. Posts shall be supported in proper position until the concrete or other approved
 material has set. Excavation and backfill shall be in accordance with Sec 903.3.1.1, except forming will not
 be required unless soil conditions warrant forming. Tops of footings shall be finished flush with the slope of
 the ground. Footings shall be visually inspected for acceptance by the engineer.
 903.3.1.2.1 In lieu of the concrete material requirements in Sec 903.3.1.2, the contractor may use a prepackaged dry commercial concrete mixture that has a manufacturer ’s 28-day compressive strength rating
 of no less than 4,000 psi for the footings for embedded-type sign posts. T he concrete shall be thoroughly
 mixed in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations. Strength requirements shall meet or exceed
 Class B concrete as specified in Sec 501.
 903.3.1.2.2 In lieu of concrete, the contractor may use a quick-setting polyurethane foam for the footings
 for embedded-type sign posts. T he foam shall have a minimum compressive strength of 80 psi (550 kPa),
 in the direction of rise, when tested in accordance with AST M D 1621, and shall have a minimum density
 of 4 pounds per cubic foot (65 kg/m3) when tested in accordance with AST M D 1622. Foam shall not be
 placed in water. Polyurethane foam shall be mixed in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations.
 Polyurethane foam will not be permitted if soil conditions are such that forming is necessary.
 903.3.1.3 O ptional Footings. Substructures for butterfly and cantilever overhead sign trusses and posts
 may be either drilled shafts or spread footings.
 903.3.1.3.1 T he quantities shown on the plans reflect the total cubic yards of substructure, based upon
 drilled shaft quantities.
 903.3.1.3.2 No adjustment in payment will be made for providing the equivalent spread footing design that
 differs in area from the specified drilled shaft design.
 903.3.1.3.3 If rock is encountered and the depth of drilled shafts is adjusted accordingly, cubic yard
 quantities will be recalculated for those locations and payment will be adjusted accordingly. Cubic yard
 
 508
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 quantities will not be recalculated for spread footings if rock is encountered, unless it is considered differing
 site conditions in accordance with Sec 104.2 of the standard specifications.
 903.3.2 Posts for Ground Mounte d Signs.
 903.3.2.1 Post Le ngths. Post lengths shown on the plans for ground-mounted signs are for bidding
 purposes only. T he contractor shall be responsible for determining post lengths to provide the vertical
 clearance shown on the plans. Field cutting of posts will be permitted.
 903.3.2.2 Post Alignme nt. Sign posts shall be vertical. Any post bent or otherwise damaged to the extent
 that the post is considered unfit for use shall be removed and replaced with an acceptable post at the
 contractor's expense.
 903.3.2.2.1 Structural Ste e l Posts. Structural steel sign posts for ground mounting of signs shall be
 fabricated and erected as shown on the plans. Welds shall be of full section and sound throughout. Posts
 with dimensional defects and structural discontinuities will be rejected. Posts built up by welding two lengths
 together will be permitted, provided the welds are ground smooth and flush with the base metal. Posts and
 appurtenances shall be hot-dip galvanized after fabrication. Posts with breakaway assemblies shall be cut at
 the hinge prior to galvanizing, except for field cutting. Hinge plates shall not be attached to the posts at
 the time of galvanizing. All welds shall be cleaned before galvanizing. All exposed steel areas and damaged
 galvanizing shall be repaired in accordance with Sec 1081.
 903.3.2.2.2 Pipe Posts. Pipe posts shall be fabricated as shown on the plans and shall be hot-dip
 galvanized after fabrication. Welds shall be of full section and sound throughout. Posts with dimensional
 defects and structural discontinuities will be rejected. All welds shall be cleaned before galvanizing. Exposed
 steel areas and damaged galvanizing shall be repaired in accordance with Sec 1081. Friction caps for pipe
 posts shall be of the dimensions shown on the plans and may be galvanized steel or aluminum alloy.
 903.3.2.2.3 Pe rforate d Square Ste e l Tube Posts. Perforated square steel tube posts shall be installed at
 locations shown on the plans. Exposed steel areas and damaged galvanizing shall be repaired in accordance
 with Sec 1081.
 903.3.2.2.4 U-Channe l Posts. U-Channel posts shall be installed at locations shown on the plans.
 Exposed steel areas and damaged galvanizing shall be repaired in accordance with Sec 1081.
 903.3.2.2.5 Wood Posts. Wood posts shall be installed at locations shown on the plans.
 903.3.2.3 Ce rtification. T he contractor shall furnish to the engineer three copies of the fabricator ’s
 certification that the material supplied is in accordance with the requirements specified.
 903.3.3 Tubular Ste e l Sign Supports. T ubular sign supports for overhead mounting of signs shall include
 span, cantilever and butterfly types, complete with poles, beams, mast arms, sign bracket assemblies and
 other specified appurtenances. All steel shall be hot-dip galvanized after fabrication in accordance with Sec
 1081. All welds shall be cleaned before galvanizing. Shop drawings will not be required for these supports.
 903.3.3.1 Tape re d Ste e l Pole s and Be ams. Tapered steel poles and beams shall be a continuous taper
 tube, fabricated from one length of open hearth sheet steel with one continuous welded longitudinal seam.
 After fabrication, the material shall have a minimum yield strength of 48,000 psi. Straight steel arms shall
 be standard or extra heavy pipe, of the dimensions and grades shown on the plans. Bolts, nuts, washers,
 clamps and sign bracket assemblies shall be hot-dip galvanized or of stainless steel. Clamps shall be
 fabricated of low alloy steel.
 903.3.3.2 Ce rtification. T he contractor shall furnish to the engineer three copies of the manufacturer's
 certification that the tubular steel sign supports are in accordance with the requirements specified.
 903.3.3.3 Surface s. Galvanized material shall be handled to avoid damage to the surfaces. Any material on
 which the galvanizing has been bruised or broken will be rejected or may, with approval from the engineer,
 be repaired in accordance with Sec 1081.
 
 509
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 903.3.4 O ve rhe ad Sign Trusse s. Overhead sign trusses shall be steel or aluminum, and shall include all
 structural steel, structural aluminum, aluminum castings, pipe railing, gratings, supports and appurtenances
 above the top surface of the concrete footings. Shop drawings in accordance with Sec 1080 shall be
 furnished to the engineer for approval.
 903.3.4.1 Te sting and Ce rtification. T he contractor shall furnish to the engineer a copy of certified mill
 test reports on all material furnished, providing the actual chemical analysis and the actual results of
 physical tests. In lieu of mill test reports for secondary members, the contractor may furnish a certification
 from the fabricator certifying the material supplied is in accordance with the requirements of these
 specifications. All test reports and certifications shall be furnished to the engineer before any requests for
 shop inspection are made.
 903.3.4.2 Ste e l Fabrication and Ere ction. Structural steel fabrication and erection shall be in accordance
 with Secs 712 and 1080, except as hereinafter specified.
 903.3.4.3 We lde r Q ualifications. Before starting fabrication of structural aluminum, all welders shall be
 qualified in accordance with the latest edition of ANSI/AWS D1.2 – Structural Welding Code, Aluminum.
 T he test specimens shall be made using a base metal of aluminum alloy 6061-T 6 using filler metal
 acceptable for welding this alloy and inert gas shield arc. Requalification may be required any time there is
 specific reason to question the welder's ability.
 903.3.4.4 We lding Inspe ction. All aluminum welds shall be inspected by the fabricator to verify the
 reliability of production as follows:
 (a) Visual inspection of all welds, proof testing of welds, and sufficient destructive testing of weld
 samples fabricated during the production welding.
 (b) Poor welding workmanship noted by visual inspection will be sufficient cause for rejection.
 903.3.4.5 Contact Surface s. Contact surfaces of aluminum flange castings shall be finished to provide at
 least 50 percent contact after assembly, as indicated by the Standard Machinist's Blue Test.
 903.3.4.6 Fabrication of Aluminum Alloy. Fabrication of aluminum alloy material shall be in
 accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and the following requirements. Flame cutting will
 not be permitted. All holes in castings shall be machined for final fit. Welding shall be done by the inert gas
 shielded arc method, and flux shall not be used. Precautions shall be taken to avoid scoring or marring of
 aluminum surfaces. T he engineer will reject any scoring or marring that gives an objectionable appearance.
 Cast parts shall have all casting irregularities removed. T ubing shall be seamless, and exterior and interior
 surfaces shall be clean, smooth and free from slivers, laminations, grooves, cracks or other defects.
 903.3.4.7 Shop Inspe ction. Shop inspection will be in accordance with Sec 1080.
 903.3.4.8 Wind Te sting. Simulated wind-shop test loading for aluminum trusses will be required as shown
 on the plans. T he load in kips and location of the point of application shall be indicated on the shop
 drawings.
 903.3.4.9 Handling and Storage . Handling and storage of material shall be in accordance with Sec 712.
 If specified, galvanized high strength bolts and washers shall be in accordance with Sec 903.2.2. Bolts shall
 be snugly tightened. Connections in which steel and aluminum are in contact shall be protected as shown on
 the plans.
 903.3.4.10 Surface s. Galvanized and aluminum material shall be handled to avoid damage to the surfaces.
 Any material on which the galvanizing has been bruised or broken will be rejected or may, with approval
 from the engineer, be repaired in accordance with Sec 1081.
 903.3.5 Sign Storage , Ce rtification and Ere ction.
 903.3.5.1 Storage of Signs. Signs delivered for use on a project shall be stored in a manner meeting the
 approval of the engineer. Any sign damaged, discolored or defaced during transportation, storage or
 
 510
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 erection may be rejected.
 903.3.5.2 Fabricator's Ce rtification. T he contractor shall furnish to the engineer, prior to sign erection,
 the fabricator's certification stating, "I hereby certify that only material and manufacturing processes in
 full compliance with the Missouri Department of T ransportation job specification requirements were used
 in the fabrication of signs for Job ___________, Route ___________, County ____________."
 903.3.5.3 Ere ction of Signs. Sign posts shall be set vertically true to line such that the signs will be level,
 at the proper angle with the roadway, and with the minimum clearances shown on the plans. Mounted signs
 shall present a smooth flat surface varying no more than 3/8 inch from a 4-foot straightedge placed in any
 position on the face of the sign after erection. Signs on traffic signal posts shall be mounted with strap or
 clamp type sign supports as shown on the plans or as approved by the engineer. Signs shall not be mounted
 on light poles.
 903.3.6 De line ators. Delineators shall be installed vertically and any delineator considered unfit for use by
 the engineer shall be removed and replaced at the contractor ’s expense.
 903.4 Final Cle anup. Final cleanup of right of way shall be in accordance with Sec 104.11.
 903.5 Me thod of Me asure me nt. Final measurement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. T he revision or
 correction will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity. Where required,
 measurements will be made in the following manner.
 Measurement of concrete for footings and end supports for overhead sign trusses, tubular steel sign supports
 and posts bolt-down bases, including all concrete, excavation, backfilling, reinforcing steel, anchor bolts and
 nuts, grout and other incidental items shown on the plans, will be made to the nearest 0.1 cubic yard.
 Concrete for footings for embedded-type posts including perforated square steel tube, u-channel and wood
 shall be incidental.
 903.5.1 Measurement of the weight of structural steel and pipe posts will be made to the nearest pound for
 each post and to the nearest 10 pounds for the total, as shown on the plans. Weights will be computed using
 the theoretical weight of the various sections.
 903.5.2 Measurement of sign areas will be made to the nearest 1/10 square foot for each sign and to the
 nearest square foot for the total. T he area of each sign will be that of the smallest rectangular, triangular or
 trapezoidal shape that will encompass the sign panel.
 903.5.3 Measurement of perforated square steel tube, u-channel and wood posts will be made to the nearest
 linear foot for each post, as shown on the plans.
 903.5.5 Measurement of delineators will be made per each.
 903.6 Basis of Payme nt.
 903.6.1 Breakaway assemblies for pipe posts and structural steel posts, including the base connection, hinge
 plate, fuse plate, structural bolts and all other fabrication, complete in place, are incidental, regardless of
 the post size or shape. Breakaway assemblies for perforated square steel tube posts, complete in place, will
 be paid for at the contract unit price each, regardless of the post size.
 903.6.2 Highway signing will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the items included in the
 contract. No direct payment will be made for incidental items necessary to complete the work, unless
 specifically provided as a pay item in the contract.
 903.6.3 Delineator posts will be paid for at the contract unit price. No direct payment will be made for
 reflective sheeting or post anchors.
 903.6.4 Perforate square steel tube, u-channel and wood posts will be paid for at the contract unit price for
 each of the items included in the contract.
 
 511
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 903.6.5 Concrete footings will be paid for at the contract unit price.
 903.6.6 Structural steel and pipe posts will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the items
 included in the contract.
 
 512
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1001
 GENERAL REQ UIREMENTS FO R MATERIAL
 1001.1 All requirements of Sec 106 will apply to material hereinafter specified. Material or processes
 requiring pre-qualification or pre-acceptance shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of these
 specifications. After approval, the material or process will be placed on either the qualified list or the preacceptance list (PAL) maintained on MoDOT ’s web site by Construction and Materials. T he contractor
 shall select materials or processes from the appropriate list for use in MoDOT work. Final acceptance may
 be based on field inspection.
 1001.2 All packaged material shall be plainly marked showing the quantity and nature of the contents and
 shall be delivered intact.
 1001.3 A description of the classification of deleterious material may be found in MoDOT ’s EPG
 106.3.2.71 on MoDOT ’s web site.
 1001.4 Chat will be defined as an aggregate waste material that was formed in the course of milling
 operations employed to recover lead and zinc from metal-bearing ore minerals.
 1001.5 Crushed stone will be defined as the product obtained by the artificial reduction in the size of rock
 that has been mined or excavated from ledge formation. Chat as defined in Sec 1001.4 is not included.
 1001.6 Gravel will be defined as the coarse granular material, generally considered as material retained on
 the No. 4 or No. 10 sieve, but may include finer sizes, resulting from the natural disintegration and abrasion
 of rock, or from processing of weakly bound conglomerate. Gravel may include such material that has been
 further reduced in size by artificial means.
 1001.7 Porphyry will be defined as a fine-grained, dense, igneous rock generally occurring in the Missouri
 counties of Iron, Madison, St. Francois and their adjacent counties.
 1001.8 Wet bottom boiler slag will be defined as a hard, angular by-product of the combustion of coal in
 wet bottom boilers.
 1001.9 Sieves specified for gradation requirements shall have openings as prescribed in AASHT O M 92.
 1001.10 Storage and Handling of Aggre gate . Aggregate shall be produced, handled and stockpiled to
 minimize segregation, degradation and contamination. Regardless of the method of storage and handling, all
 aggregate that is segregated, degraded or contaminated to the extent that the aggregate does not meet
 specifications, will be considered unacceptable. Aggregate may be reconditioned by any method that
 produces satisfactory material.
 1001.11 Approval of Aggre gate Source s. All sources of aggregate shall be evaluated by the engineer for
 initial approval and source approval as herein prescribed, prior to acceptance of aggregate from that
 source.
 1001.11.1 Sources of crushed stone shall be evaluated for initial approval on a ledge by ledge basis. Each
 exposed ledge will be identified, and the engineer will describe the ledge boundaries. Only identified ledges
 shall be used in the manufacture of the final product. A sample for initial approval will be required from
 each ledge. Resampling will be required if source approvals indicate a significant change has occurred.
 1001.11.2 Source approvals will be required a minimum of every year. Source approval samples will be
 required for each unique combination or ledges. Resampling will be required at closer intervals if, in the
 judgment of the engineer, any significant change has occurred to the source. Samples of aggregate for
 source approval shall be taken while the engineer is present.
 1001.11.3 Sources approval of natural sand, gravel and manufactured lightweight aggregate shall be
 evaluated as the final product .
 1001.11.4 Sources of aggregate such as chat, slag and other by-products from previously produced material
 
 513
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 or any other undefined sources will be evaluated on an individual basis.
 1001.12 Mining By-Product Aggre gate . Chat may be furnished under the following requirements.
 1001.12.1 Chat used in hot, warm, or cold mix asphalt, slurry seal, microsurfacing, or in epoxy seal
 delivered to MoDOT projects or property shall have a total lead content less than 4,500 ppm as
 determined by EPA Method 3050B, Acid Digestion of Sediments, Sludges, and Soils. Testing shall be
 conducted a minimum of once per year per source/location of chat.
 1001.12.2 Chat used in Portland cement concrete, granular road base, flowable fill, stabilized road base, ice
 control material, or chip seal delivered to MoDOT projects or property shall have Synthetic Precipitation
 Leaching (SPLP) testing conducted using EPA SW-846 Method 1312 as required by 40 CFR 278. T he
 leachate testing results shall not exceed the National Primary Drinking Water Standards for lead and
 cadmium and the gresh water chronic National Recommended Water Quality Criterion for zinc of 120 ug/1.
 Testing shall be conducted a minimum of once per year per source/location of chat.
 1001.12.3 Test reports shall be submitted to Construction and Materials prior to chat being used on any
 MoDOT project or property. T he report shall identify the location of the stockpile, date of sample, and
 specific test results as required in 40 CFR 278. Attached to the report shall be a certification from the
 supplier stating that the material furnished does not exceed the lead amounts specified in 40 CFR 278. T he
 Engineer will maintain copies of laboratory test results and certifications for a minimum of three years.
 1001.12.4 T he supplier shall also provide a summary at the end of each calendar year that identifies the
 quantity and location of chat shipped for use on MoDOT projects.
 1001.13 Dust Suppre ssants. Approved dust suppressant additives may be used during the crushing or
 aggregate handling process provided there is no detrimental effect to the aggregate or subsequent products
 made from the affected aggregate.
 1001.13.1 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Prior to approval and use of a dust suppressant
 additive, the manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a certified test report from an
 approved independent testing laboratory showing specific test results when tested in accordance with
 MoDOT Test Method T M 62. T he certified test report shall contain the manufacturer's name, brand name
 of material, date tested, date of manufacture and dosage rate of the additive used. In addition, the
 manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a sample representing the additive tested by the
 independent testing laboratory and accompanied by a material data sheet, an MSDS showing the brand
 name, composition or description of the product, the normal and maximum recommended dosage rates, the
 manner of identification on containers and a copy of the infrared spectrum. T he manufacturer shall certify
 that the material, when used at or below the maximum dosage rate, does not affect the properties of the
 aggregate or subsequent products made from the treated aggregate. T he manufacturer shall also guarantee
 that as long as the material is furnished under that brand and designation, the material will be of the same
 composition as originally approved and will in no way be altered or changed. Upon approval of the
 additive, the manufacturer and brand name will be placed on a list of qualified dust suppressant additives for
 aggregate.
 1001.13.2 T he aggregate supplier shall keep the inspector advised of the use of any dust suppressant
 material and shall provide for the inspection of such facilities. No dust suppressant shall be applied above
 the manufacturer's maximum recommended rate.
 1001.14 Produce r Q uality Manage me nt Plan
 1001.14.1 Scope . T his specification covers the acceptance criteria for material items produced under the
 producer Quality Management Plan (QMP). T he producer shall develop a QM plan for MoDOT 's
 acceptance as defined by one of the following:
 a) Producer QC and membership in an industry recognized audit program.
 b) Producer QC and independent QA testing.
 
 514
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1001.14.2 MoDOT shall perform audits including testing, inspection, and documentation review. QC
 testing, independent assurance testing, documentation, and conformance to product specifications may be
 subject to verification by MoDOT at the production facility or at the jobsite. MoDOT may audit the QMP
 of the producer at any time.
 1001.14.3 Q uality Manage me nt Re quire me nts. T he producer's QMP shall include the minimum
 following requirements:
 a) Frequency of QC sampling and testing.
 b) Frequency of the producer's QA sampling, testing and identification of a third party testing firm
 if applicable.
 c) Organizational structure of QC staff, job duties, and responsibilities including the identification
 of a QC manager.
 d) Method of documenting product compliance. T he producer shall provide documentation of the
 material meeting specification.
 e) Type of material to be produced.
 f) An independent dispute resolution testing firm (company name), contact person, address, and
 phone number.
 g) A process for tracking deficient work and corrective actions in accordance with Sec 1001.14.8.
 h) A process for addressing non-conforming work and corrective action requests in accordance
 with Sec 1001.14.9.
 i) A list of hold points for QC in accordance with Sec 1001.14.10.
 j) A list of MoDOT hold points in accordance with Sec 1001.14.10.
 1001.14.4 Third Party Re solution. T he third party shall be independent of the producer, contractor,
 MoDOT, consultants, and all project subcontractors or suppliers. All testing of material for dispute
 resolution shall be performed by a laboratory that is AASHT O Accreditation Program certified in the areas
 of the material being tested.
 1001.14.5 Te sting Pe rsonne l. Where applicable, testing shall be performed by individuals who are
 certified by the MoDOT Technician Certification Program or an accredited laboratory.
 1001.14.6 Re cord Re te ntion. T he producer shall maintain copies of the plant QMP, applicable
 AASHT O, AST M, MoDOT, and/or LPA standards and approved production drawings. T he records shall
 include information related to all components used to produce final product such as aggregate tests, steel
 certifications and mill tests, PAL numbers, QC test results and other material component documentation
 such as the bill of lading for material used in the production of the finished product. Records related to QC
 tester qualifications shall be retained. Records shall be retained for a minimum of three years and provided
 to the engineer in electronic form upon request.
 1001.14.7 Produce r Q uality Assurance . When required, QA testing by a third party shall be performed
 at the frequency required in each specification. Participation in an industry recognized auditing
 organization may be substituted for a third party QA testing.
 1001.14.8 Control fo De ficie nt Work. Deficient work is considered work that is found to be not
 specification compliant by QC. Deficient work may be corrected to be specification compliant as defined
 in the QMP. It is the responsibility of QC to identify, document, and correct deficient work. When QC
 personnel discovers deficient work that cannot be corrected the work becomes non-conforming. For nonconforming work, QC shall submit a Non-Conformance Report (NCR) to the engineer and contractor for
 acceptance or rejection.
 
 515
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1001.14.9 Control of Non-Conforming Work. Non-conforming work are items that are not compliant
 with the specifications and have gone through the QC process undiscovered or uncorrected. When nonconforming work is identified by QC, independent QA, MoDOT QA testing, or auditing of the contractor, a
 solution will be proposed by the producer in writing and approved or rejected by both the engineer and
 contractor.
 1001.14.9.1 Reoccurring non-conforming work shall be addressed by the producer and Construction and
 Materials Division by one of the following methods:
 a) T he producer develops a corrective action plan.
 b) Alteration of the QMP by the producer with the engineer's approval.
 c) Review producer's QC results with producer's associated independent organization. Producer to
 be re-audited by independent organization.
 1001.14.10 Hold Points
 1001.14.10.1 Hold points are events that require approval prior to continuation of work. Hold points
 occur at definable stages of work or progress phases when the succeeding work depends on acceptance of
 the preceding work. QC staff shall provide complete inspection reports and checklist to MoDOT personnel
 prior to all MoDOT hold points.
 1001.14.10.2 QC hold points are established by the QMP for compliance verification prior to any
 MoDOT hold point. At a minimum, a QC hold point shall occur just prior to or simultaneous with each
 MoDOT hold point.
 1001.14.10.3 A list of MoDOT hold points will be determined by the engineer. T he engineer may make
 changes to the MoDOT hold point list at any time. Following a MoDOT hold point inspection, all nonconforming work identified by MoDOT shall be corrected prior to continuing work and a new hold point
 shall be scheduled.
 1001.14.10.4 MoDOT may waive hold points at any time. Waivers will be in writing sent to the producer
 as soon as possible from the engineer.
 
 516
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1002
 AGGREGATE FO R ASPHALTIC CO NCRETE
 1002.1 Scope . T his specification covers aggregate to be used in asphaltic concrete.
 1002.2 Coarse Aggre gate .
 1002.2.1 All coarse aggregate shall consist of sound, durable rock, free from cemented lumps or
 objectionable coatings. When tested in accordance with AASHT O T 96, the percentage of wear shall not
 exceed 50. T he percentage of deleterious substances shall not exceed the following values, and the sum of
 percentages of all deleterious substances shall not exceed 8.0 percent.
 Deleterious Material Percent by Weight
 Deleterious Rock
 8.0
 Shale
 1.0
 Other Foreign Material
 0.5
 
 1002.2.1.1 T he above requirements apply to combined aggregates during production when used in
 accordance with Sec 403.
 1002.2.1.2 Crushed stone shall be obtained from rock of uniform quality. Rock tested from any
 combination of ledges for source approval, and trial mix samples, shall meet the following criteria.
 Property
 Value
 Los Angeles Abrasion, AASHTO T 96, percent loss, max 50
 Absorption, AASHTO T 85, percent, max
 4.0
 
 1002.2.2 Gravel aggregate shall be washed sufficiently to remove any objectional coating and shall meet
 the following criteria for source approval and trial mix samples.
 Property
 Value
 Los Angeles Abrasion, AASHTO T 96, percent loss, max 50
 Absorption, AASHTO T 85, percent, max
 5.5
 
 1002.2.3 Steel slag consisting principally of a fused mixture of oxides and silicates shall be a synthetic
 aggregate produced as a by-product of basic oxygen, electric or open hearth steel making furnaces. T he
 steel slag shall be aged at least three months after crushing and screening. Steel slag, which has been
 previously crushed, screened, and aged three months will not be required to receive additional aging. Steel
 slag from one source shall not be blended with steel slag from a different source.
 1002.3 Fine Aggre gate .
 1002.3.1 Fine aggregate for asphaltic concrete shall be a fine, granular material passing the 3/8-inch sieve,
 naturally produced by the disintegration of rock of a siliceous nature and/or manufactured by the
 mechanical reduction of sound durable rock in accordance with Secs 1002.2.1.2 and 1002.2.2. With written
 approval from the engineer and compliance with this specification, chat sand produced from flint chat in
 the Joplin area, dolomite chat as produced in the southeast lead belt area, fines manufactured from igneous
 rock, chert gravel or wet bottom boiler slag may be used as fine aggregate for asphaltic concrete. Fine
 aggregate shall be free from cemented or conglomerated lumps and shall not have any coating or injurious
 material. T he percentage of deleterious substances shall not exceed the following values:
 Item
 Percent by Weight
 Clay lumps and shale
 1.0
 Total lightweight particles,
 0.5
 including coal and lignite
 Other deleterious substances
 0.1
 
 1002.3.2 T he total lightweight particle requirement will not apply to wet bottom boiler slag, angular chert
 sand or manufactured sand.
 
 517
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1002.4 Mine ral Fille r. Mineral filler shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 17. Prior to approval and
 use of mineral filler for SMA mixtures, the manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a
 certified test report from an approved independent testing laboratory showing specific test results when
 tested in accordance with applicable sections of AASHT O M17 and MoDOT Test Method T M-73. T he
 certified test report shall contain the manufacturer's name, product, date tested and date of manufacture. In
 addition, the manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a sample representing the mineral
 filler tested by the independent testing laboratory and accompanied by a material data sheet and an MSDS
 showing the product and composition or description of the product. T he manufacturer shall guarantee that
 as long as the material is furnished under that brand and designation, the material will be of the same
 composition as originally approved and will in no way be altered or changed. Upon approval of the mineral
 filler, the manufacturer and product will be placed on a list of qualified SMA mineral fillers.
 1002.5 Hydrate d Lime . Hydrated lime shall be thoroughly dry and free of lumps. Hydrated lime shall be
 in accordance with AASHT O M 303, Type I or II, except the gradation shall be determined in accordance
 with AASHT O T 37.
 
 518
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1003
 AGGREGATE FO R SEAL CO ATS
 1003.1 Scope . T his specification covers aggregate to be used for seal coat.
 1003.2 Aggre gate . Aggregate for seal coats shall consist of sound durable rock particles, free from
 objectionable coatings.
 1003.2.1 When tested in accordance with AASHT O T 96, the percentage of wear shall not exceed 50
 percent. T he sum of the percentages of all deleterious substances shall not exceed 2.0 percent for Grade A
 aggregate, 4.0 percent for Grade B or 8.0 percent for Grade C aggregate, and the aggregate shall meet the
 following criteria:
 G rade A1 G rade B 1
 G rade C
 & A2
 & B2
 Aggregate
 Aggregate Aggregate
 Deleterious rock, percent by weight, max
 2.0
 4.0
 8.0
 Shale, percent by weight, max
 0.5
 0.75
 1.0
 Other foreign material, percent by weight, max
 0.5
 0.5
 0.5
 Two fractured faces, percent, min
 100
 100
 100
 Thin, elongated particles, ASTM D 4791, 5:1,
 10
 N/A
 N/A
 percent, maxa
 Micro-Deval, AASHTO T 327, percent, max
 18
 20
 N/A
 Property
 
 a Test
 
 material retained on the No. 4 sieve.
 
 1003.2.2 T he aggregate shall be in accordance with the following requirements for the grade specified in
 the contract:
 G rade A1 G rade A2 G rade B 1 G rade B 2 G rade C
 Aggregate Aggregate Aggregate Aggregate Aggregate
 Sieve Size Percent
 Percent
 Percent
 Percent
 Percent
 Passing by Passing by Passing by Passing by Passing by
 Weight
 Weight
 Weight
 Weight
 Weight
 1/2"
 100
 100
 100
 100
 100
 3/8"
 97-100
 100
 95-100
 100
 95-100
 1/4"
 -97-100
 -95-100
 -No. 4
 0-25
 -0-30
 -0-35
 No. 8
 -0-30
 -0-30
 -No. 200 a, b
 
 0-1.0
 
 0-1.5
 
 0-2
 
 0-2.5
 
 0-2
 
 a T he
 
 percent passing the No. 200 sieve may be increased by 1.0
 percent provided the aggregate is pre-coated with bituminous material.
 bT hese values may be raised by 0.5% at the destination to account for
 handling provided the material meets this gradation at the source.
 1003.2.3 Crushed stone shall be obtained from rock of uniform quality. Rock from individual ledges and
 gravel tested for initial source approval shall meet the following criteria:
 G rade A1 G rade B 1
 G rade C
 & A2
 & B2
 Aggregate
 Aggregate Aggregate
 Absorption, AASHTO T 85, percent, max
 2.0
 4.0
 4.0
 Property
 
 1003.2.4 Lightweight aggregate shall be in accordance with the following requirements for the grade
 specified in the contract:
 G rade
 G rade
 G rade C
 A1 & A2 B 1 & B 2
 Aggregate
 Aggregate Aggregate
 Absorption, ASSHTO T 85, percent, max
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 Los Angeles Abrasion for Lightweight
 Aggregate, MoDOT Test Method
 50
 50
 50
 Property
 
 519
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 TM 78, percent, max
 
 520
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1004
 GRADED AGGREGATE FO R BITUMINO US SURFACES
 1004.1 Scope . T his specification covers aggregate to be used in bituminous surfacing.
 1004.2 Coarse Aggre gate .
 1004.2.1 All coarse aggregate shall consist of sound, durable rock, free from cemented lumps or
 objectionable coatings. T he percentage of deleterious substances shall not exceed the following values and
 the sum of percentages of all deleterious substances shall not exceed 8.0 percent.
 Deleterious Material
 Percent by Weight
 Deleterious Rock
 8.0
 Mud Balls and Shale Combined
 2.0
 Clay, uniformly dispersed
 3.0
 Other Foreign Material
 0.5
 
 1004.2.1.1 T he above requirements apply to combined aggregates during production when used in
 accordance with Sec 401 and 402.
 1004.2.1.2 If a density requirement is specified for asphaltic concrete, the total quantity of chert in each
 size or fraction of produced crushed stone aggregate, including that permitted as deleterious, shall not vary
 by more than 10 percentage points from the quantity present in the aggregate used in the approved
 laboratory job mixtures.
 1004.2.1.3 Crushed stone shall be produced from rock of uniform quality. Rock tested from any
 combination of ledges for source approval and trial mix samples shall meet the following criteria.
 Property
 Value
 Los Angeles Abrasion, AASHTO T 96, percent loss, max. 55
 Absorption, AASHTO T 85, percent, max.
 4.5
 
 1004.2.2 Gravel aggregate shall be washed sufficiently to remove any objectionable coating and shall meet
 the following criteria for source approval and trial mix samples.
 Property
 Value
 Los Angeles Abrasion, AASHTO T 96, percent loss, max. 55
 Absorption, AASHTO T 85, percent, max.
 5.5
 
 1004.2.3 Steel slag consisting principally of a fused mixture of oxides and silicates shall be a synthetic
 aggregate produced as a by-product of basic oxygen, electric or open hearth steel making furnaces. T he
 steel slag shall be aged at least three months after crushing and screening. Steel slag, which has been
 previously crushed, screened, and aged three months will not be required to receive additional aging. Steel
 slag from one source shall not be blended with steel slag from a different source.
 1004.3 T he aggregate shall be in accordance with the following requirements for the grade specified in the
 contract. If grade is not specified, any listed grade may be used.
 Percent Passing
 G rade Type of Material
 Crushed Stone or
 1
 P orphyry
 2
 Gravel
 3
 Chat
 
 3/4 in. 1/2 in.
 
 Sieve Size
 3/8 in.
 #4
 
 #8
 
 100 95 – 100 65 – 95 20 –55 2 – 20
 100 95 – 100
 100 95 – 100
 
 ….
 ….
 
 #30 #200
 ….
 
 0–5
 
 40 – 80 15 – 50 0 – 30 0 – 5
 45 – 85 30 – 60 0 – 30 0 – 5
 
 521
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1005
 AGGREGATE FO R CO NCRETE
 1005.1 Scope . T his specification covers aggregate to be used for concrete construction.
 1005.2 Coarse Aggre gate .
 1005.2.1 All coarse aggregate for concrete shall consist of sound, durable rock, free from objectionable
 coatings and frozen and cemented lumps. T he percentage of deleterious substances shall not exceed the
 following values, and the sum of percentages of all deleterious substances, exclusive of Items 5 and 6, shall
 not exceed 6.0 percent. For crushed stone, the percentage of wear shall not exceed 50 when tested in
 accordance with AASHT O T 96.
 Deleterious Material
 Percent by Weight
 Deleterious Rock
 6.0
 Shale
 1.0
 Chert in Limestone
 4.0
 Other Foreign Material
 0.5
 Material P assing No. 200 Sieve
 a
 2.5
 Gradations D & E
 Thin or Elongated
 5.0
 a
 
 Value may be raised to 3.0 percent, providing the
 material passing the #200 sieve in the fine aggregate
 is less than or equal to 1.0 percent.
 1005.2.1.1 T he above requirements will apply to each size or fraction of aggregate produced.
 1005.2.1.2 Crushed stone shall be obtained from rock of uniform quality. Rock tested for initial approval
 shall be in accordance with the criteria below. Source approval and production samples shall also meet the
 following criteria:
 Property
 Los Angeles Abrasion, AASHTO T 96,
 percent loss, max
 Absorption, AASHTO T 85, percent, max.:
 (a) P ortland Cement Concrete P avement
 (b) P ortland Cement Concrete Masonry
 Soundness, MoDOT Test Method TM 14,
 percent loss, max.:
 (a) P ortland Cement Concrete P avement
 (b) P ortland Cement Concrete Masonry
 
 Value
 50
 -3.5
 
 -18.0
 
 Durability Factor, AASHTO T 161 P rocedure B,
 percent, min:
 (a) P ortland Cement Concrete P avement
 75 a
 (b) P ortland Cement Concrete Masonry
 -a
 
 Approval will be based on maximum aggregate size
 produced that meets durability requirements.
 1005.2.1.3 Gravel shall be washed and shall be in accordance with the criteria below for initial approval.
 Source approval and production samples shall also meet the following criteria:
 Property
 Los Angeles Abrasion, AASHTO T 96, percent loss, max.
 Absorption, AASHTO T 85, percent, max.
 Soundness, MoDOT Test Method TM 14, percent loss, max.
 
 Value
 45
 4.5
 18.0
 
 1005.2.1.4 T he engineer reserves the right to use additional test methods, such as
 AST M C 586, AASHT O T 161 or other appropriate tests, to measure the soundness and durability of
 aggregate for use in concrete when deemed necessary.
 1005.2.2 Coarse aggregate for concrete pavement or base course shall be crushed stone or porphyry.
 
 522
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1005.2.3 Grade F Aggre gate . Coarse aggregate for Portland cement concrete pavement, base and
 approach slabs for bridges that is not produced from the Burlington, Keokuk, Cedar Valley (formerly
 Callaway) or Warsaw limestone formations, which is obtained from sources in the following areas shall have
 a maximum top size of ¾ inch:
 (a) State of Kansas, Iowa and Nebraska.
 (b) Counties of Missouri – Adair, Andrew, Atchison, Bates, Benton, Buchanan, Caldwell, Carroll,
 Cass, Cedar, Chariton, Clay, Clinton, Daviess, DeKalb, Gentry, Grundy, Harrison, Henry, Holt,
 Jackson, Johnson, Lafayette, Linn, Livingston, Mercer, Macon, Nodaway, Pettis, Platte, Putnam,
 Randolph, Ray, St. Clair, Saline, Schuyler, Sullivan, Vernon and Worth.
 1005.2.4 Coarse aggregate for concrete for structures, except as specified in Sec 1005.2.5, may be gravel or
 crushed stone. Coarse aggregate for Class B, B-1, B-2, MB-2 or Seal concrete shall be in accordance with
 either Gradation D or E. Coarse aggregate for Class A-1 concrete shall be in accordance with Gradation E.
 G radation D
 Percent by Weight
 P assing 1-inch sieve
 100
 P assing 3/4-inch sieve
 85-100
 P assing 3/8-inch sieve
 15-55
 P assing No. 4 sieve
 0-10
 G radation E
 Percent by Weight
 P assing 3/4-inch sieve
 100
 P assing 1/2-inch sieve
 70-100
 P assing 3/8-inch sieve
 30-70
 P assing No. 4 sieve
 0-20
 P assing No. 8 sieve
 0-6
 
 1005.2.5 Coarse aggregate for ornamental concrete shall be crushed stone in accordance with Sec 1005.2.4,
 Gradation E. However, the use of coarse aggregate containing more than 2 percent chert will not be
 permitted.
 1005.3 Fine Aggre gate .
 1005.3.1 Fine aggregate for concrete shall be a fine granular material naturally produced by the
 disintegration of rock of a siliceous nature, or shall be manufactured from an approved limestone or
 dolomite source as defined in Sec 1005.2. By specific approval from the engineer, chat sand produced from
 flint chat in the Joplin area or fines manufactured from igneous rock or chert gravel may be used. Fine
 aggregate shall be free from cemented or conglomerated lumps and shall not have any coating of injurious
 material. T he percentage of deleterious substances shall not exceed the following values:
 Deleterious Material
 Percent by Weight
 Clay Lumps and Shale
 0.25
 Coal and Lignite
 0.50
 Total Lightweight P articles, Including Coal and Lignite
 0.50
 Material P assing No. 200 Sieve
 (a) Natural Sand
 2.0
 (b) Manufactured Sand
 4.0
 Other Deleterious Substances
 0.10
 
 1005.3.2 T he total lightweight particle requirement will not apply to angular chert sand or manufactured
 sand.
 1005.3.3 Fine aggregate shall produce a mortar having a seven-day compressive strength of at least 90
 percent of a control mortar developed at the same proportions, using standard Ottawa sand. Tests shall be
 performed in accordance with AASHT O T 106. Cement used in the tests shall be Type I, in accordance
 with Sec 1019. AASHT O T 106 may be waived provided the fine aggregate produces a glass color standard
 lighter than Organic Platte No. 3, in accordance with AASHT O T 21.
 
 523
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1005.3.4 Fine aggregate for ornamental concrete shall be free from coal and lignite material when tested in
 accordance with AASHT O T 113.
 1005.3.5 All fine aggregate for PCCM shall meet the following gradation requirements:
 Sieve
 Percent by Weight
 P assing 3/8-inch sieve
 100
 P assing No. 4 sieve
 95-100
 P assing No. 8 sieve
 70-100
 P assing No. 16 sieve
 45-90
 P assing No. 30 sieve
 15-65
 P assing No. 50 sieve
 5-30
 P assing No. 100 sieve
 0-10
 
 1005.4 Lightwe ight Aggre gate .
 1005.4.1 Lightweight aggregates shall be prepared by expanding, calcining, or sintering argillaceous
 material such as clay, shales, and slates.
 1005.4.2 Grading T he grading shall be uniform and conform to the requirements given in Table I.
 1005.4.3 Unit We ight. T he unit weight of lightweight aggregates shall not exceed the following:
 Dry, Loose Weight, Max. lb/cu f t
 Fine Aggregate
 70
 Coarse Aggregate
 55
 
 1005.4.3.1 Uniformity of We ight. If the unit weight of any shipment of lightweight aggregate when
 tested in accordance with AASHT O T 19 is found to vary by more than 10 percent from that of the
 sample submitted for source approval, the aggregate shipment may be rejected.
 1005.4.4 Soundne ss. When tested in accordance with AASHT O T 104, the loss of lightweight fine or
 coarse aggregate in 5 cycles of the accelerated soundness test shall not exceed 8 percent if sodium sulfate is
 used or 10 percent if magnesium sulfate is used.
 1005.4.5 Drying Shrinkage . T he drying shrinkage of concrete specimens prepared and tested in
 accordance with AASHT O M 195, shall not exceed 0.07 percent.
 1005.4.6 Sampling. Samples of fine and coarse aggregate shall be furnished by the contractor for source
 approval. Other samples shall be taken from shipments at intervals specified by the engineer.
 Table I
 G rading Requirements f or Lightweight Aggregate
 Percent Passing
 Sieve Sizes
 1 1/2" 1"
 3/4" 1/2" 3/8" No. 4 No. 8 No. 16 No. 50 No. 100
 
 G rade
 Size
 Fine Aggregate
 No. 4 to 0
 --------100
 Coarse Aggregate
 1
 1" to 1/2"
 100 90-100 20-55 0-10
 0-5
 2
 1" to No. 4
 100 95-100 --25-60
 --3
 3/4" to No. 4 --100 90-100 --20-55
 4
 1/2" to No. 4 ----100 90-100 40-70
 5
 3/8" to No. 8 ------100 85-100
 
 85-100
 
 ---
 
 ----0-10 0-5
 0-10 0-5
 0-15 0-5
 10-30 0-10
 
 524
 
 40-80 10-35
 --------0-5
 
 -----------
 
 5-20
 -----------
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1006
 AGGREGATE FO R SURFACING
 1006.1 Scope . T his specification covers aggregate to be used for surfacing.
 1006.2 Aggregate for surfacing shall be composed durable particles of rock or reclaimed concrete. When
 tested in accordance with AASHT O T 96, the wear shall not exceed 60 percent. T he deleterious substances
 shall not exceed the following values and the sum of percentages of all deleterious substances shall not
 exceed 12 percent.
 Deleterious Material
 Percent by Weight
 Deleterious Rock and Shale
 12.0
 Mud Balls
 5.0
 Other Foreign Material
 2.0
 
 1006.3 Aggregate shall be in accordance with the following for the grade specified in the contract:
 Type of
 Material
 
 G rade
 Aa
 a
 
 Gravel
 
 Percent Passing
 Sieve Sizes
 1 in. 3/4 in. 3/8 in. No. 4 No. 10 No. 200
 100 80-100
 
 --b
 
 B
 
 Crushed Stone or Reclaimed Concrete 100
 
 ---
 
 65
 
 C
 
 Chat
 
 ---
 
 ---
 
 100
 
 60 b 10-35
 
 0-10
 
 ---
 
 5-25
 
 ---
 
 80 b
 
 45 b
 
 ---
 
 a Type
 
 1 Aggregate for Base may be used, except all material shall be in accordance with
 Sec 1007.
 bIndicates maximum permitted.
 1006.4 If the quantity is of a size that makes sampling not practical, this material may be accepted on
 certification or visual inspection as allowed in Sec 106.1.4.
 1006.4.1 If the quantity is less than 500 tons, a commercially available grade of aggregate may be accepted
 on certification or visual inspection.
 
 525
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1007
 AGGREGATE FO R BASE
 1007.1 Scope . T his specification covers aggregate to be used for base.
 1007.2 Type 1 Aggre gate .
 1007.2.1 Type 1 aggregate for base shall consist of crushed stone, sand and gravel or reclaimed asphalt or
 concrete. T he aggregate shall not contain more than 15 percent deleterious rock and shale. T he fraction
 passing No. 40 sieve shall have a maximum plasticity index of six. Any sand, silt and clay and any
 deleterious rock and shale shall be uniformly distributed throughout the material.
 1007.2.2 T he aggregate shall be in accordance with the following gradation requirements:
 Sieve
 Percent by Weight
 P assing 1-inch
 100
 P assing 1/2-inch
 60-90
 P assing No. 4
 35-60
 P assing No. 30
 10-35
 
 1007.3 Type 5 Aggre gate .
 1007.3.1 Type 5 aggregate for base shall consist of crushed stone, sand and gravel or reclaimed asphalt or
 concrete. T he aggregate shall not contain more than 15 percent deleterious rock and shale. T he fraction
 passing the No. 40 sieve shall have a plasticity index not to exceed six. Any sand, silt and clay, and any
 deleterious rock and shale shall be uniformly distributed throughout the material.
 1007.3.2 Type 5 aggregate shall be in accordance with the following gradation requirements:
 Sieve
 Percent by Weight
 P assing 1-inch
 100
 P assing 1/2-inch
 60-90
 P assing No. 4
 35-60
 P assing No. 30
 10-35
 P assing No. 200
 0-15
 
 1007.4 Type 7 Aggre gate .
 1007.4.1 Type 7 aggregate for base shall consist of crushed stone, sand and gravel, or reclaimed asphalt or
 concrete. T he aggregate shall not contain more than 15 percent deleterious rock and shale. T he fraction
 passing the No. 40 sieve shall have a plasticity index not to exceed six. Any sand, silt and clay, and any
 deleterious rock and shale shall be uniformly distributed throughout the material.
 1007.4.2 Type 7 aggregate shall be in accordance with the following gradation requirements:
 Sieve
 Percent by Weight
 P assing 1 1/2-inch
 100
 P assing 1-inch
 70-100
 P assing No. 8
 15-50
 P assing No. 200
 0-12
 
 526
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1009
 AGGREGATE FO R DRAINAGE
 1009.1 Scope . T his specification covers material requirements for aggregate as specified for various
 drainage systems.
 1009.2 Q uality. All aggregate shall be in accordance with Sec 1002, and shall be of the material and
 gradation specified herein.
 1009.3 Gradation.
 1009.3.1 Grade 1. T he aggregate shall be sand and shall be in accordance with Sec 1005.3.
 1009.3.2 Grade 2. T he aggregate shall be a washed sand-gravel mixture in accordance with the following
 gradation requirements:
 Sieve Size Percent by Weight
 1-inch
 100
 1/2-inch
 55-90
 No. 10
 25-50
 No. 40
 10-30
 No. 100
 0-10
 No. 200
 0-3
 
 1009.3.3 Grade 3. T he aggregate shall be gravel, crushed stone, reclaimed concrete, or other approved
 material meeting on the gradation requirements for Sec 1005.2.
 1009.3.4 Grade 4. T he aggregate shall be crushed limestone or dolomite or reclaimed concrete, in
 accordance with the following gradation requirements:
 G radation A
 Sieve Size Percent by Weight
 1 1/2-inch
 100
 1-inch
 95-100
 1/2-inch
 25-60
 No. 4
 0-10
 No. 8
 0-5
 G radation B
 Sieve Size Percent by Weight
 1-inch
 100
 3/4-inch
 90-100
 3/8-inch
 20-55
 No. 4
 0-10
 No. 8
 0-5
 
 1009.3.5 Grade 5. T he aggregate shall be crushed limestone or dolomite or reclaimed concrete, in
 accordance with the following gradation requirements:
 Sieve Size Percent by Weight
 1 1/2-inch
 100
 1-inch
 95-100
 1/2-inch
 60-80
 No. 4
 40-55
 No. 8
 5-25
 No. 16
 0-8
 No. 50
 0-5
 
 527
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1010
 SELECT GRANULAR BACKFILL FO R STRUCTURAL SYSTEMS
 1010.1 Scope . T his specification covers backfill material used as part of a mechanically stabilized earth
 wall system or in other applications requiring an engineered backfill material.
 1010.2 Mate rial. Aggregate used for backfill material may consist of gravel, crushed stone, reclaimed
 concrete, or other approved material meeting the requirements of this Section. T he requirements for the
 gradation of the material, the general makeup of the material, and the testing of the material will apply to
 all potential uses of this material, unless otherwise specified on the plans or in the contract documents. T he
 electrochemical requirements listed in this specification will apply to backfill material used for
 mechanically stabilized earth wall systems.
 1010.3 Ge ne ral.
 1010.3.1 To ensure proper functioning of the structure, the backfill material used for structural
 applications shall be in accordance with the following:
 Sieve Size Percent Passing by Weight
 4-inch
 100
 No. 40
 0-60
 No. 200
 0-10*
 
 * May be increased to 15% if gradation
 sample is obtained from the compacted
 backfill material.
 1010.3.2 T he frequency of sampling of the backfill material necessary to assure gradation control
 throughout construction shall be as directed by the engineer.
 1010.3.3 T he plasticity index (PI) of the backfill material shall be determined in accordance with
 AASHT O T 90 and shall not exceed 6.
 1010.3.4 T he angle of internal friction for the backfill material shall be no less than
 34 degrees. No testing will be required whenever 80 percent of the particle sizes are greater than 0.75 inch
 or whenever the backfill material consists entirely of crushed stone. When testing is required, testing shall
 be in accordance with one of the tests specified below.
 1010.3.5 T he angle of internal friction may be determined by the direct shear test in accordance with
 AASHT O T 236. T his test shall be performed on the portion of the material finer than the No. 10 sieve,
 utilizing a sample of the material compacted to 95 percent of the maximum density as determined by
 AASHT O T 99, Methods C or D (with oversize correction as outlined in Note 7 in that publication), at
 optimum moisture content.
 1010.3.6 For select granular backfill other than crushed stone the organic content of the backfill material
 shall be less than or equal to one percent and shall be measured in accordance with AASSHT O T 267 for
 material finer than the No. 10 sieve.
 1010.4 Ele ctroche mical Re quire me nts. T he following electrochemical requirements will apply to this
 backfill material whenever the material is used for mechanically stabilized earth wall systems.
 1010.4.1 Me tallic Soil Re inforce me nt.
 1010.4.1.1 When metallic soil reinforcements are used, the backfill material shall be in accordance with the
 electrochemical requirements as follows:
 Requirement
 Test Method
 Resistivity > 2000 ohm-cm AASHTO T 288
 pH of 5-10**
 AASHTO T 289
 Chlorides ≤ 100 ppm
 AASHTO T 291
 
 528
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 Sulfates ≤ 200 ppm
 
 AASHTO T 290*
 
 * Water soluble sulfates shall be tested in accordance with
 AASHT O T 290 Method A-Gravimetric Method with the
 following modifications: Per section 13, follow subsection
 13.1 through 13.3 as stated in the test procedure. T ransfer
 250 ml of extracted sample to a 400-ml plastic beaker and
 place in a 90 C oven for 30 minutes. A blank should be run
 concurrently with the test sample using 250 ml of DI water.
 After 30 minutes, add 10 ml of barium chloride (100g/L) to
 test sample and blank. Place test sample and blank back
 into a 90 C oven and let samples digest for 12 to 24 hours.
 Filter through a retentive paper, wash the precipitate
 thoroughly with hot DI water, place the paper and contents
 in a weighted porcelain crucible, and slowly char and
 consume the paper without inflaming. Ignite at 1000 C for
 2 hours, cool in a desiccator, and determine the mass as
 grams of barium sulfate. Subtract the blank and convert
 grams of barium sulfate to mg/kg of sulfate ion content.
 ** Use pH of 5-9 for aluminized soil reinforcement.
 1010.4.1.2 Whenever the resistivity of the backfill material is greater than or equal to 5000 ohm-cm, the
 chlorides and sulfates requirements may be waived.
 1010.4.1.3 Resistivity shall be tested by the contractor in accordance with AASHT O T 288. Resistivity
 result will be defined by the minimum resistivity noted during the test. Resistivity shall be tested a minimum
 of once per 30,000 tons, by the Contractor and a minimum of once by quality assurance representing the
 engineer. Minimum sample frequency is per project, per source, per product. For samples that do not meet
 specifications a split sample shall be obtained from the source stockpile for final comparison testing.
 Contact the State Construction and Materials Engineer for acceptance.
 1010.4.2 Polyme ric Soil Re inforce me nt. When polymeric soil reinforcements are used, the backfill
 material shall be in accordance with the electrochemical requirements as follows:
 Requirement Test Method
 pH of 4.5-9 AASHTO T 289
 
 1010.5 Ce rtification and Acce ptance .
 1010.5.1 T he contractor shall furnish to the engineer written certification that the backfill material
 provided complies with the applicable sections of this specification. Test results in the certification shall be
 within one year from the start of construction of each wall. Copies of all test results for tests performed to
 ensure compliance with this specification shall be furnished to the engineer. T he engineer will assure a
 minimum of one complete set of quality assurance tests for each complete certification supplied by the
 contractor, within the same time constraints.
 1010.5.2 Acceptance will be based on the written certification, accompanying test reports, and any
 applicable tests performed as directed by the engineer.
 
 529
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1011
 GEO TEXTILE
 1011.1 Scope . T his specification covers geotextile for use in subsurface drainage, sediment control and
 erosion control, or as a permeable separator.
 1011.2 Acce ptance . Acceptance of the material will be based on the manufacturer's certification and upon
 the results of such tests as may be performed by the engineer.
 1011.3 Mate rial. Geotextiles shall be in accordance with the physical and chemical requirements of
 AASHT O M 288 for the specified application, except as modified in this specification.
 1011.3.1 Subsurface Drainage Ge ote xtile . Subsurface drainage geotextile shall be used in subsurface
 drainage as a filter to protect drainage media from clogging with fines from adjacent soil. Typical
 applications include the lining of drainage trenches and the wrapping of drainpipes.
 1011.3.1.1 T he minimum permittivity shall be 1.0 sec-1.
 1011.3.1.2 T he material shall be AASHT O Class 2.
 1011.3.2 Te mporary Silt Fe nce Ge ote xtile . Temporary silt fence geotextile shall be used in supported or
 non-supported sediment control fencing.
 1011.3.3 Pe rmane nt Erosion Control Ge ote xtile . Permanent erosion control geotextile shall be used
 when the erosion control measure will not be removed, such as erosion control of slopes and channels when
 placed under a rock blanket, rock ditch liner, etc.
 1011.3.3.1 T he minimum permittivity shall be 1.0 sec-1.
 1011.3.3.2 T he material shall be either AASHT O Class 1 or Class 2.
 1011.3.4 Se paration Ge ote xtile . Separation geotextile shall be used as a separation material to prevent
 mixing of dissimilar material, and to control migration of backfill material through joints in structural
 elements.
 1011.3.4.1 T he minimum permittivity shall be 1.0 sec-1.
 1011.3.4.2 T he material shall be AASHT O Class 1.
 1011.3.5 Erosion Control Blanke ts. Erosion control blankets (ECB) shall be certified by the
 manufacturer to meet the following criteria:
 ECB Type
 Type 1
 Type 2
 Type 3
 Type 4
 Type 5
 
 Netting Type
 Longevity
 Single, Quickly degradable 45-60 days
 Single P hotodegradable
 12 months
 Double P hotodegradable 12-18 months
 Double P hotodegradable
 24 months
 Double P hotodegradable
 36 months
 
 Slopes
 Soil Type
 3:1 or flatter Clay
 3:1 or flatter Sandy
 2:1 or flatter Clay
 2:1 or flatter Sandy
 1:1 or flatter Any
 
 1011.3.6 Turf Re inforce me nt Mats. T urf reinforcement mats (T RM) shall be certified by the
 manufacturer for open flow channels and shall meet the following calculated shear stress:
 TRM Type Calculated Shear Stress (lbs/f t2)
 Type 1
 3.5 – 6
 Type 2
 6.1 – 8
 Type 3
 8.1 – 10
 Type 4
 10.1 or greater
 
 530
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1011.3.7 Unbonde d Concre te O ve rlay Inte rlaye r. Unbonded concrete overlay interlayers shall have
 the following material properties:
 Property
 Fabric Type
 Mass per unit area
 
 Requirement
 Non-woven Geotextile
 Min. 14.8 oz/sq.yd
 
 Thickness
 under load (pressure)
 
 0.29 psi: ≥ 0.12 in
 2.9 psi: ≥ 0.10 in
 29 psi: ≥ 0.04 in
 
 Tensile strength
 Maximum elongation
 
 ≥ 685 lb/ft
 ≤ 130%
 
 Water permeability in normal direction
 under load (pressure)
 
 ≥ 3.3×10 -4 ft/s
 [under pressure of 2.9 psi]
 
 Test Method
 ASTM D 5261
 ASTM D 5199,
 modified under
 loads of 0.29, 2.9,
 and 29 psi
 ASTM D 4595
 ASTM D 4595
 ASTM D 5493
 
 ≥ 1.6×10 -3 ft/s
 
 Water permeability in the plane direction
 [under pressure of 2.9 psi]
 of the fabric (transmittivity)
 ASTM D 6574
 ≥ 6.6×10 -4 ft/s
 under load (pressure)
 [under pressure of 29 psi]
 Weather resistance
 Resistance ≥ 60%
 EN 12224
 Alkali resistance
 ≥ 96% P olypropylene/P olyethylene
 
 1011.4 Ce rtification. T he contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification to the engineer for each
 lot of material furnished stating the name of the manufacturer, the chemical composition of the filaments
 or yarns and certifying that the material supplied is in accordance with this specification. T he certification
 shall include or have attached typical results of tests from specific lots for all specified requirements.
 
 531
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1012
 GEO CO MPO SITE DRAINAGE MATERIAL
 1012.1 Scope . T his specification covers material for use as geocomposite drains.
 1012.2 Acce ptance . Acceptance of the material will be based on the manufacturer's certification and upon
 the results of such tests as may be performed by the engineer.
 1012.3 Mate rial.
 1012.3.1 Ge ne ral. During shipment and storage, the geocomposite material shall be protected from direct
 sunlight, ultraviolet rays, temperatures greater than 140 F, mud, dust and debris.
 1012.3.2 Edge Drain. T he edge drain shall consist of a plastic core completely surrounded by geotextile.
 1012.3.2.1 T he edge drain shall have nominal dimensions of 1 to 1 1/2 inches in thickness x 12 inches in
 height.
 1012.3.2.2 T he edge drain shall have a minimum flow capacity of 15 gallons per minute per foot of width,
 as determined by AST M D 4716, when tested under a confining stress of 10 psi or more at a gradient of 0.1
 or less.
 1012.3.2.3 T he edge drain shall have a minimum compressive strength of either 7,000 psf at a maximum
 deformation of 10 percent of the original thickness when tested in accordance with AST M D 1621, or
 8,000 psf at a maximum deformation of 20 percent when tested in accordance with AST M D 695.
 1012.3.2.4 T he core shall provide a minimum of 10 percent open area to facilitate water entry or cross
 flow and shall be composed of plastic, which is physically and chemically stable under a normal range of
 service conditions.
 1012.3.2.5 T he geotextile shall be in accordance with Sec 1011 for subsurface drainage geotextile.
 1012.3.3 Ve rtical Drain at End Be nts. T he vertical drain shall consist of a plastic core with a geotextile
 attached to one or both sides.
 1012.3.3.1 T he vertical drain shall be no less than 3/8 inch or no greater than one inch in thickness.
 1012.3.3.2 T he vertical drain shall have a minimum flow capacity of 5 gallons per minute per foot of
 width in either principal direction.
 1012.3.3.3 T he vertical drain shall have a minimum compressive strength of 6,000 psf at a maximum
 deformation of 10 percent of the original thickness, when tested in accordance with AST M D 1621.
 1012.3.3.4 T he core shall be composed of plastic which is physically and chemically stable under a normal
 range of service conditions.
 1012.3.3.5 Geotextile shall be in accordance with Sec 1011 for subsurface drainage geotextile.
 1012.4 Ce rtification. T he contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification to the engineer for each
 lot of material furnished stating the name of the manufacturer, and that the material supplied is in
 accordance with this specification. T he certification shall include or have attached typical results of tests
 from specific lots for all specified requirements, including the geotextile.
 
 532
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1013
 MISCELLANEO US DRAINAGE MATERIAL
 1013.1 Scope . T his specification covers material requirements for various plastic pipes and other
 miscellaneous items required to provide underdrainage and edge drainage as specified elsewhere.
 1013.2 Acce ptance . Acceptance of the material will be based on visual examination and the results of such
 tests as required by the engineer.
 1013.3 Mate rial. Pipe material shall be PVC or HDPE.
 1013.3.1 Plastic Pipe . T he pipe material shall have a minimum pipe stiffness of 46 psi.
 1013.3.1.1 Corrugated PVC sewer pipe with a smooth interior and fittings shall be in accordance with
 AST M F 949.
 1013.3.1.2 Smooth wall PVC underdrain pipe and fittings shall be in accordance with AST M D 3034.
 1013.3.1.3 Corrugated PE pipe with a smooth interior and fittings shall be in accordance with AASHT O M
 252, Type S or SP.
 1013.3.1.4 Schedule 40 PVC pipe shall be in accordance with AST M D 1785.
 1013.4 Rode nt Scre e ns. Rodent screens shall be press-formed of 3 or 4 mesh, 21 gage or heavier,
 stainless steel or hot-dipped galvanized wire screen or approved equivalent, to provide a cup-shaped screen
 that will provide a friction-tight fit when inserted into the drain outlet.
 1013.5 Ce rtification. T he contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification to the engineer for each
 lot of plastic pipe material furnished stating the name of the manufacturer and certifying that the material
 supplied is in accordance with this specification.
 
 533
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1015
 BITUMINO US MATERIAL
 1015.1 Scope . T his specification covers bituminous material to be used in highway construction.
 1015.2 Approval of Source . T he contractor shall obtain approval of the source of bituminous material
 from the engineer before any shipments to the work site are made.
 1015.3 Sampling, Te sting and Acce ptance Proce dure s .T he supplier shall certify that the bituminous
 material complies with the specification requirements.
 1015.3.1 Ce rtification. T he supplier shall furnish the truck driver a copy of the bill of lading, manifest or
 truck ticket to be available to MoDOT at the destination prior to unloading. T he engineer at the source
 shall be furnished a copy. T he bill of lading, manifest or truck ticket shall provide the following
 information regarding the shipment: type and grade of material, specific gravity at 60 F, net gallons,
 consignee, truck number, identification number, weight of truck before and after loading, destination, date
 loaded, name and location of the source, and a certification statement. T he certification statement shall be
 signed by an authorized representative of the supplier and shall be substantially as follows:
 "T his certifies that the bituminous material in this shipment is in accordance with MoDOT specifications
 for the grade specified and the weights (masses) shown hereon were obtained on MoDOT approved scales
 and are correct within the specified scale requirements."
 1015.3.2 Sampling. T he engineer will at random observe the sampling and testing of truck shipments and
 tanks, and will select representative samples of the material being supplied for testing in the field or in the
 Central Laboratory. When test results certified by the supplier are not representative of the material being
 shipped, the source approval will be withdrawn. A source may be reinstated when proof is furnished that the
 deficiency has been corrected and adequate controls are in effect to guarantee delivery of material meeting
 specifications. Sampling and test methods for asphalt shall be as follows:
 Property
 Sampling
 Water
 Flash P oint (Tag Open Cup)
 Flash P oint (Cleveland Open Cup)
 Viscosity, Centistokes
 Distillation
 P enetration
 Ductility
 Solubility in Trichlorethylene
 Ash in Bituminous Material
 Viscosity (Rotational)
 Dynamic Shear
 Rolling Thin Film Oven Test
 P ressure Aging Test
 Creep Stiffness
 Direct Tension
 
 Method
 AASHTO T 40
 AASHTO T 55
 AASHTO T 79
 AASHTO T 48
 AASHTO T 201
 AASHTO T 78
 AASHTO T 49
 AASHTO T 51
 AASHTO T 44
 AASHTO T 111
 ASTM D 4402
 AASHTO 315
 AASHTO T 240
 AASHTO R28
 AASHTO T 313
 AASHTO T 314
 
 RC
 X
 X
 X
 X
 X
 X
 X
 X
 
 MC PG
 X X
 X X
 X
 X
 X
 X
 X
 X
 X X
 X
 X
 X
 X
 X
 
 1015.3.3 Sampling Equipme nt. T he supplier shall furnish the required sampling equipment and shall
 sample the contents of the truck under the direction of the engineer. T he supplier shall keep all sampling
 equipment clean and in good condition. Sampling devices on truck transports will be approved provided an
 adequately insulated valve is used with a pipe or nipple inserted a suitable distance into the tank.
 1015.3.4 Truck Log. Each truck transport shall carry a log showing types of material and the dates hauled
 with respect to previous shipments, or the supplier shall furnish to the engineer such information with
 respect to the previous load.
 1015.3.5 Inte rme diate Storage . Intermediate storage tanks for storage and transfer of material between
 the refinery or terminal and the point of acceptance shall be equipped for sealing and shall be reserved
 exclusively for MoDOT work. Use of any material from unsealed tanks will be subject to delay until
 
 534
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 material can be sampled, tested and approved.
 1015.3.6 O the r Transportation. At sources from which liquid bituminous material is being accepted by
 certification, the applicable requirements of the foregoing sections shall be followed for shipments of
 material in transportation units other than trucks. T he certification and all information regarding each
 shipment shall be furnished to the engineer at the source.
 1015.3.7 Railroad Shipme nts. For railroad shipments from refineries where inspection is not maintained
 by MoDOT, the supplier shall sample each car load at the source and submit the sample promptly to the
 Central Laboratory. A bill of lading or identification sheet shall accompany each sample and contain the
 following information: car number, type and grade of material, quantity represented, including gross gallons,
 temperature and net gallons at 60 F, destination of shipment, project number and consignee. A certification
 statement as specified in Sec 1015.3.1 shall accompany each sample. Approval of the source may be
 withdrawn if samples submitted are not representative of the material shipped in the car.
 1015.4 Proportioning and Ble nding Bituminous Mate rial Constitue nts. All material shall be
 properly proportioned and thoroughly blended in suitable tanks prior to delivery to transportation
 equipment, or material may be proportioned and blended by use of automatic proportioning equipment. All
 automatic-proportioning blenders shall meet the approval of the engineer and shall be equipped with
 precision instruments, including electrically interlocked motors and automatic meters.
 1015.5 Application Te mpe rature s for Bituminous Mate rial.
 B ituminous Material Temperature, Degrees Fahrenheit
 Spraying
 Mixing
 Min
 Max
 Min
 Max
 Asphalt B inder
 P G 46-28
 260
 325
 ------All Other Grades
 285
 350
 275
 350
 Liquid Asphalt RC-MC
 Grade
 30
 70
 150
 50
 110
 70
 100
 180
 90
 140
 250
 150
 220
 130
 170
 800
 180
 260
 170
 210
 3000
 210
 290
 200
 240
 Asphalt Emulsions
 RS-1
 120
 140
 ------RS-2
 125
 185
 ------SS-1
 120
 160
 70
 160
 SS-1h
 120
 160
 70
 160
 SS-1vh
 160
 180
 140
 160
 CRS-1
 125
 185
 ------CRS-2
 125
 185
 ------CSS-1
 120
 160
 70
 160
 CSS-1h
 120
 160
 70
 160
 EA-90P
 130
 180
 ------CRS-2P
 130
 180
 ------CHFRS-2P
 130
 180
 ------a
 
 T he minimum mixing temperature shall be lowered to 200
 when a warm mix technology, as approved by the engineer,
 is used.
 1015.5.1 Application temperatures of other grades of emulsions shall be as specified in the contract.
 1015.5.2 T he spraying temperature for non-modified PG 46-28 asphalt binder shall be 260 - 325 F, and for
 all other higher temperature non-modified performance grades, the spraying temperature shall be 285 - 350
 F. T he mixing and compaction temperatures for performance graded asphalt binder shall be determined by
 rotational viscosity testing as defined in AST M D 4402.
 
 535
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1015.5.3 When material to be applied by pressure distributor is, due to refining or blending procedures,
 delivered at a temperature above the specified limits, the material may be applied at the higher temperature
 provided satisfactory application can be obtained at the specified rate and provided sufficient precaution is
 exercised with respect to the fire hazard.
 1015.6 Me asure me nt of Bituminous Mate rial. Field weight or field volumetric determinations of the
 material actually incorporated into the work will be used for measurement of the quantity of bituminous
 material for payment. T he volume of material supplied from intermediate storage tanks will be determined
 from the net weight of the material. T he net weight will be determined from the gross weight of the loaded
 transport vehicle used to deliver the material to the project less the empty transport vehicle weight. T he
 volume correction methods specified below will be used for determining the volume of bituminous material.
 Scales for determining the weight of bituminous material shall be in accordance with Sec 310.
 1015.6.1 Liquid Bituminous Mate rial and Asphalt Binde r - Volume tric De te rmination.
 Measurement of the material will be based on the volume at 60 F. T he volume correction factors of AST M
 D 1250, Table 24b, will be used for converting the material from the volume at the observed temperature
 to the volume at 60 F. T he volume of uncalibrated distributors and tank trucks will be determined from the
 net weight of the material. T he net weight will be determined from the gross weight of the loaded delivery
 vehicle less the empty delivery vehicle weight. For computing the volume in gallons from weight, the
 following formula will be used:
 G=
 
 W
 SG x 8.328
 where:
 G = Volume in gallons at 60 F.
 W = Weight of material in pounds.
 SG = Specific Gravity of material at 60 F.
 
 1015.6.2 Emulsifie d Asphalt. Measurement of the material will be based on the volume at 60 F using a
 coefficient of expansion of 0.0003 per degree F for converting the material from the volume at the
 observed temperature to the volume at 60 F.
 SECT ION 1015.10 PEFORMANCE GRADED ASPHALT BINDER.
 1015.10.1 Ge ne ral. Performance graded asphalt binder shall be an asphalt-based binder produced from
 petroleum residue either with or without the addition of non-particulate organic modifiers. T he grade shall
 be as specified in the contract.
 1015.10.2 Basis of Acce ptance . Suppliers furnishing performance graded asphalt binders to MoDOT
 projects by certification shall be in accordance with AASHT O R 26, except as noted herein. To become
 pre-qualified to furnish material, a written request shall be sent to Construction and Materials, along with a
 copy of the supplier's QC plan. Split samples may be required. Changes in formulation, base stock or
 methods of manufacture of qualified performance graded binders shall be noted and may require
 requalification.
 1015.10.2.1 Q uality Control Plan Re quire me nts. T he QC plan shall be in accordance with AASHT O
 R 26 with the following exceptions and modifications:
 (a) T he plan shall be written to cover multiple terminals or shipping facilities, in addition to the
 primary manufacturing facility, provided specific requirements for each location are clearly stated.
 (b) T he plan shall state the lot size used to designate the frequency of QC and specification
 compliance testing for each performance grade to be supplied. T he lot size will depend upon the
 method of manufacture and may be designated on a tank basis, or on a time basis in the case of
 binders that are blended into trucks or tanks or that are continually blended into "live" tanks.
 (c) For terminals or manufacturing facilities, the minimum reduced frequency of testing for QC or
 
 536
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 specification compliance shall be one series of tests every two weeks for "live" tanks or blenders
 and one series of tests every four weeks for "static" tanks that have had no material added between
 testing, per lot per grade of binder shipped.
 (d) Quality Control testing may be used to determine that binders being shipped from terminals or
 manufacturing facilities have not been contaminated, provided that such testing is shown to be of
 sufficient accuracy to detect contamination and to assure that material meets required
 specifications. Surrogate tests may be used for QC testing of non-modified performance graded
 binders.
 (e) Terminals or shipping facilities that blend performance graded binders from different sources,
 that blend to produce a different performance grade, or that blend to modify the properties of an
 existing performance grade shall perform complete AASHT O M 320 specification compliance
 testing.
 (f) T he shipping facility shall document that each transport vessel was inspected prior to loading
 and was found to be acceptable for the material being shipped. T he inspection shall be documented
 by a statement on the bill of lading or truck ticket, or by maintaining a record of transport vessel
 inspections at the shipping facility, which shall be available for review by MoDOT.
 1015.10.2.2 Q uality Control Plan Te st Data. T he facility shall retain test data of specification
 compliance and QC testing for five years. At a minimum, the name of the facility, the dates of testing
 activity, results of individual specification compliance and QC tests identified by blender or tank number,
 and the mean, minimum and maximum test result for each specification compliance and QC test performed
 shall be readily available to MoDOT upon request.
 1015.10.2.3 Approval of Laboratorie s. T he supplier's primary testing laboratory shall be approved by
 MoDOT. T he approval process will include split sample testing, and may include an on-site visit by
 department personnel. T he primary testing laboratory shall be regularly inspected by the AASHT O
 Materials Reference Laboratory (AMRL). Any satellite testing laboratory operated by a supplier shall be
 inspected at the same frequency by the supplier's primary AMRL inspected laboratory staff, and a copy of
 the inspection report shall be forwarded to MoDOT.
 1015.10.2.4 Failure to Comply. Failure to fulfill any of these requirements may result in disqualification
 of the performance graded binder supplier. If a primary manufacturing facility is disqualified, all terminals
 shipping performance graded binder manufactured at the primary facility and who are not performing
 AASHT O M 320 specification compliance testing will automatically be disqualified. In cases of dispute, test
 results obtained by MoDOT will be considered final.
 1015.10.3 Characte ristics. Performance graded asphalt binder shall be in accordance with AASHT O M
 320 for the grade specified, except as follows. AASHT O T 111, Inorganic Matter or Ash in Bituminous
 Materials, may be substituted for AASHT O T 44, Solubility of Bituminous Materials, at the specification
 value indicated prior to the addition of ground tire rubber (GT R.) All blends containing GT R shall include
 4.5 percent transpolyoctenamer rubber (T OR) by weight of the GT R. T he direct tension test will be
 waived. T he following additional requirements will apply:
 B inder Characteristics
 Absolute Temperature Elastic Recoveryb, Separation Testc ,
 Spread B etween Upper and
 Percent,
 Percent Dif f erence,
 Lower Temperature f or
 Minimum,
 Maximum,
 a
 PG B inder G rade
 AASHTO T 301
 ASTM D 5976
 86 C
 92 C
 55
 10
 98 C
 65
 10
 104 C
 75
 10
 a Temperature
 
 Spread = Upper PG Temperature minus Lower PG Temperature.
 recovery test to be performed on the residue from the Rolling T hin
 Film Oven Test at 25 C and 10 cm elongation.
 c Separation test to be performed in accordance with AST M D 5976, except
 test upper and lower portions as original binder for G* value according to
 bElastic
 
 537
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 AASHT O T 315 except for GT R binders that require continuous agitation.
 1015.10.3.1 In lieu of AASHT O M 320, AASHT O M 332 may be substituted eliminating the elastic
 recovery requirement, except for use with Sec 413.30, Ultrathin Bonded Asphalt Wearing Surface. T he
 equivalent grading will PG 64-22, Grade S for PG 64-22, Grade H for PG 70-22 and Grade V for PG 76-22.
 Specialty grades will be tested at the grade temperature for the desired characteristics, i.e. PG 58-28 for
 RAS mixtures.
 1015.10.4 Characte ristics for GTR. Ground tire rubber shall be ambient ground, free of wire or other
 contaminating materials and not contain more than 0.1 percent fabric. Cryogenically ground rubber may be
 used by demonstrating that the GT R is satisfactorily suspended during all phases of production and storage.
 T he gradation of the GT R shall be as follows:
 G round Tire Rubber
 Percent Passing by
 Sieve Size
 Weight
 No. 8
 100
 No. 16
 100-96
 No. 30
 100-90
 No. 50
 20 min.
 
 1015.10.4.1 Modification Proce ss. T he percentage by weight of binder shall be included with each lot of
 material. Ground tire rubber modified asphalt binder shall be tested and certified in accordance with Sec
 1015.10.2 and may be incorporated by any of the following methods:
 1015.10.4.1.1 Ble nding at HMA Plant. All sampling and testing shall be performed in accordance the
 requirements for terminal blending including high and low temperature testing.
 1015.10.4.1.2 Te rminal Ble nding. Blending and certification shall be in accordance with Sec 1015.
 1015.10.5 Storage . Performance graded asphalt binder shall be furnished as a uniform mixture shipped
 directly to the project site from the asphalt binder supplier's permanent plant address or intermediate
 storage facility, suitable for direct use. Asphalt binder shall be capable of being stored at the project site
 without separation or settling. Automatic blending will be allowed at the terminal. Intermediate blending of
 asphalt binder and additives will not be allowed at the project site, unless the asphalt binder is sampled at a
 point in the operation which captures the final blended binder with all additives incorporated.
 SECT ION 1015.20 LIQUID BIT UMINOUS MAT ERIAL.
 1015.20.1 Basis of Acceptance. Suppliers electing to furnish liquid bituminous material to MoDOT projects
 by QC/QA certification shall furnish material in accordance with Sec 1015.20.2. To become pre-qualified to
 furnish material, a written request shall be submitted to Construction and Materials, along with a copy of
 the supplier's QC plan. For source approval for any supplier of liquid bituminous material, split samples and
 an on-site laboratory inspection may be required. A manufacturer may forgo a formal QC plan and elect to
 perform full compliance testing, and certify each batch of material. If a manufacturer elects to forgo a
 formal QC Plan, all truck shipments shall be loaded from approved storage tanks that have been sampled,
 tested and certified by the supplier. If a manufacturer so elects, and automatic blending equipment is used,
 blender material will be approved for use provided the finished product is in accordance with this
 specification. At least one complete specification compliance test shall be conducted every two weeks on
 each grade of material furnished for MoDOT work from the blender. A certified copy of the test results
 shall be furnished to the engineer. For all liquid bituminous material, AASHT O T 111, Inorganic Matter or
 Ash in Bituminous Materials, may be substituted for AASHT O T 44, Solubility of Bituminous Materials, at
 the specification value indicated.
 1015.20.2 Q uality Control Plan Re quire me nts. T he QC plan shall be in accordance with the
 following:
 (a) T he plan may be written to cover multiple terminals, shipping facilities, blending or
 manufacturing facilities.
 
 538
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (b) T he plan shall state the location, organization and responsible personnel for each facility,
 including the physical address and telephone contact information. In general, following the
 guidelines in AASHT O R 26 will be acceptable.
 (c) T he plan shall state the minimum testing frequency for all material supplied. At a minimum,
 each grade of material supplied to MoDOT shall have complete specification compliance testing
 conducted monthly. Polymer modified material shall have complete specification compliance
 testing conducted every two weeks. T he manufacturer ’s internal QC testing frequency shall be
 approved by MoDOT prior to implementation. T he manufacturer shall perform sufficient tests
 and at a frequency to ensure specification compliant material is being supplied to MoDOT at all
 times. For emulsified asphalt, QC testing on each batch, at a minimum, shall consist of viscosity,
 sieve test, determination of residue by either distillation or evaporation and an identifier test, if
 applicable, for that particular grade, either cement mixing, particle charge or demusibility. T he
 manufacturer may elect to perform additional QC tests. For cutback material, QC testing shall be a
 minimum of the viscosity on a daily basis when material is being shipped to MoDOT work.
 (d) In the event of a failing sample, the manufacturer shall follow the steps outlined in AASHT O R
 26, Sec. 9.2. If a sample fails to comply with any specification requirement at the Central
 Laboratory, the manufacturer may only ship new material of that grade after full specification
 compliance testing. After the manufacturer has certified through specification compliance testing
 that three consecutive batches are in accordance with the material specification, the manufacturer
 may return to the testing frequency outlined in the QC/QA plan. If a second sample of the same
 grade from the same facility fails to comply with any specification requirement within the same
 calendar year, approval of that facility to supply that grade under QC/QA may be withdrawn. If
 approval for a grade is withdrawn, that material may only be supplied to MoDOT work after full
 certification compliance testing has been performed at the Central Laboratory. Re-approval to
 supply under the supplier ’s QC/QA Plan will occur only after three consecutive batches meet
 specifications after testing at the Central Laboratory. Failure of multiple grades from a single
 facility tested at the Central Laboratory may result in that facility being removed from approval
 to supply material to MoDOT. Reinstatement will occur only after all materials in question have
 been tested at the Central Laboratory and have met all specifications, and documentation from the
 supplier outlining the reason for the failures and what corrective measures have been taken are to
 the satisfaction of MoDOT.
 (e) T he shipping facility shall document that each transport vessel was inspected prior to loading
 and was found to be acceptable for the material shipped. T he inspection shall be documented by a
 statement on the bill of lading or truck ticket, or by maintaining a record of transport vessel
 inspections at the shipping facility, which shall be available for review by MoDOT.
 T he results of QC/QA testing shall be retained by the supplier for a period of three years. A report
 containing all test results for any material shall be available to MoDOT upon request.
 1015.20.3 Type RC Liquid Asphalt. Type RC liquid asphalt shall be produced by fluxing an asphaltic base
 with suitable petroleum distillates. T he material shall show no separation or curdling prior to use and shall
 not foam when heated to the application temperature. T he material shall be in accordance with AASHT O
 M 81, invoking Note 3 using penetration in lieu of viscosity for the grade specified in the contract.
 1015.20.4 Type MC Liquid Asphalt. Type MC liquid asphalt shall be produced by fluxing an asphaltic
 base with suitable petroleum distillates. T he material shall show no separation or curdling prior to use and
 shall not foam when heated to the application temperature. T he material shall be in accordance with
 AASHT O M 82, invoking Note 4 using penetration in lieu of viscosity for the grade specified in the
 contract.
 1015.20.5 Emulsifie d Asphalt. Non-polymer emulsified asphalt shall be in accordance with AASHT O M
 140 or AASHT O M 208, for the type and grade specified in the contract.
 1015.20.5.1 Polyme r Modifie d Asphalt Emulsion - Se al Coat. Bituminous material for polymer
 modified asphalt shall be in accordance with the following:
 
 539
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Polymer Modif ied Asphalt Emulsion
 Testa
 
 CRS-2P
 Min
 100
 
 Viscosity, SSF @ 50 C
 Storage Stability Test b, 24 hour, percent
 Classification Test
 P article Charge Test
 Sieve Test,percent
 Demulsibility, 0.02 N CaC1 2, percent
 
 ----
 
 EA-90P
 
 Max Min Max
 400 100 400
 1
 
 P ass ---P ositive ------0.3
 
 Distillation:
 Oil distillate by volume of emulsion, percent
 Residue from distillation c , percent
 Tests on Residue from Distillation:
 P enetration,25 C, 100 g, 5 sec
 Ductility, 4 C, 5 cm/minute, cm
 Ash d, percent
 Float Test at 60 C, sec
 Elastic Recovery e , percent
 
 ----
 
 1
 
 ----------
 
 ------0.3
 
 ----
 
 ----
 
 30
 
 ----
 
 ---65
 
 3
 ----
 
 ---65
 
 3
 ----
 
 100
 30
 ------58
 
 200 100 200
 ---- 25 ---1
 ---- 1
 ---- 1200 ------- 58 ----
 
 a All
 
 tests shall be performed in accordance with AASHT O T 59 except as
 noted.
 bIn addition to AASHT O T 59, upon examination of the test cylinder, and
 after standing undisturbed for 24 hours, the surface shall show no
 appreciable white, milky colored substance and shall be a homogeneous
 brown color throughout.
 c AASHT O T 59 shall be modified to maintain a 399 F ± 10 F maximum
 temperature for 15 minutes.
 dPercent ash shall be determined in accordance with AASHT O T 111,
 Ash in Bituminous Material.
 e Elastic recovery shall be determined as follows. Condition the
 ductilometer and samples to be treated at 50 F. Prepare the brass plate,
 mold and briquet specimen in accordance with AASHT O T 51.
 Keep the specimen at the specified test temperature of 50 F for 85
 to 95 minutes. Immediately after conditioning, place the specimen in
 the ductilometer and proceed to elongate the sample to 20 cm at a rate
 of pull of 5 cm/min. After the 20 cm elongation has been reached,
 stop the ductilometer and hold the sample in the elongated position for
 5 minutes. After 5 minutes, clip the sample approximately in half by
 means of scissors or other suitable cutting devices. Let the sample remain
 in the ductilometer in an undisturbed condition for one hour. At the end
 of this time period, retract the half sample specimen until the two broken
 ends touch. At this point note the elongation (x) in cm. Calculate the
 percent recovery by the following formula:
 % Recovery = 20 - X x 100
 20
 Polymer Modif ied Asphalt Emulsion
 Testa
 
 CHFRS-2P
 
 Min.
 Viscosity, SFS @ 50 C
 100
 Storage Stability Test, 24 hour, percent
 --Demulsibility, 35 ml 0.8% dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate, percent
 60
 Sieve Test, percent
 --P article Charge Test
 P ositive
 Distillation b
 Oil Distillate, by volume of emulsion, percent
 Residue from distillation, percent
 Tests on Residue from Distillation:
 P olymer content, weight, percent (solids based)
 
 540
 
 Max.
 400
 1.0
 --0.10
 
 --65
 
 0.5
 ---
 
 3.0
 
 ---
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 Softening P oint, C
 Float test at 60 C, s
 P enetration, 25 C, 100 g, 5 s
 Viscosity @ 60 C, P oise
 Solubility in Trichloroethylene, percent
 Elastic Recovery c @ 10 C , percent
 
 54
 1800
 80
 1300
 95
 65
 
 ----130
 -------
 
 a All
 
 tests shall be performed in accordance with AASHT O T-59 except as noted.
 T 59 shall be modified to maintain a 177 ± 5 C maximum temperature
 to be held for 20 minutes. Complete the total distillation in 60 ± 5 minutes from
 the first application of heat.
 c Elastic recovery shall be determined as follows. Condition the ductilometer and
 samples to be treated at 10 C. Prepare the brass plate, mold, and briquet
 specimen in accordance with AASHT O T 51. Keep the specimen at the specified
 test temperature of 10 C for 85 to 95 minutes. Immediately after conditioning,
 place the specimen in the ductilometer and proceed to elongate the sample to
 20 cm at a rate of pull of 5 cm/min. After the 20 cm elongation has been
 reached, stop the ductilometer and hold the sample in the elongated position for
 5 minutes. After the 5 minutes, clip the sample approximately in half by
 means of scissors or other suitable cutting devices. Let the sample remain in
 the ductilometer in an undisturbed condition for one hour. At the end of this
 time period, retract the half sample specimen until the two broken ends touch.
 At this point note the elongation recovery (X) in cm. Calculate the percent
 recovery by the following formula:
 bAASHT O
 
 % Recovery = 20 - X x 100
 20
 1015.20.5.1.1 Polyme r Modifie d Asphalt Emulsion - Tack Coat. Bituminous material for polymer
 modified asphalt shall be in accordance with the following:
 Slow Setting Polymer Modif ied Asphalt Emulsiona
 SS-1HP
 Test on Emulsion
 Method
 Min Max
 Viscosity, Saybolt Furol @ 25°C (77°F), s
 AASHTO T 59 20 100
 P article Charge Test
 Negative
 Storage Stability Test b, 24 hr, percent
 Sieve Test, percent
 
 AASHTO T 59
 
 --
 
 AASHTO T 59
 
 -- 0.50 -- 0.50
 
 AASHTO T 59
 Residue by Distillation c , percent
 Oil Distillate by Distillation, percent
 AASHTO T 59
 Test on Residue from Distillation
 P enetration 25°C, 100 g, 5 s
 AASHTO T 49
 
 1
 
 CSS-1HP
 Min Max
 20 100
 P ositive
 
 57
 
 -57
 
 --
 
 --
 
 --
 
 -90
 
 40
 
 90
 
 40
 
 Elastic Recovery d, 20 cm, 5 cm/min, 60 min, % AASHTO T 301 30
 
 --
 
 30
 
 Solubility in Trichloroethylenee , %
 
 -- 97.5
 
 AASHTO T 44 97.5
 
 a
 
 1
 
 ---
 
 T he emulsified asphalt shall be in accordance with Sec 1015.20.5 of the 2011
 Missouri Standard Specifications for Highway Construction, except as indicated above,
 and shall be modified with a styrene-butadiene diblock or triblock copolymer or a
 styrene butadiene rubber.
 b In addition to AASHT O T 59, upon examination of the test cylinder, and after
 standing undisturbed for 24 hours, the surface shall show no appreciable white,
 milky colored substance and shall be homogeneous brown color throughout. T he
 storage stability test may be waved provided the asphalt emulsion storage tank at the
 project site has adequate provisions for circulating the entire contents of the tank,
 provided satisfactory field results are obtained.
 c AASHT O T 59 shall be modified to use a lower distillation temperature of 177° C
 (350° F).
 d AASHT O T 301 shall be modified to allow the residue to be obtained from
 distillation as long as the distillation temperature is modified as stated above. T he test
 on residue shall be conducted at a temperature of 10° C (50° F).
 e In lieu of performing AASHT O T 44, AASHT O T 111, Ash in Bituminous Material,
 
 541
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 may be performed with a maximum allowable percent ash of 1.0 percent.
 1015.20.5.2 Asphalt Emulsion for Micro-Surfacing. Bituminous material for micro-surfacing shall be a
 polymer modified asphalt emulsion, grade CSS-lh, in accordance with the following table. T he bituminous
 material shall show no separation after mixing. A minimum of 3.0 percent polymer content, by mass, of an
 approved polymer shall be milled into the asphalt emulsion at the time of manufacture of the emulsion.
 T he emulsion shall be sampled in accordance with AASHT O T 40.
 Micro-Surf acing Emulsion (MSE-1)
 Min. Max. Test Method
 Viscosity, Saybolt Furol at 77 F, s
 20 100 AASHTO T 59
 Storage stability test, 24 hr, percent
 
 --
 
 P article charge test positiveb
 Sieve test, percent
 -Residue, percent
 62
 Tests on Residue f rom Distillation Min.
 P enetration, 77 F, 100 g, 5 s,
 40
 Ductility, 25 C, 5cm/min, cm,
 40
 Solubility in Trichloroethylene, % 97.50
 
 1 a AASHTO T 59
 AASHTO T 59
 0.50
 -Max.
 90
 ---
 
 AASHTO T 59
 AASHTO T 59
 Test Method
 AASHTO T49
 AASHTO T 51
 AASHTO T 44
 
 a T he
 
 storage stability test may be waived provided the asphalt
 emulsion storage tank at the project site has adequate provisions
 for circulating the entire contents of the tank, and provided
 satisfactory field results are obtained.
 bIf the particle charge test is inconclusive, material having a
 maximum pH value of 6.7 will be acceptable.
 1015.20.5.3 Scrub Se al Emulsion. Scrub seal emulsion shall be smooth and homogeneous, polymer
 modified, shall contain an asphalt rejuvenator and shall be in accordance with the following:
 Scrub Seal Emulsion (SSE-1)
 Min. Max. Test Method
 30 100 AASHTO T 59
 
 Saybolt Furol Viscosity, SFS @ 77 F
 Storage Stability Test a , 24 hr., %
 Demulsibility, 35 ml of 0.02N, CACl 2, %
 
 --
 
 1a
 
 AASHTO T 59
 
 --
 
 60
 
 AASHTO T 59
 
 Sieve Test b, percent
 
 --
 
 0.3
 
 AASHTO T 59
 
 Residue by Distillation (c) @ 401 ± 10 F, %
 Oil Distillate by Volume, percent
 Tests on Residue f rom Distillation
 P enetration @ 77 F, 5 s, 100 g, dmm
 Float Test @ 140 F, s
 Ash, percent
 Elastic Recovery, 10 C, 200 mm elongation, 60 min. recovery, percent
 
 60
 
 --
 
 AASHTO T 59
 
 Saturates d, percent
 
 -3 AASHTO T 59
 Min. Max. Test Method
 100 300 AASHTO T 49
 1200 -- AASHTO T 50
 -1 AASHTO T 111
 30
 -- ASTM D 5976
 --
 
 20
 
 ASTM D 4124
 
 a Upon
 
 examination of the test cylinder after standing undisturbed for 24 hours, the surface shall
 show no white, milky colored substance and shall be a homogeneous brown color throughout.
 bA percentage of 0.30 will be acceptable for samples taken at the point of use or shipped to the
 Central Laboratory for testing.
 c AST M D 244 shall be modified to include a 205 ± 5 C maximum temperature to be held for 15
 minutes.
 dAST M D 4124 shall be modified to use Alumina, CG - 20 Grade, available from Aluminum
 Company of America, Pittsburgh, PA.
 1015.20.5.4 Hard Pe ne tration Asphalt Emulsions (SS-1vh). T he hard penetration asphalt emulsions
 shall be in accordance with the following:
 Emulsion Properties of Hard Penetration Asphalt Emulsions (SS-1vh)
 Test on Emulsion
 Method
 Min. Max.
 Viscosity, Saybolt Furol @ 25º C (77º F), s AASHTO T 59 20 100
 
 542
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 Storage Stability Test a , 24 hr., percent
 Sieve Test, percent
 Residue by Distillation, percent
 Oil Distillate by Distillation, percent
 Tests on Residue f rom Distillation
 Softening P oint, º F
 P enetration 25º C (77º F), 100 g, 5 s
 G* / sin delta @ 76º C – 10 rad/sec, kP a
 
 AASHTO T 59
 
 --
 
 1.0
 
 AASHTO T 59
 AASHTO T 59
 AASHTO T 59
 Method
 AASHTO T 53
 AASHTO T 49
 AASHTO T 315
 
 -50
 -Min.
 149
 -1.0
 
 0.30
 -1
 Max.
 200
 40
 --
 
 Solubility in Trichloroethyleneb, %
 
 AASHTO T 44 97.5
 
 --
 
 a In
 
 addition to AASHT O T 59, upon examination of the test cylinder, and after
 standing undisturbed for 24 hours, the surface shall show no appreciable
 white, milky colored substance and shall be homogeneous brown color
 throughout. T he storage stability test may be waved provided the asphalt
 emulsion storage tank at the project site has adequate provisions for
 circulating the entire contents of the tank, provided satisfactory field results
 are obtained.
 bIn lieu of performing AASHT O T 44, AASHT O T 111, Ash in Bituminous
 Material, may be performed with a maximum allowable percent ash of 1.0
 percent.
 1015.20.6 Ultrathin Bonde d We aring Surface . Bituminous material for ultrathin bonded wearing
 surface shall be in accordance with the following.
 1015.20.6.1 Asphalt Binde r. T he asphalt binder shall be in accordance with Sec 1015.10, and specifically
 as follows:
 Tests
 Method
 Min. Max.
 Separation Test, %
 AASHTO P P -5
 10
 Elastic Recovery Test, % ASTM D 6084 65
 
 1015.20.6.2 Polyme r Modifie d Emulsion Me mbrane . T he anionic or cationic emulsion shall be
 polymer modified and shall be in accordance with one of the following:
 Anionic Polymer Modif ied Emulsion Membrane (PEM-1)
 Tests on Emulsion
 Method
 Min. Max.
 Viscosity, Saybolt Furol @122°F, s
 AASHTO T 59 25 125
 Storage Stability Test a , 24 h, percent
 
 AASHTO T 59
 
 1
 
 Sieve Test b, percent
 
 AASHTO T 59
 
 0.3
 
 AASHTO T 59
 Residue by Distillation c , percent
 Oil Distillate by Distillation, percent AASHTO T 59
 Demulsibilty, % 35 ml, 0.02 N CaCl 2 AASHTO T 59
 
 63
 2
 60
 
 Tests on Residue From Distillation
 P enetration
 AASHTO T 49 90
 Elastic Recovery, percent
 AASHTO T 301 60
 
 150
 
 Cationic Polymer Modif ied Emulsion Membrane (CPEM-1)
 Tests on Emulsion
 Method
 Min. Max.
 Viscosity, Saybolt Furol @122°F, s
 AASHTO T 59 25 125
 Storage Stability Test a , 24 h, percent
 
 AASHTO T 59
 
 1
 
 Sieve Test b, percent
 
 AASHTO T 59
 
 0.3
 
 AASHTO T 59
 Residue by Distillation c , percent
 Oil Distillate by Distillation, percent
 AASHTO T 59
 35 ml, 0.8% dioctyl
 Demulsibility, %
 AASHTO T 59
 sodium sulfosuccinate
 Tests on Residue From Distillation
 P enetration
 AASHTO T 49
 Elastic Recovery, %
 AASHTO T 301
 a After
 
 63
 2
 60
 
 90
 60
 
 150
 
 standing undisturbed for 24 hours, the surface shall show no
 
 543
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 white, milky colored substance, but shall be a smooth homogeneous
 color throughout.
 bT he sieve test will be waived if successful application of the material
 has been achieved in the field.
 c AASHT O T 59 shall be modified to include a 400 F ± 10 F maximum
 temperature to be held for a period of 15 minutes.
 
 544
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1017
 GRO UND GRANULATED BLAST FURNACE SLAG
 1017.1 Scope . T his specification covers ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag (GGBFS) for use in Portland
 cement concrete.
 1017.2 Ge ne ral. All GGBFS shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 302, Grade 100 or 120, except as
 herein specified. Only GGBFS from sources qualified in accordance with these specifications will be
 permitted.
 1017.2.1 GGBFS may only be used with AASHT O M 85, Type I or Type II Portland cement, unless
 otherwise directed by the engineer.
 1017.2.2 T he mixing of different grades and sources of GGBFS will not be permitted.
 1017.2.3 T he term "manufacturer", as used in this specification, will be the company grinding the
 granulated blast furnace slag to produce GGBFS. T he term "marketing entity", as used in this specification,
 will be the supplier or broker of the GGBFS. T he marketing entity will be responsible for complying with
 these specifications.
 1017.2.4 All tests shall be performed in a MoDOT approved laboratory.
 1017.3 Sampling, Te sting and Acce ptance Proce dure s. All marketing entities and terminals furnishing
 GGBFS to MoDOT projects shall be qualified as herein described. All GGBFS will be subject to inspection
 and sampling by MoDOT at the source of manufacture, an intermediate shipping terminal or destination.
 MoDOT shall be allowed unlimited access to all facilities and records as required to conduct inspection and
 sampling.
 1017.3.1 Marke ting Entity Q ualification. In order to become qualified, a written request shall be sent
 by the marketing entity to Construction and Materials, along with a copy of the marketing entity’s QC
 plan. T he production source and terminals may be inspected to verify the information and to establish
 personal contact with the QC personnel.
 1017.3.1.1 T he following information shall be included in the request for qualification:
 (a) An outline of the QC program from the source of manufacture to the point where the product
 is relinquished to the purchaser. T he QC program shall cover all tests in accordance with the
 specification and include the testing frequency for each test. T he name of the testing laboratory
 shall be included. Each sample shall not represent less than 500 tons.
 (b) A copy of the testing laboratory's most recent Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory
 (CCRL) inspection report and the latest CCRL proficiency sample report. T he CCRL inspection
 shall cover all tests in accordance with the specification. Documentation showing satisfactory
 resolution of all inspection deficiencies shall be included.
 (c) Complete name and address of the GGBFS source and owner. If located in an area without
 precise address identification, a complete map description shall be furnished. If more than one
 source is used, all sources shall be listed.
 (d) Grade of GGBFS produced.
 (e) Description of storage facilities, including capacities, set-aside capabilities and sampling
 method(s).
 (f) A copy of a typical bill of lading with the required certification statement.
 (g) A split sample of the GGBFS proposed for use, obtained over a minimum of one production
 day. T he marketing entity's test results for the split sample shall also be submitted. T he marketing
 entity shall provide reference cement if the cement used is unavailable to the area.
 
 545
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1017.3.1.2 In order to maintain qualification, the following will be required:
 (a) QC test results covering the production of all GGBFS proposed for use in MoDOT projects,
 including the high, low and average results shall be kept on file by the marketing entity. Sampling
 and testing shall be in accordance with these specifications.
 (b) A sample shall be tested for each 2000 tons intended for use. T he sample shall be tested by the
 marketing entity for fineness, No. 325 sieve analysis and Blaine, air content, 7-day and 28-day
 Slag Activity Index, percent sulfide sulfur (S) and percent sulfate ion (SO3), taken from a
 composite sample representing each 2000 tons of GGBFS transported to the storage silo. T he
 composite shall be comprised of a minimum of four samples, each representing not more than 500
 tons. Automatic samplers may be used in lieu of the individual 500-ton grab samples.
 (c) A copy of the most recent CCRL inspection and proficiency sample reports and any deficiency
 resolutions shall be forwarded promptly to MoDOT.
 (d) Semi-annual split samples for the class of approved GGBFS will be obtained by MoDOT for
 joint testing by the marketing entity. Marketing entity test results on the split samples shall be
 furnished to Construction and Materials when completed.
 (e) All QC test results shall be available for a minimum of three years, for MoDOT review upon
 request.
 (f) Only GGBFS in compliance with these specifications shall be allowed into a silo destined for
 MoDOT projects.
 1017.3.2 Te rminal Q ualification. In order to become a qualified terminal, a written request shall be sent
 from terminal personnel to Construction and Materials. A letter shall accompany the request from each
 affected and qualified marketing entity, advising of the intent to ship through the respective terminal. Any
 changes in GGBFS sources shall be updated in the same manner. Terminals will be inspected to ensure
 adequacy to accept, retain and ship GGBFS from qualified marketing entities.
 1017.3.3 Failure to Comply. Failure to fulfill any of these requirements may result in disqualification of
 the GGBFS manufacturer, marketing entity or terminal. In cases of dispute, test results obtained by MoDOT
 will control.
 1017.3.4 Disqualifie d Facilitie s. If a facility has been disqualified, the marketing entity will be required
 to designate the silo, bin or storage facility from which the marketing entity proposes to furnish GGBFS for
 MoDOT projects. Each silo, bin or storage facility designated must be sampled, tested, sealed and approved
 by MoDOT prior to shipment. T he marketing entity shall also sample, test and report the test results for
 each designated silo, bin or storage facility. T his procedure will continue until adequate QC has been
 established.
 1017.3.5 Shipping. GGBFS continually sampled and tested via autosamplers at a location, frequency and
 duration acceptable to MoDOT, may be continuously shipped direct from a marketing entity. All GGBFS
 manually sampled and tested shall be held in the silo or bin until such time as the test results are completed
 prior to shipping.
 1017.3.6 Storage . All GGBFS intended for use shall be sampled, tested and placed in a designated silo or
 bin.
 1017.4 Acce ptance . T he marketing entity shall certify that the material complies with the specification
 requirements. When a qualified marketing entity or terminal is shipping GGBFS for, or purchasing GGBFS
 from, another qualified marketing entity, the bill of lading or delivery receipt shall be from the shipping
 company. T he certification statement showing the actual manufacturer shall be prominently placed on the
 bill of lading or delivery receipt. A copy of the bill of lading or delivery receipt shall accompany each
 shipment and shall be furnished to MoDOT at the shipping and destination points.
 
 546
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1017.4.1 T he bill of lading or delivery receipt for each shipment to MoDOT projects shall carry the
 following certification statement:
 "T his is to certify this Grade _____ GGBFS originated from a MoDOT qualified manufacturer, has been
 maintained to meet MoDOT specifications and was loaded from silo number ________."
 __________________________________ Name and Location of Manufacturer
 __________________________________ Name and Location of Shipping Facility
 By_________________________________ Signature and Name of Marketing Entity
 
 547
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1018
 FLY ASH FO R CO NCRETE
 1018.1 Scope . T his specification covers fly ash for use in Portland cement concrete.
 1018.2 Ge ne ral. Only fly ash from sources qualified in accordance with these specifications will be
 permitted. T he mixing of different classes and sources of fly ash will not be permitted. All fly ash shall be
 in accordance with AASHT O M 295, Class C or F, except as herein specified.
 1018.2.1 Class C fly ash shall meet either (a) or (b) of the following requirements:
 (a) T he 7-day Strength Activity Index with Portland cement shall be at a minimum of 85 percent
 of the control.
 (b) T he Calcium oxide content shall be 23 percent, minimum.
 1018.2.1.1 All Class C fly ash shall have a minimum Strength Activity Index with Portland cement of 85
 percent of the control at 28 days.
 1018.2.2 T he percent each of silicon dioxide (SiO2), aluminum oxide (Al2O3) and iron oxide (Fe2O3)
 shall be reported in addition to the total of the three.
 1018.2.3 Loss on Ignition shall not exceed 1.5 percent unless supplies provide test data verifying
 performance and durability in fly ash concrete applications for sources exceeding this requirement.
 1018.2.4 T he term “ manufacturer”, as used in this specification, will be the actual manufacturer of the fly
 ash. T he term, “ marketing entity”, as used in this specification, will be the supplier or broker of the fly
 ash. T he marketing entity shall be responsible to be in accordance with these specifications.
 1018.2.5 Cement used for testing fly ash shall be in accordance with AASHT O M85.
 1018.2.6 All marketing entities, terminals, and independent testing laboratories shall be qualified prior to
 acceptance of any material.
 1018.3 Laboratory Q ualification.
 1018.3.1 In order to become qualified, a written request shall be sent by the marketing entity to
 Construction and Materials, along with a copy of the laboratory’s QC Plan, the QC departments most
 recent Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory (CCRL) certification and the latest CCRL Pozzolan
 proficiency sample report. T he CCRL inspection shall cover all tests required by the specification.
 Documentation showing satisfactory resolution of all inspection deficiencies shall be included. In addition,
 the plant may be inspected to verify the information and to establish personal contact with the QC
 personnel.
 1018.3.2 Failure to Comply. Failure to comply with any of these requirements and/or specified herein
 may result in the issuance of a strike. If a laboratory accumulates three strikes, the laboratory shall be
 disqualified. For every year a laboratory does not receive a strike, a strike will be removed from the
 laboratory’s accumulated total. In cases of dispute, test results obtained by MoDOT will control.
 1018.3.3 Disqualifie d Facilitie s. If a laboratory has been disqualified, the marketing entity must utilize
 an existing MoDOT approved laboratory or qualify a laboratory fulfilling MoDOT requirements. A
 disqualified laboratory will be unable to maintain qualification based on requirements governed in this
 specification.
 1018.4 Marke ting Entity Q ualification. In order to become qualified, a written request shall be sent by
 the marketing entity to Construction and Materials, along with a copy of the marketing entity’s QC plan
 and the following information. T he power plant and terminals may be inspected to verify the information
 and to establish personal contact with the QC personnel.
 
 548
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1018.4.1 T he following information shall be included in the request for qualification:
 (a) An outline of the QC program from the coal yard to the point where the product is
 relinquished to the purchaser. T he QC program shall cover all tests required by the specification,
 and shall include the testing frequency for each test. T he name of the testing laboratory shall also
 be included.
 (b) A copy of the testing laboratory's most recent Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory
 (CCRL) inspection report and the latest CCRL proficiency sample report. T he CCRL inspection
 shall cover all tests required by the specification. Documentation showing satisfactory resolution
 of all inspection deficiencies shall be included.
 (c) Complete name and address of the fly ash source and owner. If located in an area without
 precise address identification, a complete map description shall be furnished.
 (d) Complete name and address or map location of the coal mine. If more than one source of coal
 is used, all sources shall be listed.
 (e) Type of coal used.
 (f) Class of fly ash produced.
 (g) A description of production procedures including, but not limited to, any additives mixed with
 the coal during production, any additive or dust suppressant used to collect the fly ash, ash
 collection methods, production capacity in tons (Mg) per day, and the proportions and
 proportioning procedures of any blended coals.
 (h) Description of storage facilities, including capacities and set-aside capabilities.
 (i) A copy of a typical bill of lading in accordance with the certification statement.
 (j) A split sample of the class of fly ash proposed for use, obtained from the autosampler over a
 minimum of one production day. T he marketing entity's test results for the split sample shall also
 be submitted.
 1018.4.2 In order to maintain qualification, the following will be required:
 (a) Quality control test results covering the production of all fly ash proposed for use in MoDOT
 projects, including the high, low and average results for each class shall be kept on file by the
 marketing entity. Sampling and testing frequency shall be in accordance with AST M C 311. Results
 shall include the percent each of silicon dioxide (SiO2), aluminum oxide (Al2O3) and iron oxide
 (Fe2 O3) in addition to a total of all three.
 (b) A copy of the most recent CCRL inspection and proficiency sample reports and any deficiency
 resolutions shall be forwarded promptly to MoDOT.
 (c) Semi-annual split samples for the class of approved fly ash shall be obtained by MoDOT for
 joint testing by the marketing entity. Marketing entity test results on the split samples shall be
 furnished to Construction and Materials when completed.
 (d) All QC test results shall be available for a minimum of three years, for MoDOT review upon
 request.
 (e) All monthly or each 3200-ton samples shall be available for a minimum of one year, for
 MoDOT testing upon request.
 (f) Only fly ash in compliance with these specifications shall be allowed into a silo destined for
 MoDOT projects.
 1018.4.3 Failure to Comply. Failure to comply with any of these requirements and/or specified herein
 
 549
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 may result in the issuance of a strike. If a marketing entity accumulates three strikes, the marketing entity
 shall be disqualified. For every year a marketing entity does not receive a strike, a strike will be removed
 from the marketing entities’ accumulated total. In cases of dispute, test results obtained by MoDOT will
 control.
 1018.5 Te rminal Q ualification. In order to become a qualified terminal, a written request shall be sent
 from terminal personnel to Construction and Materials. A letter shall accompany the request from each
 affected and qualified marketing entity, advising of the intent to ship through the respective terminal. Any
 changes in fly ash source shall be updated in the same manner. Terminals shall be inspected to ensure
 adequacy to accept, retain and ship fly ash from qualified marketing entities.
 1018.6 Sampling, Te sting and Acce ptance Proce dure s. All fly ash will be subject to inspection and
 sampling by MoDOT at the power plant, an intermediate shipping terminal or destination. MoDOT shall
 be allowed unlimited access to all facilities and records in order to conduct inspection and sampling.
 1018.6.1 Failure to Comply. Failure to fulfill any of these requirements may result in disqualification of
 the fly ash manufacturer, marketing entity or a terminal. In cases of dispute, test results obtained by
 MoDOT will control.
 1018.6.2 Disqualifie d Facilitie s. If a facility has been disqualified, the marketing entity may elect to
 designate the silo, bin or storage facility from which the marketing entity proposes to furnish fly ash for
 MoDOT projects. If this option is used, each silo, bin or storage facility designated must be sampled, tested,
 sealed and approved by MoDOT prior to shipment. T he marketing entity shall also sample, test and report
 the test results for each designated silo, bin or storage facility.
 1018.6.3 Shipping. Fly ash shall be continually sampled and tested via autosamplers at a location,
 frequency and duration acceptable to MoDOT, and may be continuously shipped direct from a marketing
 entity or generating station silo.
 1018.6.4 Storage . All fly ash intended for use shall be sampled, tested, and placed in designated silos or
 bins.
 1018.6.5 Coal Source s and Proce ss. Fly ash from each coal source at each plant shall be qualified
 separately. Coals from different sources may be blended prior to burning, but the qualification shall be based
 on the blend. When the production procedure or fuel source is changed, or when any change is made by the
 manufacturer that alters the properties or characteristics of the qualified fly ash, requalification may be
 required.
 1018.6.6 Acce ptance . T he marketing entity shall certify that the material complies with the specification
 requirements. When a qualified marketing entity or terminal is shipping fly ash for, or purchasing fly ash
 from, another qualified marketing entity, the bill of lading or delivery receipt shall be from the shipping
 company. T he certification statement showing the actual manufacturer shall be prominently placed on the
 bill of lading or delivery receipt. A copy of the bill of lading or delivery receipt shall accompany each
 shipment and shall be furnished to MoDOT at the shipping and destination points.
 1018.6.7 T he bill of lading or delivery receipt for each shipment to MoDOT projects shall carry the
 following certification statement:
 "T his is to certify this Class ___ fly ash originated from a MoDOT qualified manufacturer, has been
 maintained to meet MoDOT specifications and was loaded from silo number ________."
 _________________________________ Name and Location of Manufacturer
 __________________________________ Name and Location of Shipping Facility
 By________________________________ Signature and Name of Marketing Entity
 
 550
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1019
 CEMENT
 1019.1 Scope . T his specification covers Portland cement, hydraulic cement and blended hydraulic cement.
 1019.2 Ge ne ral. All Portland cement shall be in accordance with the following requirements. T he basis of
 acceptance will be as described in Sec 1019.3.
 1019.2.1 Portland Ce me nt. All Portland cement shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 85 with the
 following modifications:
 (a) Specific surface, fineness, for all Type I Portland cements shall not exceed 430 m2/kg using Air
 permeability test. Maximum fineness limits do not apply if the sum of C3S + 4.75C3A is less than
 or equal to 90.
 (b) When slag cement is used as an inorganic processing addition, loss on ignition shall be corrected
 in accordance with AST M C 114 and reported on mill test reports.
 1019.2.2 Hydraulic Ce me nt. All hydraulic cement shall be in accordance with AST M C 1157.
 1019.2.3 Ble nde d Hydraulic Ce me nt. All blended hydraulic cement shall be in accordance with Type IP,
 IS, IL or IT of AASHT O M 240 with the following modification that chemical composition shall be
 provided and tolerances checked in accordance with Section 7.1.1 of AASHT O M240 and allowable
 constituent amounts of Type IP, IS, IL and IT cements are within the specified limits listed below:
 (a) Type IP cement shall have a pozzolan constituent up to 25 percent by mass of the blended
 cement. Type IP cements, in which the pozzolan constituent is metakaolin or silica fume, shall be
 a maximum of 15 or 8 percent, respectively.
 (b) Type IS cement shall have a slag cement constituent up to 25 percent by mass of the blended
 cement.
 (c) Type IL cement shall have a limestone constituent up to 15 percent by mass of blended
 cement.
 (d) Type IT cement shall have a slag cement, limestone and pozzolan constituent up to 40 percent
 by mass of the ternary blended cement. T he maximum constituent requirements shall be in
 accordance with Sec 1019.2.3 (a), (b) and (c) in some combination up to 40 percent.
 1019.2.4 O the r Ce me nts. White Portland cement shall meet the requirements for Type I. Air-entraining
 Portland cement shall be used only when specified in the contract. Different types of cement shall not be
 mixed nor shall different types be used in the same unit of construction.
 1019.2.5 Sack or Bag. A sack or bag of cement will be considered to be 94 pounds net.
 1019.3 Sampling, Te sting and Acce ptance Proce dure s. All manufacturers and terminals furnishing
 cement to MoDOT projects shall be qualified as herein described. All cement will be subject to inspection
 and sampling by MoDOT at the source of manufacture, an intermediate shipping terminal or destination.
 MoDOT shall be allowed unlimited access to all facilities and records as required to conduct inspection and
 sampling.
 1019.3.1 Manufacture r Q ualification. In order to become qualified, a written request shall be sent by
 the manufacturer to Construction and Materials, along with a copy of the QC plan. In order to maintain
 qualification, the manufacturer shall submit additional information, as listed, to MoDOT. T he plant may be
 inspected to verify the information and to establish personal contact with the QC personnel.
 1019.3.1.1 T he following information shall be included in the request for qualification:
 (a) An outline of the QC program from the quarry to the point where the product is relinquished
 
 551
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 to the purchaser. T he QC program shall cover all tests required by the specification and shall
 include the testing frequency for each test.
 (b) A copy of the most recent Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory (CCRL) inspection
 report and the latest CCRL proficiency sample report. T he CCRL inspection shall cover all tests
 required by the specification. Documentation showing satisfactory resolution of all inspection
 deficiencies shall be included.
 (c) T he physical layout of the plant, including the number and capacity of finish mills and silos
 and the type of cement stored in each silo.
 (d) A copy of a typical bill of lading with the required certification statement.
 (e) A split sample of each type of cement proposed for use. Manufacturer test results for the split
 sample shall also be submitted.
 1019.3.1.2 In order to maintain qualification, the following will be required:
 (a) Monthly QC test results covering the production of cement types proposed for use in MoDOT
 projects, including the high, low and average results for each type shall be forwarded to MoDOT
 upon manufacturer completion.
 (b) A copy of the most recent CCRL inspection and proficiency sample reports and any deficiency
 resolutions shall be forwarded promptly to MoDOT.
 (c) Semi-annual split samples for each type of approved cement will be obtained by MoDOT for
 joint testing by the manufacturer. Manufacturer test results on the split samples shall be furnished
 to MoDOT when completed.
 (d) All QC test results shall be available for a minimum of three years, for MoDOT review upon
 request.
 (e) Only cement in compliance with these specifications shall be allowed into a silo destined for
 MoDOT projects.
 1019.3.2 Te rminal Q ualification. In order to become a qualified terminal, a written request shall be sent
 from terminal personnel to Construction and Materials. T he request shall be accompanied by a letter from
 each affected and qualified manufacturer, advising of the intent to ship through the respective terminal.
 Any changes in cement source shall be updated in the same manner. Terminals will be inspected to ensure
 adequacy to accept, retain and ship cement from qualified manufacturers.
 1019.3.3 Failure to Comply. Failure to fulfill any of these requirements may result in disqualification of
 the cement manufacturer or a terminal. In cases of dispute, test results obtained by MoDOT will control.
 1019.3.4 Disqualifie d Manufacture rs. If a manufacturer has been disqualified, the manufacturer will be
 required to designate the silo, bin or storage facility from which they propose to furnish cement for
 MoDOT projects. Each silo, bin or storage facility designated shall be sampled, tested, sealed and approved
 by MoDOT prior to shipment. T he manufacturer shall also sample, test and report the test results for each
 designated silo, bin or storage facility. T his procedure shall continue until adequate QC has been established.
 1019.3.5 Fore ign Ce me nt. All tests on foreign cement shall be performed by a qualified domestic
 manufacturer.
 1019.4 Acce ptance . T he supplier shall certify that the material complies with the specification
 requirements. When a qualified manufacturer or terminal is shipping cement for, or purchasing cement
 from, another qualified manufacturer, the bill of lading or delivery receipt shall be from the shipping
 company. T he certification statement showing the actual manufacturer shall be prominently placed on the
 bill of lading or delivery receipt. A copy of the bill of lading or delivery receipt shall accompany each
 shipment and shall be furnished to MoDOT at the shipping and destination points.
 
 552
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1019.4.1 Ce rtification. T he bill of lading or delivery receipt for each shipment to MoDOT projects shall
 carry the following certification statement:
 "T his is to certify this Type ___ cement originated from a MoDOT qualified manufacturer, has been
 maintained to meet MoDOT specifications and was loaded from silo number ________."
 __________________________________ Name and Location of Manufacturer
 ________________________________ Name and Location of Shipping Facility
 By________________________________
 Signature and Name of Marketing Entity
 
 553
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1020
 CO RRUGATED METALLIC-CO ATED STEEL CULVERT PIPE, PIPE-ARCHES AND END SECTIO NS
 1020.1 Scope . T his specification covers corrugated steel pipe, pipe-arches and flared end sections intended
 for use in the construction of culverts and similar uses. T he steel used in fabrication shall have a protective
 metallic coating of zinc (galvanizing) or aluminum.
 1020.2 Basis of Acce ptance . Unless otherwise specified, the basis of acceptance will be in accordance
 with AASHT O M 36. Pipe shall be from an approved qualified plant and will be accepted based on
 certification, manufacturer quality control documentation and tests on samples as required by the engineer.
 Pipe may be fabricated using English units of measurement. Pipe fabricated using English measurements
 shall be in accordance with the dimensions and tolerances shown on the plans.
 1020.3 Mate rial.
 1020.3.1 Ste e l She e t. Steel sheet shall be certifiable in accordance with AASHT O M 218 or AASHT O M
 274. Finished steel sheet shall be free from injurious defects such as blisters, flux and uncoated spots.
 1020.3.2 Zinc Coating. Zinc for coating or galvanizing shall be prime western grade or better. Zinccoated steel shall have a weight of zinc coating no less than 2.00 ounces psf of double exposed surface. If
 the average weight of zinc coating, as determined from the required samples, is less than 2.00 ounces psf, or
 if any one specimen has less than 1.80 ounces of zinc psf of double exposed surface, the lot sampled will be
 rejected or resampled, as determined by the engineer. If a retest is conducted, the weight of zinc coating of
 all of the original samples and the samples for retest shall average at least 2.00 ounces psf of double
 exposed surface, and no specimen shall have less than 1.80 ounces psf, or the entire lot sampled will be
 rejected. Adherence of coating shall be such that no peeling occurs while the material is being corrugated or
 formed into pipe.
 1020.3.3 Aluminum Coating. Aluminum for coating shall be commercially pure aluminum. T he bath
 analysis shall be in accordance with the Aluminum Bath Analysis table shown on the plans. Aluminumcoated steel shall have a weight of aluminum coating no less than 1.00 ounce psf of double exposed surface.
 If the average weight of aluminum coating, as determined from the required samples, is less than 1.00 ounce
 psf or if any one specimen has less than 0.90 ounce of aluminum psf of double exposed surface, the lot
 sampled will be rejected or resampled, as determined by the engineer. If a retest is conducted, the weight of
 aluminum coating of all of the original samples and the samples for retest shall average at least 1.00 ounce
 psf of double exposed surface and no specimen shall have less than 0.90 ounce psf or the entire lot sampled
 will be rejected.
 1020.3.4 Docume ntation.
 1020.3.4.1 She e t Manufacture r's Ce rtifie d Analysis. T he manufacturer of each brand shall file with
 Construction and Materials a certificate setting forth the name or brand of metal to be furnished, the
 specified chemical composition and a typical or average analysis showing the percent of carbon,
 phosphorus, manganese, sulfur and silicon. T he certificate shall be sworn to, for the manufacturer, by a
 person having legal authority to bind the company.
 1020.3.4.2 She e t Manufacture r's Guarante e . T he manufacturer of the steel sheet shall submit with the
 certified analysis a guarantee providing that all metal furnished is in accordance with the specification
 requirements, shall bear a suitable identification brand or mark and shall be replaced without cost to the
 Commission when not in accordance with the specified analysis, sheet thickness or coating. T he guarantee
 shall be so worded as to remain in effect as long as the manufacturer continues to furnish material. T he
 manufacturer shall conduct such tests and measurements as necessary to ensure the material produced is in
 accordance with all specification requirements. T hese tests and measurements shall be identified by the
 identification symbols or code used on the sheet in a manner that will permit the manufacturer to produce
 specific reports showing test results representative of specific lots of steel sheet. Copies of reports of these
 tests shall be kept on file and shall be submitted to the engineer upon request. T he brand shall be removed
 or obliterated by the manufacturer on all material where control tests, as outlined herein, do not show
 conformance to this specification.
 
 554
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1020.4 Fabrication.
 1020.4.1 Rive te d Se ams. A longitudinal seam will not be permitted on the corner radius or invert of pipearch.
 1020.4.2 Re sistance Spot We lde d Se ams. A longitudinal seam will not be permitted on the corner radius
 or invert of pipe arch.
 1020.4.3 Shop Elongation. If round pipe is required to be shop elongated, the vertical axis shall be five
 percent greater than the nominal diameter. A tolerance of one percentage point in elongation will be
 permitted. Approximately 2 feet at each end of an installation may be left round to accommodate
 connecting end treatments or extensions. A paint mark to indicate the top of the pipe shall be placed on
 each piece of shop elongated pipe, and round ends on an elongated pipe shall be clearly marked "Outside
 End-Round".
 1020.4.4 Be ve le d Ends. Corrugated metal pipe requiring beveled ends to conform to the adjacent roadway
 slope shall be cut in such a manner as to leave smooth edges without damage to the coating away from the
 cut edge. Cut edges shall be completely covered with two coats of single component inorganic zinc or
 organic zinc-rich paint meeting the approval of the engineer. No other end finish will be required for pipe
 with beveled ends.
 1020.4.5 End Se ctions. Metal end sections shall be in accordance with the requirements for base metal,
 coating, fabrication, sampling, accepted brands of metal, sheet manufacturer's certified analysis, sheet
 manufacturer's guarantee, sheet thickness, workmanship and repair of coating. T he sections shall conform
 to the shape, dimensions and sheet thicknesses shown on the plans, and shall be manufactured as integral
 units or so the sections may be readily assembled in place.
 1020.4.6 Bands. Formed bands may be used on pipe with annular corrugations and helically corrugated
 pipe with reformed ends. Bands shall be formed with a minimum of two corrugations matching the profile
 of the pipes being joined together. T he corrugations shall be spaced to provide seating in the second
 corrugation of each pipe and without creating more than 1/2-inch annular space between the pipe ends
 when joined together.
 1020.4.6.1 Circumferentially corrugated bands, bands with projections and helically corrugated bands shall
 be so constructed as to lap on an equal portion of each of the culvert sections and shall be connected at the
 ends by galvanized angles having minimum dimensions of 2 x 2 x 3/16 inch, fastened with galvanized bolts
 of 1/2-inch minimum diameter. Formed bands shall be fastened together by two 1/2-inch bolts through a
 bar, and strap welded to the band. Angles shall be secured to the coupling bands by riveting, welding,
 resistance spot welding or a method approved by the engineer at each corrugation. Rivets shall be placed
 such that the head of the rivet will be on the inside of the band. Welds, except for resistance spot welds,
 shall be painted with one coat of zinc dust-zinc oxide or zinc-rich paint meeting the approval of the
 engineer. T he 7-inch and 10 1/2-inch bands shall have at least two fastening bolts, the 12-inch and 14-inch
 bands shall have at least three fastening bolts and the 16 1/4-inch or greater bands shall have at least four
 fastening bolts. Alternate methods of fastening the ends of coupling bands may be used if approved by the
 engineer. Coupling bands for pipe-arch and shop elongated pipe shall be shaped to fit the structure.
 1020.4.6.2 As an alternate to coupling bands, a bell and spigot joint system may be used as approved by
 Construction and Materials.
 1020.4.7 Spe cial Fittings. Special fittings, angles and tees shown on the plans shall be fabricated by
 welding in such a manner as to avoid excessive damage to the coating away from the welded area. T he
 welded area and adjacent damaged coating shall be repaired in accordance with Sec 1020.6.
 1020.5 Sampling, Te sting and Acce ptance Proce dure s. All fabrication plants furnishing pipe for
 MoDOT projects shall be qualified as herein described. A pipe distributor, who does not fabricate pipe, may
 attain qualification as set forth for a pipe manufacturer or may furnish pipe for MoDOT projects that is
 marked and certified from an approved plant. All pipe will be subject to inspection by the engineer at the
 source of manufacture, at an intermediate shipping terminal or at destination. T he engineer shall be allowed
 unlimited access to all facilities and records, as required, to conduct inspection and sampling in accordance
 
 555
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 with Sec 106.
 1020.5.1 Application for Place me nt on the Q ualifie d List. For a plant to become qualified, a written
 request shall be sent by the manufacturer to Construction and Materials with the following information:
 (a) A QC Plan, in accordance with Sec 1020.5.2, for each plant from which pipe is to be fabricated
 for use on MoDOT projects.
 (b) A certification statement from the manufacturer that the quality control procedures at the
 plant, at a minimum, meet the requirements set forth in the manufacturer ’s QC Plan.
 (c) Sources for each material to be used in the fabrication of pipe shall be provided.
 (d) A guarantee that all material to be used in the fabrication of pipe will be in accordance with
 MoDOT specifications and that pre-approval for any source of material will be received prior to
 use.
 (e) Units of measurement, English or metric, used to fabricate the pipe.
 1020.5.2 Manufacture r’s Q C Plans. T he QC Plan for each plant shall include the following:
 (a) A list of personnel with corresponding authority and responsibility.
 (b) Qualifications and training of QC personnel, current and proposed.
 (c) A description of how the manufacturer proposes to control production in order to assure all
 material and workmanship incorporated into the fabrication of pipe meets the applicable
 specification requirements.
 (d) Lot sizes, the specific tests to be performed during or after production, frequency of these
 tests, the point where samples or inspections will be obtained or performed, and the format for
 recording test data.
 (e) A drawing, photograph or copy of the manufacturer ’s identification marking.
 (f) A plan for resolving conflicts.
 (g) Designate how the pipe will be identified as pipe for MoDOT projects if the pipe is stockpiled
 and not marked in accordance with Sec 1020.7.
 1020.5.3 Maintaining Q ualification. To maintain qualification, the manufacturer and plant shall
 perform and maintain quality control in accordance with the manufacturer ’s QC Plan approved by
 Construction and Materials. T he manufacturer or plant shall conduct tests and inspections to verify that
 adequate quality control is maintained and that the pipe furnished is in accordance with Sec 1020. T he
 manufacturer or plant shall maintain for three years a record of all test results and inspections for review
 by the engineer. T he records shall show that each shipment of pipe has been inspected by the plant’s QC
 personnel. T he record shall indicate the purchase order number or the project number, route, county, date
 of inspection, size of corrugation, type of fabrication, quantity in lineal feet, number of bands and end
 sections, pipe diameter, sheet thickness, brand and heat number of the base metal, and the coating lot
 number. T he manufacturer or plant shall notify the engineer responsible for inspection of that plant at
 least 24 hours prior to each shipment. Additional pipe may be considered part of the original shipment
 when the ordered quantity was underestimated or material was lost or damaged. A bill of lading in
 accordance with Sec 1020.10 shall be provided for each shipment of pipe. Each plant shall maintain a
 current list of QC personnel with corresponding authority and responsibility. All training provided to QC
 personnel shall be documented with a brief description of the training and shall be kept on file at the plant.
 1020.5.4 Disqualification of a Manufacture r or Plant. A manufacturer or plant may be disqualified to
 provide pipe for use on MoDOT projects based on the discretion of Construction and Materials, for reasons
 including, but not limited to, noncompliance with the manufacturer ’s QC Plan, failure of pipe to
 
 556
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 consistently meet specifications, falsification of documentation, unsatisfactory performance in the field or
 for other reasons indicating lack of consistent material or workmanship quality.
 1020.5.4.1 A manufacturer or plant will not be considered for reinstatement until after one year from the
 date of removal for falsification of documents.
 1020.5.4.2 T hree notices of failure to meet the specification requirements within a 12-month period will
 be cause for disqualification of a plant for one year, effective from the date of the third notice.
 1020.5.4.3 A manufacturer having two or more plants disqualified will constitute disqualification of the
 manufacturer for one year.
 1020.5.4.4 A manufacturer or plant disqualified within one year of the end of a disqualification may be
 subject to permanent removal, with no application to be reinstated for a period of three years.
 1020.5.5 Reinstatement of a Manufacturer or Plant. Consideration of reinstatement of a manufacturer or a
 plant once disqualified will be no sooner than specified in Sec 1020.5.4, will require a written document
 from the manufacturer or plant stating the reasons for disqualification and the action taken to correct
 those deficiencies, written concurrence from Construction and Materials that the problem has been suitably
 addressed, and followed by an application in accordance with Sec 1020.5.1.
 1020.5.6 Sampling of Mate rial. Random sampling of the pipe or material used in the production of pipe
 will be conducted by the engineer to verify if the pipe and material are in accordance with the applicable
 specifications. Sampling size and frequency will be at the discretion of the engineer. In the event pipe
 materials certified by the manufacturer are not in accordance with Sec 1020 as determined by random
 sampling, testing and inspection, all pipe incorporating that material will be rejected.
 1020.5.7 Mill and Factory Inspe ction. T he engineer may have the material inspected and sampled in the
 rolling mill or in the shop where fabricated. T he engineer may require from the mill the chemical analysis
 of any heat number. T he inspection, either in the mill or in the shop, shall be under the direction of the
 engineer. T he engineer shall have unlimited access to the mill or shop for inspection, and every facility
 shall be extended for the purpose of inspection. Any material or pipe that has been previously rejected at
 the mill or shop and included in a later lot will be considered sufficient cause for rejection of the entire lot.
 1020.5.8 Inspection. Inspection by the engineer will include an examination of the pipe for deficiency in
 specified diameter, net length of finished pipe and any evidence of poor workmanship. T he inspection may
 include taking samples for chemical analysis, mechanical properties and determination of weight of
 coating. T he pipe making up the shipment shall meet all requirements of these specifications. If 10 percent
 of the pipe in any lot fails to meet these requirements, the entire lot may be rejected.
 1020.5.9 Sampling of Coate d Ste e l. Samples of coated steel sheet may be obtained from coils, flat or
 corrugated cut lengths or fabricated culverts. Samples shall be taken at a frequency determined by the
 manufacturer ’s QC Plan or as required by the engineer.
 1020.5.9.1 For testing weight of coating of flat or corrugated cut lengths before fabrication, three
 specimens, each no less than 2 1/4 inches square or of an equivalent area, shall be taken from each test
 sheet selected to represent the lot. T he specimens shall be taken such that no part includes metal closer
 than 2 inches from an edge or 4 inches from an end of the cut length. T hese specimens shall be obtained in
 any one of the following patterns:
 (a) One specimen shall be obtained from the center of the cut length and the other two in a
 straight line diagonally at the opposite corners.
 (b) Specimens shall be taken in a straight line from one end of the cut length, one from the middle
 portion and one from near each edge.
 1020.5.9.2 For testing weight of coating of coils before fabrication, three specimens, each no less than 2
 1/4 inches square or of an equivalent area, shall be taken, one from the middle of the width and one from
 each side. No specimen shall be taken closer than 2 inches from an edge or 4 inches from an end of the
 
 557
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 coil.
 1020.5.9.3 For testing weight of coating of fabricated pipe or pipe-arch, at least one specimen 2 1/4 inches
 square or of equivalent area, shall be selected for each 20 pieces of pipe within a given lot selected to be
 tested, provided that no less than three specimens, each from a different piece, shall represent any one lot.
 T he three specimens shall constitute one sample and shall be in accordance with Sec 1020.3.
 1020.5.9.4 For chemical analysis of the base metal of flat or corrugated cut lengths before fabrication, a
 specimen, no less than 2 1/4 inches square or of an equivalent area, shall be taken from each of three
 different cut lengths for lots weighing 5 tons or less, from four cut lengths for lots weighing more than 5
 tons and less than 10 tons and from five cut lengths for lots weighing 10 tons or more. Drillings or chips
 from the specimens shall be thoroughly mixed for analysis.
 1020.5.9.5 For chemical analysis of the base metal of coils, three specimens, each no less than 2 1/4 inches
 square or of an equivalent area, shall be taken from across the width of the coil, or if more than one mill
 lift or coil is involved, three specimens shall be selected from each of at least two different coils. Drillings
 or chips from the specimens shall be thoroughly mixed for analysis.
 1020.5.9.6 When chemical analysis of base metal of fabricated pipe or pipe-arch is required, the analysis
 shall be performed on the same specimens taken for determination of weight of coating.
 1020.5.9.7 For testing mechanical properties of the base metal, two specimens, each 4 x 14 inches, shall be
 taken from one end of a cut length or coil. T he 14-inch dimension shall be in the longitudinal direction of
 the steel sheet. No specimen shall be taken closer than 2 inches from an edge or 4 inches from an end of a
 sheet.
 1020.5.9.8 Samples for retest of weight of coating on cut lengths shall be taken in accordance with pattern
 (a) of Sec 1020.5.9.1. Samples for retest of mechanical properties or chemical composition of any base
 metal or retest of weight of coating on coils or fabricated pipe or pipe-arch shall be taken in the same
 manner as for the original test.
 1020.5.10 Te sting of Me tallic-Coate d Ste e l. Tests for weight of coating, chemical composition and
 mechanical properties of metallic-coated steel sheets shall be as herein specified.
 1020.5.10.1 Test specimen size and method of test for determining weight of coating shall be in
 accordance with AASHT O T 65 for zinc coatings, and AASHT O T 213 for aluminum coatings. At the
 option of the engineer, material may be accepted on the basis of magnetic gauge determinations made in
 accordance with AST M E 376.
 1020.5.10.2 T he method of test for chemical analysis shall be in accordance with AST M E 30-68,
 exclusive of any later revisions or additions.
 1020.5.10.3 Test specimen size and method of test for determining tensile strength, yield strength and
 elongation shall be in accordance with AST M A 370 for sheet steel.
 1020.5.11 Acce ptance of Me tallic-Coate d Ste e l She e t. Acceptance of metallic-coated steel sheet will
 be based on a satisfactory sheet manufacturer's certified analysis and guarantee and sheet identification
 markings, upon tests on samples of the material, or upon both. T he frequency of sampling will be
 determined by the engineer. T he fabricator shall provide the equipment and personnel required to obtain
 the samples as directed by the engineer.
 1020.5.12 Acce pte d Brands of Me tal. No metal will be accepted under these specifications until the
 sheet manufacturer's certified analysis and manufacturer's guarantee have been approved by the engineer.
 Misbranding or other misrepresentation and non-uniformity of product, will each be considered sufficient
 reason to discontinue the acceptance of any brand under these specifications, and notice sent to the sheet
 manufacturer of the discontinuance of acceptance of any brand will be considered to be notice to all culvert
 companies that handle that particular brand.
 1020.5.13 Sampling and Te sting of Continuous Lock Se am. Sampling and testing for continuous lock
 
 558
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 seam quality control shall be in accordance with AASHT O T 249.
 1020.5.13.1 T he pipe manufacturer or plant shall cut, log and retain quality control samples, which shall be
 retained for two years. Visual examination samples for quality control shall be cut during production. T he
 manufacturer or plant shall sample a minimum of one lock per coil when the same diameter of pipe is being
 produced. T he samples shall be taken from the beginning of the coil. If diameters are changed within a coil,
 at least one lock per diameter shall be taken. Quality control tension test specimens shall be taken from
 pipe representing each sheet thickness and diameter the first time that sheet thickness and diameter is
 produced. In addition, each sheet thickness thereafter shall be sampled on a monthly basis during
 production for tension testing of the seam. T he manufacturer or plant shall record all tension test results
 and retain those records for two years.
 1020.5.13.2 Inspection by the engineer will include random visual examination samples and tension test
 samples taken in the presence of the engineer. If visual examination samples indicate nonconformance,
 that length of the pipe will be rejected, and a resample will be taken from a different length of pipe of the
 same sheet thickness of the same diameter. If the resample fails, each shipment of that sheet thickness
 thereafter shall be sampled for visual examination and tension testing until the engineer determines that
 satisfactory quality control is established. Pipe from which tension test specimens have been taken may be
 cut and the undamaged portion accepted for use.
 1020.6 Re pair of Damage d Coating. Damaged coating on pipe shall be repaired in accordance with
 AASHT O M 36, except as follows. Coating damaged in the field shall be repaired by recoating by the hotdip process or by the metallizing process, except that in instances of minor damage to areas in the upper
 two-thirds of the perimeter as installed, the engineer may permit repair in the same manner as specified for
 repair during fabrication. T he fabricated unit shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to recoating. T he hot-dip
 process shall be in accordance with Sec 1020.3.
 1020.7 Marking. Each section of pipe to be used on MoDOT projects shall be marked with an approved
 manufacturer ’s identification marking prior to shipment. T he marking shall be permanent and located
 within 12 inches of the downstream end of the pipe.
 1020.8 Handling. All pipe shall be handled with care to avoid damage. Pipe having damaged coating,
 localized bends in excess of 5 percent of the specified pipe diameter or any dent in excess of 1/2 inch will
 be rejected at the site of the work regardless of previous approvals. Rejected damaged pipe may be used if
 repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer.
 1020.9 MoDO T Ide ntification Numbe r. When the manufacturer contacts the engineer in accordance
 with Sec 1020.5.3, the engineer will assign a specific MoDOT identification number for each size of pipe in
 the shipment.
 1020.10 Bill of Lading. A bill of lading or delivery receipt for each shipment of pipe shall be furnished to
 the engineer at the shipping and destination points. T he bill of lading shall contain an itemized statement
 of the sizes and lengths of pipe with the corresponding designated MoDOT identification number provided
 to the manufacturer for each size of pipe for that shipment. T he bill of lading shall contain a certified
 statement. T he certified statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the manufacturer and
 shall state the following:
 “ T his certifies that the pipe, bands and end sections in this shipment are in accordance with MoDOT
 specifications, were fabricated at an approved plant and were fabricated from the following brand names:”
 
 559
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1021
 BITUMINO US-CO ATED CO RRUGATED
 METAL CULVERT PIPE AND PIPE ARCHES
 1021.1 Scope . T his specification covers bituminous-coated corrugated metal culvert pipe and pipe arches
 to be used for the construction of culverts.
 1021.2 Basis of Acce ptance . T he basis of acceptance for pipe and pipe-arches will be in accordance with
 Sec 1020.2, Sec 1020.5 and as specified herein. T he basis of acceptance for bituminous material will be in
 accordance with AASHT O M 190, except acceptance may be based on samples obtained from storage or
 from the dipping tanks.
 1021.3 Mate rial. T he pipe shall be in accordance, as applicable, with Sec 1020 or Sec 1024. T he
 bituminous material shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 190.
 1021.4 Lift Hooks or Loops. Lift hooks or loops, if agreed upon by the engineer and manufacturer, may
 be attached to pipe and pipe-arches to facilitate handling.
 1021.5 Re pair of Damage d Bituminous Coating. Bituminous coating damaged or displaced during
 delivery or installation shall be repaired as directed by the engineer by application of hot bituminous
 material of the same type as that originally used. Care shall be taken to avoid damage to the bituminous
 material during heating.
 
 560
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1022
 CO RRUGATED METALLIC-CO ATED STEEL
 PIPE UNDERDRAIN
 1022.1 Scope . T his specification covers corrugated metallic-coated steel pipe underdrain.
 1022.2 Basis of Acce ptance . Basis of acceptance will be in accordance with Secs 1020.2, and 1020.5, as
 specified herein.
 1022.3 Mate rial. Corrugated metallic-coated steel underdrain shall be in accordance with Sec 1020 and
 AASHT O M 36, Type III pipe for zinc-coated or aluminum-coated, with the following modifications.
 1022.3.1 Pipe 6 inches in diameter shall be fabricated of steel no less than 0.052 inch, 18 gage, specified
 thickness. Pipe with diameters 8 to 21 inches , inclusive, shall be fabricated of steel no less than 0.064
 inch, 16 gage , of the specified thickness.
 1022.3.2 Coupling bands shall be of the same base metal as the pipe.
 1022.3.3 Mechanical requirements of the base metal shall not apply.
 1022.3.4 Samples for determination of coating thickness may be taken from fabricated pipe.
 1022.4 Pe rforations. Unless otherwise specified, all pipe shall be perforated in accordance with the
 requirements for Class 1 perforations AASHT O M 36.
 
 561
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1023
 STRUCTURAL PLATE PIPE AND
 PIPE ARCHES
 1023.1 Scope . T his specification covers corrugated galvanized steel structural plates intended for use in
 construction of pipe and pipe arches. T he plates shall consist of corrugated galvanized metal and shall be
 curved such that the plates can be bolted together to form a structure of the specified shape and size.
 1023.2 Basis of Acce ptance . T he basis of acceptance will be in accordance with Sec 1020.2, Sec 1020.5,
 and as specified herein.
 1023.3 Mate rial. Corrugated galvanized steel structural plate for structural plate pipe and pipe arches shall
 be in accordance with AASHT O M 167, with the following modifications.
 1023.3.1 Corrugations. T he radii of curvature of the corrugations shall be at least one-half the depth of
 the corrugations. T he corrugations shall have a depth of 2 inches and a pitch of 6 inches. T he depth of
 corrugations shall not underrun the specified depth by more than 5 percent, and the pitch of the
 corrugations shall not deviate from the specified depth by more than 1/4 inch.
 1023.3.2 Spe lte r Coating. T he spelter coating shall be free from injurious defects such as blisters, flux
 and uncoated spots. For testing the weight of spelter coating and for chemical analysis, if required, the
 manufacturer shall take two samples for each 100 plates of each thickness of a shipment or fraction
 thereof. T he samples may be obtained from a piece approximately 3 inches square, cut from a corner of a
 plate or from a coupon approximately
 6 inches square attached to the center of one edge of the plate prior to galvanizing. T he coupon shall be of
 the same thickness and base metal as the plate to which the coupon is attached. One sample shall be
 retained for the engineer for QA purposes and one sample shall be tested by the manufacturer. If the result
 of a test for weight of coating for any sample is not in accordance with AASHT O M 167, an additional
 sample shall be cut for tests from each of two other plates in the lot represented by the nonconforming
 sample. All original samples and samples for retest shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 167, or the
 entire shipment will be rejected. At the option of the engineer, the material may be accepted or rejected on
 the basis of magnetic gauge results, except at the request of the contractor or manufacturer, plates rejected
 by magnetic gauge results will be sampled as specified above.
 1023.3.3 Acce pte d Brands of Me tal. No metal will be accepted under these specifications until after the
 manufacturer's certificate and guarantee have been approved by the engineer.
 1023.3.3.1 Manufacture r's Ce rtificate . T he manufacturer of the structural plate identified by the
 manufacturer's mark shall file with Construction and Materials, a certificate setting forth the name of the
 manufacturer, the base metal manufacturer, the specified chemical composition and a typical or average
 analysis showing the percent of sulfur, copper and any other elements specified in Table I of AASHT O M
 167. T he certificate shall be sworn to for the manufacturer by a person having legal authority to bind the
 company. Mismarking or other misrepresentation by the manufacturer will be considered sufficient reason
 to discontinue acceptance under these specifications. Notice sent to the manufacturer of the discontinuance
 of acceptance will be considered to be notice to all companies handling that particular manufacturer's
 product.
 1023.3.3.2 Manufacture r's Guarante e . T he manufacturer of the structural plate shall submit with the
 certificate a guarantee providing that all structural plate furnished is in accordance with the specifications,
 shall bear the manufacturer's identification mark and shall be replaced without cost when not in accordance
 with the specified analysis, sheet thickness or spelter coating. T he guarantee shall be so worded as to
 remain in effect as long as the manufacturer continues to furnish the material.
 1023.3.4 Bolts and Nuts for Conne cting Plate s.
 1023.3.4.1 Bolts for connecting plates shall be 3/4 inch in diameter and shall be in accordance with AST M
 A 449. Nuts shall be in accordance with AST M A 563, Grade C. Bolts, nuts and washers shall be galvanized
 in accordance with AASHT O M 232, or the bolts, nuts and washers may be mechanically galvanized. If
 mechanically galvanized, the coating thickness, adherence and quality requirements shall be in accordance
 
 562
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 with AASHT O M 232, Class C. Except as specified herein, bolts and nuts shall meet the dimension
 requirements of ANSI B18.2.1 for heavy hex bolts and ANSI B18.2.2 for heavy hex nuts. T he bearing
 surface of both bolts and nuts shall be symmetrically shaped to a one-inch radius spherical surface. T he
 maximum height of the wrench flats on bolts and thickness of nuts shall be within the limits specified in
 ANSI B18.2.1 and ANSI B18.2.2, respectively. Bolt lengths shall be such as to result in at least "full nuts"
 when tightened in place. T he bolts and nuts may be sampled and tested before erection, or the bolts, nuts
 and washers may be accepted on certified mill tests by the manufacturer.
 1023.3.4.2 Other fasteners may be used if the fasteners:
 (a) Meet the chemical and mechanical requirements in Sec 1023.3.4.1.
 (b) Have body diameter and bearing areas no less than those specified in Sec 1023.3.4.1.
 (c) Provide a comparable fit with the corrugations.
 1023.4 Manufacture . Plates shall be connected by bolts at longitudinal and circumferential seams. Joints
 shall be staggered such that no more than three plates come together at any one point. Plates shall be
 furnished in standard sizes to permit structure length increments of 2 feet. T he size and shape of the plates
 shall be such that the finished structure will have the dimensions shown on the plans or as specified herein
 and the circumferential or peripheral transverse seams will be staggered at least one foot, except that the
 engineer may permit the seams in adjacent plates used for construction of beveled or skewed ends to be
 continuous. At least four bolts shall be used per foot of longitudinal seam, unless a greater number is
 specified on the plans, staggered in two rows 2 inches apart, with one row in the valleys and one row on the
 crests of the corrugations. Bolts along circumferential seams shall be spaced no more than 10 inches apart.
 T he distance from the center of bolt hole to the edge of the plate shall be no less than 1.75 times the
 diameter of the bolt. T he diameter of the bolt holes for the longitudinal seams, except holes at corners of
 plates, shall not exceed the diameter of the bolts by more than 1/4 inch. T he major axis of the holes for
 transverse seams, including the holes at the corners of the plates, shall not exceed the diameter of the bolt
 by more than 1/2 inch and the average of the major and minor axis shall not exceed the diameter of the
 bolt by more than 1/4 inch.
 1023.4.1 Circular Pipe . A manufacturing tolerance of 3 inches will be permitted in the diameter of the
 pipe. T he thickness of metal to be used for each structure will be specified in the contract. T he plates shall
 be prominently marked to show the position in which the plates are to be placed in the structure.
 1023.4.2 Pipe -Arch. Plates for a pipe-arch shall form a cross-section made up of four circular arcs tangent
 to each other at the arcs’ junctions and symmetrical about the vertical axis. T he top shall be an arc of no
 more than 180 degrees or no less than 155 degrees. T he bottom shall be an arc of no more than 50 degrees
 or no less than 10 degrees. T he top shall be joined at each end to the bottom by an arc of no more than
 87.5 degrees or no less than 75 degrees. T he radius of corner arcs shall be between 16 and 21 inches for
 Type C-29 and smaller sizes, and between 29 and 33 inches for Type C-30 and larger sizes. T he dimensions
 of structural plate pipe-arch shall be as specified below, subject to a manufacturing tolerance of two percent
 plus one inch. T he thickness of metal to be used for each structure will be specified in the contract.
 Structural Plate Pipe-Arch
 English
 Area, Span, Height,
 Area, Span,
 Type
 Type
 Sq Ft Ft-In. Ft-In.
 Sq Ft Ft-In.
 C-1 22
 6-1
 4-7 C-28 105 14-10
 C-2 24
 6-4
 4-9 C-29 109 15-4
 C-3 26
 6-9
 4-11 C-30 98 13-3
 C-4 28
 7-0
 5-1 C-31 102 13-6
 C-5 31
 7-3
 5-3 C-32 106 14-0
 C-6 33
 7-8
 5-5 C-33 110 14-2
 C-7 35 7-11
 5-7 C-34 115 14-5
 C-8 38
 8-2
 5-9 C-35 119 14-11
 C-9 40
 8-7
 5-11 C-36 124 15-4
 C-10 43 8-10
 6-1 C-37 129 15-7
 C-11 46
 9-4
 6-3 C-38 133 15-10
 C-12 49
 9-6
 6-5 C-39 138 16-3
 
 Height,
 Ft-In.
 9-1
 9-3
 9-4
 9-6
 9-8
 9-10
 10-0
 10-2
 10-4
 10-6
 10-8
 10-10
 
 563
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 C-13 52
 C-14 55
 C-15 58
 C-16 61
 C-17 64
 C-18 67
 C-19 71
 C-20 74
 C-21 78
 C-22 81
 C-23 85
 C-24 89
 C-25 93
 C-26 97
 C-27 101
 
 9-9
 6-7
 10-3
 6-9
 10-8 6-11
 10-11 7-1
 11-5
 7-3
 11-7
 7-5
 11-10 7-7
 12-4
 7-9
 12-6 7-11
 12-8
 8-1
 12-10 8-4
 13-5
 8-5
 13-11 8-7
 14-1
 8-9
 14-3 8-11
 
 C-40
 C-41
 C-42
 C-43
 C-44
 C-45
 C-46
 C-47
 C-48
 C-49
 C-50
 C-51
 C-52
 C-53
 ….
 
 143 16-6 11-0
 148 17-0 11-2
 153 17-2 11-4
 158 17-5 11-6
 163 17-11 11-8
 168 18-1 11-10
 174 18-7 12-0
 179 18-9 12-2
 185 19-3 12-4
 190 19-6 12-6
 196 19-8 12-8
 202 19-11 12-10
 208 20-5 13-0
 214 20-7 13-2
 ….
 ….
 ….
 
 1023.4.3 Be ve le d Ends. When specified on the plans, end plates for forming beveled ends shall be shaped
 to produce the specified slope in the finished structure. Burnt edges shall be free from oxide and burrs, and
 shall present a workmanlike finish. Any edges cut after galvanizing shall be completely covered with two
 coats of single component inorganic zinc or organic zinc-rich paint, meeting the approval of the engineer.
 Legible identification marks shall be placed on each part plate to designate the plate’s proper position in
 the structure.
 1023.5 Workmanship. All plates shall show careful and finished workmanship. Among others, the
 following defects are specified as constituting poor workmanship, and the presence of any or all of these
 defects in an individual plate or in general in any shipment, will be considered sufficient cause for rejection:
 (a) Improper shape.
 (b) Ragged edges.
 (c) Unevenly aligned or spaced bolt holes.
 (d) Illegible brands.
 (e) Bruised, scaled or broken spelter coating.
 (f) Dents in the metal.
 (g) Bends in the metal not specified.
 1023.6 Asse mbly Instructions and Drawings. T he contractor shall provide the engineer with detailed
 assembly instructions and drawings for each structural plate pipe or pipe-arch prior to the installation of
 these structures.
 1023.7 Re pair of Galvaniz ing. Spelter coating damaged in the field shall be repaired by hot-dip
 galvanizing, the metallizing process as specified in Sec 1020 or by the zinc alloy stick method in
 accordance with Sec 1081, except that in instances of minor damage, the engineer may permit repair by
 painting with two coats of single component inorganic zinc or organic zinc-rich paint. T he paint and
 application shall meet the approval of the engineer.
 
 564
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1024
 CO RRUGATED ALUMINUM ALLO Y CULVERT PIPE AND
 CO RRUGATED ALUMINUM ALLO Y STRUCTURAL PLATE
 1024.1 Scope . T his specification covers corrugated aluminum alloy culvert pipe and corrugated aluminum
 alloy structural plate intended for use in construction of pipe and pipe arches.
 1024.2 Basis of Acce ptance . T he basis of acceptance will be in accordance with Sec 1020.2, Sec 1020.5
 and as specified herein.
 1024.3 Mate rial.
 1024.3.1 Corrugate d Aluminum Alloy Culve rt Pipe . T his pipe shall be in accordance with AASHT O
 M 196, Type I.
 1024.3.2 Corrugate d Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate . Plates, shapes and fasteners for aluminum
 alloy field bolted pipe and pipe arch shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 219.
 
 565
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1025
 CO RRUGATED ALUMINUM ALLO Y
 PIPE UNDERDRAINS
 1025.1 Scope . T his specification covers corrugated aluminum alloy pipe underdrains.
 1025.2 Basis of Acce ptance . T he basis of acceptance will be in accordance with Secs 1020.2 and 1020.5
 as specified herein.
 1025.3 Mate rial. Pipe for corrugated aluminum alloy pipe underdrains shall be in accordance with
 AASHT O M 196, Type III, with the following modifications.
 1025.3.1 Pipe 6 inches in diameter shall be fabricated of metal no less than 0.048 inch, 18 gage, specified
 thickness. Pipe with diameters 8 to 21 inches, inclusive, shall be fabricated of metal no less than 0.060
 inch, 16 gage, specified thickness.
 1025.3.2 Coupling bands shall be of the same aluminum alloy as the pipe.
 
 566
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1026
 REINFO RCED CO NCRETE CULVERT PIPE
 1026.1 Scope . T his specification covers reinforced concrete pipe to be used for the conveyance of sewage,
 industrial wastes and storm water, and for the construction of culverts.
 1026.2 Basis of Acce ptance .
 1026.2.1 T he basis of acceptance will be in accordance with AASHT O M 170, unless otherwise specified.
 Pipe shall be from an approved qualified plant and accepted based on certification, manufacturer quality
 control documentation, and tests on samples as required by the engineer.
 1026.2.2 T he contractor for quality control purposes and the engineer for quality assurance purposes may
 select and apply the basis of acceptance in accordance with either Section 5.1.1 or 5.1.2 in AASHT O M
 170.
 1026.2.2.1 If cylinders are tested, the cylinders shall be tested in accordance with
 AASHT O T 22. T he average compressive strength of all cylinders tested shall be equal to or greater than
 the design concrete strength.
 1026.2.2.2 If cores are cut from the wall of the pipe and tested, the cores shall be cut and tested in
 accordance with AASHT O T 280. If the compressive strength of each core tested is equal to or greater
 than the design concrete strength, the compressive strength of the concrete for the lot will be considered
 acceptable.
 1026.2.2.2.1 If the compressive strength of a core tested is less than the design concrete strength, two
 additional cores shall be taken from that pipe section and tested. Concrete represented by these core tests
 will be considered acceptable if the average of the two additional cores is equal to or greater than the
 specified strength, and no single core is less than 85 percent of the specified strength.
 1026.2.2.2.2 If the compressive strength of the three cores is not in accordance with Sec 1026.2.2.2.1, the
 pipe section from which the core was taken will be rejected. Two pipe sections from the remainder of the
 lot shall be selected at random and tested for conformance with either Sec 1026.2.2.2 or 1026.2.2.2.1. If
 both pipe sections meet the core strength requirements of either Sec 1026.2.2.2 or 1026.2.2.2.1, the
 concrete compressive strength of the remainder of the lot will be accepted. If the compressive strength of
 either of the two pipe sections tested does not meet the requirements, the remainder of the lot will be
 either rejected or, at the option of the manufacturer, each pipe section of the remaining lot shall be cored
 and will be accepted individually. Any pipe sections that have a core not meeting the requirements of either
 Sec 1026.2.2.2 or 1026.2.2.2.1 will be rejected.
 1026.2.2.2.3 If the cores cut from a section of pipe meet the strength test requirements, the core holes
 shall be plugged and sealed by the manufacturer in a manner such that the pipe section will meet all
 requirements of these specifications. Pipe sections so sealed will be considered satisfactory for use.
 1026.3 Mate rial. Reinforced concrete pipe shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 170, except as
 specified otherwise herein.
 1026.3.1 Re inforce d Concre te . Reinforced concrete shall consist of a mixture of cement, mineral
 aggregate and water, in which steel has been embedded in such a manner that the steel and the concrete act
 together.
 1026.3.2 Ce me nt. Cement shall be in accordance with Sec 1019. Fly ash or GGBFS may be used to replace
 cement in accordance with Sec 501, except approved Class C or Class F fly ash may be used to replace a
 maximum of 25 percent of Type I or II cement on an equivalent weight basis. Fly ash shall not exceed 25
 percent by weight of the total cementitious material, i.e., microsilica, steel slag or other pozzolanic
 material.
 1026.3.3 Ste e l Re inforce me nt. All steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with Sec 1036.
 
 567
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1026.3.4 Aggre gate . Fine and coarse aggregate shall be in accordance with Sec 1005, except that
 gradation requirements and percent passing the No. 200 sieve will not apply.
 1026.3.5 Concre te Mixture . T he proportion of cementious material in the mixture shall be no less than
 470 pounds per cubic yard of concrete.
 1026.3.6 Modifie d or Spe cial De signs. T he manufacturer may request approval of modified designs that
 differ from the designs in Section 7.1, AASHT O M 170; or special designs for sizes and loads beyond those
 shown in Tables I to V of AASHT O M 170; or special designs for pipe sizes that do not have steel
 reinforcement areas shown in Tables II to V of AASHT O M 170. Modified or special designs will not be
 permitted for pipe diameters greater than 36 inches under earth fills greater than 51 feet. Modified or
 special designs shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 242.
 1026.3.6.1 De sign Acce ptance . T he manufacturer shall submit to the engineer four copies of the pipe
 design, shop drawings and installation procedures all signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered
 in the State of Missouri. T he pipe design, shop drawings and installation procedures shall be accepted in
 writing prior to the fabrication of the reinforced concrete pipe.
 1026.3.6.1.1 Pipe designs may be based on either the indirect design method or direct design method and
 shall be in accordance with the current AASHT O LRFD Bridge Design Specifications.
 1026.3.6.1.2 Designs shall provide all variables required to support computations. Designs based on the
 indirect design method shall provide test results in accordance with Section 9 of AASHT O M 242 with at
 least three specimens being tested under the three-edge-bearing method for both the D-Load to produce a
 0.01-inch crack and the D-Load to produce the ultimate load. T he computations of D-Load shall be
 included in the designs for both the indirect design method and direct design method.
 1026.3.6.1.3 Shop drawings reflecting design and stress details shall include complete details required for
 reinforced concrete pipe fabrication including wall thickness, concrete design strength, the type, size and
 placement of reinforcement, and inside and outside dimensions.
 1026.3.6.1.4 T he installation procedure shall include bedding and compaction details.
 1026.3.6.2 Pipe Acce ptance . Acceptance of pipe designed by the indirect design method shall be in
 accordance with Section 4.1.2 of AASHT O M 242. Acceptance of pipe designed by the direct design
 method shall be in accordance with Section 4.1.1 of AASHT O M 242 by testing against the D-Load to
 produce the formation of a 0.01-inch crack, which was provided in the previously submitted and accepted
 design.
 1026.3.7 Joints. If a rubber gasket-type joint is specified, joints shall be Type A rubber gaskets in
 accordance with AASHT O M 198. T he manufacturer shall conduct tests in accordance with AASHT O M
 198, Section 8, to demonstrate adequate performance, and shall furnish certification that the physical and
 chemical properties of the gasket are in accordance with this specification.
 1026.3.8 Curing. A curing membrane in accordance with Sec 1055 may be applied, and if used, shall be
 left intact until the strength requirements are met.
 1026.3.9 Lift Hole s. If agreed upon by the engineer and the manufacturer, no more than two holes may be
 cast or drilled in the wall of each pipe for the purpose of handling at the construction site. T he holes shall
 be no larger than 2 1/2 inches in diameter for pipe 60 inches in diameter or less, and no larger than 3 1/2
 inches for pipe greater than 60 inches in diameter. Lift holes shall be carefully cast or drilled in a manner
 such that it will not be necessary to cut, bend or otherwise weaken the circumferential steel in the inner
 cage in pipe having two lines of reinforcement, or any of the circumferential steel in pipe having one line
 of reinforcement. Lift holes will be permitted for pipe specified with rubber gasketed joints only with
 written approval from the engineer.
 1026.3.10 Marking. Each pipe shall be marked by the manufacturer with a “ Q Cast” stamp to certify the
 pipe was produced by an American Concrete Pipe Association (ACPA) certified plant or the equivalent
 mark of another approved certification program.
 
 568
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1026.3.10.1 T he following additional information shall be clearly marked on the inside of each section of
 pipe by indenting on the pipe section or by painting thereon with waterproof paint:
 (a) Pipe class.
 (b) Date of manufacture.
 (c) Name or trade-mark of the manufacturer.
 1026.3.10.2 One end of each section of pipe with elliptical reinforcement shall be clearly marked, during
 the process of manufacturing or immediately thereafter, on the inside and the outside of opposite walls
 along the minor axis of the elliptical reinforcement with the word "Top" or "Bottom" to designate the
 proper position when laid.
 1026.4 Sampling, Te sting and Acce ptance Proce dure s. All manufacturers furnishing pipe for MoDOT
 projects shall be qualified as herein described. All pipe will be subject to inspection by the engineer at the
 source of manufacture, at an intermediate shipping terminal or at destination. T he engineer shall be allowed
 unlimited access to all facilities and records as required to conduct inspection and sampling in accordance
 with Sec 106.
 1026.4.1 Application for Place me nt on Q ualifie d List. To become qualified, a written request shall be
 sent by the manufacturer to Construction and Materials with the following information:
 (a) A statement certifying that the quality control procedures at the plant meet the requirements
 set forth by the American Concrete Pipe Association (ACPA) or National Precast Concrete
 Association (NCPA) Compliance Audit and Certification Program or an equivalent, MoDOT
 approved, nationally recognized program.
 (b) Sources for each material to be used in the fabrication of pipe. For aggregate sources, the ledge
 the material is being taken from shall also be included.
 (c) A guarantee that all material to be used in the fabrication of pipe will be in accordance with
 MoDOT specifications, and pre-approval for any source of material will be received prior to use.
 (d) Units of measurement, English or metric, used to fabricate the pipe.
 1026.4.2 Maintaining Q ualification. To maintain qualification, the manufacturer shall perform and
 maintain a quality control program in accordance with the approved program, with the following
 modifications:
 (a) T he bill of lading for each shipment of material used in the production of pipe shall be kept on
 file for three years.
 (b) For all aggregate, the aggregate producer shall provide a certificate of compliance to applicable
 MoDOT specifications and identify what ledges the aggregate is being produced from. T he
 certificate of compliance shall be kept as long as that material from that source and ledge is being
 used.
 (c) A sieve analysis for determination of aggregate gradations used in each concrete mix shall be
 conducted once per month, and when an aggregate source is changed.
 (d) T he percentage of deleterious substance for each aggregate fraction shall be determined once a
 month.
 (e) Admixtures shall be from approved sources and the manufacturer ’s certification that the
 material meets MoDOT specifications shall be kept on file for one year.
 (f) Mill test reports for reinforcing steel shall be kept on file for one year.
 
 569
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (g) Once a month, an absorption test shall be conducted for each mix used in the production of
 pipe. Test results shall be kept on file for one year.
 (h) For pipe with diameters of 66 inches or larger, three edge bearing tests shall be performed once
 per 1000 feet of pipe manufactured, and at least once per year. Testing will not be required at
 plants where pipe of these diameters is not manufactured, nor will pipe of these diameters be
 required to be manufactured solely for the purpose of performing this testing.
 (i) T he manufacturer shall notify Construction and Materials at least 24 hours prior to each
 shipment.
 1026.4.3 Plant Ce rtification. Plants for concrete pipe production shall be certified by an approved
 program, and the certification shall be maintained current.
 1026.4.4 Disqualification of a Manufacture r. A manufacturer may be disqualified to provide pipe for
 use on MoDOT projects based on the discretion of Construction and Materials, for reasons including, but
 not limited to, not maintaining approved program certification, failure of material to consistently meet
 specifications, falsification of any documentation, misbranding of pipe, unsatisfactory performance in the
 field or for other reasons indicating lack of consistent material quality.
 1026.4.4.1 In a case where a manufacturer loses ACPA certification and was not disqualified for any other
 reason, reinstatement will be considered when the manufacturer is recertified by the approved program.
 1026.4.4.2 A manufacturer will not be considered for reinstatement until after one year from the date of
 removal for falsification of documents.
 1026.4.4.3 T hree notices of failure to meet specification requirements within a 12-month period will be
 cause for disqualification of the manufacturer for one year, effective from the date of the third notice.
 1026.4.4.4 A manufacturer disqualified within one year of the end of a disqualification may be subject to
 permanent removal, with no application for reinstatement accepted for a period of three years.
 1026.4.5 Re instate me nt of a Manufacture r. Consideration of reinstatement of a manufacturer once
 disqualified will be no sooner than specified in Sec 1026.4.4, will require a written document from the
 manufacturer stating the reasons for disqualification and the action taken to correct those deficiencies,
 written concurrence from Construction and Materials that the problem has been suitably addressed, and
 followed by an application in accordance with Sec 1026.4.1.
 1026.4.6 Sampling of Mate rial. Random sampling of the pipe or material used in the production of pipe
 will be conducted by the engineer to verify the pipe and material are in compliance with applicable
 specifications. Sampling size and frequency will be at the discretion of the engineer.
 1026.5 MoDO T Ide ntification Numbe r. When the manufacturer contacts the engineer in accordance
 with Sec 1026.4.2, the engineer will assign a specific MoDOT identification number for each size of pipe in
 the shipment.
 1026.6 Bill of Lading. A bill of lading or delivery receipt for each shipment of pipe shall be furnished to
 the engineer at the shipping and destination points. T he bill of lading shall contain an itemized statement
 of the sizes and lengths of pipe with the corresponding designated MoDOT identification number provided
 to the manufacturer for each size of pipe for that shipment. T he bill of lading shall contain a certified
 statement. T he certified statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the manufacturer and
 shall state the following:
 “ T his certifies that the pipe, bands and end sections in this shipment are in accordance with MoDOT
 specifications, were fabricated at an approved plant and were fabricated from the following brand names:”
 
 570
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1027
 PO LYMER CO ATED CO RRUGATED
 METAL CULVERT PIPE AND PIPE ARCHES
 1027.1 Scope . T his specification covers polymer coated corrugated metal culvert pipe and pipe-arches to
 be used for the construction of culverts and storm sewers.
 1027.2 Basis of Acce ptance . Basis of acceptance for pipe and pipe-arches will be in accordance with Secs
 1020.2, 1020.5 and the AASHT O specifications cited herein. T he basis of acceptance for polymer material
 will be in accordance with AASHT O M 245. Pipe shall be from an approved qualified plant and will be
 accepted based on certification, manufacturer QC documentation and results from tests on samples as
 required by the engineer.
 1027.3 Mate rial. Polymer coated corrugated metal pipe and pipe-arches shall be in accordance with Sec
 1020 and AASHT O M 245.
 
 571
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1028
 PO LYVINYL CHLO RIDE CULVERT PIPE
 1028.1 Scope . T his specification covers corrugated PVC culvert pipe intended for use in the construction
 of culverts, sewers and similar uses.
 1028.2 Basis of Acce ptance . Acceptance of corrugated PVC culvert pipe will be based upon the pipe
 being in accordance with this specification. Pipe shall be provided from an approved manufacturer, and will
 be accepted based on certification, identification markings and results from tests required by the engineer.
 1028.3 Mate rial. All corrugated PVC culvert pipe, couplings and fittings shall be in accordance with
 AST M F 949 for 46 psi stiffness, except as follows.
 1028.3.1 Section properties shall be within the following limits:
 Minimum
 Effective P ipe Wall P ipe Wall
 Extreme
 Nominal Size P ipe Wall Centroid to Moment of Area Fiber
 Area
 Inside Face Inertia Ratio a
 S
 b
 A eff
 I
 A eff/A g Ratio
 (in.)
 yc
 yc /c
 4
 (in. /in.)
 (in.)
 (in.2/in.)
 12
 15
 18
 24
 30
 36
 a
 b
 
 0.134
 0.149
 0.195
 0.235
 0.284
 0.347
 
 0.213
 0.257
 0.309
 0.406
 0.523
 0.634
 
 0.0059
 0.0111
 0.0185
 0.0415
 0.0828
 0.1445
 
 0.814
 
 0.622
 
 Ag equal gross area of pipe wall per unit length of pipe (in.2/in.)
 c equals the distance from the pipe wall centroid to the outermost fiber (in.)
 
 1028.3.2 T he pipe shall not be perforated unless otherwise specified.
 1028.3.3 Field joints of corrugated PVC pipe shall provide circumferential and longitudinal strength to
 maintain the pipe alignment, prevent separation of pipe and prevent infiltration of side fill material.
 Coupling bands, if used, shall be of the same base material as the pipe. Prior to use, the design of coupling
 bands and fastening devices shall be submitted to and approved by Construction and Materials. Final
 acceptance of coupling bands and fastening devices will be based on field performance.
 1028.3.4 T he manufacturer shall provide to the engineer an itemized statement of the sizes and lengths of
 pipe in each shipment.
 1028.4 Sampling, Te sting and Acce ptance Proce dure s. Manufacturers furnishing pipe to MoDOT
 projects shall be qualified as herein described. All pipe will be subject to inspection by the engineer at the
 source of manufacture, at an intermediate shipping terminal or at the destination. T he engineer shall be
 permitted free access to all facilities and records as required to conduct inspection and sampling in
 accordance with Sec 106.
 1028.4.1 Application for Place me nt on Q ualifie d List. To become qualified, a written request shall be
 sent by the manufacturer to Construction and Materials with the following:
 (a) A QC plan for each plant from which pipe is to be fabricated for use on MoDOT projects. T he
 QC plan shall be in accordance with Sec 1028.4.2, and shall provide that pipes be randomly
 selected for test by an independent testing laboratory, and that randomly selected pipes are
 representative of that manufacturer's pipe.
 (b) A statement certifying that the quality control procedures at the plant, at a minimum, meet
 the requirements set forth in the manufacturer ’s QC plan.
 (c) Sources for each material to be used in the fabrication of pipe.
 
 572
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (d) Certification that all pipe material to be used in the fabrication of pipe will be in accordance
 with MoDOT specifications.
 (e) Units of measurement, English or metric, used to fabricate the pipe.
 1028.4.2 Manufacture r’s Q C Plans. T he QC plan for each plant shall include the following:
 (a) A list of personnel with corresponding authority and responsibility.
 (b) Qualifications of QC personnel, to include training received or to be given.
 (c) A description of how the manufacturer proposes to control production in order to assure all
 material and workmanship incorporated into the fabrication of pipe meets the applicable
 specification requirements.
 (d) T he specific tests to be performed during or after production, frequency of these tests, the
 point where samples or inspections will be obtained or performed, and the format for recording
 test data.
 1028.4.3 Maintaining Q ualification. To maintain qualification, the manufacturer shall perform and
 maintain a QC program in accordance with the manufacturer ’s QC plan approved by Construction and
 Materials. T he manufacturer shall conduct tests and inspection to verify that adequate QC is maintained,
 and that the pipe furnished is in accordance with these specifications. T he manufacturer shall maintain for
 three years a record of all test results and inspections for review by the engineer. T he records shall show
 that each shipment of pipe has been inspected by the plant’s QC personnel. T he record shall indicate the
 purchase order number or the project number, the route, county and date of inspection. T he manufacturer
 shall notify Construction and Materials at least 24 hours prior to each shipment of pipe to a MoDOT
 project. Additional pipe may be considered part of the original shipment when the ordered quantity was
 underestimated or material was lost or damaged. A bill of lading in accordance with Sec 1028.6 shall be
 provided for each shipment of pipe. Each plant shall maintain a current list of QC personnel with
 corresponding authority and responsibility. All training given to QC personnel shall be documented with a
 brief description of the training and shall be kept on file at the plant.
 1028.4.4 Disqualification of a Manufacture r. A manufacturer may be disqualified from providing pipe
 for use on MoDOT projects based on the discretion of Construction and Materials, for reasons including,
 but not limited to, failure of material to consistently meet specifications, falsification of any
 documentation, misbranding of the pipe, unsatisfactory performance in the field or for other reasons
 indicating lack of consistent material quality.
 1028.4.4.1 A manufacturer will not be considered for reinstatement until after one year from the date of
 removal for falsification of documents.
 1028.4.4.2 T hree notices of failure to meet specification requirements within a 12-month period will be
 cause for disqualification of the manufacturer for one year, effective from the date of the third notice.
 1028.4.4.3 A plant disqualified twice for any reason in any two-year period will be subject for permanent
 removal, with a minimal suspension of three years.
 1028.4.5 Re instate me nt of a Manufacture r or Plant. Consideration of reinstatement of a
 manufacturer once disqualified will be no sooner than specified in Sec 1028.4.4, will require a written
 document from the manufacturer stating the reasons for disqualification and the action taken to correct
 those deficiencies, written concurrence from Construction and Materials that the problem has been suitably
 addressed, followed by an application in accordance with Sec 1028.4.1.
 1028.4.6 Sampling of Mate rial. Random sampling of the pipe will be conducted by the engineer to
 verify if the pipe and material are in accordance with these specifications. Samples of PVC pipe will be
 obtained from fabricated culvert sections in accordance with AST M F 949 at a frequency determined by the
 engineer.
 
 573
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1028.4.7 Inspe ction. Inspection will include an examination of the pipe for markings, deficiency in
 specified diameter, net length of fabricated pipe and any evidence of poor workmanship. T he inspection
 may include taking samples.
 1028.4.8 Te sting. Specimen testing size and method of tests shall be in accordance with AST M F 949. T he
 contractor or manufacturer shall provide the equipment and personnel to cut a sample from a section of
 pipe. T he sample shall include the markings or a record of the markings for that section of pipe.
 1028.4.9 Re je ction.
 1028.4.9.1 Any individual section of pipe failing to meet the marking, diameter, length or workmanship
 requirements of these specifications will be rejected. If 10 percent of the pipe in any lot fails to meet these
 requirements, the entire shipment of that pipe size may be rejected.
 1028.4.9.2 If a test specimen taken in accordance with Sec 1028.4.8 fails to meet the requirements of
 AST M F 949, the pipe sampled will be rejected and the lot will be resampled. A resample will be of the same
 size as the original sample. T he resample shall be in accordance with these specifications, or the entire
 shipment will be rejected.
 1028.5 MoDO T Ide ntification Numbe r. When the manufacturer contacts the engineer in accordance
 with Sec 1028.4.3, the engineer will assign a specific MoDOT identification number for each size of pipe in
 the shipment.
 1028.6 Bill of Lading. A bill of lading or delivery receipt for each shipment of pipe shall be furnished to
 the engineer at the shipping and destination points. T he bill of lading shall contain an itemized statement
 of the sizes and lengths of pipe with the corresponding designated MoDOT identification number provided
 to the manufacturer for each size of pipe for that shipment. T he bill of lading shall contain a certified
 statement. T he certified statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the manufacturer and
 shall state the following:
 “ T his certifies that the pipe and bands in this shipment are in accordance with MoDOT specifications and
 were fabricated at an approved plant.”
 
 574
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1029
 FABRICATING PRESTRESSED CO NCRETE MEMBERS FO R BRIDGES
 1029.1 Scope . T his specification covers the fabrication of prestressed concrete members for bridges. T his
 specification covers both pretensioned and post-tensioned members.
 1029.2 Acce ptance . Unless otherwise specified in the contract, acceptance of prestressed units will be
 based on tests of the material and inspection of the completed product. Acceptability of all types of
 sections covered by these specifications will be determined by the material tests required in the referenced
 sections of Sec 1029.3, by crushing tests on concrete cores or cured concrete cylinders, and by inspection
 of the finished sections, including quantity and placement of reinforcement, and freedom from defect.
 1029.3 Mate rial.
 1029.3.1 Ce me nt. Cement shall be in accordance with Sec 1019.
 1029.3.2 Aggre gate . Fine and coarse aggregate shall be in accordance with Sec 1005, except that
 requirements for gradation and percent passing the No. 200 sieve will not apply.
 1029.3.3 Ste e l Re inforce me nt. Reinforcement shall be in accordance with Sec 1036.
 1029.3.4 Ste e l Strand. Steel strand shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 203.
 1029.3.5 Structural Ste e l. Structural steel shall be in accordance with AST M A 36. Structural steel for
 anchorage plates shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 270, Grade 50.
 1029.3.6 Wire and Paralle l Lay Wire Cable s. Wire and parallel lay wire cables shall be in accordance
 with AASHT O M 203.
 1029.3.7 High-Stre ngth Ste e l Bars. High-Strength Steel Bars shall be in accordance with AASHT O M
 275.
 1029.3.8 Enclosure s. Enclosures for post-tensioning tendons shall be mortar tight, semi-rigid metal tubes
 with an internal diameter at least 1/4 inch larger than the bar, cable, strand or wire group to be enclosed,
 and shall be provided with suitable entrance and discharge ports for grouting.
 1029.3.9 Mortar. Mortar for grouting tendons in post-tensioned members shall consist of a mixture of
 cement and fine sand in the approximate proportions of four parts cement to three parts sand, by volume,
 with sufficient water to form a grout having the consistency of heavy paint.
 1029.3.10 Concre te Mixture . Concrete material, proportioning, air-entraining, mixing, slump and
 transporting of concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501, except as noted herein. Concrete for
 prestressed members shall conform to all requirements of Class A-1 concrete, except as noted herein. T he
 contractor may use Type I, IP, I(PM), IS, I(SM), Type II or Type III cement. Alternate mix designs may be
 submitted to Construction and Materials for approval. T rial batches may be required. Independent
 laboratory testing may be required. Submissions shall include all mix design, testing and production detail
 requested by the engineer.
 1029.4 Docume ntation. All wire, strand, bars and anchorage assemblies shall be assigned a lot number and
 tagged for identification. T he contractor shall furnish one copy of the certified mill test report giving the
 chemical analysis and results of physical tests on the material furnished, except chemical analysis will not
 be required for steel strand in accordance with AASHT O M 203. T he contractor shall also furnish one
 certified copy of the stress-strain curve representative of the lot to be used.
 1029.5 Equipme nt.
 1029.5.1 Pre stre ssing. T he contractor shall provide all equipment necessary for the construction and the
 prestressing of concrete members. Prestressing shall be done with approved jacking equipment. If hydraulic
 jacks are used, the jacks shall be equipped with accurate pressure gauges. All gauges, load cells,
 
 575
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 dynamometers and other devices for measuring the stressing load shall have an accuracy within two
 percent. T he combination of jack and gauge shall be calibrated by a testing laboratory meeting the approval
 of the engineer. A certified graph or table showing the calibration shall be furnished to the engineer. T he
 total load as determined from the strand elongation shall check that indicated by the gauge within five
 percent of the total load required to achieve the designated elongation. If other types of jacks are used,
 proving rings or other devices calibrated by a testing laboratory meeting the approval of the engineer shall
 be furnished such that the jacking forces may be accurately determined. Calibration shall be repeated at
 intervals not exceeding one year and after each overhaul. While work is in progress, if any jack or gauge
 appears, in the judgment of the engineer, to be giving erratic results, or if gauge pressure and elongation
 indicate materially different stresses, recalibration may be required. T he contractor shall furnish means of
 accurately measuring the elongation of the tendons to within 1/16 inch. Elongation upon completion of
 stressing operations shall be within five percent of that specified. No tensioning of strands shall be done
 when strand temperatures are below 30 F.
 1029.5.2 End Anchorage s. End anchorages and stressing blocks for pretensioned members shall be
 adequately designed to withstand the forces incidental to prestressing and to maintain the tension in all
 prestressed tendons of any member until the concrete has been placed and attained its specified transfer
 strength.
 1029.5.3 Concre te Te sting Equipme nt. Equipment for field determination of compressive strength of
 concrete shall be furnished by the contractor at the location of manufacture of prestressed concrete
 members. T he testing machine may be of any mechanical or hydraulic type, shall be power operated in
 accordance with AASHT O T 22, Section 1.2.1, shall be capable of testing cylinders to failure, and shall
 comply with the accuracy tolerances and corrections specified in AASHT O T 67, Sections 16.1 and 17.
 Approximately the last one-half of the load shall be applied at a rate between 1,200 and 3,000 psi per
 minute. T he contractor shall furnish a sufficient number of 6 x 12-inch or 4 x 8-inch compression test
 cylinder molds of a type meeting the approval of the engineer. T he contractor shall furnish sufficient
 personnel for cleaning and preparing reusable molds. T he contractor shall, at the option of the engineer,
 furnish technicians to assist the engineer with concrete testing and the making of test cylinders during the
 placing of concrete.
 1029.5.4 Fie ld Laboratory. When requested, a Type 1 field laboratory in accordance with Sec 601 shall be
 furnished.
 1029.6 Construction Re quire me nts.
 1029.6.1 Shop Drawings. Shop drawings showing in detail the type, size, number of units, location of
 tendons, enclosures, method and sequence of releasing the strands, anchorage details and details of proposed
 lifting loops and lifting procedure shall be submitted to the engineer for approval. T he contractor may
 select the method of prestressing, provided an approved specific method is used and the total prestressing
 force and the center of gravity of the prestressing tendons as shown on the plans are maintained. T he shop
 drawings shall show a tabulation of the design computations and the total prestress force, size and spacing
 of all reinforcing steel and concrete compressive strengths for strand release and design. No inspection will
 be conducted until the plant inspector has received a copy of the approved shop drawings. Prior to making
 shop drawings, the contractor shall submit in writing for approval of the engineer any proposed tack
 welding in lieu of tying of the reinforcing bars of prestressed members. If approved by the engineer, the
 location of tack welding of reinforcing bars shall be shown on the shop drawings submitted for approval. No
 heat or welding will be permitted in the proximity of prestressing tendons in the members. Shop drawings
 for the prestressed concrete solid, voided slab and box girder beams shall be required to include the
 alignment of the holes for the tie rods. T he holes shall be aligned in such a way as to prevent damage to the
 precast units during the placement of the precast units on the beam caps and the installation and tensioning
 of the tie rods through the precast units.
 1029.6.2 Forms and Formwork. Forms and formwork, placing and tying of reinforcing bars and placing
 and vibrating of concrete shall be in accordance with Secs 703 and 706, with the following additions:
 (a) Clamps, bolts or other devices connecting the bulk-head to the side forms, inserts and
 blockouts shall be capable of being removed or loosened before steam curing is applied.
 (b) T he casting bed shall have a concrete deck on which the form grillage and soffit plates may be
 
 576
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 adequately centered, aligned and leveled to the same plane.
 (c) Exterior forms for prestressed members shall be metal other than aluminum, mortar-tight and
 of adequate design to produce members within the tolerances specified. Supplemental forms, such
 as those used to form steps or to establish slopes, may be made of a material other than metal, so
 long as dimensional tolerances and mortar-tightness are maintained.
 (d) T he temperature of the mixed concrete when placed shall be no higher than 90 F. T he forms
 and reinforcing steel shall be cooled by acceptable methods to an ambient temperature of 90 F or
 lower.
 (e) Fabricating plants with demonstrated facilities for protection of the concrete during cold
 weather may, with the approval of the engineer, cast prestressed units when the ambient
 temperature is below 40 F. When the ambient temperature is below 40 F, the forms or enclosures
 and reinforcing steel shall be heated to attain and maintain a temperature of at least 40 F. No
 concrete shall be placed when the concrete temperature is below 60 F.
 (f) Concrete for girders shall be placed in a minimum of two continuous lifts. No more than 30
 minutes shall elapse between the placing of contiguous lifts of concrete. T he thickness of the first
 layer for I-girder beam sections shall be such that the top of the concrete is slightly above the top
 of the bottom fillet. T he casting procedure shall be modified if the length of girders and placement
 conditions are such that an initial set of concrete may result if each lift is continued full length
 before another lift is placed.
 1029.6.3 Pre stre ssing Te ndons. Prestressing tendons for pretensioned members, and metal enclosures for
 post-tensioned members, shall be accurately placed and securely held during placing and curing of the
 concrete. Strand chucks for pretensioning shall anchor the strand positively without slippage after seating.
 Strand chuck components shall be cleaned and inspected between each use and lubricated as necessary. All
 strands shall be free of contaminants such as dirt, oil, paint, wax, corrosion or other foreign material that
 may prevent a bond between the strands and the concrete. T he use of prestressing strands having kinks,
 bends, nicks or other defects shall not be permitted. A light coating of rust will not be cause for rejection,
 provided that the loose rust is removed and the surface of the strands is not visibly damaged. Tensioned
 strands shall be protected against excessive temperatures such as those produced by torches, welding
 equipment or sparks. Strands from more than one source shall not be used in any one tensioning operation.
 1029.6.4 Strand Splice s. One approved splice per strand will be permitted provided the splices are located
 outside of the prestressed member. For single strand tensioning, the number of strands per bed that may be
 spliced is not restricted. If multi-strand jacking is used, either all strands shall be spliced or no more than 10
 percent of the strands shall be spliced. Spliced strands shall be similar in physical properties, from the same
 source, and have the same twist or lay. Previously tensioned strands may be reused one time provided the
 strands meet all requirements of these specifications.
 1029.6.5 Wire Failure s. Wire failures may be accepted, provided no more than one wire in any strand is
 broken and the area of broken wires does not exceed two percent of the total area of the strands.
 1029.6.6 Stre ssing Re quire me nts. T he contractor shall provide a technician skilled in the use of the
 system of prestressing to supervise the prestressing operations.
 1029.6.7 Elongation. T he contractor shall compute the required elongation. Two copies of the
 computations shall be submitted to the engineer. T he length of the strand to be used in calculating
 elongations shall be the actual length of the strand along the strand’s trajectory between the fixed
 anchorage and the reference point at jacking end of the strand. Stress losses due to slippage of strand
 anchorages, splice chucks and movement of anchorage abutments shall be included in the elongation
 computations.
 1029.6.8 Pre te nsione d Me mbe rs. Prestressing tendons shall be uncoated seven-wire low relaxation
 strands in accordance with AASHT O M 203, Grade 270. Several pretensioned members may be cast in one
 continuous line. T he time intervening between the casting of the first and last member on a bed shall not
 exceed four days unless otherwise permitted by the engineer. When the temperature at the time of
 
 577
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 tensioning is such that correction must be made to compensate for change in strand stresses, all members
 on the bed shall be cast in a continuous pour. T he tension in the strand as determined from the elongation
 at the time of placing concrete shall be within five percent of that specified. T he stress to be given each
 strand shall be as shown on the plans. Pretensioning shall be by either the single strand or multi-strand
 jacking method. Each strand shall be brought to a uniform initial tension. T he initial tension of each strand
 shall be accurately measured by a dynamometer or other approved means. T he initial tension shall be
 within 50 pounds or two percent of that required, whichever is the larger. T he same jack used for single
 strand tensioning may be used for initial tensioning provided the jack is equipped with a proper gauging
 system for measuring the initial tension. Measurement of elongation shall not begin until initial tensioning
 has been completed. Strands tensioned as a group shall have the same initial tension, be from the same
 source, and have essentially the same modulus of elasticity. Coil ties shall be held in place in the forms by
 setting studs projecting through the forms. Studs shall be left in place until girders are erected and then
 replaced by coil tie rods. Alternate methods may be used, provided acceptable results are achieved. Coil ties
 shall have a concrete pull-out strength of at least 9,000 pounds in 3,000 psi concrete.
 1029.6.9 Post-Te nsione d Me mbe rs. Post-tensioned members shall be stressed in such a manner that the
 tension being applied and the elongation of the tendon may be measured at all times. T he contractor shall
 furnish a certified record of gauge pressures and elongations to the engineer. Friction losses in the
 enclosures, elastic shortening and anchorage set shall be included in the computations for the required
 elongation of the tendon. In cases of discrepancies between gauge readings and the stress indicated by the
 elongation of the tendon, the elongation method of stress determination shall govern. Loads shall not be
 applied to the concrete until the concrete has attained the design compressive strength shown on the plans.
 Tendons shall be stressed in a sequence to produce the least eccentricity of the load. Post-tensioning
 elements shall be placed in metal enclosures and after stressing shall be bonded by pressure grouting the
 space between the enclosure and the tendon. Enclosures shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign material
 prior to grouting. T he discharge ports shall be closed after all air has been forced out of the enclosure, as
 evidenced by the steady discharge of grout at the grout’s proper consistency, and a pump pressure of at least
 50 psi maintained on the grout for a sufficient length of time to ensure completely filling all voids in the
 enclosure. Post-tensioned members shall not be removed from their supports for at least 24 hours after
 grouting.
 1029.6.10 Strand Re le ase . Strands shall not be released until the concrete has attained the required
 compressive strength shown on the approved shop drawings. T he compressive strength shall be determined
 by tests of standard cylinders made of concrete from the same batches and cured in the same manner as the
 members. T he strands or prestressing elements shall be cut or released in a sequence that produces the least
 eccentricity of the load. If steam curing is used, strand release shall be performed while the members are
 still warm. Forms, hold down devices, or other appurtenances that may restrict movement of the members
 shall be removed or loosened prior to strand release. T he sequence of release for hold down devices and
 strands shall be indicated on the shop drawings. Release shall be in accordance with the approved shop
 drawings.
 1029.6.11 Curing. Concrete members shall be kept continuously wet until the conclusion of the curing
 period. Curing shall be accomplished by covering with burlap or jute mats kept continuously wet by moist
 air, live steam or any combination of these methods. Other moist curing methods that will keep the
 member moist may be used provided the details of the proposed method are submitted to the engineer and
 approved. As soon as the concrete has set sufficiently that no marring of the surface or distortion will
 result, wet burlap or jute mats shall be applied, covering the exposed surface. Curing shall be continued until
 the concrete has attained the design compressive strength shown on the plans. T he concrete shall not be
 exposed to temperatures below freezing until the curing has been completed.
 1029.6.11.1 Ste am Curing. A preset period of no less than four hours shall be allowed before steam cure
 is applied. When the ambient temperature is below 50 F, steam shall be applied also during the preset
 period, but only at a rate sufficient to keep the air surrounding the member at a temperature between 50
 and 70 F. After the preset period, steam shall be applied at a rate that will not increase the temperature of
 the air surrounding the members more than 40 F per hour. T he maximum curing temperature shall not
 exceed 160 F, and the difference in temperature adjacent to the concrete at different locations within the
 enclosure shall not exceed 30 F at any time. Fluctuations of the temperature adjacent to the concrete
 during the curing period at any one location shall vary no more than 30 F. T he contractor shall furnish and
 place, at the direction of the engineer, a minimum of two portable recording thermometers and no less than
 
 578
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 one for each 150 feet of enclosure, for use in determining the magnitude and degree of uniformity of
 temperatures within the enclosure. T he temperature recording system shall be capable of automatically
 producing a temperature record during the entire curing period. T he temperature record shall show the
 temperature at each location at intervals of no more than 15 minutes and have a range of approximately
 zero to 200 F. T he temperature recording system shall be accurate within plus or minus 5 F. Steam shall be
 applied from pipes with perforations at suitable intervals laid along each side of the member, or by other
 approved arrangements. Jets of steam will not be permitted to impinge directly against the member, forms
 or test specimens. Provisions shall be made for effective circulation of the steam around all portions of the
 members. T he concrete shall be kept continuously moist during the steam curing period. Steam curing shall
 continue until the required strength for transfer of load has developed. Steam or other curing methods shall
 continue until the concrete has attained the design compressive strength shown on the plans. After the
 expiration of the steam curing period, the temperature inside the chamber shall be reduced at a rate of no
 more than 40 F per hour until a temperature has been reached approximately 40 F above the temperature
 of the air to which the concrete will be exposed.
 1029.6.12 Form Re moval. Forms shall not be stripped from prestressed concrete members sooner than 12
 hours after casting. If strand release strength has then been attained, forms may be removed and members
 moved without unnecessary delay to a curing area. If forms are removed before the concrete has attained
 the strength which will permit the units to be moved or stressed, only the minimum area of the curing
 enclosure that is necessary to remove each individual form section shall be removed at any one time. T he
 open area in the enclosure shall immediately be closed as each form section is removed. When the
 surrounding air temperature is below 30 F, no portion of the enclosure shall be removed before the unit has
 attained the required transfer strength. Forms of test specimens shall be stripped at the same time the
 forms are removed from the members.
 1029.6.13 Handling. Handling and storage of prestressed members shall be performed with the members
 in an upright position and with points of support in approximately the same position as designated for the
 final position of the members in the structure. Members shall not be transported nor erected until the
 concrete has attained the design compressive strength shown on the plans. In storage, the members shall be
 fully supported across their width on battens that are no less than 4 inches wide. During transportation, the
 ends of I-beams shall not extend a distance of more than the depth of the beam beyond the bolsters or
 other supports on the transporting vehicle. Other beams shall not extend more than 1 1/2 times their
 depth beyond the supports on the transporting vehicle. During storage, the supports shall maintain the
 members in essentially a level position without twisting. Stacking of members in storage shall be done only
 with the approval of the engineer. If such permission is granted, the supports of all members shall be in the
 same vertical planes and shall be of adequate thickness to prevent damage to the lifting devices.
 1029.6.14 Surface Finish, I-Girde rs. Surface finish shall be in accordance with Sec 703.3.5.8, except
 that no cracks of any kind in post-tensioned members shall be filled before the stressing is completed. T he
 engineer will determine the kind, type and extent of cracks and surface defects, such as honeycomb and
 chipped edges or corners, that will be tolerated. Repairs may be permitted with mortar in accordance with
 Sec 703.3.2.9. Commercially available patching material may be used if approved by the engineer. T he top
 surface of members shall be scored transversely to a depth of approximately 1/4 inch with a wire brush,
 stiff broom or other approved method. A 3-inch wide strip across the top flange of the member shall be
 smooth finished to accurate top flange depth at each camber point designated on the plans. No laitance
 shall remain on surfaces to be embedded in concrete. After removal of hold-down devices, holes shall be
 plugged. If the method for plugging these holes is not shown on the shop drawings, written approval of the
 proposed method shall be obtained from the engineer. Exposed reinforcing steel shall be thoroughly cleaned
 of all concrete before delivery of members. T he portions of girders to be embedded in the diaphragms at
 supports shall be roughened by sandblasting or other approved methods to provide suitable bond between
 girder and diaphragm. Mechanical benders, without the use of heat, shall be used to bend the strands on
 girders.
 1029.6.15 Surface Finish, Te e Girde rs. Surface finish shall be in accordance with Sec 703.3.5.8, except
 that no cracks of any kind in post-tensioned members shall be filled before the stressing is completed. T he
 engineer will determine the kind, type and extent of cracks and surface defects, such as honeycomb and
 chipped edges or corners, that will be tolerated. Repairs may be permitted with mortar in accordance with
 Sec 703.3.2.9. Commercially available patching material may be used if approved by the engineer. T he top
 surface of members shall be scored transversely to a depth of approximately 1/8 inch. A 6-inch square area
 
 579
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 at each end and at each camber point designated on the plans, centered on each stem, shall be smooth
 finished to accurate top flange depth. Laitance on surfaces to be embedded in concrete shall be removed by
 sandblasting, waterblasting or other approved methods. After removal of hold down devices, holes shall be
 plugged. If the method for plugging these holes is not shown on the shop drawings, written approval of the
 proposed method shall be obtained from the engineer. Exposed reinforcing steel shall be thoroughly cleaned
 of all concrete before delivery of members. T he portion of girders to be embedded in the diaphragms at
 supports shall be roughened by sandblasting or other approved methods to provide suitable bond between
 girder and diaphragm. Mechanical benders, without the use of heat, shall be used to bend the strands on
 girders.
 1029.6.16 Surface Finish, De ck Pane ls. T he top surface of the panel shall be scored to facilitate bond
 with the cast-in-place deck. T he scoring shall be perpendicular to the prestressing strands in the panel and
 shall be approximately 1/8 inch in depth.
 1029.7 Dime nsional Tole rance s. T he dimensional tolerances shall be as shown in Table I, II or III.
 1029.8 Marking. Each precast unit shall be identified with the date, manufacturer and identification
 number. Markings may be indented on the unit or painted thereon with waterproof paint, and shall be
 located as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
 Table I
 Dimensional Tolerances – I–G irders, Solid Slab B eams,
 Voided Slab B eams,B ox G irder B eams and Miscellaneous Prestress Units
 ±1/8 inch per 10 feet of beam length,
 Length of Beam
 but no greater than 3/4 inch
 Width (Flanges, Web and Fillets)
 +3/8 inch, -1/4 inch
 Depth (Flanges, Web and Fillets)
 ±1/4 inch
 Depth (Overall)
 +1/2 inch, -1/4 inch
 Horizontal Alignment - I-Girders and
 Miscellaneous P restressed Units (Deviation
 Length/8 in tenths of an inch max., all lengths
 from a straight line to face of web at mid depth)
 1/4 inch max., to 40-foot lengths
 Horizontal Alignment - Solid Slab, Voided Slab
 3/8 inch max., 40 to 60-foot lengths
 and Box Girder Beams (Deviation from a
 1/2 inch max., 60 to 80-foot or greater lengths
 straight line to face of slab/web)
 5/8 inch max, 80 to 100-foot lengths
 ±1/2 inch, to 80-foot lengths
 Camber (Deviation from design camber
 ±1 inch, greater than 80-foot lengths
 within 7 days of strand release)
 ±1 1/2 inch, greater than 120-foot lengths
 Stirrup Bars (P rojection above top of beam)
 ±3/4 inch
 Stirrup Bars (Longitudinal spacing)
 ±2 inches
 Tendon P osition- I-Girders
 ±1/4 inch center of gravity of strand group
 and Miscellaneous P restressed Units
 and individual tendons
 Tendon P osition - Solid Slab, Voided Slab
 ±1/8 inch center of gravity of strand group
 and Box Girder Beams
 and individual tendons
 P osition of Deflection P oints
 ±6 inches, longitudinal
 for Deflected Strands
 P osition of Lifting Devices
 ±6 inches, longitudinal
 Side Inserts (Centerline to centerline and
 ±1/2 inch
 centerline to end)
 ±2 inches horizontal, except must be 3 inches
 Coil Inserts (Centerline to centerline and
 or more from end of beam and within
 centerline to end)
 reinforcement cage of bent, ±1 inch vertical
 ±1/2 inch from designated location,
 engineer may approve location ±6 inches
 Slab Drain Inserts
 from design, multiple inserts for single
 drain must be within ±1/2 inch of vertical line
 Exposed Beam Ends (Deviation from square
 ±1/4 inch horizontal, ±1/8 inch vertical
 or designated skew)
 per foot of beam height
 Bearing Area (Deviation from plane)
 1/8
 ± inch
 ±1/8 inch per 10 feet of beam length,
 Bearing P lates (Centerline to centerline)
 but no greater than 3/4 inch
 Bearing P lates (Centerline to end of beam)
 1/2
 ± inch
 1±1/2 inches for centerline of group
 Diaphragm Hole Location
 ±1/2 inch within group
 P laced as close as possible to design location
 
 580
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 Scupper holes, blockouts and voids
 
 after reinforcement steel and strands
 are properly located
 
 Table II
 Dimensional Tolerances – Tee G irders
 ±1/8 inch per 10 feet of beam length,
 Length of Beam
 but not greater than 1/2 inch
 Width (Overall)
 ±1/4 inch
 Depth (Overall)
 ±1/4 inch
 Flange Thickness and Stem Thickness
 ±1/8 inch
 1/4 inch max., to 40-foot lengths
 Horizontal Alignment (Deviation from a straight
 3/8 inch max., 40 to 60-foot lengths
 line to face of each web)
 1/2 inch max., 60-foot or greater lengths
 Camber (Deviation from design camber within 7 ±1/2 inch, to 80-foot lengths
 days of strand release)
 ±1 inch, greater than 80-foot lengths
 Stirrup Bars (P rojection above top of beam)
 ±3/4 inch
 Stirrup Bars (Longitudinal spacing)
 ±2 inches
 ±1/8 inch center of gravity of strand
 Tendon P osition
 group and individual tendons
 Strand P rojection
 ±1 inch
 Diagonal Tolerance
 ±1/4 inch
 P osition of Deflection P oints
 ±6 inches, longitudinal
 for Deflected Strands
 P osition of Lifting Devices
 ±6 inches, longitudinal
 Side Inserts (Centerline to centerline
 ±1/2 inch
 and centerline to end)
 ±2 inches horizontal, except must be 3 inches
 Coil Inserts (Centerline to centerline
 or more from end of beam and within
 and centerline to end)
 reinforcement cage of bent, ±1 inch vertical
 Exposed Beam Ends (Deviation from
 ±1/4 inch horizontal, ±1/8 inch vertical
 square or designated skew)
 per foot of beam height
 Bearing Area (Deviation from plane)
 ±1/8 inch
 ±1/8 inch per 10 feet of beam length,
 Bearing P lates (Centerline to centerline)
 but not greater than 3/4 inch
 Bearing P lates (Centerline to end of beam)
 ±1/2 inch
 Center of Stem to Outside Edge of Top Flange
 ±1/8 inch
 Center to Center Distance Between Stems
 ±1/8 inch
 Stem End to End of Top Flange
 ±1/4 inch
 ±1 1/2 inches for centerline of group
 Diaphragm Hole Location
 ±1/2 inch within group
 P laced as close as possible to design location
 Scupper holes, blockouts and voids
 after reinforcement steel and strands are
 properly located
 Table III
 Dimensional Tolerances – Deck Panels
 Length
 + 1/8 inch, -1/2 inch
 Width
 ±1/4 inch
 Depth
 ±1/8 inch
 Stirrup Bars (P rojection above top of panel) ±1/4 inch
 Stirrup Bars (Longitudinal spacing)
 ±1 inch
 ±1/8 inch center of gravity of strand group
 Tendon P osition
 and individual tendons
 Strand P rojection
 ±1 inch
 Diagonal Tolerance
 ±1/4 inch
 P laced as close as possible to design
 Scupper holes, blockouts and voids
 location after reinforcement steel and
 strands are properly located
 Warpage of corner (one corner
 Be 1/16 in./ft times the distance from the
 out of plane of other three)
 nearest adjacent corner
 Shall not exceed length of bow in inches
 divided by 360, with maximum of
 Bowing or camber, concave
 3/4 inch; and differential bowing or
 or convex, of any part of a flat surface
 camber between the adjacent members
 of the same design shall not exceed
 1/4 inch
 
 581
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Scupper holes, blockouts and voids
 
 P laced as close as possible to design location
 after reinforcement steel and strands are
 properly located
 
 582
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1030
 VITRIFIED CLAY SEWER AND CULVERT PIPE
 1030.1 Scope . T his specification covers vitrified clay sewer and culvert pipe for use on MoDOT projects.
 1030.2 Vitrifie d Clay Se we r and Culve rt Pipe . T his specification covers two classes of vitrified clay
 pipe: Standard Strength Clay Pipe for conveyance of sewage, industrial wastes and storm waters, and Extra
 Strength Clay Pipe for constructing culverts or where high strength pipe is desired. Vitrified clay pipe of
 these classes shall be in accordance with AST M C 700. Pipe may be of bell and spigot construction or
 plain-end.
 1030.3 Joints. Pipe shall be provided with compression joints in accordance with AST M C 425. T he
 contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification showing typical chemical resistance results of the
 joint material, physical test results representative of the joint performance, and certification that the
 joints are in accordance with AST M C 425.
 
 583
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1031
 CLAY DRAIN TILE
 1031.1 Scope . T his specification covers clay drain tile.
 1031.2 Clay Drain Tile . Clay drain tile shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 179, except paragraphs
 6.3, 6.5 and 7.4 will not apply. Unless otherwise specified in the contract, only Type II, Extra-Quality or
 Type III, Heavy-Duty Drain T ile, shall be furnished.
 
 584
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1032
 PRECAST CO NCRETE FLARED END SECTIO NS
 1032.1 Scope . T his specification covers reinforced precast concrete flared end sections for use at inlets
 and outlets of rigid pipe culverts.
 1032.2 Mate rial. All material shall be in accordance with Sec 1026.3, except that marking required by Sec
 1026.3.10 will be limited to Sec 1026.3.10.1.
 1032.2.1 Ste e l Fibe rs. Steel fibers shall be in accordance with AST M A820. T he PAL process as outlined
 in Sec 106 shall apply to steel fibers used in flared end sections.
 1032.3 De sign.
 1032.3.1 Standard Re inforce me nt. Flared end sections, utilizing rebar or cold drawn steel wire shall be in
 accordance with the Missouri Standard Plans for Highway Construction.
 1032.3.2 Ste e l Fibe rs. Steel fibers may be used exclusively or in combination with standard
 reinforcement. When steel fibers are used, the amount of steel fibers and standard reinforcement required
 shall be determined through proof of design testing accordance with AST M C1765, Section 9, for Class III
 pipe of the same diameter. Proof of design testing shall be performed every three years and the results
 provided to the engineer upon request. Additional proof of design testing shall be performed when the type
 of steel fiber is changed or when the dosage rate of the steel fibers is changed.
 1032.4 Basis of Acce ptance .
 1032.4.1 Acce ptance Crite ria. Acceptability of end sections for all diameters will be determined by the
 results of such material tests as required in Sec 1026.3, by crushing tests on concrete cores or cured
 concrete cylinders, and by inspection of the finished end sections, including quantity and placement of
 reinforcement, to determine the conformance with the design and the freedom from defects.
 1032.4.2 Workmanship. All protruding steel fibers shall be removed from the flared end prior to
 shipping.
 
 585
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1033
 PRECAST DRAINAGE UNITS
 1033.1 Scope . T his specification covers precast reinforced concrete manhole and drop inlet sections and
 appurtenances, such as grade rings, tops and special sections.
 1033.2 Acce ptance . Unless otherwise specified, the basis for acceptance shall be in accordance with Sec
 1001.14 and AASHT O M 199.
 1033.2.1 Lot Siz e De finition. A lot is defined as one day's production.
 1033.2.2 Q uality Control. T he producer QM plan shall define quality control testing and inspection
 frequencies and shall include the following minimum requirements.
 1033.2.2.1 Compressive strength of cylinders or cores shall be taken at a minimum of once per lot in
 accordance with AASHT O M 199. Compressive strength testing may also be performed to control
 handling and curing operations. Cylinders shall be cured in accordance with AASHT O T 23 field curing
 procedures.
 1033.2.2.2 Air and slump of fresh concrete shall be taken a minimum of once per lot.
 1033.2.2.3 Aggregate gradation, absorption and deleterious shall be checked a minimum of once per
 month per aggregate source in accordance with Sec 1005.
 1033.2.2.4 Absorption samples shall be taken and tested in accordance with AASHT O M199 a minimum
 of once every four months. Each sample shall be a piece broken, core drilled from the wall, having a
 thickness equal to the wall and free of visible cracks.
 1033.2.2.5 Steel placement shall be checked and documented for each unit.
 1033.2.2.6 Finished dimensions shall be checked and documented for each unit.
 1033.2.2.7 Pull out testing of steps and ladders shall be checked in accordance with AASHT O M199.
 1033.2.2.8 All equipment used for testing shall be maintained and calibrated in accordance with AASHT O
 R18 or equivalent program.
 1033.2.2.9 Concrete plant(s) shall be calibrated and monitored in accordance with producer's QMP.
 1033.2.3 Q uality Assurance . T he QMP shall reference an industry organization or define independent
 QA testing frequencies including the following:
 Test Method Independent Q A
 Tested Propertya
 Air
 T152
 Twice a year
 Slump
 T119
 Twice a year
 Coarse Aggregate Deleterious
 TM71
 Twice a year
 Coarse Aggregate Absorption
 T85
 Twice a year
 Compressive Strength
 T22
 Twice a year
 Absorption (per mix)
 T280
 Once a year
 a
 
 All samples shall be taken at the precast plant
 
 1033.2.4 MoDO T Hold Points
 1033.2.4.1
 number(s).
 
 Prior to shipping, producers shall notify MoDOT and obtain a MoDOT identification
 
 1033.2.4.2 Repair methods and completion of repairs for non-conforming work shall be approved by the
 engineer and contractor.
 
 586
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1033.2.5 MoDO T Q uality Assurance and Auditing. T he engineer may perform MoDOT Quality
 Assurance testing or audit the producer's QMP, documentation and production at any time, which may
 include coring of the precast units and the producer's expense.
 1033.2.6 De ficie nt Work. A procedure addressing deficient work shall be in accordance with Sec 1001.14.
 1033.2.6.1 Filling of form tie cavities and repair of other defects shall be in accordance with Sec 703.
 1033.2.7 Non-Conforming Work. A procedure addressing non-conforming work shall be in accordance
 with Sec 1001.14.
 1033.3 Mate rial.
 1033.3.1 Ce me nt. Cement shall be in accordance with Sec 1019. Fly ash or Ground Granulated Blast
 Furnace Slag (GGBFS) may be substituted for cement in accordance with Sec 501.
 1033.3.2 Fly Ash. Fly ash shall be in accordance with Sec 1018.
 1033.3.3 Ground Granulate d Blast Furnace Slag. GGBFS shall be in accordance with Sec 1017.
 1033.3.4 Aggre gate . Fine and coarse aggregate shall be in accordance with Sec 1005, except that
 requirements for gradation and percent passing the No. 200 sieve shall not apply.
 1033.3.5 Ste e l Re inforce me nt. Reinforcement shall be in accordance with Sec 1036.
 1033.3.6 Concre te Mixture . T he manufacturer may designate the mixture proportions, but in no case
 shall the proportion of cement in the mixture be less than 470 pounds per cubic yard of concrete.
 Admixtures or blends may be used with the approval from the engineer. At the option of the manufacturer,
 Class B or B-1 concrete may be used. If Class B or B-1 concrete is used, material, proportioning, mixing,
 slump and transporting of concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501.
 1033.4 De sign.
 1033.4.1 Pre cast Drainage Units. T he design of precast drainage units shall be in accordance with
 AASHT O M 199 with the following modifications.
 1033.4.1.1 Wall thickness for rectangular drop inlets shall be as shown on the plans.
 1033.4.1.2 T he quantity of steel reinforcement for rectangular drop inlets shall be as shown on the plans.
 1033.4.2 Modifie d or Spe cial De signs. T he manufacturer may request approval of designs, prior to
 manufacture, other than those specified in the contract documents. Special or modified designs shall be
 submitted to the engineer, in writing and shall fully describe any deviations from the contract documents.
 T he description shall also include the wall thickness, all other dimensions, concrete compressive strength
 and the area, type, placement and strength of the steel reinforcement. Such sections shall meet all of the
 test and performance requirements specified by the engineer in accordance with Sec 1033.2.
 1033.4.3 Re inforce me nt in Re ctangular Drop Inle ts. Placement of reinforcement in rectangular drop
 inlets shall be as shown on the plans.
 1033.4.4 Manhole Rise rs and Conical Tops. Each line of circumferential reinforcement shall be
 assembled into a cage that shall contain sufficient spacer bars or members, extending through the wall of
 the manhole risers and conical tops, to maintain the reinforcement rigidly in shape and correct position
 within the form. T he exposure of the ends of stirrups or spacers that have been used to position the cages
 during the placement of the concrete will not be cause for rejection.
 1033.5 Joints. T he reinforced concrete riser sections, except grade rings, shall be formed such that the
 
 587
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 risers and top when assembled will make a continuous and uniform structure compatible with the tolerances
 specified for risers in AASHT O M 199. T he joints shall be designed to permit placement without
 appreciable irregularities in the interior wall surface.
 1033.6 Manufacture .
 1033.6.1 Place me nt of Concre te . T he transporting and placing of concrete shall be by methods that will
 prevent the segregation of the concrete material and the displacement of the reinforcing steel from the
 proper position in the form.
 1033.6.2 Curing.
 1033.6.2.1 Precast units shall be cured in accordance with Sec 1026. Precast sections shall not be
 transported or erected until the design compressive strength has been reached.
 1033.6.2.2 If Class B or B-1 concrete is used, the sections shall be cured with wet burlap for 72 hours or by
 covering with transparent membrane applied in accordance with Sec 502. Precast units constructed with
 Class B or B-1 concrete shall not be transported or erected until at least seven days after casting. If forms
 are removed before the expiration of the curing period, the parts of the structure exposed shall be cured as
 directed by the engineer.
 1033.6.3 Lift Hole s. Lift holes shall be in accordance with Sec 1026. If approved by the engineer, lifting
 hooks or bars may be cast into the sections.
 1033.6.4 Forms. Forms shall be mortar-tight and of sound material adequate to prevent distortion during
 placing and curing of the concrete. Forms shall be reasonably smooth and free of loose knots, holes and
 other defects.
 1033.6.5 Cold We athe r Concre ting. Concrete placed in cold weather shall be protected from freezing
 during the curing period by the use of a heated, weatherproof enclosure. Concrete shall not be placed on or
 against reinforcing steel or other surfaces with temperatures lower than 35 F. No concrete shall be placed
 when the ambient temperature is below 35 F.
 1033.7 Physical Te st Re quire me nts.
 1033.7.1 Concre te Te st Re quire me nts. T he basis for concrete test requirements shall be AASHT O M
 199. T he specified number of specimens required for the tests shall be furnished without charge by the
 manufacturer and shall be selected at random by the engineer. T he cores for compression tests shall be
 taken from manhole or drop inlet sections that would not otherwise be rejected under this specification.
 T he selection shall be made at the point or points designated by the engineer.
 1033.7.2 Compre ssion Te sts. Compression tests for satisfying the design concrete strength requirement
 may be made on either standard rodded concrete cylinders or cylinders compacted and cured in a similar
 manner to the manhole or drop inlet sections or, at the option of the manufacturer, on cores drilled from
 the wall of the section. If compression test cylinders are being used, the manufacturer shall furnish a
 sufficient number of molds of a type meeting the approval from the engineer. T he compressive strength of
 each core tested shall be equal to or greater than the design strength of the concrete. If a core does not
 meet the required strength, another core from the same section may be tested. If this core does not meet
 the required strength, that section will be rejected. Additional tests shall be made on other sections to
 determine the acceptability of the lot.
 1033.7.3 Absorption Te st Re quire me nts. T he engineer may require samples for absorption tests if
 concrete other than Class B or B-1 is used. Each sample shall be a piece broken from the wall or a core
 drilled from the wall, have a minimum area of 9 square inches as measured on one surface of the wall, have
 a thickness equal to the wall and be free of visible cracks.
 1033.8 Pe rmissible Variations in Dime nsions.
 1033.8.1 T he basis for permissible variations in dimensions shall be AASHT O M 199.
 
 588
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1033.8.2 T he internal dimensions of precast units shall not vary more than one percent or 3/8 inch,
 whichever is greater.
 1033.8.3 T he vertical spacing and vertical alignment between adjacent manhole steps and horizontal
 distance from the inside wall to the centerline of a manhole step shall not vary more than one inch from
 the design dimensions.
 1033.9 Ste ps. Steps for precast manholes and drop inlets shall be in accordance with Sec 604 and as shown
 on the plans.
 1033.10 Re pairs. Filling of form tie cavities and repair of other defects shall be in accordance with Sec
 703.
 1033.11 Inspe ction. T he quality of material, the process of manufacture and the finished precast units
 shall be subject to inspection and approval by the engineer.
 1033.12 Marking. Marking shall be indented into the section or shall be painted thereon with waterproof
 paint. T he following information shall be clearly marked on the inside of each precast unit:
 (a) MH for manholes or DI for drop inlets. Other units do not need a designation.
 (b) Date of manufacture.
 (c) Name or trademark of the manufacturer.
 
 589
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1034
 REINFO RCED CO NCRETE ELLIPTICAL CULVERT PIPE
 1034.1 Scope . T his specification covers reinforced concrete elliptical culvert, storm drain and sewer pipe
 for use on MoDOT projects.
 1034.2 Re inforce d Concre te Elliptical Culve rt, Storm Drain and Se we r Pipe . Reinforced concrete
 elliptical culvert, storm drain and sewer pipe shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 207, except material
 shall be in accordance with Sec 1026.
 1034.3 Class and Type . T he class of the pipe and type, whether Horizontal Elliptical or Vertical
 Elliptical, shall be as specified in the contract.
 
 590
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1035
 REINFO RCED CO NCRETE ARCH CULVERT
 1035.1 Scope . T his specification covers reinforced concrete arch culvert, storm drain and sewer pipe for
 use on MoDOT projects.
 1035.2 Re inforce d Concre te Arch Culve rt, Storm Drain and Se we r Pipe . Reinforced concrete arch
 culvert, storm drain and sewer pipe shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 206, except material shall be in
 accordance with Sec 1026.
 1035.3 Class and Siz e . T he class and size of the arch pipe shall be as specified in the contract.
 
 591
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1036
 REINFO RCING STEEL FO R CO NCRETE
 1036.1 Scope . T his specification covers reinforcing steel to be used in concrete.
 1036.2 Acce ptance .
 1036.2.1 All material shall be obtained from a source identified on the PAL designated for this
 specification. T he source shall be listed on the PAL at the time the material is incorporated into the
 project.
 1036.2.2 All material will be inspected and accepted in accordance with Sec 106.
 1036.2.3 AASHT O specifications, when referenced, will control only the physical properties, chemical
 properties and handling and storage of the material, except as otherwise specified herein or shown on the
 plans.
 1036.3 Re inforcing Ste e l for Concre te Structure s.
 1036.3.1 Unless otherwise specified, reinforcement shall be deformed bars in accordance with AASHT O M
 31.
 1036.3.2 Spiral reinforcement shall be in accordance with Sec 1036.3.1, except that the reinforcement
 may be plain or deformed or shall be cold drawn steel wire in accordance with AASHT O M 32 or deformed
 steel wire in accordance with AASHT O M 225.
 1036.3.3 Steel welded wire reinforcement shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 55 or AASHT O M 221.
 1036.4 Epoxy Coate d Re inforcing Ste e l.
 1036.4.1 Epoxy coated reinforcing steel shall be in accordance with AST M A 775/A 775M except as
 otherwise specified herein or shown on the plans.
 1036.4.1.1 Only steel in accordance with Sec 1036.3.1 shall be used.
 1036.4.1.2 Coated bars shall not be spliced except as shown on the plans.
 1036.4.1.3 Organic coatings, other than epoxy, shall not be used.
 1036.4.1.4 Patching or repair material shall be compatible with the coating, inert in concrete and in
 accordance with the epoxy resin manufacturer ’s recommendations. T he material shall be epoxy and be
 suitable for application at the plant or in the field to uncoated areas and damaged areas of the coating.
 1036.5 Docume ntation.
 1036.5.1 Documentation of uncoated steel shall include the steel manufacturer ’s certified mill test report
 showing complete chemical and physical test results for each heat.
 1036.5.2 Documentation of coated steel shall include the coating applicator's certification that all material
 used, the preparation of the bars, coating and curing are in accordance with these specifications, and that
 no bar contains more than one holiday per linear foot. T he certification shall include or have attached
 specific results of tests of coating thickness and flexibility of coating.
 
 592
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1037
 SHEAR CO NNECTO RS
 1037.1 Scope . T his specification covers the requirements for stud-type shear connectors and weldability
 qualification.
 1037.2 Mate rial. Studs shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 169 for cold drawn carbon steel bars
 Grades 1015, 1017 or 1020, either semi- or fully-killed. If flux retaining caps are used, the steel for the
 caps shall be of a low carbon grade suitable for welding and shall be in accordance with AST M A 109. T he
 flux for welding shall be self-contained either in the base of the stud or in the ferrule and automatically
 applied in the welding operation. A ferrule of heat resistant ceramic or other suitable material shall be used
 with each stud, and the ferrule shall be composed of material, which is not detrimental to the welds, does
 not cause excessive slag and has sufficient strength to withstand thermal or structural shock.
 1037.3 Q ualification Proce dure . T he procedure for weldability tests to qualify shear connector studs for
 welding under shop or field conditions shall be as follows. Such tests may be performed by a university,
 independent laboratory or by other approved testing agencies. T he tests shall be made on each type and
 size of stud. T he agency performing the tests shall submit to the manufacturer of the stud a certified report
 giving procedures and results for all tests, including the information listed under Sec 1037.9.
 1037.4 Duration of Q ualification. Qualifications will be considered valid until the manufacturer makes a
 change in the base of the stud, the flux or the arc shield, which affects the welding characteristics.
 1037.5 Pre paration of Spe cime ns.
 1037.5.1 Test specimens shall be prepared by welding representative studs to the center of square specimen
 plates, 1/2 to 3/4 inch thick, in accordance with AST M A 36. At the option of the manufacturer, several
 studs may be welded to a large plate and the specimen plates cut of a size suitable for test equipment used.
 Studs shall be welded with power source, welding gun and control equipment as recommended by the
 manufacturer. Welding voltage, current and time shall be measured by suitable instrumentation and recorded
 for each specimen. Lift and plunge shall be at the optimum setting as recommended by the manufacturer.
 1037.5.2 Studs shall be of uniform quality and condition, free from laps, fins, seams, cracks, twists, bends or
 other injurious defects. T he finish shall be as produced by cold drawing, cold rolling or machining. T he
 overall height after welding will be shown on the plans. T he size of studs with allowable tolerance shall be as
 follows.
 Stud Size - Inches
 Shank Overall Height
 Shank
 Head
 Head Thickness,
 Diameter
 (Tolerance
 Diameter
 Diameter
 Min.
 Tolerances Af ter Welding)
 + 0.000
 + 0.062
 3/4
 1 1/4 ± 1/64
 3/8
 - 0.010
 - 0.125
 + 0.000
 + 0.062
 7/8
 1 3/8 ± 1/64
 3/8
 - 0.010
 - 0.125
 
 1037.5.3 T hirty test specimens shall be welded consecutively with optimum current and time. Optimum
 current and time shall be the midpoint of the range normally recommended by the manufacturer for
 production welding.
 1037.5.4 T hirty test specimens shall be welded consecutively with time held constant at optimum, but with
 current 10 percent below optimum.
 1037.5.5 T hirty test specimens shall be welded consecutively with time held constant at optimum, but with
 current 10 percent above optimum.
 1037.6 Q ualification Te sts.
 1037.6.1 Te nsile Te sts. Ten of the specimens welded in accordance with Sec 1037.5.3, ten in accordance
 with Sec 1037.5.4 and ten in accordance with Sec 1037.5.5, shall be subjected to a tensile test. Tensile
 
 593
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 properties shall be determined in accordance with the applicable sections of AASHT O T 244. If a fracture
 occurs outside the middle half of the gage length, the test shall be repeated. A stud will be considered as
 qualified if all test specimens meet the following requirements:
 Property
 Tensile Strength, min
 Yield Strength,as determined
 by a 0.2% offset method, min
 Elongation, min
 Reduction of Area, min
 
 Requirement
 60,000 psi
 50,000 psi
 20% in 2 inches
 50%
 
 1037.6.2 Be nd Te sts. Twenty of the specimens welded in accordance with Sec 1037.5.3, 20 in accordance
 with Sec 1037.5.4 and 20 in accordance with Sec 1037.5.5, shall be bent alternately 30 degrees in opposite
 directions until failure occurs. A stud will be considered as qualified if, on all test specimens, fracture occurs
 in the shank of the stud and not in the weld.
 1037.7 Re te sts. If a weld failure occurs in any of the tensile or bend test groups, another test group may be
 prepared and tested. If weld failure repeats, the stud shall fail to qualify.
 1037.8 Q ualification. For a manufacturer's studs and arc shields to be qualified, each group of thirty studs
 shall, by test or retest, meet the requirements specified in Sec 1037.6.
 1037.9 Re port of Te sts. T he report of the testing laboratory to the manufacturer shall include the
 following:
 (a) Drawings which show shapes and dimensions with tolerances of studs, arc shields and flux.
 (b) A complete description of material used in the studs and arc shields, including the quantity and
 analysis of the flux.
 (c) A certification that the studs and arc shields described in the report are qualified in accordance
 with Sec 1037.8.
 1037.10 Ce rtification. Prior to inspection, the contractor shall submit to the engineer the following
 information:
 (a) T he name of the manufacturer.
 (b) A detailed description of the studs to be furnished.
 (c) A certification from the manufacturer that the studs delivered are qualified in accordance with
 Sec 1037.8.
 (d) A copy of the qualification test results as certified by the testing laboratory unless the source
 and manufacturing process for these studs has been previously approved.
 (e) Certified copies of in-plant quality control test results.
 
 594
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1038
 BEARING PADS FO R STRUCTURES
 1038.1 Scope . T hese specifications cover elastomeric bearing pads of neoprene, of rubber and fabric and of
 rubber and fiber. Elastomeric bearing pads shall include plain bearings, consisting of elastomer only, and
 laminated bearings, consisting of layers of elastomer restrained at their interfaces by bonded laminates.
 1038.2 Acce ptance . All material will be accepted on the basis of the required certification and testing
 required by the engineer.
 1038.3 Elastome ric Be aring Pads.
 1038.3.1 Mate rial. T he elastomer shall be 100 percent virgin chloroprene (neoprene) compound meeting
 the requirements shown below. T he pads shall be of the Durometer Grade specified on the plans. If test
 specimens are cut from the finished product, a 10 percent variation in "Physical Properties" will be
 allowed.
 ASTM
 Standard
 D 2240
 D 412
 D 412
 
 Property
 
 Hardness
 Tensile Strength, psi, minimum
 Ultimate Elongation, percent, min
 Heat Resistance
 Change in Durometer
 D 573
 Hardness, points, max
 70 hrs @
 Change in Tensile Strength,
 212 F
 percent, max
 Change in Ultimate
 Elongation, percent, max
 D 395,
 Compressive Set
 Method B
 22 hrs at 212 F, %, max
 Ozone
 100 pphm ozone in air by volume,
 D 1149
 20 % strain 100 ± 2 F, 100 hrs,
 mounting procedure ASTM D 518
 P rocedure A
 Adhesion
 D 429,
 Bond made during vulcanization,
 Method B
 lbs/inch
 D 746,
 Low Temperature Test
 P rocedure B
 Brittleness at -40 F
 
 Durometer G rade
 50
 60
 70
 50 ± 5 60 ± 5 70 ± 5
 2500 2500 2500
 400
 350
 300
 
 +15
 
 +15
 
 +15
 
 -15
 
 -15
 
 -15
 
 -40
 
 -40
 
 -40
 
 35
 
 35
 
 35
 
 No
 No
 No
 Cracks Cracks Cracks
 
 40
 
 40
 
 40
 
 No
 No
 No
 Failure Failure Failure
 
 1038.3.2 Laminate s. Laminates shall be cold rolled sheets in accordance with AST M A 1008 or hot rolled
 steel sheets in accordance with AST M A 1011 with a minimum grade of 36.
 1038.3.3 Manufacturing Re quire me nts. Shop drawings for laminated neoprene bearings pad assemblies
 shall be prepared and submitted to Bridge for approval in accordance with Sec 1080.3.2. Shop drawings will
 not be required for plain neoprene bearing pads or laminated neoprene bearing pads without a steel sole
 plate. Cut edges shall be at least as smooth as ANSI 250 finish. Unless otherwise shown on the plans, all
 components of a laminated bearing shall be molded together into an integral unit, and all edges of the
 laminations shall be covered by a minimum of 1/8 inch of elastomer except at laminate restraining devices
 and around holes that will be entirely closed on the finished structure. T he laminated neoprene bearings pad
 assembly steel sole plate shall be bonded by vulcanization to the laminated neoprene pad to provide a
 homogenous bond free of air and moisture pockets. T he following values shall be met under laboratory
 testing conditions of full size bearings:
 (a) Compressive strain of any layer of an elastomeric bearing shall not exceed seven percent at
 800 psi average unit pressure or at the design dead load plus live load pressure, if so indicated on
 the plans.
 (b) Shear resistance of the bearing shall not exceed 50 psi for 50 durometer, 75 psi for 60
 durometer or 110 psi for 70 durometer compounds at 25 percent strain of the total effective
 elastomer thickness after an extended 4-day ambient temperature of -20 F.
 
 595
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1038.3.4 T he manufacturer shall proof load each laminated neoprene bearing with a compressive load of
 1,500 psi on the bearing area. T he bulging pattern shall not indicate improper laminate placement or poor
 laminate bond. No more than two separate surface cracks with a width of 0.08 inches and a depth of 0.08
 inches will be permitted.
 1038.4 Type “N” Polyte trafluoroe thyle ne (PTFE) Be arings.
 1038.4.1 Type “ N” PT FE bearings shall be either fixed units or expansion units having sliding surfaces of
 mirror stainless steel against PT FE material. Shop drawings for type “ N” PT FE bearings shall be prepared
 and submitted to Bridge for approval in accordance with Sec 1080.3.2 T he PT FE sliding bearings shall
 consist of a steel sole plate with a welded upper element of stainless steel bearing on a lower element
 consisting of a layer of PT FE material bonded to a stainless steel plate that shall be bonded to the neoprene
 elastomeric pad. T he surface of the stainless steel plate shall be protected from weld splatter during the
 welding procedure.
 1038.4.2 T he stainless steel sheet for the top and bottom elements of sliding bearings shall be Type 304 in
 accordance with AST M A 240. T he finished stainless surface of the top element shall be a plane within a
 tolerance of 1/32 inch, polished sufficiently to meet the friction requirement in Sec 1038.4.6.1, and shall
 be comparable to a No. 8 mirror finish as established by the American Iron and Steel Institute Committee
 of Stainless Steel Producers “ Finishes for Stainless Steel” at the completion of fabrication.
 1038.4.3 Neoprene elastomeric pads shall be in accordance with Sec 1038.3.
 1038.4.4 T he PT FE material shall be 100 percent virgin PT FE fluorocarbon resin, unfilled or filled with
 fiberglass reinforcement to minimize the cold flow tendencies while maintaining the friction properties of
 the PT FE fluorocarbon resin. T he amount of filler by weight of filled PT FE sheet shall be no more than 15
 percent. T he finished material shall exhibit the following physical properties:
 Test
 Method
 ASTM D 638
 Tensile Strength, psi
 ASTM D 2256
 ASTM D 638
 Elongation, P ercent
 ASTM D 2256
 Melting P oint
 ASTM D 4895
 Specific Gravity
 ASTM D 4895
 Requirement
 
 Filled
 Value
 2000, min
 150, min
 621 ± 18 F
 2.20 ± 0.03
 
 Unf illed
 Value
 2800, min
 200, min
 623 ± 2 F
 2.16 ± 0.03
 
 1038.4.5 T he PT FE sheet shall be bonded to the stainless steel with epoxy bonding material designated by
 the manufacture as compatible with the PT FE sheet and stainless steel and be able to withstand the
 temperatures of vulcanization. T he stainless steel shall then be bonded by vulcanization to the neoprene
 elastomer to provide a homogenous bond free of air and moisture pockets.
 1038.4.6 One load specimen from the sliding bearing, consisting of a bottom element and a compatible top
 element no less than the smaller of the bearing area or 7 x 7 inches shall be tested by the manufacturer.
 1038.4.6.1 T he specimen shall be loaded to 800 psi compression at 68 F ± 2 F and subjected to 100 cycles
 of one inch of horizontal movement each way from center at a rate of 2.5 inches per minute. T he
 breakaway friction coefficient shall be computed for each direction of each cycle, and the breakaway
 friction coefficient mean and standard deviation shall be computed for the sixth through twelfth cycles.
 T he initial static breakaway coefficient of friction for the first cycle shall not exceed twice the design
 coefficient of friction. T he maximum coefficient of friction for all subsequent cycles shall not exceed the
 design coefficient of friction. Failure of a single sample shall result in rejection of the entire lot. Following
 the test, the breakaway coefficient of friction shall be determined again and shall not exceed the initial
 value. T he bearing shall show no signs of bond failure or other defect.
 1038.4.6.2 A minimum of one test for sliding bearings shall be performed for each lot of bearings.
 1038.5 Rubbe r and Fabric Pads.
 
 596
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1038.5.1 Rubber and fabric bearings pads shall be manufactured of new material and be composed of
 multiple layers of prestressed cotton duck material weighing no less than 8.1 ounces per square yard. T he
 duck warp count shall be 50 threads plus or minus one thread per inch and filing count 40 threads plus or
 minus two threads per inch, each with two yarns per thread. T he finished pads shall have 64 plies per inch
 of thickness. T he duck material shall be impregnated and bound with a high quality rubber compound
 containing rot and mildew inhibitors and anti-oxidants, compounded into resilient pads of uniform
 thickness.
 1038.5.2 T he pads shall withstand compressive loads perpendicular to the plane of laminations of no less
 than 10,000 psi without separation of bond or detrimental deformation. Load deflection properties,
 determined in accordance with procedures of Military Specifications MIL-C-882B, shall not exceed 10
 percent of total pad thickness at 1,000 psi and 15 percent of total pad thickness at 2,000 psi. When loaded
 to 1,500 psi, permanent set as load shall be removed in accordance with procedures of MIL-C-882B and
 shall be no more than 2.5 percent of the original "zero point" thickness. Type A Durometer hardness shall
 be 87 to 95. T he ratio of lateral expansion to vertical deflection shall not exceed 0.25 when loaded to
 1,500 psi. T he material shall not lose effectiveness throughout a temperature range of -65 F to 150 F. T he
 thickness shall vary no more than five percent from that shown on the plans. T here shall be no visible
 evidence of damage or deterioration resulting from environmental effects of sunshine, humidity, salt spray,
 fungus or dust in accordance with MIL-E-5272.
 1038.6 Rubbe r and Fibe r Pads.
 1038.6.1 Rubber and fiber bearing pads shall consist of a rubber body and fabric fibers for insulation under
 aluminum rail posts. T he bearing pads shall be made from new unvulcanized rubber and unused fabric fibers.
 Fibers and rubber shall be in proper proportion to maintain specified strength and stability.
 1038.6.2 Type A durometer surface hardness of the pads shall be 70 to 90. Pads of the specified thickness
 shall be capable of withstanding compressive loads of no less than
 7,000 psi without excessive extrusion or detrimental reduction in thickness.
 1038.7 Tole rance s. For both plain and laminated bearings, the permissible variation from the dimensions
 and configuration shown on the plans shall be as follows:
 Inch
 Overall Vertical Dimensions
 Average total thickness 1 1/4 inches or less
 Average total thickness over 1 1/4 inches
 Overall Horizontal Dimensions
 36 inches and less
 Over 36 inches
 Thickness of Individual Layers of Elastomer
 (Laminated bearings only)
 Variation from a P lane P arallel to the Theoretical
 Surface (as determined by measurements at the
 edges of bearings)
 Top
 Sides
 Individual non-elastic laminates
 P osition of Exposed Connection Members
 Edge Cover of Embedded Laminates or
 Connection Members
 Size of Holes, Slots or Inserts
 P osition of Holes, Slots or Inserts
 
 -0, +1/8
 -0, +1/4
 -0, +1/4-0, +1/2
 ± 1/8
 
 1/8, 1/4
 1/8
 1/8
 -0, +1/8
 -0, +1/8
 ± 1/8
 
 1038.8 Ce rtification. T he manufacturer shall furnish certification of all material. T he certification shall
 indicate that the components are in accordance with this specification and shall include typical test results
 representative of the material, except for bearings meeting 1038.3 and 1038.4 which will require test
 results for the material actually used in the bearing. T he certification shall indicate the results of the proof
 loading, when required.
 
 597
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1039
 EPO XY RESIN MATERIAL
 SECTIO N 1039.10 TYPE II EPO XY.
 1039.10.1 Scope . T his specification covers epoxy resin to be used to bond plastic concrete or mortar to
 hardened concrete or mortar.
 1039.10.2 Ge ne ral Re quire me nts. T he epoxy shall be furnished as a system in accordance with the
 requirements of AST M C 881, Type II, Grade 2, Class B or C.
 1039.10.3 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Prior to approval and use of this material, the
 manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a certified test report showing specific test results
 from an independent laboratory in accordance with all requirements of these specifications. T he certified
 test report shall contain the manufacturer's name, brand name of material, lot tested, date of manufacture
 and ratio of components. In addition, the manufacturer shall submit a one-quart sample of each
 component, A and B, for laboratory testing accompanied by a technical data sheet and an MSDS. With
 approval from the engineer of the certified test report and satisfactory results of tests performed on the
 sample submitted, the brand name and manufacturer will be placed on a qualified list of concrete bonding
 compounds. New certified test results and samples shall be submitted any time the manufacturing process or
 the material formulation is changed and may be required when random sampling and testing of material
 offered for use indicates nonconformity with any of the requirements herein specified.
 1039.10.4 Acce ptance . To obtain final acceptance of this material, the manufacturer shall furnish
 certification to the engineer at the destination that the material supplied is in accordance with all
 requirements specified and stating that the material is the same system and is identically formulated to the
 material tested for manufacturer and brand name approval.
 SECTIO N 1039.20 TYPE III EPO XY.
 1039.20.1 Scope . T his specification covers epoxy to be used in the grouting of dry cracks, in epoxy
 mortar for patching concrete and in epoxy mortar surface leveling.
 1039.20.2 Ge ne ral Re quire me nts. T he epoxy shall be furnished as a system in accordance with the
 requirements of AST M C 881, Type III, Grade 1, Class B or C.
 1039.20.3 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Prior to approval and use of this material, the
 manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a certified test report showing specific test results
 from an independent laboratory in accordance with all requirements of these specifications. T he certified
 test report shall contain the manufacturer's name, brand name of material, lot tested, date of manufacture
 and ratio of components. In addition, the manufacturer shall submit a one-quart sample of each
 component, A and B, for laboratory testing accompanied by a technical data sheet and an MSDS. With
 approval from the engineer of the certified test report and satisfactory results of tests performed on the
 sample submitted, the brand name and manufacturer will be placed on a qualified list of concrete bonding
 compounds. New certified test results and samples shall be submitted any time the manufacturing process or
 the material formulation is changed and may be required when random sampling and testing of material
 offered for use indicates nonconformity with any of the requirements herein specified.
 1039.20.4 Acce ptance . To obtain final acceptance of this material, the manufacturer shall furnish a
 certification to the engineer at destination certifying that the material supplied is in accordance with all
 requirements specified and stating that the material is the same system and is identically formulated to the
 material tested for manufacturer and brand name approval.
 SECTIO N 1039.30 EPO XY O R PO LYESTER BO NDING AGENTS FO R DO WELS.
 1039.30.1 Scope . T his specification covers a multi-component epoxy or polyester bonding agent to be
 used in anchoring epoxy coated dowel bars in concrete for pavement repair.
 1039.30.2 Ge ne ral Re quire me nts. Epoxy or polyester bonding agents for anchoring epoxy coated
 
 598
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 dowel bars shall be furnished as a multi-component system. T he system shall include automatic mixing,
 whether in cartridge or bulk form. T he component ratios shall be shown on the label of each cartridge or
 bulk container.
 1039.30.3 Prope rtie s. T he epoxy or polyester bonding agent shall exhibit good bonding properties
 between the epoxy coated dowel bar and the existing concrete and shall cure in accordance with the
 manufacturer ’s recommendation. Bonding agents, when initially mixed, shall have a viscosity, which
 prevents flow from a horizontal hole. When tested in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 49, the
 minimum pull-out load shall be 8,100 pounds.
 1039.30.4 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Prior to approval and use of this material, the
 manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a certified test report from an independent
 laboratory showing specific test results in accordance with all requirements of this specification. T he
 certified test report shall contain the manufacturer's name, brand name of material, lot tested, date of
 manufacture, ratio of components by volume and system tested. In addition, the manufacturer shall submit
 to Construction and Materials a sample representing the system for laboratory testing accompanied by a
 technical data sheet, an MSDS and any special installation instructions relative to the system being
 submitted, including recommended curing time. With approval from the engineer of the certified test report
 and satisfactory results of tests performed on the sample submitted, the brand name and manufacturer will
 be placed on a qualified list of bonding agents for dowels. New certified test results and samples shall be
 submitted any time the manufacturing process or the material formulation is changed and may be required
 when random sampling and testing of material offered for use indicates nonconformity with any of the
 requirements herein specified.
 1039.30.5 Acce ptance . To obtain final acceptance of this material, the manufacturer shall furnish
 certification to the engineer at the destination that the material supplied is in accordance with all
 requirements specified and stating that the material supplied is the same system and is identically
 formulated to the material tested for manufacturer and brand name approval.
 SECTIO N 1039.40 EPO XY BO NDING AGENTS FO R RESIN ANCHO R SYSTEMS.
 1039.40.1 Scope . T his specification covers a multi-component epoxy bonding agents to be used in
 anchoring steel components in concrete for structures.
 1039.40.2 Ge ne ral Re quire me nts. T he epoxy shall be furnished as a system in accordance with the
 requirements of AST M C 881, Type IV, and Grade 3 and as described herein. When a cartridge dispensing
 system is used the epoxy shall have a gel time as stated in AST M C 881 paragraph 5.2.
 1039.40.3 Pull Te st. T he epoxy bonding agent shall exhibit good bonding properties between the anchored
 product and the existing concrete and shall cure in less than 24 hours or manufacturer ’s recommendation.
 For acceptance on the qualified list, Resin Anchor Systems shall be tested in accordance with MoDOT Test
 Method T M 74. T he ultimate minimum pull-out load shall be in accordance with the following table. When
 tested in accordance with AST M E 488 the minimum embedment for each size anchor shall be determined
 and the minimum ultimate pullout loads shall be in accordance with the following table:
 Pull-Out Specif ication Requirements
 Diameter of Threaded Rod Minimum Ultimate
 or Reinf orcing B ar
 Pullout Strength
 1/2”
 9,800 lbs
 5/8”
 15,500 lbs
 3/4”
 20,400 lbs
 7/8”
 27,500 lbs
 1”
 33,600 lbs
 
 1039.40.4 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Prior to approval and use of this material, the
 manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a certified test report from an independent
 laboratory showing specific test results in accordance with all requirements of this specification. T he
 certified test report shall contain the manufacturer's name, brand name of material, lot tested, date of
 manufacture, bar or rod size tested, embedment depth and ratio of components. In addition, the
 
 599
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 manufacturer shall submit a one- quart sample of each component, A and B, for laboratory testing
 accompanied by a technical data sheet and a material safety data sheet. With approval from the engineer of
 the certified test report and satisfactory results of tests performed on the sample submitted, the brand name
 and manufacturer will be placed on a qualified list of Epoxy Bonding Agents for Resin Anchor Systems.
 New certified test results and samples shall be submitted any time the manufacturing process or the material
 formulation is changed and may be required when random sampling and testing of material offered for use
 indicates nonconformity with any of the requirements herein specified.
 1039.40.5 Acce ptance . To obtain final acceptance of this material, the manufacturer shall furnish
 certification to the engineer at the destination that the material supplied is in accordance with all
 requirements specified and stating that the material is the same system and is identically formulated to the
 material tested for manufacturer and brand name approval.
 SECTIO N 1039.50 SAND FO R EPO XY MO RTAR.
 1039.50.1 Scope . T his specification covers sand for use in epoxy mortar for the repairing of concrete
 surfaces. T he epoxy material used in epoxy mortar shall be Type III epoxy in accordance with Sec
 1039.20.
 1039.50.2 Prope rtie s. Sand for mortar shall be a quartzite sand, Ottawa sand or equal. T he sand shall be
 clean and dust free. T he maximum moisture content shall be 2 percent. T he gradation shall be in
 accordance with the following requirements:
 G radation Requirements
 Percent Passing by
 Weight
 No. 16
 100
 No. 30
 97-100
 No. 50
 5-35
 No. 100 0-2
 No. 200 0-0.4
 Sieve Size
 
 1039.50.3 Acce ptance . T he manufacturer shall furnish certification to the engineer at the destination that
 the material supplied is in accordance with all requirements of this specification. Acceptance will be based
 on certification and testing.
 SECTIO N 1039.60 EPO XY PO LYMER CO NCRETE O VERLAY.
 1039.60.1 Scope . T his specification covers an epoxy concrete overlay system consisting of an epoxy
 resin material and aggregate for use on bridge deck surfaces.
 1039.60.2 Epoxy Re sin Mate rial. T he infrared spectrum for each component of the epoxy-resin
 material shall essentially match that of the standard infrared spectrum for the particular component as
 specified in AASHT O T 237, Sections 4 and 5. T he epoxide equivalent for Component A shall not exceed
 270. T he mixed epoxy shall meet the following requirements:
 Epoxy Resin Requirements
 Property
 Specif ic Value
 P ot life, 75 F, minutes
 10 - 55
 Tensile strength, 75 F, 7 Days, psi, min.
 1500
 Tensile elongation, 75 F, percent, min.
 20
 Water absorption, percent, max.
 0.8
 Compressive strength, 4 hr., psi, min.
 1000
 Compressive strength, 48 hr. wet, psi, min.
 4000
 Ash content, percent, max
 0.5
 Rotational Viscosity, 75 F, Spindle 3, 60 rpm, P oise 7 - 25
 Volatile Content, percent, max.
 3.0
 No shearing, shrinkage,
 Thermal Shear
 expansion or scaling.
 
 600
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1039.60.2.1 Classe s. Epoxy resin shall be formulated for use at specific temperatures as specified in
 AST M C 881. T he controlling temperature shall be that of the hardened concrete surface to which the
 overlay is applied. Where unusual curing rates are desired and upon the approval from the engineer, a class
 of epoxy may be used at a temperature other than that for which the epoxy is normally intended.
 1039.60.2.2 Packaging. Containers shall be identified as "Component A--Contains Epoxy Resin" and
 "Component B--Contains Hardener" and shall show the type, class and mixing directions. Each container
 shall be marked with the name of the manufacturer, class, batch, or lot number, date of packaging, date of
 shelf life expiration, pigmentation, if any, manufacturer, and the quantity contained in pounds and gallons.
 1039.60.3 Aggre gate for Epoxy Polyme r Concre te O ve rlay. Aggregate shall be bauxite, crushed
 porphyry, aluminum oxide, flint chat or other similarly hard, durable, dry aggregates with less than 0.2
 percent moisture. Aggregate shall be in accordance with the following gradation:
 Aggregate Requirements
 Sieve Size % Passing B y Weight
 #4
 100
 # 20
 0-5
 # 200
 0-1.0
 
 1039.60.3.1 Le ad Conte nt. Aggregate produced as a by-product from lead or zinc mining operations shall
 not have a total lead content greater than 4,500 ppm, as determined by EPA Method 3050A, “ Acid
 Digestion of Sediments, Sludges and Soils. Suppliers of this aggregate shall provide certification to the
 engineer for each shipment that the total lead content of the aggregate does not exceed this value, and
 attach a typical test report from the same source no older than 12 months prior to the shipment.
 1039.60.3.2 Aggre gate Re comme ndation. For each contract, the epoxy supplier shall supply a letter to
 the engineer specifically recommending the use of a designated aggregate and source, which has been
 previously approved by Construction and Materials.
 1039.60.4 O ve rlay Syste m. T he overlay system shall not exhibit shearing, shrinkage, expansion or
 scaling.
 1039.60.5 Te st Me thods. Tests will be performed in accordance with the following methods:
 Test Methods
 Rotational Viscosity ASTM D 2393 Model LVT Brookfield viscometer
 Epoxy equivalent
 MoDOT Test Method TM 73
 Volatile content a
 Filler content
 Ash content
 P ot life
 Tensile strength
 Compressive strength
 Water absorption
 Thermal Shear
 
 ASTM D 1259, Method B, for mixed system
 MoDOT Test Method TM 73
 ASTM D 482
 AASHTO T 237
 ASTM D 638
 ASTM C 881
 ASTM D 570
 MoDOT Test Method TM 72
 
 a Sample
 
 cured 4 days at room temperature and weighed on a previously
 weighed metal foil.
 1039.60.6 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Prior to approval and use of this material, the
 manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a certified test report showing specific test results
 in accordance with all requirements of this specification. T he certified test report shall include the
 manufacturer's name, brand name of material, lot tested, date of manufacture, ratio of components by
 volume and system tested. In addition, the manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a
 sample representing the system for laboratory testing accompanied by a technical data sheet, an MSDS and
 any special installation instructions relative to the system being submitted. Upon approval of the certified
 test report and satisfactory results of tests performed on the sample submitted, the brand name and
 manufacturer will be placed on a qualified list of epoxy resin material for polymer concrete overlay. New
 certified test results and samples shall be submitted any time the manufacturing process or the material
 
 601
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 formulation is changed and may be required when random sampling and testing of material offered for use
 indicates non-conformity with any of the requirements herein specified.
 1039.60.7 Product History. T he overlay system shall have a proven record of a minimum of two years
 on similar bridge decks within the United States. A list including the location, the name of the agency
 involved with the project, and a name and phone number of a contact person with that agency, shall be
 provided for each location used as evidence of satisfactory use.
 1039.60.8 Acce ptance . T he manufacturer shall furnish certification to the engineer at the destination that
 the material supplied is in accordance with all requirements specified and stating that the material supplied
 is the same system and is identically formulated to the material tested for manufacturer and brand name
 approval. Acceptance will be based on certification and testing.
 SECTIO N 1039.70 PO LYMER CO NCRETE.
 1039.70.1 Scope . T his specification covers polymer concrete consisting of a fast setting epoxy based solid
 that may contain aggregate for use at bridge expansion joints.
 1039.70.2 Ge ne ral Re quire me nts. T he polymer concrete shall be resilient, self-adhering, water tight
 and shall withstand and remain bonded to the surrounding material under repeated impact and thermal
 cycling. T he polymer concrete shall not flow or become tacky at temperatures up to 130 F, shall be
 resistant to ultraviolet radiation, petroleum products and abrasion, and shall be capable of curing at all
 temperatures above 50 F. Mixing and placement shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's
 recommendations.
 1039.70.2.1 T he combined liquid components with no aggregate added shall be in accordance with the
 following requirements:
 Epoxy Requirements
 Property
 Mixing Ratio, by Volume
 Viscosity (ASTM D 2393), P oises, Spindle 2,
 30 rpm, 25 C ± 2 C
 Color
 Gel Time (AASHTO M-200-73), minutes
 
 Specif ic Value
 1:1
 9-20
 Black
 25-50
 
 Elongation (ASTM D 638 a ), percent
 
 45-55
 
 Tensile Strength (ASTM D 638 a ), psi , min.
 Shore D Hardness (ASTM D 2240), 77 F
 
 900
 
 a Test
 
 45-75
 
 Method Type 1, Molded Specimens, 0.25 inches thickness
 
 1039.70.2.2 T he cured polymer concrete including aggregate, which shall be supplied by the manufacturer,
 shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
 Polymer Concrete Requirements
 Property
 Compression strength (ASTM C 579), psi min. at 24 hours
 Bond Shear Strength (ASTM C 882), psi
 Abrasion Resistance (ASTM C 501), Wear Index
 (Taber H-22), max.
 Compressive Stress (OK/OHD L-6), psi
 Resilience (OK/OHD L-6), percent
 
 Specif ic Value
 2,500
 700
 1.0
 350
 70
 
 1039.70.3 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Prior to approval and use of this material, the
 manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a certified test report from an independent
 laboratory showing specific test results in accordance with all requirements of this specification. T he
 certified test report shall contain the manufacturer's name, brand name of material, lot tested, date of
 manufacture and ratio of components. In addition, the manufacturer shall submit a one-quart sample of
 each component, A and B, for laboratory testing accompanied by a technical data sheet and a material
 safety data sheet. With approval from the engineer of the certified test report and satisfactory results of
 
 602
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 tests performed on the sample submitted, the brand name and manufacturer will be placed on a qualified list
 of polymer concretes. New certified test results and samples shall be submitted any time the manufacturing
 process or the material formulation is changed and may be required when random sampling and testing of
 material offered for use indicates nonconformity with any of the requirements herein specified.
 1039.70.4 Acce ptance . To obtain final acceptance of this material, the manufacturer shall furnish
 certification to the engineer at destination certifying that the material supplied is in accordance with all
 requirements specified and stating that the material is identically formulated to the material tested for
 manufacturer and brand name approval.
 
 603
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1040
 GUARDRAIL, END TERMINALS, O NE-STRAND ACCESS RESTRAINT CABLE AND THREESTRAND GUARD CABLE MATERIAL
 1040.1 Scope . T his specification covers guardrail, end terminals, one-strand access restraint cable, threestrand guard cable, and all appurtenances required for installation.
 1040.2 Basis of Acce ptance . T he basis of acceptance will be in accordance with specification compliance
 and from an approved qualified plant and accepted based on certification, quality control documentation,
 and tests on samples required by the engineer.
 1040.2.1 Sampling, Te sting and Acce ptance Proce dure s. All suppliers furnishing components for
 MoDOT projects shall be qualified as herein described. All components will be subject to inspection by the
 engineer at the source, intermediate shipping terminal, or at destination. T he engineer shall be allowed
 unlimited access to all facilities and records as required to conduct inspection and sampling in accordance
 with Sec 106 unless specified below.
 1040.2.2 Application for Place me nt on Q ualifie d List. To become qualified, a written request shall be
 sent by the supplier to Construction and Materials. T he request shall include a “ Pre-Qualified Section 1040,
 1043, and 1044 Supplier Inclusion Certificate and Guarantee Statement” and a guarantee that all material
 to be used in fabrication will be in accordance with MoDOT specifications and pre-approval for any source
 of material will be received prior to use.
 1040.2.3 Maintaining Q ualification. To maintain qualification, the supplier shall maintain quality
 control documentation. T he required documentation for each shipment of material used in production shall
 be kept on file for three years. T he supplier shall notify Construction and Materials at least 24 hours prior
 to each shipment.
 1040.2.4 Disqualification of a Supplie r. A supplier may be disqualified to provide components for use
 on MoDOT projects based on the discretion of Construction and Materials, for reasons including, but not
 limited to, not maintaining required documentation, failure of material to consistently meet specifications,
 falsification of any documentation, misbranding of components, unsatisfactory performance in the field, or
 for other reasons indicating lack of consistent material quality.
 1040.2.4.1 A supplier will not be considered for reinstatement until after one year from the date of
 removal for falsification of documents.
 1040.2.4.2 T hree notices of failure to meet specification requirements within a 12-month period will be
 cause for disqualification of the supplier for one year, effective from the date of the third notice.
 1040.2.4.3 A supplier disqualified within one year of the end of a disqualification may be subject to
 permanent removal, with no application for reinstatement accepted for a period of three years.
 1040.2.5 Re instate me nt of a Supplie r. Consideration of reinstatement of a supplier once disqualified
 will be no sooner than specified in Sec 1040.2.4, will require a written document from the supplier stating
 the reasons for disqualification and the action taken to correct those deficiencies, written concurrence from
 Construction and Materials that the problem has been suitably addressed, and followed by an application in
 accordance with Sec 1040.2.2.
 1040.2.6 Sampling of Mate rial. Random sampling of the material used in production will be conducted
 by the engineer to verify the material is in compliance with applicable specifications. Sampling size and
 frequency will be at the discretion of the engineer.
 1040.2.7 MoDO T Ide ntification Numbe r. When the supplier contacts the engineer in accordance with
 Sec 1040.2.3, the engineer will assign a specific MoDOT identification number for each component. A
 Shippers form must accompany the products to the job site.
 1040.3 Posts and Blocks. T he same type of posts and blocks shall be used in a given run, except as shown
 on the plans or as approved by the engineer.
 
 604
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1040.3.1 Wood Posts and Blocks. Wood posts and blocks for guardrail and one-strand access restraint
 cable shall be in accordance with Sec 1050.
 1040.3.2 Ste e l Posts, Plate s and Rails. Steel posts, anchor plates, bearing plates, soil plates, plate
 washers and channel rail shall be structural steel in accordance with AASHT O M 270, Grade 36, shall be of
 the dimensions and weights shown on the plans and shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHT O M 111.
 Bolts, nuts and washers shall be in accordance with the dimensions shown on the plans and shall be
 galvanized in accordance with AASHT O M 232, or may be mechanically galvanized. If mechanically
 galvanized, the coating thickness, adherence and quality requirements shall be in accordance with AASHT O
 M 232, Class C. Any dimensional defects and structural discontinuities will be cause for rejection. T he
 material to be welded shall be preheated in accordance with good welding practice, and welds shall be fullsection and sound throughout. All welds shall be mechanically cleaned before galvanizing. No punching,
 drilling, cutting or welding will be permitted after galvanizing.
 1040.3.3 Plastic Blocks. Plastic guardrail blocks shall meet the dimensional requirements shown on the
 plans. T he blocks shall be a homogeneous product with a uniform texture, and shall have no cracking,
 chipping, flaking, peeling or splintering after fabrication. T he blocks will not be considered homogeneous if
 there are more than five voids larger than 5/8 inch or any voids larger than 3/4 inch on any cut face. T he
 blocks shall be of new stock, shall meet all applicable requirements of NCHRP 350 for NCHRP 350
 compliant installations or MASH for MASH complaint installations, and shall meet the approval of
 Construction and Materials.
 1040.3.3.1 Approval. Prior to approval and use of the plastic guardrail blocks, the manufacturer shall
 submit to Construction and Materials, the manufacturer ’s name, the product brand name or model number,
 a copy of the NCHRP 350 or MASH test results, a copy of the FHWA eligibility letter, an MSDS and a
 sample block.
 1040.3.3.2 Acce ptance . Acceptance of the material will be based on the manufacturer ’s certification and
 upon the results of such tests as may be performed by the engineer.
 1040.4 Ste e l Be am Guardrail. Guardrail beams shall be of the class and type shown on the plans.
 Guardrail beams shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 180, Type 1 or Type 2.
 1040.4.1 Te st Spe cime ns. Test specimens for mechanical properties, irrespective of the galvanization
 method, shall be prepared and tested in accordance with AST M A 653.
 1040.4.2 End Se ctions. End sections and terminal connectors shall be of a class and type the same as or
 superior to that used for the beam to which the end sections and terminal connectors are attached. T he
 physical properties shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 180.
 1040.4.3 Fabrication. T he beams, end sections and terminal connectors shall be shaped and punched as
 shown on the plans and ready for assembly when delivered. Only drilling or cutting necessary for special
 connections and for sampling will be permitted in the field. Warped or deformed beams will be rejected.
 Beams to be erected on a radius of 150 feet or less shall be shop curved to the approximate curvature of the
 installation.
 1040.4.4 Markings.
 1040.4.4.1 Be ams. Beam markings shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 180, except the AASHT O
 specification number may be omitted if another designation for Class and Type is used.
 1040.4.4.2 Transition Se ctions and Te rminal Conne ctors. T ransition sections and terminal
 connectors shall be marked in accordance with Sec 1040.4.4.1, except as follows. Durable tags securely
 attached to each section or connector may be used. If the transition section or terminal connector is Class
 B, the Class indicator will not be required. If the transition section or terminal connector is Type 2, the
 Type indicator will not be required. Heat numbers and coating designations will not be required.
 1040.4.4.3 End Se ctions. No markings or tags will be required for end sections.
 
 605
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1040.4.4.4 Posts. Posts shall be marked such that the marking is exposed after installation, in such a
 manner as to indicate the manufacturer.
 1040.4.5 Brand Re gistration and Guarante e . T he manufacturer shall submit a brand registration and
 guarantee, and current test results indicating compliance with this specification prior to delivery of any
 material. Once the brand registration and guarantee is approved, the manufacturer ’s name will be added to
 the qualified list of guardrail fabricators. For Type I coated material, the brand registration and guarantee
 shall certify the material as being produced by the continuous galvanizing method.
 1040.4.6 Acce ptance . Acceptance will be by brand registration and guarantee, and any sampling deemed
 necessary by the engineer. T he contractor or supplier shall provide equipment and personnel required to
 obtain samples as directed by the engineer.
 1040.5 Crashworthy End Te rminals.
 1040.5.1 Mate rial. Only new material shall be used in the fabrication of end terminals. T he major items
 of the installations shall be the best standard products of a manufacturer regularly engaged in the production
 of that type of end terminal and shall be of the manufacturer's latest approved design. After installation,
 the end terminal shall redirect traffic face side vehicle impacts within the prescribed performance crash test
 criteria ranges.
 1040.5.2 Manufacture ’s Approval. Prior to approval and use of a end terminal, the manufacturer shall
 submit to MoDOT the manufacturer ’s name, the product brand name or model number, a copy of the
 MASH test results, a copy of the FHWA eligibility letter, and shop drawings.
 1040.5.3 Acce ptance . Acceptance of the material will be based on the manufacturer ’s certification and
 upon satisfactory field performance.
 1040.5.4 Contractor’s Ce rtification. Prior to installation, the contractor shall furnish to the engineer a
 manufacturer's certification that the units furnished are identical in material and design to successfully
 tested units.
 1040.6 End Anchors, Bridge Anchors, and Approach Transitions.
 1040.6.1 Ste e l Tube and Tube Block. Steel tubes for end anchors shall consist of structural steel tubing in
 accordance with AST M A 500, Grade B, or AST M A 501 and shall be galvanized in accordance with
 AASHT O M 111. Structural steel tubing blocks for guardrail shall consist of steel tubing in accordance with
 AST M A 500, Grade B, and shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHT O M 111.
 1040.6.2 Cable . Cable shall be 3/4 inch in diameter, Type II, Class A in accordance with AASHT O M 30.
 1040.6.3 Transition Cap Rail. T he transition cap rail shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 270,
 Grade 36.
 1040.6.4 Thrie Be am Rail and Transition Se ction. T he thrie beam rail and transition section shall be
 galvanized in accordance with AASHT O M 180, Type 2.
 1040.6.5 Approval. T he cable assembly and anchor plate will be subject to approval by the engineer and
 shall have a minimum breaking strength of 20 tons.
 1040.6.6 Markings. T hrie beam rail and transition sections shall be marked in accordance
 with Sec 1040.4.4.
 1040.7 Cable and Fittings.
 1040.7.1 O ne -Strand Acce ss Re straint Cable .
 1040.7.1.1 Cable . Cable shall be zinc-coated steel wire strand; 1/2-inch diameter; seven wire strand;
 
 606
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Common, Siemens-Martin or High Strength grade; Class A coating; and shall be in accordance with AST M
 A 475.
 1040.7.1.2 Hardware . Eyebolts, turnbuckles and clips for cable connections and end anchors shall be steel
 forgings in accordance with AASHT O M 102 or pearlitic malleable iron in accordance with AST M A 220.
 All miscellaneous parts, comprising of cable connections, fasteners and end anchors, shall be galvanized in
 accordance with AASHT O M 232.
 1040.7.2 Thre e -Strand Guard Cable .
 1040.7.2.1 Cable and Conne cting Hardware . T he cable and connecting hardware shall be in accordance
 with AASHT O M 30 and AASHT O M 269. T he wire rope shall be Type 1, 3/4-inch diameter, 3 by 7
 construction with a Class A coating. T he rope, with connecting hardware, shall develop the breaking
 strength of a 25,000-pound single cable. Connecting hardware shall be galvanized in accordance with
 AASHT O M 232 or may be mechanically galvanized. If mechanically galvanized, the coating, thickness,
 adherence and quality requirements shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 232, Class C. Cast Steel
 components shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 103, Grade 70-40, Class 1. Malleable iron castings
 shall be in accordance with AST M A 47. Compensating devices shall have a spring constant of 0.46 psi,
 plus or minus 0.06 pound per inch, and permit 6 inches of travel, plus or minus one inch. All threaded parts
 on compensating cable end assemblies shall be in accordance with AST M F 568, Class 4.6, 3/4-10 threads.
 Socket baskets shall be designed for use with the cable anchor wedge as shown on the plans. Guard cable
 anchor brackets shall be manufactured from an AASHT O M 270, Grade 250 steel plate, and zinc-coated in
 accordance with AASHT O M 111. Dimensional tolerances not shown on the plans shall be consistent with
 the proper functioning of the part, including the part’s appearance and accepted manufacturing process.
 1040.7.2.2 Cable Bracke ts. Steel used in the fabrication of the bracket shall be in accordance with AST M
 A 36. T he bracket shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with AASHT O M 111. All fittings,
 including splices, shall be designed to use the wedge detail, and shall be of such section as to develop the full
 strength of the 3/4-inch, 25,000-pound round cable. Designs for a combination or single-unit compensating
 device and turnbuckle assembly shall be submitted for approval. Compensating devices shall have a spring
 rate of 0.46 ± 0.03 pound per inch, and shall permit 6 inches ± one inch of travel. All parts, except cable
 wedge, shall be hot-dip zinc coated in accordance with AASHT O M 232 or AASHT O M 298.
 1040.7.2.3 Hook Bolts, He x Bolts, Nuts and Washe rs. Hook bolts, hex bolts and washers shall be in
 accordance with AST M A 307. Cable hook nuts shall be 5/16-18 threads and in accordance with AST M A
 563. Hook bolts, as installed, shall develop an ultimate pull open strength of 450 to 1,000 pounds applied
 in a direction normal to the axis of the post. Hooked anchor studs shall be in accordance with AASHT O M
 314, except the threads and nominal diameter shall be 3/4-10 and in accordance with AST M F 568, Class
 4.6. All items shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHT O M 232 or may be mechanically galvanized
 in accordance with AASHT O M 232, Class C.
 1040.8 Ce rtification. T he contractor shall furnish the manufacturer ’s certification for all material
 governed by this specification. Specifically, each certification shall indicate compliance with the
 requirements of each applicable section and as set forth in Table I.
 1040.9 Re pair of Galvaniz ing. Galvanized material shall be handled in a manner to avoid damage to the
 surface. No field punching, drilling, cutting or welding will be permitted after galvanizing. Any galvanized
 material on which the spelter coating has been damaged will be rejected or may be repaired in accordance
 with Sec 1081, with approval from the engineer.
 Table I - Certif ication Requirements
 Item
 G alvanizing Standard
 Steel G rade
 Wood P ost and Blocks
 Steel P osts, P lates and Brackets
 AASHTO M 111
 AASHTO M 270, Grade 36
 P lastic Blocks
 Guardrail Beam
 Sec 1040.4
 Sec 1040.4
 Bolts, Nuts and Washers
 AASHTO M 232
 ASTM A 307
 End Terminals Systems
 End Anchors
 - Tubes
 AASHTO M 111
 ASTM A 500/ASTM A 501
 
 607
 
 Other
 a
 b
 g
 b, c
 f
 b
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 - Transition Cap Rail
 
 AASHTO M 111
 
 One-Strand Access Restraint Cable
 AASHTO M 30
 - Cable
 AASHTO M 232
 - Hardware
 Three Strand Guard Cable
 - Cable
 - Hardware
 - Cast Steel Components
 - Malleable Iron Castings
 - Anchor Brackets
 - Cable Brackets
 - Hook and Hex Bolts
 - Hook Nuts
 - Hooked Anchor Studs
 
 AASHTO M30
 AASHTO M 232
 AASHTO M 232
 AASHTO M 232
 AASHTO M 111
 AASHTO M 111
 AASHTO M 232
 AASHTO M 232
 AASHTO M 232
 
 AASHTO M 270, Grade 36
 
 b
 
 AASHTO M 30
 AASHTO M 102/
 ASTM A 220
 AASHTO M 30 &
 AASHTO M 269
 AASHTO M 102/ASTM A 220
 AASHTO M 103
 ASTM A 47
 AASHTO M 270
 AASHTO M 270, Grade 36
 ASTM A 307
 ASTM A 563
 AASHTO M 314
 
 b
 b
 b
 d
 d
 e
 d
 
 (a) Certification shall state that the material is in accordance with Sec 1050 and shall include a
 listing of the material supplied and a certified test report as detailed in Section 7.2 of AWPA,
 Standard M2, attesting to complete compliance with this specification.
 (b) Certification shall include, or have attached, specific results of laboratory tests for physical and
 chemical properties from samples representative of the material.
 (c) Shall have Brand Registration and Guarantee on file, including certification indicating the
 coating is either Type 1 by Continuous Galvanizing Method or Type 2.
 (d) All threaded parts of compensating cable end assemblies and hooked anchor studs shall be in
 accordance with AST M F 568.
 (e) All fittings for cable bracket, except the cable wedge, shall be in accordance with AASHT O M
 232 or AASHT O M 298.
 (f) Certification shall state the name of the manufacturer and that the units furnished are identical
 in material and design as those tested for performance in accordance with Sec 606.30.
 (g) Certification shall state that the materials furnished are identical in chemistry, mechanical
 properties and geometry as those that passed the NCHRP 350 crash test, and as those that were
 approved by the Missouri Department of T ransportation.
 
 608
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1041
 PO LYPRO PYLENE CULVERT PIPE
 1041.1 Scope . T his specification covers polypropylene culvert pipe intended for use in the construction
 of culverts, sewers and similar uses.
 1041.2 Basis of Acce ptance . Acceptance of polypropylene culvert pipe will be based upon the pipe being
 in accordance with this specification. Pipe shall be provided from an approved manufacturer, and will be
 accepted based on certification, identification markings and results from tests required by the engineer.
 1041.3 Mate rial. All polypropylene culvert pipe, couplings and fittings shall be in accordance with AST M
 F 2736 for double wall and AST M F 2764 for triple wall, except as follows.
 1041.3.1 Section properties shall be within the following limits:
 Minimum
 Effective P ipe Wall P ipe Wall
 Nominal P ipe Wall Centroid to Moment of Area
 Size
 Area
 Inside Face Inertia
 Ratio a
 S
 A eff
 yc
 I
 A eff /A g
 (in.)
 (in.)
 (in.4/in.)
 (in.2/in.)
 
 Double
 Wall
 
 Triple
 Wall
 
 a
 b
 
 12
 15
 18
 24
 30
 30
 36
 42
 48
 60
 
 0.168
 0.216
 0.217
 0.241
 0.248
 0.324
 0.315
 0.452
 0.348
 0.541
 
 0.445
 0.537
 0.569
 0.710
 0.882
 1.107
 1.363
 1.208
 1.535
 1.627
 
 0.0314
 0.0538
 0.0747
 0.1318
 0.2732
 0.4416
 0.4808
 0.5554
 0.9460
 1.2088
 
 0.803
 0.821
 0.777
 0.723
 0.661
 0.676
 0.653
 0.817
 0.542
 0.739
 
 Maximum
 Extreme Inside Outside
 Fiber Diameter Diameter
 Di
 Do
 Ratio b
 yc / c
 (in.)
 (in.)
 0.586
 0.687
 0.549
 0.558
 0.475
 0.681
 1.000
 0.797
 0.980
 0.812
 
 11.97
 14.85
 17.82
 23.85
 29.70
 29.70
 35.39
 41.38
 46.92
 58.65
 
 14.65
 17.81
 21.42
 28.34
 35.81
 35.81
 41.62
 47.72
 54.14
 67.17
 
 Ag equals gross area of pipe wall per unit length of pipe (in 2/in.).
 c equals the distance from the pipe wall centroid to the outermost fiber (in.).
 
 1041.3.2 T he pipe shall not be perforated unless otherwise specified.
 1041.3.3 Field joints of polypropylene pipe shall provide circumferential and longitudinal strength to
 maintain the pipe alignment, prevent separation of pipe and prevent infiltration of fill material. Coupling
 bands, if used, shall be of the same base material as the pipe. Prior to use, the design of coupling bands and
 fastening devices shall be submitted to and approved by Construction and Materials. Final acceptance of
 coupling bands and fastening devices will be based on field performance.
 1041.3.4 T he manufacturer shall provide to the engineer an itemized statement of the sizes, section
 properties and lengths of pipe in each shipment.
 1041.4 Sampling, Te sting and Acce ptance Proce dure s. Manufacturers furnishing pipe to MoDOT
 projects shall be qualified as herein described. All pipe will be subject to inspection by the engineer at the
 source of manufacture, at an intermediate shipping terminal or at the destination. T he engineer shall be
 permitted free access to all facilities and records as required to conduct inspection and sampling in
 accordance with Sec 106.
 1041.4.1 Application for Place me nt on Q ualifie d List. To become qualified, a written request shall be
 sent by the manufacturer to Construction and Materials with the following:
 (a) A QC plan for each plant from which pipe is to be fabricated for use on MoDOT projects. T he
 QC plan shall be in accordance with Sec 1041.4.2, and shall provide that pipes be randomly
 selected for test by an independent testing laboratory, and that randomly selected pipes are
 representative of that manufacturer's pipe.
 
 609
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (b) A statement certifying that the quality control procedures at the plant, at a minimum, meet
 the requirements set forth in the manufacturer ’s QC plan.
 (c) Sources for each material to be used in the fabrication of pipe.
 (d) Certification that all pipe material to be used in the fabrication of pipe will be in accordance
 with MoDOT specifications.
 (e) Units of measurement, English or metric, used to fabricate the pipe.
 1041.4.2 Manufacture r’s Q C Plans. T he QC plan for each plant shall include the following:
 (a) A list of personnel with corresponding authority and responsibility.
 (b) Qualifications of QC personnel, to include training received or to be given.
 (c) A description of how the manufacturer proposes to control production in order to assure all
 material and workmanship incorporated into the fabrication of pipe meets the applicable
 specification requirements.
 (d) T he specific tests to be performed during or after production, frequency of these tests, the
 point where samples or inspections will be obtained or performed, and the format for recording
 test data.
 1041.4.3 Maintaining Q ualification. To maintain qualification, the manufacturer shall perform and
 maintain a QC program in accordance with the manufacturer ’s QC plan approved by Construction and
 Materials. T he manufacturer shall conduct tests and inspection to verify that adequate QC is maintained,
 and that the pipe furnished is in accordance with these specifications. T he manufacturer shall maintain for
 three years a record of all test results and inspections for review by the engineer. T he records shall show
 that each shipment of pipe has been inspected by the plant’s QC personnel. T he record shall indicate the
 purchase order number or the project number, the route, county and date of inspection. T he manufacturer
 shall notify Construction and Materials at least 24 hours prior to each shipment of pipe to a MoDOT
 project. Additional pipe may be considered part of the original shipment when the ordered quantity was
 underestimated or material was lost or damaged. A bill of lading in accordance with Sec 1041.6 shall be
 provided for each shipment of pipe. Each plant shall maintain a current list of QC personnel with
 corresponding authority and responsibility. All training given to QC personnel shall be documented with a
 brief description of the training and shall be kept on file at the plant.
 1041.4.4 Disqualification of a Manufacture r. A manufacturer may be disqualified from providing pipe
 for use on MoDOT projects based on the discretion of Construction and Materials, for reasons including,
 but not limited to, failure of material to consistently meet specifications, falsification of any
 documentation, misbranding of the pipe, unsatisfactory performance in the field or for other reasons
 indicating lack of consistent material quality.
 1041.4.4.1 A manufacturer will not be considered for reinstatement until after one year from the date of
 removal for falsification of documents.
 1041.4.4.2 T hree notices of failure to meet specification requirements within a 12-month period will be
 cause for disqualification of the manufacturer for one year, effective from the date of the third notice.
 1041.4.4.3 A plant disqualified twice for any reason in any two-year period will be subject for permanent
 removal, with a minimal suspension of three years.
 1041.4.5 Re instate me nt of a Manufacture r or Plant. Consideration of reinstatement of a
 manufacturer once disqualified will be no sooner than specified in Sec 1041.4.4, will require a written
 document from the manufacturer stating the reasons for disqualification and the action taken to correct
 those deficiencies, written concurrence from Construction and Materials that the problem has been suitably
 addressed, followed by an application in accordance with Sec 1041.4.1.
 
 610
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1041.4.6 Sampling of Mate rial. Random sampling of the pipe will be conducted by the engineer to
 verify if the pipe and material are in accordance with these specifications. Samples of polypropylene pipe
 will be obtained from fabricated culvert sections in accordance with AST M F 2736 or AST M F 2764 at a
 frequency determined by the engineer.
 1041.4.7 Inspe ction. Inspection will include an examination of the pipe for markings, deficiency in
 specified diameter, net length of fabricated pipe and any evidence of poor workmanship. T he inspection
 may include taking samples.
 1041.4.8 Te sting. Specimen testing size and method of tests shall be in accordance with AST M F 2736 or
 AST M F 2764. T he contractor or manufacturer shall provide the equipment and personnel to cut a sample
 from a section of pipe. T he sample shall include the markings or a record of the markings for that section
 of pipe.
 1041.4.9 Unacce ptable Mate rial.
 1041.4.9.1 Any individual section of pipe failing to meet the marking, diameter, length or workmanship
 requirements of these specifications will be unacceptable. If 10 percent of the pipe in any lot fails to meet
 these requirements, the entire shipment of that pipe size may be rejected.
 1041.4.9.2 If a test specimen taken in accordance with Sec 1041.4.8 fails to meet the requirements of
 AST M F 2736 or AST M F 2764, the pipe sampled will be rejected and the lot will be resampled. A resample
 will be of the same size as the original sample. T he resample shall be in accordance with these
 specifications, or the entire shipment will be rejected.
 1041.5 MoDO T Ide ntification Numbe r. When the manufacturer contacts the engineer in accordance
 with Sec 1041.4.3, the engineer will assign a specific MoDOT identification number for each size of pipe in
 the shipment.
 1041.6 Bill of Lading. A bill of lading or delivery receipt for each shipment of pipe shall be furnished to
 the engineer at the shipping and destination points. T he bill of lading shall contain an itemized statement
 of the sizes and lengths of pipe with the corresponding designated MoDOT identification number provided
 to the manufacturer for each size of pipe for that shipment. T he bill of lading shall contain a certified
 statement. T he certified statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the manufacturer and
 shall state the following:
 “ T his certifies that the pipe and bands in this shipment are in accordance with MoDOT specifications and
 were fabricated at an approved plant.”
 
 611
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1042
 HIGHWAY SIGN MATERIAL
 1042.1 Scope . T his specification covers the material used in signs and fastening devices, and the
 fabrication of signs.
 1042.2 Mate rial. Material shall be of new stock and shall be in accordance with the following, unless
 otherwise shown on the plans.
 1042.2.1 Signs.
 Item
 Specif ication
 Aluminum Flat Sheets
 ASTM B 209, 6061-T6 or 5052-H38
 Aluminum Extruded Sign P anels ASTM B221, 6063-T6
 
 1042.2.2 Sign Appurte nance s.
 Item
 Aluminum P ost Clip
 Aluminum Bolts
 Aluminum Nuts
 Aluminum Flat Washers
 Aluminum Lock Washers
 Aluminum Lock Nuts
 (Nylon Insert)
 Aluminum Edge Molding
 
 Specif ication
 ASTM B 108, 356-T6
 ASTM B 211, 2024-T4 or 6061-T6
 ASTM B 211, 2024-T4, 6061-T6,
 6262-T9 or 2017-T4
 ASTM B 209, or Alclad 2024-T4
 or 2024-T4
 ASTM B 211, 7075-T6
 ASTM B 211, 2017-T4
 
 ASTM B 221,6063-T6
 ASTM A 320 or SAE J405D,
 Stainless Steel Bolts, Nuts, Screws
 Austenitic Steel, Min. Yield 30,000
 and Washers
 psi
 
 1042.2.3 Ce rtification. A manufacturer or supplier's Certification of Metal used for signing material listed
 above shall be furnished to the engineer at the fabrication plant at the time of material inspection. T he
 contractor shall furnish to the engineer the fabricator's certification in accordance with Sec 903.3.5.2.
 1042.2.4 Structural Signs. Structural signs shall be fabricated of 0.081-inch minimum extruded aluminum
 panels and mounted as shown on the plans. T he maximum allowable deviation from flatness shall not
 exceed 0.010 inch per inch width of the panel. Shop drawings for approval from the engineer will be
 required for any variation in the assembly or mounting details.
 1042.2.5 She e t Signs. Flat sheet signs shall be fabricated as shown on the plans from sheet aluminum of
 the specified thickness. Flat sheet signs shall not have holes except those drilled or punched for proper
 mounting.
 1042.2.6 Washe rs. Nylon washers recommended by the sign sheeting manufacturer shall be used between
 the bolt heads and sign faces on flat sheet aluminum signs. T he washers shall be for use with 3/8-inch bolts
 and shall have a minimum outside diameter of 3/4 inch, and a nominal thickness of 1/16 inch.
 1042.2.7 Re trore fle ctive She e ting. Retroreflective sheeting shall be in accordance with latest versions
 or AST M D 4956 and AASHT O M 268, except as noted herein. Color and luminance values for all
 MoDOT types of reflective sheeting shall be in accordance with AST M D 4956. Retroreflective sheeting
 shall have sufficient adhesion, strength and flexibility such that the sheeting can be handled, processed and
 applied according to the manufacturer's recommendations without appreciable stretching, tearing, cracking
 or other damage. Adhesive performance for retroreflective sheeting shall be in accordance with AST M D
 4956. T he sheeting surface shall be in condition to be readily screen processed and compatible with
 transparent overlay films, plus recommended transparent and opaque screen process colors. T he
 retroreflective sheeting manufacturer shall furnish information as to the type of solvent or solvents that
 may be used to clean the surface of the sheeting without detrimental loss of performance and durability.
 Retroreflective sheeting having a datum mark on the surface shall be oriented vertically. AST M D 4956
 
 612
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Type IX, XI or AASHT O M 268 Type C or D retroreflective sheeting applied as legend and border for
 specific signing applications, without a datum mark on the surface of the sheeting, shall be evaluated for
 rotational sensitivity per AASHT O M 268, Section 3.3. Retroreflective sheeting products that do not meet
 the rotational sensitivity requirements of Section 3.3 shall follow guidelines detailed in AASHT O M 268
 Section 3.3.1 and fabricated per AASHT O M 268 Section 3.3.2.
 1042.2.7.1 AST M D 4956 Type I, Class 1 retroreflective sheeting shall be enclosed lens glass-bead or
 prismatic sheeting.
 1042.2.7.2 Background sheeting applied to flat sheet and extruded panel signs shall be in accordance with
 AST M D 4956 Type IV, Class 1. All yellow, orange and yellow green sheeted signs shall be fabricated with
 AST M D 4956 Type IX, XI or AASHT O M 268 Type C or D fluorescent yellow, fluorescent orange and
 fluorescent yellow green sheeting respectively. Retroreflective sheeting shall be high intensity that is an
 unmetallized micro prismatic reflective material.
 1042.2.7.3 Retroreflective sheeting applied as legend and border shall be in accordance with AST M D
 4956, Type IX, XI or AASHT O Type C or D, Class 1.Retroreflective sheeting shall be an unmetallized cube
 corner microprismatic reflective material.
 1042.2.7.4 Scre e n Print and O ve rlay. For screen printed transparent colored areas or transparent
 colored overlay films on white sheeting, the coefficient of retroreflection (RA) shall be no less than 70
 percent of the original values for the corresponding color.
 1042.2.7.5 Reflective sheeting for temporary traffic control devices and delineators shall be in accordance
 with Sec 1063 and Sec 1065 respectively.
 1042.2.8 O utdoor Exposure . Retroreflective sheeting, except for work zone signs, shall be submitted by
 the manufacturer to NT PEP for two years of 45-degree south-facing outdoor exposure. Retroreflective
 sheeting for work zone signs shall be submitted by the manufacturer to NT PEP for an exposure time of one
 year. Results shall be published by NT PEP and available for MoDOT review. For all NT PEP test decks,
 retroreflective sheeting shall have a coefficient of retroreflection at least 50 percent of the specified value
 for AST M D 4956 Type I or 80 percent of the original reading for AST M D 4956 Type IV, IX or XI.
 1042.2.9 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. T he manufacturer shall make available, upon
 request, NT PEP test results from all test decks, and certification to Construction and Materials, showing
 reflective material is in accordance with AST M D 4956 specification. In addition, the manufacture shall,
 upon request, submit samples representing the retroreflective sheeting tested by NT PEP, and with
 compatible inks. T hese samples shall be accompanied by a product data sheet, an MSDS, technical bulletins
 on sign fabrication and any special fabrication instructions relative to the retroreflective sheeting
 submitted. Samples of retroreflective sheeting shall 10 x 10 inches and applied to an aluminum substrate.
 1042.2.9.1 Materials that fail to provide satisfactory field performance will be evaluated and may be
 disqualified from future use on fabricated signs for MoDOT. All corrective actions made by MoDOT will
 control.
 1042.2.10 Type of Characte rs. Letters, numerals, arrows, symbols, borders and other features of the sign
 message shall be of the type, size and series shown on the plans or as specified by the engineer. Completed
 letters, numerals and other units shall be formed to provide a continuous stroke width with smooth edges,
 and shall yield a flat surface free of air bubbles, wrinkles or other blemishes as determined by the engineer.
 Units of the sign message shown on the plans shall meet the requirements for the specified type.
 1042.2.10.1 Scre e n Print, Transpare nt O ve rlay and O paque Black Film.
 1042.2.10.1.1 T he letters, numerals, arrows, symbols and borders shall be applied to the background of the
 sign by the direct or reverse screen process. Messages and borders of a color darker than the sign field shall
 be applied to the retroreflective sheeting by the direct process. Messages and borders of a color lighter than
 the sign field shall be produced by the reverse screen process. Inks used in the silkscreen process shall be of
 the type to produce the desired color and durability when applied on retroreflective sheeting. Silkscreen
 inks shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. T he ink shall produce the
 
 613
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 desired color when applied on retroreflective sheeting background and shall dry to a good film without
 running, streaking or sagging. T he screening shall be done in a manner that results in a uniform color and
 tone, with sharply defined edges of legend and border without blemishes on the sign field that will affect the
 intended use. Signs after screening shall be dried in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations to
 provide a smooth hard finish. Any signs on which blisters appear during the drying process will be rejected.
 1042.2.10.1.2 T ransparent overlay films may be used as a replacement for the reverse screen process, as
 recommended by the sheeting manufacturer.
 1042.2.10.2 Dire ct Applie d Characte rs. T he letters, numerals, symbols, borders and other features of
 the sign message shall be cut from the color and type of sheeting shown on the plans, and applied to the
 sign field in accordance with the sheeting manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 1042.2.10.3 Allowable Variations. T he design height of rounded letters or numerals shall be 1/64 inch of
 height greater than normal height, both on top and bottom of letter or numeral, where rounded. T he loop
 portion of letters such as f, g and y, shall conform to the dimensions shown on the plans with the allowable
 tolerance. T he following variations in dimensions of letters and numerals, regardless of character type, will
 be acceptable with all measurements made to the nearest 1/8 inch.
 Allowable Variation
 Nominal Height, Variation in Height, Variation in Width,
 inches
 inches
 inches
 4 thru 12
 -1/8 to +3/8
 -1/4 to +1/4
 Over 12
 -1/8 to +3/8
 -3/8 to +3/8
 
 1042.3 Sign Fabrication. A sign shall consist of aluminum flat sheets or extruded panels
 retroreflectorized on the face side with all letters, numerals, symbols, borders, corners and route shields
 mounted on the face, and shall include all necessary mounting devices shown on the plans. Signs equal to or
 greater in width than six feet are considered structural (ST ) and shall be fabricated on extruded panels. Signs
 less than six feet in width will be considered sheet (SH) signs and shall be fabricated with flat sheet. Any
 exceptions to these fabrication standards will be indicated on the plans.
 1042.3.1 All signs shall be of the highest quality with consistent daytime and nighttime color and
 retroreflectivity throughout the sign and produced as follows.
 1042.3.1.1 All aluminum substrate shall be given a chromate conversion coating in accordance with AST M
 B 449, Class 2, and shall be prepared by one of the T reatment Sequence Options described in AST M B 449,
 Appendix X2. T he chemicals and solvents shall be applied in strict accordance with the manufacturer ’s
 recommendations. Sufficient laboratory facilities to test and control the concentration of the solutions
 used shall be maintained at the treating plant. A log of the concentration of treating solutions shall be
 maintained. T reated panels shall be handled in such a manner as to prevent contamination. Panels shall be
 stored in a dry, clean area free from dust, acid fumes or vapors. When aluminum is shipped to a secondary
 location for retroreflectorizing, adequate precautions shall be taken to ensure that the material arrives at
 the destination uncontaminated.
 1042.3.1.2 All materials used to fabricate a sign legend, including retroreflective and non-retroreflective
 sheeting, used for background, letters, numerals, arrows, symbols, borders and other features of the sign
 message shall be from a single manufacturer.
 1042.3.1.3 Retroreflective sheeting splices on structural signs shall be kept to a minimum. Rolled overlap
 splices in accordance with the sheeting manufacturer ’s recommendations may be used, with no more than
 one allowed per panel. Retroreflective sheeting shall be placed on the individual extruded panels in
 accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations. T he sign panels may be clear coated or edge sealed
 after application of the retroreflective sheeting, if recommended by the sheeting manufacturer. If edge
 sealer is used, the sealer shall be applied to all splices and edges. T he completed sign shall have good color
 matching of retroreflective sheeting and shall be free from air bubbles, wrinkles or other blemishes.
 1042.3.1.4 Retroreflective sheeting applied to standard flat sheet signs shall not have splices on signs
 where the smallest dimension is less than 4 feet. One vertical overlap splice approximately 1/4 inch wide
 
 614
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 will be allowed on standard flat sheet signs where the smallest dimension is greater than 4 feet. Any special
 flat sheet signs requiring splicing other than noted for the standard flat sheet signs shall be as approved by
 the engineer. T he sign panels may be clear coated or edge sealed after application of the retroreflective
 sheeting if recommended by the sheeting manufacturer. If clear finish is used, the finish shall be applied
 after screening of messages and borders. If edge sealer is used, the sealer shall be applied to all splices and
 edges. T he completed sign face shall be free from air bubbles, wrinkles or other blemishes.
 1042.3.2 Nuts on panel bolts used to connect extruded panels together to form a structural sign shall be
 torqued to 220 - 230 inch-pounds.
 1042.3.3 Signs will be accepted on certification from the manufacture assuring all fabrication and sheeting
 specifications are in compliance with all applicable requirements specified herein. Periodic shop inspections
 of sign fabrication will be made at the discretion of MoDOT, to include contractor furnished signs for
 MoDOT projects. Routine shop inspections will include inspection and sampling of materials, inspection of
 treatment and fabrication processes, and of any signs completed at time of inspection. Inspections on
 delivered signs for maintenance operations will be conducted for quality assurance purposes by the
 appropriate district inspectors. Signs may be rejected at the fabrication shop and/or upon delivery based on
 unsatisfactory workmanship and/or material applications or based on any aspect of the product that is not
 in accordance with the specifications. T he contractor will be charged with the transportation costs of sign
 inspectors for trips from Jefferson City, Missouri to which the inspectors must travel for signs provided to
 MoDOT projects. T ransportation costs will be deducted by the Commission from monies due the
 contractor.
 1042.3.4 Signs shall be packaged and shipped according to the reflective sheeting manufacture’s
 recommendations. Signs fabricated and shipped to MoDOT for maintenance operations shall be shipped in
 accordance with manufacture’s recommendations and in a manner that meets the requirements of the
 engineer. All signs shall include decals indicating sign production date, lot number of reflective sheeting used
 in the production of sign and other information necessary for proper sign fabrication. Upon shipment of
 signs to MoDOT, certifications shall be submitted thereafter to Construction and Materials. Required
 paperwork shall include a certification statement indicating signs meet all applicable requirements herein to
 include aluminum standard and extruded panel, reflective sheeting (manufacturer, series and color), and
 hardware certifications. Material quantities, such as square foot of flat sheet, extruded panels, if produced,
 reflective sheeting and a shipping list of all signs shall be included in the certification packet.
 
 615
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1043
 FENCE MATERIAL
 1043.1 Scope . T his specification covers the material required in the construction of chain-link fence and
 woven wire fence.
 1043.2 Basis of Acce ptance . T he basis of acceptance shall be in accordance with Sec 1040.2.
 1043.3 Chain Link Fe nce Mate rial. Material used in the construction of fences and gates shall consist
 of chain-link fence fabric, posts, rails, ties, bands, bars, rods, tension wire and other fittings and hardware
 designed to support the fabric in a vertical, taut position.
 1043.3.1 Zinc Coate d Ste e l Fabric. Zinc coated steel fabric shall be in accordance with AASHT O M
 181, Type 1, Class D, with the following exceptions. T he weight of zinc coating shall be at least 2.0 ounces
 per square foot of uncoated wire surface, determined from the average of all specimens representing the lot
 and no less than 1.8 ounces per square foot on an individual specimen. Sections of fencing with excessive
 lumps, beads and drops of zinc will be removed before determining weight of coating.
 1043.3.2 Aluminum Coate d Ste e l Fabric. Aluminum coated steel fabric shall be in accordance with
 AASHT O M 181, Type 2, with the following exceptions. An individual specimen shall have at least 0.30
 ounce per square foot of uncoated wire surface on 0.148 or 0.192-inch specified diameter wire and no less
 than 0.25 ounce per square foot on 0.120-inch specified diameter wire.
 1043.3.3 Vinyl Coate d Ste e l Fabric. Vinyl coated steel fabric shall be in accordance with AASHT O M
 181, Type IV, Class A or Class B. In addition to the referenced colors, brown will also be acceptable.
 1043.3.4 Aluminum Alloy Fabric. Aluminum alloy fabric shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 181,
 Type III.
 1043.3.5 Posts, Brace s, Rails and Gate Frame s. T hese members shall be in accordance with AASHT O
 M 181, Grade 1 or Grade 2, and of the shape and dimension shown on the plans. T hese members may be
 used with either Type I, Type II, Type III or Type IV fabric.
 1043.3.5.1 Zinc Coate d Ste e l Me mbe rs. Zinc coated steel members shall be in accordance with AST M F
 1043, heavy industrial fence Group IA, with Type A interior and exterior coating, and the plans.
 1043.3.5.2 Zinc Plus O rganic Coate d Ste e l Me mbe rs. Zinc plus organic coated steel members shall be
 in accordance with AST M F 1043, heavy industrial fence Group IC, with Type B or D interior coating and
 Type B exterior coating, and the plans.
 1043.3.5.3 Aluminum Alloy Me mbe rs. Aluminum alloy members shall be in accordance with AST M F
 1043, heavy industrial fence Group IB, and the plans.
 1043.3.6 Te nsion Wire . Tension wire shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 181 Type I, Class I.
 1043.3.7 Fabric Faste ne rs. Fabric fasteners shall consist of wire ties, hog rings and C-clips. Fasteners for
 use with zinc or aluminum coated steel fabric shall be in accordance with Sec 1043.3.7.1 or Sec 1043.3.7.2;
 those for use with aluminum alloy fabric shall be in accordance with Sec 1043.3.7.2; and those for use with
 vinyl coated steel fabric shall be in accordance with Sec 1043.3.7.3. Fasteners shall be capable of
 withstanding a 180-degree bend over the fasteners own diameter without fracture of the wire or loss of
 adherence of coating. T he wire shall have a finished or coated diameter of no less than 0.143 inch, except
 C-clips for attaching fabric to H section posts shall have a finished or coated diameter of no less than
 0.187 inch. Aluminum alloy C-clips will not be permitted for fastening fabric to H section posts.
 1043.3.7.1 Zinc or Aluminum Coate d Fabric Faste ne rs. Wire shall be zinc coated at a rate of no less
 than 0.70 ounce per square foot or aluminum coated at a rate of no less than 0.30 ounce per square foot.
 1043.3.7.2 Aluminum Alloy Fabric Faste ne rs. Wire shall be of aluminum alloy having a minimum
 tensile strength of 16,000 psi.
 
 616
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1043.3.7.3 Vinyl Coate d Fabric Faste ne rs. Wire may be of steel or aluminum alloy and shall be
 uniformly coated with the same vinyl material as used to coat the fence fabric. Vinyl coating thickness shall
 be a minimum of 0.010 inch. Aluminum alloy wire shall have a minimum tensile strength of 16,000 psi.
 1043.3.8 Misce llane ous Fittings and Hardware . Miscellaneous fittings and hardware shall be in
 accordance with AASHT O M 181. Aluminum alloy fittings shall not be used with zinc coated steel posts,
 rails or gate frames.
 1043.3.9 Gate s. Frames shall be fastened at the corners by clamps and braces, or by welding. If corners are
 to be welded, the ends of the vertical members shall be hemispherically notched to fit snugly to the
 horizontal members. T he joint shall be uniformly and continuously fillet welded. T he welded area and
 adjacent damaged coating shall be recoated by the hot-dip process or metallizing process; or covered with
 two coats of zinc-rich paint. T he material for repair of welded areas and applications shall meet the
 approval of the engineer. Each gate frame shall be cross-braced with no less than two 3/8-inch adjustable
 truss rods. T he filler for gates shall be chain-link fabric of the same kind used for the fence. T his filler shall
 be attached to the frame with stretcher bars and wire ties or clamps. Gates 6 feet high or less shall be
 equipped with two hinges, and gates more than 6 feet high shall have three hinges. All gates, walks and
 drives, shall be equipped with a latch and locking attachment. Gatekeepers and center rests of an approved
 design shall be installed for double drive gates.
 1043.3.10 Barbe d Wire . Barbed wire for use with chain-link fence shall be zinc-coated steel, aluminumcoated steel or aluminum alloy, and shall be in accordance with AASHT 0 M 280, with the following
 exceptions. Zinc-coated barbed wire shall consist of two No. 12 1/2, 13 1/2 or 15 1/2 gage line wires twisted
 with 4-point barbs uniformly spaced approximately 4 or 5 inches apart in accordance with and the
 minimum weight of coating shall be 0.80 ounce per square foot of uncoated wire surface for all gages.
 Aluminum-coated barbed wire shall be in accordance with the requirements for zinc-coated barbed wire,
 except that the coating shall be aluminum alloy. T he weight of coating per square foot of surface shall be
 no less than 0.25 ounce for both line wires and barbs. However, barbs of suitable aluminum alloy will be
 permitted. Aluminum alloy barbed wire shall be aluminum alloy 5052-H38, AST M B 211. Aluminum alloy
 barbed wire shall consist of two 0.110-inch line wires twisted with 4-point 0.080-inch diameter wire barbs
 spaced 5 inches apart.
 1043.4 Wove n Wire Fe nce Mate rial. Woven wire fence shall be composed of woven wire, barbed wire,
 brace wire, posts, ties, fittings and hardware.
 1043.4.1 Fabric. Fabric shall be made of zinc-coated or aluminum-coated steel wire. Zinc coated fabric
 shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 279, for Design Number 939-6-11, Grade 60 or 939-6-12.5, Grade
 125. T he minimum weight of zinc coating shall be Class 3 for all gages. Line wires shall have tension
 curves. Aluminum-coated fabric shall be in accordance with the requirements for zinc-coated fabric, except
 that the coating shall be aluminum alloy applied at the rate of no less than 0.25 ounce per square foot of
 uncoated wire surface.
 1043.4.2 Barbe d Wire . Barbed wire for use with zinc-coated steel fabric or aluminum- coated steel fabric
 shall be in accordance with Sec 1043.3.10.
 1043.4.3 Wood Posts. Wood posts and braces shall be in accordance with Sec 1050.
 1043.4.4 Ste e l Posts. Steel posts and braces shall be in accordance with Sec 1043.3.5. Corner, end and pull
 posts shall be pipe of the sizes and weights shown on the plans. Line posts shall be of the lengths and
 shapes shown on the plans. Posts shall have a nominal weight of 1.33 pounds per linear foot and a
 minimum weight of 1.28 pounds per linear foot, exclusive of anchor plate.
 1043.4.5 Post Tops and Misce llane ous Hardware . Post tops and miscellaneous fittings and hardware
 shall be in accordance AASHT O M 181.
 1043.4.6 Brace Wire . Brace wire shall be no less than 0.143 inch in diameter and shall be of material in
 accordance with Sec 1043.4.1.
 
 617
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1043.4.7 Staple s. Staples shall be of the screw shank-type or equivalent, a minimum of 1 1/4 inches long,
 galvanized, and of good commercial quality.
 1043.4.8 Wire Tie s. Wire used for ties shall be in accordance with Sec 1043.3.7, except that the wire may
 have a minimum diameter of 0.115 inch.
 1043.4.9 Gate s. Gates for woven wire fence shall be in accordance with Sec 1043.3.9, except that the
 filler shall be woven wire fabric meeting these specifications.
 1043.5 Workmanship and Finish. Fabrication of chain-link or woven wire fencing material furnished
 under these specifications shall be in accordance with the sizes, shapes and dimensions shown on the plans.
 Excessive roughness, blisters, sal-ammoniac spots, bruises, flaking, voids in coating, frozen knuckles or
 other defects, if present to any considerable extent, will be considered cause for rejection. Polyvinyl
 chloride coating shall be without voids, tears, cracks or cuts that reveal the substrate. Welded seam pipe
 shall have smooth welds, without skips or gaps. Non-uniform or damaged organic topcoats will be
 considered cause for rejection whether caused by fabrication, shipping or handling on the job. All burrs at
 the ends of posts and rails shall be removed.
 1043.6 Sampling and Te sting.
 1043.6.1 Sampling. Sampling of material shall be in accordance with the MoDOT 's EPG 106.3.1.
 1043.6.2 Te sting. When fencing material is tested, tests shall be in accordance with the following methods.
 1043.6.2.1 We ight. Weight of hot-dip zinc coatings shall be determined in accordance with AASHT O T
 65 or, at the option of the engineer, material may be accepted on the basis of magnetic gauge
 determinations conducted in accordance with AST M E 376. Weight of aluminum coating shall be
 determined in accordance with AASHT O T 213 or, at the option of the engineer, material may be accepted
 on the basis of magnetic gauge determinations conducted in accordance with AST M E 376.
 1043.6.2.2 Thickne ss. T hickness of zinc-rich organic coating shall be determined by magnetic gauge
 determinations conducted in accordance with AST M E 376. T hickness of organic topcoat shall be
 determined by first determining the total thickness of the organic topcoat and exterior hot-dip zinc coating
 by magnetic gauge determinations conducted in accordance with AST M E 376, then chemically stripping
 the organic topcoat and determining the thickness of only the exterior hot-dip zinc in accordance with
 AASHT O T 65 or AST M E 376. T he difference between the two measurements shall be the thickness of
 the organic topcoat.
 1043.6.2.3 Te nsile Stre ngth. Tensile strength or breaking load shall be in accordance with AASHT O T
 68.
 1043.7 Inspe ction. T he engineer shall have access at all times to all parts of the manufacturer's or
 fabricator's works that concern the manufacture or fabrication of material furnished under this
 specification. Each product or article furnished under this specification will be subject to inspection at the
 factory, fabricating plant, in laboratories of the engineer's choosing, or at the point of delivery. T he
 engineer reserves the right to sample and test each product or article subsequent to acceptance at the place
 of manufacture or fabrication to determine conformance with the requirements of this specification or to
 verify certification.
 1043.8 Ce rtification. Certifications will be required as follows.
 1043.8.1 Vinyl Coate d Mate rial. T he contractor shall submit to the engineer certification that the vinyl
 material and vinyl coated fabric meet the requirements of these specifications. If vinyl coated items other
 than chain-link fabric are furnished, certification will also be required.
 1043.8.2 Aluminum Alloy Mate rial. T he contractor shall submit to the engineer certification that the
 material is in accordance with the requirements specified. T he certificate shall include or have attached a
 list or description of typical physical properties representative of the material.
 
 618
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1043.8.3 O rganic Topcoate d Mate rial. T he contractor shall submit to the engineer certification that the
 material is in accordance with the requirements specified and that the material is the same as prequalified by
 the engineer.
 1043.9 Packaging and Marking. Packaging and marking of the material shall provide ease of handling,
 storage and identification.
 1043.9.1 Each length of chain-link fabric, woven wire fabric or barbed wire shall be tightly rolled and
 firmly tied. Each roll shall carry a tag showing, as applicable to the product, the length, kind of base metal,
 type of coating, specified wire size, mesh size, design (style), height or width of fabric, and the producer
 name, brand or trademark of the manufacturer.
 1043.9.8.2 Each bundle or container of posts, hardware and fittings shall be marked with the name, brand
 or trademark of the manufacturer, type of material (steel, cast iron, aluminum alloy number, etc.), type of
 coating and any additional data required for proper identification or to determine apparent conformance to
 specified quality requirements.
 
 619
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1044
 PO STS FO R MARKERS AND DELINEATO RS
 1044.1 Scope . T his specification covers galvanized steel and flexible posts used for mounting mile and
 object markers, delineators, drain and right of way markers signs and other similar purposes.
 1044.2 Ste e l Posts. Posts shall be rerolled rail steel, in accordance with the mechanical requirements of
 AST M A 499, Grade 60, and to the chemical requirements of AST M A 1.
 1044.2.1 Shape and Dime nsions. Posts shall be of a channel or modified channel section. Posts for mile
 markers, object markers and delineators shall be of the dimensions and weights (masses) shown on the
 plans.
 1044.2.2 Drainage and Right of Way Marke rs. Posts for drainage and right of way markers shall weigh
 no less than 1.80 or more than 2.25 pounds per foot, all tolerances included, and shall be of the lengths
 shown on the plans. Permissible variations in length will be a maximum of one inch under and 2 inches
 over that shown on the plans. Posts shall have no less than five drilled or punched 3/8-inch holes along the
 centerline of the web. Holes shall be on 2-inch centers, beginning one inch from the top of posts. Anchors
 or pointed ends on posts will not be required.
 1044.2.3 Fibe rglass Composite Right of Way Marke rs. Fiberglass reinforced polymer composite posts
 for right of way markers shall be 3 and 3/4 inches wide of a multi rib design weighing no less than 0.35
 pounds per foot and shall be of the color and length as shown on the plans. T he markers shall have a right
 of way decal meeting the description as shown on the plans. T he markers shall be pointed on one end for
 installation into the ground to the depth as shown on the plans.
 1044.2.4 Galvaniz ing. Posts shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with AASHT O M 111.
 1044.3 Channe l Post De line ator. Channel post for delineators shall be manufactured from ductile
 AST M A 36 or AST M A 1011 Gr 60 and as shown on the plans. Posts shall be hot dipped galvanized after
 manufacture in accordance with Sec 1080. Damaged coating shall be repaired in accordance with Sec 1081.
 T he contractor shall furnish to the engineer three copies of the fabricator ’s certification that the material
 supplied is in accordance with the requirements specified.
 1044.4 Square Ste e l Pe rforate d Posts.
 1044.4.1 Mate rial.
 1044.4.1.1 Ste e l. Steel shall be in accordance with AST M A 1011, Grade 50, for hot rolled carbon sheet
 steel, structural quality. T he average minimum yield strength after cold-forming shall be a minimum of
 50,000 psi.
 1044.4.1.2 Coating. Posts shall be galvanized in accordance with AST M A 653, G90. T he corner weld
 shall be zinc coated after the scarfing operation. T he steel shall also be coated with a chromate conversion
 coating and a clear organic polymer topcoat. Both the interior and the exterior of the post shall be
 galvanized.
 1044.4.2 Dime nsions.
 1044.4.2.1 Dime nsional Tole rance s. All dimensional tolerances shall be in accordance with AST M A
 513, excepted as noted.
 1044.4.2.2 Le ngth. T he length of each post shall be as shown on the plans.
 1044.4.2.3 We ight Pe r Foot. T he weight per foot shall be in accordance with the following or as
 specified:
 Square Steel Perf orated Post Requirements
 Size
 Thickness Weight Tolerance
 
 620
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 2 in. x 2 in. 12 Gage
 
 2.42 lbs/ft ±0.12 lbs/ft
 
 1044.4.3 Cross Se ction. T he cross section of the post shall be square tube formed of 12 gage steel,
 carefully rolled to size and shall be welded directly in the corner by high frequency resistance welding and
 externally scarfed to agree with corner radii.
 1044.4.4 Hole Punching. All holes shall be 7/16 ± 1/64 inch in diameter on one-inch centers on all four
 sides down the entire length of the post. T he holes shall be on the centerline of each side in true alignment
 and opposite each other directly and diagonally.
 1044.4.5 Te le scoping Prope rtie s. Finished posts for telescoping post systems shall be in accordance with
 the general dimensional requirements and shall permit consecutive square tubes to telescope freely, for no
 less than 10 feet without the necessity of matching any particular face to any other face. T he finished
 posts shall be straight, and shall have a smooth, uniform finish. All holes and ends shall be free from burrs,
 and ends shall be cut square.
 1044.4.6 Base s. If bases are specified on the plans, one of the following FHWA accepted “ Breakaway
 Anchor” systems shall be used.
 a) Single. T he anchor shall be one size larger than the signpost and driven using an appropriate
 sized drive cap. All anchors shall be driven into the ground leaving one to two holes exposed for
 signpost connection.
 b) Two-Piece. An additional 18-inch outer sleeve, one size larger than the anchor, shall be used to
 double the anchor wall thickness at the critical bending area.
 1044.4.7 Conne cting Bolts and Nuts. Bolts used to connect posts to bases shall be 5/16 inch, 18NC
 threads, bent-truss head bolts in accordance with AST M A 307, Grade A. T he bolts shall be mechanically
 zinc galvanized in accordance with AST M B 695, Class 25. T he nuts shall be 5/16 inch, 18NC threads,
 serrated flange nuts in accordance with AST M A 194 and zinc electroplated in accordance with AST M B
 633.
 1044.4.8 Ce rtification. T he fabricator shall furnish to the engineer, a certification stating that the posts
 furnished comply with all requirements of this specification. T he certification shall include or have
 attached specific results of tests of the mechanical and chemical properties. T he certification shall
 accompany each shipment of the material to the destination.
 1044.5 Acce ptance . Acceptance of posts furnished under this specification will be based on Sec 1040.2 and
 on the results of any tests deemed necessary by the engineer at destination to ascertain compliance with
 these specifications. If requested, two posts shall be furnished for testing purposes from such lots as the
 engineer may determine.
 
 621
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1045
 PAINT FO R STRUCTURAL STEEL
 1045.1 Scope . T his specification covers paint, paint material and coating systems for use on structural
 steel.
 1045.2 Paint and Paint Mate rial.
 1045.2.1 Ge ne ral. All single component paints shall be ready-mixed at the factory to comply with the
 specification formula for the type of paint ordered; shall be well ground to a uniform consistency and
 smooth texture; shall be free from dirt, water and other foreign matter; shall be of such consistency to have
 good application, covering and leveling properties; and shall dry within the specified period to a good film
 without running, streaking or sagging.
 1045.2.1.1 Any paint that has livered or hardened or thickened to any extent in the container, or in which
 the pigment has settled such that the paint cannot be readily broken up with a paddle to a smooth uniform
 paint of good application consistency, will be rejected.
 1045.2.1.2 All percentages and proportions shall be on a weight basis unless otherwise stated.
 1045.2.1.3 All VOC content requirements specified shall be a maximum when thinned for application.
 1045.2.2 Sampling. Each batch or lot of paint shall be sampled and approved prior to use. Each batch or
 lot of each component of multiple-component paints shall be sampled and approved prior to use.
 1045.2.3 Packaging and Labe ling. T he lining of the containers shall not react with the paint. All
 components shall bear a label on which shall be clearly shown the name of the manufacturer, the kind of
 paint, lot number, shelf life, date of manufacture and net weight of contents. T he lot number and date of
 manufacture shall be stamped, stenciled or painted directly onto the container using a weatherproof, durable
 material.
 1045.2.4 De te rmination of Q uantitie s. Quantities of paint shall be determined by volume. One gallon
 shall equal 231 cubic inches at 77 F.
 1045.3 High Solids Inorganic Zinc Silicate Coating.
 1045.3.1 De scription. High solids inorganic zinc coating shall be a solvent base multiple-component
 material which, when mixed and applied in accordance with Sec 1081, cures without the use of a separate
 curing solution. High solids inorganic zinc coating shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 300, Type IA.
 T he VOC content shall not exceed 3.50 pounds per gallon. If thinning is necessary for application, the
 maximum VOC content after thinning shall not exceed 3.50 pounds per gallon.
 1045.3.2 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Prior to approval and use of high solids inorganic
 zinc, the manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a certified test report from an approved
 testing laboratory showing specific test results conforming to all quantitative and resistance test
 requirements of these specifications. T he certified test report shall also contain the exact ratio, by weight,
 of each component of the coating used for the tests, the lot tested, the manufacturer's name, brand name
 of coating and date of manufacture. Upon approval from the engineer of this certified test report, further
 resistance tests will not be required, except as hereinafter noted, of that manufacturer for that brand name
 of coating. New certified test results shall be submitted any time the manufacturing process or the coating
 formulation is changed, and may be required by the engineer when sampling and testing of material offered
 for use indicates nonconformance to any of the requirements herein specified. All resistance testing shall be
 performed on duplicate sets of test panels, and upon completion of the prescribed exposure testing, the
 manufacturer shall submit one set of the exposed panels to Construction and Materials.
 1045.3.3 Alte rnate Approval. If approved by Construction and Materials, compliance with all specified
 requirements for the system under NT PEP or Northeast Protective Coating Committee (NEPCOAT ), in
 addition to the physical property requirements of this specification, may be substituted for the
 manufacturer and brand name approval requirements of Sec 1045.3.2. T he manufacturer shall provide
 
 622
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 documentation identifying specific products evaluated, along with the manufacturer ’s code numbers and/or
 report code numbers.
 1045.4 High Solids Epoxy Syste m G Inte rme diate Coating.
 1045.4.1 De scription. T he coating shall be a multiple-component, modified epoxy primer with an
 amine/amide-type curing system compatible as an intermediate coat over high solids inorganic zinc primer
 and suitable for topcoating with polyurethane.
 1045.4.2 Mixe d Coating. T he color shall be gray (Federal Standard 595b No. 26373) or brown (Federal
 Standard 595b No. 30045) unless otherwise specified. T he color of the intermediate coat shall match the
 color of the finish coat, unless otherwise approved by the engineer. T he physical properties of the mixed
 paint shall be as follows:
 High Solids Epoxy System G Intermediate Coating
 Item
 Requirement
 Viscosity, Krebs-Stormer, 77 F KU
 80-130
 VOC Content, max., lb/gal
 3.50
 Fineness of Grind, Hegeman Gage, min.
 4
 Sag Resistance, Leneta Anti-Sag Meter, mils wet, min.
 8
 Dry to Touch, hours, max.
 3
 Dry to Handle, hours, max.
 6
 
 1045.4.3 Packaging and Labe ling. Packaging and labeling shall be in accordance with Sec 1045.2.3.
 1045.4.4 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Prior to approval and use of the specified coating
 system, the manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a one-gallon unit of each coat of the
 coating system proposed. T he manufacturer shall also submit a certified test report from an approved
 independent testing laboratory showing specific test results obtained on the specified coating system for
 Relative Humidity Resistance AST M D 1735 or D 2247, 3000 hours, Salt Fog Resistance AST M B 117,
 3000 hours and Accelerated Weathering AST M G 153 Cycle 1 (Carbon Arc), 4000 hours. AST M G 155,
 Cycle 2, Xenon Arc or G 154, Cycle 2 QUV (Fluorescent UV-Condensation Type using Type A lamps) may
 be used as an alternate to Carbon Arc.
 1045.4.4.1 All coats of the system to be tested shall be applied to steel test panels that have been prepared
 according to AASHT O M 300. Each coat of the system shall be from the same manufacturer. Test panels
 for salt fog exposure shall be scribed as specified in AST M D 1654 and, when rated according to AST M D
 1654, each panel shall receive a rating of 7 or greater. Test panels shall not exhibit more than slight
 rusting, undercutting, discoloration, fading, blistering, chalking, loss of gloss or change in color. Accelerated
 weathering resistance testing shall be performed on test panels that have received finish coats in the
 specified colors for which approval is being requested. After 4,000 hours of testing for accelerated
 weathering resistance, each color of the finish coat shall show a difference in color of no greater than
 3 ∆E, when compared to the control panel. Color change measurements shall be made in accordance with
 Section 6.2 CIE 1976 L*a*b* of AST M D 2244. All resistance testing shall be performed on duplicate sets
 of test panels, and upon completion of the prescribed exposure testing, the manufacturer shall submit one
 set of the exposed panels to Construction and Materials.
 1045.4.4.2 T he manufacturer shall provide documentation that the specified coating system has performed
 satisfactorily for three years. T he document shall include the name, address and telephone number of the
 proprietary agency and location of the structures. Upon approval of the coating by the engineer, further
 submittals for preliminary approval will not be required of that manufacturer for that brand name of
 coating, except as hereinafter noted. A new sample, new testing data and new test panels shall be submitted
 any time the manufacturing process or the batching proportions are changed. T he engineer may withdraw
 manufacturer and brand name approval when sampling and testing of material offered for use indicates
 nonconformance to any of the requirements herein specified. All data submitted for preliminary approval
 will be considered confidential to MoDOT.
 1045.4.5 Alte rnate Approval. If approved by Construction and Materials, compliance with all specified
 requirements for the system under NT PEP or NEPCOAT, in addition to the physical property requirements
 
 623
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 of this specification, may be substituted for the manufacturer and brand name approval requirements of Sec
 1045.4.4. If approval is requested under NT PEP or NEPCOAT, the accelerated weathering requirements
 stated in Sec 1045.4.4 will apply. T he manufacturer shall provide documentation identifying specific
 products evaluated, along with the manufacturer ’s code numbers and/or report code numbers.
 1045.5 Polyure thane Syste m G Finish Coating.
 1045.5.1 De scription. T he coating shall be a multiple-component, aliphatic acrylic polyurethane suitable
 for use over High Solids Epoxy Intermediate Coating. T he coating shall cure to a semi-gloss to high gloss,
 abrasion resistant surface and shall provide an easily cleanable finish.
 1045.5.2 Mixe d Coating. T he mixed coating properties shall be as follows:
 Polyurethane System G Finish Coating
 Physical Property
 Requirement
 Gray Brown
 Color, Federal Standard 595b
 26373 30045
 Viscosity, Krebs-Stormer, 77 F, KU
 65-96
 VOC Content, lb/gal , max.
 3.50
 Fineness of Grind, Hegeman Gage, min.
 6
 Sag Resistance, Leneta Anti-Sag Meter, mils wet, min.
 8
 Dry to Touch, hours, max.
 4
 Dry to Handle, hours, max.
 8
 
 1045.5.3 Packaging and Labe ling. Packaging and labeling shall be in accordance with Sec 1045.2.3.
 1045.5.4 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Manufacturer and brand name approval shall be in
 accordance with Sec 1045.4.4 or Sec 1045.4.5. If approval is requested under Sec 1045.4.5, the accelerated
 weathering requirements stated in Sec 1045.4.4 will apply. T he manufacturer shall provide documentation
 identifying specific products evaluated, along with the manufacturer ’s code numbers and/or report code
 numbers.
 1045.6 Wate rborne Acrylic Syste m H Inte rme diate and Finish Coating.
 1045.6.1 De scription. T he intermediate coating shall be a single component waterborne acrylic
 compatible as a coating over high solids inorganic zinc primers. T he finish coating shall be a single
 component waterborne acrylic suitable for use over a waterborne acrylic intermediate coating. T he finish
 coating shall cure to a tough, abrasion resistant surface that performs well in weathering exposures. T he
 gray finish coat shall cure to a semi-gloss finish and the brown finish coat shall cure to a low-gloss finish.
 1045.6.2 Mixe d Coating. T he color of the intermediate coat shall be gray (Federal Standard 595b No.
 26373) or brown (Federal Standard 595b No. 30045) unless otherwise specified. T he color of the
 intermediate coat will normally be required to match the color of the finish coat. T he mixed coating
 properties shall be as follows:
 Waterborne Acrylic System H Intermediate and Finish Coating
 Physical Property
 Requirement
 Gray Brown
 Color, Finish Coat, Federal Standard 595b
 26373 30045
 Viscosity, Krebs-Stormer, 77 F, KU
 80-100
 VOC Content, lb/gal, max.
 3.50
 Fineness of Grind, Hegeman Gage, min.
 7
 Sag Resistance, Leneta Anti-Sag Meter, mils wet, min.
 8
 Dry to Handle, hours, max.
 2
 
 1045.6.3 Packaging and Labe ling. Packaging and labeling shall be in accordance with Sec 1045.2.3.
 1045.6.4 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Prior to approval and use of waterborne acrylic
 intermediate and finish coats, the manufacturer shall obtain manufacturer and brand name approval in
 
 624
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 accordance with Sec 1045.4.4 or Sec 1045.4.5, except that, after the 4000 hour testing for accelerated
 weathering resistance, the Federal Standard 595b 30045 (brown) color of the finish coat shall show a
 difference in color of no greater than 4 ∆E when compared to the control panel. If approval is requested
 under Sec 1045.4.5, the accelerated weathering requirements stated in Sec 1045.4.4 will apply. T he
 manufacturer shall provide documentation identifying specific products evaluated, along with the
 manufacturer ’s code numbers and/or report code numbers.
 1045.7 Polysiloxane Syste m I Finish Coating.
 1045.7.1 De scription. T he coating shall be a multiple-component, Polysiloxane suitable for use over High
 Solids Inorganic Zinc, or High Solids Epoxy Intermediate Coating. T he coating shall cure to a semi-gloss to
 high gloss, abrasion resistant surface and shall provide an easily cleanable finish.
 1045.7.2 Mixe d Coating. T he mixed coating properties shall be as follows:
 Polysiloxane System I Finish Coating
 Physical Property
 Requirement
 Color, Federal Standard 595b
 Gray 26373
 Brown 30045
 Viscosity, Krebs-Stormer, 77 F, KU
 Within Manufactures submitted range
 VOC Content, lb/gal, max
 2.0
 Fineness of Grind, Hegeman Gage, min.
 6
 Sag Resistance, Leneta Anti-Sag Meter, mils wet, min. 8+
 Dry to Touch, hours, max.
 3
 Dry to Handle, hours, max.
 8
 
 1045.7.3 Packaging and Labe ling. Packaging and labeling shall be in accordance with Sec 1045.2.3.
 1045.7.4 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Manufacturer and brand name approval shall be in
 accordance with Sec 1045.4.4 or Sec 1045.4.5. If approval is requested under Sec 1045.4.5, the accelerated
 weathering requirements stated in Sec 1045.4.4 will apply. T he manufacturer shall provide documentation
 identifying specific products evaluated, along with the manufacturer ’s code number and/or report code
 numbers.
 1045.8 Aluminum Epoxy-Mastic Prime r.
 1045.8.1 De scription. T he coating shall be a one-coat system aluminum epoxy-mastic primer designed
 for adhesion to rusty steel, aged galvanized steel and other uses. Aluminum epoxy-mastic primer will not be
 permitted for use on any surface that is to be in contact with fresh concrete. T he epoxy-mastic shall be a
 two-component, modified epoxy-primer containing metallic-aluminum flake.
 1045.8.2 Pigme nt. T he primary pigment shall be metallic-aluminum.
 1045.8.3 Ve hicle . T he vehicle shall be an epoxy-type. T he curing agent shall have suitable insensitivity to
 moisture to allow trouble-free application.
 1045.8.4 Mixe d Coating.
 1045.8.4.1 T he coating shall be well-ground, not caked, skinned or badly settled in the container. T he
 mixed coating, when applied in one coat, shall be capable of achieving 5 mils dry film thickness without
 runs or sags.
 1045.8.4.2 T he mixed coating properties shall be as follows:
 Aluminum Epoxy-Mastic Primer
 Physical Property
 Requirement
 Dry to touch, hours, max. 24
 5a
 VOC Content, lb/gal, max. 3.50
 Dry hard, days, max.
 a When
 
 air-cured at a temperature of 75 F
 
 625
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 or above to a hard, tough film by evaporation
 of solvent and chemical reaction.
 1045.8.5 Re sistance Te sts. Test panels of steel in accordance with AST M D 609, and having dimensions
 of 2 x 5 x 1/8 inch shall be prepared by sandblasting all surfaces to a white metal condition in accordance
 with Structural Steel Painting Council SP5 (SSPC-SP5-82). T he cleaned panels shall then be exposed to
 outdoor weather for 30 days or until uniform rusting occurs. T he panel shall then be hand cleaned with a
 wire brush in accordance with SSPC-SP2-82. A 6-mil dry coating of the epoxy-mastic shall then be applied
 in one coat in accordance with the manufacturer's current recommendations. T he coating shall be cured as
 recommended by the manufacturer. Fresh Water, Salt Water, and Weathering and Salt Fog resistance tests,
 as detailed herein, shall be performed on one or more test panels. T he material will not be approved if any
 individual test panel fails any of the resistance tests specified herein.
 1045.8.5.1 Fre sh Wate r Re sistance . Panels shall be scribed down to base metal with an "X" of at least 2inch legs, and shall be immersed in fresh tap water at 75 ± 5 F. T he panels shall show no rusting, blistering
 or softening beyond 1/16 inch from the scribe mark, when examined after 30 days. Discoloration of the
 coating will be permitted.
 1045.8.5.2 Salt Wate r Re sistance . Panels shall be scribed down to base metal with an "X" of at least 2inch legs and immersed in five percent sodium chloride at 75 ± 5 F. T he panels shall show no rusting,
 blistering or softening beyond 1/16 inch from the scribe mark upon examination after 7, 14 and 30 days.
 Discoloration of the coating will be permitted. T he sodium chloride solution shall be replaced with fresh
 solution after each examination.
 1045.8.5.3 We athe ring and Salt Fog Re sistance . Panels shall be tested in the weatherometer in
 accordance with AST M G 154 QUV (Fluorescent UV-Condensation Tape using Type A Lamps) for 300
 hours using a test cycle consisting of four hours light followed by four hours condensation. After this
 period, the panels shall be removed and scribed with an "X" of at least 2-inch legs down to base metal. T he
 test panels shall then be tested in accordance with AST M B 117. After 1,000 hours of continuous exposure,
 the coating shall show no loss of bond, nor shall the coating show rusting or blistering beyond 1/16 inch
 from the center of the scribe mark.
 1045.8.6 Packaging and Labe ling. Packaging and labeling shall be labeled in accordance with Sec
 1045.2.3.
 1045.8.7 Approval and Pre qualification.
 1045.8.7.1 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Prior to approval and use of the epoxy-mastic
 primer, the manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a one-gallon sample of the coating and
 a certified test report from an approved independent testing laboratory showing specific test results
 conforming to all quantitative and resistance test requirements of these specifications. T he certified test
 report shall contain the exact ratio, by weight, of the pigment component to the vehicle component of
 the epoxy-mastic used for the tests, the lot tested, the manufacturer's name, brand name of the epoxymastic, and date of manufacture. In addition, the manufacturer shall submit a complete set of tested panels
 that have undergone each required resistance test. T he set of panels submitted shall include one untested
 control panel that has been prepared in accordance with Sec 1045.8.5. Upon approval by Construction and
 Materials of this certified test report, further resistance tests will not be required of that manufacturer for
 that brand name of epoxy-mastic primer, except as noted. New certified test results shall be submitted any
 time the manufacturing process or the epoxy-mastic formulation is changed, and may be required by the
 engineer when sampling and testing of material offered for use indicates nonconformance to any of the
 requirements specified herein.
 1045.8.7.2 Final Acce ptance . Final acceptance of the epoxy-mastic primer will be based on a
 manufacturer's certification submitted by the contractor to the engineer and on results of tests conducted
 on samples of the material. Each lot of each component will be sampled and tested prior to approval or use
 of the material.
 1045.9 Gray Epoxy-Mastic Prime r.
 
 626
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1045.9.1 De scription. T his specification covers a one-coat gray epoxy-mastic primer system designed for
 adhesion to rusty steel, aged galvanized steel and other uses, including uses in contact with freshly poured
 Portland cement concrete. T he epoxy-mastic shall be a multiple-component modified epoxy containing
 gray pigmentation, and shall be in accordance with the requirements specified herein.
 1045.9.2 Pigme nt. T he pigmentation shall be any pigment or combination of pigments formulated to
 offer the intended protective properties to the cured coating, and shall be totally non-reactive to the
 constituents contained in both cured and uncured Portland cement concrete.
 1045.9.3 Ve hicle . T he vehicle shall be an epoxy type. T he curing agent shall have suitable insensitivity to
 moisture to allow trouble-free application.
 1045.9.4 Mixe d Coating.
 1045.9.4.1 T he provisions of Sec 1045.8.4.1 will apply.
 1045.9.4.2 T he mixed coating properties shall be as follows:
 G ray Epoxy-Mastic Primer
 Physical Property
 Requirement
 Color, Federal Standard 595b
 Gray 26373
 Viscosity, (Krebs-Stormer, 25 C) KU
 90 - 120
 Volatile Organic Content, lb/gal, max.
 3.50
 Dry to touch, hours, max.
 24
 Dry hard, days, max.
 
 7a
 
 a When
 
 air-cured at a temperature of 75 F or above
 to a hard, tough film by evaporation of solvent and
 chemical reaction.
 1045.9.5 Re sistance Te sts. Test requirements and approval criteria shall be in accordance with Sec
 1045.8.5.
 1045.9.6 Packaging and Labe ling. Packaging and labeling shall be in accordance with Sec 1045.2.3.
 1045.9.7 Approval and Pre qualification.
 1045.9.7.1 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Manufacturer and brand name approval shall be
 in accordance with Sec 1045.8.7.1.
 1045.9.7.2 Final Acce ptance . Final acceptance will be in accordance with Sec 1045.8.7.2.
 1045.10 Calcium Sulfonate Syste m.
 1045.10.1 De scription. T his specification covers calcium sulfonate sealer, calcium sulfonate primer and
 various colors of calcium sulfonate topcoat paints for steel. T he color of topcoat will be specified in the
 contract and shall be in accordance with all requirements specified herein.
 1045.10.1.1 T he primary resin used to manufacture each coat of the calcium sulfonate system shall be a
 modified overbased crystalline calcium sulfonate that creates a highly polar complex capable of protecting
 the underlying steel from corrosion. In addition to the calcium sulfonate complex, the paint shall contain
 film forming oleoresinous compounds that act to reduce tack in the dry film.
 1045.10.1.2 T he coating material shall be uniform, stable in storage, and free from grit and coarse
 particles.
 1045.10.2 Calcium Sulfonate Rust Pe ne trating Se ale r.
 1045.10.2.1 Ge ne ral. T he sealer, after allowing a minimum drying time, may be recoated with an
 approved primer or topcoat. T he sealer will be suitable for any steel structure that has developed pack
 
 627
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 rusting in overlapping steel plates, joints or at bolted areas. T his coating shall be used on in-place structures
 as part of a long-term maintenance program, and as such shall be applied in accordance with SSPC-PA1,
 Shop, Field and Maintenance Painting.
 1045.10.2.2 Prope rtie s. T he mixed coating properties shall be as follows:
 Calcium Sulf onate Rust Penetrating Sealer
 Physical Property
 Requirement
 Color
 Red iron oxide
 Modified Crystalline Overbased
 Calcium Sulfonate,
 15
 percent by weight, min.
 Coarse P articles and Skins
 as retained on No. 325
 1.0
 (45µm) mesh sieve, percent, max.
 Viscosity, #4 Ford Cup, Seconds
 50 - 70
 VOC Content, lbs/gal., max.
 3.5
 Drying Time, hours to recoat
 2-6
 Flash P oint, F, max
 104
 Salt Fog Resistance, 500 hours
 No more than 1%
 (Coating applied at 1-2 mils
 rust undercutting,
 dry film over SSP C-SP 5
 blistering or peeling.
 cold rolled steel)
 
 1045.10.3 Calcium Sulfonate /Alkyd Prime r.
 1045.10.3.1 Ge ne ral. T his primer shall be used in non-abrasion exposures to provide a firm, corrosion
 resistant, highly adherent film. T his primer may be used for in-place structures but shall not be used as a
 shop-applied primer.
 1045.10.3.2 Prope rtie s. T he mixed coating properties shall be as follows:
 Calcium Sulf onate/Alkyd Primer
 Physical Property
 Requirement
 Color
 Red iron oxide
 Modified Crystalline Overbased Calcium Sulfonate,
 15
 percent by weight, min.
 Coarse P articles and Skins as retained on No. 325
 1.0
 mesh sieve, percent, max.
 Viscosity, 77 F, KU
 90 – 120
 VOC Content, lbs/gal, max.
 3.50
 Fineness of Grind, Hegman Units, min.
 5
 Drying Time, Hours
 (3 to 4 Mil Dry Film):
 Dust Dry
 1-4
 Track Free
 5 - 12
 Dry Firm
 24 - 48
 Sag Resistance, Mils
 12+
 Salt Spray Resistance, 1500 hours
 No more than 1 %
 (4 mil dry film over SSP -SP -5
 under-cutting,
 blasted cold rolled steel
 blistering or peeling.
 – 1 to 2 mil profile)
 
 1045.10.4 Calcium Sulfonate /Alkyd Topcoat.
 1045.10.4.1 Ge ne ral. Calcium sulfonate/alkyd topcoat shall be a medium to light gray, brown, green or
 tan low-gloss coating as specified in the contract for use over calcium sulfonate/alkyd penetrating sealer or
 calcium sulfonate/alkyd primer. T his paint shall be used as a topcoat for a calcium sulfonate/alkyd corrosion
 inhibitive primer, and shall be applied in accordance with SSPC-PA 1, Shop, Field, and Maintenance
 Painting. T he topcoat may be used for in-place structures and shall not be used as a shop-applied finish.
 1045.10.4.2 Prope rtie s. T he mixed coating properties shall be as follows:
 
 628
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 Calcium Sulf onate/Alkyd Topcoat
 Physical Property
 Requirement
 B rown G ray
 Tan
 G reen
 Color, Federal Standard 595b
 30045 26373 23522 24260
 Modified Crystalline
 Overbased Calcium
 15
 Sulfonate, per cent
 by weight, min.
 Coarse P articles and Skins
 as retained on No. 325
 1.0
 mesh sieve, percent, max.
 Viscosity, 77 F, KU
 90-130
 Fineness of Grind,
 5
 Hegman Units, min.
 Drying Time, 2-3 mils , hours
 Dust Dry
 1-4
 Track Free
 5 - 12
 Dry Firm
 24 – 48
 VOC Content, lbs/gal, max.
 3.5
 Sag Resistance, Mils
 12+
 QUV Weathering Resistance, 1000 hrs.
 No excessive chalking, blistering, or
 (4 mil dry film over SSP -SP -5 blasted
 change in color.
 cold rolled steel - 1-2 mil profile)
 Salt Spray Resistance, 1000 hrs
 (4 mil dry film over SSP -SP -5
 No more than 1 % rust under-cutting,
 blasted cold rolled steel – 1-2 mil
 blistering or peeling.
 profile)
 
 1045.10.5 Te st Me thods. T he test methods used to verify compliance with the properties specified in Secs
 1045.10.2, 1045.10.3 and 1045.10.4 shall be as follows:
 American Standards f or Testing and Materials (ASTM)
 G154
 P ractice for Operating Light- and Water-Exposure Apparatus
 B117
 Salt Spray (Fog) Testing
 D562
 Consistency of P aints Using the Stormer Viscometer
 D1200
 Viscosity of P aints, Varnishes and Lacquers by Ford Viscosity Cup
 D1210
 Fineness of Dispersion of P igment-Vehicle Systems
 D1475
 Density of P aint, Varnish, Lacquer and Related P roducts
 D3278
 Flash P oint of Liquids by Seta Flash Closed Tester
 D3960
 VOC Content of P aints
 Federal Test Method Standard No. 141
 Method 4061 Drying Time
 Method 4494 Sag Test (multi-notch blade)
 
 1045.10.6 Pigme nt Se ttle me nt. T he paint shall have perfect suspension (10 rating) when tested as
 specified in AST M D 869, when stored for six months.
 1045.10.7 Working Prope rtie s. T he paint shall be uniform and easily spray-applied when tested in
 accordance with Federal Standard No.141, Method 4331. T he primer and topcoat shall show no streaking,
 running or sagging after drying.
 1045.10.8 Storage . T he paint shall show no thickening, curdling, gelling or hard caking when tested as
 specified in Federal Standard No.141, Method 3011 after storage for six months from date of delivery in
 tightly covered containers at a temperature of at least 50 F and no more than 110 F.
 1045.10.9 Packaging and Labe ling. Packaging and labeling shall be in accordance with Sec 1045.2.3.
 1045.10.10 Approval and Pre qualification.
 1045.10.10.1 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Prior to approval and use of the calcium
 sulfonate coating system, the manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a one-gallon sample
 of each coat of the proposed coating system. T he manufacturer shall also submit a certified test report
 from an approved independent laboratory showing specific test results as follows:
 
 629
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (a) Calcium Sulfonate Penetrating Sealer. Salt spray resistance of steel panels prepared and tested
 in accordance with Sec 1045.10.2.2.
 (b) Calcium Sulfonate Primer. Salt spray resistance of steel panels prepared and tested in
 accordance with Sec 1045.10.3.2.
 (c) Calcium Sulfonate Topcoat. Salt spray resistance and QUV weathering resistance in accordance
 with Sec 1045.10.4.2.
 1045.10.10.2 Final Acce ptance . Final acceptance of calcium sulfonate penetrating sealer, calcium
 sulfonate primer and calcium sulfonate topcoat will be based on the manufacturer ’s certification submitted
 by the contractor to the engineer, and on results of tests conducted on samples of the material. Each lot
 will be sampled and tested prior to approval and use.
 
 630
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1046
 PIPE LINER
 1046.1 Scope . T his specification covers material requirements for pipe liner.
 1046.2 Mate rial. Pipe liner shall be in accordance with one of the following.
 (a) HDPE pipe in accordance with AST M F 714, maximum DR 32.5.
 (b) HDPE pipe in accordance with AST M D 3350 cell classification 345464C. T his pipe liner shall
 have approved dimensions on file with Construction and Materials.
 (c) HDPE pipe in accordance with AST M F 894 open profile, Class RSC 100 or RSC 160.
 (d) PVC pipe in accordance with AST M F 949, except that the PVC pipe and fittings shall be made
 of a PVC compound having a minimum call classification of 12454B, in accordance with AST M D
 1784. T he joining method for PVC pipe shall be by elastomeric material in accordance with
 AST M F 949.
 1046.3 Pipe Marking. Each length of pipe liner furnished shall be permanently marked by the
 manufacturer with the manufacturer's name and applicable AST M designation.
 1046.4 Ce rtification and Acce ptance . T he contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification to the
 engineer that the pipe liner was manufactured, tested, and is in accordance with this specification.
 Acceptance of the material will be based on the manufacturer's certification and statement, pipe liner
 identification markings and upon the results of such tests as may be performed by the engineer.
 1046.5 Inspe ction.
 1046.5.1 T he engineer may inspect the fabricated pipe liner at the manufacturing plant, intermediate
 distribution point or destination. T he manufacturer shall furnish to the engineer an itemized statement of
 the sizes and lengths of pipe liner in each shipment. T he engineer shall have access to the manufacturing
 plant or intermediate distribution point for inspection. Each facility shall provide the means to safely
 inspect all aspects of production or storage. Any previously rejected pipe liner included in a later lot will be
 cause for rejection of the entire lot. A lot will be defined as all the material presented for inspection at one
 time.
 1046.5.2 Inspection will include an examination of the pipe liner for markings, variance from specified
 diameter, net length of fabricated pipe liner, and any evidence of poor workmanship. T he inspection may
 include taking samples.
 1046.6 Re je ction.
 1046.6.1 Any individual section of pipe liner failing to meet the marking, diameter, length or workmanship
 requirements of these specifications will be rejected.
 1046.6.2 If a pipe liner fails to meet the requirements, the pipe liner sampled will be rejected and the lot
 will be resampled. A resample will be of the same size as the original sample. T he resample shall comply in
 all respects or the entire shipment will be rejected.
 
 631
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1047
 PO LYETHYLENE CULVERT PIPE
 1047.1 Scope . T his specification covers polyethylene culvert pipe used for the construction of culverts
 and other uses specified in the contract documents.
 1047.2 Basis of Acce ptance . Acceptance of polyethylene culvert pipe will be based on the pipe being
 provided by a qualified manufacturer, certification, manufacturer quality control documentation,
 identification markings and tests on samples of the material as required by the engineer.
 1047.3 Mate rial. Polyethylene culvert pipe, couplings and fittings shall be in accordance with AASHT O
 M 294 for corrugated or AASHT O MP 20 for steel reinforced. In case of conflict with AASHT O M 294 or
 AASHT O MP 20, these specifications shall govern.
 1047.3.1 Section properties shall be within the following limits:
 Corrugated
 Minimum
 Effective P ipe Wall P ipe Wall
 Nominal P ipe Wall Centroid to Moment of Area
 Size
 Area
 Inside Face Inertia
 Ratio a
 S
 A eff
 yc
 I
 A eff / A g
 (in.)
 (in.)
 (in.4/in.)
 (in.2/in.)
 12
 15
 18
 24
 30
 36
 42
 48
 60
 a
 b
 
 0.163
 0.202
 0.209
 0.233
 0.2330
 0.294
 0.331
 0.323
 0.438
 
 0.382
 0.413
 0.569
 0.669
 0.757
 1.058
 1.140
 1.095
 1.477
 
 0.0313
 0.0465
 0.0653
 0.1317
 0.2415
 0.3153
 0.5395
 0.4682
 0.8150
 
 0.699
 0.768
 0.749
 0.667
 0.816
 0.683
 0.693
 0.681
 0.751
 
 Maximum
 Extreme Inside Outside
 Fiber Diameter Diameter
 Di
 Do
 Ratio b
 yc / c
 (in.)
 (in.)
 0.494
 0.447
 0.554
 0.552
 0.448
 0.588
 0.564
 0.543
 0.766
 
 12.02
 14.83
 17.83
 23.71
 29.46
 35.44
 40.98
 47.12
 58.90
 
 14.60
 17.82
 21.42
 27.98
 34.98
 41.92
 48.18
 54.34
 66.97
 
 Ag equals gross area of pipe wall per unit length of pipe (in 2/in.).
 c equals the distance from the pipe wall centroid to the outermost fiber (in.).
 
 Steel Reinf orced
 Minimum
 Maximum
 Nominal
 Rib Radius of
 Wall
 Steel
 Moment
 of
 Inertia
 Rib
 Width/
 Size Wall Steel Area
 Gyration
 I
 Thickness Ratio
 S
 r
 A (in.2/ft)
 b/t
 (in.4/in.)
 (in.)
 (in.)
 24
 0.348
 0.00063
 0.144
 8.97
 30
 0.344
 0.00086
 0.170
 10.03
 36
 0.404
 0.00122
 0.187
 10.36
 42
 0.461
 0.00152
 0.195
 9.91
 48
 0.379
 0.00218
 0.257
 11.90
 60
 0482
 0.00352
 0.290
 11.88
 
 1047.3.2 T he pipe shall be Type S and not be perforated unless specified otherwise.
 1047.3.3 Field joints shall provide circumferential and longitudinal strength to maintain the pipe
 alignment, prevent separation of pipe and prevent infiltration of fill material. Coupling bands, if used, shall
 be of the same base material as the pipe. Corrugations in the bands shall have the same configuration as the
 corrugations in the pipe ends being connected. Prior to use, the design of coupling bands and fastening
 devices shall be submitted to and approved by Construction and Materials. Final acceptance of coupling
 bands and fastening devices will be based on field performance.
 1047.3.4 T he manufacturer shall provide to the engineer an itemized statement of the sizes, section
 properties and lengths of pipe in each shipment.
 
 632
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1047.3.5 Pipe may be fabricated using English units of measurement. Pipe fabricated using English
 measurements shall meet the diameter dimensions shown on the plans. Pipe tolerances will be in
 accordance with AASHT O M 294 or AASHT O MP 20 .
 1047.4 Sampling, Te sting and Acce ptance Proce dure s. All manufacturers furnishing pipe meeting the
 requirements of AASHT O M 294,for MoDOT projects shall be qualified as described herein. All
 manufacturers furnishing pipe meeting the requirements of AASHT O MP 20 for MoDOT projects shall
 meet the quality control and assurance requirements of the appendix section in MP 20 and these
 specifications. All pipes will be subject to inspection by the engineer at the source of manufacture, at an
 intermediate shipping terminal or at destination. T he engineer shall be allowed unlimited access to all
 facilities and records as required to conduct inspection and sampling in accordance with Sec 106.
 1047.4.1 Application for Placement on Qualified List. To become qualified to furnish pipe meeting
 AASHT O M 294, a written request shall be sent by the manufacturer to Construction and Materials, and
 shall include the following information:
 (a) A copy of the manufacturer ’s current National Product Evaluation Program(NT PEP)
 certification.
 (b) T he pipe manufacturer ’s certified analysis certificate setting forth the name or brand of pipe
 to be furnished, the specified type, category, grade and class of polyethylene compounds. T he
 certificate shall be sworn for the manufacturer by a person having legal authority to bind the
 company. T he certificate shall have attached a certified test report from an approved independent
 testing laboratory showing specific results of tests performed on each diameter pipe to be
 furnished, conforming to all requirements of these specifications. Pipes shall be randomly selected
 for test by the independent testing laboratory and shall be representative of that manufacturer's
 pipe.
 (c) A guarantee that all pipe furnished shall be in accordance with the specification requirements,
 shall bear a suitable identification brand or mark and shall be replaced without cost to the
 Commission when not in accordance with the specified requirements. T he guarantee shall be
 worded such that the guarantee will remain in effect as long as the manufacturer continues to
 furnish material. T he manufacturer shall conduct tests and measurements as necessary to ensure
 the material produced complies with all specification requirements. T hese tests and measurements
 shall be identified by the identification symbols or code used on the pipe in a manner that will
 permit the manufacturer to produce specific reports showing test results representative of specific
 lots of polyethylene pipe. Copies of reports of these tests shall be kept on file and shall be
 submitted to the engineer upon request. T he brand shall be removed or obliterated by the
 manufacturer on all material where control tests, as outlined herein, are not in accordance with
 this specification.
 (d) Units of measurement, English or metric, used to fabricate the pipe.
 1047.4.2 Maintaining Q ualification. To maintain qualification to furnish pipe meeting AASHT O M
 294 , the manufacturer shall perform and maintain a quality control program in accordance with the
 NT PEP Certification Program. T he manufacturer ’s NT PEP certification shall be maintained. T he
 manufacturer shall maintain for three years a record of all test results, inspections and the bill of lading for
 each shipment of material used in the production of pipe and for each shipment of pipe. T he manufacturer
 shall notify Construction and Materials at least 24 hours prior to each shipment of pipe to a MoDOT
 project. Additional pipe may be considered part of the original shipment when the ordered quantity was
 underestimated or material was lost or damaged. A bill of lading in accordance with Sec 1047.6 shall be
 provided for each shipment of pipe.
 1047.4.3 Disqualification of a Manufacture r. A manufacturer may be disqualified to provide pipe for
 use on MoDOT projects based on the discretion of Construction and Materials, for reasons including, but
 not limited to, not maintaining NT PEP certification, failure of material to consistently meet
 specifications, falsification of documentation, misbranding of pipe, unsatisfactory performance in the field
 or for other reasons indicating lack of consistent material quality.
 
 633
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1047.4.3.1 In the case where a manufacturer loses NT PEP certification and was not disqualified for any
 other reason, reinstatement will be considered when the manufacturer is recertified by NT PEP.
 1047.4.3.2 A manufacturer will not be considered for reinstatement until after one year from the date of
 removal for falsification of documents.
 1047.4.3.3 T hree notices of failure to meet specification requirements within a 12-month period will be
 cause for disqualification of the manufacturer for one year, effective from the date of the third notice.
 1047.4.3.4 A manufacturer disqualified within one year of the end of a disqualification may be subject to
 permanent removal, with no application for reinstatement accepted for a period of three years.
 1047.4.4 Re instate me nt of a Manufacture r. Consideration of reinstatement of a manufacturer once
 disqualified will be no sooner than specified in Sec 1047.4.3, will require a written document from the
 manufacturer stating the reasons for disqualification and the action taken to correct those deficiencies,
 written concurrence from Construction and Materials that the problem has been suitably addressed,
 followed by a new application in accordance with Sec 1047.4.1.
 1047.4.5 Sampling of Mate rial. Random sampling of the pipe will be conducted by the engineer to
 verify pipe and material is in accordance with this specification. Samples of polyethylene pipe will be
 obtained from fabricated culvert sections in accordance with AASHT O M 294 or AASHT O MP 20 at a
 frequency determined by the engineer.
 1047.4.6 Inspe ction. Inspection will include an examination of the pipe for markings, deficiency in
 specified diameter, net length of fabricated pipe and evidence of poor workmanship. T he inspection may
 include taking samples.
 1047.4.7 Te sting. Specimen testing size and method of tests shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 294
 or AASHT O MP 20. T he contractor or manufacturer shall provide the equipment and personnel to cut a
 sample from a section of pipe. T he sample shall include the markings or a record of the markings for that
 section of pipe.
 1047.4.8 Unacce ptable Mate rial.
 1047.4.8.1 Any individual section of pipe failing to meet the marking, diameter, length or workmanship
 requirements of these specifications will be unacceptable. If 10 percent of the pipe in any lot fails to meet
 these requirements, the entire shipment of that pipe diameter may be rejected.
 1047.4.8.2 If a test specimen taken in accordance with Sec 1047.4.7 fails to be in accordance with
 AASHT O M 294 or AASHT O MP 20, the pipe sampled will be rejected, and the lot will be resampled. A
 resample will be from the same diameter of pipe as the original sample. T he resample shall be in
 accordance to these specifications or the entire shipment will be rejected.
 1047.5 MoDO T Ide ntification Numbe r. When the manufacturer contacts the engineer in accordance
 with Sec 1047.4.2, the engineer will assign a specific MoDOT identification number for each size of pipe in
 the shipment.
 1047.6 Bill of Lading. A bill of lading or delivery receipt for each shipment of pipe shall be furnished to
 the engineer at the shipping and destination points. T he bill of lading shall contain an itemized statement
 of the sizes and lengths of pipe, with the corresponding designated MoDOT identification number provided
 to the manufacturer for each size of pipe for that shipment. T he bill of lading shall contain a certified
 statement. T he certified statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the manufacturer and
 shall state the following:
 “ T his certifies that the pipe and bands in this shipment are in accordance with MoDOT specifications,
 were fabricated at an approved plant and were fabricated from the following brand names:”
 
 634
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1048
 PAVEMENT MARKING MATERIAL
 1048.1 Scope . T his specification covers all temporary pavement markings, permanent pavement
 markings and drop-on glass beads.
 1048.1.1 Ce rtification and Acce ptance . All material contained in Sec 1048 shall be in accordance with
 the following requirements.
 1048.1.1.1 To obtain approval of the material, the manufacturer shall submit material and application
 specifications, samples of the material, and a history of satisfactory use to Construction and Materials for
 testing and evaluation. T he sample quantity submitted shall be at the discretion of Construction and
 Materials. T he approval process shall not be initiated prior to obtaining the concurrence of Construction
 and Materials. Following testing and evaluation, satisfactory material will be placed on a qualified list.
 1048.1.1.2 For acceptance on a project, the contractor shall furnish to the engineer a manufacturer's
 certification stating the manufacturer and trade name, lot or batch number and that all material furnished is
 similar to the material originally qualified. Acceptance of the material will be based on the manufacturer's
 certification, the results of such tests that may be performed by the engineer and satisfactory performance
 in the field.
 1048.1.1.3 T he material may be inspected and sampled at the point of manufacture, at an intermediate
 shipping terminal or at destination. T he engineer shall be allowed access to all facilities and records as
 required to conduct inspection and sampling. T he contractor shall adequately mix the contents of all
 shipping containers prior to obtaining samples or transferring partial containers of material to tanks on the
 striping equipment.
 SECTIO N 1048.10 TEMPO RARY PAVEMENT MARKING MATERIALS.
 1048.10.1 Te mporary Paint Mate rials. T his specification covers all temporary paint materials. All
 materials contained in Sec 1048.20.1 may also be used as Temporary Paint Materials.
 1048.10.1.1 Cold We athe r Pave me nt Marking Paint.
 1048.10.1.1.1 Acrylic Copolyme r Fast Dry Pave me nt Marking Paint.
 1048.10.1.1.1.1 De scription. Acrylic copolymer fast dry pavement marking paint shall be capable of
 receiving and holding glass beads for producing retroreflective pavement marking.
 1048.10.1.1.1.2 Mate rial. T he paint shall contain no more than 3,200 ppm lead or more than 800 ppm
 chromium based on dry weight, and shall have limited VOC content as noted herein.
 1048.10.1.1.1.2.1 Ge ne ral. T he finished paint shall be formulated and manufactured from first-grade
 material and shall be a fast drying, solvent-based, acrylic copolymer resin type paint capable of
 withstanding air and roadway temperatures without bleeding, staining, discoloring or deforming. T he dried
 paint film shall be capable of maintaining original dimensions and placement without chipping, spalling or
 cracking. T he dry paint film shall not deteriorate because of contact with normal roadway chemicals or
 materials.
 1048.10.1.1.1.2.2 Durability Te sting. Determination of conformance to this specification will include,
 but will not be limited to, the evaluation of test data from NT PEP or other MoDOT approved facilities.
 T he maintained retroreflectivity and durability shall be in accordance with the following requirements after
 being installed on at least one NT PEP test deck in a northern, wet climate region for a minimum of six
 months, including December, January and February.
 1048.10.1.1.1.2.3 Maintaine d Re trore fle ctivity. Photometric quantity to be measured will be the
 coefficient of retroreflective luminance (RL) in accordance with the requirements of AST M E 1743 for
 15-meter geometry or AST M E 1710 for 30-meter geometry. T he average RL for concrete and bituminous
 surfaces shall be expressed in millicandelas per footcandle per square foot and shall be at least 100 for 15-
 
 635
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 meter geometry or 75 for 30-meter geometry, when measured in the wheel path area.
 1048.10.1.1.1.2.4 Durability. Paint shall have a durability rating of at least 4 for both concrete and
 bituminous surfaces when tested in the wheel path area of the NT PEP test deck.
 1048.10.1.1.1.3 Mixe d Paint.
 1048.10.1.1.1.3.1 T he mixed paint shall be strained before filling, using a screen or a sieving device no
 coarser than 40 mesh.
 1048.10.1.1.1.3.2 T he VOC content of the finished paint shall be less than 1.25 pounds of volatile organic
 matter per gallon of total non-volatile paint material when tested in accordance with AST M D 3960.
 1048.10.1.1.1.3.3 T he paint shall have the following physical properties.
 Property
 Requirement
 Viscosity, KU
 80 - 95
 Laboratory Dry Time, ASTM D 711, minutes, max.
 10
 
 1048.10.1.1.1.4 Color. For white, the color shall closely match Color Chip 37925 of Federal Standard
 595b. For yellow, the color shall closely match Color Chip 33538 of Federal Standard 595b. Color
 determination will be made for markings and the diffuse daytime color of the markings shall be in
 accordance with the below CIE Chromaticity coordinate limits. Color determination for liquid marking
 materials will be made over the black portion of a 2A or 5C Leneta Chart or equal, at least 24 hours after
 application of a 15-mil wet film. Color readings will be determined in accordance with the requirements of
 AST M E 1349 using CIE 1931 2-degree standard observer and CIE standard illuminant D65.
 CIE Chromaticity Coordinate Limits (Initial)
 1
 2
 3
 4
 Color
 x
 y
 x
 y
 x
 y
 x
 y
 White 0.334 0.357 0.334 0.317 0.297 0.357 0.297 0.317
 Yellow 0.531 0.483 0.531 0.429 0.471 0.483 0.471 0.429
 
 1048.10.1.1.1.4.1 Contrast Ratio. T he contrast ratio shall be a minimum of 0.98 when drawn down as a
 15-mil wet film on a 2A or 5C Leneta Chart or equal, and air-dried for 24 hours. T he contrast ratio shall be
 calculated as follows: Contrast ratio = Black/White.
 1048.10.1.1.1.4.2 Re fle ctance . T he daylight directional reflectance of a 15-mil wet film applied to a 2A
 or 5C Leneta Chart or equal and dried for a minimum of 24 hours shall be 84% minimum for the white
 paint and 50% minimum for the yellow paint.
 1048.10.1.1.1.5 Acce ptance .
 1048.10.1.1.1.5.1 Except as noted, each batch or lot of paint shall be sampled and approved by the
 engineer prior to use.
 1048.10.1.1.1.5.2 No paint shall be used that is more than 15 months old.
 1048.10.1.1.1.5.3 In addition to the requirements of Sec 1048.1.1, the certification supplied by the
 manufacturer shall include reference to the specific NT PEP test deck to which the paint formulation was
 applied, including NT PEP identification numbers and report numbers.
 1048.10.1.1.2 Cold We athe r Wate rborne Pave me nt Marking Paint.
 1048.10.1.1.2.1 De scription. T hese specifications cover waterborne traffic paint for application on
 bituminous or Portland cement concrete pavements by department-owned spray equipment at application
 temperatures of 35 to 150ºF (2 to 66ºC). T he paint shall be capable of receiving and holding glass beads for
 producing reflectorized traffic markings.
 
 636
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1048.10.1.1.2.2 Mate rials. T he paint shall not contain more than 500 ppm lead and/or more than 780
 ppm chromium based on dry weight and shall have limited Volatile Organic Content (VOC), as noted herein.
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.1 Acrylic Emulsion Polymer. T he acrylic emulsion polymer used in the manufacture of
 the paint shall be Dow Fastrack XSR or preapproved equivalent. Later generation acrylic emulsions may be
 substituted only after concurrence of the Chemical Laboratory Director.
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.2 Ge ne ral. T he finished paint shall be formulated and manufactured from first-grade
 materials and shall be a fast drying, water based, acrylic resin type paint capable of withstanding air and
 roadway temperatures without bleeding, staining, discoloring, or deforming. T he dried paint film shall be
 capable of maintaining its original dimensions and placement without chipping, spalling, or cracking. In
 addition, it shall not deteriorate because of contact with sodium chloride, calcium chloride, mild alkalies and
 acids, or other ice control materials, or oil, gasoline or diesel fuel drippings from vehicles.
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.3 Maintaine d re trore fle ctivity. Photometric quantity to be measured is coefficient of
 retroreflective luminance (RL) in accordance with the requirements of AST M E1710 for 30-meter
 geometry. T he average RL for concrete and asphalt surfaces shall be expressed in millicandelas per square
 meter per lux (milicandelas/m2/lux) and shall be at least 75 for 30 meter geometry, when measured in the
 wheel path area.
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4 Mixe d Paint. T he mixed paint shall conform to the following requirements.
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4.1 T he paint shall be strained before filling, using a screen or strainer not coarser than 40
 mesh or equivalent.
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4.2 T he volatile content of the finished paint shall contain less than 150 grams of volatile
 organic matter per liter in accordance with AST M D3960.
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4.3 T he paint shall have the following properties:
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4.3.1 Physical Properties.
 Property
 Weight per Gallon @77 F, lbs
 Viscosity, KU
 Grind (Hegman Gage), min.
 Laboratory Dry Time, ASTM D 711, minutes, max.
 Dry Through Time, minutes, max
 
 Requirement
 Report
 75-92
 3
 10
 150
 
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4.3.2 Color. For white the color shall closely match Color Chip 37925 of Federal
 Standard 595b. For yellow, the color shall closely match Color Chip 33538 of Federal Standard 595b. Color
 determination will be made for markings and the diffuse daytime color of the markings shall conform to
 the below CIE Chromaticity coordinate limits. Color determination for liquid marking materials will be
 made over the black portion of a 2A or 5C Leneta Chart (or equal) at least twenty-four (24) hours after
 application of a 15-mil wet film. Color readings will be determined in accordance with the requirements of
 AST M E1349 using CIE 1931 2º standard observer and CIE standard illuminant D65.
 CIE Chromaticity Coordinate Limits (Initial)
 1
 2
 3
 4
 x
 y
 x
 y
 x
 y
 x
 y
 White 0.334 0.357 0.334 0.317 0.297 0.357 0.297 0.317
 Yellow 0.531 0.483 0.531 0.429 0.471 0.483 0.471 0.429
 Color
 
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4.3.3 Fle xibility. T he paint shall show no cracking or flaking when tested in accordance
 with Federal Specification T T-P-1952B.
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4.3.4 Wate r Re sistance . T he paint shall show no cracking or flaking when tested in
 accordance with Federal Specification T T-P-1952B.
 
 637
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4.3.5 Fre e z e -Thaw Stability. T he paint shall show no coagulation or change in
 consistency greater than 10 Kreb Units, when tested in accordance with Federal Specification T T-P-1952B.
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4.3.6 He at Stability. T he paint shall show no coagulation, discoloration or change in
 consistency greater than 10 Kreb Units, when tested in accordance with Federal Specification T T-P-1952B.
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4.3.7 Dilution Te st. T he paint shall be capable of dilution with water at all levels without
 curdling or precipitation such that the wet paint can be readily cleaned up with water only.
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4.3.8 Storage Stability. After 30 days storage in three-quarters filled, closed container,
 the paint shall show no caking that cannot be readily remixed to a smooth, homogeneous state, no
 skinning, livering, curdling, or hard settling. T he viscosity shall not change more than 5(10) Kreb Units
 from the viscosity of the original sample.
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4.3.9 Contrast Ratio. T he minimum contrast ratio (hiding power) shall be 0.99 for
 White and 0.98 for Yellow when drawn down with a 0.015 film applicator on a 2A or 5CLeneta Chart (or
 equal) and air-dried for 24 hours. Contrast Ratio = Black/White.
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4.3.10 Re fle ctance . T he daylight directional reflectance of the white paint shall not be
 less than 87 percent and not less than 50 percent for yellow paint of a 15 mil wet film applied to a 2A or
 5C Leneta Chart (or equal). After drying for a minimum of 24 hours measure the reflectance of the paint
 over the black portion of the chart using colorimeter, AST M E 1347.
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4.3.11 Ble e ding. T he paint shall have a minimum-bleeding ratio of 0.97 when tested in
 accordance with Federal Specification T T-P-1952B. T he asphalt saturated felt shall conform to AST M D
 226 for Type I.
 1048.10.1.1.2.2.4.3.12 Dry Through Time . T he paint shall be applied to a non-absorbent substrate at a
 wet film thickness of 15 ± 1 mils and placed in a humidity chamber controlled at 90 ± 5 percent R.H. and
 72.5 ± 2.5ºF. T he dry through time shall be determined according to AST M D 1640.
 1048.10.1.1.2.5 Acce ptance . T he Missouri Department of T ransportation reserves the right to make field
 tests of material after receipt of bids, but prior to award to determine the paint's suitability for application
 in its equipment and for purposes of determining compliance with drying time requirements of this
 specification.
 1048.10.1.1.2.5.1 Stability in Storage . After storage for periods up to twelve (12) months from the date
 of manufacture, the paint shall comply with the following requirements: a) T he pigment shall not settle
 badly or cake in the container, nor shall the paint skin or thicken in storage sufficiently to cause an
 undesirable change in consistency, nor show spoilage. b) T he paint shall comply with all other provisions of
 these specifications and be capable of being re-dispersed with a paddle or mixer to a smooth uniform
 condition of usable consistency.
 1048.10.2 Te mporary Re movable Pave me nt Marking Tape .
 1048.10.2.1 Ge ne ral. Temporary removable pavement marking tape shall be capable of being removed
 and shall leave no objectionable or misleading image or damage to the pavement after removal.
 1048.10.2.2 T he tape shall have a minimum specific luminance as shown for White and Yellow per AST M
 D 4592, expressed as millicandelas/m2/lux. T he tape shall be applied to an 8 x 36-inch panel per
 instrument recommendation for pavement marking tape and measured in accordance with MoDOT Test
 Method T M 8 at prescribed CEN geometry.
 1048.10.2.3 Adhe sive . Tape shall have a pre-coated pressure sensitive adhesive requiring no activation
 procedures. T he adhesive shall be resistant to normal roadway chemicals or materials.
 1048.10.2.4 Durability. T he tape shall be weather-resistant and show no appreciable fading, lifting or
 shrinkage during the tape’s useful life. Samples of the tape applied to standard specimen plates and tested in
 accordance with Federal Test Method No. 141, Method 6192, for 1,000 cycles, using a CS-17 wheel and
 
 638
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1,000-gram load shall not expose the backing material over more than five percent of the abraded area.
 1048.10.3 Te mporary Non-Re movable Pave me nt Marking Tape .
 1048.10.3.1 Re fle ctance . T he tape shall have minimum specific luminance as shown for White and
 Yellow per AST M D 4592, expressed as millicandelas/m2/lux). T he tape shall be applied to an 8 in. x 36 in.
 panel per instrument recommendation for pavement marking tape and measured in accordance with
 MoDOT Test Method T M 8 at prescribed CEM geometry.
 1048.10.3.2 Adhe sive . Tape shall have pre-coated pressure sensitive adhesive requiring no activation
 procedures. T he adhesive shall be resistant to normal roadway chemicals or materials.
 1048.10.3.3 Durability. T he tape shall be weather-resistant and show no appreciable fading, lifting or
 shrinkage during the tape’s useful life. Samples of the tape applied to standard specimen plates and tested in
 accordance with Federal Test Method No. 141, Method 6192, for 1000 cycles, using a CS-17 wheel and
 1000-gram load shall not expose the backing material over more than five percent of the abraded area.
 1048.10.4 Te mporary Raise d Pave me nt Marke rs.
 1048.10.4.1 Ge ne ral. T he brand name and manufacturer shall be stamped or indelibly printed on each
 container.
 1048.10.4.2 Te mporary Raise d Pave me nt Marke rs. Markers shall consist of an L-shaped or T-shaped
 flexible polymer body with a minimum of 6.0 squre inches of AST M Type V reflective sheeting on both
 faces of the vertical section. T he marker base shall have affixed a pressure-sensitive adhesive, protected by
 a release paper, for application to the pavement surface. When required per Sec 620.10.5.3.2, a protective
 sleeve that prevents contamination of the reflective faces during pavement surface treatment operations
 shall be affixed to each marker in a minimum of two locations. T he protective sleeve shall be easily
 removable after the surface treatment operation is complete
 1048.20 PERMANENT PAVEMENT MARKING MATERIALS.
 1048.20.1 Pave me nt Marking Paint Mate rials.
 1048.20.1.1 Standard Acrylic Wate rborne Pave me nt Marking Paint.
 1048.20.1.1.1 De scription. Standard acrylic waterborne pavement marking paint shall be capable of
 receiving and holding glass beads for producing retroreflective pavement marking.
 1048.20.1.1.2 Mate rial. T he paint shall contain no more than 3200 ppm lead or more than 800 ppm
 chromium, based on dry weight.
 1048.20.1.1.2.1 Ge ne ral. T he finished paint shall be formulated and manufactured from quality material
 and shall be a fast-drying, water-based, acrylic resin-type paint capable of withstanding air and roadway
 temperatures without bleeding, staining, discoloring or deforming. T he dried paint film shall be capable of
 maintaining original dimensions and placement without chipping, spalling or cracking. T he dry paint film
 shall not deteriorate from contact with normal roadway chemicals or materials.
 1048.20.1.1.2.2 Acrylic Emulsion Polyme r. T he acrylic emulsion polymer used in the manufacture of
 the paint shall be Rohm & Haas E-2706, Dow DT 211 or equal. Later generation acrylic emulsions may be
 substituted as approved by the engineer.
 1048.20.1.1.2.3 Durability Te sting. T he provisions of Sec 1048.20.1.2.2.3 will apply.
 1048.20.1.1.2.3.1 Maintaine d Re trore fle ctivity. Photometric quantity to be measured will be the
 coefficient of retroreflective luminance (RL) in accordance with the requirements of AST M E 1743 for
 15-meter geometry or AST M E 1710 for 30-meter geometry. T he average RL for concrete and bituminous
 surfaces shall be expressed in millicandelas/lux/m2 and shall be at least 100 for 15-meter geometry or 75
 for 30-meter geometry, when measured in the wheel path area.
 
 639
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1048.20.1.1.2.3.2 Durability. Paint shall have a durability rating of at least 4 on both concrete and
 bituminous surfaces when tested in the wheel path area of the NT PEP test deck..
 1048.20.1.1.3 Mixe d Paint. T he provisions of Sec 1048.20.1.2.3 shall apply.
 1048.20.1.1.4 Acce ptance .
 1048.20.1.1.4.1 Except as noted, each batch or lot of paint shall be sampled and approved by the engineer
 prior to use.
 1048.20.1.1.4.2 No paint shall be used that is more than 15 months old.
 1048.20.1.1.4.3 In the addition to the requirements of Sec 1048.1.1, the certification supplied by the
 manufacture shall include reference to specific NT PEP test deck to which the paint formulation was
 applied, including NT PEP identification numbers and report numbers.
 1048.20.1.2 High Build Acrylic Wate rborne Pave me nt Marking Paint.
 1048.20.1.2.1 De scription. Acrylic waterborne pavement marking paint shall be capable of receiving and
 holding glass beads for producing retroreflective pavement marking.
 1048.20.1.2.2 Mate rial. T he paint shall contain no more than 3,200 ppm lead or more than 800 ppm
 chromium, based on dry weight.
 1048.20.1.2.2.1 Ge ne ral. T he finished paint shall be formulated and manufactured from quality material
 and shall be a fast-drying, water-based, acrylic resin-type paint capable of withstanding air and roadway
 temperatures without bleeding, staining, discoloring or deforming. T he dried paint film shall be capable of
 maintaining original dimensions and placement without chipping, spalling or cracking. T he dry paint film
 shall not deteriorate from contact with normal roadway chemicals or materials.
 1048.20.1.2.2.2 Acrylic Emulsion Polyme r. T he acrylic emulsion polymer used in the manufacture of
 the paint shall be Rohm & Haas HD-21, Dow DT 400 or equal.
 1048.20.1.2.2.3 Durability Te sting. Determination of conformance to this specification will include, but
 will not be limited to, the evaluation of test data from NT PEP or other MoDOT approved facilities. T he
 maintained retroreflectivity and durability shall be in accordance with the following requirements after
 being installed on at least one NT PEP test deck in a northern climate region for at minimum of six
 months, including December, January and February.
 1048.20.1.2.2.3.1 Maintaine d Re trore fle ctivity. Photometric quantity to be measured will be the
 coefficient of retroreflective luminance (RL) in accordance with the requirements of AST M E 1743 for
 15-meter geometry or AST M E 1710 for 30-meter geometry. T he average RL for concrete and bituminous
 surfaces shall be expressed in millicandelas per footcandle per square foot and shall be at least 100 for 15meter geometry or 75 for 30-meter geometry, when measured in the wheel path area.
 1048.20.1.2.2.3.2 Durability. Paint shall have a durability rating of at least 4 for both concrete and
 bituminous surfaces when tested in the wheel path area of the NT PEP test deck.
 1048.20.1.2.3 Mixe d Paint.
 1048.20.1.2.3.1 T he paint shall be strained before filling using a screen or a sieving device no coarser than
 40 mesh or equivalent.
 1048.20.1.2.3.2 T he volatile content of the finished paint shall contain less than 150 grams of volatile
 organic matter per liter in accordance with AST M D 3960.
 1048.20.1.2.3.3 T he paint shall have the following physical properties:
 
 640
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 Acrylic Waterborne Pavement Marking Paint Physical Properties
 Property
 Requirement
 Viscosity, 77 F, KU
 83-98
 Grind (Hegman Gage), minimum
 3
 Laboratory Dry Time, ASTM D 711, @ 15 mil, minutes, max.
 10
 Laboratory Dry Time, ASTM D 711, @ 25 mil, minutes, max.
 25
 Dry Through Time, minutes, max.
 150
 
 1048.20.1.2.3.3.1 Color. For white, the color shall closely match Color Chip 37925 of Federal Standard
 595b. For yellow, the color shall closely match Color Chip 33538 of Federal Standard 595b. Color
 determination will be made for markings and the diffuse daytime color of the markings shall be in
 accordance with the below CIE Chromaticity coordinate limits. Color determination for liquid marking
 material will be made over the black portion of a 2A or 5C Leneta Chart or equal, at least 24 hours after
 application of a 15-mil wet film. Color readings will be determined in accordance with the requirements of
 AST M E 1349 using CIE 1931 2-degree standard observer and CIE standard illuminant D65.
 CIE Chromaticity Coordinate Limits (Initial)
 1
 2
 3
 4
 Color
 x
 y
 x
 y
 x
 y
 x
 y
 White 0.334 0.357 0.334 0.317 0.297 0.357 0.297 0.317
 Yellow 0.531 0.483 0.531 0.429 0.471 0.483 0.471 0.429
 
 1048.20.1.2.3.3.2 Fle xibility. T he paint shall show no cracking or flaking when tested in accordance with
 Federal Specification T T-P-1952B.
 1048.20.1.2.3.3.3 Wate r Re sistance . T he paint shall conform to Federal Specification T T-P-1952B.
 T here shall be no blistering or appreciable loss of adhesion, softening or other deterioration after
 examination.
 1048.20.1.2.3.3.4 Fre e z e -Thaw Stability. T he paint shall show no coagulation or change in consistency
 greater than 10 Kreb Units when tested in accordance with Federal Specification T T-P-1952B.
 1048.20.1.2.3.3.5 He at Stability. T he paint shall show no coagulation, discoloration or change in
 consistency greater than 10 Kreb Units when tested in accordance with Federal Specification T T-P-1952B.
 1048.20.1.2.3.3.6 Dilution Te st. T he paint shall be capable of dilution with water at all levels without
 curdling or precipitation such that the wet paint can be readily cleaned up with water only.
 1048.20.1.2.3.3.7 Storage Stability. After 30 days of storage in a 3/4 filled, closed container, the paint
 shall show no caking that cannot be readily remixed to a smooth, homogeneous state, and shall show no
 skinning, livering, curdling or hard settling. T he viscosity shall change no more than 5 Kreb Units from the
 viscosity of the original sample.
 1048.20.1.2.3.3.8 Contrast Ratio. T he minimum contrast ratio (hiding power) shall be 0.96 when drawn
 down with a 0.005 bird film applicator on a 2A or 5C Leneta Chart or equal and air-dried for 24 hours. T he
 contrast ratio shall be calculated as follows:
 Contrast Ratio = Black/White.
 1048.20.1.2.3.3.9 Re fle ctance . T he daylight directional reflectance of a 15-mil wet film, applied to a 2A
 or 5C Leneta Chart or equal and dried for a minimum of 24 hours, shall be no less than 84 percent for the
 white paint and no less than 50 percent for the yellow paint.
 1048.20.1.2.3.3.10 Ble e ding. T he paint shall have a minimum bleeding ratio of 0.97 when tested in
 accordance with Federal Specification T T-P-1952B. T he asphalt saturated felt shall be in accordance with
 AST M D 226 for Type I.
 1048.20.1.2.3.3.11 Dry Through Time . T he paint shall be applied to a non-absorbent substrate at a wet
 film thickness of 15 ± 1 mil and placed in a humidity chamber controlled at 90 ± 5 percent relative
 humidity and 72.5 ± 2.5 F. T he dry through time shall be determined in accordance with AST M D 1640,
 
 641
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 except that the pressure exerted shall be the minimum needed to maintain contact with the thumb and film.
 1048.20.1.2.4 Acce ptance .
 1048.20.1.2.4.1 Except as noted, each batch or lot of paint shall be sampled and approved by the engineer
 prior to use.
 1048.20.1.2.4.2 No paint shall be used that is more than 15 months old.
 1048.20.1.2.4.3 In addition to the requirements of Sec 1048.1.1, the certification supplied by the
 manufacturer shall include reference to the specific NT PEP test deck to which the paint formulation was
 applied, including NT PEP identification numbers and report numbers.
 1048.20.2 Durable Pave me nt Marking Mate rials.
 1048.20.2.1 Plural Compone nt Pave me nt Marking Mate rials.
 1048.20.2.1.1 Epoxy Pave me nt Marking Mate rials.
 1048.20.2.1.1.1 Fast Cure Epoxy Pave me nt Marking Mate rials.
 1048.20.2.1.1.1.1 Ge ne ral. Epoxy pavement marking material shall not contain toxic heavy metals. T he
 material shall be two-component, 100 percent solids and formulated and tested to perform as a pavement
 marking material with glass beads applied to the surface. T he two components shall be epoxy resin and an
 amine curing agent.
 1048.20.2.1.1.1.2 Toxicity. Upon heating to application temperature, the material shall not release fumes
 that are toxic to persons or property. Upon curing, the material shall be completely inert, with all
 components fully reacted and environmentally benign.
 1048.20.2.1.1.1.3 No Track Time . T he material shall have a no-track time of 10 minutes or less, when
 mixed in the proper proportions and applied at a 25-mil wet film thickness at 75 ± 2 F with the proper
 application of glass beads and when tested in accordance with AST M D 711. T he material shall fully cure
 under a constant surface temperature of 32 F or above.
 1048.20.2.1.1.1.4 Adhe sion to Concre te . T he pavement marking material shall have a high degree of
 adhesion to the concrete surface such that there is a 100 percent concrete failure when tested in accordance
 with ACI 503, Appendix A.1. T he prepared specimens shall have a film thickness of 15 ± 1 mil and shall
 be applied to concrete with a minimum compressive strength of 4,000 psi. T he concrete surface shall be 90
 ± 2 F when the material is applied. T he applied material shall be cured for 72 hours at 75 ± 2 before
 performing the test.
 1048.20.2.1.1.1.5 Hardne ss. T he material shall have a minimum Shore D Hardness of 75 when tested in
 accordance with AST M D 2240.
 1048.20.2.1.1.1.6 Te nsile Stre ngth. T he material shall have a minimum tensile strength of 5,000 psi
 after 72 hours of cure at 75 ± 2 F when tested in accordance with AST M D 638.
 1048.20.2.1.1.1.7 Compre ssive Stre ngth. T he material shall have a minimum compressive strength of
 10,000 psi after 72 hours of cure at 75 ± 2 F when tested in accordance with AST M D 695.
 1048.20.2.1.1.1.8 Abrasion Re sistance . T he material shall have a maximum abrasion resistance of 150
 mg at 15 ± 1 mil thickness after 72 hours of cure and with a CS-17 wheel under a load of 1,000 grams for
 1,000 cycles, when tested in accordance with AST M C 501.
 1048.20.2.1.1.1.9 Ye llowne ss Inde x. T he material shall have a maximum yellowness index of 6 before
 the QUV test and a maximum of yellowness index of 23 after the 72-hour QUV test, when tested in
 accordance with AST M D 1925.
 
 642
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1048.20.2.1.1.1.10 Color. T he finished white color shall be free from tint, furnishing good opacity and
 visibility under both daylight and artificial light. T he finished yellow color shall closely match Federal Test
 Standard 595 - Color Chip Number 13538.
 1048.20.2.1.1.1.11 Drop-on Glass Be ads. Glass beads shall be in accordance with Sec 1048.30.
 1048.20.2.1.1.1.12 Q ualification. In addition to the requirements of Sec 1048.1.1, the material shall
 have been field tested at NT PEP test decks in a northern, wet climate region for a minimum of six months.
 T he maintained retroflectivity and durability shall be in accordance with the following requirements after
 being installed on at least one NT PEP test deck for a minimum of six months, including December, January
 and February.
 1048.20.2.1.1.1.12.1 Maintaine d Re trore fle ctivity. Photometric quantity to be measured will be the
 coefficient of retroreflective luminance (RL) in accordance with AST M E 1743 for 15-meter geometry or
 AST M E 1710 for 30-meter geometry. T he average RL for concrete and asphalt surfaces shall be expressed
 in millicandelas per footcandle per square foot and shall be at least 125 for 15-meter geometry or 100 for
 30-meter geometry, when measured in the wheel path area.
 1048.20.2.1.1.1.12.2 Durability. Paint shall have a durability rating of at least 5 for both concrete and
 asphalt surfaces when tested in the wheel path area of the NT PEP test deck.
 1048.20.2.1.1.1.13 Packaging. T he manufacturer's name and address, product name, color, manufacturing
 date, date of expiration and if the material is Part A or B shall be visible on the containers. In addition to
 the requirements of Sec 1048.1.1, the certification supplied by the manufacturer shall include reference to
 the specific NT PEP test deck to which the paint formulation was applied, including NT PEP identification
 numbers and report numbers.
 1048.20.2.1.2 Polyure a Pave me nt Marking Mate rial.
 1048.20.2.1.2.1 Polyure a Pave me nt Marking Mate rial. Polyurea pavement marking material shall not
 contain toxic heavy metals. It shall be two components, 100 percent solids, and formulated and tested to
 perform as a pavement marking material with glass beads applied to the surface.
 1048.20.2.1.2.2 Toxicity. Upon heating to application temperature, the material shall not release fumes
 that are toxic to persons or property. Upon curing, the material should be completely inert, with all
 components fully reacted and environmentally benign.
 1048.20.2.1.2.3 No Track Time . T he material shall have a no-track time of 10 minutes or less when
 mixed in the proper proportions and applied at 20 mils wet film thickness at 75 ± 2 F with the proper
 application of glass beads and when tested in accordance with AST M D 711. T he material shall fully cure
 under a constant surface temperature of 32 F or above.
 1048.20.2.1.2.4 Adhe sion to Concre te . T he pavement marking material shall have a high degree of
 adhesion to the concrete surface such that there is a 100 percent concrete failure when tested in accordance
 with ACI 503, Appendix A.1. T he prepared specimens shall have a film thickness of 15 ± 1 mils and be
 applied to concrete with a minimum compressive strength of 4,000 psi. T he concrete surface shall be 90 ±
 2 F when the material is applied. T he applied material shall be cured for 72 hours at 75 ± 2 F before
 performing the test.
 1048.20.2.1.2.5 Hardne ss. T he material shall have a minimum Shore D Hardness of between 70 and 100
 when tested in accordance with AST M D 2240.
 1048.20.2.1.2.6 Abrasion Re sistance . T he material shall have a maximum abrasion resistance of 150 mg
 at 15 ± 1 mils thickness after 72 hour curing time and with a CS-17 wheel under a load of 1,000 grams for
 1,000 cycles, when tested in accordance with AST M C 501.
 1048.20.2.1.2.7 Ye llowne ss Inde x. T he material shall have a maximum yellowness index of 6 before the
 QUV test and a maximum of 23 after the 72 hour QUV test, when tested in accordance with AST M D
 1925.
 
 643
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1048.20.2.1.2.8 Color. T he finished white color shall be free from tint, furnishing good opacity and
 visibility under both daylight and artificial light. T he finished yellow color shall be defined by Federal Test
 Standard 595 - Color Chip Number 13538, using Federal Tests Standard 141 (Method 4252).
 1048.20.2.1.2.9 Acce le rate d We athe ring. T he material shall have been field tested at NT PEP test decks
 for a minimum of six months. T he material shall have satisfactory results from the NT PEP test deck.
 1048.20.2.1.2.10 Drop-on Glass Be ads. Glass beads shall be in accordance with Sec 1048.30.
 1048.20.2.1.2.11 Q ualification. In addition to the requirements of Sec 1048.1.1, the material shall have
 been field tested at NT PEP test decks in a northern, wet climate region for a minimum of six months. T he
 maintained retroflectivity and durability shall be in accordance with the following requirements after being
 installed on at least one NT PEP test deck for a minimum of six months, including December, January and
 February.
 1048.20.2.1.2.11.1 Maintaine d Re trore fle ctivity. Photometric quantity to be measured will be the
 coefficient of retroreflective luminance (RL) in accordance with AST M E 1743 for 15-meter geometry or
 AST M E 1710 for 30-meter geometry. T he average RL for concrete and asphalt surfaces shall be expressed
 in millicandelas per footcandle per square foot and shall be at least 125 for 15-meter geometry or 100 for
 30-meter geometry, when measured in the wheel path area.
 1048.20.2.1.2.11.2 Durability. Paint shall have a durability rating of at least 5 for both concrete and
 asphalt surfaces when tested in the wheel path area of the NT PEP test deck.
 1048.20.2.1.2.12 Packing. T he pavement marking material shall be shipped to the job site in strong,
 substantial containers. T he manufacturer shall include the MSDS with each shipment. T he manufacturer's
 name and address, name of the product, lot number and/or batch number, color, tare weight, manufacturing
 date, date of expiration, mixing proportions and if it is Part A or B shall be contained on a label and/or
 painted on the containers.
 1048.20.2.2 Durable Pre forme d Pave me nt Marking Mate rials.
 1048.20.2.2.1 Cold Applie d Pre forme d Pave me nt Marking Tape Mate rials.
 1048.20.2.2.1.1 Application. After application, the tape shall be immediately ready to receive traffic.
 1048.20.2.2.1.2 Composition. Cold applied preformed pavement marking tape shall consist of a mixture
 of polymeric material and pigments with beads distributed throughout the cross-sectional area and with a
 reflective layer of glass beads embedded in the surface. T he marking shall be capable of adhering to
 bituminous or concrete surfaces by a flexible conforming backing. A primer may be required to precondition
 the pavement surface.
 1048.20.2.2.1.3 Dime nsions. T he marking tape as supplied shall be free of cracks, and have edges true,
 straight, and unbroken. T he actual width of the rolls of preformed tape shall be no less than the nominal
 (stated) width and no more than 1/8 in. greater than the nominal width. T he length shall be no less than
 the length stated.
 1048.20.2.2.1.4 Adhe sion. T he tape shall be supplied with a precoated factory-applied pressure sensitive
 adhesive. T he marking tape shall have minimum adhesion values as shown in table 2 of AST M D1000.
 1048.20.2.2.1.5 Color. T he white and yellow marking tape shall conform to the requirements of AST M
 D6628.
 1048.20.2.2.1.6 Re fle ctance . T he tape shall have a minimum specific luminance as shown for White and
 Yellow per AST M D 4505, expressed as millicandelas /m2/lux. T he tape shall be applied to an 8 x 36-inch
 panel per instrument recommendation for pavement marking tape and measured in accordance with
 MoDOT Test Method T M 8 at prescribed CEN geometry.
 
 644
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1048.20.2.2.1.7 Inde x of Re fraction. T he glass beads mixed into the pliant polymer shall have a
 minimum index of refraction of 1.50 when tested by the oil immersion method. If ceramic elements are
 used in the pavement marking, the ceramic elements shall have a minimum index of refraction of 1.70
 when tested using the liquid oil immersion method. Ceramic beads with an index of refraction greater than
 1.80 shall not be used.
 1048.20.2.3 Durable Inte rse cton Marking Mate rials.
 1048.20.2.3.1 Pre forme d The rmoplastic Mate rial.
 1048.20.2.3.1.1 Ge ne ral. Pavement marking material shall not contain toxic heavy metals. T he material
 shall be solid, formulated and tested to perform as a pavement marking material with glass beads uniformly
 throughout the marking.
 1048.20.2.3.1.2 Toxicity. Upon heating to application temperature, the material shall not release fumes
 that are toxic to persons or property. Upon curing, the material shall be completely inert, with all
 components fully reacted and environmentally benign.
 1048.20.2.3.1.3 Adhe sion to Pave me nt. T he pavement marking material shall have a high degree of
 adhesion to the pavement surface. T he product shall be applied per manufactures specification on a clean
 dry surface.
 1048.20.2.3.1.4 Abrasion Re sistance . T he material shall have a maximum abrasion resistance of 150 mg
 with a CS-17 wheel under a load of 1,000 grams for 1,000 cycles, when tested in accordance with AST M C
 501.
 1048.20.2.3.1.5 Ye llowne ss Inde x. T he material shall have a maximum yellowness index of 6 before the
 QUV test and a maximum of yellowness index of 23 after the 72-hour QUV test, when tested in accordance
 with AST M D 1925.
 1048.20.2.3.1.6 Color. T he finished white color shall be free from tint, furnishing good opacity and
 visibility under both daylight and artificial light. T he finished yellow color shall closely match Federal Test
 Standard 595 - Color Chip Number 33538.
 1048.20.2.3.1.7 Q ualification. In addition to the requirements of Sec 1048.1.1, the material shall have
 been field tested at NT PEP test decks in a northern, wet climate region for a minimum of six months. T he
 maintained retroflectivity and durability shall be in accordance with the following requirements after being
 installed on at least one NT PEP test deck for a minimum of six months, including December, January and
 February.
 1048.20.2.3.1.8 Maintaine d Re trore fle ctivity. Photometric quantity to be measured will be the
 coefficient of retroreflective luminance (RL) in accordance with AST M E 1743 for 15-meter geometry or
 AST M E 1710 for 30-meter geometry. T he average RL for concrete and asphalt surfaces shall be expressed
 in millicandelas per footcandle per square foot and shall be at least 125 for 15-meter geometry or 100 for
 30-meter geometry, when measured in the wheel path area.
 1048.20.2.3.1.9 Durability. Paint shall have a durability rating of at least 5 for both concrete and asphalt
 surfaces when tested in the wheel path area of the NT PEP test deck.
 1048.20.2.3.1.10 Packaging. T he manufacturer's name and address, product name, color, manufacturing
 date, date of expiration of the material. In addition to the requirements of Sec 1048.1.1, the certification
 supplied by the manufacturer shall include reference to the specific NT PEP test deck to which the product
 was applied, including NT PEP identification numbers and report numbers.
 1048.20.2.3.2 Plural Compone nt Inte rse ction Marking Mate rials.
 1048.20.2.3.2.1 Epoxy Mate rials.
 1048.20.2.3.2.1.1 Ge ne ral. Epoxy Materials used for intersection markings shall be in accordance
 
 645
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 with Sec 1048.20.2.1.1.
 1048.20.2.3.2.2 Polyure a Mate rials.
 1048.20.2.3.2.2.1 Ge ne ral. Polyurea Materials used for intersection markings shall be in accordance
 with Sec 1048.20.2.1.2.
 1048.20.2.3.3 Cold Applie d Tape Inte rse ction Marking Mate rial.
 1048.20.2.3.3.1 Ge ne ral. Cold Applied Tape Materials used for intersection markings shall be in
 accordance with Sec 1048.20.2.2.1.
 SECTIO N 1048.30 DRO P-O N GLASS BEADS.
 1048.30.1 Ge ne ral. When tested in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 70 for water resistance,
 the beads shall show no readily discernible dulling and the amount of 0.1 normal hydrochloric acid needed
 to titrate the filtrate shall not exceed 4.5 mL. When tested in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M
 70 for calcium chloride and sodium sulfide resistance, the beads shall show no readily discernible darkening
 or dulling.
 1048.30.2 Type P Drop-O n Glass Be ads. Type P beads shall be manufactured from glass of a
 composition that is highly resistant to traffic wear and to the effects of weathering. If coating is required to
 meet the performance requirements for the specific marking material used, the beads shall be coated to
 ensure satisfactory embedment and adhesion.
 1048.30.2.1 Re fractive Inde x. Type P beads shall have a minimum refractive index of 1.51 when tested
 in accordance with AASHT O M 247.
 1048.30.2.2 Roundne ss. All Type P beads passing the No. 30 sieve shall have a minimum of 75 percent
 true spheres when tested in accordance with AST M D 1155 or AASHT O PP-74. All Type P beads retained
 on the No. 20 and No. 30 sieves shall have a minimum of 80 percent true spheres as determined by AST M
 D 1155 or AASHT O PP-74.
 1048.30.2.3 Gradation. Type P beads shall meet the following gradation requirements when tested in
 accordance with AST M D 1214.
 U. S. Standard Sieve No. Percent Retained
 20
 3-10
 30
 15-35
 50
 45-75
 70
 0-10
 P an
 0-5
 
 1048.30.3 Type L Drop-O n Glass Be ads. Type L beads shall be embedment coated and manufactured
 from glass of a composition that is highly resistant to traffic wear and to the effects of weathering. T he
 beads shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 247, Type 1, except as follows.
 1048.30.3.1 Coating. T he beads shall be coated to ensure satisfactory embedment and adhesion when
 applied to uncured traffic marking material. T he coating shall be tested in accordance with MoDOT Test
 Method T M 70.
 1048.30.3.2 Roundne ss. Type L beads shall have a minimum of 80 percent rounds per screen for the two
 highest sieve quantities, and no more than 3 percent angular particles per screen, as determined by AST M
 D 1155 or AASHT O PP-74. T he remaining sieve fractions shall be determined by AST M D 1155 or
 AASHT O PP-74to be no less than 75 percent rounds.
 1048.30.3.3 Gradation. Type L beads shall meet the following gradation requirements when tested in
 accordance with AST M D 1214:
 
 646
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 Type L B ead G radation Requirements
 Sieve Size
 Percent Passing
 No. 12
 100
 No. 14
 95 - 100
 No. 16
 80 - 95
 No. 18
 10 - 40
 No. 20
 0-5
 No. 25
 0-2
 
 1048.30.4 Type 1 Drop-O n Glass Be ads. Type 1 beads shall be moisture-resistant and manufactured
 from glass of a composition that is highly resistant to traffic wear and to the effects of weathering. Glass
 beads shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 247, Type 1.
 
 647
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1049
 PRECAST CO NCRETE BO X CULVERTS
 1049.1 Scope . T his specification covers precast concrete box culverts.
 1049.2 Acce ptance . T he basis of acceptance will be with producer's QMP in accordance with Sec 1001.14.
 1049.2.1 Lot Siz e De finition. A lot is defined as one day's production.
 1049.2.2 Q uality Control. T he producer QMP shall define quality control testing and inspection
 frequencies and shall include the following minimum requirements.
 1049.2.2.1 Compressive strength of cylinders or cores shall be taken at a minimum of once per lot in
 accordance with AST M C1577. Compressive strength testing shall also be performed to control handling
 and curing operations. Cylinders shall be cured in accordance with AASHT O T 23 field curing procedures.
 1049.2.2.2 Air and slump of fresh concrete shall be taken a minimum of once per lot.
 1049.2.2.3 Aggregate gradation, absorption and deleterious shall be checked a minimum of once per
 month per aggregate source in accordance with Sec 1005.
 1049.2.2.4 Steel placement shall be checked and documented for each unit.
 1049.2.2.5 Finished dimensions shall be checked and documented for each unit.
 1049.2.2.6 All equipment used for testing shall be maintained and calibrated in accordance with AASHT O
 R18 or equivalent program.
 1049.2.2.7 Concrete plant(s) shall be calibrated and monitored in accordance with the producer's QMP.
 1049.2.3 Q uality Assurance . T he QMP shall reference an industry organization or define independent
 QA testing frequencies including the following:
 Test Method Independent QA
 Tested P roperty a
 Air
 T152
 Twice a year
 Slump
 T119
 Twice a year
 Coarse Aggregate Deleterious
 TM71
 Twice a year
 Coarse Aggregate Absorption
 T85
 Twice a year
 Compressive Strength
 T22
 Twice a year
 Absorption (per mix)
 T280
 Once a year
 a
 
 All samples shall be taken at the precast plant
 
 1049.2.4 MoDO T Hold Points.
 1049.2.4.1 MoDOT shall verify steel placement prior to concrete pour.
 1049.2.4.2
 number(s).
 
 Prior to shipping, producers shall notify MoDOT and obtain a MoDOT identification
 
 1049.2.4.3 Repair methods and completion of repairs for non-conforming work shall be approved by the
 engineer.
 1049.2.5 MoDO T Q uality Assurance and Auditing. T he engineer may perform QA testing and audit
 the producer's QMP, documentation and production at any time, which may include coring of the precast
 units at the producer's expense.
 1049.2.6 De ficie nt Work. A procedure addressing deficient work in accordance with Sec 1001.14.
 
 648
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1049.2.6.1 Filling of form tie cavities and repair of other defects shall be in accordance with Sec 703.
 1049.2.7 Non-Conforming Work. A procedure addressing non-conforming work in accordance with Sec
 1001.14.
 1049.3 Mate rial.
 1049.3.1 Ce me nt. Cement shall be in accordance with Sec 1019.
 1049.3.2 Fly Ash. Fly ash shall be in accordance with Sec 1018.
 1049.3.3 Ground Granulate d Blast Furnace Slag. Ground granulated blast furnace slag shall be in
 accordance with the requirements of Sec 1017.
 1049.3.4 Aggre gate . Fine and coarse aggregate for the concrete mixture shall be in accordance with Sec
 1005, except the requirements for gradation and percent passing the No. 200 sieve will not apply.
 1049.3.5 Ste e l Re inforce me nt. Reinforcement shall be in accordance with Sec 1036.3.
 1049.3.6 Concre te Mixture . Concrete shall be a minimum of 5,000 psi in accordance with AST M C1577
 and the mix design shall be approved by the engineer. Admixtures or blends may be used with approval
 from engineer.
 1049.4 De sign. Except as otherwise specified herein, precast concrete box sections for the culvert shall be
 in accordance with AST M C 1577. Designs shall be submitted to the inspecting District.
 1049.4.1 Substituted precast concrete box culvert sections shall be designed for the earth cover shown on
 the plans for the cast-in-place box culvert, and shall be equal in height and cross sectional area or as
 approved by the engineer.
 1049.4.2 Spe cial De signs. T he producer shall request approval of any modified and special designs which
 differ from the designs in AST M C 1577. T he request for such modified and special designs shall fully
 describe any deviations from those standards, including a drawing showing wall thickness, concrete design
 strength, the type, size and placement of reinforcement, and inside or outside dimensions of both of the
 box sections.
 1049.4.3 T he minimum barrel length for box or end section shall be 2 feet.
 1049.4.4 End sections may be precast or cast-in-place. If precast, the barrel, floor and wing walls shall be
 cast as an integral unit. In either case, the end sections shall be constructed to the same dimensions, shapes,
 and with the same reinforcement as shown on the plans for cast-in-place culvert.
 1049.4.5 Segmented end sections may be provided, but will be considered a modified design and will require
 approval as such.
 1049.4.6 Toe walls shall be provided on both the upstream and downstream ends as shown on the plans, and
 may be cast-in-place or precast. Precast toe walls shall be connected to the end section floor.
 1049.5 Manufacture .
 1049.5.1 Curing. Curing shall be in accordance with Sec 1026 until the concrete has developed the
 specified compressive strength.
 1049.5.2 T he producer shall ensure that the placing, finishing and consolidating of concrete is in
 accordance with their producer quality management plan. Temperatures shall be maintained to prevent
 detrimental effects to precast production and the following:
 a) Concrete placed in cold weather shall be protected from freezing during the curing period by the
 use of a heated, weatherproof enclosure. Concrete shall not be placed on or against reinforcing
 
 649
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 steel or other surfaces with temperatures lower than 35 F. No concrete shall be placed when the
 enclosure ambient temperature is below 35 F.
 T he temperature of the mixed concrete when placed shall be no higher than 90 F. T he forms and
 reinforcing steel shall be cooled by acceptable methods to an ambient temperature of 90 F or lower.
 1049.5.3 Pe rmissible Variations. Dimensions, position of reinforcement, area of reinforcement and
 haunch dimensions shall be in accordance with AST M C1577.
 1049.6 Marking. T he following information shall be legibly marked on each box section by indentation,
 waterproof paint or other approved means. Box section span, rise, maximum and minimum design earth
 cover and specification designation.
 a) Date of manufacture.
 b) Name or trademark of the manufacturer.
 c) Indicator required by the QC program.
 d) Sample Identification Number.
 e) Station where the unit will be installed.
 f) Each section shall be clearly marked on either the inner or the outer surface during the process of
 manufacture. In addition, the word "top" shall be lettered with waterproof paint on the inside of the top
 surface.
 1049.7 MoDO T Ide ntification Numbe r. T he producer shall contact the engineer, a minimum of one
 business day, prior to shipping precast products. T he engineer shall assign a specific MoDOT identification
 number for each size and type of product in the shipment.
 1049.7.1 Prior to delivery to the jobsite, the source, intermediate agent, shipper or contractor's
 representative shall notify the inspecting District by fax or electronically a minimum of one business day
 or earlier, prior to the impending shipment of precast material. T his notification shall include a shipping
 form (Precast Shipping Form) and will include, at minimum, the following:
 a) Contract Number and Project Number.
 b) Receiving Purchaser/Contractor.
 c) Type and quantity of material.
 d) Date of expected delivery to the jobsite.
 e) Manufacturer's name.
 f) Stationing or structure number on precast unit, if applicable.
 1049.7.2 T he precast unit shall be clearly and permanently marked by the precaster with the ID number in
 accordance with Sec 1049.7 prior to shipment. Requests for alternate precast labeling shall be submitted to
 the inspecting District for approval. Material without proper identification number shall not be permitted
 for use on a project.
 1049.8 De live ry. A bill of lading or delivery receipt for each shipment shall be furnished to the engineer
 at the destination point. T he bill of lading shall contain an itemized statement of the sizes and lengths of
 precast units with the corresponding designated MoDOT identification number provided to the
 manufacturer for each size and type of precast unit for that shipment. T he bill of lading shall contain a
 certified statement. T he certified statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
 manufacturer and shall state the following:
 
 650
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 "T his certifies that the precast products in this shipment are in accordance with MoDOT specifications."
 
 651
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1050
 LUMBER, TIMBER, PILING, PO STS AND PO LES
 1050.1 Scope . T his specification covers wood products as defined in the AWPA Standards.
 1050.2 Posts.
 1050.2.1 Posts and Blocks for Guardrail. Posts and blocks for guardrail shall be rectangular, standard
 rough sawn and of the size and length shown on the plans. Posts and blocks shall be pressure treated in
 accordance with Sec 1050.6. All framing and boring shall be completed before treatment. Douglas Fir shall
 be "Dense No. 1 Structural Grade" in accordance with Paragraph 131-bb of the current Standard Grading
 Rules for West Coast Lumber. Southern Pine shall be "No. 1 Dense Grade" in accordance with Paragraph
 406 of the current Standard Grading Rules for Southern Pine Lumber.
 1050.2.2 Posts for Fe nce . Posts for fence shall be round and of the sizes and lengths shown on the plans.
 Posts shall be pressure-treated in accordance with Sec 1050.6. Allowable tolerances for size and length will
 be as follows:
 Fence Post Tolerances
 Dimension
 Tolerance
 +1/2,
 ≤4-inch diameter
 No minus tolerance
 +1 inch,
 > 4-inch diameter
 No minus tolerance
 No limit on over length,
 All Lengths (any diameter)
 Minus 1 inch
 
 1050.2.2.1 Grade . Wood for posts shall be sound, free of decay, excessive knots and of end splits and
 seasoning checks that might affect serviceability. Posts shall be free of multiple crooks, except crooks in
 one plane only in accordance with Sec 1050.2.2.2 will be permitted.
 1050.2.2.2 Straightne ss. A straight line drawn from the center of one end of the post to the center of
 the opposite end shall not deviate from the longitudinal axis of the post at any point more than one
 percent of the length of the post.
 1050.2.2.3 Manufacture . Posts shall be clean peeled to remove all bark, except that strips of inner bark
 no more than 1/2 inch wide or more than 3 inches long will be permitted to remain on the peeled post. All
 protruding knots shall be trimmed flush, and all spurs and splinters shall be removed. T he natural taper of
 round posts shall be followed in machine peeling operations. T he ends of all posts shall be cut square,
 except posts to be driven shall be machine-pointed on the small end prior to treatment.
 1050.2.3 Posts for O ne -Strand Acce ss Re straint Cable . Posts for one-strand access restraint cable
 may be round or rectangular, as shown on the plans. Round posts shall be in accordance with Sec 1050.2.2.
 Rectangular posts shall be standard rough sawn and of the grade specified in Sec 1050.2.2.1. All posts shall
 be in accordance with Sec 1050.6.
 1050.2.4 Posts for Signs. Posts for signs shall be rectangular, rough sawn or surfaced four sides (S4S), with
 square cut ends, and shall be of the grade, size and length shown on the plans. Posts shall be pressure-treated
 in accordance with Sec 1050.6. Other preservatives and wood species shall be in accordance with applicable
 AWPA Standards. If framing and boring is completed after pressure treatment, field treatment shall be in
 accordance with Sec 1050.7.
 
 1050.2.4.1 Pe rmane nt. Project sign posts shall be treated to Use Category (UC) 4B.
 1050.2.4.2 Te mporary. Post for temporary use shall be treated to UC 4A.
 1050.3 Lumbe r and Timbe r.
 1050.3.1 Spe cie s and Grade Re quire me nts. Unless otherwise specified, lumber and timber to be used as
 
 652
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 a permanent part of a structure shall be one of the species shown in Table I or other treatable species as
 specified in the AWPA Standards, and of the grade specified on the plans. Lumber and timber for temporary
 structures shall be of the species and grades shown on the plans.
 1050.3.2 Dre ssing Re quire me nts. Lumber and timber shall be standard rough sawn or shall be surfaced as
 specified in the contract. Lumber and timber shall be cut to exact lengths or to permissible variations in
 lengths shown in the contract documents.
 1050.3.3 Tre atme nt. If treatment is specified, lumber and timber shall be pressure-treated in accordance
 with Sec 1050.6.
 1050.4 Ele ctric Substation, Se rvice and Span Wire Asse mbly Pole s.
 1050.4.1 Ele ctric Substation and Se rvice s Pole s. Electric substation and service poles shall be of the
 length and class specified in the contract documents, and shall be in accordance with ANSI O5.1. Poles shall
 be pressure treated in accordance with Sec 1050.6. Poles may be gained and drilled in the field after
 treatment. Areas exposed shall be treated in accordance with Sec 1050.7 before cross-arms or equipment
 are mounted.
 1050.4.2 Span Wire Asse mbly Pole s. Span wire assembly poles shall be of the length specified in the
 contract and shall be in accordance with ANSI 05.1, Class IV, unless otherwise specified. T he poles shall be
 pressure treated in accordance with Sec 1050.6. All poles shall have a minimum diameter of 6 3/4 inches,
 measured at the top of the pole.
 1050.4.3 Pole Crossarms. T he species, grade and treatment of crossarms to be erected on substation and
 service poles will be shown on the plans.
 1050.5 Round Timbe r Pile s.
 1050.5.1 Mate rial. All round timber piles shall be in accordance with AST M D 25, except for size, which
 shall be in accordance with Table I for the class specified in the contract.
 1050.5.2 Che mical Tre atme nt. Piles shall be pressure treated in accordance with Sec 1050.6. Framing
 and boring will not be required before treatment. Exposed untreated areas resulting from framing of treated
 piling shall be field treated in accordance with Sec 1050.7. Untreated piles for use in unexposed locations or
 in temporary bridges shall be of the species approved by the engineer.
 1050.6 Timbe r Pre se rvative s. Pressure preservative treatment shall be in accordance with current
 AASHT O Standard M-133.
 1050.6.1 Re sponsibility for Q uality. T he contractor shall use preservatives that meet these
 specifications or the treated material will be subject to rejection, or to approved retreatment with an
 approved preservative.
 1050.7 Care Afte r Tre atme nt. Care shall be taken in handling pressure-treated material to avoid damage.
 Cant hooks, peavies, pickaroons and end cant hooks shall not be used on the side surfaces of treated
 material. All handling of treated round stock with pointed tools shall be confined to the ends. If damaged
 material is permitted for use by the engineer, or framing at site is required, remediation following current
 AWPA Standard M4 shall be followed.
 1050.8 Inspe ction Re quire me nts.
 1050.8.1 Inspe ction. All material shall be inspected for compliance with these specifications in
 accordance with AWPA Standard M2.
 1050.8.1.1 T imber products treated within the State of Missouri or within 100 air miles of the border may
 be inspected by MoDOT personnel.
 1050.8.1.2 T he inspection of lumber, timber, piling, posts and poles shall be performed by the supplier or
 
 653
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 an approved inspection agency, and the cost for inspection shall be at the contractor ’s expense.
 1050.8.2 Inspe ction Age ncy. An approved inspection agency will be a laboratory, accredited by the
 American Lumber Standards Committee, P.O. Box 210, Germantown, MD, or an experienced testing
 laboratory approved by the engineer. Inspection agencies not accredited by the American Lumber Standards
 Committee shall submit for approval a resume to Construction and Materials. T he resume of the agency
 shall include the agency’s history of inspection of timber and treated products, a listing of state highway
 agencies which have approved the inspection agency and a listing of state agencies for which the inspection
 agency has performed inspection.
 1050.9 Ce rtification. T he contractor shall furnish to the engineer certification from the supplier or
 inspection agency that the material furnished is in accordance with these specifications. Certification shall
 include or shall have attached a listing of the material being supplied. Except as noted, the certification
 shall have attached a certified test report, as detailed in Section 7.2 of AWPA Standard M2, from the
 supplier or inspection agency attesting to complete compliance with AWPA and these specifications.
 Electric substation, service and span wire assembly poles will not require certified test reports.
 1050.10 Acce ptance . Acceptance of material will be based on satisfactory supplier's certification or
 inspection agency certifications, and upon results of any tests deemed necessary by the engineer at
 destination to ascertain compliance with these specifications.
 TAB LE I
 Circumf erences and Diameters of Timber Piles, (in.)
 Class A
 Class B
 Class C
 Tip
 Tip
 Tip
 3 f t From B utt
 3 f t From B utt
 3 f t From B utt
 Length f t
 Min
 Max
 Min
 Min
 Max
 Min
 Min
 Max
 Min
 Cir Dia Cir Dia Cir Dia Cir Dia Cir Dia Cir Dia Cir Dia Cir Dia Cir Dia
 Up to 50 47 15 57 18 28 9 38 12 63 20 25 8 38 12 63 20 25 8
 Over 50 47 15 57 18 25 8 41 13 63 20 22 7 38 12 63 20 22 7
 
 654
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1051
 SLO TTED DRAIN
 1051.1 Scope . T his specification covers slotted drain.
 1051.2 Pipe . T he pipe portion of the slotted drain shall be 16 gage. T he material and fabrication of the
 pipe shall be in accordance with Sec 1020. T he diameter of the pipe shall be as shown on the plans.
 1051.3 Slotte d Drain Grate Asse mbly. T he grate assembly of Type A, B or C slotted drain shall be
 fabricated as shown on the plans. T he grate assembly shall be 6 inches high unless otherwise specified on
 the plans.
 1051.3.1 Type B and Type C slotted drain grate assemblies shall be fabricated from 3/16-inch thick AST M
 A 36 structural steel. T he entire grate assembly shall be hot dip galvanized, prior to attachment to the pipe,
 in accordance with AASHT O M 111.
 1051.3.2 Type A slotted drain guide assemblies shall be fabricated from 14 gage galvanized steel meeting
 the same material requirements as the pipe. T he drain guide slot shall be assembled with mechanical
 interlocks requiring no welding.
 1051.4 All coupling devices and other necessary fittings shall be in accordance with Sec 1020.
 
 655
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1052
 MECHANICALLY STABILIZED EARTH WALL SYSTEM CO MPO NENTS
 1052.1 T his specification covers material requirements for metallic soil reinforcement, non-metallic soil
 reinforcement, concrete facing panels for large block wall systems, and concrete blocks for small block wall
 systems that are supplied as part of mechanically stabilized earth wall systems. All precast items shall be in
 accordance with Sec 1001.
 SECTIO N 1052.10 METALLIC SO IL REINFO RCEMENT.
 1052.10.1 Scope . T his specification covers metallic soil reinforcement and the accompanying
 attachments utilized in mechanically stabilized earth wall systems.
 1052.10.2 Re inforce me nt Strips. Metallic soil reinforcement strips shall be in accordance with the
 specifications of the manufacturer of the wall system and the contract documents. T he minimum grade of
 steel for strips and connection devices shall be AASHT O M 270, Grade 36.
 1052.10.3 Re inforce me nt Me sh. Metallic soil reinforcement mesh shall be in accordance with the
 specifications of the manufacturer of the wall system and the contract documents. T he minimum grade of
 steel for strips and connection devices shall be either AASHT O M 270 Grade 36, AST M A 1011 Grade 50
 or AST M A 463 Grade 50. Welding shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 55.
 1052.10.4 Faste ne rs. Fasteners shall consist of either AASHT O M 164 hexagon head bolts or AASHT O
 M 164 hexagonal cap screws with nuts and washers.
 1052.10.5 Galvaniz ing and Aluminiz ing. All soil reinforcement material shall be either galvanized or
 aluminized. Galvanized soil reinforcement shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 111. Aluminized soil
 reinforcement shall be in accordance with AST M A 463 Aluminized Type 2-100, SS, Grade 50, Class 2.
 Fasteners, including bolts, nuts and washers, shall be galvanized in accordance with AASHT O M 232. All
 connection devices shall be galvanized in accordance with either AASHT O M 111 or M 232.
 1052.10.6 Ce rtification. T he manufacturer of the wall system shall certify in writing that the soil
 reinforcement, connections and fasteners meet the minimum requirements directed by the design and this
 specification. T he contractor shall provide this certification and any other supporting documentation to
 the engineer prior to the material being delivered to the construction site.
 SECTIO N 1052.20 NO N-METALLIC SO IL REINFO RCEMENT.
 1052.20.1 Scope . T his specification covers non-metallic or geosynthetic soil reinforcement utilized in
 mechanically stabilized earth wall systems.
 1052.20.2 Ge ogrids. Non-Metallic or geosynthetic soil reinforcement shall be of a polymeric nature and
 shall consist of a geogrid determined by the wall manufacturer or supplier.
 1052.20.2.1 T he geogrid shall be dimensionally stable and shall be able to maintain geometry during
 transport, handling and installation.
 1052.20.2.2 T he geogrid manufacturer shall maintain a quality control program to ensure that the
 manufactured material meets the requirements of the index tests shown below. Sampling and conformance
 testing for the index tests shown in the table shall be done in accordance with AST M D 4354.
 G eogrids
 Property
 Test Procedure
 Specific Gravity (HDP E only)
 ASTM D 1505
 Wide Width Tensile
 ASTM D 4595, GRI GG1
 Melt Flow (HDP E and P P only) ASTM D 1238
 Inherent Viscosity (P ET only)
 ASTM D 4603, GRI GG8
 Hydrolysis Resistance (P ET only) GRI GG7
 UV Oxidation Resistance
 ASTM D 4355
 
 656
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 Survivability
 
 ASTM D 5261
 
 1052.20.3 Ce rtification. T he manufacturer of geogrid shall certify in writing that the geogrid is in
 accordance with this specification. T he certification shall include the roll numbers and identification, the
 sampling procedures, the results of the quality control tests along with the tests used, and the Minimum
 Average Roll Value (MARV) for each roll. T his certification and any other supporting documentation shall
 be provided to the engineer prior to the material being delivered to the construction site.
 SECTIO N 1052.30 MSE PANEL AND SO UND WALLS.
 1052.30.1 Scope . T his specification covers the concrete facing panels used as part of mechanically
 stabilized earth wall systems and sound wall systems.
 1052.30.2 Acce ptance .
 1052.30.2.1 Lot De finition. A production lot will be defined as a group of panels and precast posts that
 will be represented by a single compressive strength sample, and shall consist of either 40 panels and or
 precast posts or single day's production, whichever is less.
 1052.30.2.2 Q uality Control. T he QMP shall define QC testing and inspection frequencies including the
 following.
 1052.30.2.3 Compressive strength of cylinders or cores shall be taken at least once a lot in accordance
 with AASHT O M199. Compressive strength testing may also be performed to control handling and curing
 operations. Cylinders shall be cured in accordance with AASHT O T 23 field curing procedures. For field
 cure compressive strength samples sufficient cylinders shall be cured in the same manner as the panels and
 precast posts and tested in accordance with AASHT O T 22, shall represent the initial strength of the
 concrete. In addition, a set of cylinders shall be cured in accordance with AASHT O T 23 and tested at 28
 days. T he average compressive strength of these cylinders, when tested in accordance with AASHT O T 22,
 shall represent the compressive strength of the production lot.
 1052.30.2.4 Air content testing shall be performed in accordance with AASHT O T 152 or AASHT O T 196.
 Air content samples shall be taken at the beginning of each day's production and at the same time as
 compressive samples are taken to ensure compliance with this specification.
 1052.30.2.5 Slump testing shall be performed in accordance with AASHT O T 119. T he slump shall be
 determined at the beginning of each day's production and at the same time as the compressive strength
 samples are taken.
 1052.30.2.6 Aggregate gradation and quality shall be checked at least once a month per aggregate source
 to ensure compliance with the specifications.
 1052.30.2.7 Steel placement shall be checked for each unit.
 1052.30.2.8 All equipment used for testing shall be maintained and calibrated in accordance with AASHT O
 R18 or equivalent program.
 1052.30.2.9 QC shall ensure the concrete plant is calibrated, monitored, and maintained in a manner
 sufficient to provide uniform compliant concrete.
 1052.30.2.10 Q uality Assurance . T he QMP shall reference an industry organization or define
 independent QA testing frequencies including the following:
 Test Method Independent Q A
 Tested Propertya
 Air
 T152
 Twice a year
 Slump
 T119
 Twice a year
 Coarse Aggregate Deleterious
 TM71
 Twice a year
 Coarse Aggregate Absorption
 T85
 Twice a year
 Compressive Strength
 T22
 Twice a year
 
 657
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 Absorption (per mix)
 a
 
 T280
 
 Once a year
 
 All samples shall be taken at the precast plant.
 
 1052.30.2.11 MoDO T Q A and Auditing. T he engineer may perform MoDOT QA testing or audit the
 producer's QMP, documentation and production at any time, which may include coring of the precast units
 at the producer's expense.
 1052.30.2.12 O the r Crite ria. Concrete facing panels, coping and precast posts will not be accepted if
 any of the following defects in physical characteristics are found: imperfect molding, honeycombing or
 open texture concrete, cracked or severely chipped panels and precast posts, soil reinforcement
 attachment devices improperly installed/damaged, lifting inserts not useable, exposed reinforcing steel, and
 color variation on the front face of the panel due to excess form oil or other reasons.
 1052.30.3 Mate rial.
 1052.30.3.1 Concre te . Concrete material, proportioning, air entraining, mixing, slump and transporting
 of concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501, except as noted in this section.
 1052.30.3.2 Aggre gate . Fine and coarse aggregate for the concrete mixture shall be in accordance with
 Sec 1005, except that the requirements for gradation and percent passing the No. 200 sieve will not apply.
 1052.30.3.3 Ste e l Re inforce me nt. Reinforcement shall be in accordance with Sec 1036.
 1052.30.4 De sign. Shop drawings shall be approved by the Bridge Division when the MSE wall is
 constructed in conjunction with a bridge abutment.
 1052.30.4.1 T he concrete shall be an approved MoDOT mix that is air-entrained, with a minimum
 compressive strength of 4,000 psi at 28 days. No additional admixtures will be permitted unless approved
 by the engineer.
 1052.30.4 Casting. T he panels shall be cast in such a manner that the acceptance criteria of this
 specification are met. Soil reinforcement connection devices shall not be in contact with or attached to the
 reinforcing steel in the concrete facing panels.
 1052.30.5 Manufacturing.
 1052.30.5.1 Casting. T he panels and precast posts shall be cast in such a manner that the acceptance
 criteria of this specification are met. Soil reinforcement connection devices shall not be in contact with or
 attached to the reinforcing steel in the concrete facing panels.
 1052.30.5.2 Curing. One of the following methods shall be used. Curing as recommended by the wall
 designer. Curing membrane, in accordance with Sec 1055, may be applied and if used shall be left intact
 until the strength requirements are met. Steam and moisture curing methods shall be in accordance with Sec
 1029.
 1052.30.5.3 Tole rance s.
 1052.30.5.3.1 Pane l and Post Syste ms. Shall be in accordance with approved shop drawings. Any
 variations from the approved shop drawings such as dimensions, materials, or finish must be approved by
 the wall manufacturer. Post dimensions for sound walls shall be within 1/4 inch in width and depth and
 within one inch along the length dimension.
 1052.30.5.3.2 Pane l Dime nsions. Panel connection devices shall be within one inch of the specified
 dimension. T he panel face and thickness dimensions shall be within 1/8 inch of the specified dimension.
 All other dimensions or items shall be within 1/4 inch of the specified dimensions.
 1052.30.5.3.3 Pane l Square ne ss. Squareness, as determined by the difference between the two diagonals,
 shall not exceed 1/2 inch.
 
 658
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1052.30.5.3.4 Pane l Surface Finish. Surface defects on smooth formed surfaces measured over a length
 of 5 feet shall not exceed 1/8 inch. Surface defects on the textured finish surfaces, measured over a length
 of 5 feet, shall not exceed 3/8 inch.
 1052.30.5.4 O the r Crite ria. Concrete facing panels, coping and precast posts will not be accepted if any
 of the following defects in physical characteristics are found: imperfect molding, honeycombing or open
 texture concrete, cracked or severely chipped panels and precast posts, soil reinforcement attachment
 devices improperly installed/damaged, lifting inserts not usable, exposed reinforcing steel, and color
 variation on the front face of the panel due to excess form oil or other reasons.
 1052.30.6 Marking. T he date of manufacture, production lot number and piece mark shall be clearly
 scribed on an unexposed face of each panel.
 1052.30.7 MoDO T Ide ntification Numbe r. When the manufacturer contacts the engineer one business
 day, or earlier, in advance of shipping precast products the engineer will assign a specific MoDOT
 identification number for each size and type of product in the shipment.
 1052.30.7.1 Prior to delivery to the jobsite, the source, intermediate agent, shipper or contractor's
 representative shall notify the inspecting District by fax or electronically a minimum of one business day,
 or earlier, prior to the impending shipment of precast material. T his notification shall include a shipping
 form (Precast Shipping Form) and will include, at minimum, the following:
 a) T he specific contract number.
 b) Receiving Purchaser/Contractor.
 c) Line number for which the material will be used.
 d) Type and quantity of material.
 e) Date of expected delivery to the jobsite.
 f) Manufacturer's name.
 g) Stationing or structure number on precast unit, if applicable.
 h) Panel type, quantity and wall number for MSE panels.
 1052.30.7.2 Upon approval, the precaster will receive an identification number. T he precast unit shall be
 clearly and permanently marked by the precaster with the ID number as required by appropriate 1000
 specification prior to shipment. Requests for alternate precast labeling shall be submitted to the inspecting
 District for approval. Material without proper identification number(s) will not be permitted for use on a
 project.
 1052.30.8 Handling, Storage and Shipping. All panels shall be free of chips, discoloration, cracks,
 fractures, and any other defects determined to be detrimental to the cosmetic value or to the performance
 characteristics of the panels. T he panels shall not be subjected to excessive bending stresses and the panel
 connection devices and exposed exterior finish shall be protected from damage.
 1052.30.9 Docume ntation. Copies of test results for all required tests, and any other supporting
 documentation shall be in accordance with Sec 1001.14.
 1052.30.10 De live ry. A bill of lading or delivery receipt shall be furnished to the engineer at the
 destination point. T he bill of lading shall contain an itemized statement of the sizes and lengths of precast
 units with the corresponding MoDOT identification number provided to the manufacturer for each size and
 type of precast unit for that shipment. T he bill of lading shall contain a certified statement. T he certified
 statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the manufacturer and shall state the following:
 "T his certifies that the precast products in this shipment are in accordance with MoDOT specifications."
 
 659
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1052.40 SMALL BLO CK WALL SYSTEMS - CO NCRETE BLO CKS.
 1052.40.1 Scope . T his specification covers the concrete blocks used as part of small block mechanically
 stabilized earth wall systems. Wet cast blocks shall be produced in accordance with Sec 1052.30. Dry cast
 blocks shall be produced at stated below.
 1052.40.2 Acce ptance .
 following requirements.
 
 Acceptance will be based upon manufacture test results compliant with the
 
 1052.40.2.1 Fre e z e Thaw Te sting. T he concrete blocks shall be tested for freeze-thaw durability in
 accordance with AST M C1262. Freeze-thaw durability shall be based on tests from five specimens made
 with the same material, concrete mix design, manufacturing process and curing method conducted not more
 than 18 months prior to delivery. Test results will be required for each project.
 1052.40.2.2 Units that are not exposed to deicing salts shall be in accordance with the following testing
 requirements. When tested in water, the weight loss of each of five test specimens at the conclusion of 100
 cycles shall not exceed 1.0 percent of its initial weight; or the weight loss of each of four of the five test
 specimens at the conclusion of 150 cycles shall not exceed 1.5 percent of its initial weight.
 1052.40.2.3 Test results for units that are exposed to deicing salts shall be tested in a 3 percent saline
 solution and shall be in accordance with the following:
 a) When tested in 3 percent saline solution the weight loss of each of five test specimens at the
 conclusion of 40 cycles shall not exceed 1.0 percent of the initial weight; or the weight loss of
 each of four of the five test specimens at the conclusion of 50 cycles shall not exceed 1.5 percent
 of its initial weight.
 1052.40.2.4 Compre ssive Stre ngth. Acceptance of the compressive strength of the concrete blocks will
 be based on production lots in compliance with AST M C140. Acceptance of the compressive strength of a
 production lot will occur if the compressive strength test results is equal to or greater than the design
 strength at 28 days. T he engineer of record shall evaluate and approve acceptance of deviations below
 design strength.
 1052.40.2.5 Absorption. T he manufacturer shall sample and test units based on production lots for
 absorption in accordance with AST M C140.
 1052.40.2.6 Dime nsional Tole rance s.
 tolerances:
 
 Concrete blocks shall be manufactured within the following
 
 a) T he length and width of each concrete block shall be within 1/8 inch of the specified dimension.
 b) T he height of each concrete block shall be within 1/16 inch of the specified dimension.
 c) When a broken face finish is used, the dimension of the front face shall be within one inch of
 the theoretical dimension of the concrete block.
 1052.40.2.7 O the r Crite ria. All concrete blocks shall be sound and free of cracks or other defects that
 would interfere with the proper placement of the blocks or significantly impair the strength or permanence
 of the construction. At the time of the delivery to the work site the concrete blocks shall:
 a) A maximum water absorption of 5 percent.
 b) Minor cracks incidental to the usual method of manufacture or minor chipping resulting from
 shipment and delivery will not be grounds for rejection. Minor cracks will be defined as cracks that
 are no wider than 1/64 inch and no longer than 25 percent of the block height.
 c) Any exposed face of a concrete block shall be free of chips, cracks or other imperfections when
 viewed from a distance of 30 feet under diffused lighting. Up to 5 percent of a shipment may
 
 660
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 contain slight cracks or small chips no larger than one inch.
 1052.40.2.8 Concrete blocks shall not be accepted if any of the requirements specified above or the
 following defects in physical characteristics are found:
 a) Defects indicating imperfect molding.
 b) Defects indicating honeycomb or open texture concrete.
 c) Cracked or severely chipped blocks.
 d) Color variation on front face of blocks.
 1052.40.3 Mate rial.
 1052.40.3.1 Concre te . Concrete material, proportioning, air entraining, mixing, slump and transporting
 of concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501, except as noted in this section. Coloring pigments,
 integral water repellants, finely ground silica and other constituents shall be previously directed as suitable
 for use and shall be in accordance with applicable AST M standards, or evidence shall be provided to prove
 the product is not detrimental to the durability of the concrete blocks or any material customarily used in
 masonry construction.
 1052.40.3.2 Aggre gate . Fine and coarse aggregate for the concrete mixture shall be in accordance with
 Sec 1005, except that the requirements for gradation and percent passing the No. 200 sieve will not apply.
 1052.40.4 De sign. T he concrete mixture shall have a minimum compressive strength of 4,000 psi at 28
 days. T he design including all contents of the mixture and curing method shall be submitted to the engineer
 for approval prior to use.
 1052.40.5 Manufacturing.
 1052.40.5.1 Finish Color. Color and finish shall be as shown on the plans. If no color or finish is
 specified on the plans, the contractor shall provide a color and finish to the engineer for approval.
 1052.40.6 Ce rtification. T he manufacturer of the concrete blocks shall certify that the concrete blocks
 are in accordance with this specification. T his certification, copies of test results for all required tests, and
 any other supporting documentation shall be provided to the engineer prior to the material being shipped
 to the construction site.
 
 661
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1053
 CO NCRETE SEALER AND CO NCRETE CRACK FILLER
 SECTIO N 1053.10 PENETRATING CO NCRETE SEALER
 1053.10.1 Scope . T his specification covers concrete sealers for the protection of concrete against damage
 from de-icing chemicals.
 1053.10.2 Acce ptance . All material under this specification shall be obtained from a source identified on
 the PAL designated for this specification. All material under this specification will be inspected and
 accepted in accordance with Sec 106. AST M and AASHT O specifications, when referenced, control only
 the physical and chemical properties of the material.
 1053.10.3 T he sealer shall be a alkyltrialkoxysilane, with low oligomer and polymer compound content.
 T he chemical composition shall meet the following requirements:
 Property
 P urity
 Solvent
 Residue
 Density
 Flash P oint
 Dry Time
 
 Specif ication
 95% minimum monomer by weight
 Less than 5% by weight
 Less than 2% by weight
 P er the manufacturer's recommendation
 ASTM D93: greater than 125 degrees F
 ASTM D1640 Sec 7.5.1: One hour or less
 
 1053.10.3.1T he AST M D1640 test shall be performed on a concrete surface. T his concrete shall be a mix
 design called for in Sec 1053.10.3.2. T he application rate shall be the same rate specified in Sec 703.
 1053.10.3.2 T he sealer shall meet the following performance criteria based on a single application at the
 application rate specified in Sec 703. MoDOT reserves the right to verify any qualification tests at their
 expense on any field application. Test specimens shall be produced using either the MoDOT Class B-2
 concrete in accordance with Sec 501 or the concrete mix specified by the test being performed.
 Test
 Water Immersion
 Water Immersion
 
 Test Method
 ASTM C642
 ASTM C642
 
 Max Absorption / Cl 48 hours 0.5 percent by weight (mass)
 50 days 1.5 percent by weight (mass)
 
 Duration
 
 Salt Water P onding
 80% min reduction in Cl (based on non-abraded AASHTO T259 90 days absorption & 0.50 lbs/cu yd Cl specimen)
 at a depth of 1/2” - 1” max
 
 1053.10.3.3 T he sealer shall not permanently stain, discolor or darken the concrete. Application of the
 sealer shall not alter the surface texture or form a coating on the concrete surfaces.
 1053.10.3.4 T he sealer shall not leave residue on glass, painted metal or automobiles.
 1053.3.5 T he sealer shall not reduce the bond of pavement markings or reduce the skid resistance of the
 surface being sealed. Any sealer determined to have these adverse effects will be removed from the prequalified list.
 1053.10.3.6 T he sealer shall be delivered to the project in unopened containers with the manufacturer ’s
 label identifying the product and with the seal(s) intact. Each container shall be clearly marked by the
 manufacturer with the following information:
 (a) Manufacturer's name and address.
 (b) Product name.
 (c) Date of manufacture and expiration date.
 (d) Lot identification.
 
 662
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (e) Storage requirements.
 1053.10.4 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Prior to approval and use of concrete sealers, the
 manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a certified test report from an approved testing
 laboratory showing specific test results conforming to the requirements of these specifications. T he
 certified test report shall also contain the manufacturer ’s name, product brand name, lot number and date
 of manufacture. Upon approval of the certified test report by the engineer the manufacturer and brand
 name will be added to the PAL designated for this specification. New certified test results shall be submitted
 any time the manufacturing process or the sealer formulation is changed, and may be required by the
 engineer when sampling and testing of material offered for use indicates nonconformance to any of the
 requirements herein specified.
 SECTIO N 1053.20 CO NCRETE CRACK FILLER
 1053.20.1 Scope . T his specification covers concrete crack fillers for the protection of concrete against
 damage from de-icing chemicals.
 1053.20.2 Acce ptance . All material shall be obtained from a source identified on the PAL designated for
 this specification, except as otherwise listed below. All materials under this specification will be inspected
 and accepted in accordance with Sec 106.
 1053.20.3 T he concrete crack filler shall be a low viscosity polymer. T he chemical composition shall meet
 the following requirements:
 Property
 Test Method
 Specif ication
 Viscosity
 AASHTO D-2393
 Less than or equal to 25 cps
 Gel Time
 AASHTO T-237 Less than or equal to 20 minutes @ 70 deg F
 Tensile Strength
 ASTM D638
 Greater than or equal to 1500 psi
 Elongation
 ASTM D638
 Greater than or equal to 5%
 Solids Content
 Greater than or equal to 95%
 Flash P oint
 ASTM D1310
 Greater than or equal to 50 deg F
 Cure Rate
 AASHTO T-237
 Less than or equal to 3 hrs@ 70 deg F
 
 1053.20.4 T he concrete crack filler shall meet the procedures and the application rates as specified in Sec
 704. MoDOT reserves the right to verify any qualification tests at their expense on any field application.
 1053.20.5 Manufacture r and Brand Name Approval. Prior to approval and use of concrete crack
 fillers, the manufacturer shall submit to Construction and Materials a certified test report from an approved
 testing laboratory showing specific test results conforming to the requirements of these specifications. T he
 certified test report shall also contain the manufacturer ’s name, product brand name, lot number and date
 of manufacture. Upon approval of the certified test report by the engineer the manufacturer and brand
 name will be added to the PAL designated for this specification. New certified test results shall be submitted
 any time the manufacturing process or the crack filler formulation is changed, and may be required by the
 engineer when sampling and testing of material offered for use indicates nonconformance to any of the
 requirements herein specified.
 
 663
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1054
 CO NCRETE ADMIXTURES
 1054.1 Scope . T his specification covers air-entraining admixtures, water-reducing admixtures, retarding
 admixtures, accelerating admixtures and latex emulsion admixtures for concrete.
 1054.2 Acce ptance . All material under this specification shall be obtained from a source identified on the
 PAL designated for this specification. All material under this specification will be inspected and accepted in
 accordance with Sec 106.
 1054.3 Air-Entraining Admixture s. Air-entraining admixtures shall be in accordance with AASHT O M
 154, except as modified herein.
 1054.3.1 Ce rtification. T he manufacturer shall submit a certification to Construction and Materials prior
 to approval. T he certification shall provide the following:
 (a) T he brand name and designation.
 (b) T he composition or description of the admixture.
 (c) T he manufacturing ranges for percent total solids and pH by AASHT O T 200.
 (d) T he infrared spectrum.
 (e) T he manner in which the material will be identified on containers.
 (f) T he material is in accordance with these specifications.
 1054.3.1.1 Certifications shall include or have attached specific test results as required in Sec 1054.3.1.2 or
 Sec 1054.3.1.3.
 1054.3.1.2 For an air-entraining admixture other than that specified in Sec 1054.3.1.3, the certification
 shall include results of tests conforming to the requirements of AASHT O M 154. Tests for bleeding, bond
 strength and volume change will not be required.
 1054.3.1.3 For an air-entraining admixture that is an aqueous solution of vinsol resin manufactured by
 neutralizing the resin with sodium hydroxide, the certification shall include results of tests showing the ratio
 of sodium hydroxide to vinsol resin. T he certification or test report shall also state that no other additive
 or chemical agent is present in the solution.
 1054.3.2 Packaging and Marking. T he containers in which air-entraining admixtures are delivered shall
 be plainly marked with the manufacturer's name, the brand name and designation of the material, lot
 number and net quantity. A delivery ticket showing this information shall accompany bulk shipments. If
 the manufacturer supplies air-entraining admixtures in more than one concentration, the concentration
 shall be designated on the container, or for bulk shipments, in a prominent manner on the delivery ticket.
 1054.4 Wate r-Re ducing Admixture s. Water-reducing admixtures shall be in accordance with AASHT O
 M 194, Type A, except as modified herein. High range water-reducing admixtures, when permitted for use,
 shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 194, Type F or Type G.
 1054.4.1 Ce rtification. T he manufacturer shall submit certification to Construction and Materials prior
 to approval.
 1054.4.1.1 T he certification shall provide the following:
 (a) T he brand name and designation.
 (b) T he composition or description of the admixture.
 
 664
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (c) T he manufacturing ranges for specific gravity at 77 F and percent total solids.
 (d) T he infrared spectrum.
 (e) T he manner in which the material will be identified on containers.
 (f) T he material is in accordance with these specifications.
 1054.4.1.2 T he certification shall include or have attached specific test results in accordance with
 AASHT O M 194, Type A, F or G, as applicable, and the recommendation for use, including amounts to be
 added.
 1054.4.2 Packaging and Marking. T he containers in which water-reducing admixtures are delivered shall
 be plainly marked with the manufacturer's name, the brand name and designation of the material, lot
 number and net quantity. A delivery ticket showing this information shall accompany bulk shipments.
 1054.5 Re tarding Admixture s. Retarding admixtures shall be in accordance with
 AASHT O M 194, Type B or D, except as modified herein.
 1054.5.1 Ce rtification. T he manufacturer shall submit certification to Construction and Materials prior
 to approval.
 1054.5.1.1 T he certification shall provide the following:
 (a) T he brand name and designation.
 (b) T he composition or description of the admixture.
 (c) T he manufacturing ranges for specific gravity at 77 F and percent total solids.
 (d) T he infrared spectrum.
 (e) T he manner in which the material will be identified on containers.
 (f) T he material is in accordance with these specifications.
 1054.5.1.2 T he certification shall include or have attached specific test results in accordance with
 AASHT O M 194, Type B or D, and the recommendation for use, including amounts to be added.
 1054.5.2 Packaging and Marking. T he containers in which retarding admixtures are delivered shall be
 plainly marked with the manufacturer's name, the brand name and designation of the material, lot number
 and net quantity. A delivery ticket showing this information shall accompany bulk shipments.
 1054.6 Acce le rating Admixture s. Accelerating admixtures shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 194,
 Type C or E, except as modified herein.
 1054.6.1 Ce rtification. T he manufacturer shall submit certification to Construction and Materials prior
 to approval.
 1054.6.1.1 T he certification shall provide the following:
 (a) T he brand name and designation.
 (b) T he composition or description of the admixture.
 (c) T he manufacturing ranges for specific gravity at 77 F and percent total solids.
 (d) T he infrared spectrum.
 
 665
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (e) T he manner in which the material will be identified on containers.
 (f) T he material is in accordance with these specifications.
 1054.6.1.2 T he certification shall include or have attached specific test results in accordance with
 AASHT O M 194, Type C or E, and the recommendation for use, including amounts to be added.
 1054.6.2 Packaging and Marking. T he containers in which accelerating admixtures are delivered shall be
 plainly marked with the manufacturer's name, the brand name and designation of the material, lot number
 and net quantity. A delivery ticket showing this information shall accompany bulk shipments.
 1054.7 Late x Emulsion Admixture s. Latex emulsion admixtures shall be non-toxic, film-forming,
 polymeric emulsion in water to which all stabilizers have been added at the point of manufacture. T he
 admixture shall be a styrene-butadiene latex emulsion in which at least
 90 percent of the non-volatiles are styrene-butadiene polymers.
 1054.7.1. Prope rtie s. T he admixture shall be homogeneous, uniform in composition and shall be in
 accordance with the following requirements when tested with the procedures shown in Report No. FHWA
 RD 78 35, April 1978, Styrene-Butadiene Latex Modifiers for Bridge Deck Overlay Concrete:
 Property
 Color
 P olymer Type
 P ercent Solids
 
 Requirement
 White
 Styrene-Butadiene
 46 - 53
 5.0 - 12.0, the pH may not vary more than ± 1 from
 pH
 the pH of matl. submitted for prequalification.
 1400 to 2500 Angstroms, the mean particle size shall
 P article Size
 not vary more than ± 300 Angstroms from the mean
 diameter of material submitted for prequalification.
 ± 20 centipoises of the viscosity of material
 Viscosity
 submitted for prequalification.
 P ercent Coagulum
 0.10 percent by weight, max.
 0.10 percent by weight max. coagulum after 2
 Freeze-Thaw Stability
 freeze-thaw cycles.
 Surface Tension
 50.0 dynes/cm, max.
 P ercent Butadiene
 30 to 40 by weight
 
 1054.7.2 Ce rtification. T he manufacturer shall submit certification to Construction and Materials prior
 to approval.
 1054.7.2.1 T he certification shall provide the following:
 (a) T he brand name and designation.
 (b) T he composition or description of the admixture.
 (c) T he manufacturing ranges for specific gravity at 77 F by AASHT O T 157, percent total solids
 by AST M D 1644, Method A and pH by AASHT O T 200.
 (d) T he infrared spectrum.
 (e) T he manner in which the material will be identified on containers.
 (f) T he material is in accordance with these specifications.
 1054.7.2.2 T he certification shall include or have attached specific test results in accordance with this
 specification.
 1054.7.3 Packaging and Marking. T he containers in which latex emulsion admixtures are delivered shall
 be plainly marked with the manufacturer's name, the brand name and designation of the material, lot
 
 666
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 number and net quantity. A delivery ticket showing this information shall accompany bulk shipments.
 
 667
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1055
 CO NCRETE CURING MATERIAL
 1055.1 Scope . T his specification covers material to be used for the purpose of curing concrete.
 1055.2 Liquid Me mbrane -Forming Curing Compounds.
 1055.2.1 Acce ptance . All material under this specification shall be obtained from a source identified on
 the PAL designated for this specification. If the manufacturer is different from the source supplying the
 material, the manufacturer shall also be listed. All material under this specification will be inspected and
 accepted in accordance with Sec 106.
 1055.2.2 Mate rial.
 1055.2.2.1 Ge ne ral. Water retention properties for all curing compounds shall be determined by AST M
 Test Method C 156. T he vehicle class of all curing compounds shall be Class A.
 1055.2.2.2 Type 1-D Curing Compounds. Type 1-D liquid membrane-forming curing compounds shall
 be in accordance with AST M C 309 for Type 1-D, clear or translucent with fugitive dye.
 1055.2.2.3 Type 2 Curing Compounds. Type 2, liquid membrane-forming curing compounds shall be in
 accordance with AST M C 309 for Type 2, white pigmented.
 1055.2.2.4 Bridge Curing Compounds. Bridge curing compounds shall be liquid membrane-curing
 compounds in accordance with AST M C 309 for Type 1-D or Type 2 and shall be designated to be
 dissipating. All bridge curing compounds shall be manufactured such that the curing compounds may be
 removed prior to dissipation.
 1055.2.3 Docume ntation.
 1055.2.3.1 Ce rtification For Q ualification. Prior to use and in addition to the required PAL
 documentation, the manufacturer shall submit certification to Construction and Materials, setting forth the
 brand name and designation, the composition or description of the curing material, the manner in which
 the material will be identified on the containers, and shall list typical values of current tests for consistency,
 drying time, reflectance and moisture retention.
 1055.2.3.2 Additional Ce rtification. Certification for bridge curing compounds shall include a statement
 that the product is manufactured to dissipate. T he certification shall specify the method by which removal
 of the compound prior to dissipation or removal of residual material from the surface can be accomplished.
 1055.2.3.3 Shipme nt Docume ntation. For each shipment of material, the source shall maintain the
 manufacturer ’s certification and test results showing that the product is in accordance with this
 specification. T he manufacturer ’s certification and test results shall be made available upon request.
 1055.3 O the r Concre te Curing Mate rial.
 1055.3.1 Acce ptance . All material under this specification shall be obtained from a source identified on
 the PAL designated for this specification. All material under this specification will be inspected and
 accepted in accordance with Sec 106.
 1055.3.2 Mate rial.
 1055.3.2.1 Wate rproof Pape r. Waterproof paper shall be in accordance with AST M C 171.
 1055.3.2.2 Polye thyle ne She e ting. Polyethylene sheeting shall be in accordance with Sec 1058 for
 curing Portland cement concrete.
 1055.3.2.3 White Burlap-Polye thyle ne She e ting. White burlap-polyethylene sheeting shall be in
 accordance with AST M C 171.
 
 668
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1055.3.2.4 Burlap and Mats of Jute or Cotton. Burlap shall be fabric made from jute or other suitable
 fibers. Jute mats shall consist of two plies of burlap stitched together to maintain the shape and stability of
 the unit. Cotton mats shall consist of filler or cotton batts covered with unsized cloth or burlap, and tufted
 or stitched to maintain the shape and stability of the unit. Burlap, mats or other synthetic material
 equivalents shall, in the judgment of the engineer, be of such construction and in such a condition as
 required to adequately maintain free moisture on the surface of the concrete with the type of system being
 used to provide the water. Material shall be free from deleterious matter harmful to concrete.
 1055.3.3 Docume ntation. T he distributor shall maintain certification that the material supplied is in
 accordance with these specifications. T he certification shall be made available upon request.
 
 669
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1056
 CO NCRETE TINTING AND STAINING MATERIAL
 SECTIO N 1056.10 CO NCRETE TINTING MATERIAL
 1056.10.1 De scription. T his work item shall consist of providing a concrete tinting material to
 aesthetically color concrete as shown on the plans.
 1056.10.2 Mate rial Re quire me nts. T his material shall consist of a homogeneous mixture mineral oxide
 pigment of an approved tint with such other additives as deemed necessary by the manufacturer. T he
 tinting material shall conform to the specification outlined on AST M C979. T he material shall be free
 from oil, grease, dirt and nonferrous particles. T he tinting material shall not contain any material that
 might promote oxidation of the iron particles if exposed to air and moisture, or that might have any
 detrimental effect on concrete. T he contractor shall supply the engineer with a maufacturer's certification
 indicating that the material supplied is in accordance with this specification.
 1056.10.3 Construction Re quire me nts. T he contractor shall incorporate the tinting material into the
 concrete through mixing with the aggregate, cementitious material and water in accordance with the
 manufacturer's recommendation. T he dry shake method; whereby the tinting material powder, combined
 with dry cement and sand, is sprinkled onto the concrete and worked into the surface through finishing;
 shall not be allowed.
 SECTIO N 1056.20 CO NCRETE STAINING MATERIAL
 1056.20.1 De scription. T his work item shall consist of providing a field concrete stain to aesthetically
 color concrete exteriors as shown on the plans.
 1056.20.2 Mate rial Re quire me nts. T he material shall be two-coat, pigmented acrylic resin system
 which penetrates into the concrete surface to provide water repellency, semi-opaque aesthetic color and
 salt resistance and shall form a breathable film allowing trapped moisture vapor to safely migrate through
 the coating without blistering or peeling. T he contractor shall supply the engineer with a manufacturer's
 certification indicating that the material supplied is in accordance with this specification.
 1056.20.3 Construction Re quire me nts. T he concrete surface shall be fully cured a minimum of 28
 days prior to application of the aesthetic concrete stain. T he absence of moisture in the concrete surface
 shall be verified with standard test AST M D4263. Pressure washing with a minimum of 3,000 psi shall be
 used to remove all foreign matter, form oils, waxes, curing compounds, laitance, efflorescence and dirt.
 Sand blasting will not be permitted for cleaning. T he cleaned surface shall be free of blemishes,
 discolorations, surface voids and conspicuous form marks to the satisfaction of the engineer. T he concrete
 stain shall be adequately mixed within its container until homogenous in color. Application of the stain
 shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations including allowable ambient conditions.
 Application of the stain will not be allowed during rain. All manufacturers’ safety precautions shall be
 submitted to the engineer prior to work and followed during staining.
 
 670
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1057
 MATERIAL FO R JO INTS
 1057.1 Scope . T his specification covers joint material to be used as specified or as shown on the plans.
 1057.2 Acce ptance . All material under this specification shall be obtained from a source identified on the
 PAL designated for this specification.
 1057.3 Dowe l Bars. Dowels for transverse joints shall be in accordance with the requirements for plain
 rounds of AASHT O M 31. T he dowels shall be epoxy coated in accordance with Sec 1036, except the
 coating thickness shall be a 5-mil minimum, the flexibility of coating requirement will not apply and the
 cut ends will not be required to be coated. T he dowels shall be free of cutting burrs and other projections.
 Dowel supporting units shall be in accordance with one of the types shown on the plans.
 1057.3.1 T he free end of the dowel bar shall be coated with an approved graphite grease for a length of 11
 inches. Graphite grease shall contain a minimum of 25 percent graphite, and the graphite content shall be
 certified by the manufacturer or shown on the container label. Graphite grease shall be applied with a thin,
 uniform coating that will result in a thorough covering of the free end of the bar.
 1057.3.2 In lieu of the graphite grease application, the dowel bar basket supplier may supply completed
 basket units pre-dipped in an approved bondbreaker solution. T he bondbreaker solution shall not be applied
 in a spray or field application. T he resulting dry dowel bar coating shall be visually evident. T he coating
 shall be uniformly applied without excessive drips or thickness. Dirty or excessively scraped dowel bar units
 will be rejected. Rejected units may be used if the units are fully cleaned of all dirt and bondbreaker coating
 and graphite grease is applied according to these specifications. T he dowel basket supplier shall provide a
 certification for the coating with each shipment, certifying the bondbreaker product name, manufacturer
 and date of coating application.
 1057.4 Tie Bars. T ie bars for longitudinal joints and construction joints shall be round, deformed and in
 accordance with AASHT O M 31, except for tie bars that are to be bent and straightened shall be in
 accordance with AASHT O M 31, Grade 40. T ie bars shall not be bent and straightened more than one time.
 T ie bars shall be epoxy coated in accordance with Sec 1036, except the coating thickness shall be a 5-mil
 minimum, the flexibility of coating requirement will not apply and the cut ends will not be required to be
 coated.
 1057.5 Concre te and Asphalt Joint Se ale r, Hot-Poure d Elastic Type . T he sealer material shall be in
 accordance with AST M D 6690, Type II. T he joint sealer material shall be packed and shipped in suitable
 commercial containers clearly marked with the name of the material, the name of the manufacturer, brand
 name, weight, batch number, pouring temperature recommended by the manufacturer and maximum safe
 heating temperature.
 1057.6 Pave me nt Joint Forming Mate rial.
 1057.6.1 Pre forme d Fibe r Expansion Joint Fille r. Preformed fiber expansion joint filler material shall
 be in accordance with AASHT O M 213. Percent asphalt content shall be tested in accordance with
 AASHT O T 42 or 164 with the following modifications: Oven dry test strips at 104 ± 3 C for one hour.
 Cool and weigh approximately 50 g into an extraction bowl. Cover test portion in the bowl with a
 chlorinated solvent, such as trichloroethylene, and allow sufficient time for solvent to soak the test
 portion. Follow test procedure outlined in AASHT O T 164 section 12.3 and 12.4, except discard extract
 and washings. Carefully transfer extracted test strips and scrap residue from the filter ring into a tared
 weighing pan. Oven dry at 104 ± 3 C for one (1) hour and cool in a desiccators. Calculate the percent
 asphalt content by weight on an oven dry basis per AST M D 545 subsection 7.5.4. In cases of dispute,
 AASHT O T 42 test results will control.
 1057.6.2 Se mi-rigid, Close d-ce ll Polypropyle ne Foam, Pre forme d Expansion Joint Fille r. T his
 material shall be semi-rigid, closed-cell polypropylene foam, preformed expansion joint filler in accordance
 with AST M D8139.
 1057.7 Joints for Concre te Structure s.
 
 671
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1057.7.1 Plastic Wate rstop. T he plastic waterstop shall consist of a basic resin of polyvinyl chloride
 (PVC) with additional resins, plasticizers and stabilizers as necessary to produce a durable material with a
 high fatigue point, resistant to acid and alkali solutions, showing little deterioration under accelerated aging
 tests and shall meet the approval of the engineer. T he plastic waterstop shall have a tensile strength of no
 less than 1,800 psi and an ultimate elongation of no less than 200 percent. T he waterstop shall be a
 continuous strip, ribbed on both sides, and with a hollow bulb center, a “ U” shaped reinforced center-pleat
 section, or other approved type of center section.
 1057.7.2 Rubbe r Wate rstop. T he rubber water stop shall consist of a durable, elastic, cured rubber
 compound capable of effectively sealing joints in concrete against the infiltration of moisture.
 1057.7.2.1 T he rubber waterstop shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
 (a) Hardness - T he Shore A durometer hardness shall be 60 - 70.
 (b) Elongation - T he elongation shall be no less than 450 percent.
 (c) Tensile Strength - T he tensile strength shall be no less than 3,000 psi.
 (d) Water Absorption - T he water absorption shall be a maximum of five percent by weight (mass)
 after immersion in water for two days at 158 F.
 (e) Tensile Strength After Aging - T he tensile strength of the test specimen, after accelerated
 aging test of seven days at 158 F, shall be no less than 80 percent of the tensile strength prior to
 the aging test. T he tensile strength of the test specimen, after accelerated aging test of 48 hours in
 oxygen at 158 F and 300 psi, shall be no less than 80 percent of the tensile strength prior to the
 test.
 (f) Compression Set - T he compression set after 22 hours at 158 F shall be no more than 30
 percent.
 1057.7.2.2 T he waterstop shall be manufactured in such a manner that the finished product will have an
 integral cross section that will be dense, homogeneous, and free from porosity and other imperfections.
 Minor surface defects, such as surface peel covering less than one square inch, and surface cavities or bumps
 less than 1/4 inch in the longest lateral dimension and less than 1/16 inch deep, will be permitted.
 1057.7.3 Coppe r She e ting for Flashing. Copper sheeting shall be of soft grade containing no less than
 99.7 percent copper and shall be capable of being bent cold through an angle of 180 degrees flat upon itself
 without evidence of cracking. Test specimens shall have an elongation in 2 inches of at least 20 percent.
 T he weight per square foot of the sheeting to be used will be shown on the plans. Tolerances in thickness
 shall be in accordance with AST M B 248.
 1057.7.4 Pre forme d Sponge Rubbe r Expansion and Partition Joint Fille r. T his material shall be in
 accordance with AASHT O M 153, Type I, Sponge Rubber.
 1057.8 Plastic Joint Compound for Vitrifie d Clay and Concre te Pipe . Plastic joint compound shall
 be a homogeneous blend of bituminous or butyl rubber material, inert filler and suitable solvents or
 plasticizing compounds thoroughly mixed at the factory to a uniform consistency suitable for sealing joints
 of vitrified clay and concrete pipe. T he physical requirements of the compound shall be in accordance with
 AST M C 990. T rowel grade material shall conform to the following requirement:
 Bitumen, soluble in soluble chlorinated solvent,
 45
 such as Trichloroethylene, percent by weight, min
 Ash, percent by weight
 15-50
 P enetration, standard cone,
 110-275
 150 g, 5 sec, 25 C - uses 12 ounce can, d mm
 
 Primer, as recommended by the manufacturer, shall be used with extruded rope or flat tape types, if required
 to maintain the material in position while pipe sections are being joined.
 
 672
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1057.9 Tubular Joint Se al. T ubular joint seal shall be manufactured from extruded closed-cellular rubber,
 the base polymer being a blend of nitrile and vinyl meeting the physical requirements of AST M D 1056,
 Type 2, Class C, Grade 1, and the chemical resistance requirements of AST M C990. T he seal shall be a
 single continuous part conforming to the joint shape. T he outer surface shall be completely covered with a
 natural skin. T he cross-sectional diameter and installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's
 recommendations for the size of pipe being placed.
 1057.10 Silicone Expansion Joint Se alant. T he sealant for expansion joints shall be in accordance with
 Sec 717.30. T he silicone joint sealant shall be a rapid cure, self-leveling, cold applied, single or twocomponent silicone sealant. T he sealant shall demonstrate resilience, flexibility and resistance to moisture
 and puncture upon curing. T he sealant shall demonstrate excellent adhesion to Portland cement concrete,
 polymer concrete and steel over a range of temperatures from –30 to 130 F, while maintaining a watertight
 seal. T he sealant shall not contain any solvents or diluents that cause shrinkage or expansion during curing.
 Acid-cure sealants shall not be used. T he date of manufacture or “ use by” date shall be provided with each
 lot of sealant or primer. Material 12 months old or older from the date of manufacture or past the “ use by”
 date shall not be used. T he engineer reserves the right to test representative samples from material
 proposed for use. If a backer rod is required, it shall be closed-cell material, as recommended by the sealant
 manufacturer. T he manufacturer shall certify that the sealant meets or exceeds the following test
 requirements before installation begins:
 Physical Properties:
 Each component as supplied:
 Specific Gravity (ASTM D 1475)
 Extrusion Rate (ASTM C 1183)
 Durometer Hardness, Shore (ASTM D 2240)
 "00" (0 C and 25 C ± 1 C [77 ± 3 F])
 Ozone and U.V. Resistance (ASTM C 793)
 
 1.2 - 1.4
 200 - 550 g/minute
 30 - 60
 
 After Mixing:
 Flow
 Tack-Free Time (ASTM C 679)
 
 Self-Leveling
 60 minutes maximum
 
 Upon Complete Cure: (ASTM D 5329 a )
 Joint Elongation (Adhesion to concrete/
 steel/polymer concrete)
 Joint Modulus (at 100% elongation)
 
 600% minimum
 
 a Modified;
 
 Requirement
 
 No chalking, cracking or
 bond loss after 5000 hrs.
 
 3-12 psi
 
 Sample cured two days at 77 ± 2 F and 50 ± 5 percent relative
 
 humidity.
 1057.11 Silicone Joint Se alant for Saw Cut and Forme d Joints. T he sealant for sawed and formed
 joint shall be in accordance with Sec 717.40. T he silicone joint sealant shall be a cold applied, single
 component, chemically curing gray sealant with 100 percent elongation and 50 percent compressive joint
 movement capability. If a backer rod is required, it shall be closed-cell material, as recommended by the
 sealant manufacturer. T he sealant shall be type NS (Non-Sag) and the physical properties shall be in
 accordance with AST M D 5893 and the following:
 Physical Properties
 Requirement
 Color
 Gray
 Tack free time
 35 – 75 minutes
 7 days @ 75 F – 90 F and 45 – 55 %
 Cure time
 relative humidity
 
 1057.12 Docume ntation. All material specified in this section shall include certification showing
 representative test results of the material and certify that the material supplied is in accordance with these
 specifications.
 
 673
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1058
 PO LYETHYLENE SHEETING
 1058.1 Scope . T his specification covers polyethylene sheeting for use in highway construction.
 1058.2 Polye thyle ne She e ting for Curing. Polyethylene sheeting for curing Portland cement concrete
 shall be white and shall be in accordance with AST M C 171.
 1058.3 Polye thyle ne She e ting as a Bond Bre ake r. Polyethylene sheeting for use as a bond breaker
 between a bridge approach slab and a granular base shall be in accordance with AST M E 1745 Performance
 Class A.
 1058.4 Ce rtification and Acce ptance . T he contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification that
 the material supplied is in accordance with these requirements.
 
 674
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1059
 PRO TECTIVE CO ATING MATERIAL
 SECTIO N 1059.10 PRO TECTIVE CO ATING–CO NCRETE BENTS AND PIERS (URETHANE).
 1059.10.1 Scope . T his specification covers modified urethane or polyurethane elastomeric coating to be
 used as shown on the plans. T his material will typically be applied under expansion devices for protection
 from deleterious agents in areas where aesthetics is not a high priority.
 1059.10.2 Ge ne ral Re quire me nts. T he material shall be suitable for outdoor exposure and shall be
 resistant to deterioration by ultraviolet light. Additives for ultraviolet stabilization shall not be added after
 the original manufacturing process. T he material shall be suitable for application to concrete surfaces.
 Surface preparation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations. T he material shall be
 suitable for application to obtain a thickness of 40 mils, dry film without runs or sags when applied to a
 vertical concrete surface. T he material shall have a minimum shelf life, in unopened containers, of at least
 six months from the date of delivery.
 1059.10.3 Cure d Mate rial. T he cured material shall be in accordance with the following:
 Protective Coating – Concrete B ents and Piers (Urethane)
 Property
 Requirement
 Shore A Hardness, ASTM D 2240 (Material shall be cured in
 40 mil thick film for 7 days at 75 ± 2 F at 50% relative
 15,
 humidity. Test specimen shall be composed of plied pieces, to minimum
 a minimum 1/4-inch thickness).
 Tensile Strength, ASTM D 412 (Method and time of cure
 45 psi,
 may be modified as recommended by the manufacturer).
 minimum
 Elongation, ASTM D 412 (Method and time of cure may be
 200 percent, minimum
 modified as recommended by the manufacturer).
 Water Vapor P ermeability, ASTM D 1653 or ASTM E 96,
 0.8 perms, maximum
 Method BW 40 mil film thickness.
 
 1059.10.4 Packaging. All two-component materials shall be prepackaged to exact mixing quantities.
 1059.10.5 Manufacture r and Brand Name Q ualification. Prior to approval and use, the manufacturer
 shall submit a representative one-gallon sample to Construction and Materials. Upon approval of the
 material, the brand name and manufacturer will be placed on a list of qualified Urethane Protective Coating
 Agents for Concrete Bents and Piers. T he sample shall be identified by brand name, manufacturer's name
 and address, and shall be accompanied by the following:
 (a) Manufacturer's complete material data showing typical test results for the properties specified,
 generic name of the major components of the material, mixing instructions, surface preparation
 and application instructions and intended use.
 (b) Test results after 1000 hours of exposure in an accelerated weathering device, in accordance
 with AST M D 822, Procedure B. T he film thickness of test specimens shall be 40 mils and shall
 show no cracking, flaking or blistering after exposure. Slight discoloration will be permitted.
 (c) In lieu of the accelerated weathering test results required in Sec 1059.10.5(b), the manufacturer
 may submit a use history showing satisfactory performance for three years in at least two exposed
 applications. Name, address and telephone number of the users shall be included in the use history.
 1059.10.6 Acce ptance . T he contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification stating that the
 material supplied is in accordance with all requirements specified and that the material furnished is of the
 same composition as originally qualified. T he engineer reserves the right to sample the material at
 destination if deemed necessary.
 SECTIO N 1059.20 PRO TECTIVE CO ATING – CO NCRETE BENTS AND PIERS (EPO XY).
 1059.20.1 Scope . T his specification covers two-component modified polyamide converted epoxy to be
 used as shown on the plans. T his material will typically be applied under expansion devices where aesthetics
 
 675
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 is a high priority.
 1059.20.2 Mate rial. T he material shall be suitable for application to obtain a minimum coating thickness
 of 6 mils, dry film without runs or sags when applied to a vertical concrete surface. Pot life and method and
 time of cure shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. T he material shall be suitable
 for outdoor exposure and shall be resistant to deterioration by ultraviolet light. Additives for ultraviolet
 stabilization shall not be added after the original manufacturing process. T he material shall have a
 minimum shelf life, in unopened containers, of at least six months from the date of delivery.
 1059.20.2.1 Color. T he color shall be clear or concrete gray.
 1059.20.2.2 Finish. T he finish shall be high gloss.
 1059.20.3 Packaging. Two-component material shall be prepackaged to exact mixing quantities.
 1059.20.4 Manufacture r and Brand Name Q ualification. Prior to approval and use, the manufacturer
 shall submit a representative one-gallon sample to Construction and Materials. Upon approval of the
 material, the brand name and manufacturer will be placed on a list of qualified Epoxy Protective Coating
 Agents for Concrete Bents and Piers. T he sample shall be identified by brand name, manufacturer's name
 and address, and accompanied by the following information:
 (a) Manufacturer's complete material data showing typical test results for the properties specified,
 generic name of the major components of the material, mixing instructions, surface preparation
 and application instructions and intended use.
 (b) Test results after 1000 hours of exposure in an accelerated weathering device shall be provided.
 T he tests shall be conducted in accordance with AST M D 822 or AST M G 154 using test cycle No.
 2 defined in AST M D 822, except that during the six hour period of darkness, the relative
 humidity of the air shall be 95 ± 4%. If AST M G 154 QUV exposure testing is used, Type A lamps
 shall be used.
 1059.20.4.1 For either test, specific operating conditions shall be summarized and provided with the test
 results. T he film thickness on test specimens shall be 6 mils and shall show no cracking, flaking or
 blistering after exposure. Only slight discoloration will be permitted.
 1059.20.4.2 In lieu of the accelerated weathering test results required in Sec 1059.20.4 (b), the
 manufacturer may submit a use history showing satisfactory performance for three years in at least two
 exposed applications. Name, address and telephone number of the users shall be included in the use history.
 1059.20.5 Acce ptance . T he contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification stating that the
 material supplied is in accordance with all requirements specified and that the material furnished is of the
 same composition as originally qualified. T he engineer reserves the right to sample the material at
 destination if deemed necessary.
 SECTIO N 1059.30 CO NCRETE AND MASO NRY PRO TECTIO N SYSTEM.
 1059.30.1 Scope . T his specification covers clear penetrating siloxane or silane based sealer for use as
 shown on the plans.
 1059.30.2 Physical Prope rtie s. T he sealer shall be breathable and non-yellowing and shall be in
 accordance with the following requirements:
 Concrete and Masonry Protection System
 Specif ication Item a
 
 Sealer Type
 
 Vertical Application Horizontal Application
 Solids Content, percent by weight, min.
 6.7
 20
 Reduction in Water Absorption, percent, min.
 80
 85
 Reduction in Chloride Intrusion, percent, min.
 82
 85
 Water Vapor Transmission, percent, min.
 110
 
 676
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 a Tested
 
 in accordance with NCHRP 244 Series tests.
 
 1059.30.3 Manufacture r and Brand Name Q ualification. Prior to approval and use, the manufacturer
 shall submit a representative one-quart sample to Construction and Materials. T he sample shall be
 identified as to brand name, designation as to horizontal or vertical application, manufacturer's name and
 address, and shall be accompanied by the manufacturer ’s data and application sheets, and test results in
 accordance with Sec 1059.30.2. T he manufacturer shall submit certification that the material complies
 with all requirements of this specification. Upon approval of the material, the brand name and
 manufacturer will be placed on a list of qualified Concrete and Masonry Protection Systems.
 1059.30.4 Fie ld Approval. Prior to application of the sealer, including bulk purchase and delivery of
 products, the contractor shall prepare a minimum 12 x 12 inch application sample on each of the specified
 concrete or masonry products for the purpose of demonstrating the final effect, visual and
 physical/chemical, of the planned installation. T he contractor shall proceed with work only after the
 engineer ’s acceptance of the test application for color and compatibility with the substrate.
 1059.30.5 Acce ptance . T he contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification stating that the
 material supplied is in accordance with all requirements specified and that the material furnished is of the
 same composition as originally approved. T he engineer reserves the right to sample the material at
 destination if deemed necessary.
 SECTIO N 1059.40 SACRIFICIAL GRAFFITI PRO TECTIO N SYSTEM.
 1059.40.1 Scope . T his specification covers a sacrificial graffiti protection system for application to all
 surfaces as shown on the plans.
 1059.40.2 Physical Prope rtie s. T he sacrificial graffiti protection system shall be in accordance with the
 following physical properties and shall be chemically compatible with any other coatings to be used. T he
 material shall be suitable for application to obtain a wet-film thickness of 4 to 6 mils without runs or sags
 when applied to a vertical surface.
 Sacrif icial G raf f iti Protection System
 Item
 Requirement
 Melting P oint, F, ASTM F 766
 165 ±5
 Solids Content, min., percent by weight,
 26
 ASTM D 2834
 Volatile Organic Content (VOC), lb/gal, max, ASTM D 3960
 0.58
 
 1059.40.3 Manufacture r and Brand Name Q ualification. Prior to approval and use, the manufacturer
 shall submit a representative one-gallon sample to Construction and Materials. T he manufacturer shall
 submit documentation to Construction and Materials stating brand name, manufacturer's name and address
 and accompanied by the manufacturer ’s data and application sheets. T he manufacturer shall submit
 certification, including specific test results, that the material complies with all requirements of this
 specification. Upon approval of the material, the brand name and manufacturer will be placed on a list of
 qualified Sacrificial Graffiti Protection Systems.
 1059.40.4 Fie ld Approval. Prior to application of the sacrificial graffiti protection system, including bulk
 purchase and delivery of products, the contractor shall prepare a minimum 12 x 12 inch application sample
 on each of the specified concrete or masonry products for the purpose of demonstrating the compatibility
 of the planned installation. If the sacrificial graffiti protection system is to be applied over previous
 coatings, the test specimen shall have already received these previous coatings. T he contractor shall
 proceed with work only after the engineer ’s acceptance of the test application for appearance and
 compatibility.
 1059.40.5 Acce ptance . T he contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification stating that the
 material supplied is in accordance with all requirements specified and that the material furnished is of the
 same composition as originally approved. T he engineer reserves the right to sample the material at
 destination if deemed necessary.
 
 677
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1059.50 TEMPO RARY CO ATING – CO NCRETE BENTS AND PIERS (WEATHERING
 STEEL).
 1059.50.1 Scope . T his specification covers a system for protection against absorptive staining from
 unpainted, corrosion-resistant steel during initial weathering as shown on plans.
 1059.50.2 Physical Prope rtie s. T he temporary coating shall be in accordance with the following
 physical properties and shall be compatible with any other coatings to be used. T he material shall be
 suitable for application to obtain a wet-film thickness of 4 to 6 mils without runs or sags when applied to a
 vertical surface.
 Temporary Coating – Concrete B ents and Piers (Weathering Steel)
 Item
 Requirement
 Melting P oint, F , ASTM F 766
 165 ±5
 Solids Content, min., percent by weight, ASTM D 2834
 26
 Volatile Organic Content (VOC), lb/gal, max, ASTM D 3960
 0.58
 
 1059.50.3 Manufacture r and Brand Name Q ualification. Prior to approval and use, the manufacturer
 shall submit a representative one-gallon sample to Construction and Materials. T he manufacturer shall
 submit documentation to Construction and Materials stating brand name, manufacturer's name and address,
 and accompanied by the manufacturer ’s data and application sheets. T he manufacturer shall submit
 certification, including specific test results, that the material complies with all requirements of this
 specification. Upon approval of the material, the brand name and manufacturer will be placed on a list of
 qualified Rust Staining Protection Systems.
 1059.50.4 Acce ptance . T he contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification stating that the
 material supplied is in accordance with all requirements specified and that the material furnished is of the
 same composition as originally approved. T he engineer reserves the right to sample the material at
 destination if deemed necessary.
 
 678
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1060
 ELECTRICAL CO NDUIT
 1060.1 Scope . T his specification covers electrical conduit to be used as specified or as shown on the plans.
 1060.2 Acce ptance . All material in this section will be accepted based on certification indicating the
 material is in accordance with this specification and any testing as required by the engineer.
 1060.3 Mate rial.
 1060.3.1 Rigid Me tallic Conduit and Tubing. Except for rigid aluminum conduit, rigid metallic conduit
 shall be galvanized on both the inside and the outside surfaces. T he weight of zinc coating shall be no less
 than 0.5 ounce per square foot of coated surface, as determined in accordance with AASHT O T 65. T he
 interior or exterior surface, or both, may be given a coating of suitable material to facilitate installation of
 wires and cables and to permit the conduit to be readily distinguished from pipe used for purposes other
 than electrical.
 1060.3.1.1 Rigid Ste e l Conduit, Zinc Coate d. Rigid steel conduit, zinc coated, (GRC) shall be in
 accordance with ANSI C80.1, except as noted herein.
 1060.3.1.2 Inte rme diate Me tal Conduit. Intermediate metal conduit (IMC) shall be in accordance with
 ANSI C80.6, except as noted herein.
 1060.3.1.3 Rigid Aluminum Conduit. Rigid aluminum conduit (RAC) shall be in accordance with ANSI
 C80.5.
 1060.3.1.4 Ele ctrical Me tallic Tubing, Zinc Coate d. Electrical metallic tubing (EMT ), zinc coated,
 shall be in accordance with ANSI C80.3 except as noted herein.
 1060.3.1.5 Fittings for Rigid Me tal Conduit and Ele ctrical Me tallic Tubing. Fittings shall be in
 accordance with ANSI C80.4.
 1060.3.1.6 Fittings for Intermediate Metal Conduit. Fittings shall be in accordance with UL 1242, except
 the coating shall meet the same requirements as the conduit with which the fittings are used.
 1060.3.1.7 Inspe ction. Conduit, tubing and fittings will be inspected for compliance with specifications.
 Test specimens for determination of weight of coating will be at least 2 inches long, cut no less than 6
 inches from the end of the length of conduit or tubing selected for testing. If the prescribed two additional
 samples for retests are taken, and either sample does not comply, the lot represented will be rejected.
 1060.3.2 Rigid Non-Me tallic Conduit. Rigid non-metallic conduit shall be either polyvinyl chloride
 (PVC) or high-density polyethylene (HDPE).
 1060.3.2.1 Polyvinyl Chloride Conduit. PVC conduit, bends, couplings and fittings shall be in
 accordance with UL 651.
 1060.3.2.2 High De nsity Polye thyle ne Conduit. HDPE conduit shall be in accordance with AST M D
 3035 SDR11.
 1060.3.2.3 Fittings for Polyvinyl Conduit. Fittings for PVC conduit shall be in accordance with UL 514.
 Cement used for the fittings shall be in accordance with the conduit manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 1060.3.2.4 Fittings for High Density Polyethylene Conduit. Fittings for HDPE conduit shall be in
 accordance with AST M D 2683. Epoxy used for the fittings shall be in accordance with the conduit
 manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 1060.3.2.5 Inspe ction and Te sting. Material will be inspected for compliance with the specifications, and
 samples for testing will be taken at either the project location or warehouse, as determined by the engineer.
 
 679
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1060.4 Ce rtification. T he contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification that the material
 supplied is in accordance with all requirements. If requested by the engineer, the contractor shall also
 furnish typical test results representative of the material.
 
 680
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1061
 ELECTRICAL CO NDUCTO RS
 1061.1 Ge ne ral. T his specification covers electrical conductors and associated material for use on
 highway construction projects. Contractor furnished equipment that will become the property of the
 Commission shall be of new stock unless stated otherwise in the contract documents. Electrical conductors
 and associated equipment shall be in accordance with applicable requirements of ICEA, IMSA, NEMA, EIA,
 NEC, NFPA and regulations of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and shall meet the approval of the
 engineer.
 1061.2 Conductors. Except as noted, all conductors shall be soft drawn, Class B or C stranded copper wire
 in accordance with NEMA WC70/ICEA A-95-658. Solid conductors may be used only for grounding where
 connected to a ground rod.
 1061.3 High Voltage Powe r Cable . T he voltage rating for high voltage power cable supplying primary
 electrical power shall be 5 KV for primary voltages less than 5,000 volts, and 15 KV for voltages of 5,000
 volts and greater. T he specific type of cable shall be as recommended and approved by the utility company
 or municipality supplying power.
 1061.4 Low Voltage Powe r Cable . Low voltage power cable shall be 600-volt, single conductor cable and
 thermoplastic or thermosetting cross-linked polyethylene insulated. All cable shall be plainly marked on
 the outside with the manufacturer's name and identification in accordance with industry practice. Insulation
 type shall be T HHN/T HWN-2 orXHHW-2. Average thickness of insulation shall be no less than specified
 in the following table, with a minimum thickness of 90 percent thereof.
 Size
 (AWG or kcmil)
 14-12
 10
 8-6
 4-2
 1-4/0
 250-500
 501-1000
 Size
 (AWG or kcmil)
 14-10
 8-2
 1-4/0
 213-500
 501-1000
 
 Thickness, Mils
 THHN/THWN-2)
 15
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 Thickness, Mils
 THHN/XHHW-2)
 30
 45
 55
 65
 80
 
 1061.5 Cable -Conduit. Cable-conduit shall consist of one to four low voltage power cables with an
 insulated sized electrical neutral and a bare safety ground, factory installed in black polyethylene conduit
 intended for direct burial. T he conduit shall be plainly marked on the outside with manufacturer's name and
 identification in accordance with industry practice and shall be in accordance with AST M D 3485. Cableconduit shall be accompanied by the manufacturer's certification stating the conduit is in accordance with
 the requirements of this specification.
 1061.6 Pole and Bracke t Cable . Pole and bracket cable located in the lighting or signal pole that
 supplies electrical power to highway lighting shall consist of two single conductors. Wire size shall be No.
 10 AWG in accordance with the requirements of low voltage power cable. Insulation type shall be
 T HHN/T HWN-2 or XHHW-2. Average insulation shall be in accordance with Sec 1061.4.
 1061.7 Multi-Conductor Cable . Multi-conductor cable for traffic signals shall be No. 16 AWG, rated at
 600 volts. T he cable shall be in accordance with IMSA Specification No. 19-1 or No. 20-1.
 1061.8 Induction Loop De te ctor Cable . Induction loop detector cable shall be single-conductor No. 14
 AWG wire, with Type XHHW insulation, marked as such, rated at 600 volts. T he cable shall be in
 accordance with IMSA Specification No. 51-7.
 
 681
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1061.9 Loop De te ctor Le ad-In Cable . Lead-in cable used between the loop detector and the controller
 shall be two-conductor, twisted, shielded No. 14 AWG wire rated at 600 volts. T he cable shall be in
 accordance with IMSA Specification No. 50-2.
 1061.10 Ce rtification. All cables and conductors shall be accompanied by certification from the supplier
 indicating: (1) the supplier is familiar with the requirements of these specifications and, (2) cable furnished
 was from a lot manufactured by (manufacturer's name) whose test results are in accordance with these
 specifications.
 
 682
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1062
 PULL AND JUNCTIO N BO XES
 1062.1 Scope . T his specification covers pull and junction boxes intended for use on highway lighting and
 traffic signal projects.
 1062.2 Pull Boxe s. Pull boxes may be cast-in-place concrete, precast concrete, preformed polymer
 concrete or preformed fiberglass reinforced polymer concrete. Pull box dimensions shall be as shown on the
 plans. Each pull box shall be equipped with cable hooks as shown on the plans. Cable hooks shall be
 galvanized steel or brass with a minimum diameter of 3/8 inch and a minimum length of 5 inches.
 1062.2.1 Cast-in-place concrete pull boxes shall be constructed of Class B or B-1 concrete, or a
 commercial mixture in accordance with Sec 501. Material, proportioning, mixing, slump and transporting
 of concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501. Placing, finishing and curing shall be in accordance with
 Sec 703. Pull boxes shall be cast in a neat and workmanlike manner. Forms will be required for the inside
 surfaces of the pull box walls; and if the excavation is irregular, forms will also be required for the outside
 surfaces of the walls. An outside form shall be installed across all trenches leading into the pull box
 excavation. T he ends of all conduits through the walls shall fit tightly against the form.
 1062.2.2 Precast concrete pull boxes shall be constructed of Class B or B-1 concrete, or a commercial
 mixture in accordance with of Sec 501. Material, proportioning, mixing, slump and transporting of
 concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501. Concrete for precast pull boxes shall be placed, finished and
 cured in accordance with Sec 703.
 1062.2.3 Preformed pull boxes shall withstand a wheel load of 20,000 pounds. Pull box walls may be either
 flared or vertical. Metal conduit, if used in preformed pull boxes, shall be electrically bonded to one another
 inside each pull box.
 1062.3 Pull Box Cove rs. Each pull box shall be equipped with a bolt down cover. T he threaded hole that
 receives the cover lock-down bolt shall be open at the bottom to allow the cleanout of sand, dirt and other
 debris. Lock-down bolts shall be stainless steel or brass with a penta-head. Frames and covers for cast-inplace and precast concrete pull boxes shall be cast iron in accordance with AASHT O M 105, Class 30, and
 shall be of the dimensions and weights shown on the plans. Preformed pull box covers shall be polymer
 concrete and shall have a minimum wheel load rating of 20,000 pounds. A lift opening shall be provided on
 all covers. Covers for pull boxes to be used for highway lighting or sign lighting shall be embossed with
 "STAT E LIGHT ING". Covers for pull boxes to be used for traffic signals, or a combination of traffic signals
 and 120 volt intersection lighting, shall be embossed with "STAT E SIGNALS". Covers for pull boxes to be
 used for fiber optics shall be embossed with “ STAT E FIBER OPT ICS”.
 1062.4 Junction Boxe s. Junction boxes shall be flanged and designed for flush mounting if encased in
 concrete, or designed for surface mounting if external mounting is specified. Junction boxes shall be drilled
 or tapped for all conduit connections. Junction boxes shall be installed such that covers are removable.
 Junction boxes shall be stainless steel, fiberglass or PVC watertight NEMA 4 enclosures. PVC junction boxes
 shall have a minimum wall thickness of 1/4 inch. Junction boxes shall be in accordance with the following
 minimum sizes unless otherwise specified:
 Maximum Entering Minimum B ox Size,
 Conduit Size, Inches
 Inches
 2
 12 x 12 x 4
 4
 16 x 12 x 6
 
 1062.4.1 PVC and metal conduit shall be joined to junction boxes to make a rigid and waterproof
 connection. If metal conduit is used, an insulated bushing shall be provided at the end of the metal conduit
 on the inside of the junction box to prevent scuffing of the cable insulation.
 1062.4.2 T he junction box cover shall be made watertight with a suitable gasket and secured with stainless
 steel or cadmium plated screws or bolts.
 1062.5 Ce rtification and Acce ptance . T he contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification that
 
 683
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 the material supplied, excepting material made from cast-in-place concrete, is in accordance with these
 specifications.
 
 684
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1063
 TEMPO RARY TRAFFIC CO NTRO L DEVICES
 1063.1 Scope . T his specification covers material to be used for temporary traffic control devices.
 1063.2 Ge ne ral Re quire me nts. All temporary traffic control devices shall be manufactured as shown on
 the plans and as specified, in accordance with MUT CD requirements and shall be NCHRP 350 compliant.
 Nominal dimensions will be permitted for dimensional lumber where applicable. All temporary traffic
 control devices shall exhibit good workmanship and shall be free of objectionable marks or defects that
 affect appearance or serviceability. T he brand name or model number shall be permanently identified on
 each traffic control device.
 1063.3 Channe liz e rs and Tubular Marke rs. All channelizers and tubular markers shall be manufactured
 from a non-metallic material, pigmented and molded of a Highway Orange color throughout and stabilized
 against fading by ultraviolet or other light rays by the incorporation of adequate inhibitors. T ubular
 markers shall be applied with reflective sheeting meeting either AST M D 4956 Type 4 or 5. Drum-like
 channelizers shall be closed-top and applied with either AST M D 4956 Type 3 or 4 reflective sheeting.
 T rim-line channelizers shall be applied with white sheeting meeting either AST M D 4956 Type 3 or 4 and
 fluorescent orange in accordance with Sec 1042.2.7.3. All retroreflective marking on channelizers and
 tubular markers shall be in accordance with AST M D 4956, Supplemental Requirements, Section S2.
 Retroreflective marking on cones will not be required.
 1063.4 Signs.
 1063.4.1 Rigid Signs.
 1063.4.1.1 Sign Substrate . All signs shall be fabricated of substrate designed to provide satisfactory
 structural rigidity.
 1063.4.1.2 Sign She e ting. All signs shall have a retroreflectorized background. Retroreflective sheeting
 shall be in accordance with Sec 1042, Type 4 or fluorescent orange and yellow, as shown on the plans.
 Sheeting shall be applied to the sign substrate in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations and
 the surface shall be free of air bubbles, wrinkles or other blemishes as determined by the engineer.
 1063.4.2 Roll-up Signs.
 1063.4.2.1 Sign Substrate . Sign and overlay blanks shall consist of either white, yellow, fluorescent
 orange and/or pink microprismatic retroreflective sheeting sealed to a heavy-duty coated fabric or vinyl
 material. T he sheeting shall have a minimum coefficient of retroreflection, expressed as candelas per
 footcandle per square foot, as shown below, when measured in accordance with AST M E 810 and shall meet
 the minimum color requirements in accordance with MGS-04-01L specification. T he color specifications
 shall be in accordance with AST M D 4956. Material shall be submitted by the manufacturer to NT PEP for
 a minimum exposure time of one year. Results shall be published by NT PEP and available for MoDOT
 review. For all NT PEP test decks, weathered material shall be within the color specification limits. Heat
 and impact resistance of the sheeting shall be in accordance with the latest version of AST M D 4956.
 
 1063.4.2.2 O ve rlays. Overlays, when used, shall be mechanically fastened to the face of the sign in a
 manner that will ensure the overlay remains securely attached. Fasteners shall not detract from the
 appearance of the sign when the overlay is not in use. Velcro fasteners will not be permitted.
 1063.4.2.3 Bracing. Each sign shall have a horizontal and vertical cross brace and at least one anti-kiting
 device located near the center of the sign. Cross braces of sufficient cross-section shall be fastened to each
 other at the midpoints and the ends securely held to the back of the sign by mechanical means. T he design
 shall ensure that the sign remains taut and retains the sign’s intended shape when exposed to normal field
 conditions.
 1063.4.3 Le ge nd and Borde rs. Legends and borders of all signs shall be vinyl or silk-screened. Vinyl shall
 be cut by die or a computer-driven cutter. Stencil ink used shall be in accordance with the sheeting
 
 685
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 manufacturer ’s recommendations. Free-hand legend and borders will not be permitted.
 1063.4.4 Sign Layout and De sign. Sign layout and design shall be as shown on the plans or as directed by
 the engineer.
 1063.4.5 Flag Asse mbly. Flag assemblies, when specified, shall consist of a flag bracket and two flags.
 Flags shall be 18 in x 18 in fluorescent orange, vinyl and be securely attached on one side to a blank suitable
 for displaying the flag as shown on the plans. T he flag shall not be of mesh material. T he blank shall be
 securely attached to the flag bracket, be of sufficient cross-section to display the flag in wind speeds up to
 50 mph and be of sufficient length to hold the flags approximately six inches from the sign.
 1063.4.6 Advance Warning Rails. Advanced warning rails shall be supplied as a system of three rails as
 shown on the plans. T he rail system may be post mounted or mounted on portable structures. When used
 on post mounted signs, the advance warning rails shall consists of substrate of high-density polyethylene
 plastic. T he rail wall thickness shall be 1/4 in. with white and orange reflective sheeting in accordance with
 Sec 1042.2.7.3, and shall be applied as shown on the plans.
 1063.5 Warning Lights.
 Warning Lights
 Type A
 Type B
 Type C
 Item
 Low Intensity High Intensity Steady B urn
 Lens Directional Faces
 1 or 2
 1
 1 or 2
 Flashing Rate per Minute
 55 to 75
 55 to 75
 Constant
 Minimum (1)
 10%
 8%
 Constant
 Hours of Operation
 Dusk to Dawn 24 hrs/day Dusk to Dawn
 
 Sequential
 Flashing
 1
 55 to 75
 Constant
 24 hrs/day
 
 1063.6 Flashing Arrow Pane ls. All lamps shall have a nominal 5-inch, 360-degree tunnel visor. A lamp
 on the back side of the flashing arrow panel shall be continuously energized during operation of the flashing
 arrow panel. Lamps shall be visible at an angle of 15 degrees to the left and right of center and 4 degrees
 above and below center during “ on” time. T he flashing arrow panel shall contain a device to align the arrow
 panel to oncoming traffic. Arrow panels shall be capable of displaying the flashing arrow, flashing double
 arrow and four corner flashing caution modes. Solar-powered flashing arrow panels shall be capable of
 operating in the flashing arrow mode for 20 consecutive days and shall be provided with a device to indicate
 the remaining charge in batteries.
 1063.6.1 Traile r-Mounte d Flashing Arrow Pane ls. T railer-mounted flashing arrow panels shall be
 MUT CD, Type C. T railer-mounted flashing arrow panels shall be solar powered.
 1063.6.2 Truck-Mounte d Flashing Arrow Pane ls. T ruck-mounted flashing arrow panels shall be
 MUT CD, Type B.
 1063.7 Change able Me ssage Sign. Each Changeable Message Sign (CMS) shall consist of a message
 board, solar power supply, control systems and mounting and transporting equipment.
 1063.7.1 Me ssage Board. T he CMS shall be equipped with a power source and battery back-up to provide
 continuous operation when failure of the primary power source occurs. Either message board shall be
 capable to provide three lines of eight individual changeable characters per line. Each character shall be
 yellow in display on a black background and be a minimum of 18-inches. T he CMS shall be legible up to a
 distance of 650 feet for both day and night operation.
 1063.7.1.1 T he CMS shall have a control system to allow the message to be changed from the CMS
 location without connection. T he control system shall include a display screen upon which messages can be
 reviewed before being displayed on the sign. For on-sight operation, the CMS shall have a removable
 waterproof keyboard with display panel.
 1063.7.1.2 T he supplier shall provide web based software and licenses necessary to change the message
 from a remote location. T his software shall be compatible with MoDOT ’s operating systems and shall be
 able to issue -compatible modem commands.
 
 686
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1063.7.2 Communication Inte rface . If specified the CMS shall have a digital cellular transceiver capable
 of receiving a message in the location deployed from a remote location and forwarding the message to the
 CMS controller to change the displayed message.
 1063.7.3 Solar Powe r Supply. T he CMS shall be equipped with a power source and battery back-up to
 provide continuous operation when failure of the primary power source occurs.
 1063.8 Portable Traffic Signals. Each portable traffic signal (PT S) system shall consist of two trailermounted PT S units, a controller assembly and communication link. Each PT S unit shall consist of signal
 heads and indications, a solar power supply, vehicle detection and mounting and transporting equipment.
 All components shall be capable of operating in a temperature range of -20 to 120 F.
 1063.8.1 Controlle r Asse mbly. T he controller assembly shall be a minimum two-phase, solid-state
 traffic signal controller with a conflict monitor capable of operating the signals in accordance with
 MUT CD requirements and NEMA Standard T S1. T he controller shall operate as a fully-actuated unit and
 shall have the capability of being manually operated to display simultaneous red on both phases. T he
 controller shall be capable of red rest during non-actuated periods. Upon detection of a conflict, the system
 shall change to a solid red clearance interval followed by flashing red.
 1063.8.2 Communication Link. A continuous communications link between the PT S units shall be
 provided. If a break in communications between the PT S units occurs, the system shall change to a solid red
 clearance interval followed by flashing red. Upon restoration of communications, the system shall change
 to a solid red clearance interval followed by normal operations.
 1063.8.3 Signal He ads and Indications. Each unit shall consist of two polycarbonate signal heads,
 including backplates and visors. One signal head shall be mounted on the mast arm assembly and the other
 on the vertical upright. T he signal head mounted on the mast arm shall provide a minimum lateral
 clearance of 9.5 feet from the center of the outer signal head to the edge of the trailer and a minimum
 vertical clearance of 16 feet from the bottom of the backplate to the roadway surface. T he signal head
 mounted on the vertical upright shall provide a minimum clearance of 8 feet from the bottom of the
 backplate to the roadway surface. All signal indications shall be 12 inches in diameter. T raffic signal heads
 and indications shall be in accordance with the vehicle traffic control signal head requirements of IT E and
 NEMA Standard T S1 and T S2.
 1063.8.4 Solar Powe r Supply. T he power supply shall use a battery bank with sufficient capacity to
 operate the PT S for 20 consecutive days with no sun. All terminals and connections shall be clearly labeled.
 1063.8.5 Ve hicle De te ction. Detection shall be provided by one of the non-intrusive vehicular detection
 methods specified in Sec 902 or temporary loop detectors with the capability of providing coverage for a
 6-foot x 30-foot area. Temporary loops shall be preformed at the factory. T he temporary loops shall have
 self-adhesive rubberized asphalt backing, which shall bond to the pavement.
 1063.8.6 Support. A factory trained service representative shall be available at the delivery location to
 provide technical assistance and training, including the installation and operation of software. No additional
 payment will be made for travel expenses.
 1063.9 Portable Signal Flagging Device. Each portable signal flagging device (PSFD) system shall consist of
 four portable cart-mounted units. Each PSFD unit shall provide a vertical upright with one signal head,
 vehicle detection, radio controller, and self-contained power supply capable of operating the unit for 16
 continuous hours. All components shall be capable of operating in a temperature range of –20 to 120 F.
 1063.9.1 Signal He ads and Indications. T he signal head shall consist of three (red ball, amber ball,
 green ball) 12-inch LED signal indications. All signal heads shall be mounted on the vertical uprights with a
 minimum clearance of 7 feet when the upright is fully extended.
 1063.9.2 Ve hicle De te ction. Detection shall be provided by one of the non-intrusive vehicular detection
 methods specified in Sec 902 with the capability of providing coverage for a 6-foot x 30-foot area.
 1063.9.3 Syste m O pe ration. T he system shall be able to operate in a fixed-time, traffic-actuated, and
 
 687
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 manual-control mode. T he system shall be MUT CD compliant with a controller and conflict monitor and
 include a wireless radio communication package and wireless remote.
 1063.10 Radar Spe e d Advisory Syste m. Each radar speed advisory system shall consist of a radar unit,
 speed display, speed limit display, solar power supply and mounting and transporting equipment.
 1063.10.1 Radar Unit. T he radar unit shall include necessary cables for connection to the digital display
 and power supply, shall be capable of instantaneously displaying and locking readings and shall meet the
 following minimum requirements:
 Radar Unit Requirements
 Speed range 15 to 99 mph
 Accuracy
 ±1 mph
 Internal test 32 mph check
 
 1063.10.2 Spe e d Display. T he speed display shall be a minimum of 12 inches high and shall be capable of
 displaying the radar unit output from 0 to 99 mph.
 1063.10.3 Spe e d Limit Display. T he speed limit display shall indicate the work zone speed limit by
 means of a 36 x 48-inch speed limit sign. T he speed limit sign may be comprised of a rigid or roll-up sign
 or a rigid sign with a variable speed display. T he variable speed display shall be a minimum of 12 inches high
 and shall be capable of displaying two digits.
 1063.10.4 Solar Powe r Supply. T he power supply shall be capable of operating the radar unit, speed
 display and speed limit display, if applicable, for a minimum of eight hours per day.
 1063.11 Truck or Traile r Mounte d Atte nuators. Each T ruck or T railer Mounted Attenuator (T MA)
 shall be in accordance with Test Level 3 criteria as set forth in NCHRP 350 or MASH. Each T MA shall
 have a standard trailer lighting system, including brake lights, taillights, turn signal lights and Federal Motor
 Carrier Safety Administration identification bar lights. In the operating position, the rear facing of the
 T MA shall be marked with alternating 8-inch yellow and 8-inch black retroreflective sheeting forming an
 inverted “ V” at the center and slope downward at an angle of 45 degrees toward each side of the unit or a
 checkered board pattern consisting of 12-inch square red and 12-inch square white retroreflective sheeting.
 T he T MA may be marked with the same operating pattern or red and white DOT conspicuity tape to
 simulate the looks of a standard van body trailer when traveling. T he T MA shall have the same standard
 trailer lighting system noted above when the unit is in the transport position.
 1063.12 Ce rtification. T he contractor shall furnish a manufacturer's certification for all material
 governed by this specification. T he certification shall indicate full compliance with each applicable
 specification.
 
 688
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1064
 TEMPO RARY TRAFFIC BARRIER
 1064.1 Scope . T his specification covers temporary traffic barrier for use in highway construction.
 1064.2 Type F Te mporary Concre te Barrie r.
 1064.2.1 Acce ptance .
 1064.2.1.1 Thre e -Loop Concre te Barrie r. T he manufacturer shall provide certification to the
 contractor that the barrier is in accordance with the contract documents.
 1064.2.1.2 Two-Loop Concre te Barrie r. District material personnel when notified to re-stamp
 previously accepted barrier will be responsible for re-stamping the barrier if the previous acceptance stamp
 is legible and if the barrier is not damaged to the extent that it is felt that the barrier cannot perform
 properly. Reasons for rejection will be, but not limited to:
 (a) Exposed steel reinforcement.
 (b) Damage or cracks in the connecting loops.
 (c) Missing chunks of concrete.
 (d) Excessive marring or scarring.
 (e) Extensive scaling of the concrete.
 (f) Misalignment of the connecting loops that would hinder insertion of the keeper pin.
 1064.2.2 Mate rial.
 1064.2.2.1 All material, in the manufacturing of three-loop type F temporary concrete barrier, shall be in
 accordance with the following specifications:
 Item
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete
 Connection Rod
 Anchor Bolts
 Connection Rod Assembly
 Retainer Bolt and Nut
 Asphalt P in
 Thrie Beam
 Thrie Beam Bolts
 
 Specif ication
 AASHTO M 31, Grade 60
 A36 Steel
 ASTM A307
 AASHTO M 183
 SAE Grade 8
 A36 Steel
 Nested 12 Gage or 10 Gage
 ASTM A307
 
 1064.2.2.1.1 All reinforcing steel shall be deformed bar. Loop steel shall be 0.75-inch smooth steel bars
 with a minimum yield of 60 ksi, shall have a tensile strength of no less than 1.25 times the yield strength,
 but a minimum of 80 ksi, a minimum 14 percent elongation in
 8 inches, and passing a 180-degree bend test using a 3.5 times diameter pin bend diameter. T he loops shall
 be installed within 0.125 inch of the plan dimensions.
 1064.2.2.1.2 T he manufacturer shall retain, at a minimum, all compressive strength test results, entrained
 air content records, and reinforcing steel certification for at least five years.
 1064.2.3 Manufacture .
 1064.2.3.1 Welding of loop steel shall be limited to the minimum surface welding necessary to maintain the
 position required for placement.
 
 689
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1064.2.3.2 Visual cracks in the loop steel will be cause for rejection.
 1064.2.3.3 Concrete shall be air-entrained with 28-day compressive strength of 5,000 psi. Concrete shall
 be continuously cured until 5,000 psi is attained. Fine and coarse aggregate shall be in accordance with Sec
 1005, except that gradation requirements and percent passing the No. 200 sieve will not apply. Temporary
 concrete traffic barrier shall be manufactured in accordance with industry standard practices for pre-cast
 construction.
 1064.2.3.4 All temporary concrete traffic barrier units shall be permanently marked with the name and
 location of the manufacturer, and the month and year of manufacture in a location visible after
 installation. Paint or other liquid marking will not be permitted.
 1064.2.3.5 T he surface of temporary concrete traffic barrier shall be smooth and non-deformed and
 substantially free of honeycomb, surface spalls and surface defects. Barrier units shall be straight and square
 on the ends and shall meet the following tolerances:
 Dimension
 Length
 Width
 Height
 
 Tolerance
 + 3/4 inch
 + 1/4 inch
 + 1/4 inch
 
 1064.3 Alte rnative Te mporary Traffic Barrie r.
 1064.3.1 Approval. Prior to approval and use, the manufacturer shall submit to MoDOT, the
 manufacturer ’s name, the product brand name or model number, a copy of the NCHRP 350 test results, a
 copy of the FHWA acceptance letter, shop drawings and any other information requested by the engineer.
 1064.3.2 Acce ptance . Acceptance of the material will be based on the manufacturer ’s certification and
 upon satisfactory field performance.
 
 690
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1065
 DELINEATO RS
 1065.1 Scope . T his specification covers delineators for use in highway construction.
 1065.2 De line ator Body. T he delineator body shall be flat sheet aluminum in accordance with Sec
 1042 and dimensions as shown on the plans.
 1065.3 Re trore fle ctive She e ting. T he retroreflective sheeting shall be in accordance with AST M D
 4956 Type 5 or 8 requirements. Retroreflective sheeting shall be permanently affixed to the body of the
 delineator and follow guidelines in accordance with Sec 1042.2.7 for application of sheeting.
 Manufacturer ’s certification shall be provided for delineator sheeting.
 
 691
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1066
 MO RTARS AND GRO UT
 1066.1 Scope . T his specification covers mortars and grout for use in pipe joints, rubble and brick masonry.
 1066.2 Mortars and Grout. Mortars and grout shall be mixed in small quantities as needed and shall not
 be retempered or used after setting has begun. Type I Portland cement shall be accordance with Sec 1019.
 Sand shall be clean and shall be in accordance with Sec 1005, except the minus No. 200 sieve requirement
 will not apply. Water shall be in accordance with Sec 1070.
 1066.2.1 Mortar For Pipe Joints. Mortar shall consist of one part Type I Portland cement and two parts
 sand, by volume, mixed with sufficient water to form a plastic mortar.
 1066.2.2 Mortar for Grout. Mortar used for grout shall consist of one part Type I Portland cement and
 three parts sand, by volume, mixed with sufficient water to form a grout of proper consistency.
 1066.2.3 Mortar For Rubble and Brick Masonry. T he mortar shall be composed of one part Portland
 cement plus 10 percent, by volume, of hydrated lime and of two parts sand by volume. Hydrated lime shall
 be in accordance with AST M C 207, Type N. After the dry material has been thoroughly mixed, water shall
 be added, and the mixture shall be turned and chopped by hand or mechanical methods until a stiff mortar
 results. Mortar shall be mixed no more than 30 minutes prior to use. Mortar for pointing shall be mixed in
 the proportions of one part Portland cement to one part sand by volume.
 1066.2.4 Expansive Mortar.
 1066.2.4.1 Aluminum Powde r Expansive Mortar. T he mortar shall consist of one part Type I Portland
 cement and three parts sand, by volume, mixed with sufficient water to form a stiff plastic mortar.
 Unpolished aluminum powder at the rate of 4 grams per sack of cement shall be thoroughly dry mixed with
 the cement before incorporation with other ingredients.
 1066.2.4.2 O the r Expansive Mortars. Upon approval from the engineer, other expansive mortars may
 be used. T he expansive mortars shall contain no more than 0.02 percent chlorides by weight and, when
 subjected to a pull-out test, shall equal or exceed the results of tests conducted using the material specified
 in Sec 1066.2.4.1.
 
 692
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1067
 TRUNCATED DO MES
 1067.1 Scope . T his specification covers truncated domes used for sidewalk curb cuts and pedestrian island
 cut-throughs.
 1067.2 Dome s. Domes shall have a base diameter of 0.9 to 1.4 inches. T he top diameter shall be 50 to 65
 percent of the base diameter. T he dome height shall be 0.2 inches. Dome center-to-center spacing shall be
 1.6 to 2.4 inches with a minimum base-to-base spacing of 0.65 inches. Stamped concrete will not be
 accepted.
 1067.3 Pane ls. T runcated dome surfaces shall extend a minimum of 24 inches in the direction of sidewalk
 travel and the full width of the curb ramp (exclusive of flares), the landing, or blended transition. T he
 panels shall be made of a durable material. T he panels shall carry a manufacturer warranty covering all
 defects for a five-year period from the time of installation.
 1067.4 Acce ptance . All material shall be obtained from a source identified on the Qualified List (QL)
 designated for this specification.
 
 693
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1068
 TRENCH DRAINS
 1068.1 Scope . T his specification covers trench drains used in median and shoulder drainage systems.
 1068.2 Acce ptance . All material shall be obtained from a source identified on the Qualified List (QL)
 designated for this specification.
 1068.3 Mate rials.
 1068.3.1 Drain grates shall meet AASHT O M 306 requirements for proof-load testing.
 1068.3.2 T he drain grate inflow area shall be a minimum of 0.27 ft2/lf. Drain grate retaining devices shall
 not obstruct hydraulic flow in the channel.
 1068.3.3 T he drain grate retaining device shall withstand, without maintenance, repetitive cyclic vertical
 loads of 500 pounds.
 1068.3.4 T he drain grate retainers shall withstand a pullout resistance of 250 pounds per foot after
 completing a 1,000-hour AST M B117 salt spray test.
 1068.4 Drain grates shall be bicycle safe.
 1068.5 T he use and location of the trench drain shall be as shown on the plans.
 
 694
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1070
 WATER
 1070.1 Scope . T his specification covers water for use in mixing and curing concrete, and for use in mortar
 and grout.
 1070.2 Re quire me nts. Water for use in mixing and curing concrete, and in mortar and grout, shall be
 reasonably clean and shall be free from injurious quantities of deleterious substances such as oil, acid, alkali,
 salt or organic matter. Potable water may be accepted without being tested. Requirements for testing water
 for mixing or curing purposes may be waived if in the judgment of the engineer, the water is considered
 satisfactory for the purpose.
 1070.3 Te sting. As required by the engineer, and if laboratory testing shows that the pH of the water is less
 than 4.5 or more than 9.5, or that the water contains deleterious substances, the following requirements
 shall also be met. Autoclaved bars, made with the water and a cement that shows satisfactory soundness
 when mixed with distilled water, shall show an expansion not to exceed 0.5 percent. T he compressive
 strength at seven days of a mortar consisting of one part cement and 2.75 parts of natural silica sand and
 the water being tested shall show a reduction of no more than 10 percent of the compressive strength
 developed by 1:2.75 mortar containing the same cement and sand and mixed with distilled water.
 
 695
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1071
 ASPHALT RELEASE AGENTS, FIBER ADDITIVES AND
 LIQ UID ANTI-STRIP ADDITIVES
 1071.1 Scope . T his specification covers asphalt release agents for use in coating truck beds and bituminous
 mixture additives.
 1071.2 Acce ptance . All material under this specification shall be obtained from a source identified on the
 Pre-Acceptance List designated for this specification. All material will be inspected and accepted in
 accordance with Sec 106.
 1071.3 Asphalt Re le ase Age nt. T he asphalt release agent shall not be detrimental to bituminous
 mixtures and shall not dissolve asphalt binder when applied to the truck bed.
 1071.3.1 Physical Prope rtie s. T he following physical properties shall be determined.
 1071.3.1.1 Unit We ight. T he weight per gallon shall be determined in accordance with AASHT O T 59,
 Weight per Gallon of Emulsified Asphalt.
 1071.3.1.2 Solids. T he percent solids shall be determined in accordance with AST M D 1644, Method A.
 1071.3.1.3 Acidity or Alkalinity Le ve l (pH). T he pH of the undiluted agent shall be determined by
 appropriate methods.
 1071.3.1.4 Asphalt Miscibility. When tested in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 63, the
 asphalt release agent shall show no evidence of dissolving the asphalt binder.
 1071.3.2 Dilution. Dilution by diesel or other petroleum products will not be permitted.
 1071.3.3 Docume ntation. T he manufacturer shall submit a certification and guarantee to Construction
 and Materials prior to initial approval showing the brand name and designation, the composition or
 description of the release agent, and the manner in which the material will be identified on the containers.
 T he manufacturer shall certify that the material is in accordance with this specification and shall list
 typical values of current tests for the properties listed in Sec 1071.3.1. T he certified test report shall show
 the manufacturer's name, brand name of material, lot and date tested. T he manufacturer shall also submit a
 one-quart sample accompanied by an MSDS for the material. In addition, the manufacturer shall furnish
 information for any dilution requirements, including the minimum dilution rate and special application
 requirements.
 1071.3.4 Packaging and Marking. T he containers in which release agents are delivered shall be plainly
 marked with the manufacturer's name, the brand name and designation of the material, lot number and net
 quantity. Special applicators and dilution rates shall be designated on the container. Bulk shipments shall be
 accompanied by a delivery ticket showing this information.
 1071.4 Bituminous Mixture Fibe r Additive s. Fibers for stone matrix asphalt mixture may be either
 cellulose or mineral fiber, and shall be in accordance with AASHT O MP8, Table 3 for cellulose fibers, or
 Table 4 for mineral fibers when tested in accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 60.
 1071.4.1 Docume ntation. T he manufacturer shall submit a certification and guarantee to Construction
 and Materials prior to initial approval, showing the brand name and designation, the composition or
 description of the fibers, and the manner in which the material will be identified on the containers. T he
 manufacturer shall certify that the material is in accordance with this specification and shall list typical
 values of current tests for the properties listed in AASHT O MP8. T he certified test report shall show the
 manufacturer's name, brand name of material, lot and date tested. T he manufacturer shall submit at least a
 5-pound sample accompanied by an MSDS for the material.
 1071.4.2 Packaging and Marking. T he containers in which fibers are delivered shall be plainly marked
 with the manufacturer's name, the brand name and designation of the material, lot number and net quantity.
 Bulk shipments shall be accompanied by a delivery ticket showing this information.
 
 696
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1071.5 Liquid Anti-Strip Additive s. Liquid anti-strip additives shall not be detrimental to the bituminous
 mixture.
 1071.5.1 Physical Prope rtie s. Amine-type liquid anti-strip additives that are physically mixed with the
 asphalt binder will be classified as Type I. Latex-type liquid anti-strip additives that are applied to the
 aggregate will be classified as Type II. T he following physical properties shall be determined for each type.
 1071.5.1.1 Type I Liquid Anti-Strip Additive s.
 Test
 Specific Gravity @ 77 F
 Brookfield Viscosity 77 F using an RVT viscometer. The report
 shall include the corresponding test temperature,
 speed, spindle and model of instrument.
 P ensky-Martens Closed Cup Flash P oint or
 Cleveland Open Cup Flash P oint
 Infrared Spectrum (neat material)
 
 Test Method
 AASHTO T 228
 ASTM D2196
 ASTM D93
 AASHTO T 48
 Appropriate Method
 
 1071.5.1.2 Type II Liquid Anti-Strip Additive s.
 Test
 Weight P er Gallon @ 77 F
 Brookfield Viscosity 77 F using an RVT viscometer. The
 report shall include the corresponding test temperature, speed,
 spindle and model of instrument.
 pH
 P ercent Solids
 Infrared Spectrum (latex portion)
 
 Test Method
 ASTM D1475
 ASTM D2196
 Appropriate Method
 ASTM D1644 Method A
 Appropriate Method
 
 1071.5.2 He at Stability. T he additive shall be stable and shall not separate under all manufacturer listed
 storage and use temperatures. When Type I or Type II additives are blended with the proposed bituminous
 material to be used at the anticipated application rate, the blended material shall still meet all bituminous
 material specifications and shall be heat stable. Heat stability shall be established by comparing AASHT O T
 283 specimens made by preparing three conditioned specimens using aged, blended material that has been
 held at 325 F for 96 hours and three conditioned specimens using fresh blended material. T he average
 tensile strength of conditioned specimens using aged material shall be compared with conditioned specimens
 made with fresh blended material. If the average conditioned strength of the mixture with aged material is
 less than 90 percent of the mixture with fresh blended material, the anti-strip additive will not be permitted
 for use. T his requirement will also apply if tested on any specific mix design using the approved anti-strip
 additive.
 1071.5.3 Unconditione d Stre ngth. T he anti-strip additive shall not significantly lower the
 unconditioned strength of AASHT O T 283 specimens. T his shall be determined by preparing an additional
 six unconditioned specimens, three with and three without the liquid anti-strip additive. T he average tensile
 strengths of unconditioned specimens shall be compared with specimens with and without the liquid antistrip additive. If the average unconditioned strength of the mixture with the additive is less than 90 percent
 of the mixture without the additive, the anti-strip additive will not be permitted for use in that bituminous
 mixture.
 1071.5.4 Docume ntation. T he manufacturer shall submit a certification and guarantee to Construction
 and Materials prior to initial approval showing the brand name and designation, the composition or
 description of the anti-strip liquid, and the manner in which the material will be identified on the
 containers. T he manufacturer shall certify that the material is in accordance with this specification and
 shall list typical values of current tests for the properties listed in Sec 1071.5.1. A copy of the bituminous
 mix design used to test for heat stability and unconditioned strength shall be included with the test results.
 T he certified test report shall show the manufacturer's name, brand name of material, lot and date tested.
 T he manufacturer shall submit at least a one-gallon sample accompanied by an MSDS for the material.
 1071.5.5 Packaging and Marking. T he containers in which anti-strip liquids are delivered shall be
 
 697
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 plainly marked with the manufacturer's name, the brand name and designation of the material, lot number
 and net quantity. Bulk shipments shall be accompanied by a delivery ticket showing this information.
 
 698
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1073
 JO INT MATERIAL FO R STRUCTURES
 1073.1 Scope . T his specification covers material for performed compression seals and strip seals with
 lubricant-adhesive for sealing joints, and expanded or extruded polystyrene material for use as bedding
 material under prestressed panels and in the corrugation areas of stay-in-place forms used on bridge decks.
 1073.2 Acce ptance . All material under this specification shall be obtained from a source identified on the
 PAL designated for this specification. All material will be inspected and accepted in accordance with Sec
 106.
 1073.3 Pre forme d Compre ssion Se al. Preformed compression seals shall be in accordance with AST M
 D 3542 and with the following additional requirements.
 1073.3.1 T he movement range of the seal as defined in AST M D 3542 shall be as shown in the contract
 documents, and the height of seal shall be no less than the nominal width. T he seal shall be delivered in
 containers marked with the manufacturer ’s name, size of the seal, lot number and date of manufacture.
 1073.3.2 T he lubricant adhesive applied for installation shall be in accordance with the seal manufacturer
 and in accordance with Sec 717. T he lubricant adhesive shall be delivered in containers marked with the
 manufacturer's name, lot number, date of manufacture and instructions for storage and use.
 1073.4 Strip Se al. Strip seals shall be in accordance with AST M D 5973 and the following additional
 requirements.
 1073.4.1 T he gland lugs of the seal that fasten into the steel extrusion shall be of a type that exerts
 pressure to the contact surfaces. Glands with snap or arrowhead-type lugs will not be permitted. T he seal
 shall be delivered in containers marked with the manufacturer ’s name, size of the seal, lot number and date
 of manufacture.
 1073.4.2 T he lubricant adhesive applied for bonding the gland to the steel extrusion shall be as
 recommended by the seal manufacturer and in accordance with Sec 717. T he lubricant-adhesive shall be
 delivered in containers marked with the manufacturer's name, lot number, date of manufacture and
 instructions for storage and use.
 1073.5 Expande d or Extrude d Polystyre ne Mate rial.
 1073.5.1 Be dding Mate rial for Pre stre sse d Pane ls. T he expanded or extruded polystyrene material
 shall be in accordance with the following:
 Property
 Test
 Requirement
 Compression Strength ASTM D 1621 60 psi, min.
 Water Absorption
 ASTM D 2842 2% by volume, max.
 Oxygen Index
 ASTM D 2863 24 minimum
 
 1073.5.2 Mate rial for Corrugation Are as of Stay-In-Place Forms. Expanded polystyrene material
 shall be in accordance with the following:
 Property
 Test
 Requirement
 Compression Strength ASTM D 1621 10 psi, min.
 Water Absorption
 ASTM D 2842 2% by volume, max.
 
 1073.5.3 Adhe sive for Expande d or Extrude d Polystyre ne Mate rials. Adhesive for use with expanded
 or extruded polystyrene material shall be in accordance with the polystyrene manufacturer ’s
 recommendations.
 1073.6 O pe n Ce ll Foam Joint Syste m. All components of the system shall be supplied by one
 manufacturer. T he joint system shall be comprised of the following components.
 
 699
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (a) Cellular polyurethane foam impregnated with 100% hydrophobic polymer, water based
 emulsion and factory coated, on the roadway surface, with highway-grade, fuel resistant silicone.
 (b) Field-applied epoxy adhesive primer.
 (c) Field-applied silicone sealant bands that seal the gap between the edge of the bridge and the
 silicone topping on the joint. T his silicone will also be used for locking field splices in the joint
 together.
 1073.6.1 Ge ne ral Move me nt Re quire me nts. T he seal shall have a working range of 50% in tension
 and 50% in compression. Changes in plane and direction shall be executed using factory fabricated
 watertight transition assemblies conforming to the plans and specifications.
 1073.6.2 Se al Prope rtie s. T he seal shall be able to meet the following properties:
 Property
 Temperature Service Range, ASTM C 711
 Bleeding
 UV Resistance, ASTM G 155
 P olymer impregnation agent
 
 Requirement
 -40° F to 185° F
 None at 180° F @ 50% compression for 3 hrs.
 No Changes at 2000 hrs.
 Free of any waxes or asphalts
 
 1073.6.3 Adhe sive Prope rtie s. T he epoxy adhesive shall be a 100% solids, two component moisture
 sensitive modified epoxy adhesive which meets AST M C 881.
 1073.6.4 Se alant Prope rtie s. T he silicone sealant shall be a one part, cold applied chemically curing
 silicone joint sealant which meets AST M D 5893.
 1073.7 Pre forme d Silicone or EPDM Joints. All components, materials and equipment required for the
 installation shall be obtained through an approved supplier of the system. All components of each
 respective joint system shall come from the same manufacturer and cannot be substitutes for others.
 1073.7.1 Joint Prope rtie s. T he joint material shall meet or exceed the following physical requirements:
 Property
 Durometer (Shore A)
 Tensile Strength
 Elongation
 Tear Strength (Die B)
 Compression Set At 350° F 22 hrs.
 Operating Temperature Range
 Specific Gravity
 
 Specif ication
 ASTM D 2240
 ASTM D 412
 ASTM D 412
 ASTM D 624
 ASTM D 395
 
 Requirement
 55 ±5 min.
 550 psi min.
 350% min.
 100 ppi min.
 30% max.
 -60° F to 350° F
 1.51 ±0.10
 
 1073.7.1.1 T he joint seal shall be pre-qualified by undergoing and passing a cyclic loading test. Any rips,
 tears or bond failure will be cause for rejection. Manufacturer shall provide documentation to verify testing
 meeting these minimum requirements.
 Cyclic Loading Test
 Property
 Requirement
 Test Sample Length
 2 feet min.
 Joint Skew
 45°
 Number of Cycles
 200 min.
 Joint Opening
 2 inches
 Movement
 min. to max. opening
 Temperature
 -20° F
 
 1073.7.2 Epoxy Prime r. Epoxy primer shall be used to ensure the appropriate bond of the joint sealing
 system and to protect the surfaces of the joint after installation of the seal. T he epoxy primer shall meet
 the following physical requirements:
 
 700
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 Epoxy Primer
 Property
 Specif ication Requirement
 Viscosity (centipoises) ASTM D 2196
 44
 Solids
 ASTM D 4209
 41
 Specific Gravity
 ASTM D 1217
 0.92
 Flashpoint
 ASTM D 56
 48
 VOC
 ASTM D 3960
 520
 
 1073.7.3 Locking Adhe sive . T he adhesive material shall cure quickly and shall be as recommended by the
 manufacturer. T he material shall adhere to concrete, elastomeric concrete, polymer concrete and steel and
 shall meet the following physical requirements:
 Locking Adhesive
 Specif ication
 Requirement
 Sag/Flow
 ASTM C 639
 3/16 inch max.
 Hardness
 ASTM C 661
 20-30
 Tack Free Time
 ASTM C 679
 30 minute max.
 Cure Through to ¼ inch Thickness At 75° F/50% Relative Humidity
 24 hours max.
 Skin Over Time (Tooling Time)
 At 75° F/50% Relative Humidity
 5 minute max.
 Resistance to U.V.
 ASTM C 793
 No cracking, Ozone Chalking or Degradation
 Flashpoint
 ASTM D 412
 200 psi min.
 VOC
 ASTM D 412
 450% min.
 Property
 
 1073.8 Docume ntation. Prior to approval and use of this material, the manufacturer shall submit to
 Construction and Materials a certified test report showing specific test results in accordance with all
 requirements of these specifications. T he certified test report shall contain the manufacturer's name, brand
 name of material, lot tested and date of manufacture. In addition, the manufacturer shall submit a sample of
 the seal or polystyrene material and a one-pint sample of the adhesive for laboratory testing, accompanied
 by a technical data sheet and an MSDS. With approval by the engineer of the certified test report and
 satisfactory results of tests performed on the sample submitted, the brand name and manufacturer will be
 placed on the appropriate pre-acceptance list. Pre-acceptance lists are available through Construction and
 Materials or MoDOT ’s web site. New certified test results and samples shall be submitted any time the
 manufacturing process or the material formulation is changed, and may be required when random sampling
 and testing of material offered for use indicates nonconformity with any of the requirements herein
 specified.
 
 701
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1075
 CENTRIFUGALLY-CAST FIBERGLASS-REINFO RCED PO LYMER MO RTAR PIPE
 1075.1 Scope . T his specification covers centrifugally-cast fiberglass-reinforced polymer mortar pipe to be
 used in pipejacking and microtunneling for horizontal boring applications under roadways.
 1075.2 Acce ptance . Acceptance of the material will be based on the manufacturer ’s certification and upon
 the results of any tests required by the engineer.
 1075.3 Manufacture .
 1075.3.1 Pipe shall be manufactured from polyester resin systems with a proven history of acceptable
 performance for the particular application. T he historical data shall have been acquired from a composite
 material of similar construction and composition as the proposed product.
 1075.3.2 Pipe shall be manufactured from reinforcing glass fibers of commercial grade E-glass filaments
 with binder and sizing compatible with impregnating resins.
 1075.3.3 Pipe shall be manufactured from silica sand, with a minimum of 98 percent silica, and a maximum
 moisture content of 0.2 percent.
 1075.3.4 When used, resin additives, such as curing agents, pigments, dyes fillers, thixotropic agents, etc.,
 shall not detrimentally affect the performance of the product.
 1075.4 Docume ntation. T he manufacturer shall provide certification to the contractor that the material
 provided is in accordance with AST M D 3262 and that pipe joints meet the performance requirements of
 AST M D 4161. T he certification shall state the manufacturer ’s name and shall have attached typical
 results of tests on the material and pipe joints.
 1075.5 Construction Inspe ction. Pipe will be inspected for defects prior to installation. Damaged pipe
 will be rejected. Any pipe that appears cracked near the joint will be rejected.
 
 702
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1080
 STRUCTURAL STEEL FABRICATIO N
 1080.1 Scope . T his specification covers the fabrication and inspection of bridges and structures made of
 structural steel and miscellaneous metals.
 1080.2 Mate rial. Except as amended by Sec 1080.2.4, all material shall be in accordance with Division
 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Shear Connectors
 P aint for Structural Steel
 Coating of Structural Steel
 
 Section/Specif ication
 1037
 1045
 1081
 AASHTO M 270, Grade 36
 Structural Carbon Steel
 ASTM A 709, Grade 36
 AASHTO M 270, Grade 50
 ASTM A 709, Grade 50
 Structural Low Alloy Steel
 AASHTO M 270, Grade 50W
 ASTM A 709, Grade 50W
 AASHTO M 270, Grade HP S 50W
 ASTM A 709, Grade HP S 50W
 Quenched and Tempered Alloy Steel
 AASHTO M 270, Grade HP S 70W
 ASTM A 709, Grade HP S 70W
 ASTM A 709, Grade 100/100W
 Low Carbon Steel Bolts and Nuts
 ASTM A 307
 ASTM A 325
 ASTM A 490
 High Strength Bolts, Nuts and Washers ASTM F 436
 ASTM A 563
 AASHTO M 292
 Cold Finished Carbon Steel Shafting
 AASHTO M 169
 Carbon Steel Forgings
 AASHTO M 102 Class F
 Alloy Steel Forgings
 AASHTO M 102 Class G
 Gray Iron Castings
 AASHTO M 105 Class 50
 Malleable Iron Castings
 ASTM A 47
 Carbon Steel Castings
 AASHTO M 103 Grade 485-275
 AASHTO M 111
 Galvanized Coatings
 AASHTO M 232 Class C
 ASTM B 695 Class 55
 Lead for Bearing P ads
 ASTM B 29
 Identification of Metals
 ASTM A 6
 
 1080.2.1 Galvaniz e d Bolts. Bolts, nuts and washers specified to be galvanized shall be galvanized in
 accordance with the requirements of AASHT O M 232, Class C or shall be mechanically galvanized in
 accordance with AST M B 695, Class 55. Except for anchor bolts, galvanizing thickness shall not exceed 6
 mils. Fasteners installed prior to the completion of shop blast cleaning will not require galvanizing. T he
 thickness of the zinc coating for galvanized bolts shall be measured on the wrench flats and top of the bolt
 head. For mechanically galvanized bolts, the significant surfaces as referenced in AST M B 695 shall be the
 entire bolt surface, excluding the underside of the surface of the head and the shank surface between the
 threaded portion and the underside of the head. T he thickness of the zinc coating on the galvanized nuts
 shall be measured on the wrench flats. For mechanically galvanized nuts, the significant surfaces shall be all
 surfaces of the nut excluding the threads. T he thickness of the zinc coating on galvanized washers shall be
 measured on both sides. T he significant surfaces on mechanically galvanized washers shall be all surfaces of
 the washer.
 1080.2.2 Fit Up Bolts. Fit up and shipping bolts shall be coated to prevent corrosion where a finish coat
 will not be applied. Shipping bolts for uncoated weathering steel will not require coating.
 1080.2.3 False work. Falsework material will be subject to the engineer's approval. All falsework material
 shall be in good condition such that the material performs as designed. Falsework piling shall be capable of
 withstanding driving to a depth sufficient to develop adequate bearing.
 1080.2.4 Ce rtifie d Mill Te st Re ports. For structural steel, the contractor shall submit a copy of the
 
 703
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 certified mill test report giving the chemical analysis and results of physical tests on the material furnished.
 T he mill test report shall state the location of the mill where the molten metal was produced. Two copies
 of the mill test report will be required for material used in railroad structures. If steel is produced outside the
 United States, the contractor shall submit a certified test report from a MoDOT approved U. S. laboratory
 showing specific results of chemical analysis and physical tests for each heat furnished and stating that the
 material meets the specification requirements. Mill tests and laboratory reports shall be submitted for
 approval before any request is made for shop or field inspection. In addition, the engineer may take
 samples for chemical analysis and physical tests from the fabricated steel delivered to the project site. Any
 time or cost effects caused by obtaining and analyzing samples from delivered steel shall be anticipated by
 the contractor as part of the quality assurance process and no compensation or additional time will be
 allowed for costs or delays associated with this activity. Unless otherwise specified, the supplementary
 requirements of AASHT O M 270 for Charpy V-notch impact tests in temperature zone 2 shall be
 mandatory where the contract documents indicate notch toughness is required for fracture critical or nonfracture critical components. Mill test reports shall include the results of Charpy V-notch testing and
 impact serial numbers for fracture critical components.
 1080.2.5 High Stre ngth Faste ne r Asse mblie s. In addition to the requirements of Sec 712.2, high
 strength bolts, nuts and washers shall meet the following requirements. T he contractor shall furnish a
 manufacturer's certification showing results of tests performed. Identification in accordance with the
 appropriate AASHT O/AST M specifications shall be maintained by container markings which shall match
 identifying numbers on the certifications and be traceable to the certified mill test reports. High strength
 fastener assemblies shall be galvanized unless used with unpainted weathering steel or specifically indicated
 otherwise by the contract documents. When high strength bolts are used with weathering steel, the
 fasteners shall be Type 3. AST M A 490 bolts shall be installed black, tensioned and then cleaned and coated
 with the coating system as specified on the plans. T he cleaning and the zinc coating shall not be applied by
 any process, which can cause hydrogen embrittlement. All certification testing requirements and mill test
 reports referenced in the following sections shall be in accordance with Sec 106.
 1080.2.5.1 Bolts. All bolts shall be in accordance with AST M A 325 except when AST M A 490 bolts are
 specified on the plans. If the contractor elects to use load indicator bolts, only a hex head will be permitted.
 T he type of head used shall be consistent throughout the entire structure, unless otherwise approved by the
 engineer.
 1080.2.5.1.1 Proof Load Te sts. Proof load tests in accordance with AST M F 606 Method 1 shall be
 performed. Minimum test frequency shall be in accordance with AST M A 325.
 1080.2.5.1.2 We dge Te sts. Wedge tests on full size bolts, in accordance with AST M F 606, paragraph 3.5
 shall be performed. If bolts are to be galvanized, tests shall be performed after galvanizing. Minimum test
 frequency shall be in accordance with AST M A 325.
 1080.2.5.2 Nuts. All nuts shall be in accordance with AASHT O M 292 as applicable or AST M A 563,
 except as follows.
 1080.2.5.2.1 Nut Grade s. Ungalvanized nuts shall be grades 2, C, D or C3 with a minimum Rockwell
 hardness of 89 HRB or Brinell hardness 180 HB or heat treated grades 2H, DH or DH3. Nuts that are to be
 galvanized shall be heat treated grade 2H, DH or DH3.
 1080.2.5.2.2 O ve rtapping. Nuts to be galvanized shall be tapped oversize the minimum amount required
 for proper assembly. T he amount of overtap in the nut shall be such that the nut will assemble freely on
 the bolt in the coated condition and shall be in accordance with the mechanical requirements and the
 rotational-capacity test requirements of AST M A 563. T he overtapping requirements of AST M A 563 will
 apply, except these limits shall be considered maximum values instead of the minimum, as currently shown.
 1080.2.5.2.3 Nut Lubrication. All galvanized nuts, including AST M A 194 nuts, shall meet the
 supplementary requirements of AST M A 563. Galvanized nuts shall be lubricated with a lubricant containing
 a dye of any color that contrasts with the color of the galvanizing.
 1080.2.5.2.4 Proof Load Te sts. Proof load tests in accordance with AST M F 606 shall be performed.
 Minimum test frequency shall be in accordance with AST M A 563 or AASHT O M 292. If nuts are to be
 
 704
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 galvanized, tests shall be performed after lubricating.
 1080.2.5.2.5 We athe ring Ste e l. When Type 3 fasteners are specified for use with weathering steel, nuts
 shall be in accordance with AST M A 563 and shall be grades C3 or DH3.
 1080.2.5.3 Washe rs. All washers shall be in accordance with AST M F 436. Hardness testing shall be
 performed on galvanized washers. T he coating shall be removed prior to taking hardness measurements.
 1080.2.5.4 Rotational-Capacity Te sts. Rotational-capacity tests shall be performed on all bolt, nut and
 washer assemblies by the manufacturer or distributor prior to shipping. Washers shall be part of the test,
 regardless if they are required as part of the installation procedure or not. Tests shall be conducted after
 galvanizing when galvanizing is required.
 1080.2.5.4.1 Te st Me thods. Except as modified herein, the rotational-capacity test shall be performed in
 accordance with AST M A 325.
 1080.2.5.4.2 Te st Lots. Each combination of bolt production lot, nut lot and washer lot shall be tested as
 an assembly. Where washers are not required as part of the installation procedures, washers need not be
 included in the lot identification. A rotational-capacity lot number shall be assigned to each combination of
 lots tested. T he minimum frequency of testing shall be two assemblies per rotational-capacity lot.
 1080.2.5.4.3 Te sting De vice . T he bolt, nut and washer assembly shall be assembled in a Skidmore-Wilhelm
 Calibrator or an acceptable equivalent device.
 1080.2.5.4.4 Minimum Rotation. T he minimum rotation, from a snug tight condition, 10 percent of the
 specified proof load, shall be as follows:
 Minimum B olt Rotation
 B olt Length
 Rotation
 ≤ 4 Diameters
 240° (2/3 turn)
 > 4 Diameters and ≤ 8 Diameters 360° (1 turn)
 > 8 Diameters
 480° (1 1/3 turn)
 
 1080.2.5.4.5 Re quire d Te nsion. T he tension reached at the above rotation shall be equal to or greater
 than 1.15 times the required installation tension. T he installation tension and the tension for the turn test
 for AST M A 325 and AST M A 490 bolts shall be as follows:
 Required B olt Tensions
 Diameter, in. 1/2 5/8 3/4 7/8 1.00 1-1/8 1-1/4 1-3/8 1-1/2
 ASTM A 325
 Req.
 Installation 12 19 28 39 51
 Tension, kips
 Turn
 Test Tension, 14 22 32 45 59
 kips
 ASTM A 490
 Req.
 Installation 15 24 35 49 64
 Tension, kips
 Turn
 Test Tension, 17 28 40 56 74
 kips
 
 56
 
 71
 
 85
 
 103
 
 64
 
 82
 
 98
 
 118
 
 80
 
 102
 
 121
 
 148
 
 92
 
 117
 
 139
 
 170
 
 1080.2.5.4.6 Torque . After the required installation tension has been exceeded, one reading of tension and
 torque shall be taken and recorded. T he torque value shall be as follows:
 Torque
 
 ≤
 
 0.25 PD
 
 Where:
 
 705
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Torque = measured torque, foot-pounds
 P = measured bolt tension, pounds
 D = bolt diameter, feet
 1080.2.5.4.7 Short Bolts. Bolts that are too short to test in a Skidmore-Wilhelm Calibrator may be tested
 in a steel joint. T he maximum torque requirement shall be computed using a value of P equal to the turn
 test tension shown in Sec 1080.2.5.4.5.
 1080.2.5.5 Re porting. T he results of all tests, including zinc coating thickness, required herein and in the
 applicable AASHT O/AST M specifications and the location and date of the tests performance, shall be
 recorded on the appropriate document. T he tests need not be witnessed by an inspection agency. T he
 manufacturer or distributor performing the tests shall certify the results are accurate.
 1080.2.5.6 Docume ntation for High Stre ngth Faste ne r Asse mblie s.
 1080.2.5.6.1 Mill Te st Re ports. A Mill Test Report (MT R) shall be furnished for all mill steel used in the
 manufacture of the bolts, nuts or washers. T he MT R shall indicate the location where the material was
 melted and manufactured.
 1080.2.5.6.2 Manufacture r Ce rtifie d Te st Re ports. T he manufacturer of the bolts, nuts and washers
 shall furnish a Manufacturer Certified Test Report (MCT R) for each item furnished including the following
 information:
 (a) T he lot number of each of the items tested.
 (b) T he rotational-capacity lot number as required in Sec 1080.2.5.4.2.
 (c) T he results of the tests required in Sec 1080.2.5.5.
 (d) T he pertinent information required in Sec 1080.2.5.4.2.
 (e) A statement that MCT R for the items are in conformance to this specification and the
 applicable AASHT O/AST M specifications.
 T he location where the bolt assembly components were manufactured.
 Rotational capacity testing if completed by the manufacturer.
 1080.2.5.6.3 Distributor Ce rtifie d Te st Re ports. T he Distributor Certified Test Report (DCT R) shall
 include MCT R for the various bolt assembly components. T he rotational-capacity test may be performed
 by a distributor in lieu of a manufacturer and shall be reported on the DCT R. T he DCT R shall indicate the
 following if not included in the MCT R:
 (a) T he results of the tests required in Sec 1080.2.5.5.
 (b) T he pertinent information required in Sec 1080.2.5.4.2.
 (c) T he rotational-capacity lot number as required in Sec 1080.2.5.4.3.
 (d) A statement that the MCT R are in accordance with this specification and the applicable
 AASHT O/AST M specifications.
 (e) Certification of galvanizing from the galvanizing supplier shall be in accordance with Sec
 1080.2.1.
 1080.2.5.7 Shipping of High Stre ngth Faste ne r Asse mblie s. Bolts, nuts and washers, where required,
 from each rotational-capacity lot shall be shipped in the same container in proportionate quantities for
 use. If there is only one production lot number for each size of nut and washer, the nuts and washers may be
 
 706
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 shipped in separate containers. Each shipping container shall be permanently marked by the manufacturer
 or distributor with the rotational-capacity lot number such that identification will be possible at any stage
 prior to installation. T he appropriate MT R, MCT R or DCT R shall be supplied in accordance with the
 contract documents.
 1080.2.6 Machine Bolts. Machine bolted field connections shall be made with machine bolts having
 American Standard Regular Heads and Nuts of hexagonal shape and shall be in accordance with ANSI B
 18.2.1 and B 18.2.2. T hreads shall extend slightly beyond the nut to permit burring. One plain washer in
 accordance with ANSI B 18.22.1 shall be used at all slotted holes.
 1080.2.7 Cast Ste e l. For cast steel, the foundry shall furnish a certified copy of foundry reports giving
 the chemical analysis and results of physical tests on the material from each heat. T hese reports shall be
 submitted for approval of material being furnished before any required machine work is done on the
 castings.
 1080.2.8 Cast Iron. For gray iron castings, the foundry shall furnish one finished tension test specimen in
 accordance with AASHT O M 105 from each heat. T he required machine work shall not proceed until
 material being furnished has been approved. If cast steel is furnished in lieu of gray iron, the minimum
 tensile strength shall be 50,000 psi.
 1080.2.9 Ide ntification of Me tals. T he steel shall be stamped or stenciled and color striped with paint at
 the mill. Heat numbers shall be steel stamped or stenciled with paint at the mill. Separate markings and
 color codes shall be in accordance with AST M A 6. T he characteristic color stripes shall be placed on each
 part cut from the mill piece. For steels not covered by AST M A 6, the fabricator shall furnish the engineer
 the color coding in writing before fabrication begins. Heat numbers shall be painted on all principal pieces
 and these pieces shall be so noted on the shop drawings. Principal pieces for this requirement shall include
 all beams, flanges, webs, splice plates, cover plates, bearings, bearing stiffener plates, load bearing members
 of end diaphragms, pin plates, hanger plates and others as may be directed by the engineer. Principal pieces
 shall include individual plates of all truss members, truss gusset plates, splice plates and floorbeam
 connection angles. T he color code and heat number markings shall be placed on the material such that the
 markings are visible throughout the work of fabrication. Loss of identification on pieces or items will be
 cause for rejection of the pieces or items.
 1080.2.9.1 Fracture Critical Me mbe rs. Principal pieces requiring identification shall also include
 components of fracture critical members. T raceability of both heat numbers and impact serial numbers
 shall be maintained for fracture critical members and attachments.
 1080.2.9.2 Dire ction of Rolling. Unless otherwise indicated in the contract documents, steel plates for
 main members and splice plates for flanges and main tension members shall be cut and fabricated such that
 the primary direction of rolling is parallel to the direction of the principal tensile or compressive stresses.
 T he direction of rolling shall be maintained for all principal pieces during fabrication.
 1080.2.10 Ste e l Stamping. Any metal die stamping of match marks and erection marks in structural steel
 members shall be limited to a position in the end 1 1/2 inches of flange plates and flange splice plates, the
 middle third of web plates and the outside edge of the middle third of web splice plates. Metal die stamping
 at other locations or for other purposes may be approved by the engineer provided low stress dies are used.
 Low stress dies will be defined as those manufactured to produce impressions that are rounded at the bottom
 rather than sharp edged. Metal die stamping on pin plates and hanger plates will not be permitted.
 1080.3 Fabrication and Inspe ction.
 1080.3.1 Q uality Assurance Inspe ction. T he engineer will be responsible for QA inspection to assure
 the quality of the fabricated material. QA inspection by the engineer will not relieve the contractor of the
 responsibility to provide fabricated structural steel items in accordance with the contract documents.
 Sufficient QC, as necessary to assure work being performed conforms to the contract documents, shall be
 the responsibility of the contractor and fabricator. Following adequate notification that QC inspections and
 testing by the fabricator have been performed, QA inspection will be at the option of the engineer.
 Regardless of the location and degree of QA inspection, material and workmanship not meeting specified
 performance criteria or conforming to the contract documents or recognized good practice may be rejected
 
 707
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 at any time prior to final acceptance of the work.
 1080.3.1.1 Locations of Inspe ction. QA inspection of fabricated material will ordinarily be made in the
 shop for fabricating shops within the 48 contiguous States and for shops outside the U. S., but within 1,000
 miles of Jefferson City, MO. High strength bolts, nuts and washers shall be presented for sampling at the
 fabrication shop performing the primary fabrication or at a location agreed to by Construction and
 Materials. In some cases, QA inspection in the fabrication shop may be waived and inspection made when
 the fabricated material is delivered to the project site. All costs of QA inspection at fabricating shops
 located both outside the 48 contiguous States and more than 1,000 miles from Jefferson City, shall be at
 the contractor ’s expense. In such cases, the contractor will be charged with transportation costs and
 expenses of QA inspectors for trips made from Jefferson City to locations to which the inspectors must
 travel for shop inspection work. T hese transportation costs and expenses of QA inspectors will be deducted
 by the Commission from monies due the contractor.
 1080.3.1.2 Notification of Inspe ction. T he engineer shall be notified at least four working days prior to
 the beginning of the shop fabrication so a QA inspector may be present if so desired and to allow the QA
 inspector to make travel arrangements. If the fabricator notifies and requests inspection and the QA
 inspector arrives at the location of inspection to find the material is not ready for inspection as indicated
 in the request, any travel costs incurred by MoDOT for additional inspection shall be paid by the
 contractor.
 1080.3.1.3 Acce ss for Inspe ction. T he engineer shall have full access to all parts of the shop or project
 site where material is being fabricated or assembled and shall be provided with every reasonable facility for
 determining the character of material and workmanship.
 1080.3.1.4 Fie ld Inspe ction. No increased time or compensation will be allowed for additional work,
 delays or additional costs as a result of QA inspection at the project site, including required repairs,
 including where samples were removed, refabrication, securing samples for chemical analysis and physical
 tests.
 1080.3.1.5 O ffice Space . A suitable office area shall be provided for exclusive use by the engineer. T he
 office may be enclosed or semi-enclosed as available at the location of QA inspection, but shall be suitable
 for use as determined by the engineer. T he floor space shall be at least 120 square feet unless otherwise
 approved by the engineer, weatherproof, secure, insulated and lighted. T he office space shall be adequately
 ventilated, heated and air conditioned. Electric outlets with 110-120 volt, 60 Hz current and a telephone
 with outside line, inter-plant and dial-up computer capabilities shall be provided. Office furniture consisting
 of a desk, a minimum of 30 x 60 inches with drawers, a swivel desk chair with arms and a storage/filing
 cabinet with lock hardware and key shall be provided. All office furniture will be subject to approval by the
 engineer. Should any furniture become unsatisfactory, the furniture shall be promptly repaired or replaced
 to the satisfaction of the engineer. Accessible parking shall be provided near the office any time the shop is
 in operation on MoDOT projects. No direct payment will be made for furnishing and maintaining an
 acceptable office area for QA inspection.
 1080.3.1.6 Ce rtifications. All structural steel fabricators performing work for the following listed
 components of steel structures shall be certified prior to the start of fabrication under the appropriate
 category of the AISC Certification Program for Steel Bridge Fabricators or the AISC Certification Program
 for Bridge and Highway Metal Component Manufacturers as follows:
 (a) Fabricators of unspliced rolled beams and temporary bridges shall be certified to the Simple
 Bridge (SBr) requirements.
 (b) Fabricators of straight or curved (radius over 500 feet) rolled beams with field or shop splices,
 built-up welded constant depth straight or curved (radius over 500 feet) I-shape plate girders, builtup welded variable depth straight or curved (radius over 1000 feet) I-shaped plate girders, and
 trusses with a total length less than 200 feet or substantially pre-assembled and shipped in no more
 than three sub-assemblies shall be certified to the Intermediate Bridge (IBr) requirements.
 (c) Fabricators of bridges beyond the listed structures of 1080.3.1.6(a) or 1080.3.1.6(b) shall be
 certified to the Advanced Bridge (ABr) requirements.
 
 708
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (d) Fabricators of fracture-critical members indicated in the contract plans shall also meet the
 requirements for fracture-critical certification in addition to the other bridge certifications.
 (e) Fabricators of overhead sign trusses, steel bearings, POT bearings, finger plate expansion
 devices, and flat plate expansion devices shall be certified to the Bridge and Highway Metal
 Component Manufacturers requirements unless the fabricator is certified to one of the Steel Bridge
 Fabricator levels (SBr, IBr, or ABr).
 (f) AISC certification will not be required for manufacturers of simple laminated or elastomeric
 bearing pad assemblies or PT FE bearing pad assemblies.
 1080.3.2 Shop Drawings. Shop drawings for structural steel and miscellaneous metals shall be required and
 shall be prepared in strict accordance with the design details shown on the plans. If details are lacking, the
 details shall be supplied and shall conform to the design plans and specifications. All drawings shall be clear
 and complete and shall be thoroughly checked before submittal. Shop drawings shall be completely titled in
 accordance with the contract plans and shall pertain to only a single structure. Four sets of the shop
 drawings for railroad structures and two sets for other structures shall be submitted to Bridge for approval.
 T he prints submitted shall be legible and shall have distinct details of sufficient contrast to be suitable for
 microfilming. Prints that do not have the desired clarity and contrast will be returned for corrective action.
 One set of prints will be returned marked reviewed or approved subject to noted corrections. T he
 contractor shall promptly make necessary corrections and resubmit for final approval. When shop
 drawings are approved, the contractor shall furnish as many additional prints as requested. Reproductions
 on cloth or film of the original shop drawings shall be required for railroad structures and shall be delivered
 to the engineer prior to completion of the work. T he approval of shop drawings will cover only the
 general design features and in no case shall this approval be considered to cover errors or omissions in shop
 details. T he contractor shall be responsible for the accuracy of the shop drawings, the fabrication of
 material and the fit of all connections. All changes in the fabrication and erection work caused by errors in
 shop drawings and any changes in fabrication necessary for satisfactory results shall be at the contractor ’s
 expense. After shop drawings have been approved, no changes in dimensions or substitutions of sections
 shall be made without written approval from the engineer. Shop drawings shall be revised to show any
 authorized changes and the required number of prints shall be furnished to the engineer.
 1080.3.2.1 Non-Dome stic Shop Drawings. Shop drawings from fabricators located outside the 48
 contiguous States, whether marked approved or approved subject to the corrections noted, will be returned
 to the contractor and the contractor shall be responsible for transmitting the drawings to the fabricator for
 further handling. Should such fabricator also be the contractor, all prints will be returned to the office
 located on the project.
 1080.3.2.2 We ld Proce dure s. All welding procedures to be used shall be prepared by the manufacturer,
 contractor or fabricator as a written procedure specification. For new welding procedures, two copies shall
 be submitted for approval prior to submitting shop drawings. Approved weld procedures will be kept on file
 by Bridge and may be considered for use on multiple projects. Any changes to the parameters of an
 approved welding procedure shall require submittal for approval. T he shop drawings submitted for approval
 shall indicate the welding procedure to be used for each joint.
 1080.3.2.3 Ve rification of Work. By submission of shop drawings, the contractor represents to the
 Commission that all material, field measurements, construction requirements, performance criteria and
 similar data have been verified. T he contractor further represents that the shop drawings have been
 coordinated and verified with the details of the work to be performed by other fabricators and entities on
 the project. No allowance for additional costs or delays will be made to the contractor for incorrect
 fabrication as a result of failure to coordinate or perform these verifications.
 1080.3.3 Fabrication. Fabrication of all parts of the structure shall be carefully done in strict accordance
 with the approved shop drawings.
 1080.3.3.1 Straighte ning. Straightening of any deformed structural material shall be performed by noninjurious methods prior to being worked in the shop. Sharp kinks and bends will be cause for rejection.
 
 709
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1080.3.3.2 Hole s. Holes for connections of main members shall be subpunched or subdrilled and reamed
 while assembled in the shop or may be drilled from the solid with main members and each splice plate fully
 assembled in their final erected positions. Holes for floor beams and framed stringer connections shall be
 drilled or reamed to a steel template of sufficient thickness to center the drill accurately and all members to
 be secured through the same group of holes shall be drilled or reamed from the same template. Holes may
 be punched full size in secondary members such as lateral, longitudinal and sway bracing, lacing bars, stay
 plates and diaphragms. Stacking of web splice plates during drilling or reaming operations on straight girders
 will be permitted.
 1080.3.3.3 Re aming and Finishing of Hole s. Reaming or drilling full size from the solid shall be done
 while the truss, girder, continuous I-beam or other component as noted, is assembled, either in an upright
 position or on its side, properly adjusted for camber and sweep and after the connecting parts have been
 firmly fastened together. A minimum of one full span, from bearing to bearing, shall be fully assembled
 before reaming or drilling full size begins. Connecting parts assembled in the shop for the purpose of
 reaming or drilling holes for field or shop connections shall not be interchanged or reversed and shall be
 matchmarked. A diagram showing such marks shall be detailed on the shop drawings. Burrs resulting from
 reaming, drilling or punching shall be removed. All connections shall be disassembled after drilling or
 reaming to make these holes accessible for deburring. Required cleaning and painting shall be done after
 disassembly. Reamed, drilled or punched holes shall be round and perpendicular to the member. Any hole out
 of round more than 1/16 inch will be cause for rejection of the plate. Eighty-five percent of the holes in
 any group shall not show an offset greater than 1/32 inch between adjacent thicknesses of metal after
 reaming or drilling. All holes shall be drilled or reamed and aligned such that a bolt of the specified diameter
 will enter the hole and the head and nut will seat on the metal before tensioning.
 1080.3.3.4 Applicable Code s. All welding, oxygen cutting, shearing and clipping and dimensional
 tolerances shall be in accordance with the ANSI/AASHT O/AWS D1.5: 2002, Bridge Welding Code. T ubular
 steel structures shall be governed by the current edition of the AWS D1.1, Structural Welding Code - Steel,
 in effect at the time of the contract, unless specified otherwise. Aluminum structures shall be governed by
 the current edition of the AWS D1.2, Structural Welding Code - Aluminum, except as amended by Sec 903,
 unless otherwise indicated.
 1080.3.3.5 Modifications to the Bridge We lding Code . T he following modifications to the
 ANSI/AASHT O/AWS D1.5 2002, Bridge Welding Code (AWS), shall apply:
 1080.3.3.5.1 AWS Se c 1.3 Paragraph 1.3.4 - Paragraph 1.3.4 shall be replaced with the following:
 T he gas metal arc welding process shall not be used on any structural components of bridges. Approved gas
 metal arc processes may be used for incidental, non-structural components as may be specifically approved
 by the engineer. Tack welding with an approved gas metal arc process will be permitted for joints that will
 subsequently be welded using an approved submerged arc automatic welding process.
 1080.3.3.5.2 AWS Se c 1.3 Paragraph 1.3.7 - A new Paragraph 1.3.7 shall be added as follows:
 All primary shop welds shall be made by approved submerged arc automatic welding processes. T he
 automatic welding process shall be one in which the wire or electrode feed, speed of travel and guidance are
 all mechanically controlled. Noncompliance with this requirement will be cause for rejection of the welded
 material unless prior approval is granted by the engineer for welding the specified joints by the use of other
 processes. T he automatic welding process requirement for primary shop welds shall be shown on the shop
 drawings for each joint. Primary shop welds will be defined as flange and web butt welded splices in
 I-beams, box members and plate girders, plate girder or box flange to web fillet welds and cover plate to
 flange fillet welds.
 1080.3.3.5.3 AWS Se c 2.8 Paragraph 2.8.1.1 - Paragraph 2.8.1.1 shall be replaced with the following:
 T he minimum fillet weld size, except for fillet welds used to reinforce groove welds, shall be as shown in the
 following table or as calculated using procedures established to prevent cracking in accordance with
 Paragraph 4.2.2. In both cases, the minimum size will apply if the size is sufficient to satisfy design
 requirements.
 
 710
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 Material Thickness of Thicker Part Joined, in. Minimum Size of Fillet Welda, in.
 To 3/4
 
 1/4 b
 
 Over 3/4 to 2 1/2
 
 5/16 b
 1/2
 
 Over 2 1/2
 a Except
 bSingle
 
 that the weld size need not exceed the thickness of the thinner part joined.
 pass welds must be used.
 
 1080.3.3.5.4. AWS Se c 3.2 Paragraph 3.2.2.2 (4) - A new Paragraph 3.2.2.2 (4) shall be added as
 follows:
 Quenched and tempered steel plate may be thermally cut provided sufficient preheating is applied according
 to the steel producer's written recommendations. Procedures for thermal cutting of quenched and tempered
 steel plate, along with the steel producer's written report, shall be submitted to the engineer for approval
 prior to the start of such work.
 1080.3.3.5.5 AWS Se c 3.2 Paragraph 3.2.3.4 - Paragraph 3.2.3.4 shall be replaced with the following:
 T he corrective procedures described in Table 3.1 shall not apply to discontinuities in rolled base-metal
 surfaces. Such discontinuities may be corrected by the fabricator in accordance with AST M A 6, except that
 repair by welding will be permitted only when approved by the engineer. Approval will be limited to areas
 where there will be less than the maximum design stress in the finished structure. When surface
 imperfections in alloy, low alloy and carbon steel plates are repaired by grinding, the surfaces shall have
 edges faired to the plate surface with a maximum slope of 1 in 10.
 1080.3.3.5.6 AWS Se c 3.2 Paragraph 3.2.11 - A new paragraph 3.2.11 shall be added as follows:
 Sheared edges of plates not to be welded that are more than 5/8 inch thick and carrying calculated stress
 shall be planed to a depth of 1/4 inch.
 1080.3.3.5.7 AWS Sec 3.3.8 - Sec 3.3.8 shall be replaced with the following:
 Temporary welds shall be subject to the same WPS requirements as final welds. Temporary welds shall be
 removed unless otherwise permitted by the engineer and the surface shall be made flush with the original
 surface. Unless previously approved in writing by the engineer, there shall be no temporary welds for
 fabrication, transportation, erection or other purposes on main members except at locations more than 1/6
 the depth of the web from the flanges of beams and girders. T here shall be no temporary welds in tension
 zones of members of quenched and tempered steels. Temporary welds at other locations shall be shown on
 shop drawings and shall be made with approved consumables. Removal of temporary welds shall conform to
 Paragraphs 3.3.7.3 and 3.3.7.4.
 1080.3.3.5.8 AWS Se c 3.4 Paragraph 3.4.6 - Paragraph 3.4.6 shall be replaced with the following:
 All shop splices in each component part of a cover-plated beam or built-up member shall be made and all
 required nondestructive testing completed and approved by the engineer before the component part is
 welded to other component parts of the member. Long members or member sections may be made by shopsplicing subsections, each made in accordance with this subsection (See 2.17.6). All shop splices shall be
 made using full penetration welds that fully develop the capacity of the original member. Additional shop
 splices required due to length limits of available material may be used if detailed on the shop drawings and
 placed at locations approved by the engineer. No additional payment will be made for any additional shop
 splices placed in the members at the option of the contractor, including shop splices that may be required as
 a result of material limitations.
 1080.3.3.5.9 AWS Se c 3.5 Paragraph 3.5.1.8.1 - A new Paragraph 3.5.1.8.1 shall be added as follows:
 T he maximum permissible variation from specified width for rolled or burned flange plates shall be -1/8
 inch to +3/8 inch.
 1080.3.3.5.10 AWS Se c 3.5 Paragraph 3.5.1.9 - Paragraph 3.5.1.9 shall be replaced with the following:
 T he bearing ends of bearing stiffeners shall be flush and square with the web and shall have at least 75
 percent of this area in contact with the inner surface of the flanges. T he remaining
 
 711
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 25 percent of the area of the bearing stiffener shall be within 0.010 inch of the inner surface of the flanges.
 When bearing against a steel base or seat, all steel components shall fit within 0.010 inch for 75 percent of
 the projected area of web and stiffeners and not more than 1/32 inch for the remaining 25 percent of the
 projected area. Girders without stiffeners shall bear on the projected area of the web on the outer flange
 surface within 0.010 inch. T he included angle between web and flange shall not exceed 90 degrees in the
 bearing length. T he top surface of a flange or shelf plate supporting a steel bearing rocker shall be
 considered a flat surface with a tolerance of 0.003 inch per inch in any direction over the projected area of
 the rocker. T he top surface of a flange or shelf plate in direct contact with elastomeric bearings shall not
 deviate from a true plane surface by more than 1/16 inch.
 1080.3.3.5.11 AWS Se c 3.5 Paragraph 3.5.1.16 - A new Paragraph 3.5.1.16 shall be added as follows:
 Permissible variation in length of assembled beams or girders between the centerline of bearing devices shall
 not exceed plus or minus 1/4 inch for any one span or plus or minus
 1/2 inch for any two or more spans within the assembled unit. T he actual centerline of any bearing device
 shall lie within the thickness of the bearing stiffener.
 1080.3.3.5.12 AWS Se c 3.7 Paragraph 3.7.2.5 - A new Paragraph 3.7.2.5 shall be added as follows:
 If, after three repairs to the same area of a weld requiring radiographic quality, there is any part of the
 original defect remaining or there is a new rejectable indication, the total joint shall be cut apart, all
 deposited weld metal removed, joint preparation made and the total joint rewelded.
 1080.3.3.5.13 AWS Se c 3.7 Paragraph 3.7.2.6 - A new Paragraph 3.7.2.6 shall be added as follows:
 T he gas metal arc welding process shall not be used for the repair of welds except when repairing welds
 made with the GMAW process.
 1080.3.3.5.14 AWS Se c 5.21 Paragraph 5.21.6.2 - A new Paragraph 5.21.6.2 shall be added as follows:
 Any cost involved in qualifying welders, welding operators and tackers, including all material costs,
 finishing of test specimens, the physical testing of finished specimens and any radiography required shall be
 borne by the contractor. Required radiography and physical testing of finished specimens shall be performed
 at test facilities approved by the engineer.
 1080.3.3.5.15 AWS Se c 6.6 Paragraph 6.6.5 - Paragraph 6.6.5 shall be replaced with the following:
 If the engineer subsequently requests nondestructive testing, not specified in the original contract
 agreement, the contractor shall perform any requested testing or shall permit any requested testing to be
 performed. Handling, surface preparation, repair welds and any nondestructive testing requested by the
 engineer, as a result of weld repair, shall be at the contractor ’s expense. Payment for any non-destructive
 testing that does not indicate the need for repair to the tested weld will be in accordance with Sec 109.4.
 1080.3.3.5.16 AWS Se c 6.7 Paragraphs 6.7.1, 6.7.1.1 and 6.7.1.2 - Paragraphs 6.7.1, 6.7.1.1 and
 6.7.1.2 shall be replaced with the following:
 Radiographic inspection shall be required for areas of both shop and field butt welds as specified herein. One
 hundred percent inspection shall be required for flanges of rolled beams and girders and 100 percent of
 transverse butt welds in webs for a distance of no less than one-sixth of the web depth from each flange and
 25 percent of the remainder of the web depth. At least one-third of the length of all longitudinal web
 splices shall be radiographed at even intervals throughout the length of the splice. When a rejectable defect
 is found by radiography in any partially tested joint, either initially or in a later additional radiograph, tests
 shall be conducted on either side of and adjacent to the rejectable test area. If a rejectable defect is found in
 any additional areas, then 100 percent of vertical web splices and an additional 10 percent of total weld
 length in longitudinal web splices shall be tested. T he location of these additional test areas shall be as
 directed by the engineer. All complete joint penetration groove welds in T- and corner joints shall be tested
 by ultrasonic testing.
 1080.3.3.5.17 AWS Se c 6.10 Paragraph 6.10.3.4 - A new Paragraph 6.10.3.4 shall be added as follows:
 
 712
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Edge blocks shall be used when radiographing butt welds greater than 1/2 inch in thickness. T he edge blocks
 shall have a length sufficient to extend beyond each side of the weld centerline for a minimum distance of 2
 inches and shall have a thickness equal to the thickness of the weld, plus or minus 1/16 inch. T he minimum
 width of the edge blocks shall be no less than 1 inch. T he edge blocks shall be centered on the weld with a
 snug fit against the plate being radiographed, allowing no more than 1/16 inch gap. Edge blocks shall be
 made of radiographically clean steel and the surface shall have a finish of ANSI 125μin. or smoother (refer
 to ANSI/AWS D1.1-98 Structural Welding Code - Steel, Sec 6.17, Paragraph 6.17.13 and Figure 6.15).
 1080.3.3.5.18 AWS Se c 6.10 Paragraph 6.10.11.2 - Paragraph 6.10.11.2 shall be replaced with the
 following:
 If the greatest and least thickness of a weld connecting parts of different thickness cannot be rendered with
 adequate contrast on a single film with a single exposure, a dual film or dual exposure technique shall be used
 to obtain suitable density for both the greatest and the least thickness of the weld.
 1080.3.3.5.19 AWS Se c 6.12 Paragraph 6.12.4 - A new Paragraph 6.12.4 shall be added as follows:
 After completion of all radiographic inspection, the contractor shall submit to the engineer one set of
 drawing details showing the location and identification numbers of all radiographs taken.
 1080.3.3.5.20 AWS Se c 6.26 Paragraph 6.26.2.1 - Paragraph 6.26.2.1 shall be replaced with the
 following:
 For any welds, the greatest dimension of any porosity or fusion type discontinuity that is
 1/16 inch or larger in greatest dimension shall not exceed the size, B, indicated in Figure 6.8 for the
 effective throat or weld size involved. T he distance from any porosity or fusion type discontinuity
 described above to another such discontinuity, to an edge or to the toe or root of any intersecting flangeto-web weld shall not be less than the minimum clearance allowed, C, indicated in Figure 6.8 for the size of
 discontinuity under examination.
 1080.3.3.5.21 AWS Se c 6.26 Paragraph 6.26.2.2 and Figure 6.9 - Delete paragraph 6.26.2.2 and
 Figure 6.9.
 1080.3.3.5.22 AWS Se c 6.26 Paragraph 6.26.3.1 - Paragraph 6.26.3.1 shall be replaced with the
 following:
 Welds subjected to ultrasonic testing in addition to visual inspection shall conform to the requirements of
 Table 6.3.
 1080.3.3.6 Calibrate d Tape s. When the contract involves fabrication of a bridge with a bearing-tobearing span of 100 feet or more, certifications and identifying numbers of calibrated measuring tapes or
 numbered tapes matched to a calibrated master shall be kept on file for review by the engineer.
 Certification of the measuring tape to be used or certification of the master from which the tape was
 matched shall be traceable to the U. S. National Bureau of Standards. Certification of tapes for shop use
 shall be renewed at least every two years.
 1080.3.3.7 Conne ction Angle s. Connection angles for floor beams and stringers shall be flush and shall
 be correct as to position and length of member. If milling is required, no more than 1/16 inch shall be
 removed from the thickness of the angles.
 1080.3.3.8 Longitudinal Stiffe ne rs. Longitudinal girder web stiffeners shall be a single length if possible.
 If more than a single length is necessary, such lengths shall be joined by a full penetration butt weld. T he
 location of these butt welds shall be shown on the shop drawings for each joint and shall be subject to
 approval by the engineer. Runoff plates in accordance with AWS Section 3.12 shall be used. T he welds shall
 be radiographically tested and accepted in accordance with AWS Sec 6.10 prior to being attached to the
 web.
 1080.3.3.9 Pins. Pins shall be furnished true to size and shall be straight, smooth and free from flaws. Pins
 
 713
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 shall be provided with hexagonal chamfered nuts. T he screw ends shall be sufficiently long to permit burring
 the threads when members are connected. Pilot and driving nuts shall be furnished for each size of pins
 where required. T hreads for all pins and bolts shall conform with the ANSI B1.1 Free Fit - Class 2 Series
 except that when recessed nuts are specified, pin ends requiring a threaded diameter of 1 3/8 inches or more
 shall have six threads per inch. If standard nuts are specified for this size pin, a minimum of four threads to
 the inch shall be used.
 1080.3.3.10 Pin Hole s. Pin holes shall be bored true to size, smooth and straight, at right angles to the
 axis of the member and parallel with each other. T he boring shall be done after the member is assembled
 and welded. T he center-to-center distance of pin holes shall be correct within 1/32 inch for an individual
 component or member. T he diameter of pin holes shall not exceed that of the pin by more than 1/50 inch
 for pins 4 inches or less in diameter or no more than 1/32 inch for pins larger than 4 inches in diameter.
 1080.3.3.11 Casting. Castings shall be free from inclusions of foreign material, casting faults, injurious
 blow holes or other defects which render the castings unsuitable for the service intended. Castings shall be
 properly filleted at re-entrant angles. No tolerance will be allowed below the dimensions shown on the plans
 for thicknesses over an appreciable area of the casting. A reasonable oversize will not be cause for
 rejection.
 1080.3.3.12 Be nt Plate s. Bent plates shall be cold bent and taken from the stock plates such that the
 bend line will be at right angles to the direction of rolling. T he radius of bends, measured to the concave
 face of the metal, shall be in accordance with the requirements as shown in the table below, in which "T " is
 the thickness of the plate. If a shorter radius is required, the plates shall be hot bent. Hot bent plates shall
 be bent at right angles to the direction of rolling. Before hot or cold bending, the corners of the plate shall
 be rounded to a radius of 1/16 inch throughout that portion of the plate at which the bending is to occur.
 Angle Through Which Plate is B ent
 61 degrees to 90 degrees
 Over 90 degrees to 120 degrees
 Over 120 degrees to 150 degrees
 
 Minimum Radius
 1.0 T
 1.5 T
 2.0 T
 
 1080.3.3.13 Surface Finish. Bearing plates of rolled steel not requiring a surface finish shall be
 straightened to a plane surface. T he surfaces of plates of rolled steel or cast material which are to be in
 contact shall be finished as shown on the plans and the final finish shall be prepared in a manner to give at
 least 50 percent contact as indicated by standard machinist's blue test. Rockers and pedestals made from
 rolled steel shall be finished after welding. If a flat surface is shown on the plans, the tolerance shall be
 0.003 inch per inch in any direction. Flat surfaces in full contact shall be finished at right angles to each
 other. Bearing plates shall be assembled in sets. T he surface finish of bearing and base plates and other
 bearing surfaces that are to come in contact with each other or with concrete shall meet the following
 surface roughness requirements as defined in ANSI B 46.1, Surface Roughness, Waviness and Lay, Part I:
 Surf ace Roughness Requirements
 Steel Slabs
 Heavy P lates in Contact in Shoes to be Welded
 Milled Ends of Compression Members,
 Stiffeners and Fillers
 Bridge Rollers and Rockers
 P ins and P in Holes
 Sliding Bearings
 
 Micro-inches, Max.
 2,000
 1,000
 500
 250
 125
 125
 
 1080.3.3.14 Horiz ontally Curve d Rolle d Be ams and Plate Girde rs. If the plans show rolled beams or
 welded plate girders to be finished to a horizontal curvature, fabrication shall be as follows:
 (a) Rolled beams shall be curved by the heat curving procedure.
 (b) Welded plate girders may be fabricated by cutting the flanges to the specified curvature before
 the girders are attached to the webs or, if not prohibited by the contract, may be curved by the
 heat curving procedure.
 
 714
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (c) If the heat curving procedure is used, the procedure shall comply with the following
 requirements:
 (1) Material. Heat curving of rolled beams and welded plate girders shall be limited to
 AASHT O M 270 Grade 36, AASHT O M 270 Grade 50, AASHT O M 270 Grade 50W and
 AASHT O M 270 Grade HPS 70W.
 (2) Type of Heating. Beams and girders may be curved by either continuous or V-type
 heating.
 (3) Temperature. T he heat curving operation shall be conducted such that the
 temperature of the steel never exceeds 1,100 F as measured by temperature-indicating
 crayons or other suitable means applied before heating. T he heating of the steel to a
 temperature greater than 1,200 F will be considered destructive heating and will be
 conclusive cause for rejection of the steel. Quenching with water or water and air, will not
 be permitted. Cooling with dry compressed air will be permitted after the steel has cooled
 to 600 F.
 (4) Position for Heating. T he girder may be heat curved with the web in either a vertical
 or a horizontal position, unless noted on the contract plans. When curved in the vertical
 position, the girder shall be braced or supported in such a manner that the tendency of the
 girder to deflect laterally during the heat curving process will not cause the girder to
 overturn. When curved in the horizontal position, the girder shall be supported near the
 ends and at intermediate points, if required, to obtain a uniform curvature. When the
 girder is positioned horizontally for heating, intermediate safety catch blocks shall be
 maintained at the mid-length of the girder within 2 inches of the flanges at all times
 during the heating process.
 (5) Sequence of Operations. Heat curving shall be completed before the girder is painted.
 T he contractor shall submit a curving procedure addressing the attachment of stiffeners,
 connection plates and cover plates for review prior to commencement of the heat
 curving process.
 1080.3.3.15 Shop Asse mbly.
 1080.3.3.15.1 If required by the contract, the structural steel for bridges shall be completely shop
 assembled for inspection, supported only at points of bearing. Long bridges required to be entirely shop
 assembled may be divided into units for assembly with each unit extending from expansion device to
 expansion device.
 1080.3.3.15.2 Beams and girders of all other bridges shall be assembled for inspection in line assemblies
 with a minimum length assembled of one complete span, from bearing to bearing.
 1080.3.3.15.3 During shop assembly, connecting parts shall be firmly fastened together and held in
 alignment with a minimum of four drift pins and four make-up bolts per flange splice plate, web splice plate
 or similar connecting part, until assembly inspection is complete.
 1080.3.3.15.4 All trusses, plate girders and continuous I-beams shall be assembled to permit inspection of
 all parts. QA inspection of the assembly will be at the option of the engineer.
 1080.3.3.16 Shop Me asure me nt of Curvature and Cambe r. Horizontal curvature and vertical camber
 will not be measured for QA inspection in the shop until all welding, drilling and heat curving operations
 have been completed and the flanges have cooled to a uniform temperature. For bridges not requiring
 complete shop assembly, the vertical camber will be checked with the girder in a horizontal position and
 the horizontal curvature will be checked with the girder in either a horizontal or vertical position. T he
 shop drawings shall show the required offsets for both curvature and camber at approximately 10-foot
 intervals, measured along the girder. T he permissible variation in specified sweep for horizontally curved
 beams and girders, measured in inches, but not to exceed 1/2 inch, shall be as follows:
 1/8 inch x 0.1 x (number of feet from end bearing)
 
 715
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1080.3.4 She ar Conne ctor Studs. Shear connector studs may be attached to the beams or girders either
 in the fabricating shop or in the field. All applicable requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health
 Administration (OSHA) shall be met. If the shear connector studs are to be attached in the field, the
 contractor shall notify the engineer no less than one week before the contractor begins welding shear
 connectors to the beams or girders so the engineer may inspect for approval the proposed welding
 procedure and equipment. Only welding procedures, equipment and operators meeting the requirements of
 Secs 1080.3.3.4, 1080.3.3.5 and 712 shall be used. Areas to which shear connectors are to be attached shall
 be cleaned of all foreign material, such as oil, grease or paint by a suitable method. Where a shop coat of
 inorganic zinc primer has been applied, removal shall be limited to the minimum area necessary to apply
 the studs. After completion of the welding operations, the primed area shall be touched up with a suitable
 inorganic zinc primer or epoxy mastic paint (non-aluminum).
 1080.3.5 Shipping. Fabricated material shall not be shipped before a "Fabrication Inspection Shipment
 Release" is issued by the engineer. All parts shall be loaded and protected to prevent damage in transit. Pins,
 nuts, bolts and other small parts shall be boxed or crated. T he "Fabrication Inspection Shipment Release"
 shall be delivered by the contractor to the engineer at destination prior to erection of steel.
 1080.4 We athe ring Ste e l.
 1080.4.1 De scription. T his section contains provisions that shall modify, supplement and expand the
 requirements of the contract plans and other provisions of Sec 1080 when the use of weathering steel is
 specified for structures. Weathering steel will be defined as structural steel specified under AASHT O M 270
 Grades 50W, HPS 50W and HPS 70W that is intended to be primarily used in a bare, uncoated application
 for the structure.
 1080.4.2 High Pe rformance Ste e ls.
 1080.4.2.1 Mate rial Re quire me nts. All high performance steel shall be in accordance with the latest
 edition of AASHT O M 270 and supplements. As an option, HPS 50W and HPS 70W thermomechanicalcontrolled-processing (T MCP) steel plates available from the manufacturer in limited thicknesses may be
 directly substituted for the quenched and tempered product.
 1080.4.2.2 Fabrication Re quire me nts. All fabrication shall be in accordance with the latest edition of
 the AASHTO Guide Specifications for Highway Bridge Fabrication with HPS70W Steel, an addendum to be
 used in conjunction with ANSI / AASHT O / AWS D1.5: 2002, except as modified by this section. Only
 fabricators meeting the requirements of the AISC Certification Program for Steel Bridge Fabricator
 Advanced Bridge (ABr) classification or approved equal may be used to fabricate HPS 50W and HPS 70W
 steel. Whenever magnetic particle testing is conducted, only the yoke technique will be permitted as
 described in Sec 6.7.6.2 of AWS D1.5: 2002, modified to test using alternating current only.
 1080.4.2.3 We lding Re quire me nts for HPS. All welding for high performance steel shall be in
 accordance with AASHT O / ANSI / AWS D1.5: 2002 Bridge Welding Code except as modified herein and by
 the latest edition of the AASHT O Guide Specifications for Highway Bridge Fabrication with HPS70W Steel.
 Only submerged arc and shielded metal arc welding processes shall be permitted when welding Grade HPS
 70W steel. T he matching submerged arc consumables using the ESAB electrode and Lincoln flux
 combinations, recommended in Appendix A of the guide specification shall not be allowed. Filler metals
 used for single pass fillet welds or for complete joint penetration groove welds connecting Grade HPS 70W
 plate to AST M A 709 Grade HPS 50W or Grade 50W may conform to the matching or undermatching
 requirements from AWS D1.5: 2002 as indicated in the guide specification. Moisture resistant coating shall
 be required for all shielded metal arc welding. T he contractor may request approval of alternate
 consumables in lieu of the filler metals listed in the guide specification for submerged arc welding in
 accordance with AWS D1.5 Table 4.1. T he request for approval shall include documentation of successful
 welding and shall include diffusible hydrogen tests indicating the levels of diffusible hydrogen to meet the
 requirements of the guide specifications. Grade HPS 50W may be welded under the same requirements as
 AST M A 709 Grade 50W.
 1080.4.3 Cle aning. Except for the areas of the structure to be partially coated as described in Sec
 1080.4.4, all surfaces of the structural steel shall be blast cleaned in the fabrication shop to meet the
 
 716
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 requirements of the Steel Structures Painting Council (SSPC) SSPC-SP6 and may be left uncoated. Faying
 surfaces of connections to be shop bolted shall be blast cleaned prior to permanent assembly of the
 connections. After blast cleaning, the steel shall be kept clean of all foreign material. If the steel becomes
 contaminated, the steel shall be cleaned with a method approved by the engineer. Girders contaminated
 with concrete or grout splatters shall be washed off before the material is allowed to dry.
 1080.4.4 Partial Coating. T he surfaces of all structural steel located under expansion joints, but not in
 contact with concrete, shall be coated with complete System H within a distance of 1 1/2 times the girder
 depth, but no less than 10 feet, from the centerline of all deck joints. Within this limit, items to be coated
 shall include all surfaces of beams, girders, diaphragms, stiffeners, bearings and miscellaneous structural steel
 items. T he prime coat for the specified paint system shall be applied to the structural steel within the
 above limits in the fabrication shop. T he intermediate and finish coats shall be applied in the field in
 accordance with Sec 1081.3.10. T he color of the finish coat shall be brown. Portions of the structural steel
 embedded in or in contact with concrete, including but not limited to the top flanges of girders, shall be
 coated with no less than 2.0 mils of the prime coat for System H. Shear connectors may not be coated or
 protected from overspray.
 1080.4.4.1 Surface Pre paration. All surface preparation and application of the partial coating described
 herein shall be as specified in Sec 1081. Required work shall include blast cleaning for all areas to receive
 the specified prime coat to SSPC-SP-10 (Near White Blast Cleaning) in accordance with Sec 1081.3.2,
 except that areas to be primed that will be embedded in concrete may be prepared to no less than SSPC-SP6. T he limits of the areas to be shop and field coated shall be masked to provide crisp, straight lines to
 prevent overspray on adjacent areas.
 1080.4.4.2 Drain Bracke t Coating. T he galvanized surfaces of drain support brackets shall be prepared
 according to the coating manufacturer's recommendation and field coated with a gray epoxy mastic primer
 (non-aluminum) within a distance of 6 inches from the point of connection to the weathering steel
 structure.
 1080.4.5 Bolting and Faste ne rs. All fasteners, such as bolts, nuts and washers, that bolt directly to the
 weathering grade structural steel, including fasteners located in areas of the structure to be partially coated
 and fasteners for expansion device supports and similar items shall be high strength weathering fasteners
 with atmospheric corrosion resistance and weathering characteristics comparable with the A 709
 weathering steel. Bolts shall be in accordance with AST M A 325, Type 3. Nuts shall be in accordance with
 the requirements of AST M A 563 and shall be Grades C3 or DH3. Washers shall meet the requirements of
 AST M F 436, Type 3. All other requirements of Secs 712 and 1080 relating to high strength fastener
 assemblies and fastener assembly installation shall remain in effect. Fasteners for slab drain brackets may be
 plain uncoated assemblies in accordance with Sec 1080.2.5 and coated in accordance with Sec 1080.4.5.1.
 1080.4.5.1 Coate d Conne ctions. Weathering grade fasteners in contact with coated structural steel items
 or located in areas of the structure to be partially coated shall be initially prepared and coated in the field
 with a gray epoxy mastic (non-aluminum) after the erection of the structure in accordance with the same
 procedure specified in Sec 1081. T he epoxy-primed fasteners shall be subsequently coated with the System
 H field coats specified for the structure in areas to be partially coated.
 1080.4.5.2 Cle aning. Prior to field bolting connections of high strength fasteners, the faying surfaces
 shall be cleaned of loose rust by abrasive blast, power hand tools or other approved methods. T ightly
 adhering rust will not be required to be removed.
 1080.4.6 We lding. All welds shall utilize welding processes and electrodes as required that will provide
 corrosion resistance and weathering characteristics for the welds comparable to the base metal, in
 accordance with the Section 4 of AWS D1.5: 2002 or as modified in Sec 1080.4.2.3.
 1080.4.7 Be arings and Anchor Bolts. Steel bearings, plate steel for elastomeric and PT FE bearings,
 structural steel for POT bearings, anchor bolts, sole plates, masonry plates and associated items shall be in
 accordance with AST M A 709 Grade 50W. Anchor bolt nuts shall be heavy hexagon nuts in accordance
 with AST M A 563, Grades C3 or DH3. T he exposed surfaces of all bearings for weathering steel structures
 under expansion joints shall be shop primed and field coated with the complete System H in accordance
 with Sec 1080.4.4 and 1081.
 
 717
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1080.4.8 Prote ction of Concre te Masonry. All substructure concrete shall be protected from the effects
 of rust staining during construction in accordance with Sec 711.
 1080.4.9 Storage of We athe ring Ste e l. Weathering steel shall be stored under conditions that will
 prevent unsightly, uneven weathering and excessive corrosion. If uneven weathering occurs, the contractor
 shall reclean the steel to the satisfaction of the engineer. If cleaning does not produce satisfactory
 uniformity in appearance or if in the judgment of the engineer, excessive corrosion or chemical
 contamination has occurred, the contractor shall replace the material at the contractor ’s expense. As a
 minimum, the following conditions shall be avoided and the contractor shall take additional precautions as
 deemed necessary:
 (a) Storage in transit, open cars or trucks for an extended period of time.
 (b) Standing water on material in storage or entrapment of moisture.
 (c) Contact with chemically treated lumber used for blocking or other types of foreign matter.
 (d) Exposure to chlorides or other chemical contamination.
 1080.5 High Stre ngth Bolt Installation. Shop installed high strength bolts shall be in accordance with
 Sec 712.
 1080.6 Coating of Structural Ste e l. Shop coating of structural steel shall meet the requirements of Sec
 1081.
 
 718
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1081
 CO ATING O F STRUCTURAL STEEL
 1081.1 Scope . T his specification covers coating new and existing bridges and structures made of structural
 steel and miscellaneous metals.
 1081.2 Syste ms of Coatings. T he required system and color or choice of systems and color will be
 specified on the plans. Each coat of the specified system shall be applied to all structural steel, unless the
 contract specifically delineates otherwise. T he system and color of coating to be shop-applied shall be
 shown on the shop drawings. All coatings shall comply with local VOC (Volatile Organic Compound)
 regulations where the paint is applied. T he system and color shall not vary for any portion of the entire
 structure, including material for field repairs and shall be compatible products of a single manufacturer. T he
 contractor shall coordinate the various items of work to ensure compliance with the requirements of this
 section. Approved material specifications and dry film thickness for the coating systems shall be as
 indicated in the following table:
 Paint Systems f or Structural Steel
 System G (High Solids, Inorganic Zinc Silicate-Epoxy-Polyurethane)
 Coating
 Section Dry Film Thickness, mils
 P rime Coat
 1045.3 3.0 min. to 6 max.
 Epoxy Intermediate Coat
 1045.4 3.0 min. to 5 max.
 P olyurethane Finish Coat, Gray or Brown
 1045.5 2.0 min. to 4 max.
 System H (High Solids, Inorganic Zinc Silicate-Waterborne Acrylic IntermediateWaterborne Acrylic Finish)
 Coating
 Section Dry Film Thickness, mils
 P rime Coat
 1045.3 3.0 min. to 6 max.
 Waterborne Acrylic, Intermediate Coat
 1045.6 2.0 min. to 4 max.
 Waterborne Acrylic, Finish Coat, Gray or Brown 1045.6 2.0 min. to 4 max.
 System I (High Solids, Inorganic Zinc Silicate-Polysiloxane)
 Coating
 Section Dry Film Thickness, mils
 P rime Coat
 1045.3 3.0 min. to 6 max.
 P olysiloxane Finish Coat
 1045.7 3.0 min. to 6 max.
 Calcium Sulf onate System
 Coating
 Section Dry Film Thickness, mils
 Calcium Sulfonate Rust P enetrating Sealer
 1045.10.2 1.0 min.
 Calcium Sulfonate P rimer
 1045.10.3 4.0 min.
 Calcium Sulfonate Topcoat
 1045.10.4 5.0 min.
 Aluminum & G ray Epoxy-Mastic Primer
 Coating
 Section Dry Film Thickness mils
 Aluminum Epoxy-Mastic P rimer
 1045.8 5.0 min.
 Gray Epoxy-Mastic P rimer
 1045.9 5.0 min
 
 1081.3 Prote ctive Coating of Structural Ste e l.
 1081.3.1 Scope . T his specification covers the preparation of previously uncoated structural steel surfaces,
 furnishing and applying specified coatings, protection and drying of coatings, furnishing protection from
 coating spatter and disfigurement, and final cleanup.
 1081.3.2 Surface Pre paration.
 1081.3.2.1 Cle aning. Oil, grease and other contaminants shall be removed in accordance with procedures
 from Steel Structures Painting Council specification SSPC-SP1 prior to blast cleaning. Where high strength
 bolts are installed prior to blast cleaning or finish coat, the lubricant on high strength bolt assemblies shall
 also be removed in accordance with SSPC-SP1. Surfaces to be prime coated shall be blast cleaned with
 abrasives in accordance with SSPC-SP10, producing a height of profile 1.5 mils minimum and 3.0 mils
 maximum for all systems. T he appearance of the final blast cleaned surface shall be in accordance with
 SSPC-Vis1, Photograph A SP-10, B SP-10, C SP-10, or D SP-10. Conformance with the corresponding SP5 photographs will also be acceptable. T he blast profile shall be assessed with replica tape per AST M D
 4417, Method C. T he contractor shall make available to the engineer access to all SSPC specifications
 referenced for cleaning and coating operations.
 
 719
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1081.3.2.2 Pre paration for Coating. After blast cleaning, all surfaces shall be cleaned to remove any
 trace of blast products, dust or dirt from the surface and from all pockets and corners. T he blast-cleaned
 surfaces shall be given the specified prime coat as soon as practical, but within 24 hours after blast cleaning.
 If blast cleaned surfaces rust before coating is accomplished, the surface shall be reblasted by the contractor
 at the contractor's expense. All rusted, damaged or uncoated areas, including ungalvanized nuts, bolts and
 washers to be prime coated in the field, shall be blast cleaned to the same degree as specified above for the
 applicable coating system. Care shall be exercised to ensure the blasted steel remains free of grease and oil
 during handling.
 1081.3.2.3 Re cle aning. When there is contamination of any blast-cleaned surface to be coated, the
 material shall be recleaned to the requirements of SSPC-SP10.
 1081.3.3 Limits of Coating Application. Unless otherwise indicated on the plans, the application of the
 intermediate and finish coats for Systems G and H, and the application of the finish coat for System I,
 hereinafter referred to as field coats, shall be applied to the structure within the following limits.
 1081.3.3.1 Bridge s ove r Roadways. T his section will not apply to bridges over railroads.
 1081.3.3.1.1 T he intermediate field coat for beam and girder spans shall be applied to the surfaces of all
 structural steel, except that areas of steel to be in contact with concrete shall not receive the intermediate
 coat. T he intermediate coat shall also be applied to the bearings, except where bearings will be encased in
 concrete. T he finish coating for beam and girder spans shall include the facia girder or beams. T he limits of
 the facia girders or beams shall include the bottom of the top exterior flanges, top of the bottom exterior
 flanges, the exterior web area, the exterior face of the top and bottom flange and the bottom of the
 bottom flange. Areas of steel to be in contact with concrete shall not receive the finish coat. T he finish
 coat shall also be applied to the exterior bearings, except where bearings will be encased in concrete.
 1081.3.3.1.2 T he surfaces of all structural steel located under expansion joints of beam and girder spans
 shall be field coated for a distance of 1 1/2 times the girder depth, but no less than 10 feet from the
 centerline of the joint. Within this limit, the items to be field coated shall include all surfaces of beams,
 girders, bearings, diaphragms, stiffeners and miscellaneous structural steel items. Areas of steel to be in
 contact with concrete shall not receive the field coats. T he limits of the field coatings shall be masked to
 provide crisp, straight lines and to prevent overspray on adjacent areas.
 1081.3.3.1.3 For all truss or steel box girder spans, the above limits will not apply and all structural steel
 for these span types shall be field coated, except the areas of steel to be in contact with concrete.
 1081.3.3.1.4 Straps for steel stay-in-place forms shall be removed in areas where field coating shall be
 required in accordance with this Specification. Flame cutting will not be permitted. T he contractor shall
 take care not to damage the structure or the shop coating during strap removal. Any damage to the shop
 coating as a result of the contractor's operations shall be repaired by the contractor in accordance with this
 Specification. Any damage to the rest of the structure shall be repaired as approved by the Engineer.
 1081.3.3.1.5 When System I is specified on the plans for beam and girder spans, a System G intermediate
 coat shall be applied similarly in accordance with Sec 1081.3.3.1.1 intermediate field coating requirements
 except that an intermediate coat will not be required to be applied to the beams and girders where the
 System I finish coat is to be applied. T he contractor shall have the option to substitute the System I finish
 coat in place of a System G intermediate coat.
 1081.3.3.2 Bridge s O ve r Stre ams or Railroads.
 1081.3.3.2.1 T he field coating for beam and girder spans shall include the facia girders or beams. T he limits
 of the facia girders or beams shall include the bottom of the top exterior flanges, top of bottom exterior
 flanges, the exterior web area, the exterior face of the top and bottom flange and the bottom of the
 bottom flange. Areas of steel to be in contact with concrete shall not receive the field coats. T he field
 coatings shall also be applied to the exterior bearings, except where bearings will be encased in concrete.
 T he interior beams or girders shall only have the prime coat applied with no other field coating required.
 
 720
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1081.3.3.2.2 T he surfaces of all structural steel located under expansion joints of beam and girder spans
 shall be field coated for a distance of 1 1/2 times the girder depth, but no less than 10 feet from the
 centerline of the joint. Within this limit, the items to be field coated shall include all surfaces of beams,
 girders, bearings, diaphragms, stiffeners and miscellaneous structural steel items. Areas of steel to be in
 contact with concrete shall not receive the field coats. T he limits of the field coatings shall be masked to
 provide crisp, straight lines and to prevent overspray on adjacent areas.
 1081.3.3.2.3 For all truss or steel box girder spans, the above limits will not apply and all structural steel
 for these span types shall be field coated, except the areas of steel to be in contact with concrete.
 1081.3.3.2.4 Straps for steel stay-in-place forms shall be removed in areas where field coating shall be
 required in accordance with this Specification. Flame cutting will not be permitted. T he contractor shall
 take care not to damage the structure or the shop coating during strap removal. Any damage to the shop
 coating as a result of the contractor's operations shall be repaired by the contractor in accordance with this
 Specification. Any damage to the rest of the structure shall be repaired as approved by the Engineer.
 1081.3.4 Coating Thickne ss Me asure me nt. T he dry film thickness of the coatings will be measured by
 magnetic-type gauges in accordance with Steel Structures Painting Council, specification SSPC-PA2. At the
 option of the engineer, the adhesion of the prime coat will be measured in accordance with AST M D 3359,
 Test Method A. When the adhesion is tested, each test result shall equal or exceed scale 3A. Locations for
 adhesion tests shall be randomly selected. Test locations shall be in areas of least visibility in the completed
 structure and shall be touched up in an approved manner after completion of the test. When satisfactory
 test results are not obtained, additional adhesion tests shall be taken to determine the area of insufficient
 adhesion. For these areas, the surface shall be prepared in accordance with Sec 1081.3.2.1 and the area
 recoated in accordance with these specifications. If additional prime coat is required to provide the
 specified minimum thickness, the prime coat shall be applied as soon as possible, but within 24 hours of the
 initial application.
 1081.3.5 Coating Mate rial Storage . All coating material shall be stored in accordance with the coating
 manufacturer ’s recommendations. Exposure to storage temperatures outside the range recommended in the
 manufacturer's specifications will be considered cause for rejection of the coating material.
 1081.3.6 We athe r Conditions.
 1081.3.6.1 Te mpe rature Limitations. T he prime coat shall be applied in accordance with the
 manufacturer ’s recommendations, except that the minimum air and steel temperature shall be no less than
 34 F. Finish and intermediate coats applied over the prime coat shall be applied in accordance with the
 manufacturer's recommendations, which shall be furnished to the engineer. T he minimums and maximums
 or additional requirements established by the coating manufacturer ’s written specifications for
 recommended air or metal temperature or relative humidity will apply if those requirements are more
 restrictive than those specified in the contract documents.
 1081.3.6.2 Moisture Limitations. Coatings shall not be applied in rain, snow, fog or mist, or when the
 steel surface temperature is less than 5 F above the dew point. T he dew point shall be determined in
 accordance with MoDOT Test Method T M 38. Coatings shall not be applied to wet, damp, frosted or icecoated surfaces.
 1081.3.6.3 Application in Prote cte d Are as. When coatings are applied in a protected area to eliminate
 the weather conditions, the coated steel shall remain in the protected area until the coatings are cured.
 1081.3.6.4 Damage d Coatings. Any uncured coatings exposed to freezing, excess humidity, rain, snow,
 condensation or curing temperatures outside the range recommended by the manufacturer will be considered
 damaged. Damaged coatings shall be permitted to dry, then shall be removed and the surface blast cleaned
 and recoated at the contractor ’s expense.
 1081.3.7 Thinning. T hinners will be permitted as recommended by the manufacturer's recommendations,
 provided VOC limits are not exceeded.
 1081.3.8 Application. Coatings shall be applied in accordance with the Steel Structures Painting Council
 
 721
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 specification SSPC-PA1, unless otherwise specified by the product manufacturer. T he manufacturer's
 written specifications for application, upon request, shall be submitted to the engineer for review prior to
 application.
 1081.3.8.1 Application Re pairs. If deficiencies in the quality of work or material result in rejection, the
 contractor shall submit a repair proposal for approval by the engineer.
 1081.3.8.2 Curing of Coatings. Curing time for recoating shall be within the limits of the manufacturer's
 recommendations. Application of the finish coat over the intermediate coat shall be accomplished within
 the recoat time for proper adhesion established by the manufacturer's recommendations.
 1081.3.9 Shop Coating. All surfaces of fabricated structural steel, including areas that will be inaccessible
 after assembly, contact surfaces of high strength bolted connections and all surfaces to be in contact with
 concrete in the completed structure shall be coated in the shop with the prime coat. T he primer shall be of
 the type and thickness specified, except as modified by Secs 1081.3.9.1 and 1081.3.9.2. Structural steel
 sway bracing for the substructure may be prepared and coated in the field.
 1081.3.9.1 Contact Surface s. Contact surfaces of high strength bolted field splice and diaphragm
 connections shall be prime coated to produce a dry film thickness no less than 1.5 mils or more than 2.5
 mils. T he limits of the coating thickness for these surfaces shall be shown on the shop drawings. T he
 maximum limit of 2.5 mils may be increased provided acceptable test results in accordance with the Testing
 Method to Determine the Slip Coefficient for Coatings Used in Bolted Joints (AISC Specification for
 Structural Joints Using AST M A 325 or A 490 Bolts, Appendix A) are submitted and approved by the
 engineer. Revised shop drawings will not be required upon acceptance of the test results. T he tests shall
 meet the requirements for the slip coefficient and creep resistance for Class B coatings and shall be
 performed by a nationally recognized independent testing laboratory. Any change in the formulation of the
 coating will require retesting, except when thinned within the limits of manufacturer's recommendations.
 At the contractor's option, the contact surfaces of connections for all non-slab bearing diaphragms on noncurved girders may be prime coated with a dry film thickness of no less than 3.0 mils or more than 6.0
 mils, unless noted otherwise on the plans.
 1081.3.9.2 Inacce ssible Surface s. Surfaces that will not be in contact, but that will be inaccessible after
 assembly, shall be prime coated to produce a dry film thickness of no less than 3.0 mils and no more than
 6.0 mils. Dry film thickness on surfaces that will be in contact with concrete may be reduced to 2.0 mils
 provided thorough and complete coverage is obtained. Although shear connectors need not be coated,
 protection of the connectors from overspray when coating other parts of the beam or girder will not be
 necessary. Coating thickness measurements will not be made on shear connections.
 1081.3.9.3 Touch-up of Galvaniz e d Bolts. T he galvanized coating of nuts, bolts and washers damaged
 during shop installation shall be shop repaired in accordance with Secs 1081.3.10.1 and 1081.3.10.1.1.
 1081.3.9.4 Inspe ction Prior to Coating. No coatings shall be applied before shop inspection of
 fabrication has been completed. Surfaces of steel within 2 inches of edges to be field welded shall not be
 coated in the shop.
 1081.3.9.5 Ere ction Match Marks. Erection match marks shall not be visible in the completed structure.
 1081.3.10 Fie ld Coating. Intermediate and finish coats for the specified coating system shall be applied
 in the field. T he contractor shall be responsible for final cleanup and field touch-up of any shop applied
 coating, including surface preparation and coating of field connections, welds or bolts, areas masked in the
 shop and all damaged or defective coating and rusted areas. Surface preparation for field touch-ups shall be
 performed in accordance with Sec 1081.3.2, unless otherwise approved by the engineer. T he touch-up field
 coat shall consist of the same coating used for the shop-applied coat. Contact surfaces of high strength
 bolted connections shall be protected from the intermediate and finish coats. Damage to the coating of
 galvanized bolts, nuts and washers where bare steel is exposed shall be repaired in accordance with these
 specifications or, the connection may be prepared as specified in Sec 1081.3.2, followed by a touch-up field
 coat application of the required coating system.
 1081.3.10.1 Fie ld Touch-up of Galvaniz e d Bolts. T he galvanized coating of nuts, bolts and washers
 
 722
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 damaged during installation shall be repaired. Lubricants shall be removed in accordance with SSPC-SP1.
 Rust shall be removed in accordance with SSPC-SP-2 or
 SSPC-SP-3. Touch-ups shall consist of the application of an approved gray epoxy mastic. T he touch-up
 material shall be compatible with and from the same manufacturer as the coating system to be used for the
 structure. Prior to field coating operations, the contractor shall submit information on the specific
 products to be used, including compatibility data and applicable recoating times, to the engineer for review.
 Subsequent coatings shall be applied within the recoat time recommended by the manufacturer.
 1081.3.10.1.1 Touch-up Color. For areas of the structure that will not receive a field coat, the color of
 the touch-up material for bolts specified in Sec 1081.3.10.1 shall be similar to galvanized metal.
 1081.3.10.1.2 Pre viously Re paire d Mate rial. If repairs to the galvanized coating of shop-installed nuts,
 bolts and washers have previously been performed in accordance with Sec 1081.3.9.3 or if epoxy mastics
 are otherwise shop-applied to structural steel, the contractor shall be responsible for any special field
 preparation required for proper adhesion of subsequent field coats to the epoxy coating. Prior to field
 coating operations, the contractor shall submit the manufacturer's recommendations to the engineer.
 1081.3.10.1.3 Masking. Previously coated or adjacent areas shall be masked or otherwise protected from
 material used to touch-up the galvanized coating of fasteners.
 1081.3.10.2 Se que nce of Work. Field coatings, except for touch-up and coating of inaccessible surfaces,
 shall not be applied until the concrete deck has been placed, the forms removed and all concrete spatter,
 foreign material and contaminants are removed from existing coatings, unless otherwise approved by the
 engineer. Prior to submittal of alternative application methods, the contractor shall present methods to be
 used to prevent damage to the intermediate and final field coatings. T he sequence of work shall be arranged
 to provide ample time for each coat to cure before the next coat is applied. T he intermediate field coats
 shall be free of all oil, grease, dust or dirt prior to application of the next coat. Intermediate or prime coats
 that have been exposed to chlorides used in snow removal operations shall be cleaned by power washing as
 defined in Sec 1081.5.3.2.2 prior to application of the subsequent intermediate or final coats. In no case
 shall a coat be applied until the previous coat has been approved by the engineer. Excessive rust streaks or
 coatings on concrete masonry shall be removed by sandblasting or by other approved methods without
 damage to the masonry.
 1081.3.10.3 Work Unde r Stage Construction Contracts. If complete field coating is not included in
 the contract for erection of structural steel, the touch-up coating of newly erected work and the coating of
 surfaces that will be inaccessible after erection shall be included as part of the work to be performed under
 the contract for erection. Field coating under any contract that does not include the erection shall include
 cleaning, preparation of any previously applied coatings, repairs and spot application of coatings required
 at the time the work is performed. Prior to field coating structural steel that was erected under a previous
 contract, the contractor shall submit the manufacturer's recommendations to the engineer, outlining
 requirements for cleaning and preparation of all existing coatings. T he manufacturer ’s recommendations
 shall include requirements for preparation of epoxy mastics previously applied for touch-up or other
 purposes.
 1081.3.10.4 Partial Applications. If partial applications of the field finish coats to a structure as
 provided in Sec 1081.3.3 is required or permitted, the contractor shall perform field touch-up coating to
 areas of the structural steel outside the limits to receive the intermediate and finish coats. Touch-up shall be
 in accordance with in Sec 1081.3.10 and at the contractor ’s expense.
 1081.3.11 Ide ntification. T he contractor shall, at the completion of the coating application, stencil in
 black paint on the structure the number of the bridge, the word "COAT ED", the system used and the month
 and year the coating was completed. T he letters shall be capitals approximately 3 inches high. T he legend
 shall be stenciled on the outside face of an outside stringer or girder near each end of the bridge as directed
 by the engineer.
 1081.3.12 Prope rty and Traffic Prote ction. T he contractor shall protect pedestrian, vehicular, railroad
 and other traffic, persons and property, upon, beneath and in the vicinity of the structure and all portions
 of the bridge against damage or disfigurement by blast media, blast residue, coatings, coating material,
 equipment or by any other operations.
 
 723
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1081.4 Re coating of Structural Ste e l (Syste m G , H or I).
 1081.4.1 Scope . T his specification covers the field preparation of structural steel surfaces to be recoated,
 furnishing and applying specified coatings, protection and drying of coatings, furnishing protection from
 coating spatter and disfigurement, and final cleanup.
 1081.4.2 Syste ms of Prote ctive Coatings. All structural steel shall be recoated by the contractor in the
 field using one of the complete systems, including prime coats, in accordance with Sec 1081.2, unless noted
 otherwise. Recoating of structural steel, including surface preparation, weather conditions, application,
 touch-up and protection, shall be in accordance with all requirements of Sec 1081.3 unless in conflict with
 Sec 216, which shall control.
 1081.4.3 Surface Pre paration. Cleaning and coating of structural steel shall proceed in areas or sections
 as approved by the engineer, usually consisting of one or more complete spans. T he cleaning and
 application of the coatings for each specified section shall be entirely completed and accepted by the
 engineer prior to proceeding with additional cleaning or coating. Surface preparation shall be in accordance
 with Sec 1081.3.2. All existing coatings and paint shall be removed by blast cleaning unless specifically
 indicated otherwise in the contract.
 1081.4.3.1 Approve d Blast Me dia. Approved blast media materials, such as silica sand and steel abrasive,
 shall be used to remove lead and non-lead paint. T his approved blast media can be sent to a lead smelter for
 recycling and is not considered a solid or hazardous waste in accordance with 40 CFR 261.2(e)(1)(ii). T he
 use of other blast media shall be approved in writing by the receiving lead smelter prior to use to determine
 if the smelter can recycle the blast media. A copy of the smelter approval letter shall be submitted to the
 engineer and to the Environmental Section in Design Division. Only blast media approved by the receiving
 lead smelter will be permitted. Surface preparation areas cleaned with unapproved blast media shall be at the
 contractor ’s expense. T he collected residue shall consist of media no larger than one inch and removed
 paint chips.
 1081.4.3.2 Environme ntal Re gulations. T he paint removal operation shall comply with all local, state
 and federal regulations, including but not limited to, the EPA, OSHA Standards 29 CFR 1910 and 1926.62,
 and the Missouri Code of State Regulations, including 10 CSR 10 Air Conservation Commission, 10 CSR 20
 Clean Water Commission, 10 CSR 25 Hazardous Waste Commission, and 10 CSR 80 Solid Waste
 Management. T he contractor shall have all necessary licenses and certifications as required by the Missouri
 Department of Health including necessary licenses and certification for lead abatement/removal workers
 prior to commencement of the cleaning operation. If hazardous waste will be generated at the site, the
 contractor shall notify the engineer and Environmental Section in Design Division and comply with all
 applicable hazardous waste generator requirements.
 1081.4.3.3 Colle ction of Blast Re sidue . T he contractor shall collect the lead contaminated or non-lead
 blast residue from the cleaning operations for recycling or disposal. Blast residue shall be managed as a
 recyclable material or hazardous waste. Container management shall be in accordance with Sec
 1081.4.3.3.2. Analytical testing required for the disposal of blast residues shall be the responsibility of the
 contractor.
 1081.4.3.3.1 Haz ardous Waste Notification. T he contractor shall submit a “ Notification of Regulated
 Waste Activity” form to MDNR Hazardous Waste Program to obtain the EPA identification number.
 Requests shall be submitted as soon as hazardous waste is determined or at least 30 days prior to shipping
 hazardous waste. Hazardous waste shall not be shipped offsite until the EPA identification number has been
 received. T he contractor will file the quarterly and annual hazardous waste reports in accordance with 10
 CSR 25-5.262(2)(D)1 and will deactivate the EPA identification number upon contract completion. T he
 contractor shall submit copies of all hazardous waste manifests and quarterly/annual reports to MoDOT ’s
 Environmental Section.
 1081.4.3.3.2 Containe r Manage me nt.
 1081.4.3.3.2.1 T he blast residue from cleaning operations shall be stored in contractor furnished,
 watertight 55-gallon steel drum containers stacked on wooden pallets with labels facing outward. T he
 
 724
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 containers shall be free of structural defects and all other materials including but not limited to construction
 debris, solvents, flammables, aluminum, magnesium, aerosol cans, rags and any ferrous or non-ferrous
 metals larger than one cubic inch. T he containers shall have removable lids complete with a bolt ring, bolt
 and nut. Containers shall remain closed at all times, except when necessary to add blast residue. Material
 other than the blast residue from the cleaning operations shall not be placed in the containers. At the end
 of each day’s work, the containers shall be stored outside the 100-year floodplain in a secure area as
 approved by the engineer. Containers of approved blast residue destined for recycling, shall be marked with
 a “ Blast Residue” label provided by the engineer or Environmental Section in Design Division and marked
 with the following information:
 (a) Blast Residue.
 (b) Marked with one of the following:
 (1) Contains Heavy Metals/Lead Compounds.
 (2) Contains Non-Lead Compounds.
 (c) Generator: MoDOT.
 (d) Bridge Site Number.
 (e) Date Container was Filled.
 1081.4.3.3.2.2 Containers of hazardous waste, such as unapproved blast media, shall be packaged, marked
 and labeled according to hazardous waste regulations 10 CSR 25-5.262(2)(C)1. Containers of hazardous
 waste shall be stored separate from containers of non-hazardous waste and approved blast media destined
 for recycling. T he contractor shall maintain an inventory of the quantity of the containers stored at the
 site and the quantity delivered to an approved facility. All containers shall be delivered to the approved
 facility within 30 days upon completion of the surface preparation. Copies of container inventories, all
 test results, shipping papers, hazardous waste manifest signed by the receiving facility, solid waste disposal
 request, recycling certificates and any other disposal documentation shall be submitted to the engineer with
 a copy to the Environmental Section in Design Division within 30 days upon delivery to the approved
 facility.
 1081.4.3.3.3 Shipme nt of Re sidue . Approved blast media residue containing heavy metals/lead or nonlead residue shall be shipped with a bill of lading to a lead smelter for recycling. Heavy metal/lead
 contaminated residue determined to be a hazardous waste shall be transported by a Missouri licensed
 hazardous waste transporter with a hazardous waste manifest and land ban forms, if required, to an approved
 lead smelter or approved hazardous waste treatment, storage and disposal facility. T he contractor shall
 obtain appropriate shipping papers (bill of lading), hazardous waste manifest forms and land ban forms, if
 required, from the engineer or Environmental Section in Design Division. T hese shipping forms shall be
 completed prior to shipment. T he lead smelter or approved hazardous waste treatment, storage and
 disposal facility will reject any shipment received without the proper shipping paper or hazardous waste
 manifest. T he contractor shall notify the receiving facility at least
 2 days prior to shipment to ensure the receiving facility will be able to accept the load.
 1081.4.3.3.4 Pe rsonal Prote ctive Equipme nt. Clothing, tarps, hoses and other cleaning material
 containing lead and lead blast residue shall be managed as a hazardous waste unless determined nonhazardous. Personal protective equipment being disposed, such as tyvek suits, respirator cartridges, boots,
 etc. but not tarps, shall be placed into 55-gallon steel drums. Spent tarps shall be placed into DOT approved
 cardboard boxes and stacked on wooden pallets. Container management shall be in accordance with Sec
 1081.4.3.3.2.
 1081.4.3.3.5 Invoice s and Payme nt. T he contractor shall dispose of all lead and non-lead based residue
 and personal protective equipment in accordance with all Federal and State regulations at the approved lead
 smelter or hazardous waste treatment, storage and disposal facility. T ransporting and disposal cost shall be
 the contractor ’s responsibility. A copy of the disposal manifest and paid receipt shall be given to the
 engineer. Failure to provide proper documentation will result in withholding payment. For more
 
 725
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 information concerning management of blast residue, approved lead smelters or approved hazardous waste
 treatment, storage and disposal facilities, contact the Environmental Section in Design Division.
 1081.4.4 Joints. All seams and joints that cannot be satisfactorily sealed or coated shall be adequately
 caulked with compounds compatible with the coating system being applied. Caulking material shall be in
 accordance with the coating manufacturer's recommendations and shall meet the approval of the engineer.
 Caulking shall be satisfactorily completed for an entire joint or seam after application of the prime coat
 and before application of any specified finish or intermediate coats.
 1081.4.5 Ide ntification. At the completion of recoating, the contractor shall stencil in black paint on the
 structure the number of the bridge, the word "RECOAT ED", the system used and the month and year the
 coating was completed. T he letters shall be capitals approximately
 3 inches high. T he legend shall be stenciled on the outside face of an outside stringer or girder near each end
 of the bridge as directed by the engineer.
 1081.4.6 Prope rty and Traffic Prote ction. T he contractor shall provide protection in accordance with
 Sec 1081.3.12.
 1081.5 O ve rcoating of Structural Ste e l (Calcium Sulfonate Syste m).
 1081.5.1 Scope . T his specification covers the field preparation of structural steel surfaces to be
 overcoated, disposal of paint residues and power washing water, furnishing and applying the specified
 coatings, protection and drying of the coatings, furnishing protection from coating spatter or disfigurement
 and final cleanup.
 1081.5.2 Syste m of Prote ctive Coatings. All exposed and accessible surfaces of structural steel and steel
 bearings shall be coated with the Calcium Sulfonate paint system in accordance with Sec. 1081.2 unless
 otherwise noted. T he color of the topcoat shall be as shown on the plans. Overcoating of structural steel
 shall be in accordance with all requirements of Sec 1081.3 except surface preparation and unless in conflict
 with Sec 216, which shall control.
 1081.5.3 Surface Pre paration. Surface preparation shall be in accordance with Sec 1081.4.3, except that
 blast cleaning will not be required.
 1081.5.3.1 Re moval of Existing Paint. T he existing steel shall be cleaned by approved methods in
 accordance with Sec 1081.5.3.2.
 1081.5.3.1.1 Environme ntal Re gulations. T he paint removal operation shall be in accordance with all
 local, state and federal regulations, including those defined in Sec 1081.4.3.2.
 1081.5.3.1.2 Wate r for Powe r Washing. T he water used for power washing shall be clean, potable water,
 free from contaminants. Non-hazardous wastewater shall be collected and disposed of in accordance with all
 applicable state, local and federal clean water regulations. Wastewater determined to be hazardous waste in
 accordance with Sec 1081.5.3.1.3 shall be collected and disposed of in accordance with Sec 1081.5.3.1.3.
 T he wastewater shall not be discharged onto the ground or into waters of the state without a permit. If no
 permit is obtained, the wastewater shall be collected and transported to a qualified wastewater plant or other
 facility that can dispose of it in accordance with applicable wastewater regulation. Water collected from the
 power washing operation shall not be reused in the power washing operation.
 1081.5.3.1.3 Colle ction of Re sidue . Collection of lead or non-lead based residue shall be in accordance
 with Sec 1081.4.3.3 with the addition of the following requirements. T he containers shall remain closed at
 all times, except when necessary to add additional residue or wastewater. Material other than the residue or
 wastewater from the cleaning operations shall not be placed in the containers. Wastewater collected during
 cleaning operations shall be tested in accordance with 40 CFR 261.24. Wastewater that test results indicate
 is a hazardous waste as determined by 40 CFR 261.24 shall be handled as hazardous waste in accordance
 with the 10 CSR 25. T he contractor shall keep an inventory of the quantity of heavy metal contaminated
 wastewater generated and delivered to the storage site and the quantity of heavy metal contaminated
 wastewater that has been disposed. Wastewater that has been tested and determined to be non-hazardous
 shall be handled in accordance with Sec 1081.5.3.1.2. Any remaining hazardous or non-hazardous residues
 
 726
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 shall be disposed of in accordance with Sec 1081.4.3.3. Any testing required for the disposal of the
 wastewater or residues shall be the responsibility of the contractor. Copies of the inventory, all testing data,
 required certifications and shipping manifests shall be provided to the engineer and to the Environmental
 Section in Design Division in accordance with Sec 1081.4.3.3.2.2.
 1081.5.3.1.4 Te sting of Wate r Sample s. At the conclusion of the power washing operation, the
 contractor shall obtain samples of the wastewater in the presence of the engineer. T he samples shall be
 analyzed by an independent testing laboratory for total metals, oil and grease, biochemical oxygen demand,
 total suspended solids, pH and Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (T CLP) heavy metals. Samples
 shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with EPA approved methods. Copies of all test reports shall
 be supplied to the engineer and the Environmental Section in Design Division. Additional testing required
 to comply with any federal, state or local regulations shall be provided by the contractor.
 1081.5.3.2 Cle aning of Structural Ste e l. All exposed steel surfaces shall be mechanically cleaned in
 accordance with Sec 1081.5.3.2.1 and in accordance with the paint manufacturer ’s recommendations prior
 to application of the coating. Power washing will not be required. However, the contractor may use power
 wash cleaning if desired during surface preparation. All surfaces cleaned shall be approved by the engineer
 prior to application of the coating.
 1081.5.3.2.1 Me chanical Cle aning. Exposed structural steel where mechanical cleaning is required shall
 be cleaned in accordance with SSPC-SP2 or SSPC-SP3. Blast cleaning as a substitute cleaning method will be
 acceptable. Mechanical cleaning will be required for areas of rusted steel, loose, cracked or brittle paint or
 areas indicated by the engineer. T he cleaning shall be performed 2 inches beyond the areas of rust or
 defective paint in all direction or until tightly adhered paint is obtained with no rust or blisters. Edges
 between the bare steel and the paint shall be feathered. Collection of the residue removed shall be in
 accordance with Sec 1081.5.3.1.3.
 1081.5.3.2.2 Powe r Wash Cle aning. T he contractor may clean the steel by a low-pressure power wash
 to remove loose paint, dirt and other loose deleterious material. T he maximum pressure for the power
 washing shall be 1,500 psi. If necessary, solvent cleaning in accordance with SSPC-SP1 shall be employed to
 augment the power washing. Collection of the wastewater, solvents and other residues from the power
 washing operation shall be in accordance with Sec 1081.5.3.1.2. After the power washing operation, areas
 that have remaining rust or loose paint shall be recleaned in accordance with Sec 1081.5.3.2.1, except that
 vacuum power tools will be required for power tool cleaning. All surfaces washed shall be completely free of
 all foreign matter, surface dry and approved by the engineer prior to application of the coating.
 1081.5.4 Application. Coating shall be applied in accordance with Sec 1081.3 and the manufacturer ’s
 recommendations. T he steel shall be free of all cleaning residues prior to coating. Areas that have been
 cleaned to bare steel shall be prime coated on the same day as the cleaning. Any areas that rust prior to
 application of the prime coat shall be recleaned. T he prime coat and topcoat shall be applied to all steel
 surfaces with the exception of steel encased in concrete. Any existing paint that curls or lifts after
 application of the Calcium Sulfonate system shall be removed, the area recleaned and the coating reapplied.
 Application of the rust penetrating sealer will only be required if specified in the contract documents or as
 determined by the engineer. Application of the rust penetrating sealer shall be in accordance with the rust
 penetrating sealer manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 1081.5.5 Ide ntification. At the completion of the final coating application, the contractor shall, stencil
 in black paint on the structure the number of the bridge, the words “ OVERCOAT ED – Calcium Sulfonate”
 and the month and year the coating was completed. T he letters shall be capitals approximately 3 inches
 high. T he legend shall be stenciled on the outside face of an outside girder near each end of the bridge as
 directed by the engineer.
 1081.5.6 Prope rty and Traffic Prote ction. T he contractor shall provide protection in accordance with
 Sec 1081.3.12.
 1081.6 Galvaniz e d Me tal. Galvanizing shall be applied after fabrication. Galvanized material on which
 the galvanizing has been damaged will be rejected or may, with approval from the engineer, be repaired in
 the field by the zinc alloy stick method. Required field welds and adjacent areas on which galvanizing has
 been damaged shall be galvanized by this same method. T he area to be regalvanized shall be thoroughly
 
 727
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 cleaned, including the removal of slag on welds. Touch-up of galvanizing of sheet material less than 3/16
 inch may be completed by the use of an approved aluminum epoxy mastic coating if the material will not
 be in direct contact with concrete or with an approved non-aluminum epoxy mastic coating if the material
 will be in direct contact with concrete.
 1081.7 Aluminum & Gray Epoxy-Mastic Prime r.
 1081.7.1 Scope . T his specification covers the application of other approved primer coatings for touch-up
 and other repair applications.
 1081.7.2 Surface Pre paration. T he epoxy-mastic shall be applied over an SSPC-SP2, SSPC-SP3 or
 SSPC-SP6 surface preparation, including removal of all rust scale, loose rust, loose mill scale and loose or
 non-adherent paint. Oil and grease shall be removed in accordance with SSPC-SP1 Solvent Cleaning. Areas
 adjacent to required areas will not be required to be masked to prevent overspray.
 1081.7.2.1 Environme ntal Re gulations. T he surface preparation operation shall be in accordance with
 all local, state and federal regulations, including those defined in Sec 1081.4.3.2.
 1081.7.2.2 Colle ction of Re sidue . T he collection of residue shall be in accordance with Sec 1081.4.3.3
 and 1081.5.3.1.3.
 1081.7.3 Application. Material application methods, air and surface temperatures and relative humidity
 shall be in accordance with the manufacturer ’s written instructions and Sec 1081.3. T he most restrictive
 application and environmental requirements for the epoxy-mastic shall be used when applying the primer
 to the steel.
 
 728
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1091
 LIGHTING EQ UIPMENT
 1091.1 Lighting Pole s.
 1091.1.1 Pre -Approval. Fabricators shall submit two copies of shop drawings to T raffic. Submittals shall
 be approved by T raffic in writing prior to fabrication of the lighting poles. Shop drawings shall indicate
 design details required for pole fabrication, including material grades and thicknesses, welding and
 orientation of any longitudinal seams. Shop drawings shall provide pole installation and hardware details.
 Design details for all possible pole combinations shown on the plans may be submitted. Shop drawings stress
 calculations shall be signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer in the State of Missouri. Upon
 written approval, pre-approved drawings may be used on any project where the design conditions of the
 shop drawings are not exceeded.
 1091.1.2 Re quire me nts. Lighting poles shall be steel or aluminum in accordance with the contract and
 shall be of the same material and design throughout the project. Poles shall be of the type shown on the
 plans. T he fabricator may furnish poles with other shapes, gages and dimensions meeting or exceeding
 those shown on the plans and specifications. T he mounting height of the slipfitter above the pavement and
 the pole design numbers will be specified by numbers following the pole type designation. Clamps shall be
 provided for connecting bracket arms to poles to obtain the specified mounting height. All poles shall have
 removable raintight metal pole caps. All handhole covers and pole caps shall be attached to the pole with a
 chain constructed of the same material as the pole and shall be held in place by screws. T he screws shall
 penetrate through the metal cap or cover and pole securely attaching the cap or cover to the pole. T he
 chain shall be capable of supporting at least six times the weight of the cover or cap and be securely
 attached to the inside of the pole and of sufficient length to allow removal of the cover or cap for
 maintenance access. An aluminum or stainless steel identification tag with embossed or engraved letters and
 numbers shall be provided with all poles as shown on the plans. T he tag shall be attached to the pole 6
 inches above the top of the handhole or 18 inches above the base plate over the transformer base door.
 Shims may be used between the pole base or transformer base and the foundation for leveling purposes.
 Four copies of applicable pre-approved drawings shall be supplied with the poles and shall be provided to
 the engineer.
 1091.1.2.1 Type AT. Each Type AT pole shall be provided with a transformer base in accordance with Sec
 901. A grounding conductor shall be attached to the ground lug in each transformer base as shown on the
 plans.
 1091.1.2.2 Type B and MB. Each Type B and MB pole shall have a wiring handhole with a suitable metal
 cover near the base using a grounding lug inside the pole as shown on the plans. A grounding conductor shall
 be attached to the ground lug in each pole as shown on the plans.
 1091.1.2.3 Ste e l. Steel lighting poles shall be round or octagonal shaft poles. T he shaft section shall be
 fabricated from basic oxygen or open hearth steel sheet, No. 11 gage, as one continuous shaft or as
 individual segments no less than 10 feet in length, joined together using electrically welded, intermediate,
 transverse, full penetration, circumferential joints. Each sheet shall be formed into a tube with one
 continuous-welded longitudinal seam. After manufacture, the material shall have a minimum yield strength
 of 48,000 psi, including the weld. Poles shall be manufactured with steel shoe bases or base plates attached
 to the lower end of the shafts and arranged for bolting to a transformer base or to a foundation. All base
 plates and shoe bases shall be equipped with four cast steel or cast iron nut covers in accordance with
 AASHT O M 103 or M 105 or four aluminum nut covers and shall have four galvanized or stainless steel
 screws for securing covers to the pole. Welding and fabrication of the assemblies shall be in accordance with
 the ANSI/AWS D1.1 Structural Welding Code-Steel. All poles, shoe bases, base plates and cast steel or cast
 iron nut covers shall be fully galvanized after fabrication.
 1091.1.2.3.1 For shoe base-type poles, each shoe base shall be a one-piece casting in accordance with
 AASHT O M 103, Grade 65-35 with four anchor bolt holes. Each shoe base shall consist of a collar, flange
 and gussets, all integrally cast. Ample fillet radii shall be provided at the juncture of these components to
 reduce the effects of stress concentration. T he flange of the base shall be flat and continuous around the
 outside of the collar. T he base shall telescope from the shaft and be secured by two continuous welds. One
 weld shall be on the inside of the base at the end of the shaft and the other weld shall be on the outside at
 
 729
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 the top of the base. T he shoe base shall be arranged for bolting to a transformer base or to a foundation.
 1091.1.2.3.2 For base plate-type poles, the base plate shall be no less than 13 inches square and no less
 than 1 1/4 inches thick.
 1091.1.2.4 Aluminum.
 1091.1.2.4.1 Aluminum lighting poles shall be round shaft poles. Each shaft shall be manufactured as a twopiece pole by the spun drawn method from seamless extruded aluminum tubing, AST M B 221, Alloy 6063T 6 and shall have a nominal wall thickness for the lower section of 0.250 inch and a nominal wall
 thickness for the upper section of 0.188 inch. T he one-piece shaft for 30-foot mounting height shall have
 a nominal wall thickness of 0.188 inch, except those with twin-truss type arms shall have a nominal wall
 thickness of 0.250 inch. Shoe base-type poles shall be manufactured with heavy cast aluminum shoe bases
 attached to the lower ends of the shafts. Each shoe base shall be a permanent mold casting in accordance
 with AST M B 108, Alloy 356.0-T 6 and shall be free from cracks, pits and blowholes. T he shoe base shall
 be arranged for bolting to a transformer base or to a foundation. T he base shall have four anchor bolt holes,
 shall be equipped with four cast aluminum bolt covers and shall have four stainless steel fasteners for
 securing covers to the shoe base. Each shoe base shall consist of a collar, flange and gussets, all integrally
 cast. Ample fillet radii shall be provided at the juncture of these components to reduce the effects of stress
 concentration. T he flange of the base shall be flat and continuous completely around the outside of the
 collar. T he base shall telescope from the shaft and be secured by two continuous welds. One weld shall be on
 the inside of the base at the end of the shaft and the other weld shall be on the outside at the top of the
 base. T he base and shaft shall be welded in the T 4 temper with filler alloy 4043 and precipitation heat
 treated, artificially aged, to the T 6 temper by an approved method after welding. Welding shall be in
 accordance with Article 6.9 of AASHT O’s Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway
 Signs, Luminaires and T raffic Signals.
 1091.1.2.4.2 At the fabricator ’s option, the shafts for aluminum lighting poles may be formed from one
 piece of aluminum sheet, AST M B 209, Alloy 5086-H34, having one continuous weld. T he one-piece shaft
 for the 30-foot mounting height shall have a 9-inch diameter at the base and a nominal wall thickness of
 0.135 inch. Shafts for 35 to 55-foot mounting heights shall have a 13.4-inch diameter at the base and a
 nominal wall thickness of 0.135 inch for both sections. Each shoe base shall be a permanent mold casting
 having an integral cast aluminum riser and shall be in accordance with AST M B 108, Alloy 356.0-T 6 and
 shall be free from cracks, pits and blow holes. T he integral riser shall be designed to slip-fit into the pole
 shaft a sufficient distance to develop the full strength of the pole. T he riser shall be bonded to the shaft
 with a structural epoxy adhesive that shall develop the strength of the pole. T he epoxy shall develop a
 minimum of 1,200 psi in shear when tested in accordance with AST M D 1002. T he shoe base shall have
 four anchor bolt holes, shall be equipped with four cast aluminum bolt covers and shall have four stainless
 steel fasteners for securing the covers to the shoe base. Each shoe base shall consist of a collar, flange and
 gussets, all integrally cast. T he flange of the shoe base shall be flat.
 1091.2 Transforme r Base s. T ransformer bases shall be permanent mold castings in accordance with
 AST M B 108, Alloy 356.0-T 6 and shall be free from cracks, pits and blow holes. T he transformer base
 shall be designed to accommodate and provide access to electrical equipment. T he base shall have internal
 lugs for mounting on a foundation and shall be designed for bolting to the base plate of the lighting pole
 using flat and lock washers. A grounding lug shall be provided in each base. T he access opening shall have a
 hinged fiberglass or plastic door with a tamper-resistant fastening device. T he outside of the door shall be
 imprinted or adequately labeled with the warning, "DANGER - HIGH VOLTAGE". No direct payment will
 be made for transformer bases.
 1091.3 Circular Ste e l Pile Foundations. Circular steel pile foundations, the steel connector plate and
 steel closure plate shall be of the dimensions shown on the plans. T he slotted hole may be saw cut or flame
 cut. All sharp edges shall be ground smooth. T he steel connector plate and steel closure plate shall be
 welded to the steel pile foundation. T he foundation assembly shall be fully galvanized after fabrication.
 Bolts shall project no less than 1/4 inch nor more than 5/8 inch beyond the nut when properly tensioned.
 Flat and lock washers shall be used for attachment.
 1091.4 Ste e l H-Pile Foundations. Steel H-pile foundations and steel connector plates shall be of the
 dimensions shown on the plans. T he steel connector plates shall be welded to the H-pile foundation. T he
 
 730
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 foundation assembly shall be fully galvanized after fabrication. Bolts shall project no less than 1/4 inch or
 more than 5/8 inch beyond the nut when properly tensioned. Flat and lock washers shall be used for
 attachment.
 1091.5 Scre w Anchor Foundations. Screw anchor foundations and steel connector plates shall be of the
 dimensions shown on the plans. T he slotted hole may be saw cut or flame cut. All sharp edges shall be
 ground smooth. T he steel connector plates shall be welded to the screw anchor shaft. T he foundation
 assembly shall be fully galvanized after fabrication. Bolts shall project no less than 1/4 inch nor more than
 5/8 inch beyond the nut when properly tensioned. Flat and lock washers shall be used for attachment.
 1091.5.1 Fabricators for screw anchor foundations shall submit four copies of shop drawings to T raffic.
 Shop drawings shall indicate complete design details required for fabrication, including material grades,
 dimensions, thicknesses and welding. Shop drawings shall provide installation procedures and indicate the
 maximum torque ratings of the foundations.
 1091.5.2 Submittals shall be approved by T raffic in writing prior to fabrication. Upon written approval,
 pre-approved drawings may be used on any project where the design conditions of the shop drawings are
 not exceeded.
 1091.6 Bracke t Arms. Bracket arms shall be similar in design to those shown on the plans, arranged for
 2-inch slipfitter luminaire mounting, and shall be attached to the poles as shown on the plans. Bracket arms
 shall be of the same material as the pole. Bracket arm mounting plates shall match the shape of the pole. A
 one-inch pipe nipple shall be welded in place in the wire entrance hole on the mounting plate. T he welds
 shall be placed on the side of the plate away from the pole. Flat and lock washers shall be used for
 attachment.
 1091.7 Luminaire s.
 1091.7.1 Pre -Approval. Manufacturers of LED luminaires shall submit a completed New Product
 Evaluation Form and LED Luminaire New Product Submittal Form. Family grouping in accordance with
 LED Lighting Facts is permitted, provided this is clearly indicated on the submittal form, and clearly
 communicated via a letter that includes detailed calculations relating the tested product to the submitted
 product. T he luminaire size shall be as specified in the contract. A pipe stop shall be included in the
 assembly to locate the luminaire properly on the bracket arm. Product cutsheets shall be submitted for
 luminaire, LED light source, LED driver and surge protection device, if applicable. If dimmable LED driver
 is specified, provide diagrams illustrating light output and input power as a function of control signal.
 Instructions for installation and maintenance of LED luminaires shall be provided. Summary of luminaire
 recycled content and recyclability in accordance with the FT C Green Guides, expressed as a percentage of
 luminaire weight. IES LM-79 luminaire photometric report shall be produced by a test laboratory that
 satisfies LED Lighting Facts accreditation requirements. T he report shall include, name of test laboratory,
 report number, date, complete luminaire catalog number, description of luminaire, LED light source, LED
 driver, and Goniophotometry. IES T M-15 Backlight-Uplight-Glare (BUG) ratings shall be for initial (worstcase) values, i.e., Light Loss Factor (LLF) = 1.0. If luminaires are tilted upward for Energy Star T M-21
 calculations, BUG ratings shall correspond to the same angle of tilt.
 1091.7.1.1. Lumen maintenance calculations and supporting test data shall be in accordance with LED
 Lighting Facts guidance, with the exception calculations shall be based on 50,000 cumulative hours of
 operation and an ambient temperature range of max. 40°C (104°F) to min.-20°C (-4°F). Submit completed
 ENERGY STAR T M-21 Calculator as an electronic excel file. Provide computer-generated point-by-point
 photometric analysis of maintained light levels. Calculation/measurement points shall be per IES RP-8.
 Separated vehicular lanes, bikeways, and walkways shall be evaluated separately. Calculations shall be for
 maintained values, i.e. Light Loss Factor (LLF) < 1.0, where LLF = LLD x LDD x LAT F. Lamp Lumen
 Depreciation (LLD) shall be 0.90 or the value calculated in the Energy Star T M-21 calculations, whichever
 is lower. Luminaire Dirt Depreciation (LDD) shall = 0.90 and Luminaire Ambient Temperature Factor
 (LAT F) shall = 0.96. Mesopic multipliers (i.e., effective luminance factors) shall not be used. All values
 shall assume photopic visual adaptation. Submit IES LM-63 format electronic file containing luminous
 intensity data associated with submitted LM-79 report(s) and used for point-by-point calculations.
 Summary of Joint Electron Devices Engineering Council (JEDEC) or Japan Electronics and Information
 Technology Industries (JEITA) reliability testing performed for LED packages. Summary of reliability
 
 731
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 testing performed for LED driver(s). Safety certification and file number indicating compliance with UL
 1598. Applicable testing bodies are determined by the US Occupational Safety Health Administration
 (OSHA) as Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratories (NRT L) and include: CSA (Canadian Standards
 Association), ET L (Edison Testing Laboratory), and UL (Underwriters Laboratory). Documentation
 supporting any U.S. origin claims for the product, in accordance with FT C guidance.
 1091.7.1.2. Before approval and purchase, vendor shall supply luminaire sample(s) identical to product
 configuration(s) submitted for inspection. Commission may request IES LM-79 testing of luminaire
 sample(s) to verify performance is within manufacturer-reported tolerances. Electrically test fully
 assembled luminaires before shipment from factory. After installation, Commission may perform IES LM50 field measurements to verify performance requirements, giving consideration to manufacturing
 tolerances and measurement uncertainties as outlined in IES LM-61 and NEMA LSD 63.
 1091.7.1.3. Written product warranty shall be of the minimum duration of ten years, and shall cover
 maintained integrity and functionality of luminaire housing, wiring, connections, LED light source(s) and
 LED driver(s). Negligible light output from more than 10 percent of the LED packages constitutes
 luminaire failure. Warranty period shall begin 90 days after date of invoice, or as negotiated by Commission
 such as in the case of an auditable asset management system. Manufacturer or local sales representative
 shall provide installation and troubleshooting support via telephone and/or email.
 1091.7.2 Re quire me nts.
 1091.7.2.1. Roadway. Luminaire shall be designed for ease of component replacement and end-of-life
 disassembly. Type III medium distribution, semi-cutoff light distribution shall be set in accordance with the
 manufacturer's recommendations unless otherwise directed by the engineer, or shown on the plans.
 T ransmissive optical components shall be applied in accordance with OEM design guidelines to ensure
 suitability for the environment (e.g., electromagnetic, thermal, mechanical, chemical). LED light source(s)
 and driver(s) shall be RoHS compliant. Nominal luminaire input wattage shall account for nominal applied
 voltage and any reduction in driver efficiency due to sub-optimal driver loading. Luminaire shall accept the
 voltage or voltage range specified at 50/60 Hz, and shall operate normally for input voltage fluctuations of
 plus or minus 10 percent. All internal components shall be assembled and pre-wired using modular electrical
 connections. T he following shall be in accordance with corresponding sections of ANSI C136.37, wiring
 and grounding, terminal blocks for incoming AC lines (electrical mains wires), photocontrol receptacle,
 latching and hinging, mounting provisions, and ingress protection.
 1091.7.2.1.1.Unde rpass. Luminaires for underpass lighting shall be high-pressure sodium T he luminaires
 shall consist of a pre-wired unit for wall mounting, with raintight cast aluminum housing, cast aluminum
 door with integral cast guard, heat-resistant glass prismatic refractor, asymmetric aluminum reflector and
 socket for horizontal lamp position, complete with 150-watt lamp and 240-volt or 480-volt ballast as
 required. Type IV short distribution, non- cutoff light distribution shall be set in accordance with the
 manufacturer's recommendations, unless otherwise directed by the engineer or shown on the plans. T he
 door shall have a stainless steel hinge along the bottom, stainless steel latches at the top and non-ferrous
 metal or stainless steel safety chains. Provisions shall be made for attaching the unit directly to a wall or to
 an outlet box stud with non-ferrous metal or stainless steel hardware. Ballasts for underpass luminaires shall
 be in accordance with Sec 901. T he ballast power cables shall be individually fused with in-line fuse holders
 between the line and load, in the junction box or the luminaire housing if no junction box is shown on the
 plans. T he fuse rating shall be three amps unless otherwise shown on the plans.
 1091.7.2.2. Painted or finished luminaire surfaces exposed to the environment shall exceed a rating of six
 per AST M D1654 after 1000 hours of testing per AST M B117. Each luminaire shall have aluminum
 housing with two 2-inch slipfitters or one 4-bolt slipfitter or one 2-inch slipfitter with a longitudinal
 leveling system. T he housing shall have a natural aluminum or gray baked enamel finish. T he coating shall
 exhibit no greater than 30% reduction of gloss per AST M D523, after 500 hours of QUV testing at AST M
 G154 Cycle 6. All metal parts, such as springs on the latches and hinges, U-bolts and screws shall be made
 from non-ferrous metal or stainless steel. All parts of the luminaire shall be fabricated from corrosion
 resistant material.
 1091.7.2.3. Luminaire shall start and operate in ambient temperature range specified. Maximum rated case
 temperature of driver and other internal components shall not be exceeded when luminaire is operated in
 
 732
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 ambient temperature range specified. Wiring inside the luminaire housing shall be protected by suitable heat
 resistant insulating material. Mechanical design of protruding external surfaces (heat sink fins) shall
 facilitate hose-down cleaning and discourage debris accumulation. Liquids or other moving parts shall be
 clearly indicated in submittals, shall be consistent with product testing, and shall be subject to review by
 Commission. Luminaire designation indicated “ ANSI C136.41, 7-pin” on LED Luminaire New Product
 Submittal Form shall be fully prewired and shall incorporate an ANSI C136.41 compliant receptacle. If a
 dimmable LED driver is specified, the 0-10V or DALI control wires shall be connected to the receptacle
 pads as specified in ANSI C136.41; connection of the two remaining pads shall be by Manufacturer, as
 directed by Commission.
 1091.7.2.4. Luminaire shall be listed for wet locations by a U.S. Occupational Safety Health Administration
 (OSHA) Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRT L), shall have locality-appropriate governing
 mark and certification, and shall meet the performance requirements specified in ANSI C136.2 for
 dielectric withstand, using the DC test level and configuration. Luminaire shall meet the performance
 requirements specified in ANSI C136.2 for electrical immunity, using the combination Enhanced Wave Test
 Level (10kV/5kA) indicated on LED Luminaire New Product Submittal Form whether failure of the
 electrical immunity system can possibly result in disconnect of power to luminaire. Luminaire shall comply
 with FCC 47 CFR part 15 interference criteria for Class A (non-residential) digital devices, and shall
 comply with section 5.2.5 (luminaires rated for outdoor use) of ANSI C82.77 at full input power and across
 specified voltage range.
 1091.7.2.5. Color Rendering Index (CRI) shall be no less than 50. Nominal Correlated Color Temperature
 (CCT ) shall be 3000k with allowable IES LM-79 Chromaticity Values of 2870 to 3220 measured CCT (k)
 and -0.006 to 0.006 Measured Duv. Luminaire shall have an external label per ANSI C136.15 and shall
 have an internal label per ANSI C136.22.
 1091.7.3 Navigation. All lanterns shall be weatherproof and operate on a 120-volt system. Lanterns shall
 be of the fresnel lens-type and shall be fabricated from a corrosion-resistant material. Each lantern shall
 provide an LED or a standard service lamp with at least four standby lamps controlled by a lampchanger
 mechanism capable of illuminating the standby lamp after each lamp burnout. Mounting brackets and all
 accessories shall be provided with each lantern. A swing arm and retrieval chain shall be provided for main
 channel lanterns to hold the fixture in proper operating position. T he swing arm and retrieval chain shall
 be capable of being locked in both the upright and inverted positions. Mounting brackets shall be fully
 galvanized or stainless steel, and all hardware shall be stainless steel.
 1091.8 Control Stations. Control stations shall consist of all equipment and material necessary for the
 distribution of secondary electrical power as shown on the plans. Control stations will be specified by the
 secondary voltage.
 1091.8.1 Cabine ts. Control cabinets shall be of sufficient size to house all equipment as shown on the
 plans. All equipment such as circuit breakers, switches, contactors, fuses, photoelectric controls and
 terminal blocks shall be installed on the panel as shown on the plans. Control cabinets shall have a control
 panel constructed of the same material as the cabinet. Cabinets shall be NEMA 4, dust-tight, watertight and
 constructed of 0.125-inch minimum reinforced sheet aluminum alloy and be of clean-cut design and
 appearance. All hinges, catches and other hardware shall be non-ferrous metal or stainless steel. Cabinets
 shall have a No. 2 Corbin cabinet lock and provisions for locking with a padlock. Two keys for cabinet
 locks shall be furnished by the contractor. Mounting shall be as shown on the plans.
 1091.8.2 Lightning Arre stors. Lightning arrestors shall be of the rated voltage as shown on the plans.
 1091.8.3 Photoe le ctric Controls. Photoelectric controls shall be of the cadmium-sulfide or solid-state
 type operating on 120 volts or 240 volts, as shown on the plans and shall operate on a line supply of 50 to
 60 hertz. T he load capacity of the photoelectric cell relays shall be a minimum of 1,000 watts.
 Photoelectric cells shall operate a lighting system through mercury load relays or contactors as shown on
 the plans. T he photoelectric cell circuitry shall be designed to be normally closed at night. T he
 photoelectric cell shall be configured such that in the event of failure, the lights shall be on. T he turn-on
 range shall be adjustable from 1.0 to 3.0 footcandle. A turn-on setting of 1.0 footcandle and a turn-off
 setting of 2.0 footcandles shall be made at the factory. T he photoelectric cell shall have a time delay to
 avoid operation due to lightning and transient light. A suitable bracket for mounting the photoelectric cell
 
 733
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 shall be provided. T he photoelectric cell shall be mounted into a three-prong twist lock socket. All top
 mount photoelectric controls shall face an open sky and side mount photoelectric controls shall face
 north. Each photoelectric control unit shall include a lightning arrestor. Test switches used with
 photoelectric controls shall be three-position switches or two single-pole breakers as shown on the plans.
 Test switches shall be clearly labeled and mounted in the control cabinet.
 1091.8.4 Contactors. Contactors shall be NEMA Type 1 enclosed, magnetic-type, two-pole, single phase
 for 600 volts, 60-hertz service. T he operating coil shall be designed for 120-volt or 240-volt operation as
 shown on the plans. T he contactor shall be electrically held, have the minimum rating and shall be housed
 in the control cabinet as shown on the plans. Mercury load relays shall be two-pole, normally-open,
 mercury contact, magnetic-type with load capacity as shown on the plans.
 1091.8.5 Circuit Bre ake rs. All circuit breakers shall be molded-case thermal-magnetic circuit breakers.
 T he number and trip rating of circuit breakers shall be as shown on the plans. All breakers shall be designed
 for panel mounting with cable connections on the line and load sides.
 1091.8.5.1 Type A Circuit Bre ake rs. Type A circuit breakers shall have a minimum of 18,000 amps
 alternating current interrupting rating at 240 volts alternating current and 14,000 amps alternating current
 interrupting rating at 480 volts alternating current. Breakers shall be full-size and designed to accept wire
 sizes up to 2/0 AWG. Terminals shall be provided for the wire sizes as shown on the plans.
 1091.8.5.2 Type B Circuit Bre ake rs. Type B circuit breakers shall have a minimum of 10,000 amps
 alternating current interrupting rating at 240 volts alternating current. Type B circuit breakers shall have a
 nominal size no greater than one inch wide by 4 inches high by
 3 inches deep. Terminals shall be configured for the wire sizes as shown on the plans. If the breaker
 terminals are not designed for the required wire sizes, suitable terminal adapters, connectors or terminal
 blocks shall be used to convert the wire sizes.
 1091.9 Powe r Supply Asse mbly.
 1091.9.1 Disconnect cabinets shall be NEMA 4, dust-tight and watertight. T he operating handle shall have
 full cover interlock to prevent the door from opening when the breaker is on. T he enclosure shall have
 provisions for padlocking the enclosure and for padlocking the switch in the on or off position.
 1091.9.2 Meter boxes shall be NEMA 3R or NEMA 4.
 1091.10 Cable Splicing.
 1091.10.1 Splice blocks shall be designed for the wire size used, shall have one port per wire and the wires
 secured with set screws. T he set screw holes shall be protected with removable plugs.
 1091.10.2 Resin splice kits shall consist of a protective plastic case designed for the type of connector
 used, filled with a resin insulating compound mixed in accordance with the manufacturer's
 recommendations.
 
 734
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTIO N 1092
 SIGNAL EQ UIPMENT
 1092.1 Signal He ads. Signal heads shall meet the following requirements:
 (a) All signal heads shall be weatherproof and black in color in accordance with Sec 1092.1.1. All
 indications shall be 12 inches unless specified otherwise.
 (b) All signal indications in conventional signal heads shall be illuminated with LED modules. All
 LED modules, shall be in accordance with IT E Vehicle T raffic Control Signal Heads: Light
 Emitting Diode (LED) Circular Signal Supplement dated Jun 27, 2005, shall be Intertek ET L
 verified and shall be in accordance with the following:
 (1) T he lens of each green indication shall be clear. If a polymeric lens is supplied, a
 surface coating shall be applied to provide abrasion resistance.
 (2) T he LED modules shall not contain Aluminum Gallium Arsenide (AlGaAs).
 (3) T he LED modules shall provide constant light output under power. Modules with
 dimming capabilities shall have the option disabled or shall be set on a non-dimming
 operation.
 (4) Module shall be labeled with “ Manufactured in conformance with the IT E LED
 Circular Signal Supplement”.
 (5) Provided with spade adapters.
 (c) All arrow LED modules shall be in accordance with IT E Vehicle T raffic Control Signal Heads.
 Light Emitting Diodes (LED) Vehicle Arrow T raffic Signal Supplement dated July 1, 2007, shall be
 Intertek ET L verified and shall be in accordance with the following.
 (1) Be omni-directional.
 (2) T he lens of each green arrow indication shall be clear.
 (3) Module shall be labeled with "Manufactured in conformance with the IT E LED Vehicle
 Arrow T raffic Signal Supplement".
 (4) Provided with spade adapters.
 1092.1.1 Housing, Door and Visor. All new signal sections shall be clean, smooth and free from
 imperfections. T he connection between signal housings shall be weatherproof. Housings shall be rigidly
 fastened together by a three- or four-bolt assembly or other connectors approved by the engineer. Doors
 that will exclude dust and moisture shall be used to ensure a weatherproof unit. A tunnel visor shall be
 supplied with each signal section and each door shall have provisions for attachment of the tunnel visor.
 All visors shall be held in place by four stainless steel fastening screws or bolts and shall be capable of being
 removed without opening the signal head door. Internal bosses or inserts shall be provided, in each housing,
 for mounting a terminal block and for the attachment of back plates. T he top and bottom exterior of the
 housing shall be flat to ensure perfect alignment of assembled sections. T he housing of each section shall be
 one piece with sides, back, top and bottom integrally molded. T he design of the housing shall be such that,
 with the aid of simple tools and the addition of standard parts, it shall be possible to make any assembly
 consisting of one or more signal sections and, with the addition of standard bracket assemblies, assemble
 signal faces into multi-way traffic signal head configurations. T he housings shall be polycarbonate. All
 material used in construction of polycarbonate signal heads shall be of ultraviolet stabilized colorimpregnated polycarbonate resin. T he housing shall have a minimum thickness of 0.09 inch and shall be
 ribbed or plated to produce added strength. If signal housings are not ribbed, minimum 0.10-inch aluminum
 plates shall be furnished and installed inside and outside the section housing at all points of attachment of
 the pipe bracket.
 1092.1.2 Louve rs. T he degree of cut-off shall be stamped on the louver or printed on a decal on the front
 
 735
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 of the louver and shall be visible after installation.
 1092.1.2.1 Fixed louvers shall be formed of 0.025-inch sheet aluminum. T he top and bottom bends of each
 fin shall be securely fastened to the inside of the supporting ring. T he angles of cut-off from either side of
 the center axis of the light beam shall be provided by six types of louvers: Type A - 3 degrees, Type B - 7
 degrees, Type C - 10 1/2 degrees, Type D - 14 degrees, Type E - 18 1/2 degrees and Type F - 26 1/2
 degrees.
 1092.1.2.2 Adjustable louver units shall be composed of an acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic
 housing and polycarbonate baffles. T he unit shall be designed to prevent light leakage between the housing
 and the visor, and shall have an adjustable view range of 7 to
 42 degrees. All plastic material shall be ultraviolet stabilized. All hardware shall be brass or stainless steel.
 1092.1.3 Hardware . Hardware shall be 1 1/2-inch galvanized steel or unfinished aluminum, except
 aluminum pipe brackets and side mount brackets. Aluminum pipe brackets shall have a spun finish. Side
 mount brackets may be constructed of molded, glass-impregnated polycarbonate no greater than 12 inches
 in length. Elbows, tees and crosses shall be straight threaded and furnished with a square head set screw at
 each connection point to ensure rigid mounting. Fittings attached to the signal housing shall incorporate
 serrations or, by the use of an adapter ring, shall be compatible with the serrations on the signal housing.
 1092.1.4 Backplate s. Backplates shall be provided on all signal heads as shown on the plans. Backplates
 shall be black in color and constructed of flat pre-cut or preformed thermoplastic. Flat pre-cut
 thermoplastic backplates shall have a minimum thickness of 0.250 inch. Preformed thermoplastic
 backplates shall have rolled out edges and a minimum final thickness of 0.10 inch. When as indicated in the
 plans, a reflectorized strip shall be placed along the perimeter of the backplate. T he reflectorized strip shall
 be made from yellow sheeting in accordance with Section 1042. T he reflectorized strip shall be adhered to
 the backplate as shown in the plan.
 1092.1.5 O ptically Limiting Signal He ads. All signal sections shall meet the following:
 (a) Each signal housing shall be die cast aluminum having a chromate preparatory treatment. T he
 signal housing and lens holder shall be predrilled for backplates and visors. All access openings shall
 be sealed with weather resistant gaskets. Hinge and latch pins shall be non-ferrous metal or
 stainless steel. T he lens holder and interior of the housing shall be optical black. T he housing shall
 mount to standard 1 1/2-inch fittings as a single section, as a multiple section face or in
 combination with conventional signals. T he signal housing shall be provided with an adjustable
 connection that permits incremental tilting from zero to 10 degrees above or below the horizontal
 while maintaining a common vertical axis through the mounting assembly. T he housing
 connection shall permit external adjustment about the mounting axis in 5-degree increments.
 Attachments such as visors, backplates or adapters shall readily fasten to mounting surfaces
 without affecting the weatherproof characteristics and light integrity of the signal.
 (b) T he optical system shall consist of an objective lens, optical limiter-diffuser, lamp, lamp
 fixture and optical masking tape.
 (1) T he objective lens shall be a high-resolution planar incremental lens, hermetically
 sealed within a flat laminate of weather-resistant acrylic or approved equivalent. T he lens
 shall be symmetrical in outline and if rotated to any 90-degree orientation about the
 optical axis, shall not displace the primary image.
 (2) T he optical limiter-diffuser shall provide an accessible imaging surface at focus on the
 optical axis for objects up to 1,200 feet distant and shall permit an effective veiling mask
 to be applied as determined by the desired visibility zone. T he optical limiter-diffuser shall
 be provided with positive positioning and shall be composed of heat resistant glass.
 (3) T he lamp shall be in accordance with Sec 1092.1, and shall have an integral reflector.
 T he lamp shall be attached to the diffusing element with a collar having a specular inner
 surface.
 
 736
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (4) T he lamp fixture shall consist of a separately accessible housing and integral lamp
 support, an adjustable ceramic socket and a self-aligning, quick release lamp retainer.
 Electrical connection between section housing and lamp housing shall be accomplished
 with an interlock assembly that disconnects the lamp holder when the door is opened.
 (5) A signal lamp intensity control shall be supplied in each signal section to provide
 dimming of the signal lamp as the ambient light intensity drops below approximately 3
 footcandles.
 1092.1.6 Pe de strian LED Countdown Signal He ads. Pedestrian LED countdown signal heads shall
 include two LED signal modules, one indicating a “ WALKING PERSON” and “ UPRAISED HAND” icon
 and the second a two digit numeric pedestrian change interval countdown display to inform pedestrians of
 the number of seconds remaining in the pedestrian change interval and any array of LEDs and related
 power supplies and any required lenses which, when connected to appropriate power, provides a single
 pedestrian signal indication and a countdown signal in a single housing unit. LED pedestrian signal
 countdown heads shall be in accordance with IT E specifications and standards for Pedestrian T raffic
 Control Signal Indicators: Light Emitting Diode (LED) Signal Modules dated August 4, 2010 and the
 following:
 (a) Pedestrian LED countdown signal head housings shall be constructed of a black, one-piece,
 0.250-inch thick, polycarbonate material as shown on the plans. T he housing shall include an
 integral mounting bracket designed for mounting on the side of the pole on all makes of signal
 poles with a terminal compartment and minimum 5-position, double-row terminal block.
 (1) T he door, lens and any openings in the housing shall have gaskets or seals to exclude
 dust and moisture from the inside of the compartment.
 (2) Lenses shall be constructed of polycarbonate material and reduce glare.
 (3) Lenses shall be hard coated or otherwise made to comply with the UV material
 exposure effects of the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) J576.
 (4) Lenses shall be a replaceable part, without the need to replace the complete LED
 signal housing.
 (5) Pedestrian LED countdown signal head housing shall be provided with a manufactured,
 preformed rectangular visor or screen-type louver.
 (b) Indications on LED signal modules shall be IT E Class 3 for icons and countdown display digits
 Icon and countdown modules shall be Intertek ET L verified and be in accordance with the
 following:
 (1) T he LED module lenses shall use transparent film or materials with similar
 characteristics.
 (2) Modules, conforming to this specification, shall be labeled with
 the following statement, “ Manufactured in Conformance with
 the IT E Pedestrian T raffic Control Signal Indicators: Light Emitting Diode (LED) Signal
 Modules”.
 (3) Modules with dimming capabilities shall have the option
 disabled or shall be set on a non-dimming operation.
 (4) LED signal modules displaying IT E Class 3 icons shall be constructed such that both
 the “ WALKING PERSON” icon and the “ UPRAISED HAND” icon are displayed from
 the same module on the same rectangular surface area. T he illumination of one icon shall
 not result in the illumination of the other icon.
 (5) Supplied with spade adapters.
 
 737
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (c) If the pedestrian change interval is interrupted or shortened as part of the transition into a
 preemption sequence the countdown pedestrian signal display should be discontinued and go dark
 upon activation of the preemption transition.
 (d) T he countdown learning cycle shall only be initiated after the initial installation, a return from
 a power failure greater than 2 seconds, a repeated demand to change programming, or after
 preemption. During the learning cycle, the countdown display shall remain blank. T he learning
 cycle shall not last more than two complete cycles.
 1092.1.7 Finishing. Mounting brackets and hardware, except the aluminum pipe brackets and
 polycarbonate side mounted brackets, shall be galvanized steel or unfinished aluminum. Aluminum pipe
 brackets shall have a spun finish. Painting of the mounting brackets and hardware will not be permitted.
 1092.2 Posts and Mast Arms. A grounding lug shall be provided for all units. A grounding conductor shall
 provide grounding continuity for all metallic, noncurrent carrying poles in one circuit.
 1092.2.1 Ste e l Pe de stal Posts. Steel pedestal posts shall be 4 1/2-inch outside diameter schedule 40 steel
 pipe. T he base shall be cast iron, free from imperfections, and shall be provided with a suitable plastic,
 fiberglass or cast door for wiring access. T he grounding lug shall be inside the base. T he bolt circle and hole
 diameter shall be as shown on the plans. After fabrication, posts and bases shall be fully galvanized.
 1092.2.2 Aluminum Pe de stal Posts. Aluminum pedestal posts shall be schedule 80 straight tubing of
 6063-T 6 aluminum alloy in accordance with AST M B 210, with a 4 1/2-inch outside diameter. T he
 pedestal base casting shall be either permanent mold casting of Alloy 356.0 F, in accordance with AST M B
 108, or sand castings of Alloy 356.0 F, in accordance with AST M B 26. T he base shall be free from
 imperfections and shall be provided with a suitable door for wiring access. T he base and post shall be joined
 by a threaded connection. Welded connections will not be permitted. T he grounding lug shall be provided
 inside the base. All hardware shall be non-ferrous metal or stainless steel.
 1092.2.3 Signal Post and Mast Arm Pre -Approval. Fabricators shall submit six copies of shop drawings
 and supporting calculations to T raffic. Submittals shall be approved by T raffic in writing prior to
 fabrication of the signal posts and mast arms. Shop drawings shall indicate complete design details required
 for post and mast arm fabrication, including material grades and thicknesses, welding and orientation of any
 longitudinal seams. T he projected areas and weights of signs and signals used in the design of the post and
 mast arms shall be shown on the shop drawings. Design details for all possible post and mast arm
 combinations shown on the plans may be submitted. Shop drawings shall provide post and mast arm
 installation and hardware details. All welding procedures shall be prepared by the manufacturer as a written
 procedure specification and shall be submitted with the shop drawings for approval. Approval of the weld
 procedures will be required before approval of the shop drawings. Shop drawings shall indicate the specific
 approved welding procedure to be used for each joint. Shop drawings and supporting stress calculations shall
 be signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer in the State of Missouri. Manufacturers shall
 submit all required documentation, in accordance with Sec 1092.2.4.3. Upon written approval, preapproved drawings may be used on any project where the design conditions of the shop drawings are not
 exceeded.
 1092.2.4 Ste e l Posts and Mast Arms. Steel posts and mast arms shall be continuously tapered, hollow
 shafts fabricated as one continuous shaft or as individual segments at least 10 feet long, joined together
 using electrically welded, intermediate, transverse, full penetration, circumferential joints. Steel posts and
 mast arms shall be fabricated from basic oxygen or open-hearth steel sheet. T he continuous, tapered,
 hollow shafts or individual segments shall be manufactured from one or two lengths of steel sheet, with one
 or two continuous, welded, longitudinal seams. T he longitudinal seams in the mast arm shall be located
 outside of the upper half of the cross section of the member. Where transverse, full penetration,
 circumferential welds are used, the fabricator shall furnish to the engineer written certification that 100
 percent of all such welds have been radiographed or ultrasonic tested by an independent testing agency using
 a qualified non-destructive testing technician, as described in Section 6.14.7 of ANSI/AWS D1.1 Structural
 Welding Code-Steel and equipment calibrated annually. T he testing agency shall be approved by the
 engineer prior to fabrication. Post base and mast arm attachment plates shall be plate steel attached to the
 larger end of the shafts by continuous welds on the inside and outside of the shaft. After manufacture, the
 material shall have a minimum yield strength of 48,000 psi.
 
 738
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1092.2.4.1 A handhole equipped with a suitable metal cover shall be provided in the post near the base, and
 12 inches above the mast arm connection if luminaire mounting is specified. A grounding lug or connector
 shall be provided inside the post near the handhole. A removable raintight metal pole cap shall be provided
 on the top of the post and on the small end of each mast arm. All handhole covers and metal caps shall
 include a galvanized steel chain. T he chain shall be capable of supporting at least six times the weight of
 the cover or cap and be securely attached to the inside of the post or arm, with sufficient length to allow
 removal of the cover or cap for maintenance access.. T he pole caps and handhole covers shall be securely
 attached to the post with screws that penetrates through the cap or cover and the post or arm. An
 aluminum or stainless steel identification tag shall be provided with all posts and mast arms as shown on the
 plans. T he letters and numbers on the tag shall be embossed or engraved. T he post tag shall be attached to
 the pole 6 inches above the top of the handhole. T he mast arm tag shall be attached 3 inches from the base
 of the end cap. T he base plate shall be equipped with four cast steel or cast iron nut covers in accordance
 with AASHT O M 103 or M 105, or four aluminum nut covers and shall have four galvanized or stainless
 steel screws for securing covers to the pole. All poles, shoe bases, base plates and cast steel or cast iron nut
 covers shall be fully galvanized after fabrication. All anchor bolt nuts shall be completely covered by nut
 covers. Luminaire bracket arms, when specified, shall be included with the post and mast arm. T he
 contractor may furnish posts with the shape, gage and dimensions meeting or exceeding those required by
 the plans and specifications, provided shop drawings are submitted and approved in accordance with Sec
 1092.2.3.
 1092.2.4.2 Welding and fabrication of the assemblies shall be in accordance with the ANSI/AWS D1.1
 Structural Welding Code-Steel. All requirements of the welding code for tubular structures will apply to the
 fabrication for the post and mast arm shafts and shall include any welds used to attach these members to
 plates or other hardware. T he manufacturer shall employ qualified personnel to perform all visual and
 nondestructive testing (NDT ) required. In addition to the visual inspections and NDT that may otherwise
 be required by the welding code, the manufacturer shall perform 100 percent magnetic particle (MT )
 testing of circumferential fillet welds used to attach the flange plate to the larger end of the mast arm shaft.
 NDT personnel shall be qualified as set forth in paragraph 6.14.7 of ANSI/AWS D1.1 Structural Welding
 Code-Steel. Qualifications of NDT personnel shall be submitted to the engineer for approval.
 1092.2.4.3 T he post and mast arm manufacturer shall be certified under the AISC certification program,
 Conventional Steel Building, or higher category. Evidence of current AISC certification will be required
 prior to the approval of shop drawings, and lapsing of the certification will be cause for the manufacturer's
 removal from the approved list of suppliers.
 1092.2.4.4 Steel posts, luminaire bracket arms, mast arms, nut covers and plate steel bases shall be hot-dip
 galvanized inside and out after fabrication, visual inspections and NDT testing. Galvanized material shall be
 handled in such a manner to avoid damage to the surface. Any galvanized material on which the coating has
 been damaged will be rejected or may, with approval from the engineer, be repaired in accordance with Sec
 1081.
 1092.2.5 Fabricator's Ce rtification. Prior to erection of the posts and mast arms, the contractor shall
 furnish to the engineer a fabricator's certification. T he certification shall specifically state the fabricated
 posts and mast arms have been quality control inspected by the fabricator and all material and
 manufacturing processes used were in full compliance with the specification requirements and the approved
 shop drawings and weld procedures. Certification shall be accompanied by supporting documentation,
 including the results of the visual inspections and NDT in accordance with Sec 1092.2.4.2 and copies of the
 pre-approved drawings required by Sec 1092.2.3.
 1092.3 Lighting Control Cabine t. T he lighting control cabinet shall contain a control panel
 constructed of the same material as the cabinet. Circuit breakers, the photoelectric switch, a contactor, if
 specified, and any other specified equipment for luminaire control shall be installed on the panel. Control
 cabinets shall be of sufficient size to house all equipment shown on the plans. Cabinets shall be dust tight,
 watertight, NEMA 4 and constructed of aluminum or stainless steel. All hinges, catches and other hardware
 shall be stainless steel. Cabinets shall have a No. 2 Corbin cabinet lock. Photoelectric switches and
 contactors shall be in accordance with Sec 901. Circuit breakers shall be Type B circuit breakers in
 accordance with Sec 901.
 
 739
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1092.4 Traffic Controlle r Asse mblie s. T raffic controller assemblies will be defined as the complete
 assembly of all required equipment and components for control of traffic signal indications. T he type of
 controller assembly required for each location shall be as specified in the contract documents.
 1092.4.1 NEMA TS1. Each NEMA T S1 controller assembly shall consist of a controller cabinet, signal
 controller, back panel, conflict monitor, card rack assembly, all required wiring, switches and connectors and
 all other equipment as defined in these specifications and as shown on the plans. Double controller
 assemblies to control two intersections shall consist of a controller cabinet, two signal controllers, two back
 panels, two conflict monitors, two card rack assemblies, all required wiring, switches and connectors and all
 other equipment as defined in these specifications and as shown on the plans.
 (a) Each controller and associated equipment shall be designed to operate on 120 volts, 60 hertz,
 single phase, alternating current.
 (b) Variations in the voltage of the power supply of ± 10 percent or sustained temperatures inside
 the cabinet between -20 and 165 F shall not change the total time cycle of pretimed controllers or
 the length of any interval, portion, period or unit extension of actuated controllers by more than
 five percent or cause electrical or mechanical damage. Heater elements shall not be used to attain
 compliance with these requirements.
 (c) Vibration shall not affect normal operation of any equipment.
 (d) All controllers and other specified auxiliary equipment shall be properly protected with fuses
 on each applicable unit. Fuses shall be installed in 1/4-twist or screw-in type fuse holders. Pop-out
 fuse holders will not be permitted.
 1092.4.1.1 Controlle r Cabine ts. Controller cabinets shall be cast aluminum or 0.125 inch reinforced
 sheet aluminum alloy and shall be of clean-cut design and appearance. T he cabinet shall provide ample
 space for housing all equipment and components. Controller cabinets housing solid state controllers shall be
 furnished with unused cabinet space measuring 18 inches wide by 12 inches high by 12 inches deep, unless
 coordination equipment is specified on the plans. For pretimed and actuated NEMA controllers, the cabinet
 shall support a sixteen-position back panel. Double controller cabinets for two controllers shall support two
 sixteen-position back panels. All double cabinets shall have two doors that are hinged on the outside
 corners of the cabinet such that the doors open away from each other. Double cabinets shall have a divider
 between the two halves of the cabinet with an 8-inch opening between the compartments at the bottom of
 the divider for wiring between the compartments. T he cabinet shall contain a rigid mounting table, sliding
 ways or hinged support of such construction that the controller and auxiliary equipment may be withdrawn
 from the cabinet without breaking any electrical connections or interrupting normal controller operation.
 Hinged supports shall be welded to the controller cabinet. Electrical connectors on the controller and
 auxiliary equipment to all circuits shall be NEMA 1/4 twist or MS type. Components of controller cabinets
 shall meet the following requirements.
 (a) A hinged door or doors shall provide complete access to the interior of the cabinet. Door holds
 shall secure the door in an open position at least 90 degrees from the closed position and shall be
 furnished with each cabinet. T he doors shall fit against a raintight gasket. Each door shall have a
 stamped or raised outside designation, "T raffic Control" or other approved identification. Each
 main cabinet door shall have a No. 2 Corbin cabinet lock and provisions for locking with a
 padlock. T he handles for each door shall swing outward. An auxiliary door, positioned on each
 main cabinet door, equipped with a raintight gasket, shall allow access to a police panel and shall be
 equipped with a lock whose key will not unlock the main door. Two keys shall be furnished for
 each type lock used. T he door hinges and pins shall be of corrosion-resistant metal. Pins shall be
 rolled or solid rod, at least 1/8 inch in diameter, except if continuous hinges are furnished, the pins
 shall be continuous the full length of the hinges, and shall be no less than 1/16 inch in diameter.
 (b) T he back panel in all controller cabinets shall be hinged at the bottom to permit the top of the
 panel to be rotated forward and down to an angle of no less than 45 degrees with all components,
 including load switches, attached for maintenance purposes. T he bottom of the back panel shall be
 no less than 6 inches above the bottom of the cabinet.
 (c) Cabinets housing solid state controllers shall have a thermostatically controlled ventilating fan
 
 740
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 with exhausting capability in an enclosure of at least 150 cubic feet per minute for cabinets up to
 30.5 cubic feet and at least 250 cubic feet per minute for cabinets 30.5 cubic feet and more,
 installed in the top of the cabinet. Cabinets shall be supplied with a replaceable furnace-type
 fiberglass filter of at least one square foot area mounted behind louvers in the lower one-fourth of
 the door.
 (d) Each controller cabinet shall be furnished with a clearly labeled switch mounted in the access or
 police panel to place the signals on flash. Operation of this switch shall not affect the electrical
 power supply to the controller. T his shall be the only control switch accessible from the police
 panel.
 (e) Each cabinet shall be provided with a grounded service outlet and a switch-controlled lamp
 receptacle.
 (f) Each cabinet shall contain a separate aluminum power panel containing the following
 equipment.
 (1) Two Type B circuit breakers in accordance with Sec 901. One breaker shall interrupt
 power to the controller and signals. T he frame size and trip rating will be shown on the
 traffic signal plans or designated in the contract. T he second Type B circuit breaker shall
 be an auxiliary breaker that interrupts power to the cabinet lamp and receptacle. T he
 frame size and trip rating shall be 15 amperes.
 (2) One mercury contactor controlling power to the signal bus.
 (3) One radio frequency line filter.
 (4) One line surge protector.
 (5) One terminal block for alternating current power input.
 (6) One ground bus terminal block.
 (7) One isolated neutral bus terminal block.
 (g) If specified, a manual operation push button shall be installed in the police panel. T he push
 button shall be wired for manual operation of the signals. T he push button shall be water-resistant,
 designed to protect the user against electrical shock, and shall be supplied with a coiled cord with a
 nominal 6-foot stretched length. A clearly labeled switch shall also be installed in the police panel
 to switch between manual or automatic operation of the controller.
 1092.4.1.2 Flashe r Unit. Each controller, through terminal options, shall permit yellow-red or red-red
 flash operation. Indications shall be flashed at no less than 50 or more than 60 flashes per minute, with
 approximately 50 percent dwell time. A two-circuit flasher, alternate flash and three flasher field circuits
 for each of the two flasher circuits will be required. A separate flasher shall provide flashing pedestrian
 indications when required by the contract. T he timing of flashing pedestrian intervals shall be separately
 adjustable from all other timed intervals. T he flasher shall be solid state with ratings of at least 15 amperes
 per circuit and shall comply with the latest revision of NEMA Standards Publication T S. T he flasher units
 shall have a 150-volt metal oxide varistor (MOV) placed on each output flash terminal. Uniform code flash
 circuitry will be required for each controller. Flashing operation shall be in accordance with the MUT CD.
 1092.4.1.3 Exte rnal Time Switche s. External time switches shall be solid state, keyboard entry and shall
 contain filtering and shielding circuitry to protect the unit's operation against electrical interference.
 T iming shall be based on the 60-hertz power supply frequency. Each unit shall contain a programmable
 automatic central daylight time compensation feature and a back-up power source to maintain time and
 memory functions during loss of alternating current power. Each unit shall provide a weekly program with
 at least 20 event changes per week.
 1092.4.1.4 Wiring. T he controller cabinet shall be equipped with a 600-volt heavy-duty one-piece
 mechanical screw connector offset tang assembly attached to a barrier terminal strip for terminating field
 
 741
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 conductors. Each mechanical screw connector shall accommodate up to four No. 12 AWG conductors. T he
 connector shall be mounted horizontally on the inside back of the cabinet, approximately 6 inches from
 the bottom of the cabinet. All wiring to the terminal strips, except the incoming field circuits, shall be
 performed by the controller manufacturer. T he terminal strips shall accommodate at least:
 (a) Two terminals for the power supply.
 (b) An unfused terminal for neutral side of power supply line.
 (c) One terminal for each signal lamp circuit and one terminal for the common return from each
 signal face.
 (d) If detectors are used:
 (1) Two terminals for each detector.
 (2) Screw terminal strips mounted vertically on the side of the cabinet approximately 6
 inches from the bottom of the cabinet.
 (3) All inductive loop detector inputs shall be protected with two 30-volt MOVs with a
 30-j rating. An MOV shall be connected between each field terminal and cabinet ground.
 (e) Terminals for interconnect cable when the controller is to be hard-wire interconnected shall be
 fused and provided with a 150-volt MOV with an 80 j rating.
 (f) Terminals for closed loop system interconnect cable shall be fused and provided with a 30-volt
 MOV with a 30 j rating.
 1092.4.1.5 Back Pane l Wiring. Regardless of the number of phases specified on the plans, all load switch
 positions shall be completely wired for use. If pedestrian phases are not specified, twelve-position back
 panels for actuated NEMA controllers shall be configured for operation of eight phases and four overlaps.
 If pedestrian phases are specified, 12-position back panels shall be configured for operation of eight phases
 and four pedestrian phases or a combination of overlaps and pedestrian phases if specified on the plans. If
 flashing yellow arrow operation is called for, the appropriate load switches shall be configured as specified
 on the plans. Twelve-position back panels for pretimed controllers shall be configured for operation of 36
 circuit outputs from the controller unless otherwise specified on the plans. A flash transfer relay socket
 shall be provided for each pair of load switch positions. Flash circuit one shall be wired to positions one, 3,
 5, 7, 9 and 11. Flash circuit 2 shall be wired to positions 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12. All flash transfer relay
 sockets shall be fully wired for operation. All controller harness wiring shall be connected to labeled
 terminals on the front of the panel.
 1092.4.1.6 Solid State Controlle rs. T his section describes the general specifications for actuated solid
 state controllers. If requested by the engineer, the contractor shall provide a prototype controller for
 testing and evaluation.
 (a) Each controller shall be solid state keyboard entry and the circuit design shall use
 microprocessor techniques.
 (b) T iming shall be accomplished in a digital manner by counting the 60 hertz power supply
 frequency. T iming circuits, interval and phase switching functions shall be accomplished by solid
 state circuitry. Removing, changing wires or using any tools to make timing interval adjustments
 shall not be necessary. T he controller shall indicate the right of way conditions of the phase
 timing interval in effect, detector or actuation on each phase and memory conditions or demand
 on each phase for vehicles and pedestrians by use of status lights or display panels. T he controller
 shall be capable of flashing yellow arrow operation without any external devices or special
 software upgrades.
 (c) Opening and closing of signal lamp circuits shall be performed by plug-in solid state load
 switches, rated at no less than 10 amperes and loaded at a maximum of 6.7 amperes, located
 external to the controller. All load switch jacks shall be completely wired to field output terminal
 
 742
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 strips. Actuated and pretimed controllers shall have a minimum of twelve load switch jacks. Each
 load switch shall provide three independent circuits with "on" indicator lamps and shall comply
 with the latest revision of NEMA Standards Publication T S.
 (d) Each controller assembly shall contain a conflict monitor external to the controller circuitry
 conforming to NEMA Standards Publication T S and be capable of monitoring flashing yellow
 arrow operation on any channel. T he monitor shall cause immediate transfer to flashing operation
 when conflicting or absent indications occur or when a voltage fault occurs. When the conflict
 monitor actuates flashing operation, the controller shall freeze or stop timing in the condition
 causing the actuation until manually reset. A single lamp failure in any signal head shall not cause
 the monitor to actuate.
 (e) For double controller cabinets, two sets of switches shall be provided, one set for each
 controller installed in each compartment. Each controller cabinet shall be furnished with the
 following switches:
 (1) Power Interrupt Switch - A switch located inside the main cabinet shall interrupt
 electrical power to the controller during maintenance on the controller. Operation of this
 switch shall not affect the flash operation. T his switch shall not be accessible via the
 police panel.
 (2) Flash Switch - A switch mounted in the police panel shall place the signal on flash.
 Operation of this switch shall not affect the electrical power supply to the controller.
 When the signals are returned to normal operation the external start shall be activated
 causing the controller to revert to the programmed initialization phase(s).
 (3) Stop T ime Switch - A three-position switch mounted inside the main cabinet shall
 provide the following functions:
 (i) Stop T ime - Causes the controller to stop time.
 (ii) Normal - Allows the controller to cycle all phases, but during conflict
 monitor flash causes the controller to stop time.
 (iii) Run - Allows the controller to cycle all phases and during any flashing
 operation allows the controller to continue cycling all phases without displaying
 them on the signal heads.
 (f) During all direction flash condition, controller operation shall permit the cycling of all signal
 phases without an external load being connected to the field terminals.
 (g) Solid state controllers shall have electronic filters to prevent interference caused by the
 opening and closing of circuits in electro-mechanical auxiliary equipment.
 (h) T he controller shall be of modular design constructed for individual removal and replacement
 in the controller by multiple prong jacks or outlets without modifying wiring. Hand operable
 positive locking devices shall be used to hold the modules securely in the controller.
 (i) T he functional operating circuits and associated components shall be grouped in plug-in printed
 circuit assemblies. Similar assemblies shall be interchangeable between controllers manufactured by
 the same company.
 (j) T he controller shall contain the necessary phase sequence, interval sequence timing, power
 supply and monitoring equipment required to supervise the operation for the phasing shown on the
 plans, including any future controller expansion. If future phases are specified, the controller shall
 be completely configured to accept the future phases.
 (k) Controllers that are interconnected shall have a coordinated/free operation switch to allow the
 controller to operate in coordination with the system or run free.
 
 743
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (l) High energy transient surge protection shall be provided on all solid state controllers to
 minimize damage to the controller and auxiliary equipment. T his device shall be located on the
 incoming 120 volts, 60 hertz power service between the controller and signal circuit breaker and
 the power inputs to the controller and auxiliary equipment. T he surge protector will plug-in to a
 hardwired base. Two LEDs that indicate the status of the surge protector shall be incorporated on
 the surge protector. One LED will indicate the surge protector is still operable and the other will
 indicate it has failed. T he surge protector and base shall be capable of operating in the
 temperature range of -40 C to +85 C. T he arrestor shall meet the latest NEMA specifications for
 surge protection.
 (m) Every all direction flash operation called from a source external to the controller shall occur
 through the flash transfer relay.
 (n) Any multi-conductor cable shall be contained in an expandable braided sleeve.
 (o) Switches or relays that completely interrupt power to the signal heads other than the
 protective circuit breaker shall not be installed in the cabinet.
 (p) All controllers shall be capable of downloading all programming data to a printer via a front
 panel RS-232 connection. T he controller shall be capable of printing directly to a printer or via an
 external computer. If an external computer is required, the required software shall be provided with
 the controller.
 (q) All controllers shall be provided with internal pre-emption functions and circuitry.
 1092.4.1.6.1 Solid State Actuate d Controlle r. Each solid state actuated controller shall meet the latest
 revision of NEMA Standards Publication T S. Actuated controllers shall meet the following requirements:
 (a) Recall by keyboard entry shall be provided for each phase to furnish continuous recall. With
 the recall function in the "OFF" position, the controller shall operate normally with the right of
 way being transferred only upon pedestrian or vehicle actuation or external force-off control.
 (b) Controllers shall be furnished with provisions for external maximum control for each signal
 phase complete with wiring to permit installation of a coordination unit. All wiring to facilitate
 coordination shall be terminated on terminal strips and complete information stating the function
 of each terminal shall be shown on the controller-wiring diagram.
 (c) All phases shall contain a non-locking memory feature that can be energized or de-energized by
 keyboard entry.
 (d) All phases shall be capable of being activated or inactivated by keyboard entry.
 (e) On the cabinet inside door test panel, an external push button switch for each vehicle and
 pedestrian phase shall be provided. Each switch shall provide call to the phase assigned and ability
 to extend the phase. T his detector input shall be independent of the circuitry between the
 amplifier and back panel.
 (f) A MoDOT D-plug shall be provided between the D-plug on the controller and the interconnect
 panel on the cabinet. In the absence of the sync signal, the coordination interface shall be
 configured to cause the controller to default to free operation. Configuration of the MoDOT Dplug shall be as follows:
 Pin Assignment
 D1 Cycle 1
 D2 Cycle 2
 
 Pin Assignment
 D10 Split 4
 D11 Offset 1
 
 Pin
 Assignment
 D19 Future (P re-empt 4)
 D20 Flash
 
 D3 Cycle 3
 
 D12 Offset 2
 
 D4
 D5
 D6
 D7
 
 D13
 D14
 D15
 D16
 
 D21 Hardware Interconnect a
 D22 Future
 D23 Future
 D24 Future
 D25 Future
 
 Cycle 4
 Future (Cycle 5)
 Future (Cycle 6)
 Split 1
 
 Offset 3
 Future (Offset 4)
 Future (Offset 5)
 P re-empt 1
 
 744
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 D8 Split 2
 D9 Split 3
 a Omit
 
 D17 P re-empt 2
 D18 P re-empt 3
 
 when activated through the cycle, split or offset inputs.
 
 (g) T he MoDOT D-Plug shall be a Cinch T RW Super D Connection as follows:
 1 - P art #TB 25 P
 
 P lug
 
 1 - P art #TB 25SLB-1 Socket
 
 1 - P art #SHD-25GL
 
 Hood with Latch
 
 1 - P art #SHD-25GFCS Hood with Filler Ends
 
 (h) Actuated controllers shall be fully configured for operation of a minimum of eight vehicle
 phases, four pedestrian phases and four overlaps, regardless of the number of phases shown on the
 plans.
 1092.4.1.6.2 Timing Function. T iming intervals or periods shall be set by means of keyboard entry. Each
 timing interval shall be adjustable to any value within the following minimum ranges for each phase. Zero
 may be satisfied by a time increment of up to 100 milliseconds.
 Range
 (seconds)
 Minimal Initial
 0 - 99
 Unit Extension or P assage Time 0 - 9.9
 Yellow Clearance
 0 - 9.9
 Red Clearance
 0 - 9.9
 Maximum I Green
 0 - 99
 Maximum II Green
 0 - 99
 Walk
 0 - 99
 P edestrian Clearance
 0 - 99
 Seconds per Actuation
 0 - 9.9
 Maximum Initial
 0 - 99
 Time Before Reduction
 0 - 99
 Time to Reduce
 0 - 99
 Minimum Gap
 0 - 9.9
 Interval
 
 1092.4.2 Type 170. Except as herein modified, the Microcomputer 170E controller, cabinet and equipment
 shall be in accordance with the Caltrans T ransportation Electrical Equipment Specifications, Chapter 2,
 dated August 16, 2002, which shall form a part of these specifications. A copy of the Caltrans
 specifications is available upon request. In case of conflict, MoDOT specifications will govern.
 Certification that the equipment proposed is included on the most current Qualified Products List of
 Caltrans and MoDOT Approved Products List shall be provided. A list of pre-approved equipment and
 material is available through T raffic or MoDOT ’s web site. Department-specific equipment not defined in
 the Caltrans specification will be exempt from this Qualified Product List requirement.
 1092.4.2.1 Type 170 Controlle rs.
 (a) T he controller shall be fully compatible with the software specified on the plans.
 (b) T he C2, C20, C30 and C40 connectors shall be amp standard.
 (c) One spare set of internal printed circuit boards shall be furnished with each controller unit. T his
 shall include, but is not limited to, the power supply, front panel, I/O, central processing unit and
 modem, if specified.
 1092.4.2.1.1 Maste r Controlle r. If a master controller or master coordination unit is specified in the
 plans, the master controller shall be a Type 170 controller. T his controller shall be in addition to the
 intersection controller and shall be installed in the same cabinet unless otherwise specified on the plans.
 1092.4.2.1.2 Diagnostic Te st Program. For each ten or fewer Model 170E controllers purchased, a
 Diagnostic Test Program Prom Chip shall be provided. T he Diagnostic Test Program Prom Chip shall test
 the operation of the Model 170E controller units including, but not limited to, internal memory, the
 
 745
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 program module, the real-time clock, input-output circuitry, the modem, the display and keyboard. T he
 program shall be capable of operating with an external monitor and controller keypad. Full documentation
 on the program shall be included. T he software shall be configured to work on a 412C prom module.
 1092.4.2.1.3 Prom Module . Each Model 170E controller unit shall be furnished with one prom module,
 Model 412C, including a back up lithium battery and real time clock adjuster circuit, one Dallas 1225 chip
 and two 6264 ram chips.
 1092.4.2.2 Type 170 Controlle r Cabine ts. Type 170 controller cabinets, including the auxiliary door,
 shall be cast aluminum or 0.125 inch reinforced sheet aluminum alloy and be of clean-cut design and
 appearance. An auxiliary door equipped with a raintight gasket, shall allow access to a police panel and shall
 be equipped with a lock whose key will not unlock the main door. T he doors shall be louvered to direct the
 incoming air downward. T he cabinet shall be supplied with a replaceable furnace-type fiberglass filter
 mounted behind the louvers and shall cover the vent openings. A filter shell shall be provided to fit over
 the filter to provide mechanical support. Each cabinet door shall have a No. 2 Corbin cabinet lock and
 provisions for locking with a padlock. Two keys shall be furnished for each type of lock used. T he handles
 for each door shall swing outward. Components of the Type 170 controller cabinets shall meet the
 following requirements:
 (a) T he cabinet shall contain a pull out, hinged-top drawer, including sliding tracks, with lockout
 and a quick-disconnect feature, such as a Vent-Rak Retractable Writing Shelf, #D-4090-13, or
 equivalent. T he pull out drawer shall extend a minimum of 14 inches to facilitate removal of the
 processor by providing an aluminum platform covered with a formica-type, chemical-proof plastic
 sheet while the rear connector is being removed. T he interior of the drawer shall be accessible.
 Minimum interior dimensions of the drawer shall be one inch high, 13 inches deep and 16 inches
 wide. T he drawer shall be capable of supporting 40 pounds when fully extended and shall be
 mounted immediately below the controller assembly.
 (b) All cabinet assemblies shall be supplied with a power distribution assembly Number 2, (PDA#2).
 If an auxiliary output file is specified, C5 connections shall be included.
 (c) Each Type 336S cabinet shall include two fluorescent lighting fixtures mounted inside the front
 and back portion of the cabinet. T he fixtures shall include a cool white lamp with protective cover
 and shall operate by a normal power UL listed ballast. T he fixtures shall be installed to
 automatically power on when the cabinet door is opened and automatically power off when the
 cabinet door is closed. A manual on/off switch shall be provided for each fixture. Each switch
 should work each individual light. T he Type 332 cabinet will require only one lighting fixture
 meeting the above requirements.
 (d) Each controller cabinet shall be furnished with a clearly labeled switch, mounted in the access
 or police panel to place the signals on flash. Operation of this switch shall not affect the electrical
 power supply to the controller. T he switch shall be labeled FLASH/AUT OMAT IC. T his shall be
 the only control switch accessible from the police panel.
 (e) All output field conductors shall be terminated in the cabinet on a one-piece copper 600-volt
 heavy duty mechanical screw connector offset tang assembly. Each mechanical screw connector
 shall accommodate up to four No. 12 AWG conductors. Each clamp shall be captive to the contact
 screw and the screw captive to the contact. Field wiring shall not be spade lugged. T he alternating
 current neutral bus and chassis ground bus shall be a 17-position solid copper neutral bar with set
 screws that allow the wires to be attached without tang or spade assemblies.
 (f) T he output file shall be hand wired and printed circuit boards will not be allowed, except for red
 fail monitoring. T he back of the load switch bay and the conflict monitor bay shall be enclosed to
 prevent wires interfering with plugging in of components.
 (g) A 420 auxiliary output file will be required when specified on the plans or if more than 12 load
 switches are required.
 (h) I and J input files shall be provided unless otherwise specified.
 
 746
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (i) All cables shall be located and secured such that the cables do not interfere with removal of the
 controller or the opening of the controller front panel.
 (j) A diagnostic cabinet test program, including documentation, shall be provided with each ten or
 fewer cabinets.
 1092.4.2.3 Surge Prote ction. Each cabinet shall be provided with devices to protect the control
 equipment from surges and over voltages. T his shall include incoming power lines, the input and output
 files and communication lines.
 1092.4.2.3.1 All input file inputs shall be protected with a 30-volt MOV with a 30-j rating. All load switch
 outputs shall be protected with a 150-volt MOV with an 80-j rating. Each MOV shall be connected from
 the alternating current positive field terminal to the chassis ground. Each output MOV shall be mounted on
 the field terminal side of the output assembly.
 1092.4.2.3.2 For the 332A cabinet, appropriate input surge protection shall be mounted on the lower input
 termination panel (LIP). T he PDA#2 of each controller cabinet shall include a surge protection unit on the
 alternating current service input. T he protector shall be installed between the applied line voltage and earth
 ground. T he surge protector shall be capable of reducing the effect of lightning transient voltages applied to
 the alternating current line. T he protection device shall be a two-stage series parallel device. T he device
 shall include the following features and functions:
 (a) Maximum alternating current line voltage shall be 140 volts during 20 pulses of peak current,
 each of which shall rise in 8 microseconds and fall in 20 microseconds to one half of the peak of
 20,000 amps.
 (b) T he protector shall be provided with the following terminals:
 (1) Main line (alternating current line first stage terminal).
 (2) Main neutral (alternating current neutral input terminal).
 (3) Equipment line out (alternating current line second stage output terminal, 10 amps.).
 (4) Equipment neutral out (neutral terminal to protected equipment).
 (5) GND (earth connection).
 (c) T he main alternating current line in and the equipment line out terminals shall be separated by
 a minimum 200 microhenry inductor rated to handle 10-amp alternating current service. T he first
 stage clamp shall be between the main line and ground terminals.
 (d) T he second stage clamp shall be between the equipment line out and equipment neutral.
 (e) T he protector for the first and second stage clamp shall have an MOV or similar solid state
 device rated at 20 kiloamps and shall be of a completely solid stage design. Gas discharge tubes will
 not be allowed.
 (f) T he main neutral and equipment neutral out shall be connected internally and shall have an
 MOV similar solid state device or gas discharge tubes rated at 20 kiloamps between the main
 neutral and ground terminals.
 (g) Peak clamp voltage shall be 350 volts at 20 kiloamps measured between the equipment line out
 and equipment neutral out terminals. Current shall be applied between the main line and ground
 terminals. Ground and main neutral terminals shall be externally tied together. T he voltage shall
 not exceed 350 volts.
 (h) T he protector shall be epoxy-encapsulated in a flame retardant material.
 (i) Continuous service current shall be 10 amps at 120 volts alternating current root means squared
 
 747
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (RMS).
 (j) T he equipment line out shall provide power to the Type 170 controller and to the 24 volt
 power supply.
 (k) Communications line protector for incoming and outgoing communication lines shall be EDCO
 part #PC642C-008 or equivalent with mounting connector #PCB1B or equivalent. If fiber or radio
 communications are specified, these communications line protectors will not be required.
 1092.4.2.4 Cabine t Acce ssorie s. Each cabinet shall be equipped with the following, unless specified
 otherwise:
 (a) A minimum of one direct current isolator.
 (b) Load switches, quantity as specified in the contract documents.
 (c) Two flashers.
 (d) Alternating current isolators, quantity as specified in the contract documents.
 (e) Four flash transfer relays. Two additional flash transfer relays shall be provided when a 420
 auxiliary is shown on the plans.
 (f) Modem, quantity as specified in the contract documents.
 (g) SM modem, quantity as specified in the contract documents.
 (h) Fiber optic modem, quantity as specified in the contract documents.
 (i) Computer cable. T he computer cable shall consist of both male and female amp connectors.
 T he female connector shall be located in the front of the cabinet and shall extend past the front
 edge of the rack a minimum of 0.5 inches and a maximum of 1 inch. T he male connector shall be
 located in the back of the cabinet. T he cable shall extend 14 inches along the side of the rack with
 a minimum of 12 inches free that can be used to plug into any of the controller ’s four ports. T he
 cable shall consist of one wire connecting the like pin in the other connector starting with A and
 ending with R. T he wire shall be 20 AWG. One cable shall be supplied for each cabinet. T he
 mounting of this cable shall not interfere in any way with the installation or removal of the
 controller. If the cable is mounted within the pull out drawer, any hole that is drilled in the drawer
 shall be equipped with a rubber grommet to protect the cable and the cable shall have enough slack
 to prevent binding.
 (j) Conflict monitor.
 (1) T he conflict monitor shall be external to the controller circuitry in accordance with
 the Caltrans specifications. T he monitor shall cause immediate transfer to flashing
 operation when conflicting or absent indications occur or when a voltage fault occurs.
 When the conflict monitor actuates flashing operation, the controller shall freeze or stop
 timing in the condition causing the actuation until manually reset. A single lamp failure in
 any signal head shall not cause the monitor to actuate.
 (2) A connector and terminal assembly designated as P20 ,Magnum P/N 722120 or
 equivalent, for monitoring the absence of red shall be an integral part of the output file.
 T he connector shall terminate and shall be compatible with the cable and connector of
 the conflict monitor unit. T he pin assignments of the P20 connector and terminal
 assembly shall be provided with the cabinet plans. T he P20 connector shall be designed
 such that the cable may only be inserted into the P20 connector in one direction. Unused
 red channels shall be programmed through jumpers. T hese jumpers shall cause 115 volts
 alternating current to be applied to any and all unused red monitoring channels. T hese
 jumpers and the respective attachment points shall be part of the output file.
 
 748
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1092.4.2.5 Software . Software shall be provided with each Type 170 controller unless otherwise specified.
 Requirements for software will be as follows.
 1092.4.2.5.1 District 4 - Kansas City Are a. T he 412C prom module shall be configured for Wapiti
 software. For intersection controllers, the most recent revision of Wapiti W4IKS shall be mounted on the
 prom module. For master controllers, the most recent revision of Wapiti W70SM shall be mounted on the
 prom module.
 1092.4.2.5.2 District 8 - Springfie ld Are a. T he 412C prom module shall be configured for Bi-T rans
 software that will be provided by District 8.
 1092.4.2.6 Te sting Re quire me nts. All equipment shall be tested for conformance to these specifications.
 Testing may be done by an independent laboratory if the manufacturer does not have sufficient facilities to
 conduct the testing. A copy of the test results for all equipment shall be supplied by the manufacturer to the
 engineer.
 1092.4.2.6.1 Conflict Monitor Te st Cable . To facilitate testing of the conflict monitor, one additional
 4-foot connector cable shall be furnished by the manufacturer and installed in each cabinet. T he cable shall
 utilize an 18 AWG wire to connect a 36-pin plug to the back panel terminals as specified below. T he
 connector cable shall utilize a 36-circuit polarized nylon Waldon Molex type receptacle, P/N 03-06-1361,
 using a 0.062-inch female terminals made of 70/30 spring tempered 0.010 inch thick tin-plated brass with
 contact of resistance 0.0025 ohm millivolts, drop of 2.5 millivolts at one amp with 250 volts, 4 amps
 maximum per circuit. T his connector cable shall "free float” in the bottom front 6 inches of the cabinet
 and shall not be used in the normal operation of the controller. A moisture-proof cap shall be provided to
 prevent the accumulation of moisture on the plug terminals. T he cap shall remain attached to the
 connector when the cable is in use.
 Receptacle Terminal
 Circuit
 Phase
 
 Receptacle
 Circuit
 
 1
 
 1G
 
 19
 
 2
 
 1Y
 
 20
 
 8 WALK
 
 3
 
 2G
 
 21
 
 1 AUX G a
 
 4
 
 2Y
 
 22
 
 1 AUX Y a
 
 5
 
 3G
 
 23
 
 3 AUX G a
 
 6
 
 3Y
 
 24
 
 3 AUX Y a
 
 7
 
 4G
 
 25
 
 5 AUX G a
 
 8
 
 4Y
 
 26
 
 5 AUX Y a
 
 9
 
 5G
 
 27
 
 6 AUX G a
 
 10
 
 5Y
 
 28
 
 6 AUX Y a
 
 11
 
 6G
 
 29
 
 I14-W STOP TIME
 
 12
 
 6Y
 
 30
 
 DC GROUND
 
 13
 
 7G
 
 31
 
 MONITOR RESET
 
 14
 
 7Y
 
 32
 
 DC GROUND
 
 15
 
 8G
 
 33
 
 2 AUX G a
 
 16
 
 8Y
 
 34
 
 2 AUX Y a
 
 17
 
 2 WALK
 
 35
 
 4 AUX G a
 
 18
 
 6 WALK
 
 36
 
 4 AUX Y a
 
 a Circuits
 
 Terminal
 Phase
 4 WALK
 
 used only in a 332A cabinet with an auxiliary output file
 
 1092.4.2.6.2 Controlle rs. Each Model 170E controller unit shall be tested over a temperature range of
 -29 to 165 F. Proper operation of the unit shall be verified at both temperature extremes and at ambient
 temperature. Testing shall be conducted prior to final inspection, and will not constitute a substitute for any
 quality control testing or final inspection testing normally performed.
 
 749
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1092.4.2.6.2.1 T he environmental chamber(s) shall have provisions for remotely operating the Model
 170E controller under test. Front panel displays shall be visible from a window in the environmental
 chamber. Signal outputs shall be brought out of the chamber to display board if controllers cannot be
 directly observed. Cold and hot soak times shall be sufficient to allow all components in the device to reach
 the specified temperatures. A minimum soak time of three hours shall be used for all testing.
 1092.4.2.6.2.2 T he manufacturer shall submit to the engineer a proposed testing procedure and schedule 30
 days prior to testing for evaluation. Test procedures, environmental chambers, automatic test equipment,
 display boards, power supplies and controls shall be described in detail.
 1092.4.2.6.2.3 T he controller shall pass the following test at least five times at each temperature extreme
 and ambient:
 (a) Recovery from a short power interruption of approximately 500 milliseconds.
 (b) Recovery from a long power interruption of approximately 5 seconds.
 1092.4.2.6.2.4 T he vendor shall provide a method of testing controller inputs and outputs. Diagnostic
 software and wraparound connector for controller harnesses may be used. If diagnostic software is not used,
 outputs shall be brought out to a display board. Inputs may be paralleled to each controller.
 1092.4.2.6.3 Cabine t Te sting. Cabinets shall be tested at ambient conditions only. An automatic or semiautomatic method of checking cabinet wiring between equipment harnesses and field connections will be
 required.
 1092.4.2.6.4 Card Rack Asse mblie s. Card rack assemblies shall be in accordance with Caltrans.
 1092.4.3 Auxiliary Equipme nt and Inte rface s for Controlle rs. Interface panels shall be aluminum
 panels installed in the controller cabinet containing the required terminals and equipment. Interface panels
 shall be neatly laid out, neatly wired and easily accessible. Each auxiliary unit shall be enclosed in a suitably
 finished metal case and shall be mounted in the controller cabinet unless otherwise specified. T he function
 of each auxiliary unit shall be indicated by an identification plate on the case. Auxiliary equipment cases
 shall be ventilated. Temperature, voltage and frequency shall be in accordance with Sec 1092.4.
 1092.4.3.1 Pre -Emption Inte rface . T he pre-emption interface shall consist of internal pre-emption
 functions in the controller, any field wire termination panels, relays, wiring and connectors required for
 proper operation. T he pre-emption interface shall be wired to transfer control of the signals to the preemption sequence when actuated and shall provide the color sequence specified. After release of preemption, normal controller operation shall be automatically resumed except that actuated controllers shall
 be on recall for one complete cycle.
 1092.4.3.2 Maste r and Local Coordination Inte rface . T he coordination interface shall consist of
 internal coordination functions in the controller, and of any field wire termination panels, wiring and
 connectors required for proper operation. T he master coordination interface shall supervise the actuated
 controller operating the signals in the intersection at which the actuated controller is located. Local
 coordination interfaces shall be supervised by the master coordination interface and shall in turn supervise
 the actuated controllers operating the signals at the intersections where the controllers are located.
 Coordination interfaces shall be connected to one another or to a telephone interconnection unit by a
 multi-conductor cable. T he master coordination interface shall be furnished with internal time-based
 functions in the controller. T he coordination interface shall provide the following:
 (a) Fully actuated operation.
 (1) Cycle length of the actuated controller may vary with traffic demand, but shall not
 exceed the cycle length set on the coordination interface.
 (2) Vehicle and pedestrian detectors shall remain energized.
 (3) During periods of light traffic, the actuated controller shall respond to detector
 
 750
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 demand on any signal phase.
 (4) When there is continuous demand for all signal phases, the coordination interface
 shall cause termination of each signal phase in accordance with the time intervals set on
 the coordination interface for each signal phase.
 (5) T he actuated controller shall not be forced to transfer right of way to a signal phase if
 there is no demand.
 (b) Semi-actuated operation.
 (1) Signal phases, controlling the street on which signal progression is desired, shall be
 placed on maximum recall.
 (2) Vehicle and pedestrian detectors shall remain energized.
 (3) T ransfer of right of way from the coordinated signal phase(s) shall not occur until
 there is detector actuation for a non-coordinated signal phase and only after the
 coordination interface has terminated the coordinated signal phase(s).
 (4) T he right of way interval awarded the coordinated signal phase(s) shall be governed by
 the time interval set on the coordination interface.
 (5) If detector actuations for a non-coordinated signal phase(s) causes the phase(s) to
 time to maximum, the phase(s) shall be forced off and the coordinated phase(s) awarded
 right of way.
 (6) If demand for the non-coordinated signal phase(s) is not sufficient to extend the
 phase(s) to maximum, right of way shall transfer to the coordinated phase(s) and remain
 there until demand for the non-coordinated phase(s) occurs and the coordination interface
 times the coordinated phase(s) to maximum.
 (7) Detector actuation on a non-coordinated signal phase(s) occurring during the
 coordinated phase(s) right of way interval shall cause a call to be placed and retained for
 the non-coordinated signal phase(s).
 (c) Fixed cycle length operation.
 (1) All signal phases shall be placed on maximum recall.
 (2) Vehicle and pedestrian detectors shall remain energized.
 (3) T he coordination interface shall control the time interval that each signal phase is
 awarded right of way.
 (d) Free operation.
 (1) When permitted by internal time-based functions, the coordination interface shall
 provide free operation of associated actuated controllers. During this operation the
 actuated controller shall operate without supervision by the coordination interface.
 (2) Pretimed controllers, in a signal system supervised by a master coordination interface,
 shall revert to dial 1, reset 1 or internal time based coordination during free operation at
 the user's option.
 
 1092.4.3.2.1 Each coordination interface shall have the following minimum operational characteristics:
 (a) T hree cycles.
 
 751
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (b) Eight splits.
 (c) Eight force off periods per split.
 (d) T hree offsets per cycle.
 (e) Selectable recall by signal plan.
 1092.4.3.2.2 Each coordination interface shall have all of the following methods of synchronizing to the
 master sync pulse:
 (a) Dwell. T he coordinator shall establish a new offset by stopping the cycle timer in the
 coordinated phase(s) green, until the new offset value is reached.
 (b) Dwell with Interrupt. T he coordinator shall establish a new offset by stopping the cycle timer
 in the coordinated phase(s) green. T he maximum time the coordinator can dwell shall be adjustable
 from 1 to 99 seconds.
 (c) Shortway. T he coordinator shall establish a new offset by the shortest route possible.
 1092.4.3.2.3 Each master coordination interface shall be furnished with necessary relays and internal
 functions in the controller to provide the following supervisory functions:
 (a) Semi-actuated operation.
 (b) Fixed cycle length operation.
 (c) Free operation.
 (d) Cycle T ransfer (cycle 1 to cycle 2, cycle 3 or cycle 4 and vice versa; cycle 2 to cycle 3 or
 cycle 4 and vice versa; cycle 3 to cycle 4 and vice versa).
 1092.4.3.2.4 Each controller shall be capable of permitting the manual selection of the following:
 (a) Cycle Length 1, 2, 3, 4 or System.
 (b) Offset 1, 2, 3, 4 or System.
 (c) Semi-actuated operation, fixed cycle length operation or free operation.
 1092.4.4 Re mote "O N - O FF" Switch (Pe de strian Inte rval Se que nce ). T he following type of "On Off" switches shall be furnished as specified:
 (a) Type I. Type I switches shall consist of one manually operated heavy-duty switch in a circuit
 not exceeding 18 volts. Necessary relays shall be located in the controller cabinet for including or
 excluding the pedestrian phase in the phasing sequence or switching signals between flashing and
 sequence operation. T his shall be accomplished by energizing or de-energizing the pedestrian signal
 indications and push-button detectors. T he switch shall be enclosed in a weatherproof, cast
 aluminum housing equipped for post mounting. T he housing shall have a suitable lock, the key of
 which shall not unlock the controller cabinet. T he housing shall be tapped for conduit.
 (b) Type II. T he Type II switch shall be operationally identical to the Type I, except the switch
 may be 120 volts and shall be located inside the police panel of the controller cabinet.
 1092.4.5 Inte rconne ct Type s.
 1092.4.5.1 Time Base Coordination Inte rface . T he time base coordination interface shall consist of
 internal time base coordination functions in the controller.
 
 752
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (a) T iming base shall be the 60-hertz power line frequency. T iming error due to power failure or
 low voltage shall not exceed ± 0.005 percent during these conditions. Changes to and from
 standard time and daylight time shall be programmed to automatically occur at the specified times.
 Memory and timing shall be maintained for at least 48 hours during an alternating current power
 failure. A power failure indicator shall be provided.
 (b) T he interface shall have a multi-digit security access code or key and lock security access.
 (c) T he interface shall be zero time based, settable to the second, programmable for 52 weeks,
 accommodate at least three weekly programs, twelve day programs and no less than twelve
 exception day programs. Total event changes shall be a minimum of 160. Interrogation of the
 interface to determine the year, month, day, hour, minute, second, a.m. and p.m., as well as
 program information programmed in the unit, shall be possible. Indicators shall show the condition
 of all outputs.
 (d) T he interface shall permit the controller to operate free or in coordination. When in
 coordination, all maximum green limits shall be inhibited. T he interface shall be capable of
 continuously generating no less than four cycle lengths from 40 to 255 seconds.
 (e) T he interface shall be capable of continuously generating eight individual force-off commands
 in each cycle length even though the use all of the force-off commands may not be necessary. T he
 interface shall also place a continuous call to the detector inputs of the coordinated phases.
 Position of the force-off and continuous call functions shall be settable at any percentage point or
 seconds in any selected cycle length.
 (f) T he first program of the day shall be implemented at the beginning of the minute selected.
 When changing from one cycle length to another while in the coordination mode, the change to
 the new cycle length shall not occur until the present cycle length has terminated. If the controller
 is operated in the free mode between cycle lengths, the next cycle length programmed shall begin
 at the beginning of the minute selected.
 (g) T he interface shall be furnished with the capability of generating a daily reference point at
 which time all cycles are resynchronized. T his daily reference point shall be either 12:00 midnight
 or a selectable time of which 12:00 midnight could be selected. T he resynchronization reference
 time is an arbitrary point in time that marks the beginning of all cycles on a daily basis.
 (h) When designated, the interface shall be capable of generating an absolute reference point at
 which time all cycles are resynchronized. T his absolute reference point shall be a selectable time
 by date and hour and minute that marks the beginning of all cycles.
 (i) While under coordination, the designated coordinated phase(s) shall be capable of releasing
 from a hold status and operating in the actuated mode. T he controller unit shall operate in
 actuated mode from a designated hold release point to the corresponding force-off point(s) of the
 coordinated phase(s).
 (j) T hree instruction manuals covering operational information shall be furnished with each
 interface.
 1092.4.5.2 Close d Loop Syste ms.
 1092.4.5.2.1 Equipme nt. New systems shall be compatible with any existing components in the system.
 1092.4.5.2.1.1 Syste m Software . T he system software shall be designed to operate a traffic-responsive
 signal system with two-way communications between all local controllers and the system master. T he
 software shall be capable of time-of-day system operation and a mix of time-of-day and traffic responsive
 operation. T he software shall also provide for two-way communication between the system master and a
 remote personal computer, via a dial-up modem and a direct connect to the system master. T he system
 software shall be fully compatible with all equipment supplied in the system and shall be compatible with
 the latest Windows operating system. T he software shall be new and in the original packaging provided by
 the manufacturer. T he system manufacturer shall provide software updates at no cost to the Commission
 
 753
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 for a period of at least two years from the date of final acceptance of the project. All licensing issues shall
 be addressed by the contractor.
 1092.4.5.2.1.2 Close d Loop Syste m Compone nts. T he principal components of the closed loop system
 shall consist of the system master, local intersection controller(s) and a modem.
 1092.4.5.2.1.2.1 Syste m Maste r. T he system master controller shall consist of a NEMA or Type 170
 microcomputer signal controller as specified in the plans, prom module and all necessary connectors and
 cables. T he system master controller shall be installed in the local controller cabinet designated on the
 plans. A separate cabinet will not be required.
 1092.4.5.2.1.2.2 Local Inte rse ction Controlle r. T he local controller assembly shall consist of a NEMA
 or Type 170 complete actuated traffic controller assembly, as specified in the plans and in accordance with
 these specifications.
 1092.4.5.2.1.3 Cabine t Acce ssorie s.
 1092.4.5.2.1.3.1 Te le phone Inte rface Pane l. T he panel shall provide for interfacing of a leased,
 unconditioned telephone drop to a Hayes compatible modem that connects to the on-street system master.
 T he panel shall be fabricated from 0.125-inch sheet aluminum with deburred edges and rounded corners.
 T he panel shall be mounted on the inside of the cabinet as directed by the engineer. A telephone network
 interface, such as a Siecor CAL3000 or other approved interface acceptable to the local telephone
 company, shall be attached to the aluminum panel. T he telephone interface shall include the installation of
 all necessary equipment to connect the interface to the telephone drop. T he contractor shall be responsible
 for the installation of the telephone line. T he system acceptance test shall not begin until the telephone
 line is in operation.
 1092.4.5.2.1.3.2 Extra Se rvice O utle t. One extra duplex service outlet shall be provided in the controller
 cabinet housing of the system master. T he extra duplex service outlet shall not be located on the door of
 the cabinet. T he receptacle shall be connected to the 120 volts alternating current auxiliary circuit in the
 cabinet.
 1092.4.5.2.1.3.3 Inte rconne ct Pane l. T he interconnect panel shall provide for system communication
 between the system master and local intersection controller units. An interconnect panel shall be provided
 in each controller cabinet. T he panel may include terminations for system detector inputs and other
 auxiliary input/output functions. All controller assemblies shall be configured with inputs for system
 detectors. T he panel shall be fabricated from 0.125-inch sheet aluminum with deburred edges and rounded
 corners. T he panel shall be mounted on the inside of the cabinet on the left side. Over-voltage protectors
 shall be provided and shall be an encapsulated, three-element gas tube type equipped to mate with a tencircuit Buchannan Connector PnPcB1B. As a minimum, the over-voltage protection ratings shall be:
 (a) Primary surge current – 10 kiloamps (80 x 20 us, waveshape).
 (b) Secondary protector: Solid state clamps 1.5 kilowatts.
 (c) Response time < 5 nanoseconds.
 (d) Clamp voltage – 8 volts.
 1092.4.5.2.1.3.4 Door Alarm. A limiting switch shall be installed and wired to activate an alarm when the
 cabinet door is opened.
 1092.4.5.2.1.3.5 Dial-Up Mode m. T he modem shall be in accordance with Sec 1092.4.6 and shall be
 installed in the controller cabinet housing of the on-site system master.
 1092.4.5.3 Twiste d Pair Inte rconne ct. If 3-pair cable is specified, the interconnect cable for system
 communication between the on-street master and local controllers shall be 16 AWG, stranded copper
 conductor, twisted pairs individually shielded. T he cable shall be PVC insulated, aluminum shielded, in
 accordance with specifications of Belden No. 1037A. Each interconnect cable shall have three pairs. Each
 
 754
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 pair shall be wired to a terminal strip on the interconnect panel. Each shield shall be grounded on at least
 one end.
 1092.4.5.4 Wire le ss Inte rconne ct.
 1092.4.5.4.1 Wire le ss Close d Loop Syste m Compone nts. T he wireless system shall consist of a fully
 operational wireless interconnect system between the system master and all local controllers. Components
 shall include telemetry radios, interface cables between the radios and signal controllers, radio power supply
 and handheld diagnostic/programming keypads.
 1092.4.5.4.1.1 Te le me try Radios. T he telemetry radio shall be an unlicensed frequency hopping spread
 spectrum and shall be a Microwave Data Systems, Model 9810 or equivalent, in accordance with the
 following:
 Item
 
 Requirement
 902-928 Megahertz FCC P art 15 Spread Spectrum
 Band or1.2 Gigahertz FCC P art 15 Spread Spectrum Band
 Frequency Hopping Range 8 Selectable Zones @ 128 frequencies – 1019 total frequencies
 Frequency Stability
 ± 1.5 ppm @ -20 to 140 F
 Data Interface
 RS232 (or as required by the system)
 Data Interface Rate
 Std. Baud Rates up to 19200 bytes/second, minimum
 Latency
 <10 milliseconds typical (buffer off mode)
 Transmitting P ower Output 1 watt minimum, adjustable
 Transmitting Duty Cycle
 Continuous
 Transmitting Max Voltage
 Standing Wave Ratio
 Infinite, all phase angles
 (VWSR) (No Damage)
 Frequency Band
 
 Less than 10 -6 at -110 decibels
 Receiving Intermodulation 75 decibels, minimum
 Receiving Desensitization 65 decibels, minimum
 Receiving Spurious
 70 decibels, minimum
 Operating Humidity
 95% Relative Humidity at 104 F
 Operating Temperature
 -20 to 140 F with full performance
 Receiving Bit Error Rate
 
 1092.4.5.4.1.1.1 Telemetry radios shall provide transparent communications between signal controllers.
 All radio equipment shall be installed in the signal controller cabinets. Radio power supplies shall meet all
 requirements of the radio manufacturer, including power, temperature and humidity. All required interface
 cables and connectors shall be provided with the radios.
 1092.4.5.4.1.1.2 T he radio shall have the capability to monitor receiver signal strength and be
 programmed through a diagnostic/programming keypad. Two handheld diagnostic/ programming keypads
 for the radios shall be provided with the system.
 1092.4.5.4.1.2 Ante nna Syste m. T he antenna system shall consist of the omnidirectional antenna or
 yagi directional antenna, as specified, antenna mounts, coaxial cable and surge and lightning protection.
 Antennas shall be products manufactured by Decibel Products, Celwave, Scala or Antenna Specialists, and
 shall meet the following requirements.
 1092.4.5.4.1.2.1 O mnidire ctional Ante nna. All omnidirectional antennas shall be in accordance with
 the following:
 Item
 General Frequency Range
 Bandwidth at Rated VSWR
 VSWR
 P olarization
 Maximum P ower Input
 Connector
 Antenna Housing
 Radiating Elements
 
 Requirement
 896-960 Megahertz
 70 Megahertz, min.
 1.5:1, min.
 Vertical
 250 watts, min.
 N Female
 Fiberglass Radome
 Brass or Copper
 
 755
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 Support P ipe
 Lightning P rotection
 Rated Wind Velocity
 
 6061-T6 Aluminum
 Direct Ground
 100 mph, min.
 
 1092.4.5.4.1.2.2 Yagi Dire ctional Ante nna. All yagi directional antennas shall be in accordance with the
 following:
 Item
 General Frequency Range
 Gain
 Bandwidth at Rated VSWR
 VSWR
 Horizontal Beamwidth
 Vertical Beamwidth
 P olarization
 Maximum P ower Input
 Connector
 Radiating Elements
 Lightning P rotection
 Rated Wind Velocity
 
 Requirement
 896-960 Megahertz
 10 decibels, min.
 60 Megahertz, min.
 1.5:1, min.
 45 degrees, min.
 30 degrees, min.
 Vertical or Horizontal
 100 watts Min.
 N Female
 Gold Anodized Welded Aluminum Alloy
 Direct Ground
 100 mph Min.
 
 1092.4.5.4.1.2.2.1 Directional antennas shall be in accordance with the level of gain shown on the plans
 and with the following:
 Antenna
 G ain
 3 decibel 3 decibels, min.
 6 decibel 6 decibels, min.
 9 decibel 9 decibels, min.
 
 Vertical B eam Width
 30 degrees, min.
 16 degrees, min.
 7 degrees, min.
 
 1092.4.5.4.1.2.3 Ante nna Mounts. Mounts shall provide a rigid mounting of the specified antenna that
 will withstand winds of up to 100 mph minimum. Mounts and associated hardware shall be constructed of
 galvanized steel, aluminum or stainless steel.
 1092.4.5.4.1.2.4 RG-8/U Coaxial Cable . All antenna cable shall be a low loss, RG-8/U, Belden 9913 or
 equivalent, coaxial cable in accordance with the requirements listed below. Connectors for antenna cable
 shall be Type N male connectors constructed of silver-plated brass with a gold plated pin and soldered
 center connection.
 Item
 Impedence
 Attenuation at 900 Megahertz
 Overall Diameter
 Outer Conductor
 Inner Conductor
 Dielectric
 Outer Jacket
 
 Requirement
 50 ohms, nominal
 5.7 decibels/100 ft., max.
 0.405 in., nominal
 Tinned Copper Braid with 95% min. coverage
 0.108 in. Copper
 Foam-P olyethylene
 Black P olyvinyl Chloride
 
 1092.4.5.4.1.2.5 Ante nna Surge and Lightning Prote ction. A lightning and surge arrestor shall be
 provided for the coaxial cable in the controller cabinet. T he arrestor shall be bulkhead-mounted or flangemounted and shall be securely fastened to a grounded metal surface inside the cabinet. T he arrestor shall be
 manufactured by Polyphaser and shall be in accordance with the following:
 Item
 Throughput Energy
 Maximum Surge Current
 Turn On Voltage
 Turn On Response
 Connectors (both ends)
 Housing
 
 Requirement
 220 µj
 50 kiloamps
 600 volts
 2.5 nanoseconds
 N Female
 Aluminum
 
 756
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 Hardware
 
 Stainless Steel
 
 1092.4.5.5 Fibe r O ptic Inte rconne ct. T he fiber optic system shall consist of a fully operational fiber
 optic interconnect system between the system master and all local controllers. Components shall include
 fiber optic cable, splice cabinet, closed loop system components, modem and a fiber distribution unit.
 1092.4.5.5.1 Splice Cabine t. T he Type 336 cabinet and EIA 19-inch rack cage shall be in accordance
 with the Traffic Signal Control Specifications published by the California Business, T ransportation &
 Housing Agency, Department of T ransportation (Caltrans), dated January 1989, including all current
 addenda and revisions. Housing shall include, but will not be limited to, the enclosure, doors, latches/locks,
 hinges and door catches, ventilation, gaskets, cage supports and mounting, the rack cage, and anchor bolts.
 1092.4.5.5.1.1 Each splice cabinet shall include a fiber distribution unit to provide a termination and
 service access point for the fiber optic cables. T he fiber distribution unit shall be mounted on the 19-inch
 rack cage and shall be a modular design to support both fusion and mechanical splices of multimode and
 single mode fiber. T he single cabinet construction shall have a minimum termination/connection capacity
 of 48 fibers and four splice trays. T he connector panel, to be located at the top of the unit, shall be
 designed to accommodate stick and turn (ST ) and other standard connectors. Six ST couplings with ceramic
 inserts, designed to accommodate both single mode and multi-mode fiber, shall be provided and installed for
 future use. One single mode splice tray and one multi-mode splice tray, each with a closure for 12 fusion
 splices, as a minimum, shall be provided in each cabinet. Additional trays shall be provided as necessary to
 splice or terminate fibers in accordance with the system design and this specification.
 1092.4.5.5.1.2 T he design of the unit shall allow stacking of splice trays in a manner that permits access to
 individual trays without disturbing other trays and splicing to be conducted at a distance from the unit. T he
 lower portion of the unit shall provide for the neat storage of continuous tubes. Excess cable may be stored
 either in the fiber distribution unit or within the splice cabinet. T he unit shall provide both front and rear
 access with hinged door access and cable strain relief accommodations. T he unit and splice tray shall be
 constructed of durable aluminum designed for outdoor applications. Plastic doors may be considered for
 approval by the engineer.
 1092.4.5.5.2 Fibe r O ptic Data Link for Close d Loop Syste m. T he data link between the fiber optic
 cable and the master or local intersection NEMA or Type 170 controller arranged in a closed loop system
 shall be accomplished using a data link, referred to as a modem on the plans, compatible with daisy chain
 operation to transmit RS-232 data using fiber optics. T his data link shall be compatible with and installed in
 the NEMA or Type 170 controller unit in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations.
 1092.4.5.5.2.1 T he fiber optic data link shall be capable of operating in a full duplex mode of operation,
 employing asynchronous RS-232 data link protocols. RS-232 signals shall be converted to light and
 transmitted from data link to data link until the light is reconverted to RS-232 electrical signals sent to a
 particular controller. T he fiber optic data link shall operate in a daisy chain communication mode.
 1092.4.5.5.2.2 On the data link assembly, there shall be two pairs of clearly labeled optical emitters and
 optical detectors, designed to attach to standard ST connectors. T here shall be two clearly labeled LED's,
 one for transmit and one for receive. T hese LED's shall illuminate when the fiber optic data link is either
 receiving or transmitting at the local controller. T here shall be a slide switch labeled "M" for master
 operation and "L" for local operation.
 1092.4.5.5.2.3 In the master mode of operation, the electrical data entering the fiber optic data link from
 the controller unit shall be transmitted as optical signals in a parallel mode from each of the two emitters.
 T he optical signals received by the two detectors shall be converted to electrical signals and sent in parallel
 to the controller.
 1092.4.5.5.2.4 In the local mode of operation, optical signals received by Detector 1 shall be converted to
 electrical signals and sent to the controller unit. T hese same signals shall be regenerated and transmitted by
 Emitter 2 to the next adjacent fiber optic data link downstream in the daisy chain. Optical signals received
 by Detector 2 shall be regenerated and transmitted by Emitter 1 to the next adjacent fiber link upstream.
 Electrical signals received by Emitter 1 from the controller shall be transmitted to the next adjacent fiber
 link upstream. Regeneration shall maintain pulse fidelity within ± 0.1 percent for each data link.
 
 757
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1092.4.5.5.2.5 T he fiber optic data link shall have an emergency backup power source that allows
 continued daisy chain operation when the NEMA or Type 170 controller unit is removed or if the power to
 the controller has been turned off. T he backup power source shall provide uninterrupted operation of the
 daisy chain interconnect system, both upstream and downstream from the affected data link, for a period
 of 12 hours. An RJ11/4 jack shall be available on the assembly to interface an external data link, allowing
 fiber optic communications in four directions.
 1092.4.5.5.2.6 T he fiber optic data link shall operate with all fiber ranging from 50/125 glass to 1 mm
 plastic fiber and shall meet the following electrical requirements:
 Item
 Voltage
 Current
 Wavelength
 Data Link Sensitivity
 Data Rate
 Operating Range
 Temperature Range
 
 Requirements
 12-volt direct current
 26 milliamps continuous
 850 nanometers
 Maximum 0 decibels, Minimum –40 decibels
 100 to 19.2 k baud
 1.9 miles from data link to data link
 -30 to 165 F
 
 1092.4.5.5.2.7 Fibe r Distribution Unit. Each controller cabinet shall be equipped with a fiber distribution
 unit to provide a termination, storage and service access point for fiber optic cables. T he fibers in the
 interconnect cable(s) shall be terminated on one side and duplex jumpers shall extend on the other side to
 the data links. T he fiber distribution unit shall be a modular design to support a minimum
 termination/connection capacity of 12 fibers, one splice tray and strain relief for up to four cables. No
 splice tray will be required. T he connector panel shall be designed to accommodate ST connectors for both
 multi-mode and single mode fibers, as appropriate. ST couplings with ceramic inserts shall be provided to
 accommodate all fibers brought into the controller cabinet from the splice cabinet. T he unit shall provide
 both front and rear access with hinged door access. T he unit shall be constructed of durable aluminum
 constructed for outdoor applications. Plastic doors may be considered for approval. T he unit shall be sized
 to fit in the controller cabinet and shall be positioned to allow fiber cables to be routed with bending radii
 exceeding manufacturer's recommendation. T he unit shall not conflict with other cabinet components or
 panels. Fiber cables shall not conflict with other cabinet wiring.
 1092.4.5.5.3 Training for Fibe r O ptic Installation. When specified in the contract documents, training
 on system software and system operation shall be provided. T raining shall be conducted by qualified
 instructors and shall be provided to personnel designated by the engineer on all facets of the system.
 Personnel shall be trained to operate the system, analyze system performance and revise critical operating
 parameters based on the analysis. T he training shall be in a classroom atmosphere and shall be for a
 minimum of 16 hours over two days. T he first eight-hour training session shall be conducted prior to the
 system acceptance test. T he second eight-hour session shall be conducted at the conclusion of the system
 acceptance test. Maintenance personnel shall be trained on maintenance and repair of all serviceable
 equipment. T raining shall include field level troubleshooting and bench repair. T he training shall be for a
 minimum of eight hours in one day.
 1092.4.6 Dial Up Mode ms. T he dial-up modem shall be an auto-dial, auto-answer modem and shall be
 installed in the controller cabinet as specified on the plans. If specified, an identical modem shall be
 installed at the central office computer facility in the MoDOT district office. T he modem shall be Hayes
 compatible capable of responding to the standard "Hayes command set" and shall be self-contained. T he
 unit shall be powered by a nominal 120-volt alternating current from the duplex service outlet provided in
 the cabinet. T he modem shall be capable of operating at all standard baud rates from 300 to 56k baud over
 a standard dial-up, unconditioned telephone line and shall be capable of reliable operation from -35 to 165
 F. Installation shall include the appropriate interface cable to connect to an RJ-11 telephone jack on the
 telephone interface panel, the RS-232 cable from the modem to the system master and all other cabling,
 connectors and incidental items necessary for operation.
 1092.4.7 De te ctors.
 1092.4.7.1 Induction De te ctor Probe s. T he encapsulated induction detector probe shall detect the
 
 758
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 passage or presence of all vehicles with a standard induction loop detector amplifier. T he induction detector
 probe shall operate in a temperature range from -35 to 165 F with 0 to 100 percent humidity. T he
 operating field intensity range shall be 0.2 to 1.0 oersted with a nominal inductance of 20 microhenries
 plus 20 microhenries per 100 feet of cable. T he nominal direct current resistance shall be 0.5 ohm plus 3.2
 ohms per 100 feet of probe cable. Induction detector probes shall be as specified on the plans and shall
 meet the following:
 (a) T he sensing probes shall be cylindrical having maximum dimensions of 7/8-inch diameter by 4
 inches long. T he sensing probes shall be suitable for installation in a one-inch diameter bored hole.
 T he interconnecting four-conductor cable and lead-in cable shall be suitable for installation in a
 1/4-inch wide pavement sawed slot.
 (b) T he jacket on the interconnecting cable and the casing on the sensing probe shall be an
 abrasion resistant polyurethane elastomer. T he device shall be impervious to moisture and
 chemically resistant to all normal motor vehicle petroleum products. Lead-in cables shall be
 shielded, chemical resistant and completely waterproof.
 (c) T he combined probe sets, manufacturer specified lead-in cable and detector probe shall detect
 all vehicles up to a lead-in cable length of 750 feet with up to six probes per set.
 (d) T he conductor cable from the probes to the detector panel in the controller assembly shall be
 as specified by the detector manufacturer, shall be continuous and unspliced and shall be a minimum
 of 50 feet in length. Probes shall be assembled in a set to form a vehicle detector as shown on the
 plans. No more than six probes shall be assembled as a set. T he cables between probes shall be long
 enough to provide the spacing shown on the plans plus 5 feet. If spacing is not shown on the
 plans, 15 feet of cable shall be provided between probes. Each set of probes shall have one lead-in
 cable.
 1092.4.7.2 Pe de strian Push Button. Pedestrian push-button detectors shall be of the pressure-activated
 type with essentially no moving parts. T he housing shall be black, round in shape and shaped to fit the
 curvature of the post to which it is attached and shall provide a rigid installation. Contacts shall be
 normally open, entirely insulated from the housing and actuator, and have connecting terminals. T he
 housing shall have one outlet tapped for ½ inch pipe. T he actuator shall be a minimum of 2 inches in
 diameter, raised, contrast visually with the housing and be made of brass or corrosion-resistant metal alloy
 or non-metallic material. A maximum force of 5 pounds shall be required to activate the switch. Switch
 shall be of the solid-state electronic, piezo type, T he operating voltage shall not exceed 24 volts. T he
 entire assembly shall be weatherproof, secure against electrical shock to the user and vandal resistant.
 Entire assembly shall be rated to operate between –30 degrees F to 165 degrees F and shall not allow ice to
 form such to impede the operation of the button.
 1092.4.7.3 Induction Loop De te ctors. Induction loop vehicle detectors shall detect a vehicle stopped
 within the field of the loop or passing over the loop at speeds up to 80 mph. Induction loop detectors shall
 be card rack mounted. For double controller cabinets, card rack assemblies and detectors shall be installed in
 the same compartment as each respective associated controller.
 1092.4.7.4 NEMA Card Rack Asse mblie s. T he supporting and connecting rack shall contain space for a
 minimum of two power supplies and shall have a minimum of eight card positions for two-channel detector
 units. Upper and lower slide guides shall be provided for the power supply and each detector card. Where
 detectors are specified, the rack and power supplies shall be included with the detectors, and no direct
 payment will be made.
 (a) T he card mounting rack shall be attached to the controller cabinet by a hinge or pivot
 assembly, which allows the rack to rotate horizontally so as to expose the rack wiring to facilitate
 maintenance operations. T he rack shall be positioned to rotate out freely 90 degrees without
 conflicting with other wiring, equipment or the controller cabinet. Sufficient wire lengths shall be
 provided for rotation. T he rack shall not block the back panel or other termination panels.
 (b) T he power supply shall be capable of supplying a minimum of 200 milliamps to each detection
 channel position. T he power supply shall be capable of operating a full rack of time delay
 detectors regardless of the amount and type of detectors required. Each power supply channel shall
 
 759
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 power no more than one detector card. Each channel shall be individually fused.
 (c) Each card rack detector shall have a regulator for the power input. T he regulator shall have the
 appropriate power and voltage rating for operation of the detector.
 (d) Card racks shall mate with a 44-terminal, double row, 0.156-inch contact spacing, Cinch Jones
 card edge connection 50-44A-30M or equivalent. Input/output connector pin terminations shall be
 in accordance with NEMA Specification T S. All useable functions shall be fully wired for use.
 (e) All circuitry shall be of solid state, temperature compensating components.
 (f) Unless shown otherwise on the plans, each detector in the card rack shall be associated with the
 appropriate phase as follows:
 Channel
 1
 2
 
 Card Position
 1
 2
 3 4 5
 6
 7 8
 ø 1 ø 1 or 6 ø 6 ø 6 ø 3 ø 3 or 8 ø 8 ø 8
 ø 5 ø 5 or 2 ø 2 ø 2 ø 7 ø 7 or 4 ø 4 ø 4
 
 (g) Each detector channel shall be clearly labeled with phase and direction.
 1092.4.7.4.1 Card Rack De te ctors. Card rack detectors shall meet the following requirements:
 (a) Card rack-mounted detectors shall incorporate two detection channels.
 (b) Each detector channel shall have at least a two-frequency selection capability, at least two
 levels of operational sensitivity and shall be capable of tuning to a minimum inductance range of
 70 to 1000 microhenries.
 (c) All controls and indications shall be mounted on the front panel of the sensing unit, with the
 exception of extension and delay timing controls on card rack mounted detectors.
 (d) A manual control shall be provided for each channel to select pulse or full presence operation.
 (e) Each detector channel, after installation and initial adjustment, shall automatically tune to
 various loop configurations ranging in size from 6 x 6 feet minimum to 6 x 100 feet maximum.
 T he maximum lead-in length shall be 750 feet.
 (f) Each detector channel shall time out and retune automatically if a continuous vehicle
 occupation of the loop field for a nominal time of 10 to 30 minutes is sensed.
 (g) In the event of power loss to the detector or channel, a continuous call shall be made to the
 controller.
 (h) All circuitry shall be of solid state, digital design and incorporate temperature-compensating
 components, with the exception of the output relay.
 (i) If specified, each channel shall have extension and delay timing features, as follows:
 (1) Delay timing range from 0 to 30 seconds in 1.0-second increments.
 (2) Extension timing range from 0 to 7.5 seconds in a maximum of 0.5-second
 increments.
 (j) T he sensing unit shall have a light that will illuminate when a vehicle is within the loop field.
 Other visual indications of relay closure may be used if approved by the engineer.
 (k) Each detector and channel shall be in accordance with NEMA Standard Publication T S.
 1092.4.7.4.2 Dual O utput Card Rack De te ctors. Dual output card rack detectors shall be in accordance
 
 760
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 with NEMA and shall provide two relay outputs per induction loop detector. One output shall be capable of
 pulse detection for the purpose of traffic counting, speed and occupancy measurements. T he other output
 shall be capable of presence detection. Each detector output shall be assigned to a separate detector input
 into the controller.
 1092.4.7.5 Calling De te ctor Re lay. A calling detector relay shall operate with any detector and allow the
 detector to place only one actuation when the red indication is being displayed to the associated phase. T he
 relay shall be self-contained.
 1092.4.7.6 Microwave Ve hicle De te ctors. T he unit shall detect all vehicles moving within the field of
 detection at speeds from 2 to 80 mph. T he unit shall have a minimum detection range from 3 to 200 feet
 for all vehicles. T he pattern spread of the detection field shall be no more than 16 degrees. T he unit shall
 be self-tuning and capable of continuous operation over a temperature range of -35 to 165 F. T he unit shall
 be microprocessor based using Doppler microwave at an operating frequency of 10.525 GHz. T he unit shall
 have FCC certification and shall be tested to the applicable FCC specifications. T he unit shall be capable of
 side-fire mount or overhead mount. T he enclosure shall be constructed of aluminum or stainless steel and
 shall be water resistant. T he unit shall be capable of detecting directional traffic and the direction shall be
 user selectable. All user operated controls and adjustments shall be clearly marked and easily accessible. T he
 unit shall have a relay detection output to the controller with a minimum 5-amp rating and shall be
 designed to place a constant call to the controller in the event of any failure. T he unit shall have an easily
 accessible indicator showing activation of detection relay. Required wiring shall be as specified by the
 manufacturer. Mounting hardware for the type of mounting shown on the plans and power supply
 equipment shall be as specified by the manufacturer and shall be provided with the unit.
 1092.4.7.7 Vide o De te ction Syste m.
 1092.4.7.7.1 Syste m Re quire me nts. T he video detection system shall provide flexible detection zone
 placement at any location and at any orientation within the combined field of view of the image
 processors. Preferred presence detector zone configurations shall be a box or lines placed across lanes of
 traffic or lines placed parallel with lanes of traffic. Detection zones shall be capable of overlapping.
 1092.4.7.7.1.1 T he detection zones shall be created by using a track ball to draw the detection zones on the
 video image. A graphical user interface shall be built into the automatic control unit (ACU) and displayed
 on a video monitor or computer. Editing of previously defined detector configurations to fine-tune
 detection zone placement shall be possible.
 1092.4.7.7.1.2 When a vehicle is detected by crossing a detection zone, there shall be a visual change on
 the video display, such as a flashing symbol or a change in color or intensity to verify proper operation of
 the detection system.
 1092.4.7.7.1.3 Overall performance of the video detection system shall be comparable to inductive loops.
 Using camera optics and in the absence of occlusion, the system shall be able to detect vehicle presence
 with 95 percent accuracy under normal day and night conditions with only slight deterioration in
 performance under adverse weather conditions, including fog, snow and rain. When visibility exceeds the
 capabilities of the camera, the system shall default to placing a call on all detectors.
 1092.4.7.7.1.4 T he video detection system shall be programmable via one dial up modem connection at a
 minimum of 19,200 bytes per second to the camera(s). Still image and real time detection displays to a
 remote computer using supplied system software through the modem shall be provided.
 1092.4.7.7.2 Syste m Compone nts. T he video detection system will be defined as the complete assembly
 of all required equipment and components for detection of vehicles. Each system shall consist of the video
 camera(s), lightning arrester for video cabling, an ACU, a track ball, software and license, if applicable, for
 system control via a computer, one dial-up modem, 56.6 kilobytes per second maximum connection and
 V.90 compliant and a monitor. All camera views shall be obtainable without requiring the disconnection and
 reconnection of cables within the system.
 1092.4.7.7.2.1 Syste m Software . T he system shall include software that detects vehicles in multiple lanes
 using only the video image. Detection zones shall be defined using a video monitor and a pointing device to
 
 761
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 place the zones on a video image, which may include a laptop computer. A minimum of 12 detection zones
 per camera shall be available.
 1092.4.7.7.2.2 Automatic Control Unit. T he bus connections used to interconnect modules of the ACU
 shall be gold-plated DIN connectors. Serial communications to a computer shall be through an RS-232/RS422 serial port. T he port shall have the capability to access detection system data as well as the real-time
 imagery needed to show detector actuations. A subminiature "D" connector on the front of the ACU shall
 be used for serial communications with a computer running supplied system software.
 1092.4.7.7.2.2.1 T he equipment shall be provided with either a NEMA T S1 or NEMA T S2 interface as
 shown on the plans.
 1092.4.7.7.2.2.1.1 For T S1 systems, the ACU process unit shall be equipped with a T S1 detector interface
 for a minimum of 16 detector outputs or 32 detector outputs, if required by specifications. NEMA red/green
 inputs for each phase shall be available to provide delay/extend functions, either through the detector or
 the controller. Logic output levels shall be compatible with the T S1. A subminiature "D" connector on the
 front of the ACU shall be used for interfacing to these outputs.
 1092.4.7.7.2.2.1.2 For T S2 systems, the ACU processor unit shall be equipped with a T S2 Type 1 detector
 interface, where detector information is transmitted serially via an RS-485 data path. NEMA red/green
 inputs for each phase shall be available to provide delay/extend functions, either through the detector or
 the controller. A 15-pin subminiature "D" connector, meeting the requirements of the T S2 standard, shall
 be used for the serial detector output. A minimum of 32 detector outputs will be required.
 1092.4.7.7.2.2.2 T he video detection system shall be provided for either single camera or multiple camera
 installations as shown on the plans.
 1092.4.7.7.2.2.2.1 For single camera installations, the ACU shall have an RS-170 (NT SC) video input to
 process the camera or any other synchronous video source in real-time. T he ACU shall have an RS-170
 (NT SC) video output.
 1092.4.7.7.2.2.2.2 For multiple camera installations, the ACU shall have a minimum of four RS-170
 (NT SC) composite video inputs to process the synchronous video cameras or any other synchronous video
 source in real-time. A fifth video input shall be provided to allow connection of a local surveillance camera
 or other non-detection video source. T he video from the auxiliary input shall not be processed for video
 detection. T he ACU shall have an RS-170 (NT SC) composite video output, which may correspond to any
 of the video inputs, as selected remotely via RS-232 or locally by front panel switch. Multiple video inputs
 requiring external cable connections will not be permitted.
 1092.4.7.7.2.2.3 T he ACU or computer shall store a minimum of two separate detection zone
 configurations. T he ACU shall be capable of switching to any of the different detector patterns at the
 request of the user and shall be a menu selection with a track ball.
 1092.4.7.7.2.3 Monitor. T he monitor shall have a 9-inch screen, an NT SC-M system and BNC video inout connections.
 1092.4.7.7.2.4 Vide o Came ra and Housing. T he ACU supplier shall furnish the video camera for traffic
 detection. T he camera shall produce a video image of vehicles under normal roadway lighting conditions
 regardless of time of day. T he video shall produce a clear image for scenes with a luminance from 0.009 to
 929 footcandles.
 1092.4.7.7.2.4.1 T he camera shall provide a minimum resolution of 500 lines horizontal and 350 lines
 vertical.
 1092.4.7.7.2.4.2 T he camera shall include an electronic shutter or auto iris control based on average scene
 luminance and shall be equipped with an auto iris lens.
 1092.4.7.7.2.4.3 T he camera shall have a variable focal length. T he maximum aperture of the lens shall
 not be smaller than f1.8 and the minimum aperture shall not be larger than f300. T he camera shall have a
 
 762
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 horizontal field of view ranging from a minimum angle of view between 5 degrees and 10 degrees wide to a
 maximum angle of view 45 degrees or more. T he adjustments for focus and focal length shall be made
 without opening up the camera housing.
 1092.4.7.7.2.4.4 T he camera shall be contained in an enclosure that is waterproof and dust-tight to
 NEMA-4 specifications. A heater shall be incorporated in the camera to prevent the formation of
 condensation and to assure proper operation of the lens' iris mechanism. T he heater shall not interfere
 with the operation of the image sensor electronics and shall not cause interference with the video signal.
 T he enclosure shall allow the camera to be rotated in the field during installation.
 1092.4.7.7.2.4.5 T he housing shall be equipped with a sun shield that prevents sunlight from directly
 entering the lens. T he sun shield shall include a provision for water diversion to prevent water from flowing
 in the camera field of view.
 1092.4.7.7.2.4.6 T he total weight of the enclosure, camera, lens, housing, sun shield and mounting bracket
 shall be less than 10 pounds.
 1092.4.7.7.2.5 Cable . Coaxial cable shall be a 75 ohm, precision video cable with 20 AWG solid or
 stranded bare copper conductor, maximum of 10.1 ohms/m Nom. direct current resistance, solid
 polyethylene insulating dielectric, 96 percent minimum tinned copper double-braided shield with a black
 polyethylene outer covering. T he signal attenuation shall not exceed 0.8 decibels per 100 feet at 10
 megahertz. Nominal outside diameter shall be
 0.305 inches. T he cable shall be in accordance with Belden Type 8281, West Penn P806 or approved equal.
 1092.4.7.7.2.5.1 Seventy-five ohm BNC plug connectors shall be used with coaxial cable. T he supplier of
 the video detection system shall approve the coaxial cable, BNC connectors and crimping tool. T he
 manufacturer's instructions shall be followed.
 1092.4.7.7.2.5.2 Multi-conductor cable shall be per the manufacturer's recommendations and in accordance
 with Sec 1061.
 1092.4.7.7.2.6 Mainte nance and Support. T he supplier shall maintain an ongoing program of technical
 support and software updates for the video detection system following expiration of the warranty period.
 T he supplier shall maintain an adequate inventory of parts to support maintenance and repair of the video
 detection system.
 1092.4.7.7.2.7 Warranty of Vide o De te ction Syste m. T he video detection system shall be warranted to
 be free of defects in material and workmanship for a minimum of two years. During the warranty period,
 technical support from factory certified personnel or factory certified installers shall be available from the
 supplier. Ongoing software support by the supplier shall include updates for the ACU and computer software
 and shall be provided at no cost to the Commission during the warranty period. T he update of the ACU
 software to be National T ransportation Communications for IT S Protocol (NT CIP) compliant shall be
 included.
 1092.4.7.7.2.8 Training of Vide o De te ction Syste m. A minimum of one day of training shall be
 provided in the operation, setup and maintenance of the video detection system.
 1092.5 De te ctor Loop Se alant. Loop sealant shall have the following minimum characteristics:
 (a) T he loop sealant used to fill the saw cuts and other gaps shall be of a type intended for and
 designed to be used as traffic loop embedding. T he sealant shall be designed for installation when
 the surface temperature of the roadway is between 40 and 120 F and exhibit minimal shrinkage and
 stringing during and after installation. T he curing time of the sealant shall be a maximum of 72
 hours. Cured sealant shall retain permanent flexibility to 0 F, be temperature stable and ensure the
 integrity of the loop detector installation from -40 to 200 F. T he loop sealant shall adhere to the
 roadway pavement and resist the effects of weather, including freeze-thaw cycles, de-icing
 chemicals, salts, gasoline and motor oils, such that the operation of the detector is not affected.
 (b) T he three types of allowable loop sealant will be two-part polyester resin, one-part moisture
 
 763
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 curing polyurethane and hot-melt bituminous.
 (c) T he loop sealant shall provide a minimum shelf life of nine months. Prior to the installation
 of any detector loop sealant, the MSDS or an OSHA Form 20 along with the manufacturer's
 technical data sheet, shall be submitted to the engineer. Any sealant used on loop detectors shall
 meet the approval of the engineer.
 1092.6 Warranty. All traffic controller assemblies, excluding video detection systems, shall be warranted
 by the manufacturer to be free from defects in workmanship and material for at least one year from the
 date of project acceptance. Any components found to be defective during the warranty period shall be
 replaced free of charge. All warranties provided shall be transferred to the Commission upon project
 acceptance. Video detection systems shall be warranted in accordance with Sec 1092.4.7.7.
 
 764
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Table of Contents
 100 General Conditions of the Contract
 
 4
 
 101 Definition of Terms
 
 17
 
 102 Bidding Requirements and Conditions
 
 26
 
 103 Award and Execution of Contract
 
 35
 
 104 Scope of Work
 
 37
 
 105 Control of Work
 
 46
 
 106 Control of Material
 
 63
 
 107 Legal Relations and Responsibility to the Public
 
 70
 
 108 Prosecution and Progress
 
 77
 
 109 Measurement and Payment
 
 89
 
 110 State and Federal Wage Rates and Other Requirements
 
 99
 
 200 Grading and Removals
 
 5
 
 201 Clearing and Grubbing
 
 101
 
 202 Removal of Roadways and Buildings
 
 104
 
 202.10 Plugging and Closure of Wells
 
 106
 
 202.20 Septic Tank Plugging and Disposal
 
 106
 
 202.30 Removal of Improvements for Roadway Contracts
 
 107
 
 202.40 Demolition and Removal of Buildings
 
 107
 
 202.50 Removal of Contaminated Material and Storage Tanks
 
 111
 
 202.60 Individual Wastewater Lagoon Closures
 
 113
 
 203 Roadway and Drainage Excavation, Embankment and Compaction
 
 115
 
 204 Embankment Monitoring
 
 127
 
 204.10 Settlement Gauges
 
 127
 
 204.20 Pore Pressure Measurement Devices
 
 127
 
 205 Modified Subgrade
 
 131
 
 206 Excavation for Structures
 
 133
 
 207 Linear Grading
 
 138
 
 208 Interception Ditch
 
 140
 
 209 Subgrade Preparation
 
 141
 
 210 Subgrade Compaction
 
 142
 
 211 Subgrade Scarifying
 
 143
 
 212 Subgrading and Shouldering
 
 144
 
 214 Rock Fill
 
 145
 
 215 Shaping Slopes
 
 146
 
 216 Removal of Bridge Structures
 
 147
 
 216.10 Removal of Bridges
 
 147
 
 216.20 Scarification of Bridge Decks
 
 147
 
 216.30 Seal Coat and Wearing Surface Removal
 
 147
 
 216.40 Removal and Storage of Existing Bridge Rails
 
 148
 
 216.50 Removal of Existing Bridge Decks
 
 148
 
 216.60 Partial Removal of Existing Bridge Decks
 
 149
 
 765
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 216.70 Partial Removal of Culvert and Substructure Concrete
 
 149
 
 216.80 Curb Removal
 
 150
 
 216.90 Removal of Existing Expansion Joints and Adjacent Concrete
 
 150
 
 216.100 Removal of Existing Expansion Joint Seal or Sealant
 
 151
 
 300 Bases and Aggregate Surfaces
 
 6
 
 302 Stabilized Permeable Base
 
 152
 
 303 Rock Base
 
 154
 
 304 Aggregate Base Course
 
 156
 
 310 Aggregate Surface
 
 160
 
 400 Flexible Pavements
 
 7
 
 401 Plant Mix Bituminous Base and Pavement
 
 162
 
 402 Plant Mix Bituminous Surface Leveling
 
 171
 
 403 Asphaltic Concrete Pavement
 
 175
 
 404 Bituminous Mixing Plants
 
 196
 
 407 Tack Coat
 
 202
 
 408 Prime Coat
 
 204
 
 409 Seal Coat
 
 205
 
 413 Surface T reatments
 
 208
 
 413.10 Micro-Surfacing
 
 208
 
 413.20 Scrub Seal
 
 211
 
 413.30 Ultrathin Bonded Asphalt Wearing Surface
 
 213
 
 413.31 Bonded Hot Mix Asphalt Using Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane
 
 218
 
 413.40 Bituminous Fog Sealing
 
 219
 
 413.50 Bituminous Pavement Crack Sealing
 
 220
 
 413.60 Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Joint/Crack Sealing
 
 221
 
 413.70 Bituminous Pavement Crack Filling
 
 221
 
 413.80 Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Crack Filling
 
 222
 
 500 Rigid Pavements
 
 8
 
 501 Concrete
 
 223
 
 502 Portland Cement Concrete Base and Pavement
 
 234
 
 503 Bridge Approach Slab
 
 252
 
 504 Concrete Approach Pavement
 
 253
 
 505 Bridge Deck Concrete Wearing Surface
 
 254
 
 505.10 Low Slump Concrete
 
 254
 
 505.20 Latex Modified Concrete
 
 259
 
 505.30 Silica Fume Concrete
 
 262
 
 505.40 Latex Modified High Early Strength Concrete
 
 265
 
 506 Concrete Overlays for Pavement
 
 270
 
 506.10 Bonded Concrete Overlays of Asphalt Pavements
 
 270
 
 506.20 Unbonded Concrete Overlays of Concrete Pavements
 
 272
 
 506.30 Unbonded Concrete Overlays on Asphalt Pavements
 
 276
 
 507 Strength of Concrete Using the Maturity Method
 
 600 Incidental Construction
 
 277
 
 9
 766
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 601 Field Laboratories
 
 280
 
 602 Markers
 
 282
 
 603 Water Line Installation
 
 283
 
 604 Miscellaneous Drainage
 
 285
 
 604.10 Concrete Headwalls, Drop Inlets and Manholes
 
 285
 
 604.20 Adjusting Drainage Facilitites
 
 286
 
 604.30 Adjusting House Sewer Connections
 
 286
 
 604.40 Pipe Collars
 
 287
 
 604.50 Connecting Pipe to Existing Structures
 
 287
 
 604.60 Slotted Drains
 
 287
 
 605 Underdrainage
 
 289
 
 605.10 Pipe-Aggregate Pavement Edge Drain
 
 289
 
 605.20 Geocomposite Pavement Edge Drain
 
 291
 
 605.30 Pipe-Aggregate Pavement Cross Drain
 
 291
 
 605.40 Structural Underdrain
 
 292
 
 605.50 French Underdrain
 
 293
 
 605.60 Outlet Pipes and Splash Pads
 
 293
 
 605.70 Aggregate Drains
 
 294
 
 606 Guardrial, Crashworth End Terminals, One-Strand Access Restraint Cable and T hree-Strand
 Guard Cable
 
 295
 
 606.10 Guardrail
 
 296
 
 606.20 Blank
 
 297
 
 606.30 Crashworthy End Terminals
 
 297
 
 606.40 One-Strand Access Restraint Cable
 
 298
 
 606.50 T hree-Strand Guard Cable
 
 298
 
 607 Fencing
 
 300
 
 607.10 Chain-Link Fence
 
 300
 
 607.20 Woven Wire Fence
 
 301
 
 608 Concrete Median, Median Strip, Sidewalk, Curb Ramps, Steps and Paved Approaches
 
 303
 
 609 Paved Drainage
 
 306
 
 609.10 Concrete Curb, Gutter and Paved Ditch
 
 306
 
 609.20 Integral Curb
 
 307
 
 609.30 Asphalt Curb
 
 308
 
 609.40 Drain Basin Asphalt Curb
 
 308
 
 609.50 Blank
 
 309
 
 609.60 Rock Ditch Liner
 
 309
 
 609.70 Rock Lining
 
 310
 
 610 Pavement Smoothness
 
 311
 
 611 Embankment Protection
 
 316
 
 611.10 Blank
 
 316
 
 611.20 Blank
 
 316
 
 611.30 Rock Blanket
 
 316
 
 611.40 Blank
 
 317
 
 611.50 Revetment
 
 317
 767
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 611.60 Concrete Slope Protection
 
 317
 
 611.70 Gabions
 
 318
 
 612 Impact Attenuators
 
 320
 
 613 Pavement Repair
 
 321
 
 613.10 Full Depth Pavement Repairs
 
 321
 
 613.20 Class A Partial Depth Pavement Repairs
 
 323
 
 613.30 Class B Partial Depth Pavement Repairs
 
 326
 
 613.35 Class C Partial Depth Pavement Repair
 
 327
 
 613.40 Dowel Bar Retrofit
 
 328
 
 613.50 Cross Stitching
 
 330
 
 614 Drainage Fittings
 
 331
 
 614.10 Grates and Bearing Plates
 
 331
 
 614.20 Automatic Floodgate
 
 331
 
 614.30 Manhole Frame and Cover and Curb Inlet
 
 332
 
 616 Temporary T raffic Control
 
 333
 
 617 Concrete T raffic Control
 
 339
 
 617.10 Permanent Concrete T raffic Barrier
 
 339
 
 617.20 Temporary T raffic Barrier
 
 339
 
 617.30 T raffic Barrier Delineators
 
 341
 
 618 Mobilization
 
 342
 
 619 Pavement Edge T reatment
 
 343
 
 620 Pavement Marking
 
 344
 
 620.10 Temporary Pavement Marking
 
 344
 
 620.20 Permanent Pavement Marking
 
 348
 
 620.30 Drop-On Glass Beads
 
 351
 
 620.40 Quality Control and Quality Assurance
 
 351
 
 620.50 Pavement Marking Removal
 
 353
 
 621 Flowable Backfill
 
 354
 
 622 Pavement and Bridge Surface Removal and Texturing
 
 356
 
 622.10 Cold Milling Existing Pavement for Removal of Surface
 
 356
 
 622.20 Cold Milling Pavement for a Driving Surface
 
 357
 
 622.30 Diamond Grinding of Existing Portland Cement Concrete Pavement
 
 359
 
 622.40 Diamond Grinding of New Portland Cement Concrete Pavement
 623 Concrete Bonding Compound, Epoxy Mortar and Epoxy Polymer Concrete Overlay
 
 361
 363
 
 623.10 Concrete Bonding Compound
 
 363
 
 623.20 Epoxy Mortar
 
 363
 
 623.30 Epoxy Polymer Concrete Overlay
 
 364
 
 623.40 Polymer Concrete
 
 367
 
 624 Geotextile Construction
 
 368
 
 625 Slab Stabilization
 
 369
 
 625.10 Slab Undersealing
 
 369
 
 625.20 Slab Jacking
 
 371
 
 626 Rumble Strips
 
 373
 768
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 627 Contractor Surveying and Staking
 
 374
 
 700 Structures
 
 11
 
 701 Drilled Shafts
 
 376
 
 702 Load-Bearing Piles
 
 392
 
 703 Concrete Masonry Construction
 
 398
 
 704 Concrete Masonry Repair
 
 409
 
 705 Prestressed Concrete Members for Bridges
 
 413
 
 706 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete Structures
 
 414
 
 707 Conduit System on Structure
 
 416
 
 710 Epoxy Coated Reinforcing Steel
 
 417
 
 711 Protective Coatings for Exposed Concrete Surfaces
 
 418
 
 712 Structural Steel Construction
 
 419
 
 713 T hrie Beam for Bridge Guardrail
 
 426
 
 715 Vertical Drain at End Bents
 
 427
 
 716 Neoprene Bearings
 
 428
 
 716.10 Plain and Laminated Neoprene Bearing Pad
 
 428
 
 716.20 Laminated Neoprene Bearing Pad Assembly
 
 428
 
 716.30 Type "N" Polyetrafluoroethylene (PT FE) Bearings
 
 428
 
 717 Neoprene and Silicone Joint Systems
 
 430
 
 717.10 Preformed Compression Seal
 
 430
 
 717.20 Strip Seal
 
 430
 
 717.30 Silicone Expansion Joint Sealant
 
 431
 
 717.40 Silicone Joint Sealant for Saw Cut and Formed Joints
 
 432
 
 718 Temporary Bridge
 
 435
 
 720 Mechaznically Stabilized Earth Wall Systems
 
 437
 
 724 Pipe Culverts
 
 442
 
 725 Metal Pipe and Pipe-Arch Culverts
 
 447
 
 726 Rigid Pipe Culverts
 
 450
 
 727 Structural Plate Pipe and Structural Plate Pipe-Arch Culverts
 
 453
 
 730 T hermoplastic Pipe Culverts
 
 455
 
 731 Precast Reinforced Concrete Manholes and Drop Inlets
 
 457
 
 732 Flared End Sections
 
 458
 
 733 Precast Concrete Box Culverts
 
 460
 
 734 Installation of Pipe by Horizontal Boring Methods
 
 462
 
 735 Culvert Pipe Liner
 
 464
 
 800 Roadside Development
 
 12
 
 801 Lime and Fertilizer
 
 466
 
 802 Mulching
 
 467
 
 803 Sodding
 
 469
 
 804 Topsoil
 
 470
 
 805 Seeding
 
 471
 
 806 Pollution, Erosion and Sediment Control
 
 473
 
 806.10 Temporary Berms
 
 474
 769
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 806.20 Temporary Slope Drains
 
 475
 
 806.30 Temporary Ditch and Inlet Checks
 
 475
 
 806.50 Temporary Seeding and Mulching
 
 476
 
 806.60 Sediment T rap
 
 477
 
 806.70 Silt Fence
 
 478
 
 806.80 Temporary Pipe
 
 478
 
 806.90 Erosion Control Blankets and T urf Reinforcement Mats
 
 479
 
 806.100 Temporary Stream Crossing
 
 480
 
 806.110 Sediment Removal
 
 480
 
 808 Planting T rees, Shrubs and Other Plants
 
 482
 
 900 Traffic Control Facilities
 
 13
 
 901 Highway Lighting
 
 484
 
 902 T raffic Signals
 
 491
 
 903 Highway Signing
 
 507
 
 1000 Materials Details
 
 14
 
 1001 General Requirements for Material
 
 513
 
 1002 Aggregate for Asphaltic Concrete
 
 517
 
 1003 Aggregate for Seal Coats
 
 519
 
 1004 Graded Aggregate for Bituminous Surface
 
 521
 
 1005 Aggregate for Concrete
 
 522
 
 1006 Aggregate for Surfacing
 
 525
 
 1007 Aggregate for Base
 
 526
 
 1009 Aggregate for Drainage
 
 527
 
 1010 Select Granular Backfill for Structural Systems
 
 528
 
 1011 Geotextile
 
 530
 
 1012 Geocomposite Drainage Material
 
 532
 
 1013 Miscellaneous Drainage Material
 
 533
 
 1015 Bituminous Material
 
 534
 
 1015.10 Performance Graded Asphalt Binder
 
 536
 
 1015.20 Liquid Bituminous Material
 
 538
 
 1017 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag
 
 545
 
 1018 Fly Ash for Concrete
 
 548
 
 1019 Cement
 
 551
 
 1020 Corrugated Metallic-Coated Culvert Pipe, Pipe-Arches and End Sections
 
 554
 
 1021 Bituminous-Coated Corrugated Metal Culvert Pipe and Pipe-Arches
 
 560
 
 1022 Corrugated Metallic-Coated Steel Pipe Underdrain
 
 561
 
 1023 Structural Plate Pipe and Pipe-Arches
 
 562
 
 1024 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Culvert Pipe and Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate
 
 565
 
 1025 Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe Underdrains
 
 566
 
 1026 Reinforced Concrete Culvert Pipe
 
 567
 
 1027 Polymer-Coated Corrugated Metal Culvert Pope and Pipe-Arches
 
 571
 
 1028 Polyvinyl Chloride Culvert Pipe
 
 572
 
 1029 Fabricated Prestressed Concrete Members for Bridges
 
 575
 
 770
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1030 Vitrified Clay Sewer and Culvert Pipe
 
 583
 
 1031 Clay Drain T ile
 
 584
 
 1032 Precast Concrete Flared End Sections
 
 585
 
 1033 Precast Drainage Units
 
 586
 
 1034 Reinforced Concrete Elliptical Culvert Pipe
 
 590
 
 1035 Reinforced Concrete Arch Culvert
 
 591
 
 1036 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete
 
 592
 
 1037 Shear Connectors
 
 593
 
 1038 Bearing Pads for Structures
 
 595
 
 1039 Epoxy Resin Material
 
 598
 
 1039.10 Type II Epoxy
 
 598
 
 1039.20 Type III Epoxy
 
 598
 
 1039.30 Epoxy or Polyester Bonding Agents for Dowels
 
 598
 
 1039.40 Epoxy Bonding Agents for Resin Anchors
 
 599
 
 1039.50 Sand for Epocy Mortar
 
 600
 
 1039.60 Epoxy Polymer Concrete Overlay
 
 600
 
 1039.70 Polymer Concrete
 
 602
 
 1040 Guardrail, End Terminals, One-Strand Access Restraint Cable and T hree-Strand Guard Cable
 Material
 
 604
 
 1041 Polypropylene Culvert Pipe
 
 609
 
 1042 Highway Sign Material
 
 612
 
 1043 Fence Material
 
 616
 
 1044 Posts for Markers and Delineators
 
 620
 
 1045 Paint for Structural Steel
 
 622
 
 1046 Pipe Liner
 
 631
 
 1047 Corrugated Polyethylene Culvert Pipe
 
 632
 
 1048 Pavement Marking Material
 
 635
 
 1048.10 Temporary Pavement Marking Materials
 
 635
 
 1048.20 Permanent Pavement Marking Materials
 
 639
 
 1048.30 Drop-On Glass Beads
 
 646
 
 1049 Precast Concrete Box Culverts
 
 648
 
 1050 Lumber, T imber, Piling, Posts and Poles
 
 652
 
 1051 Slotted Drain
 
 655
 
 1052 Mechanically Stabilized Earth Wall System Components
 
 656
 
 1052.10 Metallic Soil Reinforcement
 
 656
 
 1052.20 Non-Metallic Soil Reinforcement
 
 656
 
 1052.30 MSE Panel and Sound Walls
 
 657
 
 1052.40 Small Block Wall System - Concrete Blocks
 
 660
 
 1053 Concrete Sealer
 
 662
 
 1054 Concrete Admixtures
 
 664
 
 1055 Concrete Curing Material
 
 668
 
 1056 Concrete T inting and Staining Material
 
 670
 
 1056.10 Concrete T inting Material
 
 670
 
 1056.20 Concrete Staining Material
 
 670
 771
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1057 Material for Joints
 
 671
 
 1058 Polyethylene Sheeting
 
 674
 
 1059 Protective Coating Material
 
 675
 
 1059.10 Protective Coating-Concrete Bents and Piers (Urethane)
 
 675
 
 1059.20 Protective Coating - Concrete Bents and Piers (Epoxy)
 
 675
 
 1059.30 Concrete and Masonry Protection System
 
 676
 
 1059.40 Sacrifical Graffiti Protection System
 
 677
 
 1059.50 Temporary Coating - Concrete Bents and Piers (Weathering Steel)
 
 678
 
 1060 Electrical Conduit
 
 679
 
 1061 Electrical Conductors
 
 681
 
 1062 Pull and Junction Boxes
 
 683
 
 1063 Temporary T raffic Control Devices
 
 685
 
 1064 Temporary Concrete T raffic Barrier
 
 689
 
 1065 Delineators
 
 691
 
 1066 Mortars and Grout
 
 692
 
 1067 T runcated Domes
 
 693
 
 1068 T rench Drains
 
 694
 
 1070 Water
 
 695
 
 1071 Asphalt Release Agents, Fiber Additives and Liquid Anti-Strip Additives
 
 696
 
 1073 Joint Material for Structures
 
 699
 
 1075 Centrifugally - Cast Fiberglass-Reinforced Polymer Mortar Pipe
 
 702
 
 1080 Structural Steel Fabrication
 
 703
 
 1081 Coating of Structural Steel
 
 719
 
 1091 Lighting Equipment
 
 729
 
 1092 Signal Equipment
 
 735
 
 772
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 MISSOURI
 HIGHWAYS and TRANSPORTATION
 COMMISSION
 JEFFERSON CITY, MISSOURI
 
 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND
 SUPPLEMENTAL SPECIFICATIONS TO 2017
 MISSOURI STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR
 HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION
 Effective April 1, 2018
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 CONTENTS
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 DIVISION TITLE …………..….. ........................................................................................................................................................ Page
 DIVISION 100
 SECTION 404 NATIONWIDE PERMIT GENERAL CONDITIONS ...................................................................................................... 2
 SECTION 401 WATER QUALITY CERTIFICATION CONDITIONS ................................................................................................... 6
 DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS ENTERPRISE (DBE) PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS ...................................................................... 7
 TRAINING PROVISION ......................................................................................................................................................................... 14
 OPTIONAL ROLLER COMPACTED CONCRETE SHOULDERS AND MAINLINE ........................................................................ 16
 ASPHALT CEMENT PRICE INDEX...................................................................................................................................................... 22
 SAFETY PLAN ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 23
 SAFETY EDGESM .................................................................................................................................................................................... 24
 E-CONSTRUCTION ................................................................................................................................................................................ 24
 ELECTRONIC INFORMATION FOR BIDDER’S AUTOMATION ..................................................................................................... 25
 DIVISION 600
 "RATE OUR WORK ZONE" SIGNS ...................................................................................................................................................... 26
 "POINT OF PRESENCE" SIGNS ............................................................................................................................................................ 26
 SERVICE SIGNING ................................................................................................................................................................................ 26
 REVISIONS TO 2017 MISSOURI STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION
 SECTION 101-DEFINITION OF TERMS .............................................................................................................................................. 27
 SECTION 104-SCOPE OF WORK .......................................................................................................................................................... 28
 SECTION 107-LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC ............................................................................. 29
 SECTION 202-REMOVAL OF ROADWAYS AND BUILDINGS ........................................................................................................ 29
 SECTION 407-TACK COAT................................................................................................................................................................... 29
 SECTION 408-PRIME COAT ................................................................................................................................................................. 29
 SECTION 409-SEAL COAT ................................................................................................................................................................... 29
 SECTION 501-CONCRETE .................................................................................................................................................................... 29
 SECTION 608 CONCRETE MEDIAN, MEDIAN STRIP, SIDWALK, CURB RAMPS, STEPS AND PAVED APPROACHES ....... 30
 SECTION 616 TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL ............................................................................................................................ 30
 SECTION 622-PAVEMENT AND BRIDGE SURFACE REMOVAL AND TEXTURING .................................................................. 31
 SECTION 625-SLAB STABILIZATION ................................................................................................................................................ 31
 SECTION 701-DRILLED SHAFTS ........................................................................................................................................................ 31
 SECTION 702-LOAD-BEARING PILES ................................................................................................................................................ 32
 SECTION 703-CONCRETE MASONARY CONSTRUCTION ............................................................................................................. 33
 SECTION 717-FLEXIBLE JOINT SYSTEMS ........................................................................................................................................ 34
 SECTION 733-PRECAST CONCRETE BOX CULVERTS ................................................................................................................... 34
 SECTION 808-PLANTING TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER PLANTS ............................................................................................... 35
 SECTION 901-HIGHWAY LIGHTING .................................................................................................................................................. 35
 SECTION 902-TRAFFIC SIGNALS ....................................................................................................................................................... 35
 SECTION 903-HIGHWAY SIGNING..................................................................................................................................................... 35
 SECTION 1001-GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MATERIAL ....................................................................................................... 36
 SECTION 1018-FLY ASH FOR CONCRETE ........................................................................................................................................ 36
 SECTION 1048-PAVEMENT MARKING MATERIAL ........................................................................................................................ 37
 SECTION 1055-CONCRETE CURING MATERIAL ............................................................................................................................. 37
 SECTION 1057-MATERIAL FOR JOINTS ............................................................................................................................................ 37
 SECTION 1091-LIGHTING EQUIPMENT ............................................................................................................................................ 38
 SECTION 1092-SIGNAL EQUIPMENT ................................................................................................................................................. 39
 
 1
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 SECTION 404 NATIONWIDE PERMIT GENERAL CONDITIONS
 04/17
 General Conditions. The following general conditions shall be followed in order for authorization by a Nationwide Permit
 (NWP) to be valid. Permit authorization from U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) may have additional conditions that will
 be binding to the project. The contractor shall refer to the permit authorization letter included in the contract.
 1.0 Navigation. No activity shall cause more than a minimal adverse effect on navigation.
 2.0 Aquatic Life Movements. No activity shall substantially disrupt the necessary life-cycle movements of those species of
 aquatic life indigenous to the waterbody, including those species that normally migrate through the area, unless the activity's
 primary purpose is to impound water. All permanent and temporary crossings of waterbodies shall be suitably culverted,
 bridged, or otherwise designed and constructed to maintain low flows to sustain the movement of those aquatic species. If a
 bottomless culvert cannot be used, then the crossing should be designed and constructed to minimize adverse effects
 to aquatic life movements.
 3.0 Spawning Areas. Activities in spawning areas during spawning seasons must be avoided to the maximum extent practical.
 Activities that result in the physical destruction (e.g., through excavation, fill or downstream smothering by substantial turbidity)
 of an important spawning area are not authorized.
 4.0 Migratory Bird Breeding Areas. Activities in waters of the United States that serve as breeding areas for migratory birds
 must be avoided to the maximum extent practicable.
 5.0 Suitable Material. No activity may use unsuitable material (e.g., trash, debris, car bodies, asphalt, etc.) Material used for
 construction or discharged must be free from toxic pollutants in toxic amounts (see Section 307 of the Clean Water Act).
 6.0 Water Supply Intakes. No activity may occur in the proximity of a public water supply intake, except where the activity is
 for the repair or improvement of public water supply intake structures or adjacent bank stabilization.
 7.0 Adverse Effects from Impoundments. If the activity creates an impoundment of water, adverse effects to the aquatic
 system due to accelerating the passage of water, and/or restricting its flow must be minimized to the maximum extent practicable.
 8.0 Management of Water Flows. To the maximum extent practicable, the pre-construction course, condition, capacity and
 location of open waters must be maintained for each activity, including stream channelization, storm water management
 activities, and temporary and permanent road crossings, except as provided below. The activity must be constructed to withstand
 expected high flows. The activity must not restrict or impede the passage of normal or high flows, unless the primary purpose of
 the activity is to impound water or manage high flows. The activity may alter the preconstruction course, condition, capacity,
 and location of open waters if it benefits the aquatic environment (e.g., stream restoration or relocation activities).
 
 2
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 9.0 Fills Within 100-Year Floodplains. The activity must comply with applicable FEMA-approved state or local floodplain
 management requirements.
 10.0 Equipment. Heavy equipment working in wetlands or mudflats must be placed on mats, or other measures shall be taken
 to minimize soil disturbance.
 11.0 Soil Erosion and Sediment Controls. Appropriate erosion and sediment controls must be used and maintained in effective
 operating condition during construction, and all exposed soil and other fills, as well as any work below the ordinary high water
 mark or high tide line, must be permanently stabilized at the earliest practicable date. Permittees are encouraged to perform work
 within waters of the US during periods of low-flow or no-flow.
 12.0 Removal of Temporary Fills. Temporary fills must be completely removed in their entirety and the affected areas
 returned to the pre-construction elevations. The affected areas must be revegetated, as appropriate.
 13.0 Wild and Scenic Rivers. No activity may occur in a component of the National Wild and Scenic River System; or in a
 river officially designated by Congress as a "study river" for possible inclusion in the system while the river is in an official study
 status, unless the appropriate Federal agency, with direct management responsibility for such river, has determined in writing that
 the proposed activity will not adversely affect the Wild and Scenic River designation, or study status.
 14.0 Tribal Rights. No NWP activity may cause more than minimal adverse effects on tribal rights (including treaty rights),
 protected tribal resources, or tribal lands.
 15.0 Endangered Species No activity is authorized under any NWP which is likely to directly or indirectly jeopardize the
 continued existence of a threatened or endangered species or a species proposed for such designation, as identified under the
 Federal Endangered Species Act, or which will directly or indirectly destroy or adversely modify the critical habitat of such
 species. No activity is authorized under any NWP which ‘‘may affect’’ a listed species or critical habitat, unless ESA section 7
 consultation addressing the effects of the proposed activity has been completed. Direct effects are the immediate effects on listed
 species and critical habitat caused by the NWP activity. Indirect effects are those effects on listed species and critical habitat that
 are caused by the NWP activity and are later in time, but still are reasonably certain to occur. In cases where the non-Federal
 applicant has identified listed species or critical habitat that might be affected or is in the vicinity of the activity, and has so
 notified the Corps, the applicant shall not begin work until the Corps has provided notification that the proposed activity will
 have ‘‘no effect’’ on listed species or critical habitat, or until ESA section 7 consultation has been completed.
 16.0 Migratory Birds and Bald and Golden Eagles. The permittee is responsible for ensuring their action complies with the
 Migratory Bird Treaty Act and the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act. The permittee is responsible for contacting appropriate
 local office of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to determine applicable measures to reduce impacts to migratory birds or
 eagles, including whether ‘‘incidental take’’ permits are necessary and available under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act or Bald and
 Golden Eagle Protection Act for a particular activity.
 17.0 Historic Properties. In cases where the USACE District Engineer determines that the activity may have the potential to
 cause effects to properties listed, or eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic Places, the activity is not authorized,
 until the requirements of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) have been satisfied.
 18.0 Mitigation. The project must be designed and constructed to avoid and minimize adverse effects, both temporary and
 permanent, to waters of the U.S. to the maximum extent practicable at the project site (i.e., on site).
 19.0 Regional and Case-by-Case Conditions. The contractor’s activity shall comply with any regional conditions that may
 have been added to the contract by the USACE Division Engineer, (see 33 CFR 330.4(e)), and with any case-specific conditions
 added by the Corps or by the state, Indian Tribe, or U.S. EPA in its Section 401 water quality certifications.
 20.0 Activities Affecting Structures or Works Built by the United States. If an NWP activity also requires permission from
 the Corps pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 408 because it will alter or temporarily or permanently occupy or use a USACE federally
 authorized Civil Works project (a ‘‘USACE project’’), the prospective permittee must submit a preconstruction notification. See
 paragraph (b)(10) of general condition 32. An activity that requires Section 408 Permission is not authorized by NWP until the
 appropriate Corps office issues the section 408 permission to alter, occupy, or use the USACE project, and the USACE District
 Engineer issues a written NWP verification.
 21.0 Section 404 Conditions. In addition to the General Conditions, the following conditions will apply only to activities that
 involve the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the US, and shall be followed to maintain compliance with the
 NWP authorization.
 21.1 Section 404 Nationwide Permit No. 3.
 
 3
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 21.1.1 The repair, rehabilitation, or replacement of any previously authorized, currently serviceable, structure or fill, or of any
 currently serviceable structure or fill authorized by 33 CFR 330.3, provided that the structure or fill is not to be put to uses
 differing from those uses specified or contemplated for the fill in the original permit or the most recently authorized modification.
 Minor deviations in the structure's configuration or filled area, including those due to changes in material, construction
 techniques, requirements of other regulatory agencies, or current construction codes or safety standards that are necessary to
 make the repair, rehabilitation, or replacement are authorized. This NWP also authorizes the removal of previously authorized
 structures or fills. Any stream channel modification is limited to the minimum necessary for the repair, rehabilitation, or
 replacement of the structure or fill; such modifications, including the removal of material from the stream channel, must be
 immediately adjacent to the project. This NWP also authorizes the removal of accumulated sediment and debris within, and in the
 immediate vicinity of, the structure or fill. This NWP also authorizes the repair, rehabilitation, or replacement of those structures
 or fills destroyed or damaged by storms, floods, fire or other discrete events, provided the repair, rehabilitation, or replacement is
 commenced, or is under contract to commence, within two years of the date of their destruction or damage. In cases of
 catastrophic events, such as hurricanes or tornadoes, this two-year limit may be waived by the district engineer, provided the
 permittee can demonstrate funding, contract, or other similar delays.
 21.1.2 This NWP also authorizes the removal of accumulated sediments and debris outside the immediate vicinity of existing
 structures (e.g., bridges, culverts road crossings, water intake structures, etc.). The removal of sediment is limited to the minimum
 necessary to restore the waterway in the vicinity of the structure to the approximate dimensions that existed when the structure
 was built, but cannot extend farther than 200 feet in any direction from the structure. This 200 foot limit does not apply to
 maintenance dredging to remove accumulated sediments blocking or restricting outfall and intake structures or to maintenance
 dredging to remove accumulated sediments from canals associated with outfall and intake structures. All dredged or excavated
 materials must be deposited and retained in an area that has no waters of the United States unless otherwise specifically approved
 by the district engineer under separate authorization.
 21.1.3 This NWP also authorizes temporary structures, fills, and work, including the use of temporary mats, necessary to conduct
 the maintenance activity. Appropriate measures must be taken to maintain normal downstream flows and minimize flooding to
 the maximum extent practicable, when temporary structures, work, and discharges, including cofferdams, are necessary for
 construction activities, access fills, or dewatering of construction sites. Temporary fills must consist of materials, and be placed in
 a manner, that will not be eroded by expected high flows. After conducting the maintenance activity, temporary fills must be
 removed in their entirety and the affected areas returned to preconstruction elevations. The areas affected by temporary fills must
 be revegetated, as appropriate.
 21.2 Section 404 Nationwide Permit No. 12. Activities required for the construction, maintenance and repair of utility lines
 and associated facilities in waters of the U.S. shall be as follows.
 21.2.1 Utility lines. This NWP authorizes discharges of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States and structures
 or work in navigable waters for crossings of those waters associated with the construction, maintenance, or repair of utility lines,
 including outfall and intake structures. There must be no change in pre-construction contours of waters of the United States. A
 ‘‘utility line’’ is defined as any pipe or pipeline for the transportation of any gaseous, liquid, liquescent, or slurry substance, for
 any purpose, and any cable, line, or wire for the transmission for any purpose of electrical energy, telephone, and telegraph
 messages, and internet, radio and television communication. The term ‘‘utility line’’ does not include activities that drain a water
 of the United States, such as drainage tile or french drains, but it does apply to pipes conveying drainage from another area.
 Material resulting from trench excavation may be temporarily sidecast into waters of the U.S. for no more than three months,
 provided that the material is not placed in such a manner that it is dispersed by currents or other forces. The USACE District
 Engineer may extend the period of temporary side casting for no more than a total of 180 days, where appropriate. In wetlands,
 the top 6 to 12 inches of the trench should normally be backfilled with topsoil from the trench. The trench cannot be constructed
 or backfilled in such a manner as to drain waters of the U.S. (e.g., backfilling with extensive gravel layers, creating a french drain
 effect). Any exposed slopes and stream banks shall be stabilized immediately upon completion of the utility line crossing of each
 waterbody.
 21.2.2 Utility line substations. This NWP authorizes the construction, maintenance, or expansion of substation facilities
 associated with a power line or utility line in non-tidal waters of the United States, provided the activity, in combination with all
 other activities included in one single and complete project, does not result in the loss of greater than 1/2-acre of waters of the
 United States.
 21.2.3 Foundations for Overhead Utility Line Towers, Poles, and Anchors. This NWP authorizes the construction or
 maintenance of foundations for overhead utility line towers, poles, and anchors in all waters of the U.S., provided the foundations
 are the minimum size necessary and separate footings for each tower leg (rather than a larger single pad) are used where feasible.
 21.2.4 Access Roads. This NWP authorizes the construction of access roads for the construction and maintenance of utility
 lines, including overhead power lines and utility line substations, in non-tidal waters of the US, provided the activity, in
 
 4
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 combination with all other activities included in one single and complete project, does not cause the loss of greater than 1/2 acre
 of non-tidal waters of the U.S. Access roads shall be the minimum width necessary. Access roads must be constructed so that the
 length of the road minimizes any adverse effects on waters of the US and must be as near as possible to preconstruction contours
 and elevations (e.g., at grade corduroy roads or geotextile/gravel roads). Access roads constructed above preconstruction
 contours and elevations in waters of the U.S. must be properly bridged or culverted to maintain surface flows. This NWP
 authorizes, to the extent that Department of the Army authorization is required, temporary structures, fills, and work necessary
 for the remediation of inadvertent returns of drilling fluids to waters of the United States through sub-soil fissures or fractures
 that might occur during horizontal directional drilling activities conducted for the purpose of installing or replacing utility lines.
 These remediation activities must be done as soon as practicable, to restore the affected waterbody. District engineers may add
 special conditions to this NWP to require a remediation plan for addressing inadvertent returns of drilling fluids to waters of the
 United States during horizontal directional drilling activities conducted for the purpose of installing or replacing utility lines. This
 NWP also authorizes temporary structures, fills, and work, including the use of temporary mats, necessary to conduct the utility
 line activity. Appropriate measures must be taken to maintain normal downstream flows and minimize flooding to the maximum
 extent practicable, when temporary structures, work, and discharges, including cofferdams, are necessary for construction
 activities, access fills, or dewatering of construction sites. Temporary fills must consist of materials, and be placed in a manner,
 that will not be eroded by expected high flows. After construction, temporary fills must be removed in their entirety and the
 affected areas returned to preconstruction elevations. The areas affected by temporary fills must be revegetated, as appropriate.
 21.3 Section 404 Nationwide Permit No. 13. The following bank stabilization activities will be necessary for erosion
 prevention provided the activity meets all of the following criteria.
 21.3.1 No material is placed in excess of the minimum needed for erosion protection.
 21.3.2 The bank stabilization activity is no more than 500 feet in length.
 21.3.3 The activity will not exceed an average of one cubic yard per running foot as measured along the length of the treated
 bank, below the plane of the ordinary high water mark or the high tide line, unless the district engineer waives this criterion by
 making a written determination concluding that the discharge will result in no more than minimal adverse environmental effects.
 21.3.4 No material is placed in any special aquatic site, including wetlands. Special aquatic sites include wildlife sanctuaries and
 refuges, wetland, mudflats, vegetated shallow and riffle and pool complexes.
 21.3.5 No material is of the type, or is placed in any location, or in any manner, to impair surface water flow into or out of any
 waters of the U.S.
 21.3.6 No material is placed in a manner that will be eroded by normal or expected high flows (properly anchored trees and
 treetops may be used in low energy areas).
 .
 21.3.7 Native plants appropriate for current site conditions, including salinity, must be used for bioengineering or vegetative
 bank stabilization.
 21.3.8 This NWP shall not be used for the channelization of a water of the U.S.
 21.4 Section 404 Nationwide Permit No. 14. Activities required for the construction, expansion, modification, or improvement
 of linear transportation projects (e.g., roads, highways, railways, trails, airport runways, and taxiways) in waters of the U.Sif the
 activity meets the following criteria.
 21.4.1 The discharge does not cause the loss of greater than 1/2-acre of waters of the US.
 21.4.2 . Any stream channel modification, including bank stabilization, is limited to the minimum necessary to construct or
 protect the linear transportation project; such modifications must be in the immediate vicinity of the project.
 21.4.3 This NWP also authorizes temporary structures, fills, and work, including the use of temporary mats, necessary to
 construct the linear transportation project. Appropriate measures must be taken to maintain normal downstream flows and
 minimize flooding to the maximum extent practicable, when temporary structures, work, and discharges, including cofferdams,
 are necessary for construction activities, access fills, or dewatering of construction sites. Temporary fills must consist of
 materials, and be placed in a manner, that will not be eroded by expected high flows. Temporary fills must be removed in their
 entirety and the affected areas returned to preconstruction elevations. The areas affected by temporary fills must be revegetated,
 as appropriate.
 21.5 Section 404 Nationwide Permit No. 15. Discharges of dredged or fill material incidental to the construction of bridges
 5
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 across navigable waters of the U.S., including cofferdams, abutments, foundation seals, piers, and temporary construction and
 access fills provided the construction of the bridge structure has been authorized by the U.S. Coast Guard under Section 9 of the
 Rivers and Harbors Act of 1899 or other applicable laws. Causeways and approach fills are not be included in this NWP and will
 require a separate Section 404 permit.
 21.6 Section 404 Nationwide Permit No. 23. Activities undertaken, assisted, authorized, regulated, funded, or financed, in
 whole or in part, by another Federal agency or department where that agency or department has determined, pursuant to the
 Council on Environmental Quality’s implementing regulations for the National Environmental Policy Act (40 CFR Part 1500 et
 seq.), that the activity is categorically excluded from the requirement to prepare an environmental impact statement or
 environmental assessment analysis, because it is included within a category of actions which neither individually nor
 cumulatively have a significant effect on the human environment, and the USACE Office of the Chief of Engineers (ATTN:
 CECW-OR) has concurred with that agency’s or department’s determination that the activity is categorically excluded and
 approved the activity for authorization under NWP23.
 21.7 Section 404 Nationwide Permit No. 33. Temporary structures, work and discharges, including cofferdams, necessary for
 construction activities or access fills or dewatering of construction sites; provided that the associated primary activity is
 authorized by the USACE or the U.S. Coast Guard. This NWP also authorizes temporary structures, work, and discharges,
 including cofferdams, necessary for construction activities not otherwise subject to the Corps or U.S. Coast Guard permit
 requirements. Appropriate measures shall be taken to maintain near normal downstream flows and to minimize flooding. Fill
 must consist of materials, and placed in a manner that will not be eroded by expected high flows. The use of dredged material
 may be allowed if the USACE District Engineer determines that it will not cause more than minimal adverse effects. Following
 completion of construction, temporary fill must be entirely removed to areas an area that has no waters of the U.S., dredged
 material must be returned to its original location, and the affected areas must be restored to pre-construction elevations.
 Cofferdams shall not be used to dewater wetlands or other aquatic areas changing the use of these areas. The affected areas must
 also be revegetated, as appropriate. This permit does not authorize the use of cofferdams to dewater wetlands or other aquatic
 areas to change their use. Structures left in place after cofferdams are removed will require a Section 10 permit if located in
 navigable waters of the U. S. (See 33 CFR, Part 322).
 
 SECTION 401 WATER QUALITY CERTIFICATION CONDITIONS
 04/17
 1.0 Description. When a Clean Water Act Section 404 Nationwide Permit is in effect, the contractor is automatically permitted
 to perform this work under a Water Quality Certification (Section 401) by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources
 (MDNR). The contractor shall adhere to the following conditions:
 1.1 Temporary stream crossings will be designed so that no drops or dams are created that impede the passage of aquatic life.
 1.2 Stream channel modifications should be avoided as much as possible and, if needed, will be minimized. Where modifications
 are necessary for highway design safety or protection of state infrastructure, they will be designed using scientific guidelines,
 such as natural channel design.
 1.3 The following materials will not be specified or used for bank stabilization: earthen fill, gravel, fragmented asphalt, broken
 concrete with exposed rebar, large slabs of unbroken concrete, tires, vehicle bodies, liquid concrete including grouted riprap, or
 any material containing chemical pollutants.
 1.4 During construction, clearing of vegetation will be kept to the minimum necessary to accomplish the project.
 1.5 Petroleum products, hazardous chemicals, hazardous wastes, equipment, construction material and solid waste will not be
 stored after construction working hours below the ordinary high water mark.
 1.6 Equipment will not be operated in wetland or stream areas, except where permitted, expressed by the project plans or the
 engineer in writing. Petroleum products will not be stored in waters of the state.
 1.7 Riparian areas and stream banks will be restored to a stable condition as soon as possible after final contouring.
 1.8 Work done in streams shall be conducted during low flows whenever possible.
 
 6
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1.9 Petroleum products spilled into any water or in areas where material could enter a water will be cleaned up immediately and
 disposed of properly. Any such spills of petroleum shall be reported as soon as possible, but no later than 24 hours after
 discovery to the MDNR, Environmental Emergency Response number at (573) 634-2436.
 
 DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS ENTERPRISE (DBE) PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS
 1.0 Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) Program Requirements. The subsequent Sections will apply only to contracts
 involving U.S. Department of Transportation (USDOT) federal-aid or federal financial participation. Federal-aid or federal
 financial participation includes, but is not limited to, any funds directly or indirectly received by MoDOT, or authorized for
 distribution to or through MoDOT, by the USDOT or any operating administration within the USDOT. These provisions will not
 apply to Commission contracts funded exclusively with state funds, or state and local funds. Any contractor, subcontractor,
 supplier, DBE firm, and contract surety involved in the performance of a federal-aid contract shall be aware of and fully
 understand the terms and conditions of the USDOT DBE Program, as the terms appear in Title 49 CFR Part 26 (as amended), the
 USDOT DBE Program regulations; Title 7 CSR Division 10, Chapter 8 (as amended), the Commission’s DBE Program rules.
 2.0 DBE Program Distinguished From Other Affirmative Action Programs. The USDOT DBE Program established by the
 U.S. Congress is not the same as, and does not involve or utilize, any of the elements or authority of other state or local
 affirmative action programs, nor does the program rely upon state legislation or gubernatorial executive orders for
 implementation or authorization, other than the general authority given the Commission in Section 226.150, RSMo. The USDOT
 DBE Program is implemented by the Commission and MoDOT, through and in conjunction with the FHWA, FTA and FAA, as a
 “recipient” defined in Title 49 CFR 26.5.
 3.0 Policy Regarding DBE Firms. It is the policy of the U. S. Department of Transportation and MoDOT that businesses
 owned by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals have an opportunity to participate in the performance of contracts
 financed in whole or in part with federal funds. Consequently, the requirements of 49 CFR Part 26 (as amended) and the
 Commission's implementing state regulations in Title 7 CSR Division 10, Chapter 8, "Disadvantaged Business Enterprise
 Program", will apply to any contract with federal funds.
 4.0 Opportunity for DBEs to Participate. Each contractor, subcontractor and supplier working on a contract financed in whole
 or in part with federal funds shall take all necessary and reasonable steps to ensure that DBEs have an opportunity to compete for,
 and participate in performance on project contracts and subcontracts.
 5.0 Required Contract Provision. The federal-aid contract will include the following provision, as mandated by USDOT at
 Title 49 CFR 26.13(b):
 (a) The contractor, subrecipient or subcontractor shall not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, or
 sex in the performance of the contract. The contractor shall carry out applicable requirements of 49 CFR Part 26 in the award and
 administration of USDOT-assisted contracts. Failure by the contractor to carry out these requirements is a material breach of the
 contract, which may result in the termination of the contract or such other remedy, as the recipient deems appropriate.
 In this provision, “contractor” will be defined as the contractor on the contract; “subrecipient” will be defined as any
 subcontractor performing the work. For the purposes of any federal-aid contract awarded by the Commission, “the recipient”
 will be defined as either the Commission, or MoDOT, or both. The contractor shall include this same contract provision in every
 supply contract or subcontract the contractor makes or executes with a subrecipient.
 6.0 Bank Services. The contractor, and each subrecipient on a federal-aid contract, is encouraged to use the services of banks
 owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals. Such banking services, and the fees charged for
 services, typically will not be eligible for DBE Program contract goal credit. Any questions on this subject should be directed to
 the MoDOT External Civil Rights Division. See Sec 7.0.
 7.0 DBE Program Information. DBE Program information may be obtained from the MoDOT External Civil Rights Division,
 105 W. Capitol Avenue, P.O. Box 270, Jefferson City, Missouri 65102-0270. Phone (573) 751-7801, Fax (573) 526-0558, EMail: dbe@modot.mo.gov. It will be the duty of each contractor, for the contractor and for the contractor’s subrecipients and
 surety, to take the steps necessary to determine the legal obligations and limitations under the DBE Program, as an element of
 responsibility. It will be the duty of each certified DBE firm to know, understand and comply with the DBE firm’s legal
 obligations and limitations under the DBE Program, as a requirement of program participation. A surety providing a bid or
 contract bond will be bound by those bonds to the duties of the surety’s principal.
 8.0 DBE Certification, and the Missouri Unified Certification Program. The Missouri Department of Transportation and
 other certifying agencies within Missouri have partnered to form the Missouri Regional Certification Committee (MRCC) and
 developed a Unified Certification Program (UCP) pursuant to 49 CFR 26.81 and 7 CSR 10-8.061. Only DBE firms certified by
 the MRCC are eligible to perform work on a federal-aid contract for DBE contract goal credit. It is the contractor’s responsibility
 7
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 to ensure firms identified for participation are approved certified DBE firms. The MRCC DBE Directory can be found at the
 following link:
 http://www.modot.mo.gov/business/contractor_resources/External_Civil_Rights/DBE_program.htm
 9.0 DBE Program-Related Certifications Made By Bidders and Contractors. If the bidder makes a written, express
 disclaimer of one or more certifications or assurances in the bid, the bid will be considered non-responsive. By submitting a bid
 on any call involving USDOT federal financial participation, and by entering into any contract on the basis of that bid, the
 contractor makes each of the following DBE Program-related certifications and assurances to USDOT, to the Commission, and to
 MoDOT:
 (a) The bidder certifies that management and bidding officers have reviewed and understand the bidding and project
 construction and administration obligations of the USDOT DBE Program regulations at Title 49 CFR Part 26 (as amended), the
 USDOT DBE Program regulations; Title 7 CSR Division 10, Chapter 8 (as amended), and the Commission’s DBE Program
 rules. The bidder further certifies that the contractors management personnel on the project understand and are familiar with the
 requirements of these federal and state DBE Program regulations; and if the bidder was not familiar with or did not understand
 the requirements of these regulations, they have contacted the External Civil Rights Division of MoDOT and have been informed
 as to their duties and obligations under the DBE Program regulations by MoDOT staff and/or by USDOT DBE Program staff.
 (b) The bidder certifies that the bidder has complied with the federal and state DBE Program requirements in
 submitting the bid, and will comply fully with these requirements in performing any federal-aid contract awarded on the basis of
 that bid.
 (c) The bidder agrees to ensure that certified DBE firms have a full and fair opportunity to participate in the
 performance of the contract financed in whole or in part with federal funds. The bidder certifies that all necessary and reasonable
 steps were taken to ensure that DBE firms have an opportunity to compete for, and perform work on the contract. The bidder
 further certifies that the bidder not discriminate on the basis of race, color, age, national origin or sex in the performance of the
 contract, or in the award of any subcontract.
 (d) The bidder certifies, under penalty of perjury and other applicable penal laws that if awarded the federal-aid
 contract, the contractor will make a good faith effort to utilize certified DBE firms to perform DBE work at or above the amount
 or percentage of the dollar value specified in the bidding documents. The bidder further certifies the bidder’s understanding that
 the bidder may not unilaterally terminate, substitute for, or replace any DBE firm that was designated in the executed contract, in
 whole or in any part, with another DBE, any non-DBE firm or with the contractor's own forces or those of an affiliate of the
 contractor, without the prior written consent of MoDOT as set out below.
 (e) The bidder certifies, under penalty of perjury and other applicable penal laws that a good faith effort was made to
 obtain DBE participation in the contract, at or above the DBE participation contract goal. The bidder further certifies, under
 penalty of perjury and other applicable penal laws, that if the bidder is not able to meet the Commission’s DBE contract goal, and
 if the bidder is not able to meet that DBE contract goal by the time the proposed DBE participation information must be
 submitted, within three business days after bid opening, the bidder has submitted with and as a part of the bid, a true, accurate,
 complete and detailed written explanation of good faith efforts to meet the DBE Contract Goal.
 (f) The bidder understands and agrees that if awarded the contract the contractor is legally responsible to ensure that the
 contractor and each DBE subcontractor and supplier, comply fully with all regulatory and contractual requirements of the
 USDOT DBE Program, and that each DBE firm participating in the contract fully perform the designated tasks, with the DBE’s
 own forces and equipment, under the DBE’s own direct supervision and management. The bidder certifies, under penalty of
 perjury and other applicable penal laws, that if it awarded the contract and if MoDOT or the Commission determine that the
 contractor, a DBE or any other firm retained by the contractor has failed to comply with the DBE Program requirements or
 federal or state DBE Program regulations, the Commission, through MoDOT, shall have the sole authority and discretion to
 determine the extent of the monetary value to which the DBE contract goals have not been met, and to assess against and
 withhold monetary damages from the contractor in the full amount of that breach. The Commission, through MoDOT, may
 impose any other remedies available at law or provided in the contract in the event of a contract breach. The bidder further
 understands and agrees that this clause authorizes the Commission, through MoDOT, to determine and fix the extent of the
 damages caused by a breach of any contractual or regulatory DBE Program requirement and that the damage assessment will be
 enforced in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other general liquidated damages clause in the contract. By submitting a bid for a
 federal-aid contract, and by entering into a contract, the bidder irrevocably agrees to such an assessment of liquidated damages
 for DBE Program purposes, and authorizes the Commission and MoDOT to make such an assessment of liquidated damages
 against the contractor, and to collect that assessment from any sums due the contractor under the contract, or any other contract,
 or by other legal process. The bidder makes this certification, agreement and authorization on behalf of itself, its subcontractors
 and suppliers, and the bid bond and contract bond sureties, for each federal-aid contract.
 
 8
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (g) The surety upon any bid or contract bond acknowledges the surety is held and firmly bound to the Commission for
 each and every duty of the surety’s principal provided in any bid or contract regarding the DBE program.
 10.0 Designation of DBE firms to perform on contract. The bidder states and certifies, under penalty of perjury or other
 applicable penal laws, that the DBE participation information submitted in the bid or within the stated time thereafter is true,
 correct and complete and that the information provided includes the names of all DBE firms that will participate in the contract,
 the specific line item (s) that each DBE firm will perform, and the creditable dollar amounts of the participation of each DBE.
 The specific line item must reference the MoDOT line number and item number contained in the proposal. The bidder further
 states and certifies that the bidder has committed to use each DBE firm listed for the work shown to meet the DBE contract goal
 and that each DBE firm listed has clearly confirmed that the DBE firm will participate in and perform the work, with the DBE’s
 own forces. Award of the contract will be conditioned upon meeting these and other listed requirements of 49 CFR 26.53.
 (a) The bidder certifies the bidder’s understanding that as the contractor on a contract funded in whole or in part by
 USDOT federal funds, the bidder may not unilaterally terminate, substitute for, or replace any DBE firm that was designated in
 the executed contract, in whole or in any part, with another DBE, any non-DBE firm or with the contractor's own forces or those
 of an affiliate, without the prior written consent of MoDOT. The bidder understands it must receive approval in writing from
 MoDOT for the termination of a DBE firm, or the substitution or replacement of a DBE before any substitute or replacement firm
 may begin work on the project in lieu of the DBE firm participation information listed in the executed contract.
 (1) The bidder further certifies understanding, that if a DBE firm listed in the bid or approved in the executed
 contract documents ceases to be certified at any time during the performance of the contract work, and a contract or subcontract
 with that firm has not yet been executed by the prime and subcontractor, the contractor can not count any work performed by that
 firm after the date of the firm’s loss of eligibility toward meeting the DBE contract goal. However, if the contractor has executed
 a subcontract with the firm before the DBE lost eligibility and ceased to be a certified DBE, the contractor may continue to
 receive credit toward the DBE contract goal for that firm's work.
 (2) The bidder further certifies understanding, that if a DBE subcontractor is terminated, or fails, refuses or is
 unable to complete the work on the contract for any reason, the contractor must promptly request authority to substitute or
 replace that firm. The request shall include written documentation that the DBE firm is unwilling or unable to perform the
 specified contract work. The contractor shall make good faith efforts to find another DBE subcontractor to substitute or replace
 the dollar amount of the work that was to have been performed by the DBE firm. The good faith efforts shall be directed at
 finding another DBE to perform the same, or more, dollar amount of work that the DBE firm that was terminated was to have
 performed under the executed contract. The substitute or replacement DBE firm may be retained to perform the same or different
 contract work from that which the terminated firm was to have performed. The contractor shall obtain approval from MoDOT in
 writing before the replacement or termination of one firm with another before the work will count toward the project DBE goal.
 (3) The bidder further certifies the bidder’s understanding, that the dollar value of any work completed by a
 DBE firm prior to approval of the DBE’s substitution or replacement, in writing, by MoDOT will not be credited toward meeting
 the DBE contract goal. The contractor will remain subject to appropriate administrative remedies, including but not limited to,
 liquidated damages for the full dollar amount that the DBE contract goal is not met. Liquidated damages will also be assessed
 against the contractor if the original, substitute or replacement DBE firms perform the required contract work, but are not paid in
 full for some or all of that work by the contractor, including back charges. No credit toward the DBE goal will be given for any
 amount withheld from payment to the DBE or “back charged” against monies owed to the DBE, regardless of the purpose or
 asserted debt.
 11.0 Good Faith Effort to Secure DBE Services. The bidder shall make a good faith effort to seek DBEs in a reasonable
 geographic area to where the solicitation for subcontracts and material is made. If the bidder cannot meet the goals using DBEs
 from that geographic area, the bidder shall, as a part of the effort to meet the goal, expand the search to a wider geographic area.
 11.1 Bidding Procedure. The following bidding procedure shall apply to the contract, for DBE program compliance purposes.
 11.2 Contract Goal, Good Faith Efforts Specified. The bidder may submit the completed “DBE Identification Submittal”
 information in the bid documents at the same time as, and within the sealed bid, at the time the bid is submitted. However, if that
 information is not completed and submitted with the initial sealed bid, then as a matter of responsiveness and responsibility, the
 apparent low and second low bidder shall file the completed “DBE Identification Submittal” pages with MoDOT on or before
 4:00 p.m. of the third business day after the bid opening date, directly to the External Civil Rights Division, Missouri Department
 of Transportation, 105 W. Capitol Avenue, P.O. Box 270, Jefferson City, Missouri 65102-0270. Telefax transmittal to MoDOT
 will be permitted at fax no. (573) 526-0558. The complete and signed original documents shall be mailed to MoDOT no later
 than the day of the telefax transmission. No extension of time will be allowed for any reason. The means of transmittal and the
 risk of timely receipt of the information shall be the bidder’s.
 
 9
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 11.3 Bid Rejection, Bid Security Disposition. The failure of either the apparent low bidder or the second low bidder to file the
 completed and executed “DBE Identification Submittal”, listing actual, committed DBE participation equal to or greater than the
 DBE contract goal percentage specified in the bid by 4:00 p.m. on the third business day after the bid opening, will be cause for
 rejection of that bid, and the bid surety bond or bid guaranty of that bidder will be forfeited to and become the property of the
 Commission upon Commission demand.
 (a) Any bidder rejected for failure to submit the completed and executed “DBE Identification Submittal” information in
 the bidding documents, with full documentation of sufficient DBE participation to satisfy the DBE contract goal cannot submit a
 bid on the same, or substantially similar, project, when and if the project is re-advertised for bids. By submitting a bid on a
 federal-aid project, the bidder accepts and agrees to this provision, and the disposition of the bidders bid bond or guaranty, on
 behalf of the bidder and the bidders bid surety or guaranty.
 (b) The surety separately acknowledges the surety to be held and firmly bound to the Commission to immediately upon
 demand pay to Commission the face amount of the bid bond.
 11.4 Good Faith Efforts Described. Good faith efforts to meet the DBE contract goal may include, but are not limited to, the
 following:
 (a) Attending a pre-bid meeting, if any, scheduled by the department to inform DBEs of contracting and subcontracting
 opportunities.
 (b) Advertising in general circulation trade association and socially and economically disadvantaged business directed
 media concerning subcontracting opportunities.
 (c) Providing written notice to a reasonable number of specific DBEs so that the DBE’s interest in the contract are
 solicited in sufficient time to allow the firm to participate effectively.
 (d) Following-up on initial written notice or solicitations of interest by contacting DBEs to determine with certainty
 whether the DBEs were interested.
 (e) Maintaining documentation of responses received in the effort to solicit DBE participation.
 (f) Selecting portions of work to be performed by DBEs to increase the likelihood of meeting the DBE goal, including,
 where appropriate, breaking down contracts into economically feasible units to facilitate DBE participation.
 (g) Providing interested DBEs adequate information about plans, specifications and requirements of the contract.
 (h) Negotiating in good faith with interested DBEs, not rejecting DBEs as unqualified without sound business reasons
 based on a thorough investigation of the DBE’s capabilities.
 (i) Making efforts to assist interested DBEs in obtaining bonding, lines of credit or insurance required by MoDOT or by
 the bidder.
 (j) Making effective use of available disadvantaged business organizations, minority bidders' groups, local, state and
 federal disadvantaged business assistance offices, MoDOT and other organizations that provide assistance in the recruitment and
 placement of DBEs.
 11.5 Documentation, and Administrative Reconsideration of the Bidder's Good Faith Efforts. In the bidding documents,
 the bidder has the opportunity and responsibility to provide certified written documentation as to whether the bidder made a good
 faith effort to meet the DBE contract goal as proposed by the Commission. Any bidder that has not met the Commission’s
 proposed DBE contract goal at the time of bid opening must submit the completed “Certification of Good Faith Efforts to Obtain
 DBE Participation”. The certification should be included in the bidding documents, fully and in detail, at the time its sealed bid
 is submitted; however, if that information is not completed and submitted with the initial sealed bid, the bidder must submit the
 documentation to MoDOT on or before 4:00 p.m. of the third business day after the bid opening date, directly to the External
 Civil Rights Division, Missouri Department of Transportation, 105 W. Capitol Avenue, P.O. Box 270, Jefferson City, Missouri
 65102-0270. Telefax transmittal to MoDOT will be permitted at fax no. (573) 526-0558. The complete and signed original
 documents shall be mailed to MoDOT no later than the day of the telefax transmission. No extension of time will be allowed for
 any reason. The means of transmittal and the risk of timely receipt of the information shall be the bidder’s. The bidder shall
 attach additional pages to the certification, if necessary, in order to fully detail specific good faith efforts made to obtain certified
 DBE firm participation in the proposed contract work. If the apparent low bidder appears to have failed to adequately document
 in the bid that the bidder made a good faith effort to achieve sufficient DBE participation in the contract work, that firm will be
 offered the opportunity for administrative reconsideration upon written request, before MoDOT and the Commission reject that
 bid as non-responsive. However, regardless of the DBE contract goal participation level proposed by the bidder, or the extent of
 
 10
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 good faith efforts shown, the apparent low and second low bidders shall each timely and separately file their completed and
 executed “DBE Identification Submittal” or face potential sanctions and the bid bond or guaranty, as specified in Sec 10.0 of
 these provisions, may become the property of the Commission subject to Commission’s demand.
 12.0 DBE Participation for Contract Goal Credit. DBE participation on the contract will count toward meeting the DBE
 contract goal as follows:
 (a) The applicable percentage of the total dollar value of the contract or subcontract awarded to the DBE will be
 counted toward meeting the DBE contract goal, only if that firm is certified by the Missouri Regional Certification Committee as
 a DBE before the due date for bids or offers on a contract which a firm seeks to participate as a DBE, and only for the value of
 the work, goods or services that are actually performed, or provided, by the DBE firm itself in the area(s) in which the DBE firm
 is certified.
 (b) When a DBE performs work as a participant in a joint venture, the contractor may count toward the DBE goal only
 that portion of the total dollar value of the contract equal to the distinct, clearly defined portion of the contract work that the DBE
 has performed with the DBE’s own forces. The MoDOT External Civil Rights Division shall be contacted in advance regarding
 any joint venture involving both a DBE firm and a non-DBE firm to review and approve the contractor’s organizational structure
 and proposed operation. When a DBE subcontracts part of the work of the contract to another firm, the value of that
 subcontracted work may be counted toward the DBE contract goal only if the DBE's subcontractor at a lower tier is a MoDOT
 certified DBE. Work that a DBE subcontracts to a non-DBE firm will not count toward the DBE contract goal. The cost of
 supplies and equipment a DBE subcontractor purchases or leases from the prime contractor or the prime’s affiliated firms, or
 from another non-DBE subcontractor, will not count toward the DBE contract goal.
 (c) The contractor may count expenditures to a DBE subrecipient toward the DBE contract goal only if the DBE
 performs a commercially useful function (CUF) on that contract.
 (d) A contractor may not count the participation of a DBE subcontractor toward the contractor's final compliance with
 the contractor’s DBE contract goal obligations until the amount being counted has actually been paid to the DBE. A contractor
 may count 60 percent of the contractor’s expenditures actually paid for material and supplies obtained from a DBE certified by
 MoDOT as a regular dealer, and 100 percent of such expenditures actually paid for materials and supplies obtained from a
 certified DBE manufacturer.
 (1) A regular dealer will be defined as a firm that owns, operates, or maintains a store, warehouse or other
 establishment in which the material, supplies, articles or equipment required and used under the contract are bought, kept in
 stock, and regularly sold or leased to the public in the usual course of business. To be a regular dealer, the DBE firm shall be an
 established, regular business that engages, as its principal business and under its own name, in the purchase and sale or lease of
 the products in question. Packagers, brokers, manufacturers' representatives, or other persons who arrange or expedite
 transactions will not be considered regular dealers.
 (2) A DBE firm may be a regular dealer in such bulk items as petroleum products, steel, cement, gravel, stone
 or asphalt, without owning, operating or maintaining a place of business where it keeps such items in stock, if the DBE both
 owns and operates distribution equipment for the products it sells and provides for the contract work. Any supplementation of a
 regular dealer's own distribution equipment shall be by a long-term lease agreement, and not on an ad hoc or contract-by-contract
 basis.
 (3) If a DBE regular dealer is used for DBE contract goal credit, no additional credit will be given for hauling
 or delivery to the project site goods or materials sold by that DBE regular dealer. Those delivery costs shall be deemed included
 in the price charged for the goods or materials by the regular dealer, who shall be responsible for their distribution.
 (4) A manufacturer will be defined as a firm that operates or maintains a factory or establishment that
 produces on the premises, the material, supplies, articles or equipment required under the contract and of the general character
 described by the project specifications. A manufacturer will include firms that produce finished goods or products from raw or
 unfinished material, or that purchases and substantially alters goods and materials to make them suitable for construction use
 before reselling them.
 (e) A contractor may count toward the DBE contract goal the following expenditures to certified DBE firms that are not
 "regular dealers" or "manufacturers" for DBE program purposes:
 (1) The contractor may count toward the DBE contract goal the entire amount of fees or commissions
 charged by a certified DBE firm for providing a bona fide service, such as professional, technical, consultant or managerial
 services, or for providing bonds or insurance specifically required for the performance of the federal-aid contract, if the fee is
 reasonable and not excessive, compared with fees customarily charged for similar services.
 
 11
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (2) The contractor may count toward the DBE contract goal the entire amount of that portion of the
 construction contract that is performed by the DBE's own forces and equipment, under the DBE's supervision. This includes the
 cost of supplies and material ordered and paid for by the DBE for contract work, including supplies purchased or equipment
 leased by the DBE except supplies and equipment a DBE subcontractor purchases or leases from the prime contractor or its
 affiliates.
 (f) A contractor may count toward the DBE contract goal 100 percent of the fees paid to a certified DBE trucker or
 hauler for delivery of material and supplies required on a job site, but not for the cost of those materials or supplies themselves,
 or for the removal or relocation of excess material from or at the job site, when the DBE certified trucking company is not also
 the manufacturer of or a regular dealer in those material and supplies, provided that the trucking or hauling fee is determined by
 MoDOT to be reasonable as compared with fees customarily charged by non-DBE firms for similar services. The certified DBE
 trucking firm shall also perform a CUF on the project and not operate merely as a pass through for the purposes of gaining credit
 toward the contract DBE goal. Prior to submitting a bid, the contractor shall determine, or contact the MoDOT External Civil
 Rights Division for assistance in determining, whether a DBE trucking firm will meet the criteria for performing a CUF on the
 project.
 (g) The contractor will receive DBE contract goal credit for the fees or commissions charged by and paid to a DBE
 broker who arranges or expedites sales, leases or other project work or service arrangements, provided that those fees are
 determined by MoDOT to be reasonable and not excessive, as compared with fees customarily charged by non-DBE firms for
 similar services. A broker will be defined as a person or firm that does not own or operate the delivery equipment necessary to
 transport materials, supplies or equipment to or from a job site; a broker typically will not purchase or pay for the material,
 supplies or equipment, and if the broker does purchase or pay for those items, those costs will be reimbursed in full. In most
 instances, the broker is merely the entity making arrangements for delivery of material, supplies, equipment, or arranging project
 services. To receive DBE contract goal credit, MoDOT must determine that the DBE broker has performed a CUF in providing
 the contract work or service.
 13.0 Performing a Commercially Useful Function (CUF). No credit toward the DBE contract goal will be allowed for
 contract payments or expenditures to a DBE firm, if that DBE firm does not perform a CUF on that contract. A DBE performs a
 CUF when the DBE is solely responsible for execution of a distinct element of the contract work, and the DBE actually performs,
 manages and supervises the work involved with the firm’s own forces. To perform a CUF, the DBE alone shall be responsible,
 and alone must bear the risk, for the material and supplies used on the contract, selecting a supplier or dealer from those
 available, negotiating price, determining quality and quantity, ordering the material and supplies, installing those materials with
 the DBE’s own forces and equipment and paying for those materials and supplies. The amount the DBE firm is to be paid under
 the contract shall be commensurate with the work the DBE actually performs and the DBE credit claimed for the DBE’s
 performance.
 13.1 Contractor’s Obligation to Monitor CUF Performance. It shall be solely the contractor's responsibility to ensure that all
 DBE firms perform a CUF. Further, the contractor is responsible to, and shall ensure that each DBE firm fully performs the
 DBE’s designated tasks, with the DBE’s own forces and equipment, under the DBE’s own direct supervision and management.
 MoDOT is under no obligation to warn the contractor that a DBE's participation may not count toward the goal, other than
 through official notification with an opportunity for administrative reconsideration at the conclusion of the contract work.
 13.2 DBEs Must Perform a Useful and Necessary Role in Contract Completion. A DBE does not perform a commercially
 useful function if the DBE’s role is limited to that of an extra participant in a transaction, contract, or project through which funds
 are passed in order to obtain the appearance of DBE participation.
 13.3 DBEs Must Perform The Contract Work With Their Own Workforces. If a DBE does not perform and exercise
 responsibility for at least 30 percent of the total cost of the DBE’s contract with the DBE’s own work force, or the DBE
 subcontracts a greater portion of the work of a contract than would be expected on the basis of normal industry practice for the
 type of work involved, MoDOT will presume that the DBE is not performing a commercially useful function.
 13.4 Factors Used to Determine if a DBE Trucking Firm is Performing a CUF. The following factors will be used to
 determine whether a DBE trucking company is performing a commercially useful function (CUF):
 (a) To perform a CUF, the DBE trucking firm shall be completely responsible for the management and supervision of
 the entire trucking operation that the DBE is being paid for on the contract work. There shall not be contrived arrangement,
 including but not limited to, any arrangement that would not customarily exist under regular construction project subcontracting
 practices for the purpose of meeting the DBE contract goal.
 (b) The DBE must own and operate at least one fully licensed, insured and operational truck used in performance of
 the contract work. This does not include a supervisor’s pickup truck or a similar vehicle that is not suitable for hauling the
 necessary materials or supplies.
 
 12
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (c) The DBE receives 100 percent contract goal credit for the total reasonable amount the DBE is paid for the
 transportation services provided on the contract using trucks the DBE owns, insures and operates, using drivers that the DBE
 employs.
 (d) The DBE may lease trucks from another DBE firm, including an owner-operator who is certified as a DBE. The
 DBE firm that leases trucks from another DBE will receive credit for the total fair market value actually paid for of the
 transportation services the lessee DBE firm provides on the contract.
 (e) The DBE may also lease trucks from a non-DBE firm, including an owner-operator. However, the DBE who leases
 trucks from a non-DBE is entitled to DBE contract goal credit only for the brokerage fee or commission the DBE receives as a
 result of the lease arrangement. The DBE will not receive credit for the total value of the transportation services provided by the
 non-DBE lessee. Furthermore, no DBE contract goal credit will be allowed, even for brokerage fees or commissions, where the
 DBE leases the trucks from the contractor on the project or a firm owned, controlled by, or affiliated by ownership or control to,
 the contractor.
 (f) For purposes of this section, the lease shall indicate that the DBE firm leasing the truck has exclusive use of and
 control over the truck. This will not preclude the leased truck from working for others during the term of the lease with the
 consent of the DBE, provided the lease gives the DBE absolute priority for and control over the use of the leased truck. Leased
 trucks shall display the name and identification number of the DBE firm that has leased the truck at all times during the life of
 that lease.
 13.5 MoDOT Makes Final Determination On Whether a CUF Is Performed. MoDOT and the Commission will have the
 final authority to determine whether a DBE firm has performed a CUF on a federal-aid contract. To determine whether a DBE is
 performing or has performed a CUF, MoDOT will evaluate the amount of work subcontracted by that DBE firm or performed by
 other firms, and the other firms forces and equipment. Any DBE work performed by the contractor, or by employees or
 equipment of the contractor will be subject to disallowance under the DBE Program, unless the independent validity and need is
 demonstrated.
 14.0 Verification of DBE Participation, Liquidated Damages.
 14.1 Prior to final payment by the Commission, the contractor shall file with the Commission a detailed list showing each DBE
 used on the contract work, and the work performed by each DBE. The list shall show the actual dollar amount paid to each DBE
 for the creditable work on the contract, less any rebates, kickbacks, deductions, withholdings or other repayments made. The list
 shall be certified under penalty of perjury, or other law, to be accurate and complete. MoDOT and the Commission will use this
 certification and other information available to determine if the contractor and the contractor’s DBEs satisfied the DBE contract
 goal percentage specified in the contract and the extent to which the DBEs were fully paid for that work. The contractor shall
 acknowledge, by the act of filing the detailed list, that the information is supplied to obtain payment regarding a federal
 participation contract.
 14.2 Failure on the part of the contractor to achieve the DBE participation to which the contractor committed in the contract may
 result in liquidated damages being imposed on the contractor by the Commission for breach of contract and for non-compliance.
 If the contract was awarded with less than the original DBE contract goal proposed by the Commission, the revised lower amount
 shall become the final DBE contract goal, and that goal will be used to determine any liquidated damages to be assessed.
 Additionally, the Commission or MoDOT may impose any other administrative sanctions or remedies available at law or
 provided by the contract in the event of breach by the contractor by failing to satisfy the contractor’s DBE contract goal
 commitment. However, no liquidated damages will be assessed, and no other administrative sanctions or remedies will be
 imposed when, for reasons beyond the control of the contractor and despite the good faith efforts made by the contractor, the
 final DBE contract goal participation percentage was not achieved. The contractor will be offered the opportunity for
 administrative reconsideration of any assessment of liquidated damages, upon written request. The administrative
 reconsideration officer may consider all facts presented, including the legitimacy or business reason for back charges assessed
 against a DBE firm, in determining the final amount of liquidated damages.
 15.0 Prompt Payment Requirements. In accordance with Title 49 CFR 26.29, the contractor shall comply with the prompt
 payment requirements of that regulation, Section 34.057, RSMo., the provisions of the Commission’s rule 7 CSR 10-8.111 and
 the contract. By bidding on a federal-aid contract, and by accepting and executing that contract, the contractor agrees to assume
 these contractual obligations, and to bind the contractor’s subrecipients contractually to those prompt payment requirements at
 the contractor’s expense.
 16.0 Miscellaneous DBE Program Requirements. In accordance with Title 49 CFR Part 26 and the Commission’s DBE
 Program rules in Title 7 CSR Division 10, Chapter 8, the contractor, for both the contractor and for the contractor’s
 subcontractors and suppliers, whether DBE firms or not, shall commit to comply fully with the auditing, record keeping,
 
 13
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 confidentiality, cooperation and anti-intimidation or retaliation provisions contained in those federal and state DBE Program
 regulations. By bidding on a federal-aid contract, and by accepting and executing that contract, the contractor agrees to assume
 these contractual obligations, and to bind the contractor’s subrecipients contractually, at the contractor’s expense.
 
 TRAINING PROVISION
 1.0 Description. This provision supplements subparagraph 7(e) of the Contract Provision entitled "Standard Federal Equal
 Opportunity Construction Contract Specification” (Executive Order 11246)", and in the implementation of CFR Part 230,
 Subpart A, Appendix B.
 2.0 Training Requirements. As part of the contractor's equal employment opportunity affirmative action program, training
 shall be provided as follows.
 2.1 The contractor shall provide on-the-job training aimed at developing full journeymen in the type of trade or job classification
 involved.
 2.2 The number of trainee hours to be provided under this provision will be specified in the bidding documents.
 2.3 Trainee goals will be set in 1,000 hour increments or 1 slot (person). For example, if the trainee goal on the project is 2,000
 hours a maximum of 2 trainees will be approved for the project. In the event a trainee leaves the project for valid reasons the
 trainee shall be replaced as soon as possible. No apprentice/trainee can be assigned less than 500 hours on a contract. Providing
 less than 500 hours is not considered to be beneficial training nor helping to achieve journey-level status. Therefore, a
 trainee/apprentice, regardless of craft, must have been trained on the contact for at least 500 hours to be eligible for
 reimbursement. However, the contractor may transfer the trainee, with MoDOT’s approval, to another MoDOT highway
 construction project in order to continue the training. Upon reaching the 500 hours, the contractor will be compensated as noted
 herein. If the enrollee is transferred to a non-federal project, MoDOT, upon availability of funding, may have the option of
 reimbursing the contractor for those hours completed that achieve the 500-hour minimum and for any hours that continue the
 successful training of the individual(s). The same documentation will be required to be submitted in order to determine if hours
 will be approved. However, if the trainee is moved to another federally funded enhancement, then a “change order” could be
 requested for the additional hours, and thus offer the Contractor the necessary credit so as to accomplish the 500 hour plateau.
 FHWA and MoDOT will only approve training programs meeting the requirements of the Training Special Provisions (TSP). A
 program will be approved if it is reasonably calculated to meet the equal employment opportunity obligations of the Contractor
 and to qualify the average trainee for journeyman status in the classification concerned by the end of the training period.
 Furthermore, apprenticeship programs registered with the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, or
 with a State apprenticeship agency recognized by the Bureau and training programs approved but not necessarily sponsored by
 the Department of Labor, Manpower Administration, Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training will also be considered acceptable
 provided it is being administered in a manner consistent with the equal employment obligations of Federal-aid highway
 construction contracts.
 2.4 When a contractor subcontracts a portion of the contract work, the contractor shall determine how many, if any, of the trainee
 hours are to be trained by the subcontractor, provided, however, that the contractor shall retain the primary responsibility for
 meeting the training requirements imposed by this provision.. The contractor shall also insure this training provision is made
 applicable to such subcontract. Where feasible, 25 percent of apprentices or trainees in each occupation shall be in their first year
 of apprenticeship or training.
 2.5 The number of trainee hours shall be distributed among the work classifications on the basis of the contractor's needs and the
 availability of journeymen in the various classifications within a reasonable area of recruitment. Prior to commencing
 construction, the contractor shall submit to the engineer for approval a trainee notification for each individual they intend to train
 on the project. The contractor will be credited for the hours worked by each trainee employed on the contract work who is
 currently enrolled or becomes enrolled in an approved program and will be reimbursed for such trainees as provided hereinafter.
 If the trainee goal on the project is 1,000, no more than two trainees will be approved for the project. Each individual must
 complete at least 500 hours before reimbursement or hour will be counted towards meeting the goal. In the event a trainee leaves
 the training program prior to completing the minimum 500 hours the External Civil Rights Division will determine if that
 individual can be replaced on the project.
 2.6 Training and upgrading of minorities and women toward journeyman status is a primary objective of this provision.
 Accordingly, the contractor shall make every effort to enroll minority trainees and women (e.g., by conducting systematic and
 direct recruitment through public and private sources likely to yield minority and women trainees) to the extent that such persons
 are available within a reasonable area of recruitment. The contractor shall be responsible for demonstrating the steps taken in
 pursuance thereof, prior to a determination as to whether the contractor is in compliance with this provision. This training
 commitment is not intended, and shall not be used, to discriminate against any applicant for training, whether a member of a
 
 14
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 minority group or not.
 2.7 No employee shall be employed as a trainee in any classification in which the employee has successfully completed a
 training course leading to journeyman status or in which the employee has been employed as a journeyman. The contractor shall
 satisfy this requirement by including appropriate questions in the employee application or by other suitable means. Regardless of
 the method used the contractor's records shall document the findings in each case.
 2.8 The minimum length and type of training for each classification will be as established in the training program selected by the
 contractor and approved by the engineer and FHWA. A program will be approved if it is reasonably calculated to meet the equal
 employment opportunity obligations of the contractor and to qualify the average trainee for journeyman status in the
 classification concerned by the end of the training period... Furthermore, apprenticeship programs registered with the U.S.
 Department of Labor, Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, or with a state apprenticeship agency recognized by the Bureau of
 apprenticeship and training programs approved, but not necessarily sponsored by, the Department of Labor, Manpower
 Administration, Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, will also be considered acceptable provided the training is being
 administered consistent with the equal employment obligations of Federal-aid highway construction contracts.
 2.9 Approval or acceptance of a training program shall be obtained from the engineer prior to beginning work on the
 classification covered by the program. It is the intention of these provisions that training is to be provided in the construction
 crafts rather than clerk-typists or secretarial-type positions. Training will be permissible in lower level management positions,
 such as office engineers, estimators, timekeepers, etc., where the training is oriented toward construction applications and must
 be approved by FHWA. Training in the laborer classification may be permitted, provided significant and meaningful training is
 provided and approved by the engineer. Some offsite training will be permissible as long as the training is an integral part of an
 approved training program and does not comprise a significant part of the overall training.
 2.10 Except as otherwise noted below, the contractor will be reimbursed $10.00 per hour of training given an employee in the
 contract in accordance with an approved training program. As approved by the engineer, reimbursement will be made for
 training persons in excess of the number of trainee hours specified in the contract. Reimbursement will be made even though the
 contractor receives additional training program funds from other sources, provided such other sources do not specifically prohibit
 the contractor from receiving other reimbursement. Reimbursement for offsite training indicated above may only be made to the
 contractor when the trainees are concurrently employed on a federal-aid project and the contractor does one or more of the
 following, and contributes to the cost of the training, provides instruction to the trainee, or pays the trainee's wages during the
 offsite training period. In order receive the reimbursement the trainee must complete at least 500 hours on the project
 2.11 No payment will be made to the contractor if either failure to provide the required training or failure to hire the trainee as a
 journeyman is caused by the contractor and evidences a lack of good faith on the part of the contractor in meeting the
 requirements of this provision. It is normally expected that a trainee will begin training on the project as soon as feasible after
 start of work, utilizing the skill involved and remain on the project as long as training opportunities exist in the trainee's work
 classification or until the trainee has completed the training program. It is not required that all trainees be on board for the entire
 length of the contract. The contractor’s responsibilities under this provision will be fulfilled if the contractor has provided
 acceptable training for the number of trainee hours specified.
 2.12 Trainees shall be paid at least 60 percent of the appropriate minimum journeyman's rate specified in the contract for the first
 half of the training period, 75 percent for the third quarter of the training period, and 90 percent for the last quarter of the training
 period, unless apprentices or trainees in an approved existing program are enrolled as trainees on this project. In that case, the
 appropriate rates approved by the U.S. Department of Labor or Transportation in connection with the existing program will apply
 to all trainees being trained for the same classification who are covered by this provision.
 2.13 Contractor may choose to transfer trainee hours worked on another project, whether MoDOT or not. The contractor must
 submit monthly trainee reports for that project to the RE Office where the hours will be credited. The contractor must submit
 with the monthly trainee reports, copies of the certified payrolls so the RE Office can verify the number of hours worked on the
 project, as well as the wage the trainee was being paid. Once the RE reviews the monthly reports, copies of the monthly reports
 should be sent to the External Civil Rights Division. The RE Office should include with the report a note indicating the hours
 that are being transferred from the other project. Both job numbers must be included in the note.
 2.14 When the job is 50% complete the contractor must have at least 50% of the trainee hours assigned on that job completed.
 The percentage of job completion is based on the total value of the contract paid to the Contractor. The remaining amount of the
 hours must be completed before the completion of the project or the Contractor will be subject to liquidated damages unless a
 GFE is submitted to and approved by the External Civil Rights Division.
 2.15 If the training hours have not been obtained and a GFE has not been displayed upon project completion, the Contractor will
 be assessed liquidated damages in the amount of $20.00 per hour for those hours not realized. For instance, if the project goal
 was 1,000 hours and only 450 hours were met, then liquidated damages would be assessed at 550 x $20.00 = $11,000.00.
 
 15
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 2.16 In the event the External Civil Rights Division denies the Good Faith Effort (GFE) submitted by the contractor, the
 contractor shall have the right to an Administrative Reconsideration Hearing. The request for an Administrative Reconsideration
 Hearing must be made within seven (7) days of the receipt of the denial letter. The Administrative Reconsideration Committee
 may be constituted, as MoDOT deems appropriate and fair, provided no committee member on the Reconsideration Committee
 shall have taken part in the original MoDOT determination that the contractor failed to meet the OJT contract goal and/or failed
 to make adequate good faith efforts to do so.
 2.17 If the Administrative Reconsideration Committee does not find the contactor met the OJT contract goal, and/or does not
 find the contractor made adequate and sufficient good faith efforts to do so, then the Administrative Reconsideration Committee
 will recommend that liquidated damages as outlined in the non-compliance sanctions sections of the OJT Training Special
 Provision will be carried out. If the Administrative Reconsideration Committed does find that the contractor has met a good faith
 effort (GFE), then no liquidated damages will be assessed.
 2.18 If the Contractor does not achieve the full OJT goal, they will not receive partial credit for hours completed. For instance, if
 the goal on the project was 1,000 hours and only 450 were convened, then no reimbursement will be given for any hours fulfilled.
 If the goal on the project is 2,000 hours and only 1,500 hours are completed and no GFE is demonstrated, the contractor will
 receive credit for the 1,500 hours and also be assessed liquidated damages in the amount of the 500 hours there were not met.
 2.19 The contractor shall furnish to the trainee a copy of the training program the contractor will follow in providing the
 training. The contractor shall provide each trainee and the resident engineer with a certification showing the type and length of
 training satisfactorily completed.
 2.20 The contractor shall provide for the maintenance of records and furnish monthly reports documenting the contractor's
 performance under this provision. Monthly reports shall include at least the following information:
 Contractor's name and address
 Period that the report covers
 Job Number, Description, and Federal Aid number
 Information for each employee being trained on the project, including:
 - Name
 - Social Security Number
 - Trade/craft
 - Pay percent, based on portion of training complete (if applicable)
 - Journeyman's full prevailing wage applicable
 - Trainee wage
 - Hours this period
 - Cumulative hours for the project
 Total trainee hours for the project for this period
 Cumulative trainee hours for the project
 2.21 When a contractor submits a trainee who is economically disadvantaged the following information should be submitted
 with the trainee notification to verify this status:
 - The previous year’s tax return verifying the individual’s income is less than the federal poverty guidelines.
 - Verification of enrollment in food stamps received from Missouri Department of Social Services.
 - Verification of housing assistance received from Missouri Department of Social Services.
 
 OPTIONAL ROLLER COMPACTED CONCRETE SHOULDERS AND MAINLINE
 01/16
 1.0 Description. Roller Compacted Concrete (RCC) is an optional method to be used in constructing A2 and A3 shoulders or
 mainline pavement up to 7 inches thick in lieu of conventional PCCP or HMA placement. RCC may be used, as designed in the
 plans, for mainline pavements greater than 7 inches. RCC consists of aggregate, portland cement and water. Supplementary
 cementing materials, such as fly ash, slag cement (ground granulated blast- furnace slag - GGBFS), and silica fume may be used.
 RCC is proportioned, mixed, placed, compacted, and cured in accordance with these specifications. RCC shall conform to the
 lines, grades, thickness, and typical cross section shown in the plans or otherwise established by the Engineer.
 2.0 Materials. All materials shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Materials Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 
 Section
 1005.2
 1005.3
 
 Coarse Aggregate
 Fine Aggregate
 16
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag
 Fly Ash
 Cement
 Concrete Admixture
 Curing Compound
 Water
 
 1017
 1018
 1019
 1054
 407, 1055
 1070
 
 2.1 Aggregate. The plasticity index of the aggregates used shall not exceed 5. The aggregate gradation shall be well-graded
 without gradation gaps and shall meet the following combined gradation for the application type for RCC specified in the
 contract:
 
 Application
 Sieve Size
 1 inch
 ¾ inch
 ½ inch
 3/8 inch
 No. 4
 No. 8
 No. 200
 
 RCC as a Base or Intermediate Lift
 (Overlaid with 2-inch HMA
 or greater)
 Percent Passing by Weight
 100
 --70 - 95
 60 - 85
 40 - 60
 -0-8
 
 RCC as the Final Surface or with a Thin Lift Overlay
 (RCC as the final surface or capped with a thin HMA
 overlay less than 2-inches)
 Percent Passing by Weight
 --100
 85 - 100
 --60 - 85
 40 - 60
 0 - 10
 
 3.0 Mix Design. At least 30 days prior to the beginning of placing RCC on the project, the Contractor shall submit a proposed mix
 design to the Engineer. The target and allowable gradation range of each fraction shall be included. The contractor may be required to
 submit representative samples of each ingredient to Construction and Materials for laboratory testing.
 3.1 Required Information. The mix design shall contain the following information:
 (a) Source, type and specific gravity of portland cement
 (b) Source, type (class, grade, etc.) and specific gravity of supplementary materials, if used
 (c) Source, name, type and amount of admixture, if used
 (d) Source, type (formation, etc.), ledge number if applicable, of the aggregate
 (e) Specific gravity and absorption of each fraction in accordance with AASHTO T 85 for coarse aggregate and
 AASHTO T 84 for fine aggregate, including raw data
 (f) Unit weight of each fraction in accordance with AASHTO T 19
 (g) Batch weights of portland cement and supplemental cementitious materials
 (h) Batch weights of coarse, intermediate and fine aggregates
 (i) Batch weight of water in pounds per cubic yard (optimum moisture content)
 (j) Maximum laboratory density
 (k) The laboratory proctor curves illustrating moisture contents vs. density for each cementitious material content.
 The RCC mix design shall be done in a similar fashion as is done to determine the relationship between the moisture content and
 the unit weight as soils and soil aggregate mixtures. The apparatus and compacted effort used to fabricate the moisture density
 specimens correspond to that described in AASHTO T 180, Method D. Strength specimens shall be made in accordance with
 ASTM C 1176 or ASTM C 1435 at the optimum moisture content for each cementitious material content to verify minimum
 compressive strength requirements.
 3.2 Trial Batch. The Contractor shall prepare and test a trial batch mixture at the mixing facility to verify that the RCC mix
 complies with the design criteria. The trial batch shall be prepared and tested in the presence of the Engineer.
 3.3 Production. Production shall not begin until an approved mix design has been obtained and verified by the trial batch.
 17
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 3.4 Design Strength. The mix design shall have a minimum compressive strength of 3,500 psi within 28 days when specimens
 prepared according to ASTM C 1176 or ASTM C 1435. Compressive strength test shall be performed in accordance with
 AASHTO T 22.
 3.5 Minimum Water Content. The water-cement ratio shall not be lower than 0.25.
 3.6 Minimum Cementitious Content. The total amount of cementitious materials shall not be below 450 pounds per cubic yard.
 3.7 Supplementary Cementitious Material. RCC may use fly ash, slag cement (GGBFS), or silica fume. Ternary mixes will
 be allowed for RCC. Ternary mixes are mixes that contain a combination of portland cement and two supplementary
 cementitious materials. The amount of supplementary cementitious material content shall be limited to the following
 requirements:
 
 18
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Supplementary Cementitious Material (SCM)
 SCM
 Maximum Percent of Total
 Cementitious Material
 Fly Ash (Class C or Class F)
 25 %
 Slag Cement (GGBFS)
 30 %
 Silica Fume
 8%
 Ternary Combinations
 40 %
 4.0 Equipment. RCC shall be constructed with any combination of equipment that will produce a pavement meeting the
 requirements for mixing, transporting, placing, compacting, finishing, and curing as provided in this specification.
 4.1 Mixing Plant: The mixing plant shall be capable of producing RCC to the proportions defined by the final approved mix
 design and within the specified tolerances. The capacity of the plant shall be sufficient to produce a uniform mixture at a rate
 compatible with the placement equipment.
 4.2 Paver: RCC shall be placed with a high-density or conventional asphalt type paver subject to approval by the Engineer. The
 paver shall be of suitable weight and stability to spread and finish the RCC material, without segregation, to the required
 thickness, smoothness, surface texture, cross-section, and grade.
 4.3 Compactors: When a conventional asphalt type paver is used, self-propelled steel drum vibratory rollers shall be used for
 primary compaction. For final compaction, a steel drum roller, operated in a static mode, or a rubber-tired roller may be utilized
 to meet density requirements.
 4.4 Haul Equipment: The hauling equipment shall be smooth, mortar-tight, metal containers capable of discharging the
 concrete at a controlled rate without segregation. Hauling equipment shall have a retractable cover to protect mix from weather
 and excessive evaporation.
 4.5 Access for Inspection and Calibration: The Engineer shall have access at all times for any plant, equipment, or machinery
 to be used in order to check calibration, scales, controls, or operating adjustments.
 5.0 Construction Requirements.
 5.1 Preparation of Subgrade. Before the RCC processing begins, the subgrade and base course must be prepared in accordance
 with Sec 304.
 5.2 Subbase Condition. The surface of the subbase shall be clean and free of foreign material and standing water prior to
 placement of the RCC. The aggregate base shall be uniformly moist at the time of RCC placement. RCC shall not be placed
 upon frozen subbase.
 5.4 Mixing Time. Mixing time shall be adequate to ensure a thorough and complete mixing of all materials. Concrete shall be
 homogeneous with no aggregate segregation. In no case shall the mixing time, after all materials including water are in the
 mixer, be less than 90 seconds.
 5.5 Operating Tolerances. The mixing plant shall receive the quantities of individual ingredients to within the following
 tolerances:
 Material
 Cementitious Materials
 Water
 Aggregates
 
 Variation by Weight
  2.0%
  3.0%
  4.0%
 
 5.6 Plant Calibration. Prior to RCC production, the Contractor shall calibrate the plant in accordance with the manufacturer's
 recommended practice. A copy of the calibration shall be provided to the Engineer when requested.
 5.7 Curing. Immediately after final rolling, the RCC surface shall be kept continuously moist until an approved curing
 compound is applied. The application of the curing compound shall progress such that no more than 10 linear feet of the final
 RCC surface is exposed without curing at any time.
 5.7.1. Water Cure. Water cure shall be applied such that a uniform moist condition on the surface of the RCC is attained.
 Application of this moisture shall be done in a manner that will not erode or damage the finished RCC surface.
 19
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 5.7.2 Curing Compound. When RCC is used as the final surface, either white pigmented curing compound applied at the rate of
 one gallon for each 100 square feet or a tack coat product applied at 0.14 gal/yd 2 shall be used for curing. When RCC is to be
 overlaid with asphalt, the curing compound shall be a tack coat product applied at 0.14 gal/yd 2 in accordance with Sec 407.
 5.8 Weather Conditions.
 5.8.1 Hot Weather Precautions. During periods of hot weather or windy conditions, special precautions shall be taken to
 minimize moisture loss due to evaporation.
 5.8.2 Cold Weather. The contractor shall provide a method, meeting the approval of the engineer, of monitoring the concrete
 that demonstrates that the concrete has been protected from freezing.
 5.8.3 Protection Against Rain. To protect against rain, the contractor shall have on location at all times material for the
 protection of the unhardened concrete. The contractor shall protect the concrete from damage due to rain.
 5.9 Finished Surface. The finished RCC surface shall be smooth, uniform, and continuous without tears, ridges, or aggregate
 segregation once it leaves the paver. RCC mainline pavement shall meet the smoothness criteria of Sec 502.8. When RCC is the
 final surface, the finished surface texture shall be broom finished, diamond ground, or other finishes approved by the engineer.
 All finished surface textures shall be in accordance with Sec 502.4.
 5.9.1 Inaccessible Areas. All areas inaccessible to either roller or paver shall be paved with cast-in-place concrete in accordance
 with Sec 502.
 5.9.2 Handwork. Broadcasting or fanning the RCC material across areas being compacted is not permissible. Such additions of
 materials may only be done immediately behind the paver and before any compaction has taken place.
 5.9.3 Segregation. If segregation occurs in the RCC during paving operations, placement shall cease until corrective measures
 are taken.
 5.10 Cold Joints. Prior to placing fresh RCC mixture against a cold vertical joint, the joint shall be thoroughly cleaned of loose
 or foreign material. The vertical joint face shall be wetted and in a moist condition immediately prior to placement of the
 adjacent lane.
 5.11 Control Joints. Concrete control joints shall be constructed at 15-foot intervals in RCC mainline pavement. Control joint
 spacing for RCC shoulders adjacent to HMA or composite pavement shall be a minimum of 30-foot intervals. RCC shoulders
 adjacent to existing PCC pavement shall have control joints located to match the joints of the adjacent pavement. For all other
 PCC joint spacing; the RCC control joints shall match the adjacent PCC pavement’s joints or cracks not to exceed a 30-foot
 interval. All control joints shall be tooled or cut to 1/3 the depth of the RCC thickness. Sealing the control joints is not required.
 5.12 Opening to Traffic. The Contractor shall protect the RCC from traffic during the curing period. The RCC shoulder
 pavement may be opened to light traffic after one day and opened to unrestricted traffic after 5 days. The RCC mainline
 pavement may be opened to light traffic at 2,500 psi and opened to unrestricted traffic at 3,000 psi.
 6.0 Material Acceptance.
 6.1 Quality Control Testing. The contractor shall perform all quality control tests necessary to control the production and
 construction processes applicable to this specification. Quality control testing shall be performed by technicians qualified
 through MoDOT’s technician certification program. Testing shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, deleterious content,
 aggregate gradation, coarse aggregate absorption, thin or elongated pieces, pavement thickness and density. The contractor shall
 record all test results and furnish a copy to the engineer no later than the beginning of the day following the test.
 6.2 Quality Control Plan. A Quality Control Plan (QCP) for RCC mainline pavement and shoulders will be required as per Sec
 502.11.1.
 6.3 Testing.
 6.3.1 Density. The density shall be determined in accordance with AASHTO T 310, direct transmission. Tests shall be
 performed no later than 30 minutes after the completion of the rolling. Only wet density shall be used for evaluation. QC shall
 determine the density of the RCC shoulder and mainline pavement at a frequency of no less than one per 7500 square yards.
 Sampling locations will be determined by the engineer using random sampling procedures in accordance with ASTM D 3665.
 
 20
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 6.3.2 Thickness. The contractor shall determine thickness of the RCC shoulder and mainline pavement by testing the fresh
 concrete. The Resident Engineer will need to review and approve the testing procedure. QC shall determine the thickness of the
 RCC mainline pavement and shoulders at a frequency of no less than one per 7,500 square yards. Sampling locations will be
 determined by the engineer using random sampling procedures in accordance with ASTM D 3665.
 
 6.4 Aggregate Gradation. A sieve analysis shall be performed once a week. Testing shall be performed in accordance with
 AASHTO T 27 from randomly sampled material taken from the discharge gate of storage bins or from the conveyor belt.
 6.5 Deleterious Materials. Deleterious content shall be determined each day at a frequency of one test per 7500 square yards of
 material placed or fraction thereof. Test shall be performed in accordance with MoDOT TM 71 from randomly sampled material
 taken from the discharge gate of storage bins or from the conveyor belt. Tests shall be performed on coarse aggregate fractions.
 6.6 Absorption. Samples for coarse aggregate absorption shall be taken from the discharge gate of storage bins or from the
 conveyor belt at least once every 2000 cubic yards with a minimum of once per project. Coarse aggregate absorption shall be
 performed in accordance with AASHTO T 85.
 6.7 Thin or Elongated. Thin or elongated pieces shall be determined on samples of coarse aggregate taken from the discharge
 gate of the storage bins or from the conveyor belt. Test shall be performed in accordance with ASTM D 4791 using a ratio of
 5:1. Test shall be performed on aggregate particles retained on the ¾ in. sieve. Tests shall be performed at least once every
 10,000 cubic yards with a minimum of once per project.
 6.8 Retained Samples. All aggregate samples taken by the contractor, including but not limited to gradation, deleterious,
 absorption, and thin or elongated pieces shall be retained for the engineer for a minimum of seven days unless otherwise
 instructed. The retained sample shall be the remaining half of the final reduction in sample size obtained for QC testing. These
 samples shall be maintained in clean covered containers, without contamination, readily accessible to the engineer. The retained
 sample’s identification shall consist of, but is not limited to:
 (a) Time and date sampled
 (b) Product specification number
 (c) Type of sample, i.e. belt, bin, stockpile
 (d) Lot and sublot designation
 (e) Sampler/Tester
 (f) Project Job Number
 6.9 Acceptance.
 6.9.1 Density. The density shall not be less than 98 percent of the maximum laboratory density.
 6.9.1.1 Compressive Strength. Roller compacted concrete properly placed and compacted, but not meeting the density
 requirements shall be cored and tested for compressive strength at no additional cost. Cores shall be taken in accordance with
 AASHTO T 24. The compressive strength shall be determined by approved methods. Cores shall be tested for compressive
 strength within 7 days of density testing. If the tested area achieves the design strength, the material will be paid for at full price.
 Areas that fail to comply with the design strength will be deemed unacceptable and shall be addressed in accordance with Sec
 105.11.
 6.9.2 Thickness. The thickness shall not be deficient by more than 10 percent of the plan thickness. Areas that fail to comply
 with the design thickness will be deemed unacceptable and shall be addressed in accordance with Sec 105.11.
 6.9.3 Aggregate Gradation. When one test is outside the allowable gradation range, immediate steps shall be taken to correct
 the gradation.
 6.9.4 Deleterious Materials. When one test is outside the specification limits, immediate steps shall be taken to correct the
 deleterious content.
 6.9.5 Absorption. The contractor shall halt production and make appropriate adjustments whenever either of the following
 occurs:
 
 21
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 (a) One point falls outside the action limit line for individual measurement
 (b) Two points in a row fall outside the specification limit but within the action limit line for individual measurement
 6.9.5.1 Action Limits. The following action limit shall be used to control the aggregate absorption.
 Individual Measurements
 Control Parameter
 Action Limit
 Absorption
 Mix Design plus 0.3% to Mix Design
 plus 0.6%
 6.9.6 Thin or Elongated Pieces. The coarse aggregate shall not have more than 5 percent thin or elongated pieces.
 7.0 Quality Assurance.
 7.1 Independent Samples. Corrective action shall be required when any QA tests are outside the required ranges or action limits.
 The engineer will at a minimum, independently test at the following frequency:
 
 Test
 Density
 
 Frequency
 1 test per 30,000 square yards
 
 Thickness
 
 1 test per 30,000 square yards
 
 Aggregate Gradation
 
 1 per project
 
 Coarse Aggregate Deleterious
 
 1 per week
 
 Absorption
 
 1 per 10,000 cubic yards
 
 Thin or Elongated
 
 1 per project
 
 7.2 Test Procedures. The engineer will use the same test procedures as the contractor for determining the density and thickness
 of the RCC.
 7.3 Retained Samples. The QA inspector will test at least ten percent of the retained portion of the QC samples for aggregate
 gradations and deleterious content. The QA inspector will test at least twenty percent of the QC retained samples for absorption
 and thin or elongated pieces. Retained samples will be chosen at random. A comparison will be considered favorable when the
 QA results of a QC retained sample are within the applicable limits specified in Sec 403.
 8.0 Method of Measurement. Final measurement of the completed pavement will not be made except for authorized changes
 during construction, or where appreciable errors are found in the contract quantity. Where required, measurement of the RCC
 mainline pavement and shoulders, complete in place, will be made to the nearest 1/10 square yard. The revision or correction
 will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 9.0 Basis of Payment. The accepted quantities of RCC will be paid for at the contract unit price, for specified A2 or A3
 shoulders or mainline. Sec 610 for smoothness pay factor adjustments will apply to the final RCC mainline pavement surface.
 The contract unit price for A2 or A3 shoulders or mainline pavement will be considered as full compensation for all materials,
 equipment, tools, labor, and incidentals necessary to satisfactorily complete the work. No additional compensation will be
 allowed for any excess thickness.
 
 ASPHALT CEMENT PRICE INDEX
 12/11; 01/17
 1.0 Asphalt Cement Price Index. Adjustments will be made to the payments due the Contractor for any plant mix bituminous
 base, plant mix bituminous pavement, plant mix bituminous surface leveling, asphaltic concrete pavement and ultrathin bonded
 asphalt wearing surface that contains performance graded (PG) asphalt binder when it has been determined that the Monthly
 Asphalt Index for the month prior to placement of the asphalt mixture has fluctuated from the Monthly Asphalt Index for the
 month the project was let. The Monthly Asphalt Index shall be established for each calendar month as the average of the
 midpoint selling prices of PG64-22 for St. Louis and Kansas City, Missouri areas, as published by Poten & Partners Inc. in the
 Asphalt Weekly Monitor®, on the first Monday preceding the date of the normal monthly MoDOT letting. For months when
 there is no normal monthly letting, the published price on the third Monday of that month shall be used for the Monthly Asphalt
 
 22
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Index. Special lettings shall have no effect on determining the Monthly Asphalt Index. The asphalt base index shall be the
 Monthly Asphalt Index for the month of the bid opening. For calculation of the price adjustment, any asphalt placed on the first
 day of a month will be included with the asphalt placed the previous month in order to keep price adjustments in sync with the
 payment estimate period schedule.
 1.1 The price adjustment will be applied to the actual amount of virgin PG asphalt binder used by the Contractor for all asphalt
 items specified in 1.0. For asphalt mixture that are paid for with square yard pay items, the price adjustments will be made for
 applicable equivalent tons, as calculated by the engineer, based upon the plan square yard quantity and thickness converted to
 tons, excluding the 1:1 wedge. The price adjustment will be applied to all Job Order Contract projects for all quantities of the
 wet ton and square yard asphalt mix. The percentage of virgin PG asphalt binder as shown in the job mix formula, in accordance
 with Sec 401, Sec 403 and Sec 413, will be the basis for price adjustments for any asphalt mix type placed on the project. The
 effective asphalt binder obtained from the use of Recycled Asphalt Pavement (RAP) and/or Recycled Asphalt Shingles (RAS)
 will not be eligible for adjustment. The Monthly Asphalt Index for PG64-22 will be applied to the asphalt mix for mixes using
 any PG asphalt binder.
 2.0 Price Adjustment Calculated. To determine the price adjustment for any asphalt mix specified in this provision, the
 following formula will be used.
 A = (B x C/100) x (D-E)
 Where:
 
 A = Dollar value adjustment for mix placed during the payment estimate period
 B = Tons of asphalt mixture placed during the payment estimate period
 C = Percent of virgin PG asphalt binder as listed in the job mix formula in use
 D = The Monthly Asphalt Index for the month prior to the month the asphalt mix was placed
 E = The asphalt base index = the Monthly Asphalt Index for the month the project was let
 
 2.1 The engineer will apply the price adjustments, as determined by the price adjustment calculation established herein, for each
 payment estimate period in which asphalt is placed, except for any asphalt placed after the allowable contract time period as
 defined in Sec 108. For asphalt placed after the contract completion time limit, the "D" value used for the price adjustment
 calculated shall be either the last "D" value prior to the date that contract time was exceeded, or the current monthly "D" value,
 whichever is lower.
 3.0 Optional. This provision is optional. If the bidder wishes to be bound by this provision, the bidder shall execute the
 acceptance form in the Bid. Failure by the bidder to execute the acceptance form will be interpreted to mean election to not
 participate in the Asphalt Cement Price Index. If the Asphalt Cement Price Index is accepted, PG asphalt binder for the project
 will not be eligible for a material allowance as described in Sec 109.
 
 SAFETY PLAN
 04/16
 1.0 Description. This contractor shall submit to the engineer a project Safety Plan (SP) for all work performed by the contractor
 and all subcontractors. The purpose of the SP is to encourage and enable all work to be performed in the safest possible manner
 and that all parties involved are aware of their individual responsibility for safety on the jobsite.
 1.1 The SP shall be completed by the contractor and provided to the engineer prior to the beginning of any construction activity
 or phase on the project.
 1.2 The contractor shall designate a person to serve as Project Safety Manager (PSM). The PSM shall be responsible for
 implementing and overseeing the SP. The PSM is not required to be present on the project at all times, but must be available to
 address safety issues and needs.
 1.3 The PSM shall make revisions to the SP as necessary. Any new project activities or phases shall be included in the SP prior
 to work beginning on that activity or phase.
 1.4 An example Safety Plan is available at: www.modot.org/safetyplan
 2.0 Emergency Preparedness. The SP shall outline and detail for all workers, the specific procedures and actions necessary to
 respond to a jobsite emergency and the measures taken to communicate these requirements to all workers.
 2.1 The SP shall include a list of local emergency contacts including phone numbers. A copy of the emergency contact list shall
 be accessible to workers.
 
 23
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 2.2 In the case where there is no cellular or land line phone service at the jobsite, the SP shall identify how to reach the nearest
 available phone service.
 3.0 Project Safety Analysis. The SP should contain a basic Project Safety Analysis (PSA) that outlines the actions necessary to
 complete each activity or phase of the project. The SP shall include a general description of the primary activities or steps
 required to safely complete the project.
 3.1 Each activity should also include a general description of the work involved along with the known risks associated with the
 activity. In addition the PSA should outline the controls for those risks, including any Personal Protection Equipment (PPE)
 requirements for that activity or phase, and whether or not the activity or phase requires a specific safety meeting prior to
 beginning the activity or phase.
 3.2 Submittal of the PSA for all activities or phases is not required with the initial submittal of the SP; however, the PSA for
 each activity or phase shall be completed prior to the beginning of that activity or phase.
 4.0 Safety Meetings. The SP shall include the types of safety meetings that will be required of and conducted by the contractor.
 5.0 Safety Training. The SP shall identify the required safety training provided to the contractor’s personnel. The contractor
 shall require that the appropriate safety training for the contractor’s personnel is completed prior to the beginning of work on
 each activity or phase.
 5.1 The SP shall identify the recommended safety training needs and PPE for MoDOT employees who will be exposed to the
 work activities. MoDOT will provide safety training and PPE to MoDOT employees based on MoDOT safety policies.
 6.0 Payment. There will be no direct payment for compliance with this Safety Plan provision.
 SAFETY EDGESM
 04/16; 04/18
 1.0 Description. An approved longitudinal shoulder wedge system shall be used to create a beveled edge at the edge of
 pavement for a roadway without a paved shoulder, or at the edge of shoulder for pavement with a paved shoulder up to and
 including 4 feet in width.
 2.0 Construction Requirements. The Safety Edge shall be constructed as shown in Standard Plan 401.00 The construction
 tolerance of the 30 degree Safety EdgeSM shall be plus or minus 5 degrees.
 2.1 The shoulder wedge system shall maintain contact between the device and road shoulder surface and allow automatic
 transition to cross roads, driveways and obstructions. The device must be removable or be able to be lifted when not in use.
 2.2 All shoulder wedge systems to be used for the purpose of creating a Safety EdgeSM must be approved by the engineer. The
 device must be designed to constrain the material, increase the consolidation of the extruded profile, and provide a smooth
 wedged surface. The use of a conventional single plate strike-off is not permitted.
 3.0 Basis of Payment. There will be no direct payment for compliance with the requirements of this provision.
 
 E-CONSTRUCTION
 01/17
 1.0 Description. e-Construction is a paperless construction administration delivery process that includes electronic submission
 of construction documents, approval of documents with digital signatures, and communication between stakeholders by mobile
 devices. e-Construction saves both time and money for all stakeholders involved, simplifies document storage, and eliminates
 waste of paper and other resources. This provision does not apply to the contract or other contract execution documents.
 2.0 Document Submittals.
 2.1 The contractor shall submit all required documents to MoDOT electronically, except as described in section 2.2 of this
 provision. Documents to be submitted electronically include, but are not limited to, Change Orders, Request to Subcontract
 
 24
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Work (C-220), Project Payrolls, Progress Schedules, Value Engineering proposals, Safety Plans, Quality Plans, Pre-Construction
 conference submittals, etc. All documents shall be submitted in standard pdf format, except when otherwise directed by the
 engineer.
 2.2 The Affidavit for Compliance with the Prevailing Wage Law and the Contractor’s Affidavit Regarding Settlement of Claims
 (Form C-242) require a notarization and therefore, by law, must be submitted on paper.
 2.3 The engineer will submit project documents to the contractor via email or through other secure file sharing sites, except that
 the Contractor Performance Questionnaire will be submitted by certified mail.
 2.4 Documents that require multiple signatures, such as change orders, must include all required signatures on the original
 electronic document, without scanning.
 2.5 Project Payrolls from subcontractors shall be digitally signed by the subcontractor. Payrolls shall be submitted as separate
 files per contractor per pay period.
 3.0 Digital Signature.
 3.1 All electronic documents that require signature, such as those listed in section 2.1, must be signed electronically. Scanning
 an ink-signed document is not considered a valid digital signature.
 3.2 All users who are authorized to sign documents for the contractor shall submit their Digital Signature Certificate (Public Key
 .fdf file) to the Division of Construction prior to signing any documents. This file is used to validate the user’s signature on
 documents. An authorization letter is also required for each person authorized to sign documents. A Digital Signature for
 Contractors Quick Reference Guide (QRG) is available on MoDOT’s Engineering Policy Guide at http://epg.modot.mo.gov/
 (click on QRG in the left hand column).
 4.0 Communication. The contractor shall be able to communicate and exchange information with MoDOT staff by email and
 mobile phone.
 5.0 Basis of Payment. No payment will be made for compliance with this provision.
 ELECTRONIC INFORMATION FOR BIDDER’S AUTOMATION
 07/17
 1.0 Description. If electronic information for bidder’s automation is provided in the Electronic Deliverables, it is for information
 only. This information, used for project design and quantity estimation purposes, is provided for the bidder’s use in automation
 of bid estimating, project staking, automated machine guidance and other construction methods.
 2.0 Information Provided. Electronic information may be provided consisting of survey and design information including but
 not limited to 3-dimensional design models, cross-section models, alignment data, and plan view geometry. This information
 does not constitute part of the bid documents or contract documents.
 3.0 Disclaimers. The electronic information shall not be considered a representation of actual conditions to be encountered
 during construction. Furnishing this information does not relieve a bidder or contractor from the responsibility of making an
 investigation of conditions to be encountered including, but not limited to site visits, and basing the bid on information obtained
 from these investigations, and the professional interpretations and judgment of the bidder or contractor. The bidder or contractor
 shall assume the risk of error if the information is used for any purposes for which the information was not intended. The
 Commission makes no representation as to the accuracy or reliability of the information, since the information may not be
 representative of the sealed contract documents. Any assumption the bidder or contractor may make from this electronic
 information is at the bidder or contractor's risk; none are intended by the Missouri Highways and Transportation Commission.
 The bidder or contractor assumes the sole risk of liability or loss if the bidder or contractor does rely on this electronic
 information to its detriment, delay or loss.
 4.0 Basis of Payment. No payment will be made for compliance with this provision.
 
 25
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 "RATE OUR WORK ZONE" SIGNS
 03/12; 05/12
 1.0 Description. This work shall consist of furnishing and installing a 72 X 36 inch or 48 X 24 inch "Rate Our Work Zone"
 signs, as indicated in the plans. The contractor shall furnish signs, labor, equipment, posts and hardware for installation of the
 signs in accordance with this provision, or as directed by the engineer.
 2.0 Material. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details.
 3.0 Construction Requirements. The signs shall be post-mounted and placed approximately 500 feet before the beginning of
 the project limits or the "ROAD WORK AHEAD" sign or the "ROAD WORK NEXT XX MILES" sign, if used, when these
 signs are located outside the project limits for each direction of travel affected by the project. A project on only one pavement of
 a dual divided facility will require only one sign. The contractor shall maintain all signs until completion of the project. Upon
 completion of the project, the contractor shall remove the signs, posts and hardware. The signs, posts and hardware shall remain
 the property of the contractor.
 4.0 Basis of Payment. The accepted quantity of signs will be paid for at the contract unit price per square feet of construction
 signs.
 
 "POINT OF PRESENCE" SIGNS
 03/12; 05/12
 1.0 Description. This work shall consist of furnishing and installing a 36 X 48 inch or a 96 X 48 inch “Point of Presence" signs,
 as indicated in the plans. The contractor shall furnish signs, labor, equipment, posts and hardware for installation of the sign in
 accordance with this provision or as directed by the engineer.
 2.0 Construction Requirements. The sign shall be placed as shown on the plans. A project impacting only one direction of a
 divided highway will require only one sign. The contractor shall maintain all signs until completion of the project. Upon
 completion of the project, the “Point of Presence” signs shall remain in place ninety days with the “Completed as Promised”
 decal or plaque attached. After the ninety day period expires, the contractor shall be required to remove the sign. The sign, decal
 or plaque, posts and hardware will remain the property of the contractor.
 2.1 The 36 X 48 inch “Point of Presence” sign shall be post mounted on two 3-pound/foot U-channel posts, or one-2 ½ inch
 perforated square steel tube post.
 2.2 The 96 X 48 inch "Point of Presence" sign shall be post mounted on three 3-pound/foot U-channel posts with 32-inch
 spacing between posts.
 3.0 Basis of Payment. The accepted quantity of "Point of Presence" signs will be paid for at the contract unit price per square
 feet of construction signing. The “Completed as Promised” decal or plaque shall be considered incidental to the “Point of
 Presence” sign.
 
 SERVICE SIGNING
 1.0 Description. All installation, relocation and repair of Missouri LOGO, Tourist Oriented Destination Signs (TODS) and
 General Service Signing shall be coordinated between the engineer, contractor and the designated Missouri LOGO
 representative.
 1.1 It shall be noted by the contractor that Missouri LOGOS is responsible for the installation, relocation and repair of all
 LOGO, TODS and General Service Signs on MoDOT owned right of way. The contractor shall be solely responsible and liable
 for determining any impact to LOGO, TODS or General Service Signing due to contractor operations during construction of this
 contract. The contractor shall be responsible for notifying Missouri LOGOS at the time of the preconstruction meeting when a
 service sign is determined to be impacted and advise Missouri LOGOS of the project details. The Missouri LOGO representative
 will attend these meetings at their discretion.
 
 26
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 The Missouri LOGO representative shall be contacted 24 hours a day, 7 days per week at (573) 291-6788.
 1.2 Missouri LOGOS will be responsible any installation or relocation of service signs necessary for this contract. If Missouri
 LOGO's has to perform work within the limits of the project, Missouri LOGOS will conduct work so as not to interfere with or
 hinder the progress or completion of the work being performed by the contractor. Full cooperation of the contractors involved, in
 careful and complete coordination of their respective activities in the area, will be required.
 2.0 Basis of Payment. No direct payment will be made to the contractor to recover the cost of equipment, labor, materials or
 time required to fulfill this provision.
 
 REVISIONS TO 2017 MISSOURI STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION
 
 SECTION 101-DEFINITION OF TERMS
 Delete Sec 101.1 and substitute the following:
 
 10/17
 
 101.1 Abbreviations.
 AASHTO
 
 American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
 
 AISC
 
 American Institute of Steel Construction
 
 AGC
 
 Associated General Contractors of America
 
 ANSI
 
 American National Standards Institute
 
 AREA
 
 American Railroad Engineering Association
 
 ASME
 
 American Society of Mechanical Engineers
 
 ASTM
 
 ASTM International
 
 AWG
 
 American Wire Gauge
 
 AWPA
 
 American Wood-Preservers' Association
 
 AWS
 
 American Welding Society
 
 AWWA
 
 American Water Works Association
 
 CFR
 
 Code of Federal Regulations
 
 CS
 
 Commercial Standards, U. S. Department of Commerce
 
 CSR
 
 Code of State Regulations
 
 COE
 
 Corps of Engineers
 
 CUF
 
 Commercially Useful Function
 
 DBE
 
 Disadvantaged Business Enterprise
 
 EEI
 
 Electrical Engineer's Institute
 
 EEO
 
 Equal Employment Opportunity
 
 EPA
 
 Environmental Protection Agency
 
 EPG
 
 Engineering Policy Guide
 
 27
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 ESAL
 
 Equivalent 18-kip Single Axle Load
 
 FCC
 
 Federal Communications Commission
 
 FHWA
 
 Federal Highway Administration
 
 GGBFS
 
 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag
 
 GRI
 
 Geosynthetic Research Institute
 
 ICEA
 
 Insulated Cable Engineers Association
 
 IMSA
 
 International Municipal Signal Association
 
 ITE
 
 Institute of Transportation Engineers
 
 LED
 
 Light Emitting Diode
 
 MASH
 
 AASHTO Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware
 
 MDC
 
 Missouri Department of Conservation
 
 MDNR
 
 Missouri Department of Natural Resources
 
 MGS
 
 Midwest Guardrail System
 
 MHTC
 
 Missouri Highways and Transportation Commission
 
 MoDOT
 
 Missouri Department of Transportation
 
 MSDS
 
 Material Safety Data Sheet
 
 MUTCD
 
 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
 
 NCHRP 350
 
 National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) Report 350, Recommended Procedures for the
 Safety Performance Evaluation of Highway Features
 
 NEC
 
 National Electrical Code
 
 NEMA
 
 National Electrical Manufacturers Association
 
 NESC
 
 National Electrical Safety Code
 
 NFPA
 
 National Fire Protection Association
 
 NRCS
 
 Natural Resources Conservation
 
 NRMCA
 
 National Ready Mixed Concrete Association
 
 NTPEP
 
 National Transportation Product Evaluation Program
 
 SECTION 104-SCOPE OF WORK
 Delete Sec 104.6.2.6 and substitute the following:
 
 01/18
 
 104.6.2.6 An electronic copy of the complete proposal shall be submitted to the engineer for review. The contractor may submit
 a conceptual proposal for approval stating the basic proposal and approximate cost savings in order to provide the contractor with
 the opportunity to submit an idea without large initial development costs if the proposal is rejected. Approval or disapproval of
 proposals will be granted within ten days of receipt of the proposal.
 
 28
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTION 107-LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC
 Delete Sec 107.13.2.1 and substitute the following:
 
 01/18
 
 107.13.2.1 Commercial Liability Insurance. The contractor shall carry commercial general liability insurance and commercial
 automobile liability insurance from a company authorized to issue insurance in Missouri. Each such policy shall name the
 Commission, and the Missouri Department of Transportation and its employees, as additional named insureds, in amounts
 sufficient to cover the sovereign immunity limits for Missouri public entities as calculated by the Missouri Department of
 Insurance, Financial Institutions and Professional Registration, and published annually in the Missouri Register pursuant to
 Section 537.610, RSMo. Each policy shall be endorsed to cover liability arising from blasting if applicable, other inherently
 dangerous activities, and underground property damage. Each policy shall be endorsed to include broad form general liability,
 contractual liability and completed operations coverage.
 SECTION 202-REMOVAL OF ROADWAYS AND BUILDINGS
 Delete Sec 202.2.4 and substitute the following:
 
 10/17
 
 202.2.4 Salvage. All material designated in the contract to be salvaged for Commission use from existing structures or
 improvements shall be removed without damage, in sections that may be readily handled, transported and stored as approved by
 the engineer. Unless otherwise designated in the contract, all coldmilled material, existing guardrail, and guard cable material
 designated for removal shall become the property of the contractor. All buildings, material and equipment of any description not
 designated for salvage by the Commission shall become the property of the contractor, unless owned and claimed by a political
 subdivision or utility company. Salvaged material becoming the property of the contractor shall not be stored on the right of
 way, nor shall any portion of the right of way or land owned by the Commission be used by the contractor as a place of sale for
 salvaged material.
 SECTION 407-TACK COAT
 Delete Sec 407.5 and substitute the following:
 
 01/18
 
 407.5 Method of Measurement. Measurement of asphalt emulsion to the nearest gallon will be made in accordance with Sec
 1015. If water is added to asphalt emulsion, the quantity to be paid for will be determined prior to the addition of water.
 SECTION 408-PRIME COAT
 Delete Sec 408.5 and substitute the following:
 
 01/18
 
 408.5 Method of Measurement. Bituminous material will be measured to the nearest gallon in accordance with Sec 1015.
 SECTION 409-SEAL COAT
 Delete Sec 409.8.3 and substitute the following:01/18
 409.8.3 Final measurement for binder will be made to the nearest gallon in accordance with Sec 1015. Any revision or correction
 will be computed and added to or deducted from the contract quantity.
 SECTION 501-CONCRETE
 Delete Sec 501.10.2 and substitute the following:
 
 01/18
 
 501.10.2 Air Content Limitations. When air-entrained concrete is used, the mix design target range for quantity of air content
 by volume shall not be less than 4.5 percent or greater than 7.5 percent. When field measured air content exceeds 7.5 percent, but
 is less than or equal to 9.0 percent, the concrete may be placed if allowed by the contractor’s quality control plan and at the
 contractor’s risk that all other concrete requirements will be met, including strength. When field measured air content is less than
 4.5 percent, the concrete may be re-dosed with air entrainment admixture in accordance with Section 501.10.4. Under no
 circumstances shall any concrete be incorporated into the work with an air content less than 4.5 percent or greater than 9.0
 percent.
 
 29
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Delete Sec 501.10.4 thru 501.10.4.3 and substitute the following:
 
 01/18
 
 501.10.4 Re-dosing. When the measured air content is below the minimum specified limit, the contractor will be allowed one
 attempt per mixer truck load to re-dose the concrete in the field. The contractor shall obtain approval of the Re-Dosing Plan from
 the engineer prior to the start of work. The Re-dosing Plan shall address the following:
 (a) Field measurement of the air entrainment admixture
 (b) Brand of air entrainment admixture being used
 (c) Incorporation and mixing of the air entrainment admixture
 (d) The use of additional water
 SECTION 608 CONCRETE MEDIAN, MEDIAN STRIP, SIDWALK, CURB RAMPS, STEPS AND PAVED
 APPROACHES
 Renumber Sec 608.3.7 to 608.3.8 and renumber subsequent sections accordingly. Add new Sec 608.3.7 thru 608.3.7.2.
 
 01/18
 
 608.3.7 Concrete strength and air content shall be tested at the required QC and QA frequencies. Concrete strength shall be
 tested with either cylinders or the maturity method. Concrete shall have a minimum 28-day strength of 4000 psi. Air content shall
 be a minimum of a percent.
 608.3.7.1 The contractor shall measure concrete strength and air content at a frequency of one test per 100 cubic yards. The
 engineer shall measure concrete strength and air content at a frequency of one test per 500 cubic yards.
 608.3.7.2 No concrete strength and air content testing will be required on any day when the total volume of concrete placed in a
 day is less than 3 cubic yards.
 SECTION 616 TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL
 Delete Sec 616.3.3 and substitute the following:
 
 01/18; 04/18
 
 616.3.3 The contractor shall:
 (a) Designate an individual as the Work Zone Specialist (WZS) who is knowledgeable and competent by training
 and/or certification in the principles of proper temporary traffic control in accordance with Chapter 6 of the MUTCD,
 and who has the primary responsibility, with sufficient authority, for implementing the traffic management plan and
 other safety and mobility aspects of the project. The WZS shall be directly involved with daily traffic management, and
 shall communicate pertinent information with the engineer either in person or via telecommunication. Duties of the
 WZS shall include monitoring the work zone to ensure an efficient flow of traffic, correcting any failed or misaligned
 traffic control signs or devices, and recommending traffic management improvements to the engineer. The name,
 certification, and a 24-hour contact number for the WZS shall be provided to the engineer prior to the start of work. If
 the contractor makes a change in the designated WZS, the engineer shall be notified immediately. The WZS shall be
 trained and certified by a qualified person as defined by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
 The WZS shall have a card and/or certificate that includes the WZS’s name, instructor’s nam e and title,
 training entity/agency, date of training, and signature of the instructor. Re-certification of the WZS shall be
 required a minimum of every four years.
 (b) Ensure all contractor personnel are trained in traffic control to a level commensurate with their responsibilities.
 (c) The contractor shall obtain authorization from the engineer for any lane closure or traffic shift at least two working
 days prior to the planned closure or lane shift. Requests for complete road closures, or any imposition of height, width
 or weight restrictions shall be submitted to the engineer for approval at least 15 calendar days prior to the planned
 closure or restriction. The engineer reserves the right to deny any request for lane closure, traffic shift, road closure or
 restrictions of height, width or weight that the engineer determines could be in conflict with other known or anticipated
 traffic impacts, including but not limited to, outstanding permits that have been issued by the Commission for oversized
 or overweight loads.
 (d) Perform quality control of work zones to promote consistency and ensure compliance with contract documents,
 policies and guidelines.
 
 30
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Delete Sec 616.4.3 and substitute the following:
 
 01/18
 
 616.4.3 Each flagger, automated flagger assistance devices (AFAD) operator, portable signal flagging device (PSFD) operator
 and pilot vehicle operator shall maintain a valid flagger certification card that certifies the individual has been trained by a
 qualified person as defined by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, in the principles and procedures of flagging in
 accordance with Chapter 6 of the MUTCD. Flagger certification cards shall include the flagger’s name, instructor’s name and
 title, training entity/agency, date and signature of the instructor. Flagger certifications shall be provided to the engineer prior to
 flagging operations. Flagger re-certification shall be required a minimum of every four years. Certifications will not be
 required in emergency situations that arise due to actions beyond the contractor’s control when flagging is necessary to maintain
 safe traffic control on a temporary basis. All flagging, AFAD, PFD and pilot vehicle operations shall be in accordance with the
 MUTCD. Flaggers and pilot vehicles shall be provided as shown on the plans or as approved or directed by the engineer. When
 not specified in the plans, the contractor may use a Type B (Red/Yellow Lens) AFAD PSFD or pilot vehicle to supplement the
 flagging operation upon approval from the engineer. When two-way traffic is maintained over a single lane, each flagger, AFAD
 operator, if used in tandem, and pilot vehicle operator involved in the traffic flagging operation shall be equipped with a portable,
 two-way, communication system approved by the engineer. When the AFED or PSFD are not in use they shall be removed from
 the roadside.
 Delete Sec 616.5.2.2 and substitute the following:
 
 10/17
 
 616.5.2.2 Overhead lighting shall be provided for flaggers and other specified locations shown on the plans. Lighting in these
 areas shall provide a minimum maintained intensity of 5 footcandles.
 Renumber Sec 616.10 to 616.11 and renumber subsequent sections accordingly. Add new Sec 616.10 thru 616.10.3.
 
 04/18
 
 616.10 Radar Speed Advisory System
 616.10.1 The contractor shall place the Radar Speed Advisory System at the location shown on the plans or as directed by the
 engineer.
 616.10.2 The contractor shall deploy, operate and maintain the Radar Speed Advisory System as specified in the traffic control
 plan and in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations for the duration of the project at the contractor ’s expense. The
 contractor shall program the Radar Speed Advisory System as directed by the engineer and shall not include advertising,
 animation, rapid flashing, dissolving, exploding, scrolling, or other dynamic elements as stated in Chapter 2L of the MUTCD.
 616.10.3 When the Radar Speed Advisory System is not in use, it shall be turned away from traffic. When not required for
 longer than a 24-hour period, the Radar Speed Advisory System shall be stored in accordance with Sec 107.5.
 SECTION 622-PAVEMENT AND BRIDGE SURFACE REMOVAL AND TEXTURING
 Added Sec 622.2.3.1:
 
 01/18
 
 622.2.3.1 A temporary asphalt wedge transition shall be installed, maintained, and removed at the contractor’s expense for each
 vertical lip created from a cold milled depth transition when the contractor opens the cold milled depth transition to traffic prior
 to resurfacing. The temporary asphalt wedge shall be, in the opinion of the engineer, of sufficient length and texture to provide a
 smooth transition from the existing pavement or bridge surface to the cold milled surface. Temporary asphalt wedges shall be
 removed prior to the resurfacing.
 Delete Sec 622.10.3.1 and substitute the following:
 
 01/18
 
 622.10.3.1 Except for cold milling of depth transition sections and butt joints, all pavement that is cold milled for the purpose of
 resurfacing shall receive the first lift of resurfacing during the same day or night work shift as the cold milling operation.
 SECTION 625-SLAB STABILIZATION
 Delete Sec 625.10.4.2 and substitute the following:
 
 10/17
 
 625.10.4.2 Asphalt cement shall be measured to the nearest gallon in accordance with Sec. 1015.
 SECTION 701-DRILLED SHAFTS
 Delete Sec 701.4.10.3 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 31
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 701.4.10.3 Video Camera Inspection. The primary means of inspecting a shaft excavation, steel casing and the rock socket shall
 be by video camera lowered into the shaft. The contractor shall furnish all equipment necessary to conduct the camera inspection.
 The contractor shall operate the camera and supporting equipment under the direction of the engineer in such a manner as to
 obtain optimum results from the equipment. The video camera and lighting equipment shall be capable of operating in dry or
 submerged conditions encountered during the inspection. The excavated shaft shall have the engineer’s approval prior to
 proceeding with construction.
 Delete Sec 701.4.10.3.2 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 701.4.10.3.2 Drawings. The contractor shall submit layout drawings to the engineer showing the relative position of all
 components of the video inspection system, including type and size of barge or other work area. The information submitted shall
 include a written description of the operating procedure in a step-by-step sequence and shall state the source of power.
 Delete Sec 701.4.10.3.3 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 701.4.10.3.3 Shaft Inspection. Inspection of a shaft by video camera shall be performed as directed by the engineer. The
 excavated shaft, including the rock socket when applicable, shall be thoroughly cleaned of all loose fragments, sediment and
 turbidity prior to inspection. The camera shall be operated such that optimum clarity of detail can be obtained and all surface
 areas of the shaft, including the rock socket and the rock socket’s base, can be observed. All scanning of the rock surfaces shall
 be recorded. After completion of the inspection of a rock socket, the engineer will direct whether or not drilling of the shaft shall
 be continued to a greater depth. Recordings shall be furnished to and shall become the property of the engineer upon completion
 of the work.
 SECTION 702-LOAD-BEARING PILES
 Delete Sec 702.2 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 702.2 Material. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Item
 Reinforcing Steel for Concrete
 Cast-In-Place Pile Shells (Thick Shell Type)
 Welded or Seamless Steel Pipe
 Closure Plates
 
 Section/ Specification
 1036
 ASTM A 252, Grade 2 or 3
 AASHTO M 270, Grade 50 (ASTM
 A 709 Grade 50)
 AASHTO M 270, Grade 50 (ASTM
 A 709 Grade 50)
 SAE-1010 or SAE-1015
 SAE-1020
 ASTM A 27, Grade 65-35 or ASTM
 A 148, Grade 90-60
 1080, ASTM A 123,
 ASTM A 780*
 
 Structural Steel Pile
 Fluted Pipe
 Forged Steel Tips or Noses
 Pile Point Reinforcement
 Galvanizing
 Galvanizing Repair
 *Zinc rich paints will not be allowed.
 Delete Sec 702.2.3 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 702.2.3 Pile Point Reinforcement. Pile point reinforcement shall be furnished and installed on load-bearing piles at locations
 shown on the plans. Pile point reinforcement for steel piles shall be furnished and installed in accordance with Sec 1080, except
 as modified herein.
 Delete Sec 702.4.5 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 702.4.5 Pile Point Reinforcement. Each point shall be manufactured in one piece of cast steel. Pile points furnished for castin-place concrete piles shall be attached to the pile as shown on the plans. Pile points for structural steel piles shall be furnished
 with the minimum point web and flange thickness at the location of attachment to the pile equal to the thickness of that portion of
 the pile being attached thereto multiplied by the factor (t) shown below with additional requirements as described herein.
 Material
 ASTM A 27 Grade 65-35 (450-240)
 ASTM A 148 Grade 90-60 (620-415)
 
 32
 
 (t)
 2.0
 1.6
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 Delete Sec 702.4.8.1 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 702.4.8.1 Bitumen and Paint. Before the coatings are applied, steel shall be thoroughly cleaned. A commercially available
 bituminous coating, as approved by the engineer, shall be applied heavily to steel shells and structural steel piles in end bents for
 a length of 3 feet below the bottom of the concrete cap. All exposed steel piles shall have a bituminous coating 3 feet below and
 one foot above the finished ground line. Unless otherwise specified in the contract documents, all other exposed surfaces of steel
 shells and structural steel piles, including bracing, shall be coated with one 6-mil thickness of an approved gray epoxy mastic in
 accordance with the epoxy mastic manufacturer’s recommendations. Protective coatings will not be required below the normal
 low water line or for galvanized piles and bracing.
 Amend Sec 702.4.8 to include the following:
 
 04/18
 
 702.4.8.2 Galvanizing. Steel shells for cast-in-place piles, structural steel piles, and bracing shall be galvanized as shown on the
 plans and in accordance with ASTM A 123 and Sec 1080. All pile below the pile concrete encasement shall be galvanized down
 to an elevation as shown on the plans. At the contractor’s option, the entire pile length may be galvanized. Repairs to the
 galvanized coating and field galvanizing shall be in accordance with ASTM A 780. Zinc rich paints will not be allowed. Repairs
 and field galvanizing will not be required where the pile will be encased in concrete or below the limits specified herein.
 Galvanizing material shall be omitted or removed one inch clear of weld locations. The method used to omit or remove the
 galvanizing material shall be masking, grinding or other methods as approved by the engineer. If a weld location falls within an
 area where galvanizing is required, clean the weld area making sure to remove all welding slag. Then field galvanize the weld
 area in accordance with ASTM A 780.
 Delete Sec 702.4.10 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 702.4.10 FHWA-modified Gates Dynamic Formula. The following formula shall be used to determine the nominal axial
 compressive resistance, P, of piles when other methods of determination are not specified in the contract documents:
 P = 1.75(E)0.5log10(10N) – 100
 P = Nominal Axial Compressive Resistance measured during pile driving in kips
 E = Developed hammer energy in foot-pounds (Joules). This is the kinetic energy in the ram at impact for a given blow and may
 be assumed equal to the ram weight times the stroke.
 N = Number of hammer blows for 1.0 inch of pile permanent set in blows/inch.
 Delete Sec 702.5.2 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 702.5.2 Load-Bearing Piles. Piles in place will be the actual length of all piles, except test piles, measured to the nearest foot
 for that portion of each pile that remains permanently in the structure. For galvanized pile, no separate measurement will be made
 for the part of the pile that is not galvanized.
 Delete Sec 702.6.2 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 702.6.2 Load-Bearing Pile. The accepted quantity of load-bearing pile in place will be paid for at the contract unit price for
 each of the items included in the contract. No direct payment will be made for incidental items necessary to complete the work
 unless specifically provided as a pay item in the contract.
 SECTION 703-CONCRETE MASONARY CONSTRUCTION
 Delete Sec 703.3.6.1.4 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 703.3.6.1.4 Wet Curing. The contractor shall submit to the engineer a plan to monitor the free moisture and maintain continuous
 free moisture for the 7 day period. The concrete shall be covered with clean mats as soon as the curing compound has dried
 sufficiently to prevent adhesion, and the concrete surface will support the curing mat without marring or distorting the finish, but
 no more than 90 minutes after the concrete is floated or textured. If the concrete mix contains more than 15 percent fly ash or slag
 or combination thereof and remains plastic after 90 minutes, coverage with mats may be delayed, as directed by the engineer,
 until the surface will support the curing mat without marring or distorting the finish. The mats shall be sufficiently wet at the time
 of placement to prevent moisture absorption from the finished surface. The contractor shall control the run-off so as not to cause
 
 33
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 a traffic hazard or soil erosion. The continuous wet cure shall be maintained a minimum of seven days and until the concrete has
 attained a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 psi.
 SECTION 717-FLEXIBLE JOINT SYSTEMS
 Delete Sec 717.10.3.1and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 717.10.3.1 Shop Drawings. Shop drawings for structural steel for expansion joint systems shall be prepared in accordance with
 Sec 1080. The dimensions of the seal shall be shown on the shop drawings for the armored joint. Shop drawings will not be
 required when the seal is placed against concrete or existing steel armor.
 Delete Sec 717.20.3.1and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 717.20.3.1 Shop Drawings. Shop drawings for structural steel for expansion joint systems shall be prepared in accordance with
 Sec 1080. The drawings shall show in detail the type, size, location of anchors, and sequence of installation. The dimensions of
 the seal shall be shown on the shop drawings for the armored joint. The cavity in the steel armor (also known as an extrusion)
 shall be of a dimensional tolerance that prevents the lug of the strip seal gland from slipping loose. The upper lip of the extrusion
 shall extend over the bottom lip to avoid pinching the gland when the expansion joint system is in a closed position. Shop
 drawings will not be required when the seal is placed in existing steel extrusions.
 Delete Sec 717.30.3.1and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 717.30.3.1 Shop Drawings. Shop drawings for structural steel for expansion joint systems shall be prepared in accordance with
 Sec 1080. The dimensions of the seal shall be shown on the drawings for the armored joint. Shop drawings will not be required
 when the sealant is placed against concrete or existing steel armor.
 SECTION 733-PRECAST CONCRETE BOX CULVERTS
 Delete Sec 733.2 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 733.2 Material. All material shall be in accordance with Division 1000, Material Details, and specifically as follows:
 Subsurface Drainage Geotextile
 Precast Concrete Box Culverts
 Plastic Joint Compound for Vitrified
 Clay and Concrete Pipe
 Tubular Joint Seal
 Mortars and Grout
 Delete Sec 733.3.2.1 and substitute the following:
 
 1011
 1049
 1057
 1057
 1066
 04/18
 
 733.3.2.1 Joints.
 733.3.2.1.1 All joints between individual box sections shall be sealed with an approved plastic joint compound or a tubular joint
 seal. Trowel grade compounds shall be applied to both mating surfaces. Rope or tape-type plastic joint compounds and tubular
 joint seals shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Excess compound shall extrude from both
 the inside and outside of the joint when box sections are assembled. Excess compound shall be removed from the interior
 surface. The joint gap between individual box sections shall be uniform for the full perimeter.
 733.3.2.1.2 Filter cloth 2 feet in width and double thickness shall be centered over the top and sides of all joints between
 individual box sections with edges sealed with mastic or two sided tape. Filter cloth shall be a subsurface drainage geotextile in
 accordance with Sec 1011.
 733.3.2.1.3 When cast-in-place concrete box culvert collars are shown on the plans and the alternate precast option is used,
 precast box culvert ties shall be used in accordance with standard plans to connect individual box sections. Regular strength
 connections shall be supplied unless specified otherwise.
 Delete Sec 733.3.2.2 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 733.3.2.2 Lift and Core Holes. Lift holes shall be filled with expansive mortar or tapered precast mortar plugs to provide a
 permanent watertight section, and shall be finished flush on the inside of the box. Lift and core holes are to be sealed with
 approved materials. Filter cloth at joints may be extended to cover patched holes in lieu of sealing.
 34
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 SECTION 808-PLANTING TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER PLANTS
 Delete Sec 808.2.1.1 and substitute the following:
 
 10/17
 
 808.2.1.1 Trees, shrubs and other plants shall be nursery stock and shall be true to type and name in accordance with the current
 edition of Standardized Plant Names published by the American Joint Committee on Horticultural Nomenclature. The plants
 shall have well developed branch systems and vigorous healthy root systems. All stock shall be well formed and the trunks of
 trees shall be uniform. The plants shall be free from insects, disease and defects such as knots, sun-scald, injuries, serious
 abrasions of the bark or objectionable disfigurements. Thin, weak plants will not be accepted. All nursery stock shall qualify
 under the AmericanHort Horticultural Standards of the current American Standard for Nursery Stock,
 ANSI Z60.1. Substitution of plant stock or other material will not be permitted except with approval from the engineer.
 Delete Sec 808.2.1.2 and substitute the following:
 
 10/17
 
 808.2.1.2 All measurements for height, spread, branching, caliber and root spread or ball size shall be as specified in the current
 AmericanHort American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1. Acceptance of plant material will be made only at the
 planting site following the completion of the planting work, except that acceptance for height, spread and number of branches
 will be made before pruning the plant. Each shipment shall be accompanied by an invoice showing sizes and varieties of material
 and ANSI Z60.1 certification.
 SECTION 901-HIGHWAY LIGHTING
 Delete Sec 901.4 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 901.4 Equipment List. An approved list of lighting equipment is required in accordance with Sec 902.4.5 prior to installation.
 Delete Sec 901.6.1 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 901.6.1 Lanterns mounted in an inverted position shall have a hole in the tip of the lens to prevent water from collecting in the
 lantern. Lamps shall be properly installed and oriented for the applications.
 SECTION 902-TRAFFIC SIGNALS
 Delete Sec 902.4.2 and substitute the following:
 
 01/18
 
 902.4.2 Concrete. Concrete shall be of the class specified in the contract. Material, proportioning, mixing, slump and
 transporting of concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501 for the specific class specified. Concrete shall be placed, finished
 and cured in accordance with Sec 703.
 Delete Sec 902.4.5 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 902.4.5 The Commission will include Form D-15 in the Electronic Deliverables listing the lighting and signal equipment to be
 installed. The contractor shall complete the list by writing in the name of the equipment manufacturer and catalog number of
 each item listed. A list of preapproved equipment and material is available on the MoDOT web site. Only items on the latest
 revision of the preapproved list will be accepted for use. A completed list shall be submitted electronically to the engineer and
 shall be approved in writing before items are installed. Approval of the items on the list will not relieve the contractor of
 responsibility for satisfactory performance of the installation.
 SECTION 903-HIGHWAY SIGNING
 Delete Sec 903.2.4 and substitute the following:
 
 01/18
 
 903.2.4 Concrete. Concrete shall be of the class specified in the contract. Material, proportioning, mixing, slump and
 transporting of concrete shall be in accordance with Sec 501 for the specific class specified. Concrete shall be placed, finished
 and cured in accordance with Sec 703.
 Delete Sec 903.3.1.2 and substitute the following:
 
 01/18
 
 903.3.1.2 Embedded Installations. Class B or B-1 concrete, or concrete of a commercial mixture meeting the requirements of
 Sec 501 shall be used for the footings for embedded-type sign posts, except as otherwise allowed herein. Posts shall be supported
 
 35
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 in proper position until the concrete or other approved material has set. Excavation and backfill shall be in accordance with Sec
 903.3.1.1, except forming will not be required unless soil conditions warrant forming. Tops of footings shall be finished flush
 with the slope of the ground. Footings shall be visually inspected for acceptance by the engineer.
 Amend Sec 903.3.1.2.1 to include the following:
 
 01/18
 
 903.3.1.2.1 In lieu of the concrete material requirements in Sec 903.3.1.2, the contractor may use a pre-packaged dry commercial
 concrete mixture that has a manufacturer’s 28-day compressive strength rating of no less than 4,000 psi for the footings for
 embedded-type sign posts. The concrete shall be thoroughly mixed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.
 Strength requirements shall meet or exceed Class B concrete as specified in Sec 501.
 Delete Sec 903.5.1 and amend Sec 903.5 to include the following. Renumber subsequent sections accordingly:
 
 01/18
 
 Measurement of concrete for footings and end supports for overhead sign trusses, tubular steel sign supports and posts bolt-down
 bases, including all concrete, excavation, backfilling, reinforcing steel, anchor bolts and nuts, grout and other incidental items
 shown on the plans, will be made to the nearest 0.1 cubic yard. Concrete for footings for embedded-type posts including
 perforated square steel tube, u-channel and wood shall be incidental.
 SECTION 1001-GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MATERIAL
 Amend Sec 1001.4 to include the following:
 
 04/18
 
 1001.4 Chat will be defined as an aggregate waste material that was formed in the course of milling operations employed to
 recover lead and zinc from metal-bearing ore minerals.
 Delete Sec 1001.12 thru 1001.12.3 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 1001.12 Mining By-Product Aggregate. Chat may be furnished under the following requirements.
 1001.12.1
 Chat used in hot, warm, or cold mix asphalt, slurry seal, microsurfacing, or in epoxy seal delivered to MoDOT
 projects or property shall have a total lead content less than 4,500 ppm as determined by EPA Method 3050B, Acid Digestion of
 Sediments, Sludges, and Soils. Testing shall be conducted a minimum of once per year per source/location of chat.
 1001.12.2 Chat used in Portland cement concrete, granular road base, flowable fill, stabilized road base, ice control material, or
 chip seal delivered to MoDOT projects or property shall have Synthetic Precipitation Leaching (SPLP) testing conducted using
 EPA SW-846 Method 1312 as required by 40 CFR 278. The leachate testing results shall not exceed the National Primary
 Drinking Water Standards for lead and cadmium and the fresh water chronic National Recommended Water Quality Criterion for
 zinc of 120 µg/l. Testing shall be conducted a minimum of once per year per source/location of chat.
 1001.12.3 Test reports shall be submitted to Construction and Materials prior to chat being used on any MoDOT project or
 property. The report shall identify the location of the stockpile, date of sample, and specific test results as required in 40 CFR
 278. Attached to the report shall be a certification from the supplier stating that the material furnished does not exceed the lead
 amounts specified in 40 CFR 278. The Engineer will maintain copies of laboratory test results and certifications for a minimum
 of three years.
 Add Sec 1001.12.4:
 
 04/18
 
 1001.12.4 The supplier shall also provide a summary at the end of each calendar year that identifies the quantity and location of
 chat shipped for use on MoDOT projects.
 SECTION 1018-FLY ASH FOR CONCRETE
 Delete Sec 1018.3.1 thru 1018.3.4 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 1018.3.1 In order to become qualified, a written request shall be sent by the marketing entity to Construction and Materials,
 along with a copy of the laboratory’s QC Plan, the QC departments most recent Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory
 (CCRL) certification and the latest CCRL Pozzolan proficiency sample report. The CCRL inspection shall cover all tests required
 by the specification. Documentation showing satisfactory resolution of all inspection deficiencies shall be included. In addition,
 the plant may be inspected to verify the information and to establish personal contact with the QC personnel.
 1018.3.2 Failure to Comply. Failure to comply with any of these requirements and/or specified herein may result in the issuance
 of a strike. If a laboratory accumulates three strikes, the laboratory shall be disqualified. For every year a laboratory does not
 
 36
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 receive a strike, a strike will be removed from the laboratory’s accumulated total. In cases of dispute, test results obtained by
 MoDOT will control.
 1018.3.3 Disqualified Facilities. If a laboratory has been disqualified, the marketing entity must utilize an existing MoDOT
 approved laboratory or qualify a laboratory fulfilling MoDOT requirements. A disqualified laboratory will be unable to maintain
 qualification based on requirements governed in this specification.
 SECTION 1048-PAVEMENT MARKING MATERIAL
 Delete Sec 1048.30.3.3 and substitute the following:
 
 01/18
 
 1048.30.3.3 Gradation. Type L beads shall meet the following gradation requirements when tested in accordance with ASTM D
 1214:
 Type L Bead Gradation Requirements
 Sieve Size
 Percent Passing
 No. 12
 100
 No. 14
 95 - 100
 No. 16
 80 - 95
 No. 18
 10 - 40
 No. 20
 0-5
 No. 25
 0-2
 SECTION 1055-CONCRETE CURING MATERIAL
 Delete Sec 1055.3.2.1 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 1055.3.2.1 Waterproof Paper. Waterproof paper shall be in accordance with ASTM C 171.
 Delete Sec 1055.3.2.3 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 1055.3.2.3 White Burlap-Polyethylene Sheeting. White burlap-polyethylene sheeting shall be in accordance with ASTM C
 171.
 Delete Sec 1055.3.2.4 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 1055.3.2.4 Burlap and Mats of Jute or Cotton. Burlap shall be fabric made from jute or other suitable fibers. Jute mats shall
 consist of two plies of burlap stitched together to maintain the shape and stability of the unit. Cotton mats shall consist of filler or
 cotton batts covered with unsized cloth or burlap, and tufted or stitched to maintain the shape and stability of the unit. Burlap,
 mats or other synthetic material equivalents shall, in the judgment of the engineer, be of such construction and in such a condition
 as required to adequately maintain free moisture on the surface of the concrete with the type of system being used to provide the
 water. Material shall be free from deleterious matter harmful to concrete.
 SECTION 1057-MATERIAL FOR JOINTS
 Renumber Sec 1057.6 and 1057.6.1:
 
 04/18
 
 1057.6 Pavement Joint Forming Material.
 1057.6.1 Preformed Fiber Expansion Joint Filler. Preformed fiber expansion joint filler material shall be in accordance with
 AASHTO M 213. Percent asphalt content shall be tested in accordance with AASHTO T 42 or 164 with the following
 modifications: Oven dry test strips at 104 ± 3 C for one hour. Cool and weigh approximately 50 g into an extraction bowl.
 Cover test portion in the bowl with a chlorinated solvent, such as trichloroethylene, and allow sufficient time for solvent to soak
 the test portion. Follow test procedure outlined in AASHTO T 164 section 12.3 and 12.4, except discard extract and washings.
 Carefully transfer extracted test strips and scrap residue from the filter ring into a tared weighing pan. Oven dry at 104 ± 3 C for
 one (1) hour and cool in a desiccators. Calculate the percent asphalt content by weight on an oven dry basis per ASTM D 545
 subsection 7.5.4. In cases of dispute, AASHTO T 42 test results will control.
 Amend Sec 1057.6 to include the following:
 
 37
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1057.6.2 Semi-rigid, Closed-cell Polypropylene Foam, Preformed Expansion Joint Filler. This material shall be semi-rigid,
 closed-cell polypropylene foam, preformed expansion joint filler in accordance with ASTM D8139.
 SECTION 1091-LIGHTING EQUIPMENT
 Delete Sec 1091.1.1 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 1091.1.1 Pre-Approval. Fabricators shall submit two copies of shop drawings to Traffic. Submittals shall be approved by
 Traffic in writing prior to fabrication of the lighting poles. Shop drawings shall indicate design details required for pole
 fabrication, including material grades and thicknesses, welding and orientation of any longitudinal seams. Shop drawings shall
 provide pole installation and hardware details. Design details for all possible pole combinations shown on the plans may be
 submitted. Shop drawings stress calculations shall be signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer in the State of
 Missouri. Upon written approval, pre-approved drawings may be used on any project where the design conditions of the
 shop drawings are not exceeded.
 Delete Secs 1091.7 thru 1091.7.2 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 1091.7.1 Pre-Approval. Manufacturers of LED luminaires shall submit a completed New Product Evaluation Form and LED
 Luminaire New Product Submittal Form. Family grouping in accordance with LED Lighting Facts is permitted, provided this
 is clearly indicated on the submittal form, and clearly communicated via a letter that includes detailed calculations relating the
 tested product to the submitted product. The luminaire size shall be as specified in the contract. A pipe stop shall be included
 in the assembly to locate the luminaire properly on the bracket arm. Product cutsheets shall be submitted for luminaire, LED
 light source, LED driver and surge protection device, if applicable. If dimmable LED driver is specified, provide diagrams
 illustrating light output and input power as a function of control signal. Instructions for installation and maintenance of LED
 luminaires shall be provided. Summary of luminaire recycled content and recyclability in accordance with the FTC Green
 Guides, expressed as a percentage of luminaire weight. IES LM-79 luminaire photometric report shall be produced by a test
 laboratory that satisfies LED Lighting Facts accreditation requirements. The report shall include, name of test laboratory,
 report number, date, complete luminaire catalog number, description of luminaire, LED light s ource, LED driver, and
 Goniophotometry. IES TM-15 Backlight-Uplight-Glare (BUG) ratings shall be for initial (worst-case) values, i.e., Light Loss
 Factor (LLF) = 1.0. If luminaires are tilted upward for Energy Star TM-21 calculations, BUG ratings shall correspond to the
 same angle of tilt.
 1091.7.1.1 Lumen maintenance calculations and supporting test data shall be in accordance with LED Lighting Facts
 guidance, with the exception calculations shall be based on 10,000 cumulative hours of operation. Submit completed
 ENERGY STAR TM-21 Calculator as an electronic excel file. Provide computer-generated point-by-point photometric
 analysis of maintained light levels. Calculation/measurement points shall be per IES RP -8. Separated vehicular lanes,
 bikeways, and walkways shall be evaluated separately. Calculations shall be for maintained values, i.e. Light Loss Factor
 (LLF) < 1.0, where LLF = LLD x LDD x LATF. Lamp Lumen Depreciation (LLD) shall be 0.90 or the value calculated in
 the Energy Star TM-21 calculations, whichever is lower. Luminaire Dirt Depreciation (LDD) shall = 0.90 and Luminaire
 Ambient Temperature Factor (LATF) shall = 0.96. Mesopic multipliers (i.e., effective luminance factors) shall not be used.
 All values shall assume photopic visual adaptation. Submit IES LM-63 format electronic file containing luminous intensity
 data associated with submitted LM-79 report(s) and used for point-by-point calculations. Summary of Joint Electron Devices
 Engineering Council (JEDEC) or Japan Electronics and Information Technology Industries (JEITA) reliability testing
 performed for LED packages. Summary of reliability testing performed for LED driver(s). Safety certification and file
 number indicating compliance with UL 1598. Applicable testing bodies are determined by the US Occupational Safety
 Health Administration (OSHA) as Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratories (NRTL) and include: CSA (Canadian
 Standards Association), ETL (Edison Testing Laboratory), and UL (Underwriters Laboratory). Documentation supporting
 any U.S. origin claims for the product, in accordance with FTC guidance.
 1091.7.1.2 Before approval and purchase, vendor shall supply luminaire sample(s) identical to product configuration(s)
 submitted for inspection. Commission may request IES LM-79 testing of luminaire sample(s) to verify performance is within
 manufacturer-reported tolerances. Electrically test fully assembled luminaires before shipment from factory. After
 installation, Commission may perform IES LM-50 field measurements to verify performance requirements, giving
 consideration to manufacturing tolerances and measurement uncertainties as outlined in IES LM -61 and NEMA LSD 63.
 1091.7.1.3 Written product warranty shall be of the minimum duration of ten years, and shall cover maintained integrity and
 functionality of luminaire housing, wiring, connections, LED light source(s) and LED driver(s). Negligible light output from
 more than 10 percent of the LED packages constitutes luminaire failure. Warranty period shall begin 90 days after date of
 invoice, or as negotiated by Commission such as in the case of an auditable asset management system. Manufacturer or local
 sales representative shall provide installation and troubleshooting support via telephone and/or email.
 1091.7.2 Requirements.
 
 38
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 1091.7.2.1 Roadway. Luminaire shall be designed for ease of component replacement and end-of-life disassembly. Type III
 medium distribution, semi-cutoff light distribution shall be set in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations unless
 otherwise directed by the engineer, or shown on the plans. Transmissive optical components shall be applied in accordance
 with OEM design guidelines to ensure suitability for the environment (e.g., electromagnetic, thermal, mechanical, chemical).
 LED light source(s) and driver(s) shall be RoHS compliant. Nominal luminaire input wattage shall account for nominal
 applied voltage and any reduction in driver efficiency due to sub-optimal driver loading. Luminaire shall accept the voltage
 or voltage range specified at 50/60 Hz, and shall operate normally for input voltage fluctuations of plus or minus 10 percent .
 All internal components shall be assembled and pre-wired using modular electrical connections. The following shall be in
 accordance with corresponding sections of ANSI C136.37, wiring and grounding, terminal blocks for incoming AC lines
 (electrical mains wires), photocontrol receptacle, latching and hinging, mounting provisions, and ingress protection.
 1091.7.2.1.1 Underpass. Luminaires for underpass lighting shall be high-pressure sodium The luminaires shall consist of a
 pre-wired unit for wall mounting, with raintight cast aluminum housing, cast aluminum door with integral cast guard, heatresistant glass prismatic refractor, asymmetric aluminum reflector and socket for horizontal lamp position, complete with
 150-watt lamp and 240-volt or 480-volt ballast as required. Type IV short distribution, non- cutoff light distribution shall be
 set in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations, unless otherwise directed by the engineer or shown on the plans.
 The door shall have a stainless steel hinge along the bottom, stainless steel latches at the top and non-ferrous metal or stainless
 steel safety chains. Provisions shall be made for attaching the unit directly to a wall or to an outlet box stud with nonferrous metal or stainless steel hardware. Ballasts for underpass luminaires shall be in accordance with Sec 901. The ballast
 power cables shall be individually fused with in-line fuse holders between the line and load, in the junction box or the
 luminaire housing if no junction box is shown on the plans. The fuse rating shall be three amps unless otherwise shown on the
 plans.
 1091.7.2.2 Painted or finished luminaire surfaces exposed to the environment shall exceed a rating of six per ASTM D1654
 after 1000 hours of testing per ASTM B117. Each luminaire shall have aluminum housing with two 2-inch slipfitters or one 4bolt slipfitter or one 2-inch slipfitter with a longitudinal leveling system. The housing shall have a natural aluminum or gray
 baked enamel finish. The coating shall exhibit no greater than 30% reduction of gloss per ASTM D523, after 500 hours of
 QUV testing at ASTM G154 Cycle 6. All metal parts, such as springs on the latches and hinges, U-bolts and screws shall be
 made from non-ferrous metal or stainless steel. All parts of the luminaire shall be fabricated from corrosion resistant
 material.
 1091.7.2.3 Luminaire shall start and operate in ambient temperature range specified. Maximum rated case temperature of
 driver and other internal components shall not be exceeded when luminaire is operated in ambient temperature range
 specified. Wiring inside the luminaire housing shall be protected by suitable heat resistant insulating material. Mechanical
 design of protruding external surfaces (heat sink fins) shall facilitate hose-down cleaning and discourage debris accumulation.
 Liquids or other moving parts shall be clearly indicated in submittals, shall be consistent with product testing, and shall be
 subject to review by Commission. Luminaire designation indicated “ANSI C136.41, 7-pin” on LED Luminaire New Product
 Submittal Form shall be fully prewired and shall incorporate an ANSI C136.41 compliant receptacle. If a dimmable LED
 driver is specified, the 0-10V or DALI control wires shall be connected to the receptacle pads as specified in ANSI C136.41;
 connection of the two remaining pads shall be by Manufacturer, as directed by Commission.
 1091.7.2.4 Luminaire shall be listed for wet locations by a U.S. Occupational Safety Health Administration (OSHA)
 Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL), shall have locality-appropriate governing mark and certification, and
 shall meet the performance requirements specified in ANSI C136.2 for dielectric withstand, using the DC test level and
 configuration. Luminaire shall meet the performance requirements specified in ANSI C136.2 for electrical immunity, using
 the combination Enhanced Wave Test Level (10kV/5kA) indicated on LED Luminaire New Product Submittal Form whether
 failure of the electrical immunity system can possibly result in disconnect of power to luminaire. Luminaire shall comply
 with FCC 47 CFR part 15 interference criteria for Class A (non-residential) digital devices, and shall comply with section
 5.2.5 (luminaires rated for outdoor use) of ANSI C82.77 at full input power and across specified voltage range.
 1091.7.2.5 Color Rendering Index (CRI) shall be no less than 50. Nominal Correlated Color Temperature (CCT) shall be
 3000k with allowable IES LM-79 Chromaticity Values of 2870 to 3220 measured CCT (k) and -0.006 to 0.006 Measured
 Duv. Luminaire shall have an external label per ANSI C136.15 and shall have an internal label per ANSI C136.22.
 SECTION 1092-SIGNAL EQUIPMENT
 Delete Sec 1092.1.4 and substitute the following:
 
 04/18
 
 1092.1.4 Backplates. Backplates shall be provided on all signal heads as shown on the plans. Backplates shall be black in color
 and constructed of flat pre-cut or preformed thermoplastic. Flat pre-cut thermoplastic backplates shall have a minimum thickness
 of 0.250 inch. Preformed thermoplastic backplates shall have rolled out edges and a minimum final thickness of 0.10 inch.
 
 39
 
 Return to Table of Contents
 
 When as indicated in the plans, a reflectorized strip shall be placed along the perimeter of the backplate. The reflectorized strip
 shall be made from yellow sheeting in accordance with Section 1042. The reflectorized strip shall be adhered to the backplate as
 shown in the plan.
 
 40
 
 