.A QUALITY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS Quality terms and definitions shall be as defined by the Australian Standard ASNZS ISO Quality management systems Fundamentals and vocabulary .
Department of State Growth May Section Page of Department of State Growth Other definition and terms shall be as follows asset component means a component part of a road bridge or other asset forming part of the works .
The Quality Plan must include the following details for the Work Breakdown Structure A definition of the discrete sections of the Works .
Further to definition of Practical Completion in the General Conditions of Contract the supply of the following documents are deemed to be essential for the use operation and maintenance of the Works Completed Works Report Contract Records AsConstructed Drawings Service Installations and Relocations Department of State Growth May Section Page of Department of State Growth Design Calculations .
COMPACTION AND MOISTURE CONTENT TESTING a General For the purpose of control of moisture content of material and for determination of compaction procedure the following definitions shall apply i material of nominal size mm or less material which has or less by wet mass retained on a . mm AS sieve .
but does not include e a channel declared by the regulations to be excluded from this definition or f a drain or drainage depression in the contours on the land which only serves to relieve upper land of excess water in times of major precipitation .
Construction Monitoring Parameter Method Turbidity NTU Measure with onsite meter Electrical Conductivity EC µScm Measure with onsite meter pH Measure with onsite meter Dissolved oxygen DO mgL Measure with onsite meter Temperature C Measure with onsite meter Litter definition including solid inert waste Visual prevent litter from entering waterways and drainage systems Oils and Greases Visual No visible free oil or greases b Monitoring Monitoring shall be carried out in waterways andor drainage infrastructure upstream and downstream of the limits of the site for each rain event as follows within one hour of commencement of rain event during working hours every four hours for periods of continuous rain during working hours within hours of a rain event outside working hours .
GENERAL This section covers the requirements for the supply and placement of high friction surface treatment HFST. . DEFINITIONS The following definitions apply to the high friction surface treatment clauses .
GENERAL This section covers the requirements for the supply and placement of coloured surface treatments. . DEFINITIONS The following definitions apply to the coloured surface treatment clauses Accelerant Accelerant refers to any material used to reduce the curing time of the binder .
Where the required design life can not be achieved using steel consideration must be given to the use of alternative materials for example aluminium or precast concrete pipes and box culverts. . STANDARDS The definitions and requirements in ASNZS Buried corrugated metal structures shall apply where appropriate. . MATERIAL COMPLIANCE Materials shall comply with the requirements of the relevant Australian Standard .
GENERAL This section specifies the requirements for the supply of materials testing and construction of soil nail walls. . DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply Soil Nail A component of a soil strengthening system consisting of steel or fibre reinforced polymer FRP reinforcement bars inserted centrally into a predrilled hole and grouted in place .
Supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement Part Amorphous silica AS Formwork for concrete AS Liquid membraneforming curing compounds for concrete AS General purpose and blended cements ASNZS Steel reinforcing materials ASNZS Hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles b Other Standards and Referenced Specifications ASTM C Standard Specification for FiberReinforced Concrete ASTM C Standard Test Method for Flexural Performance of FiberReinforced Concrete Using Beam With ThirdPoint Loading ASTM C Standard Test Method for Obtaining Average ResidualStrength of Fiber Reinforced Concrete ASTM D Standard Test Methods for Density and Specific Gravity Relative Density of Plastics by Displacement ASTM D Standard Test Method for Tensile Properties of Single Textile Fibers Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of Section details the relevant references to these documents. . DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this section the following definitions apply Alkaline Component Combinations of alkali and alkali earth containing salts minerals and glasses .
Department of State Growth Department of State Growth August Section Page of Other Documents Manufacturers recommendations and any applicable VicRoads requirements for each proprietary end treatment. . DEFINITIONS The following definitions below will apply to this section .
Definition of terms The meaning of terms and definitions in this section shall be as defined in ASNZS .
