The Ministry accepts the following definitions associated with Quality Management Quality Control QC The process of checking specific product or service results to determine if they comply with relevant quality standards and identifying ways to eliminate causes of unsatisfactory product or service performance .
Provide Traffic Management Plan The Contractor shall prepare a Traffic Management Plan TMP in accordance with the Ministry definitions and guidelines specified in the Traffic Management Manual for Work on Roadways .
Type D All Other Materials Type D shall include all other materials of a nature not included in the foregoing definitions of Type A Type B or Type C regardless of the nature or condition of the material or the method used to excavate or remove .
Definition of negligence will be deemed to be lack of the following the sequence of operations lack of a blast design lack of preblast survey lack of asbuilt blast design as described in .. .. and .. and Also definition of negligence will be deemed to mean lack of cutoff drill holes on the backslope excessive spacing of drill holes and overloading of the same. . Not used .
For resin systems records shall also include the start and end times of spinning the bar through the resin in the hole. . Definitions The following definitions refer to words and terms used in this Section .
For definitions not covered here refer to definitions provided by the Post Tensioning Institute .
Records shall also include an original summary report of all test results showing the sample number sample origin panel number panel origin date the panel was sprayed panel shipping date date panel received at the laboratory photos of prepared test samples test date sample age at testing test results for each sample average test results of the three samples for each test at a given age and acceptability of the results. . Definitions The following definitions refer to words and terms used in this specification .
For definitions not covered in this document refer to ACI R and ACI .. .. Blow pipe Air water jet operated by nozzle operators helper during shotcrete placement to assist in keeping rebound and overspray out of the work .
Piles shall be driven to the minimum depthmaximum tip elevation indicated on the Drawings or as otherwise specified and unless ordered otherwise by the Ministry Representative to practical refusal which shall be to the depth at which the piles have an allowable load resistance of tonnes and an average penetration per blow determined by the following formulae SECTION TIMBER PILING CONSTRUCTION of BC MoT For drop hammers s wh p . For mechanical hammers s wh p . Where s average penetration per blow in metres under last blows w weight of moving part of hammer in newtons h effective fall of hammer in metres p allowable load of pile in newtons Where it is required by the Ministry Representative to penetrate a thin stratum which may show practical refusal in driving to obtain greater depth in a less resistant formation driving shall be continued through the stratum regardless of the definition laid down for practical refusal .
Piles shall be driven to the minimum depthmaximum tip elevation indicated on the Drawings or as otherwise specified and unless ordered otherwise by the Ministry Representative to practical refusal which shall be to the depth at which the piles have an allowable load resistance of tonnes and an average penetration per blow determined by the following formulae SECTION TIMBER PILING CONSTRUCTION of BC MoT For drop hammers s wh p . For mechanical hammers s wh p . Where s average penetration per blow in metres under last blows w weight of moving part of hammer in newtons h effective fall of hammer in metres p allowable load of pile in newtons Where it is required by the Ministry Representative to penetrate a thin stratum which may show practical refusal in driving to obtain greater depth in a less resistant formation driving shall be continued through the stratum regardless of the definition laid down for practical refusal .
The definition of small areas will vary depending on the situation but in general will apply to areas that can be economically treated using the touchup technique .
Products on the RPL shall be used in accordance with the introductiondefinitions descriptions notes qualifiers and all other information given in the RPL .
AASHTO M Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe nominal pipe diameter from mm through to mm. . Definitions For the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply .
Due to the nature of variation in asphalt mixes and their compactive characteristics the definition of degrees of segregation will be established on a project by project basis .
The Contractor and the Ministry Representative shall establish using photographs or other mutually agreed upon tools the definition of slight moderate and severe segregation .
