Wherever the following terms are used in these specifications or on the plans they are to be construed the same as the respective definitions represented .
Any contract pay item that does not meet the definition of a Major Item .
See definition Contract Pay Item .
Insurance policies that remove or restrict blanket contractual liability located in the insured contract definition as stated in Section V Number Item f in the ISO CGL policy or that remove or modify the insured contract exception to the employers liability exclusion so as to limit coverage for claims that arise out of contract work or that do not cover the additional insured for claims involving injury to employees of the named insured or subcontractors are not acceptable .
If Quality Level Designations are not shown in the contract documents information shall be assumed to be Quality Level D. Below are the Quality Level Designation definitions .
Reinforcing steel embedded in concrete is considered an incidental metal and is included within the definition of concrete .
Ordinary borrow will be accepted for use where the material qualifies under the definition of Suitable Material .H .
Microsilica a pozzolanic material is not included in the definition of a pozzolan in these specifications. . High Reactivity Pozzolan .
Formliners shall leave crisp sharp definition of the architectural surface .
B .. above which does not meet the definition of a minor defect .
The definition of defects and the repair requirements contained in shall apply. . CastInPlace Concrete Constructed Forms .
Defects which conform to the definition of minor defects as given in shall be repaired in accordance with the requirements of that subsection .
Major defects are defined as NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS USC May Any defect which does not meet the definition of a minor defect .
See Figure Component Parts of a Typical Highway Work Zone for definitions of terms . .
The following general definitions shall be used in conjunction with this section .
The following definitions shall apply to all work equipment and materials included under this section .
The following definitions were obtained from the NCHRP Synthesis Trenchless Installation of Conduits Beneath Roadways .
The following definitions shall apply to all work equipment and materials included under this section .
GY Light Gray Paint Munsell B Blue Paint Federal Color Standard Brown Paint Federal Color Standard BrownGray Paint Federal Color Standard Dark Blue Paint Federal Color Standard Textured Concrete Finish Paint Federal Color Standard Weathered Brown Guide Rail Paint Federal Color Standard Assistance in providing definitions for other colors is offered by the Materials Bureau .
This specification refers to definitions and practices described in the Institute of Transportation Engineers ITE publication STB Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads referred to in this document as VTCSH and Pedestrian Traffic Control Signal Indications referred to in this document as PTCSI .
The following definitions apply A. TD .
