This definition includes metering devices .
Where certain words and terms appear they are to be construed with reference to the definitions abbreviations heading titles item names and other pertinent provisions of the Contract documents as may be implied .
C. Wells and Holes Refer to Minnesota Rules Chapter Wells and Borings for the definition of wells and borings .
C Definitions Refer to Abbreviations and Definitions and this section for the definitions of abbreviations words and phrases pertaining to lighting systems and related work .
Refer to the National Electric Code article for the definition of the term Listed .
Refer to the National Electric Code article for the definition of the term Labeled .
Refer to the National Electric Code article for the definition of the term Service .
Use the definitions in this section unless otherwise defined elsewhere in the Contract .
The foundation is not considered as part of this definition .
This work also consists of providing the following as specified in the Contract Revised traffic control signal systems Wood pole span wire traffic control signal systems Automatic Traffic Recorder ATR systems Temporary bridge signal systems Conduit systems Detection systems Materials for future signal systems Interconnect systems Flasher systems and Emergency Vehicle Preemption EVP systems or a combination. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Qualifications of Workers .. B C Definitions Refer to the ITE the MN MUTCD Abbreviations and Definitions for the definitions of words and phrases pertaining to traffic control signal systems and related work .
Refer to NEMA Standards Publication for Traffic Control Systems for the definitions of words and phrases in conjunction with traffic control signal control equipment and controller units .
Refer to the NEC Article for the definition of the term Listed .
Refer to the NEC Article for the definition of the term Labeled .
Use the definitions in these Standard Specifications unless otherwise defined in other Contract Documents .
Refer to ASTM D for definition of terms . .
REQUIREMENTS Refer to ASTM D for the definition of terms and provide plank made from the following species Douglas Fir Norway Red Pine Ponderosa Pine White Pine Southern Yellow Pine or Northern White Poplar .
Refer to NEC article for the definition of the term Listed .
REQUIREMENTS Refer to the NEC article for the definition of the term Listed .
