For the purpose of this definition Socially and economically disadvantaged person means an individual who is a citizen or lawful permanent resident of the United States and who is a Woman Black Hispanic Portuguese Native American Asian American or a member of another group or an individual found to be disadvantaged by the Small Business Administration pursuant to Section of the Small Business Act .
For the purpose of definition the limits of the Construction Zones will be the beginning and end of the designated Project or portions thereof including approaches and connections as denoted within the Contract Special Provisions .
A station when used as a definition or term of measurement will be linear feet measured horizontally .
Backfill material shall conform to AASHTO M using the definitions given in AASHTO M except the density requirements shall conform to .
The material contains partially decayed organic matter is fibrous in texture dark brown or black in color and has an odor of decay. . Embankment material shall conform to AASHTO M using the definitions given in AASHTO M except the density requirements shall conform to .
Muck excavation shall be performed in areas shown on the plans and in areas encountered during the work where the material meets the definition of muck as defined in .. ..
When no item for muck excavation is contained in the Contract muck encountered and verified as meeting that definition will be paid for at .
The expelled metal around the base of the stud is designated as flash in accordance with the definition of flash in Annex V of AASHTOAWS D ..
The repair area definition is comparable to Rust Grade in ASTM D Standard Test Method for Evaluating Degree of Rusting on Painted Steel Surfaces .
This definition shall only apply in cases where material properties compaction or bearing requirements are not otherwise specified in the Contract documents . .
Major defects are defined as any defect which does not meet the definition of a minor defect or minor defects which in aggregate comprise more than of the surface area of the barrier section .
The repair area definition is comparable to Rust Grade in ASTM D Standard Test Method for Evaluating Degree of Rusting on Painted Steel Surfaces .
The repair area definition is comparable to Rust Grade in ASTM D Standard Test Method for Evaluating Degree of Rusting on Painted Steel Surfaces .
The welding terms used in these specifications shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions given in the latest edition of Welding Terms and Definitions ANSIAWS A .. ..
