SECTION CONTRACT INTERPRETATION Scope of Section This Section consists of abbreviations definitions and general rules of interpretation. . Abbreviations Abbreviations are defined in the following list .
For a related definition see Substantially Conform .
For related provisions see the definitions of Bid Guaranty Performance Bond and Payment Bond .
For related provisions see the definition of Acceptable Work and Section ..
Deliver To cause Receipt by a means set forth in the definition of Received or Receipt .
For related provisions see definitions of Project Manager and Resident .
Minor Span Same definition as Bridge except having an opening of at least feet but less than feet .
For a related definition see Conformity .
Uncontrollable Events are of two types A severe weather events that meet the requirements of the first sentence of this definition andor B nonweather events that meet the requirements of the first sentence of this definition which might include acts by foreign enemy quarantine restrictions strikes not involving the Contractor action or inaction by governmental authorities action or inaction by Utility Companies or other third parties not Subcontractors working on Project related Work within the Project Limits and freight embargoes .
Uncontrollable Events specifically do not include fires unless caused by a weather event described in this definition above acts by other third parties including vandals and members of the traveling public non performance of Subcontractors except in cases of unforeseeable permanent and complete cessation of all operations by the Subcontractor for reasons unrelated to the Contractor and difficult but foreseeable weather for the location and time of the Work including but not limited to cold snow and ice in the winter flooding caused by snow melt and rain in the spring rain in the fall and thunderstorms in the summer .
If the condition meets the definition of a Differing Site Condition under Section .. the Contractor may be eligible for an Equitable Adjustment .
For the purposes of this Section .. the following definitions apply Completely Rehabilitated means grading all areas disturbed as a result of the MDOT Project and treating of the ground surface in accordance with Section Rehabilitation of Pits .
For the purpose of this definition .
that meets the manufacturing definition above .
Establishment Period .. Warranty Definitions Notwithstanding any other provision of the Contract the following words or phrases have the following definitions for the purposes of the Contractors warranty obligation under this Contract .
Number of Days of impact to the Critical Path. . A summary of all operations that have been Delayed or will be Delayed on the impact of the Contractors Critical Path. . A narrative describing how the cause of the Delay meets the definition of Excusable Delay or Compensable Delay contained in Section .. A or B. . Itemization of all extra costs being incurred including A how the extra costs relate to the Delay B the identification of all nonsalaried Project employees for whom costs are being compiled and c a summary of time charges for Equipment identified by the manufacturers number for which costs are being compiled .
Request and Report After Completion Within Days of Completion of the phase of Work that the Contractor claims has been Delayed the Contractor shall submit a written report to the Department that contains the following information. . A description of the operations that were Delayed and the documentation and narrative of how the cause for the Delay meets the definition of Excusable Delay or Compensable Delay contained in Sections .. A or B including all reports prepared for the Contractor by consultants if used .
The definitions of the two hydraulic cements mentioned above are as follows See ASTM C Portland cement a hydraulic cement produced by pulverizing Portland cement clinker and usually containing calcium sulfate .
