Specific reference is made to Subsection A. . Shall or Will Should May As used in these Specifications the following definitions apply SHALL or WILLA mandatory condition .
F. Definitions The following definitions shall apply to Subsection ..
Determination of Contract Time The definition of Contract Time and when Contract Time officially begins is stated in Subsection .. After the Contract has been signed by all parties Contract Time becomes the specified period of time agreed upon by the Contractor the Surety and the Department during which all Items and quantities of work set forth in the Proposal and included in the original Contract will be completed .
If the manufacturers definition of mixing speed is not available use a mixing speed of to revolutions per minute. . Mixer and Agitator Maintenance Maintain mixers and agitators as follows a .
For further definition see Subsection Always have a qualified electrician on the job site when pulling electrical wiring or making electrical connections .
Personnel For the definition of a qualified electrician see Subsection .. Equipment Use machinery such as trucks derricks bucket vehicles saws trenchers and other equipment necessary for the work and approved by the Engineer prior to installation operations .
For further definition see Subsection .. Equipment Ensure that equipment is at the project site and approved before construction begins .
Standard Specifications Section Timber structures Section Preservative Treatment of Timber Products B. Referenced Documents American Softwood Lumber Standard PS US Department of Commerce or the National Hardwood Association Section Lumber and Timber ASTM D . Materials For the definition and limitations of defects use the current manufacturing association grade rules applicable for the species specified .
Section DefinitionsModify the Short Crook definition as follows Any localized deviation from straightness within any section ft . m or less in length shall not be more than in mm when measured with a straightedge parallel to the long axis of the pole .
B. Referenced Documents General Provisions through . . Materials Definitions for Optical Requirements Use the following definitions in this Specification .
