Terms and Definitions ForthepurposesofthisClausethetermsanddefinitionsgiveninBSshallapplytogetherwiththe following i Peak Shear Stress The maximum value of shear stress determined as the maximum force divided by the initial cross sectional area of a specimen when tested as described in this Clause .
Definitions ForthepurposesoftheproceduresspecifiedinthisClausethefollowingdefinitionsapply i Laboratory Sample sample of bituminous binder intended for laboratory tests .
When samples with retroreflective portions attached are tested in accordance with subClauses to of this Clause the coefficient of luminous intensity R as defined in Publication CIE No Retroreflection definition and measurement after testing shall be not less than of the value previous to the test .
For samples with retroreflective portions attached the coefficient of luminous intensity R of every such face at an observation angle of and at an entrance angle normal to the face of the blade prior to the conditioning shall be determined the definitions of observation angle and entrance angle being those given in BS Part .
The following definitions shall apply i A Road Lighting Unit shall consist of the following as described in the Contract column bracket wall mounting Electrical Equipment as defined in iv below and wiring excluding electrical supply cable .
The following definitions shall apply i A Road Lighting Unit shall consist of the following as described in the Contract column bracket wall mounting Electrical Equipment as defined in iv below and wiring excluding electrical supply cable .
This interface agreement covering the period of the works shall as a minimum capture the joint requirements in respect of i the scope and geographic coverage of the interface agreement ii a description of the contractual and operational interfaces including current and future plans iii contacts and rolesresponsibilities including fault reporting handling and escalation iv requirements in respect of meetings and written and electronic communications v requirements in respect of authorisations and the provision of notices vi specific access boundaries and access protocols vii definition of responsibilities for maintenance including any shared maintenance responsibilities viii the booking and provision of temporary traffic management ix a schedule and details of special requirements including references to sitespecific special requirements such as site health and safety requirements and permits to work x any additional requirements within contract specific Appendix .
The definition of rock types shall be as in BS EN .
E See for definition of change in level .
Terms and Abbreviations Unless specifically defined otherwise the definitions of terms used in the Specification and associated documents are those in BS Building and Civil Engineering Vocabulary .
